Light-emitting diodes of colloidal quantum dots and nanorod heterostructures for future emissive displays  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC05972H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC05972H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2618-2634Light-emitting diodes of colloidal quantum dots and nanorod heterostructures for future emissive displays

        
          
            Yiran 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seong-Yong 
            Cho
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Moonsub 
            Shim
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering and Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. E-mail: mshim@illinois.edu
Received 
      29th December 2017
    , Accepted 21st February 2018First published on 23rd February 2018AbstractTunable, narrow-linewidth photoluminescence with nearly ideal quantum yields and solution processability make colloidal quantum dots (QDs) a unique class of emitters for a variety of applications including light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Wide color gamut and high color saturation that can be achieved with QDs along with recent advances in QD-LEDs motivate their use as large-area, patternable electroluminescent materials especially in displays. In this review, critical issues in performance and long-term stability of QD-LEDs, Cd-free compositions necessary for practical applications, lower-symmetry heterostructures that impart new capabilities, and unconventional fabrication approaches are discussed. As the current CdSe-based QD-LEDs approach their performance limits, emerging nanorod heterostructures, as exemplified by the double heterojunction nanorods (DHNRs), can extend efficiencies beyond these limits. Furthermore, enhancements in device lifetime and light detection/photovoltaic capabilities using the same high-performance DHNR-LEDs can allow exciting prospects for novel emissive displays. Such multifunctional LEDs that can be solution-processed into large-area, mulitcolor pixel arrays may fundamentally alter how we perceive, interact with and utilize display devices.
Yiran Jiang
Yiran Jiang is a former PhD student at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. She received her BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Tongji University in 2012. She worked with Professor Moonsub Shim on nano electronic materials. Her doctoral research is focused on double heterojunction nanorod-based light-emitting diodes.
Seong-Yong Cho
Seong-Yong Cho is a former postdoctoral research associate at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He received his BS and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University. He worked with Professor Moonsub Shim at University of Illinois as a postdoctoral researcher. Now, he is an assistant professor at Myongji University in Korea. His background is nanomaterials and research interests are graphene growth mechanism, thin film characterization and nanorod heterostructure light-emitting diode. His postdoctoral studies are developing multifunctional double heterojunction nanorod LED and understanding failure mechanism of colloidal quantum dot LED.
Moonsub Shim
Moonsub Shim is a professor of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He received his BS degree from the University of California at Berkeley in 1997 and his M.S. and PhD degrees both from the University of Chicago in 1998 and 2001. After working as a postdoctoral researcher at Stanford University, he joined the faculty of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Illinois in 2002. His research interests revolve around nanoscale materials, spanning materials synthesis to charging and charge-separation processes to their applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and photovoltaics.
1. Introduction
Colloidal quantum dots (QDs) or semiconductor nanocrystals are appealing for many optoelectronic applications due to their properties that are variable with size, shape, and composition.1,2 Their unique optical properties, especially their narrow and tunable photoluminescence (PL),3 have attracted much attention over the past three decades or so. High color purity and wide color gamut that can be achieved with QDs are generating much excitement especially in display applications.1,4,5 In fact, TVs, monitors and tablets containing QDs have already appeared and are beginning to thrive in the consumer market. These current commercial displays that incorporate QDs typically utilize their PL to down-convert a portion of the photons from blue light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to provide back-lighting with improved color gamut and reduced losses over traditional phosphors. In addition to exploiting PL, emissive displays incorporating QDs as electroluminescent materials is also gaining traction. Electroluminescence (EL) across the visible spectrum including red (R), green (G), and blue (B) necessary for displays has been achieved with QD-LEDs.6–8Fig. 1(a) shows an example of RGB EL and PL from QDs. The highly-tunable, narrow-width emission of QDs allows a much wider color gamut compared to the National Television System Committee (NTSC) color standards, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In addition to these exceptional EL characteristics with low turn-on voltage, QD-LEDs also feature low-temperature solution processability, which can facilitate manufacturing and enable large-area and flexible/foldable devices.9
 Fig. 1  (a) Electroluminescence (solid lines) and photoluminescence (dashed lines) spectra of red, green, and blue quantum dot light-emitting diodes shown along with the corresponding photographs of the actual devices. (b) Wide color gamut that can be achieved using QDs compared to 1953 and 1987 color gamut (dashed and dotted lines), respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
In recent years, solution-processed QD-LEDs have achieved efficiencies and brightness comparable to those of vacuum deposited phosphorescent organic LEDs (OLEDs).6,10–15 These advances are especially exciting because QD-LEDs have much narrower emission linewidth and lower turn-on voltage than OLEDs. The performance of QD-LEDs has rapidly improved through engineering of device architecture and charge transport materials, as well as through innovative designs of the QDs themselves. Efforts on fine-tuning the band structure and exploring shapes beyond spherical core/shells (C/S) are just beginning to be explored. Emerging anisotropic nanocrystal heterostructures can not only improve device performance but also impart an entirely new set of capabilities in these promising LEDs. Here, we review some of these advances and highlight new opportunities especially with respect to paving the path to next generation of displays and related devices.
2. Quantum dot light emitting diodes (QD-LEDs)
2.1 Device architecture
Much of the device architecture design in QD-LEDs has evolved from advances in OLEDs. Essentially all current QD-LEDs consist of an emissive QD film sandwiched between two charge transport layers (CTLs). Indium tin oxide (ITO) is widely used as the transparent electrode. Poly(ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) is commonly employed as the hole injection layer (HIL)16,17 when an organic hole transport layer (HTL) is used in the conventional device structure.6,11,18 For the inverted structure, large work function metal oxides such as MoO3 are often deposited between the anode and the HTL.
As with any LED, the device architecture plays a vital role in performance and long-term stability of QD-LEDs. It has evolved over the last two decades, from simple p–n junction-like structure between a QD film on a polymer layer19,20 to p–i–n junction-like structures with CTLs of different composition (Fig. 2(a)).21,22 Improvements to the p–n structure have been made utilizing C/S QDs23,24 and incorporating more than one polymer film for hole injection and transport.25 However, device architecture with separate electron transport layer (ETL) and HTL has quickly been adopted for much higher device performance. CTL combinations of all-organic, all-inorganic, and organic–inorganic have been developed and examined for both conventional and inverted structures.
 Fig. 2  (a) General device architecture of QD-LEDs. Energy band alignment of (b) all-organic, (c) all-inorganic, and (d) organic–inorganic combination CTLs. (e) Inverted device structure with organic–inorganic CTLs. ((b) Reprinted with permission from (ref. 26), copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; (c) adapted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society; (d) reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 6), copyright 2017; (e) adapted with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
One of the earlier p–i–n-like structures that represents a substantial advance is the all-organic device architecture utilizing CTLs developed for OLEDs with a monolayer of QDs. By incorporating N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (TPD) as the HTL, (8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminum (Alq3) as ETL, and 3-(4-biphenylyl)-4-phenyl-5-t-butylphenyl-1,2,4-triazole (TAZ) as a hole blocking layer, the luminescent power efficiency of the QD-LED has been shown to improve 25-fold compared to polymer-QD p–n junctions.21 Introducing an HIL between ITO and the organic HTL has led to further improvements22 and a series of QD-LEDs with emission wavelengths across the entire visible spectrum have been demonstrated with the all-organic CTL device structure (Fig. 2(b)).26 One of the highest performance of all-organic CTL QD-LEDs has been achieved with polar electrolytic polymer ETL and dot-in-rod nanocrystals as emitters.27 The polar polymer ETL not only provides good charge balance in the devices, but also allows solution process for fabrication without affecting the optical properties of the emitters. These red QD-LEDs have been shown to exhibit maximum brightness of 1200 cd m−2 and peak external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 6.1%. In addition, the all-organic CTLs have also been used to explore an alternative excitation mechanism in QD-LEDs. A phosphorescent molecule-codoped ETL of 2,2′,2′′-tris(N-carbazolyl)-triphenylamine:iridium, tris(2-phenylpyidine) (TCTA:Ir(ppy)3) has been employed as a triplet state harvester and energy transfer pump to facilitate nonradiative energy transfer from the CTL to QDs.28
Another device architecture that has drawn some attention is the all-inorganic CTL structure (Fig. 2(c)). Organic materials used in QD-LEDs (and OLEDs) are quite susceptible to degradation in air and processing must be carried out in an inert environment. More importantly, the air-sensitivity can limit device performance and lifetime. Hence, QD-LEDs with all inorganic CTLs may be very appealing.29 ZnO, widely used in the prevalent organic–inorganic CTL LEDs discussed below, is a suitable choice as ETL. Therefore, the challenge lies, as is the case for many other device applications, in finding a sufficiently high-performance p-type metal oxide with a proper band alignment. The most well-known is NiOx and it has been examined as the HTL for QD-LEDs.30,31 However, the efficiencies of these devices are quite low (EQE less than 0.1% or luminous efficiency less than 0.014 cd A−1 for red-emitting devices). Trap states on the surface of NiOx, which can quench QD emission and induce leakage current in the devices, may be one of the main limiting factors. By passivating the surface of the NiOx with a thin AlOx layer, the performance of the all-inorganic CTL QD-LEDs has been significantly improved, reaching EQE of ∼1% for emission in the green.32 Much room for improvement still remains for all-inorganic CTL QD-LEDs.
Currently, most high performance QD-LEDs, including those exhibiting record performance, are designed with organic–inorganic CTL combination. In these devices, the ETL is usually an n-type semiconductor metal oxide, and the HTL is a p-type organic semiconductor. An additional HIL to facilitate hole injection from the anode to HTL may also be necessary. The valence band edge of most widely used QDs is typically at ∼−6 to −7 eV, which is significantly lower than that of most available organic HTLs. The barrier for hole injection then becomes much larger than that for electron injection. A typical organic–inorganic CTL device of conventional architecture consists of ITO as the anode, with PEDOT:PSS as the HIL, a semiconducting polymer as the HTL, QD film as the emitting layer (EML), ZnO as the ETL, and Al as the cathode (Fig. 2(d)).4,6 These devices can be made through all-solution processes and have been shown to exhibit high performance/efficiencies with promising long-term stability.6,11
The organic–inorganic CTL combination has also been fabricated with an inverted structure (Fig. 2(e)). These devices that use ITO as the cathode and the top electrode as the anode for the bottom-emitting configuration are becoming increasingly more popular and important. The inverted structure, when fabricated to be top emitting, can facilitate integration with widely used thin film transistor backplane technology for active-matrix pixels. Most inverted QD-LEDs still require vacuum-deposited HTL and HIL on top of the QD EML for high device efficiencies.10,33 QD-LEDs of both conventional6,11,34–37 and inverted10 structures have exhibited EQEs close to the theoretical maximum of ∼20% set mainly by the light outcoupling efficiency limit, suggesting ideal internal quantum efficiency (IQE) has been nearly reached.38 These results are especially impressive considering that they can be achieved in all solution-processed QD-LEDs with conventional device architecture.
2.2 Charge balance in QD-LEDs
One of the most important issues in achieving high performance in QD-LEDs is the charge balance. When an unequal number of electrons and holes are injected, a significant fraction of QDs can be charged and the performance of QD-LEDs can degrade. Since the valence band edges of CdSe and the typical shell materials (CdS or ZnS) are significantly lower than those of available organic HTLs (Fig. 2), hole injection is often more difficult. The alignment of energy levels in QDs with those of commonly used ZnO ETL can also lead to a spontaneous electron transfer to the QDs, further offsetting charge balance.39 If QDs are negatively charged due to such a charge transfer even before any bias is applied, the device physics will also be completely altered. That is, the majority or a significant portion of the emitting states can be negative trions rather than desired neutral excitons.39 The increasing PL lifetime with increasing reverse bias observed may be explained by the removal of electrons from charged QDs allowing more contributions to PL from neutral excitons.39,40 Observation of a much better correlation of QD-LED peak EQE to PL quantum yield (QY) of negative trions rather than neutral excitons further supports the idea of electron transfer from ZnO/electrode to QDs.39 In addition to this spontaneous electron transfer, smaller electron injection barrier than the hole barrier will result in further charge imbalance under device operation. Multicarrier dynamics can then dictate QD-LED characteristics. The degree of charging and therefore the role of non-radiative Auger recombination is expected to increase with increasing forward bias, reducing the value of peak efficiencies and causing efficiency roll-off (droop) in QD-LEDs.39 Even in the absence of excess charges arising from a spontaneous electron transfer from ETL/electrode, large external fields can affect radiative recombination processes in QDs. The applied electric field can induce a spatial separation of electrons and holes, causing a polarization of the exciton wave function in the QD. As a result, radiative recombination rate is reduced and luminescence is quenched.41,42 In fact, some have suggested that the efficiency droop in QD-LEDs arises from this electric field induced luminescence quenching (i.e., the Stark effect)41,42 rather than from Auger processes.39 Whether Auger or Stark effect induced PL quenching dominates can depend on a variety of factors including the choice of charge transport materials in contact with QDs and the composition and thickness of the shell surrounding the QD. For example, a CdS shell which forms a quasi type-II band offset with CdSe can facilitate charge separation under an external electric field, significantly more so than the type-I band offset ZnS shell.41
While the mechanism of efficiency droop remains under debate, promoting charge balance is critical for improving performance of QD-LEDs. Several approaches have been examined to address this issue, including CTL engineering, modification of the shells and surfaces of QDs, and exploring QD composition beyond CdSe. In general, one approach is to modify the band alignment in the devices to provide a better match of energy barriers for electron and hole injection. Efforts have been made to select or modify CTLs to both reduce the hole injection barrier37 and increase electron injection barrier.11 Similarly, raising the conduction band edge of the shell of the QD can impede electron injection and improve charge balance in the QD film.43 Shell composition and thickness can also be exploited to provide other benefits. For instance, thick alloyed shell that forms type-I band offset with the core has been shown to suppress QD-QD energy transfer, prevent QD charging and reduce Auger recombination in devices.40 Non-Cd-based QDs with a higher valence band edge position can provide a smaller energy barrier for hole injection, leading to a similar net effect as selecting HTL with lower valence band edge position.44
2.3 Charge transport layer engineering
Given the multilayer architecture, the performance of QD-LEDs can be affected by many factors. One critical challenge, as we have discussed thus far, is the charge balance, which IQE, and therefore EQE, is directly proportional to. As mentioned earlier, most of the current state-of-the-art QD-LEDs are made with the organic–inorganic CTL combination structure.10,11,36 Given the widely different materials’ properties of the metal oxide ETL and the organic HTL, various combinations of and modifications to CTLs have been explored. Although TiO2 has also been used frequently,34,35 the majority of QD-LEDs with organic–inorganic CTLs use ZnO as the ETL. The preference of ZnO over TiO2 appears to be the slightly more favorable conductivity and band alignment.45 Currently, ZnO thin films prepared through the solution approach are the most commonly used ETLs. The work function of ZnO can also be tuned by introducing dopants such as Mg,46,47 Ga48 or Al.49 Bilayer ETLs such as TiO2/ZnO stack,50 or Al-doped ZnO/Li-doped ZnO stack51 have also been explored for more precisely controlled energy band alignment. Processing conditions can affect the electron mobility of the ZnO films as well, which in turn impacts device performance.52 In addition to doping, chemical treatment at the interfaces using polymers such as polyethylenimine has been exploited to control band alignment for better charge balance.53,54
For the organic HTLs, most of the available materials have their valence band edge significantly higher than that of CdSe-based QD EMLs. Fig. 3 compares the band positions of commonly used HTLs with CdSe/CdS EML and ZnO ETL.37,55 Further details of the organic HTLs are given in Table 1. In addition to the larger band edge offset with EML, conductivity of HTL can be significantly different than that of the ETL. Then, one method to ameliorate the problem of charge imbalance is to dope the HTL. For example, by doping the HTL, poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,4′-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl))diphenylamine)] (TFB), with 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ), the hole injection barrier has been shown to be reduced by ∼0.2 eV (Fig. 4(a)).37 The conductivity of HTL is increased upon doping as well. The HIL can also be modified or changed to improve hole injection and charge balance. For example, replacing commonly used PEDOT:PSS with a fluorinated self-assembled monolayer on ITO (Fig. 4(b)) has led to reduced resistance on the hole side, leading to better charge balance.56
 Fig. 3  Energy band positions of some commonly used organic HTLs compared with CdS, CdSe and ZnO. The energy band positions are extracted from the references listed in Table 1. 
Table 1 Commonly used organic HTL materials for QD-LEDs




Material
Full name
Structure
Processing method
Ref.




TFB
Poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,40-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl)) diphenylamine]



Solution

35



PVK
Poly(9-vinlycarbazole)



Solution

11



Poly-TPD
Poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bisphenylbenzidine]



Solution

11 and 36



CBP
4,4′-Bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl



Vacuum

33, 39 and 40



NPB

N,N′-Di(1-naphthyl)-N,N′-diphenyl-(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine



Vacuum

10





 Fig. 4  Different strategies for CTL engineering. (a) Doping HTL (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society), (b) SAM modification on ITO substrate (Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society), and (c) blocking electrons with PMMA layer. (d) and (e) are the device characteristics with the structure in (c). (c)–(e) Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 11), copyright 2014). 
Instead of improving hole injection/transport for charge balance, the opposite approach of reducing electron injection has also been examined. By introducing an insulating thin film of poly(methyl methacrylate) between the QD film and the ZnO ETL and increasing the ETL thickness (Fig. 4(c)), electron injection has been shown to be suppressed in QD-LEDs. These modifications have led to maximum EQE values (20.5%) approaching the theoretical limit set by light outcoupling.11 The device characteristics with this current record EQE are shown in Fig. 4(d) and (e). However, the introduction of an insulating layer to enhance EQE may come at a cost of reduced current and power efficiencies, which are critical for practical implementation of these devices.
In addition to the band structure and energy level alignment, the thicknesses of the CTLs also need to be optimized for high device performance. The thicknesses of CTLs affect the resistance on each side of the EML, which in turn influence charge transport and balance. Furthermore, the thickness of CTLs determines the distance between excitons and the metal electrode, which can reflect light, cause losses through coupling to surface plasmons57 and/or alter the distribution of the confined radiation field or local density of optical states.58 Hence, CTL thickness plays a critical role in device performance. In general, although often not explicitly discussed, CTL thicknesses need to be optimized for any new combination of CTL materials.
2.4 Effects of the shell and surface capping ligands in Cd-II–VI-based QD-LEDs
CdSe-based C/S QDs have been the most extensively studied nanocrystals for QD-LEDs for many reasons including color tunability in the visible with narrow linewidth, the best established synthetic protocols with near unity PL QYs, and wide availability. From ZnS shell to gradient alloy composition and “giant” shells, C/S QDs of several different shell composition and thickness have been incorporated into QD-LEDs as the EML. The shell can affect device performance in several ways.
One important impact well known from many PL studies is that the shell can minimize effects of surface traps59 and suppress non-radiative recombination.18 In most cases, it is probably true that higher solution PL QY will more likely lead to higher EL efficiency. However, the radiative recombination efficiency under the device operation conditions is what actually matters for LED brightness and efficiency. Even without an applied bias, films of QDs often have significantly lower PL QYs than in dilute solutions.40 Energy transfer in QD solids has been observed60 and can be a significant contribution to this reduction in PL.41,61 Energy transfer can also reduce EL in QD-LEDs and the thickness of the shell has been exploited to address this problem. In particular, a “giant” CdS shell with more than 10 CdS monolayers overcoating the CdSe core has been shown to mitigate the QD-QD energy transfer induced losses43,49 and in turn improve LED brightness and efficiency.18
The composition of the shell material can also play a vital role in many other aspects that contribute to QD-LED characteristics. While CdS shell can reduce non-radiative recombination and even allow near unity solution PL QYs,43 the energy level alignment may be less than ideal for CdSe-based QD-LED devices. As shown in the bottom inset of Fig. 5(a), CdS can form a quasi-type-II band offset with CdSe, with a conduction band edge very close to that of the ZnO ETL. This alignment leads to a significantly lower electron injection barrier than that of the hole. As discussed earlier, this energy level alignment not only causes asymmetric injection barriers but can also lead to spontaneous electron transfer into QDs from ETL/cathode. To address this electron transfer issue and to achieve better charge balance, the composition of the shell material has also been examined. Compared to CdS, another commonly used shell material ZnS forms type-I heterostructure with CdSe core, and introduces a larger energy barrier for electron injection.3,40 However, with a wide bandgap of 3.6 eV, ZnS also possesses low valence band edge, imposing large injection barriers for both charge carriers. In addition, ZnS has a significantly smaller lattice constant than CdSe, which will lead to lattice mismatch and potential strain related problems especially if the CdSe core is large. Alloyed Zn0.5Cd0.5S shell has been introduced to address this problem.39 As shown in the top inset of Fig. 5(a), a Zn0.5Cd0.5S alloy shell on CdSe/CdS QDs raises the energy barrier for electron injection, reducing the difference with the hole injection barrier. By engineering the shell composition, the maximum EQE has been increased by about an order of magnitude, with reduced efficiency droop (Fig. 5(a)). Further improvements, including better charge barrier match and reduced QD-QD energy transfer, have been achieved by optimizing both composition and thickness of the graded alloy shells (Fig. 5(b)).40
 Fig. 5  EQE versus current–density of QD-LEDs with (a) CdSe/CdS QDs and CdSe/CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S QDs (reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications (ref. 39), copyright 2013) and (b) CdSe/Zn1−xCdx–S of varying total radius R (reprinted with permission from Advanced Materials (ref. 40), copyright 2014). The insets in (a) compare the energy band alignment of CdSe/CdS vs. CdSe/CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S QDs. The top figure in (b) is a schematic of the successive growth for the graded alloy shell. 
In addition to the inorganic shell, organic surface ligands can have profound effects on the optical and electrical properties of QDs and therefore on the performance of QD-LEDs. First, surface ligands affect the conductivity of the QD films, and therefore charge transport in QD-LEDs. The native ligands used in the synthesis QDs often contain long carbon chains (typically, C8 to C18). These native ligands are not necessarily ideal for LED applications and the exchange of surface ligands may be beneficial. To improve electrical conductivity and charge transport in QD films, molecules with shorter lengths are typically selected for ligand exchange. For example, replacing oleic acid ligands on the as-synthesized ZnCdS/ZnS C/S QDs with shorter 1-octanethiol ligands has been shown to lead to increases in both the electron mobility within and hole injection into the QD film.62 To further reduce the chain length and facilitate charge transport, halide ions have also been explored.63 By treating the CdSe/ZnS QD films with acetyl trimethylammonium bromide solution, the surface ligands can be changed to bromide anions. Compared to QDs capped with native oleic acid ligands, the bromide-capped QDs lead to improvements in maximum EL intensity and current efficiency. Second, electric dipoles can be generated between the ligand head groups and the surface atoms of the QDs. As a result, the energy levels of the QDs can be shifted, which in turn affect the band alignment in devices. For example, by partially exchanging the native oleic acid ligands with benzenethiol on CdSe/ZnS QDs, the valence band edge can be shifted by 0.3 eV, reducing the hole injection barrier. Device performance improvement is reflected in a decrease in the turn-on voltage by 0.6 V and an increase in the maximum current efficiency from ∼11 cd A−1 to ∼19 cd A−1.64 Ligand exchange can also affect the energy levels of CTLs. For example, by replacing the native oleic acid ligands with poly(amidoamine) dendrimers at the QD/ZnO interface, the conduction band edge energy level and the Fermi level of the ZnO have been shown to shift up by 0.5 eV.65 This energy level shift arising from coordination of amines to ZnO surface increases the barrier for electron injection, resulting in better charge balance and a 3-fold improvement in peak EQE.
2.5 Cd-Free QD-LEDs
Efforts in optimizing composition and thickness of CTLs and shells/surfaces of QDs such as those discussed in the previous sections have led to rapid advances in CdSe-based QD-LEDs. However, the use of Cd is severely restricted in commercial products and QDs of Cd-free composition are drawing much attention for most applications including QD-LEDs. Among different candidates, InP, CuInS2 and related materials have been examined the most. These materials have a higher valence band edge compared to CdSe and the problem of large hole injection barrier that leads to difficulties in charge balance in the CdSe-based QD LEDs may be significantly alleviated simply by replacing CdSe with these non-Cd materials. However, the challenge remains in the synthesis of high-quality materials that exhibit optical characteristics comparable to CdSe-based QDs, namely, narrow linewidth and high PL QYs. In recent years, there has also been a rapidly growing interest in metal halide perovskites and their QDs. Along with much success in solar cell applications, these materials are now being intensively studied as EMLs for LEDs.66,67 However, given the nascent nature of this field and given that these materials also contain a restricted element, namely Pb, we will limit our discussion here to InP and I–III–VI2 based QDs for LED applications.
InP-based QDs possess the proper band gap range across the visible spectral region (Fig. 6(a))68 and band alignment better matched with available organic CTLs (bulk InP has valence band maximum at 5.2–5.3 eV compare to bulk CdSe, which has it at ∼6 eV).69 InP-based QD-LEDs have employed materials and device structures similar to CdSe-based QD-LEDs. The C/S structure widely used for CdSe QDs in enhancing stability and PL QY has been adopted for InP QDs. For example, InP QDs passivated with thick ZnSeS composition-gradient shells have led to green-emitting QD-LEDs with a maximum luminance of 3900 cd m−2 and a maximum EQE of 3.46% (Fig. 6(b)).44 Using an additional thick ZnS shell and ZnMgO as ETL, a PL QY of 70% and maximum luminance over 10000 cd m−2 have been demonstrated with these “giant” InP/ZnSeS/ZnS QDs.70
 Fig. 6  Cd-Free QDs and their LEDs. (a) InP QDs with PL emission ranging across the visible spectral range (reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group). (b) Band diagram and device characteristics of InP-QD based LEDs (reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (c) Composition-tunable PL emission of Cu doped Zn–In–S/ZnS C/S QDs (reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). (d) Heterostructured C/S Cu–In–S (CIS)/ZnS QDs and the EQE–luminance curves of their LEDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) 
As for the device architecture, CTL engineering has also been an important approach for improving device performance in InP-based QD-LEDs. Inverted structure with organic–inorganic combination CTLs has been utilized in many InP-based QD-LEDs.44,70,71 The valence band edge of InP-based QDs aligns quite well with several organic HTLs, such as 4,4′,4′′-tris(N-carbazolyl)triphenylamine (TCTA)44 and 4,4′-cyclohexylidenebis[N,N-bis(4-methylphenyl)benzenamine] (TAPC).72 Although a sol–gel ZnO film has been used as the ETL, generating over 3000 cd m−2 maximum EL at ∼540 nm,73 the energy alignment is not ideal with InP-based QDs. The conduction band edge of InP-based QDs is significantly higher than that of ZnO. Therefore, ZnMgO-nanoparticle-based film has been applied as ETL to reduce electron injection barrier and promote charge balance.70 Inserting a thin layer of poly[(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl))-2,7-(9,9-ioctyl-fluorene)] (PFN) between the QD emitting layer and the ZnO layer has been shown to be another route to facilitate electron injection.44 Solution-processed ZrO2 has also been demonstrated as a feasible ETL for InP-based QDs.72 Progress continues to be made in both emitter material synthesis and device engineering.
Beyond II–VIs and III–Vs, I–III–VI2 compounds have also been explored as EML for QD-LEDs. QDs of CuInS2, CuInSe2 and related compositions can exhibit PL that can span the visible through near infrared spectral region. For example, varying the In/Ga molar ratio in Cu–In–Ga–S QDs has been shown to control the emission wavelength between 479–578 nm range74 and varying the size of CuInSe2 can give rise to emission range from red into the near infrared.75,76 Although their PL is usually associated with at least one of the charge carriers being localized in a trap state,77,78 I–III–VI2 QDs can be quite bright especially with the C/S structure. In a conventional organic–inorganic CTL device structure with PEDOT:PSS as HIL, PVK as HTL and ZnO as ETL, a maximum luminance of 1673 cd m−2 and a maximum EQE of 1.54% have been achieved with Cu–In–S/ZnS QDs.74 Composition-tunable PL emission over the entire visible spectral window and extending into the near-infrared has also been obtained with Cu doped Zn–In–S/ZnS C/S QDs (Fig. 6(c)).79 Similar to InP-based QDs, I–III–VI2-based QDs still lag behind CdSe-based materials with respect to their LED performance but improvements continue to be reported. Early on, maximum luminance of 1200 cd m−2, 1160 cd m−2, and 1600 cd m−2 have been reported for red, yellow and green emission, respectively, with corresponding current efficiencies of 0.58 cd A−1, 0.49 cd A−1, 0.62 cd A−1.80 Recently, yellow emitting LEDs with CuInS2/ZnS C/S QDs have exhibited EQE up to 7.3%, with maximum luminance of 8464 cd m−2 (Fig. 6(d)), demonstrating much promise in these Cd-free QD-LEDs.81
2.6 Lower-symmetry nanocrystal emitters for LEDs
Beyond the challenges associated with developing Cd-free materials of equivalent or better optical properties, the current state-of-the-art QD-LEDs appear to have hit the ceiling on efficiency.10,11 When the transition dipoles of the emitters are randomly oriented, the maximum EQE of OLEDs and QD-LEDs with multilayer thin film device structure is limited by the light outcoupling efficiency that tops at ∼20%.10,38 Losses through surface plasmons, waveguide modes, non-radiative recombination and other processes contribute to this limit.82 Although spherical C/S QDs are the most widely used in QD-LEDs, lower-symmetry anisotropic nanocrystals are beginning to be investigated. Anisotropic structures are promising since they may be engineered to have in-plane dipoles that could increase the light outcoupling limit by about a factor of 2 and may also provide additional unique benefits.
One type of lower-symmetry nanocrystals that have been incorporated into LEDs are nanoplatelets (NPLs). With a largely 2D structure, the NPLs exhibit thickness-tunable emission.83 Since NPLs can be synthesized with near-atomic level control over their thickness, the emission linewidth of NPLs can be extremely narrow (e.g., ∼10 nm at peak position of 508 nm).84 In addition to the narrow linewidth, the 2D structure presents different density of states and exciton binding energy compare to 0D nanoparticles, which may also impact the device performance.83 The first NPL-LED has been made with quasi-2D colloidal C/S CdSe/Cd0.7Zn0.3S NPLs with 1.2 nm thick core and 2 nm thick shell as the emissive material.85 A maximum luminance of 4499 cd m−2 and peak EQE of 0.63% have been achieved with red-emitting NPL-LEDs with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/NPL/ZnO/Al. Green-emitting NPL-LEDs with bare CdSe NPLs as emitters have also been reported.84 By alloying CdSe with CdS, the emission wavelength range can be further fine-tuned.86 EL at 496 nm, 507 nm, 520 nm has been demonstrated with these CdSe1−xSx NPLs, with maximum luminance <100 cd m−2. More recently, maximum luminance up to 33000 cd m−2 and peak EQE of 5% have been achieved for NPL-LEDs with CdSe/CdS C/S NPLs as the EML.87
Rod-shaped nanocrystals have also been used as emitters in LEDs. The first example of nanorod-LEDs used CdSe/CdS C/S nanorods for light emission. The nanorods were first spin-cast on a substrate, and then rubbed uniaxially using a velvet cloth under heating, resulting in partially oriented nanorods. As a result, polarized EL emission from these devices has been demonstrated with a maximum luminance of ∼450 cd m−2 and EQE of ∼0.5%.88 Better lateral alignment of nanorods has been achieved at the air–water interface.89 However, possibly due to the more complex processes including self-assembly and contact transfer printing, the device performance did not improve much. Another type of rod-shaped nanocrystals is the dot-in-rod (DiR) heterostructures.90,91 LEDs with deep-red-emitting CdSe/CdS DiRs and a polyelectrolytic ETL with mobile Br− counteranions have exhibited a maximum luminance of 1200 cd m−2 with a maximum EQE of 6.1%.27 Nanocrystals with even more complex morphologies have been widely synthesized, but rarely used as emitters in LEDs. One example is CdSe (core)/CdS (arm) tetrapods.92 A simple device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/tetrapods/LiF/Al has been shown to emit from the CdSe core at 660 nm under lower bias (<5 V), while the CdS arms also start to emit at 500 nm under higher bias.
These different types of lower-symmetry nanocrystals are very interesting and scientifically important, but when they are used as emitters in LEDs, the device performance generally falls quite far behind the current state-of-the-art QD-LEDs. Although device performance would likely improve with further efforts, the problem of charge balance mentioned earlier also remains for these lower-symmetry nanocrystals. Since these nanocrystals still use CdSe-based C/S type structure, the energy band alignment in devices favor electron injection over hole injection and only a single shell material is physically accessible for carrier injection. Double heterojunction nanorods (DHNRs) in which two distinct semiconductor materials with type-II staggered band offset are both in contact with one smaller band gap emitting QD have been developed to address these problems. As discussed in the following section, DHNRs not only improve LED performance through enhanced charge balance and light outcoupling but also provide new capabilities that can define exciting directions for the next generation of optoelectronic devices.
3. Double heterojunction nanorod LEDs
3.1 Double heterojunction nanorods
The C/S structure, whether the core is of spherical or lower symmetry shape, is not the ideal structure especially when considering charge injection. While a complete shell surrounding the emitting core is often necessary for high PL QYs, it represents a barrier for charge injection. For CdSe QDs, ZnS and CdS are the most widely used as the shell materials. A ZnS shell imposes significant barriers for both electron and holes. The organic HTLs used in the prevalent organic–inorganic CTL device structures already impose a much larger injection barrier for holes and the asymmetric charge injection barrier imposed by CdS shell can amplify the charge balance problem that could be detrimental to device performance.
Rather than a single composition shell, two distinct and physically accessible materials with proper band gaps and alignment would allow independent control over electron and hole injection processes, thereby facilitating charge balance. Such a structure would amount to a colloidal QD equivalent of the double heterostructure commonly employed in current III–V LEDs and semiconductor lasers.93,94 While a proper choice of CTLs can allow a double heterostructure with QD emitters in the middle, direct growth of two distinct shell materials would minimize undesirable surface states and ensure high PL QYs as well. Colloidal double heterostructures may also lead to similar benefits seen in heteroepitaxial semiconductor devices. Furthermore, they may impart new capabilities and new means of controlling desirable properties of QDs. However, it is extremely challenging to achieve two-composition asymmetric shells that are only about a nm thick at high growth temperatures needed for high crystallinity. A successful approach to achieving the double heterostructure in colloidal nanocrystals is based on the nanorod synthesis.95–97 In these double heterojunction nanorods (DHNRs), two distinct semiconductor materials (CdS and ZnSe) that would form a type-II staggered band offset by themselves, are both in contact with the smaller band gap CdSe QD emitter (Fig. 7(a)).55 The key strategy is to start with the solution growth of CdS nanorods, which reduces the symmetry and allows preferential tip growth. CdSe QDs are then grown at the tips, followed by ZnSe which initially grows selectively on the CdSe tips. Despite three growth steps, the size/shape distribution of the initial CdS NRs can be maintained quite well (Fig. 7(b)).
 Fig. 7  (a) Energy band alignment and schematic of the double heterojunction nanorods (DHNRs). (b) From left to right: representative TEM and STEM images of CdS nanorod seeds, CdS/CdSe nanorod heterostructures and CdS/CdSe/ZnSe DHNRs. (c) Absorption and PL spectra of CdS nanords, CdS/CdSe nanorod heterostructures and CdS/CdSe/ZnSe DHNRs of two different ZnSe amounts. (Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications (ref. 55), copyright 2014.) 
While the solution PL QY of DHNRs (∼40%) is lower than CdSe-based C/S QDs (approaching unity), the linewidth is comparable to or even narrower than the C/S counterpart (FWHM of DHNRs typically range from ∼25 to 30 nm). The narrow linewidth PL of the final DHNR structures is somewhat surprising especially in that CdSe QDs have been grown by heterogeneous nucleation on CdS NRs with initial double-peaked emission. That is, CdSe QDs in DHNRs initially had a bimodal size distribution that should be significantly broader than CdSe in C/S QDs which have been quite well optimized for tight size control. Etching by Zn-oleate followed by ripening of the CdSe tips has been shown to cause the double-peaked PL to merge into a single peak and reduce the linewidth.61 In addition, anisotropic strain imposed by an asymmetric shell has recently been shown to lift valence band degeneracies and lead to narrower linewidths in C/S QDs.98 Similar effects may also be occurring here with two different lattices surrounding the CdSe emitter in DHNRs.
Although the synthesis becomes slightly more complex, DHNRs provide many new parameters within the EML that can be tuned to improve device performance. For example, the amount of ZnSe growth, which eventually occurs on the sides of the DHNRs as well, can be exploited. The areas of CdS and ZnSe exposed to CTLs can be varied by ZnSe coverage, which can be tuned to help balance charge in LEDs. The band alignment in DHNRs imposes electron wave function to extend into the main CdS rod while the hole wave function remains mainly at the tip. This spatial distribution of carrier wave functions and the rod shape can lead to transition dipoles that enhance light outcoupling and polarized emission. The band structure designed into DHNRs can also facilitate separation of photogenerated carriers, paving the path to devices that can exhibit multiple functionality.
3.2 DHNR-LED characteristics and the role of shape anisotropy
When DHNRs are incorporated into LEDs with device design similar to that commonly used in C/S QD-LEDs (band diagram shown in Fig. 4(a)), very narrow (FWHM = 26 nm), bright (maximum luminance of 76000 cd m−2) and efficient EL can be observed (Fig. 8). DHNR-LEDs using PEDOT:PSS and F4TCNQ doped TFB as HIL and HTL, respectively, has been reported to exhibit maximum EQE of 12% and current and power efficiencies of 27.5 cd A−1 and 34.6 lm W−1, respectively.37 Replacing PEDOT:PSS with a self-assembled monolayer on ITO56 with further optimization has led to maximum luminance >100000 cd m−2, maximum EQE up to 16% and current and power efficiencies of 42.9 cd A−1 and 44.9 lm W−1, respectively, thus far.99 While the EQE values are comparable to the best reported QD-LEDs, the current and power efficiencies exceed all QD-LEDs of similar emission wavelength.
 Fig. 8  (a) EL spectra of a DHNR-LED shown along with DHNR solution PL spectrum. Inset is EL/PL comparison at low voltage. (b) EQE vs. current density of a DHNR-LED. Inset shows the dependence of luminance and current density on the applied voltage. (c) Current and power efficiencies along with a photograph of a QD-LED and a DHNR-LED under operation shown in inset (reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
Compared to control C/S QD-LEDs that are fabricated in parallel with the same device structure, the efficiencies of DHNR-LEDs are routinely 2 to 3 times higher and brighter EL can be readily seen by the naked eye (Fig. 8(c) inset). Interestingly, despite having PL QY that is more than a factor of two lower than that of C/S QDs, DHNR-LEDs are on par with or outperform current state-of-the-art C/S QD-LEDs. Fig. 9 compares the improvements in maximum luminance, EQE and current and power efficiencies of red-emitting QD-LEDs with those of DHNR-LEDs over time.100–103
 Fig. 9  (a) Maximum luminance, (b) EQE, (c) current efficiency, and (d) power efficiency of red-emitting QD- and DHNR-LEDs over the years. Numbers in brackets are the corresponding reference numbers. Legends in (a) also apply to (b)–(d). 
In addition to the use of ZnSe to reduce the hole injection barrier (compared to CdS or ZnS shell of C/S QDs), the rod geometry of DHNRs brings other advantages that improve LED performance. First, because CdSe is grown at the NR tips, emitters are relatively far away from each other and therefore minimize energy transfer losses, similar to the thick shell “giant” QD-LEDs discussed earlier. However, without the thick shell, the turn-on voltage of DHNR-LEDs can be kept low (∼1.7 V) and the power efficiency can be high. Second, light outcoupling is enhanced by the shape anisotropy of DHNRs that lie parallel to the substrate. Studies on OLEDs have shown that random transition dipole orientation leads to a maximum light outcoupling efficiency (ηout) of only about 20%, while surface parallel dipoles can lead to ηout ≥ 40%.104–106 Nearly spherical C/S QDs in QD-LEDs appear to fall close to the former case of random transition dipoles, while DHNRs with their shape anisotropy with spatially engineered, dual-composition “shell” fall close to the latter case. That is, the directionality of the type-II staggered band offset between CdS and ZnSe that asymmetrically surround the emitting CdSe center induces a transition dipole along the rod axis, which lies parallel to the substrate. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry studies have revealed that the complex refractive index of DHNR films consists of a significantly larger ordinary (in-plane) extinction than the extraordinary (out-of-plane) extinction, while C/S QD films do not exhibit such anisotropy. Hence, DHNRs with their in-plane orientation and spatially anisotropic band structure significantly increase the upper limit of ηout, leading to high maximum luminance and EQE despite PL QY of only ∼40%.
With recent reports of EQE nearly reaching the theoretical limit,10,11 there may not be much room for further improvements using C/S QDs. New means of improving light extraction may be the only option but that may require drastic changes to device fabrication and therefore cumbersome re-optimization efforts to recover maximum IQE. The anisotropic shape and band structure designed into DHNRs can not only enhance charge injection and light outcoupling but also enhance device lifetime and impart new capabilities.
4. Device lifetime/long-term stability
Despite rapid advances in improving QD-LED efficiencies and brightness, much less attention has been given to the long-term stability of these devices. In addition to the limited data on device lifetime, measurement conditions are often different across different research groups, introducing further difficulties. More importantly, a general understanding of how these devices fail is lacking. Yet this knowledge is critical for practical implementation of QD-LEDs into commercially viable products, including those for emissive display applications.
One of the earliest reports of QD-LED device lifetime showed continuous operation of 50–100 h under inert N2 atmosphere.24 These devices consisting of p–n junction between polymer film and QD solid had a maximum luminance of only about 150 cd m−2 with a maximum EQE of ∼0.1% and a device half-life of ∼11 h. QD-LEDs of all organic CTLs using a monolayer of QDs as an EML exhibited an improved device half-life of ∼300 h at an initial luminance of ∼1200 cd m−2 which represents a significant improvement.22 However, these results are based on measurements in vacuum.
One of the main motivations for developing all inorganic CTLs for QD-LEDs has been the fact that organic CTLs can be very sensitive to humidity and oxygen and can therefore facilitate device degradation, as it is well known in OLEDs.107 In particular, NiOx/ZnO based CTLs have been employed in QD-LEDs.30–32,108 However, PL quenching of QDs on materials such as NiOx poses complications and potential problems for long-term stability of QD-LEDs. Recently, a thin layer of AlOx deposited on NiOx HTL has been shown to reduce such PL quenching and a device half-life of more than 100 h at an initial luminance of 1886 cd m−2 has been demonstrated for a green-emitting all-inorganic CTL QD-LED.32 However, this device lifetime is at best comparable to all organic CTL QD-LEDs and at least an order of magnitude worse than that of the current state-of-the-art QD-LEDs fabricated using organic/inorganic CTL combination.6,109
We note that all-inorganic CTL QD-LEDs still lag behind in device efficiencies compared to all-organic and organic/inorganic CTL QD-LEDs. One can anticipate device lifetime to be closely related to the device efficiency since higher efficiency devices will operate at lower current densities and/or lower voltages for the same initial brightness. Hence, advances in charge balance, CTL selection, EML PL QYs, etc. that have led to recent rapid improvements in device performance have also drastically enhanced long-term stability. Indeed, Fig. 10(a) shows that device lifetime (multiplied by the initial luminance to partly account for different measurements conditions) for this device architecture has been increasing exponentially over the last ten years or so just as device efficiencies have (Fig. 9). Here, actually measured t0.9 (time for luminance to decrease to 90% of the initial value) is used rather than extrapolated device half-life, which requires an assumption of stretch exponential behavior and that that behavior holds true at different operating conditions. It is noteworthy that all data shown in Fig. 10(a) are measured in air with devices that have minimal encapsulation. Furthermore, the majority of these devices (including the one with the longest device lifetime) are fabricated through all-solution processes.110Fig. 10(b) and (c) show that, in some cases, there can be no observable degradation in luminance over >100 h of continuous operation at ≥1000 cd m−2. These cases, which are also all-solution processed devices, are not included in Fig. 10(a). Interestingly, an enhancement in device efficiencies can be observed upon initial operation (or “positive aging”) in some cases.110
 Fig. 10  (a) Device lifetime (t0.9) multiplied by the initial luminance to partly account for different measurement conditions of C/S QD- and DHNR-LEDs. (b and c) Examples of time evolution of luminance of QD- and DHNR-LEDs under constant current. (d) Device lifetime (t0.9) of C/S QD- and DHNR-LEDs as a function of initial voltage. Numbers in brackets are the corresponding reference numbers. The reference numbers given in (d) have been edited to match references given here. ((b) is reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 6), copyright 2015; (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Although these are promising results with respect to long-term stability, there is very little understanding of the failure mechanism(s). Recent findings show that, at least for organic/inorganic CTL QD-LEDs with conventional device structure, the device lifetime strongly depends on the initial driving voltage (Fig. 10(d)).109 This dependence is observed across devices fabricated in different laboratories with different emitting materials and with two orders of magnitude variations in the initial luminance. PL of DHNRs or C/S QDs in the EML has been shown to remain essentially unchanged while the EL of the devices completely decays, which reveals that the QDs are not the reason for device failure.109 In addition, factors that reduce the hole injection barrier (i.e., use of DHNRs or p-doping of the HTL) have been shown to enhance device lifetime.109 These observations put together suggest that hole accumulation in the organic HTL due to a sizable hole injection barrier is the main cause of device failure. Hence, developing HTLs to provide even lower hole injection barriers (or QDs that have better valence band edge match with available HTLs) should improve not only the charge balance and device efficiencies but also their long-term stability. Further work is much needed in the area of device failure mechanisms in QD-LEDs.
5. Unconventional approaches to device fabrication
Given the high brightness and efficiencies with promising device lifetime at application-relevant luminous power, QD-LEDs are especially appealing for developing emissive displays. Hence, there is an increasing interest in and a need for scalable patterning approaches that will allow manufacturing of large multicolor pixel arrays of QD-LEDs. While beneficial in many ways, the solubility of QDs can also be a hindrance especially when delicate features and patterns are needed within complex device structures. For example, spin-cast thin films of QDs are in general not compatible with conventional photolithography because QDs can be dissolved away in the solvents used with photoresists. Solvents for QDs can in turn strip or damage patterned photoresists. When depositing multiple layers during LED fabrication, the solvent compatibility of the CTLs also needs to be considered. Several approaches including surface modification of QDs, dry patterning and direct printing are actively being examined to address these issues.
5.1 Ligand exchange enabling conventional photolithography for patterning QDs
One method to overcome the challenge of solvent compatibility is to modify the surface of QDs to achieve solvent orthogonality and allow direct use of conventional photolithography. For instance, with ionized hydrophilic surfaces, QDs can be assembled in a layer-by-layer manner into a film that can maintain its integrity through the photolithography process.111Fig. 11 outlines a method that exploits such an approach where a positively charged polyelectrolyte, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA), and II–VI C/S QDs with negative surface charges are alternately deposited on a substrate with patterned photoresist (PR). Since the QD/PDDA film is resistant to solvents used for PR, subsequent PR lift-off leads to patterned array of QDs. By repeating this process with different color emitting QDs, RGB pixels of QD films have been demonstrated.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of patterning different QDs on a Si/SiO2 substrate using repeated photolithography and layer-by-layer assembly of QDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) 
More recently, an elegant approach to direct optical lithography of QD films has been demonstrated by incorporating photoactive ionic molecules as ligands for the QDs rather than using separate PR.112 The ligand molecules can be constructed as ion pairs, Cat+X−, where X− is an electron rich nucleophilic group that binds to the electron-deficient surface sites, typically metal ions (Lewis acids). The negative charge on X− is balanced by the Cat+, and either one of the ions can be photochemically active. Upon UV exposure, the product of these photo-active ions can alter either the ligand or the surface of the QDs, leading to a change in solubility of the QDs. This solubility change then allows QD films to be directly patterned without the need of a separate PR layer.
As shown by these two examples, patterning of QDs can be made compatible with conventional photolithography through careful engineering of surface ligands. These approaches allow direct exploitation of a well-established technique with high-resolution capabilities. However, ligand exchange can often lead to degradation of desired characteristics, especially PL, and may even be detrimental in some cases.113 Furthermore, most high-performance QD-LEDs use organic materials as HTL, which can also be damaged by the photolithography process when QDs are being patterned on top. Hence, developing alternate approaches may be highly desirable and often necessary.
5.2 Contact and transfer printing for QD-LED
Among different approaches to pattern and subsequently to integrate QD thin films within LED structures are contact and transfer printing methods. An example of contact printing is where QDs are spin-cast onto a structured polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp, then brought into contact with a receiving substrate to deliver QDs only from the protruding regions of the stamp.114 Through this approach, patterned QD-based LEDs have been successfully fabricated. Similarly, instead of spin-casting directly onto the stamp, QDs can be selectively picked up by the structured PDMS stamp from a donor substrate and subsequently transfer printed onto a receiving substrate (Fig. 12(a)).115,116 When the receiving substrate is ITO with pre-coated HIL and HTL layers, LED devices can be fabricated simply by depositing the ETL and top electrode onto the patterned QD pixels. Large-area flexible QD-LED displays have been demonstrated using this approach.34 Furthermore, the performance of QD-LEDs has been shown to improve with the transfer-printed QD films, with maximum luminance and luminous efficiency increasing by ∼25–52% over devices fabricated using QD films directly spin-cast on HTL.34 These improvements have been attributed to mechanical pressure applied through the stamp increasing the density of QDs as well as to transfer printing being a dry process that eliminates possible swelling of the HTL by the solvent used for QDs.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of transfer printing process for patterning QDs. The bottom right image is a fluorescence micrograph of the transfer-printed RGB QD strips. (Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 34), copyright 2011.) (b) Schematic of the intaglio transfer printing process. (c) Comparison of pattern size scaling and transfer yield for structured stamping and intaglio transfer printing. ((b) and (c) reprinted with permission from ref. 4, copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.) 
Further efforts to improve transfer printing of QDs are being made, especially to achieve high resolution with high yields. In particular, an intaglio patterning approach in which the QD films are picked up by a PDMS stamp and then brought in contact with an intaglio trench appears to show much promise (Fig. 12(b)).4 Only the part of the QD layer that is not in contact with the intaglio substrate remains on the stamp and is transfer printed on the target substrate. This process enables definition of small pixel areas, and in turn pushes the resolution limit well beyond current needs for most applications (Fig. 12(c)).
Another advantage of transfer printing is that multiple layers of QD films or heterogeneous materials can be patterned together. Such an ability can be especially beneficial for device fabrication. For example, white-emitting LEDs consisting of a stack of RGB QD films have been fabricated through multiple transfer printing steps using poly(vinyl alcohol) to enhance retrieval of each film of different color QDs.117 Another approach is to use a fluoropolymer as a low energy protective coating to allow transfer printing and patterning of multilayer stacks consisting of QDs, ETL, and the metal electrode simultaneously.45 Because the fluoropolymer can be removed with an orthogonal solvent, multi-color QD-LED pixel arrays with customized ETL for each color can be patterned on the same plane of the substrate. These transfer printing-based strategies, especially when developed into a parallel printing/patterning scheme, should accelerate integration of QD-LEDs into displays and other applications.
One potential disadvantage of transfer printing using PDMS is that it relies on the viscoelastic characteristics of PDMS to pick up and release the materials being printed. Hence, high peeling speeds are needed to induce elastic response of PDMS to pick up QDs whereas much slower peeling speeds are needed for releasing the QD film onto the final target substrate. This requirement of very different peeling rates makes transfer printing with PDMS incompatible with high throughput approaches such as roll-to-roll printing where a constant speed is required. To address this issue, alternative stamp materials are being examined. For example, a shape memory polymer (SMP) that switches its elastic modulus as a function of temperature rather than peeling rate may lead to a potential solution.118
5.3 Direct printing for QD-LED fabrication
Another alternative approach that is showing promise with respect to QD-LED fabrication is ink-jet printing and related methods.119 As the name suggests, QD solutions are used as inks, and QD pixels are printed onto the substrates followed by the deposition of CTLs.120 With optimized HTL, air stable QD-LED with a maximum EQE of 5.54% has been demonstrated using ink-jet printing method.121 Improvements to these direct printing methods include electro-hydrodynamic jet printing or E-jet printing.122 In this method, a voltage is applied between the substrate and a metal-coated glass capillary (Fig. 13), inducing a rapid flow of the QD ink through a fine opening at the end of a nozzle. E-jet printing method offers higher resolution and improved control over thickness, as well as the versatility of printing different color QDs as shown in Fig. 13(c) and (d). Feature sizes down to ∼20 nm in both height and width have been demonstrated with E-jet printing.
 Fig. 13  (a and b) An optical microscope image and the corresponding schematic of E-jet printing of QDs. Composite fluorescence images of QD-LEDs with EML consisting of (c) a spin-cast film of red QDs and E-jet printed lines of green QDs and (d) alternating dotted lines of E-jet printed green and red QDs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
6. Towards multifunctional emissive displays
There is an increasing demand for multifunctional electronics in compact, light-weight format as exemplified by smart phones that now act as cameras, audio/video recorders/players, finger print scanners, etc. with increasing computing power. Integrating a new device or devices for each added capability increases not only weight and volume but also complexity in manufacturing. Developing individual devices that can function in multiple ways presents a potentially important solution to this challenge and may lead to new opportunities. For example, a large-area, patterned arrays of LEDs (e.g., as emissive pixels in a display) that can also detect and harvest light with sufficient efficiency would be highly enabling. Such devices can allow real-time bidirectional communication, unique user interfaces, self-powering capabilities and more. While LEDs of III–V semiconductors can have high performance in both emitting and detecting light, they are not well suited for high-resolution displays that require large arrays of such devices due to high cost, complexity of manufacturing and difficulty in scaling beyond the wafer size. Improving photocurrent generation in OLEDs usually leads to the degradation of LED performance since donor–acceptor blends needed to induce charge separation in organic photodetectors quench PL and therefore become detrimental to EL.
Nevertheless, there have been recent advances in integrating OLEDs with CMOS technology, demonstrating the usefulness of having each pixel of a display capable of not only emitting but also sensing light.123 Multi-color OLEDs can be stacked on top of a CMOS sensor array, leading to the ability of simultaneously capturing/recording and displaying an image. These bidirectional displays are already being incorporated into augmented/virtual reality glasses and may lead to more sophisticated user interactivity.124 However, because of the necessity of wafer-based manufacturing and vacuum deposition processes, this technology has been limited to rigid micro-displays.
Two of the most prominent solution-processed devices based on QDs have been solar cells and LEDs. Colloidal QDs may then be well suited for developing large-area pixel arrays where each pixel contains both multicolor light sources and detectors. However, there are some difficult fabrication challenges that remain. At least four different types of QDs (three for RGB light sources and one for photodetection) that are likely to have very similar solubility need to be patterned on a single plane. Each type of QD has to be also interfaced with its own CTLs or other necessary layers. While such challenges may eventually be overcome with unconventional patterning and fabrication approaches discuss earlier, one material that can be used for both EL and photodetection/light harvesting would radically simplify device design and fabrication. However, C/S QDs suffer a similar fate as organic materials when used as both light emitting and charge separation centers. For example, removing the shell to improve photocurrent generation in QD films will drastically degrade their EL characteristics and vice versa.
The double heterostructure designed into DHNRs, on the other hand, allows simultaneous enhancements in both carrier injection and extraction.3 Hence, DHNR-LEDs can function as photodetectors without sacrificing LED performance. Currently, DHNR-LEDs can generate about a factor of 20 higher photocurrent in the visible than their C/S QD counterparts and are comparable in responsivity to commercial Si photodiodes in the UV region. Since the photocurrent is generated through the photovoltaic response, DHNR-LEDs can also function as solar cells, albeit improvements are needed to make them practical in powering devices. The photodetector/photovoltaic performance demonstrated in DHNR-LEDs is especially exciting in that these devices have been optimized only for EL. Hence there is much room for improvement and improving photovoltaic power conversion efficiency may also enhance LED performance. Furthermore, both EL and photo-response times of DHNR-LEDs are 3 orders of magnitude faster than that required for current video displays. These features of DHNR-LEDs that can be easily fabricated by an all-solution process are quite exciting. The feasibility of displays that are capable of automatic brightness control at the individual pixel level, touchless user interfaces, imaging, massively parallel data communication and energy harvesting, etc. have been demonstrated (Fig. 14). These examples highlight what devices such as light-responsive DHNR-LEDs might enable in paving the path to new directions in emissive displays and beyond.
 Fig. 14  Automatic brightness control at the single-pixel level in response to an approaching (a) white LED bulb and (b) finger that blocks ambient light. (c) Demonstration of light-signal generation and detection using two identical DHNR-LEDs. (d) Photographs of a light-responsive LED array responding to a laser pointer. (e) Magnified images of region enclosed by the red dotted box in (d). (f) Time-dependent voltage curves for a supercapacitor being charged by and powering four DHNR-LEDs. Insets show the corresponding circuit diagrams and photographs of the LEDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2017 AAAS.) 
7. Conclusion/future outlook
Among the different device structures developed, QD-LEDs that employ organic/inorganic combination CTLs have achieved the highest performance thus far. Some of the key issues that have been and are continuing to be addressed in QD-LEDs revolve around achieving charge balance, which arises in large part from the unfavorable energy level alignment between organic HTL and Cd-based II–VI QD emitters. Approaches to mitigate this problem include CTL selection and doping, addition of blocking layers, and optimizing QD shell and surface passivation. Interestingly, efforts to increase electron injection barrier to better match the undesirably large hole barrier have been the most successful thus far. One of the few exceptions is replacing C/S QDs with DHNRs that can address this asymmetric charge injection barrier problem through the more obvious approach of reducing the hole injection barrier rather than hindering electron injection. Overall, there has been an impressively rapid progress in QD-LEDs, including the EQE limit set by light outcoupling efficiency being nearly reached and >100000 cd m−2 luminance. In addition, the potential of manufacturing large-area, high-resolution emissive pixel arrays on arbitrary substrates through unconventional fabrication techniques are generating much excitement especially in displays. One can anticipate these advances to contribute to novel foldable/flexible displays and lighting devices among many potential applications. Notable recent achievements in this area of flexible devices include ultrathin QD-LED arrays that can be laminated conformally on the human skin, opening up new directions in soft, wearable displays.125
Emerging anisotropic heterostructures such as DHNRs allow improvements beyond the anticipated limits of C/S QD-based devices. They also impart new capabilities that can redefine how and in what applications QD-based LEDs can be used. However, there are still some fundamental challenges remaining, including the long-standing challenge of developing Cd-free QDs and their heterostructures with equivalent performance and the understanding of the mechanism(s) of device failure. Addressing these outstanding issues will usher in the next generation of displays and related devices that exploit QD- and DHNR-LEDs with unprecedented performance and multi-functionality.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by US NSF (Grant No. 1507170).
References
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 7, 13–23 CrossRef .
J. M. Pietryga, Y.-S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oh, B. H. Kim, S. Cho, S. Nam, S. P. Rogers, Y. Yu, Y. K. Cho, G. Hur, J. Zhang, P. Trefonas, Y. Jiang, J. C. Flanagan, Y. Zhai, J.-H. Kim, J. Lee, Y. Yu, Y. K. Cho, G. Hur, J. Zhang, P. Trefonas, J. A. Rogers and M. Shim, Science, 2017, 355, 616–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Choi, J. Yang, K. Kang, D. C. Kim, C. Choi, C. Park, S. J. Kim, S. I. Chae, T.-H. Kim, J. H. Kim, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607022 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. R. Manders, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, J. H. Lee, H. D. Kang, B. Park, Y. Kwon, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. Lee and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4893–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, J. H. Lee, W. S. Song, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. H. Lee and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7295–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, E. Mutlugun, C. Dang, K. Dev, Y. Gao, S. T. Tan, X. W. Sun and H. V. Demir, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8224–8231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Dai, Z. X. Zhang, Y. Z. Jin, Y. Niu, H. J. Cao, X. Y. Liang, L. W. Chen, J. P. Wang and X. G. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Leung, C. C. Chang, M. H. Wu, K. H. Chuang, J. H. Lee, S. J. Shieh, S. C. Lin and C. F. Chiu, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 2623–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Shen, Y. K. Su and L. W. Ji, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 445–446, 509–512 CrossRef .
Y. L. Chang, Z. B. Wang, M. G. Helander, J. Qiu, D. P. Puzzo and Z. H. Lu, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 925–931 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, N. S. Cho, H. Oh, J. H. Yang, W. S. Jeon, J. S. Park, M. C. Suh and J. H. Kwon, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2721–2726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Carter, M. Angelopoulos, S. Karg, P. J. Brock and J. C. Scott, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2067–2069 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirchmeyer and K. Reuter, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2077 RSC .
B. N. Pal, Y. Ghosh, S. Brovelli, R. Laocharoensuk, V. I. Klimov, J. A. Hollingsworth and H. Htoon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 331–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, O. Onitsuka and M. F. Rubner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1316–1318 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W. K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nature, 2002, 420, 800–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. A. Wang, L. S. Li, D. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Xu, C. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 717–722 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Schlamp, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 5837–5842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mattoussi, L. H. Radzilowski, B. O. Dabbousi, E. L. Thomas, M. G. Bawendi and M. F. Rubner, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 7965 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, K. Shanmugasundaram, S. C. Price, J. Ruzyllo, F. Zhang, J. Xu, S. E. Mohney, Q. Zhang and A. Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 23111 CrossRef .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castelli, F. Meinardi, M. Pasini, F. Galeotti, V. Pinchetti, M. Lorenzon, L. Manna, I. Moreels, U. Giovanella and S. Brovelli, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5455–5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mutlugun, B. Guzelturk, A. P. Abiyasa, Y. Gao, X. W. Sun and H. V. Demir, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2802–2807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. E. Halpert, J.-M. Caruge, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3581–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, V. Wood, V. Buloví and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Mashford, T.-L. Nguyen, G. J. Wilson, P. Mulvaney, M. Lerch, G. Muller, U. Bloeck, D.-S. Su, M. Giersig, A. Rougier and A. Blyr, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 167–172 RSC .
W. Ji, S. Liu, H. Zhang, R. Wang, W. Xie and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1271–1278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, I. Park, J. Lim, M. Park, H. Cho, H. Woo, D. Y. Yoon, K. Char, S. Lee and C. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2362–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, S. J. Lee, J. Chae, J. W. Kim, D. H. Kim, J.-Y. Kwon, G. Amaratunga, S. Y. Lee, B. L. Choi, Y. Kuk, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, W.-J. Joo, E. Jang, T.-H. Kim, S. J. Lee, S.-J. Kwon, J. Y. Han, B.-K. Kim, B. L. Choi and J. M. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nam, N. Oh, Y. Zhai and M. Shim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 878–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5048–5051 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Bae, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, D. Lee, L. A. Padilha, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, C. Lee, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2661 Search PubMed .
J. Lim, B. G. Jeong, M. Park, J. K. Kim, J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, V. I. Klimov, C. Lee, D. C. Lee and W. K. Bae, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8034–8040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bozyigit, O. Yarema and V. Wood, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3024–3029 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, W. A. Tisdale and V. Bulović, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 217403 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S. Park, A. V. Malko, J. Vela, Y. Chen, Y. Ghosh, F. García-Santamaría, J. A. Hollingsworth, V. I. Klimov and H. Htoon, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 187401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lim, M. Park, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, S. Lee, C. Lee and K. Char, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9019–9026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Kim, S. Nam, N. Oh, S.-Y. Cho, K. J. Yu, C. H. Lee, J. Zhang, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas, J.-H. Kim, J. Lee, J. H. Shin, Y. Yu, J. Bin Lim, S. M. Won, Y. K. Cho, N. H. Kim, K. J. Seo, H. Lee, T. Kim, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4920–4925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Kim, C.-Y. Han, K.-H. Lee, K.-S. An, W. Song, J. Kim, M. S. Oh, Y. R. Do and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Yan, Y. Li, Y. T. Zhou, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. G. You and Y. Li, IEEE Photonics J., 2017, 9, 8200508 Search PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Zheng, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, C. Li, X. Guan, W. Yang, M. Shang and T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15605–15614 CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, W. Ji, P. Jing, X. Yuan, Y. A. Wang, W. Xiang and J. Zhao, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. Kim, D. Geng, J. Kim, E. Hwang and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28727–28736 CAS .
N. Kirkwood, B. Singh and P. Mulvaney, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600868 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Shi, F. Liang, Y. Hu, M.-P. Zhuo, X.-D. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14792–14797 RSC .
K. Ding, H. Chen, L. Fan, B. Wang, Z. Huang, S. Zhuang, B. Hu and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20231–20238 CAS .
N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Zhai, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas and M. Shim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3642 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, N. Oh and M. Shim, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1862–1868 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Scholz, J. Frischeisen, A. Jaeger, D. S. Setz, T. C. G. Reusch and W. Brütting, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A205–A212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ji, Q. Zeng, P. Jing, M.-M. Jiang, S. Qu, D. Li, J. Wang and C.-X. Shan, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 32413–32419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019–7029 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Kagan, C. B. Murray, M. Nirmal and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 1517–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oh and M. Shim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10444–10451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, W. Cao, N. T. Shewmon, C. Yang, L. S. Li and J. Xue, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1211–1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-H. Kang, J.-S. Lee, S.-W. Lee, S.-W. Kim, J.-W. Lee, S.-A. Gopalan, J.-S. Park, D.-H. Kwon, J.-H. Bae, H.-R. Kim and S.-W. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 34659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, Y. Fu, J. Kim, K. Lee, H. Kim, H. Yang and H. Chae, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 245203 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Cho, H. Jung, B. G. Jeong, J. H. Chang, Y. Kim, K. Char, D. C. Lee, C. Lee, J. Cho and W. K. Bae, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 684–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Park, J.-J. Lee and S.-W. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Y. Chen, H. C. Yeh, M. R. Tseng, R. J. Chung, S. Chen and R. S. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603962 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shen, H. Tang, X. Yang, Z. Cao, T. Cheng, X. Wang, Z. Tan, J. You and Z. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8243–8249 RSC .
H. Y. Kim, Y. J. Park, J. Kim, C. J. Han, J. Lee, Y. Kim, T. Greco, C. Ippen, A. Wedel, B.-K. Ju and M. S. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3454–3461 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jang, J. Kim, C. Ippen, T. Greco, M. S. Oh, J. Lee, W. K. Kim, A. Wedel, C. J. Han and S. K. Park, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 02BC01 CrossRef .
J.-H. Kim, K.-H. Lee, D.-Y. Jo, Y. Lee, J. Y. Hwang and H. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 133104 CrossRef .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, Z. Wang, E. Bovero, Z. Lu, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12396–12402 CAS .
H. Zang, H. Li, N. S. Makarov, K. A. Velizhanin, K. Wu, Y. S. Park and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1787–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fuhr, H. J. Yun, N. S. Makarov, H. Li, H. McDaniel and V. I. Klimov, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2425–2435 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Lou, W. Ji, J. Zhao and X. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1204–1212 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, Y. Zhang, C. Xie, H. Su, J. Liu, C. Zhang, N. Dellas, S. E. Mohney, Y. Wang, J. Wang and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3553–3558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Kim and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meerheim, M. Furno, S. Hofmann, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 253305 CrossRef .
M. Nasilowski, B. Mahler, E. Lhuillier, S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10934–10982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Vitukhnovsky, V. S. Lebedev, A. S. Selyukov, A. A. Vashchenko, R. B. Vasiliev and M. S. Sokolikova, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 619, 185–188 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, B. Nadal, B. Mahler, H. Aubin and B. Dubertret, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 295–302 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fan, P. Kanjanaboos, M. Saravanapavanantham, E. Beauregard, G. Ingram, E. Yassitepe, M. M. Adachi, O. Voznyy, A. K. Johnston, G. Walters, G. H. Kim, Z. H. Lu and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4611–4615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Lin, H. Shen, W. Cao, C. Yang, H. Wang, L. Yu, Z. Du, J. Xue and L. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12182–12188 RSC .
R. A. M. Hikmet, P. T. K. Chin, D. V. Talapin and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1436–1439 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rizzo, C. Nobile, M. Mazzeo, M. De Giorgi, A. Fiore, L. Carbone, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1506–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Corrias, E. Conca, G. Cibin, G. Mountjoy, D. Gianolio, F. De Donato, L. Manna and M. F. Casula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16338–16348 CAS .
D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Gotzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. Benson, J. Feldmann and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1677–1681 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Wong, N. Mishra, G. Xing, M. Li, S. Chakrabortty, T. C. Sum, Y. Shi, Y. Chan and H. Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2873–2879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kroemer, Proc. IEEE, 1963, 51, 1782–1783 CrossRef .
Z. Alferov, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2000, 6, 832–840 CrossRef CAS .
H. McDaniel, M. Pelton, N. Oh and M. Shim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Oh and M. Shim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11621 RSC .
F. Shieh, A. E. Saunders and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8538–8542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fan, O. Voznyy, R. P. Sabatini, K. T. Bicanic, M. M. Adachi, J. R. McBride, K. R. Reid, Y.-S. Park, X. Li, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Saravanapavanantham, M. Liu, M. Korkusinski, P. Hawrylak, V. I. Klimov, S. J. Rosenthal, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2017, 544, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Jiang, Doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,  2017 .
S. Coe-Sullivan, J. S. Steckel, W. K. Woo, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1117–1124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Niu, A. M. Munro, Y. J. Cheng, Y. Tian, M. S. Liu, J. Zhao, J. A. Bardecker, I. Jen-La Plante, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3371–3376 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Stouwdam and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1889 RSC .
K. H. Lee, C. Y. Han, H. D. Kang, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. Lee, N. S. Myoung, S. Y. Yim and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10941–10949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Kim, W.-I. Jeong, C. Mayr, Y.-S. Park, K.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee, C.-K. Moon, W. Brütting and J.-J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3896–3900 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Kim, P. K. H. Ho, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 1073 CrossRef CAS .
W. Brütting, J. Frischeisen, T. D. Schmidt, B. J. Scholz and C. Mayr, Phys. Status Solidi, 2013, 210, 44–65 CrossRef .
A. P. Ghosh, L. J. Gerenser, C. M. Jarman and J. E. Fornalik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 223503 CrossRef .
J. M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2991–2994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Cho, N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Jiang and M. Shim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6103–6110 RSC .
K. P. Acharya, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, C. Wang, J. Tokarz and P. H. Holloway, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14451–14457 RSC .
J. S. Park, J. Kyhm, H. H. Kim, S. Jeong, J. Kang, S. E. Lee, K. T. Lee, K. Park, N. Barange, J. Han, J. D. Song, W. K. Choi and I. K. Han, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6946–6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, I. Fedin, H. Zhang and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2017, 357, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zillner, S. Fengler, P. Niyamakom, F. Rauscher, K. Köhler and T. Dittrich, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16747–16754 CAS .
L. Kim, P. O. Anikeeva, S. A. Coe-Sullivan, J. S. Steckel, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4513–4517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rizzo, M. Mazzeo, M. Palumbo, G. Lerario, S. D’Amone, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1886–1891 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, W. Liu, W. Ji, J. Yu, W. Zhang, L. Zhang and W. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, J. Ku, I. Song, S. Sul, D.-H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, B. L. Choi, J. Min Kim, S. Hwang and K. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2637 Search PubMed .
H. Keum, Y. Jiang, J. Park, J. Flanagan, M. Shim and S. Kim, Micromachines, 2017, 8, 18 CrossRef .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. Chen, M. S. Bradley, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2151–2155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, Z. Zhong, B. Liu, Z. He, J. Zou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26162–26168 CAS .
Z. Xing, J. Zhuang, C. Wei, D. Zhang, Z. Xie, X. Xu, S. Ji, J. Tang, W. Su and Z. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16351–16359 CAS .
B. H. Kim, M. S. Onses, J. Bin Lim, S. Nam, N. Oh, H. Kim, K. J. Yu, J. W. Lee, J.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kang, C. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. H. Shin, N. H. Kim, C. Leal, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wartenberg, B. Richter, S. Brenner, M. Thomschke, K. Fehse, J. Baumgarten and U. Vogel, SID Int. Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap., 2015, 46, 204–206 CrossRef .
U. Vogel, Photonics Spectra, 2016, 50, 56–61 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, H. J. Shim, J. Yang, M. K. Choi, D. C. Kim, J. Kim, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700217 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Yiran Jiang
	Yiran Jiang is a former PhD student at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. She received her BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Tongji University in 2012. She worked with Professor Moonsub Shim on nano electronic materials. Her doctoral research is focused on double heterojunction nanorod-based light-emitting diodes.

Seong-Yong Cho
	Seong-Yong Cho is a former postdoctoral research associate at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He received his BS and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University. He worked with Professor Moonsub Shim at University of Illinois as a postdoctoral researcher. Now, he is an assistant professor at Myongji University in Korea. His background is nanomaterials and research interests are graphene growth mechanism, thin film characterization and nanorod heterostructure light-emitting diode. His postdoctoral studies are developing multifunctional double heterojunction nanorod LED and understanding failure mechanism of colloidal quantum dot LED.

Moonsub Shim
	Moonsub Shim is a professor of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He received his BS degree from the University of California at Berkeley in 1997 and his M.S. and PhD degrees both from the University of Chicago in 1998 and 2001. After working as a postdoctoral researcher at Stanford University, he joined the faculty of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Illinois in 2002. His research interests revolve around nanoscale materials, spanning materials synthesis to charging and charge-separation processes to their applications in electronics, optoelectronics, and photovoltaics.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Electroluminescence (solid lines) and photoluminescence (dashed lines) spectra of red, green, and blue quantum dot light-emitting diodes shown along with the corresponding photographs of the actual devices. (b) Wide color gamut that can be achieved using QDs compared to 1953 and 1987 color gamut (dashed and dotted lines), respectively. (Adapted with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) General device architecture of QD-LEDs. Energy band alignment of (b) all-organic, (c) all-inorganic, and (d) organic–inorganic combination CTLs. (e) Inverted device structure with organic–inorganic CTLs. ((b) Reprinted with permission from (ref. 26), copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; (c) adapted with permission from ref. 32, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society; (d) reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 6), copyright 2017; (e) adapted with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy band positions of some commonly used organic HTLs compared with CdS, CdSe and ZnO. The energy band positions are extracted from the references listed in Table 1.	 

TFB	Poly[(9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,40-(N-(4-sec-butylphenyl)) diphenylamine]	

	Solution	
35

PVK	Poly(9-vinlycarbazole)	

	Solution	
11

Poly-TPD	Poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bisphenylbenzidine]	

	Solution	
11 and 36

CBP	4,4′-Bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl	

	Vacuum	
33, 39 and 40

NPB	
N,N′-Di(1-naphthyl)-N,N′-diphenyl-(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine	

	Vacuum	
10


 	Fig. 4  Different strategies for CTL engineering. (a) Doping HTL (Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society), (b) SAM modification on ITO substrate (Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society), and (c) blocking electrons with PMMA layer. (d) and (e) are the device characteristics with the structure in (c). (c)–(e) Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 11), copyright 2014).	 

 	Fig. 5  EQE versus current–density of QD-LEDs with (a) CdSe/CdS QDs and CdSe/CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S QDs (reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications (ref. 39), copyright 2013) and (b) CdSe/Zn1−xCdx–S of varying total radius R (reprinted with permission from Advanced Materials (ref. 40), copyright 2014). The insets in (a) compare the energy band alignment of CdSe/CdS vs. CdSe/CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S QDs. The top figure in (b) is a schematic of the successive growth for the graded alloy shell.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cd-Free QDs and their LEDs. (a) InP QDs with PL emission ranging across the visible spectral range (reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group). (b) Band diagram and device characteristics of InP-QD based LEDs (reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (c) Composition-tunable PL emission of Cu doped Zn–In–S/ZnS C/S QDs (reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). (d) Heterostructured C/S Cu–In–S (CIS)/ZnS QDs and the EQE–luminance curves of their LEDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Energy band alignment and schematic of the double heterojunction nanorods (DHNRs). (b) From left to right: representative TEM and STEM images of CdS nanorod seeds, CdS/CdSe nanorod heterostructures and CdS/CdSe/ZnSe DHNRs. (c) Absorption and PL spectra of CdS nanords, CdS/CdSe nanorod heterostructures and CdS/CdSe/ZnSe DHNRs of two different ZnSe amounts. (Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications (ref. 55), copyright 2014.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) EL spectra of a DHNR-LED shown along with DHNR solution PL spectrum. Inset is EL/PL comparison at low voltage. (b) EQE vs. current density of a DHNR-LED. Inset shows the dependence of luminance and current density on the applied voltage. (c) Current and power efficiencies along with a photograph of a QD-LED and a DHNR-LED under operation shown in inset (reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Maximum luminance, (b) EQE, (c) current efficiency, and (d) power efficiency of red-emitting QD- and DHNR-LEDs over the years. Numbers in brackets are the corresponding reference numbers. Legends in (a) also apply to (b)–(d).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Device lifetime (t0.9) multiplied by the initial luminance to partly account for different measurement conditions of C/S QD- and DHNR-LEDs. (b and c) Examples of time evolution of luminance of QD- and DHNR-LEDs under constant current. (d) Device lifetime (t0.9) of C/S QD- and DHNR-LEDs as a function of initial voltage. Numbers in brackets are the corresponding reference numbers. The reference numbers given in (d) have been edited to match references given here. ((b) is reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 6), copyright 2015; (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of patterning different QDs on a Si/SiO2 substrate using repeated photolithography and layer-by-layer assembly of QDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of transfer printing process for patterning QDs. The bottom right image is a fluorescence micrograph of the transfer-printed RGB QD strips. (Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Photonics (ref. 34), copyright 2011.) (b) Schematic of the intaglio transfer printing process. (c) Comparison of pattern size scaling and transfer yield for structured stamping and intaglio transfer printing. ((b) and (c) reprinted with permission from ref. 4, copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) An optical microscope image and the corresponding schematic of E-jet printing of QDs. Composite fluorescence images of QD-LEDs with EML consisting of (c) a spin-cast film of red QDs and E-jet printed lines of green QDs and (d) alternating dotted lines of E-jet printed green and red QDs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Automatic brightness control at the single-pixel level in response to an approaching (a) white LED bulb and (b) finger that blocks ambient light. (c) Demonstration of light-signal generation and detection using two identical DHNR-LEDs. (d) Photographs of a light-responsive LED array responding to a laser pointer. (e) Magnified images of region enclosed by the red dotted box in (d). (f) Time-dependent voltage curves for a supercapacitor being charged by and powering four DHNR-LEDs. Insets show the corresponding circuit diagrams and photographs of the LEDs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 3. Copyright 2017 AAAS.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
