Urchin-like nanowire array: a strategy for high-performance ZnO-based electrode utilized in photoelectrochemistry   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR00889D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR00889D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5530-5538Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUrchin-like nanowire array: a strategy for high-performance ZnO-based electrode utilized in photoelectrochemistry†

        
          
            Hoang Nhat 
            Hieu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nguyen Quoc 
            Dung
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jimin 
            Kim
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dojin 
            Kim
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 305-764, Rep. of Korea. E-mail: dojin@cnu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 42 823 7648;   Tel: +82 42 821 6639
Received 
      20th February 2013
    , Accepted 2nd April 2013First published on 8th April 2013AbstractThe electrodes in photoelectrochemical cells responsible for the generation of hydrogen and oxygen by water splitting have been intensively studied because of their high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency. The morphology of nanostructures with these high-efficiency electrodes was systematically compared with the morphology of ZnO structures with vertically aligned nanorod arrays (NA), hollow hemisphere arrays (HA), urchin-like (UL) nanorod arrays, and thin films (TF). The UV-vis light absorption, photoresponse (current–voltage characteristics in the dark and under light), and photoelectrochemistry of the electrodes were measured. The highest photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 65% at a specific UV wavelength for an electrode with a ZnO UL structure was derived from the UL morphology of high light-trapping efficiency and carrier collection efficiency. The UL morphology also produced a photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 4.5% under a solar simulator by CdS-sensitization of the ZnO UL electrode. The value was the highest observed thus far among the ZnO-based electrodes. We demonstrated that photoresponse measurement is a practical and simple technique for the estimation of the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of an electrode.
1 Introduction
Photoelectrolysis of water is a method that produces hydrogen by solar energy. Since Fujishima and Honda1 reported water splitting in a TiO2 photoelectrode in 1972, various semiconducting metal oxides have been investigated for electrode use in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells.2–6 The thermodynamics of the technique require semiconductors with an energy gap greater than 1.23 eV as the electrode materials, and the solar spectrum requires materials with smaller energy gaps for higher efficiency in sunlight absorption. However, in practice, the technique requires materials with much higher energy gaps (approximately >1.7 eV to 2.0 eV), and the majority of wavelengths in the visible region are not absorbed by the electrode, producing a maximum solar energy that is less than ∼10%.7 Various strategies in material engineering have been tested to obtain a higher absorption efficiency, particularly in the visible range. These strategies include employing materials with smaller bandgap energies, doping to form intra-gap energy levels, and hybridization with small bandgap semiconductors.2–5
Another important strategy is the control of material morphology. Micro- and nano-structural morphologies have been intensively studied to enhance the absorption of sunlight for application in solar cells.8–17 The morphology of nanorod arrays shows enhanced absorption of sunlight theoretically and experimentally in terms of the range of absorption wavelength and layer thickness.9,10 The enhancement in the absorption efficiency is attributed to high light trapping caused by the low reflection and transmittance in the vertical nanorods.12,18 Tapered nanorods and domed-tip arrays also enhance efficiency by absorption through wide angles of light incidence.12–14 The above nanostructures for solar cells are mostly studied with Si. Similar light-absorption enhancement effects for PEC electrodes have been studied with branched nanorod structures of TiO2 and ZnO.8,15–17 Carrier collection efficiency is another critical issue that needs to be addressed for PEC electrodes to achieve high efficiency during water splitting, just like in solar cells. However, no systematic studies on carrier transport behavior have been conducted thus far.
We report that the urchin-like (UL) ZnO nanowire structure recently developed in this lab,19 omnidirectionally grown with ZnO nanowires on the surfaces of the ZnO hemispheres, is a morphology suitable for use as an electrode of high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency in PEC cells. ZnO nanostructural electrodes composed of a hemisphere array (HA), vertically grown nanorods, omnidirectionally grown urchin-like nanorods, and thin film electrodes were systematically compared with respect to light absorption, carrier transport, and PEC performance. We demonstrated that the omnidirectional growth morphology of nanowires (UL structure) is efficient in light trapping, particularly in the visible region, and in carrier collection. This result was derived by measuring the photo-current of the electrodes in air, which is also a simple technique to estimate the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the electrode in the PEC cell. Motivated by the highest photon-to-electron conversion efficiency at a UV light wavelength (UV-CE) with the optimized ZnO UL electrode, we further sensitized the electrodes with a narrow bandgap material for more efficient visible-light absorption.
2 Experiment
2.1 Preparation of ZnO–NA, ZnO–HA, and ZnO–UL films
A thin Zn layer was sputter-deposited on the substrates, followed by oxidation at 500 °C in air for 2 h to serve as the seed layer for the hydrothermal synthesis of vertically aligned ZnO–NAs. For the hydrothermal synthesis, a mixture of 0.04 M of aqueous solution that included zinc nitrate [Zn(NO3)2·6H2O] and hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4) (1:1 ratio) was prepared based on our previous research.19 The seeded substrates were placed in the solution at 90 °C to allow ZnO–NA growth. The nanorod length was controlled by varying the growth time (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12 h). The ZnO–NA structures were washed with deionized water and dried by nitrogen flow drying.
The ZnO–UL structures were formed through the same hydrothermal synthesis method described above for the ZnO–NA growth, but on hollow ZnO HAs synthesized on SiO2/Si and ITO substrates following the process developed in this laboratory, described in detail in ref. 19. To summarize, a powdery substance composed of polystyrene (PS) spheres with diameters of ∼1.5 μm was first synthesized as described in ref. 29, and then dispersed in ethanol (1 wt%) to form the PS sphere solution. The PS spheres were coated on the SiO2/Si and ITO substrates by a drop-casting method and dried on a hot plate at 90 °C. Zn was subsequently sputter-deposited on the PS spheres/SiO2/Si and PS spheres/ITO substrates. Zn was deposited only on the top half of the PS sphere arrays because of the shadowing effect. The oxidation of the Zn/PS sphere substrates in air at 500 °C for 2 h burned out the PS cores and converted the Zn–HAs to ZnO–HAs on the SiO2/Si and ITO substrates. The ZnO–HAs formed though this method also served as the seed layer for further hydrothermal synthesis of the ZnO–UL electrode samples or the vertical growth of ZnO nanorods on the ZnO–HA seed layers formed by the ZnO–UL structures. The nanorod length was again controlled by varying the growth time (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12 h).
2.2 Preparation of CdS/ZnO–NA and CdS/ZnO–UL films
The ZnO–NA and ZnO–UL structures were chemically grown for 4 h, and those that exhibited the best photoconversion properties were further decorated with CdS layers for higher absorption in the range of visible light.30,31 The CdS nanocrystals were directly grown on the ZnO nanorod surfaces by incubating the ZnO–NA/ITO and ZnO–UL/ITO electrodes in an aqueous solution of 10 mM of Cd (NO3)2·4H2O and 10 mM of C2H5NS at room temperature for 15, 30, 60, and 90 min, followed by rinsing with deionized water and blow-drying with N2.
2.3 Characterization of the films
The crystalline structures of the synthesized ZnO–NA and ZnO–UL were examined by XRD (Rigaku, D/MAX-RC) with Cu Kα radiation. The morphology of the synthesized structures was examined with a field-emission scanning electron microscope (JEOL, JSM-700F) and a transmission electron microscope (JEOL, JEM-1010). A UV-vis spectrophotometer (S-3100, SCINCO Co.) was utilized to measure the optical absorption spectra.
2.4 PEC measurements
PEC properties were measured with a three-electrode electrochemical analyzer (Potentiostat/Galvanostat Model 263A). The fabricated nanostructural films formed on ITO were utilized as the working electrode, the Pt-grid as the counter electrode, and the Hg2Cl2/Hg in saturated KCl as the reference electrode. The electrolyte utilized for the ZnO structures consisted of 0.01 M of Na2SO4, whereas that for the CdS/ZnO structures consisted of 1 M of Na2S. A UV light source with an intensity of 0.3 mW cm−2 and a wavelength of 365 nm (Z169609 – E-Series UV Lamp, output 4 W, AC input 230 V) was utilized to measure the photoconversion efficiency of the structures by measuring the photocurrent while varying the potential at a sweeping rate of 10 mV s−1. A visible light source, a 150 W Xe lamp with the intensity of 100 mW cm−2 passing through an AM 1.5 G filter, was also employed to evaluate the photoconversion efficiency of the CdS/ZnO electrodes. The area of the working electrode exposed to the electrolyte was fixed at 0.25 cm2 by nonconductive epoxy coating. The photoconversion efficiency was calculated with the following equation: (1)where Jp is the photocurrent density (mA cm−2), I0 is the power density of the incident light (0.3 and 100 mW cm−2), and Erev is the standard state-reversible potential (1.23 V vs. NHE). Eapp = Emeas − Eaoc is the applied potential, where Emeas is the electrode potential of the working electrode (vs. SCE) under illumination and Eaoc is the electrode potential of the same working electrode under open circuit conditions.15 The I–V characteristics of the electrodes in the dark and under the UV light were measured through the nanostructures formed on bar-type Pt electrodes with a multimeter (Keithley 2400). The photoresponse of the electrodes was defined as S = (A − A0)/A0, where A0 and A are the currents measured with UV light off and on, respectively.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Structure and morphology
The morphologies of the synthesized ZnO structures with (a) thin film (TF), (b) hollow HA, (c and d) vertically aligned nanorod array (NA), and (e and f) UL nanorod array structures are compared in Fig. 1. The ZnO–NA and ZnO–UL structures show the 4 h growth of nanorods in the solution. Comparisons with the other growth times are shown in Fig. S1 and S2.† The comparison reveals that the diameters of ZnO nanorods increased with synthesis time, whereas the density of the nanorods decreased. This morphological change in relation to growth time occurred because most of the nanorods were not normally grown into the substrate but quasi-vertically with tilt angles θ < 30° in the ZnO–NA structure as illustrated in Fig. 2a. When a growing rod encounters another growing rod, the rod front is blocked by another rod and the lengthwise growth stops. Thus, the rod density continues to decrease as the synthesis continues, and the length and diameter of the surviving rods increase. As a result, the average size of the space among the nanorods increases with time. This “block-and-survive” control of nanorod density also occurs with the ZnO–UL structures, where growth omnidirectionally occurs with tilt angles from 0° to almost 90° (Fig. 1e, f, 2c and S2†). The UL morphology was obtained by the quasi-vertical growth of ZnO nanorods on hemispherical ZnO seed layers in Fig. 2b. The hollow ZnO–HAs have a uniform size of about 1.5 μm in diameter, and the nanorods growing upon them are distributed in diameters of tens of nanometers. The 3D hierarchical UL and NA structures are divided into regions α and β, as shown in Fig. 2a. Both regions contribute to light absorption and carrier generation, but β forms an effective conduction channel that carries the collected electrons to the external circuit. The equivalent circuit components forming the conduction channel β for NA, HA, and UL structures are also shown in Fig. 2. The nanorods were grown on ZnO seed layers with thin films in the NA structures; therefore, conduction occurred through two parallel channels of thin film (seed layer) and rod-to-rod contacts. Similarly, the UL structure has two parallel channels: the hollow HA and the rod-to-rod contacts. No clear α region was observed in the HA structure and in the thin films.
 Fig. 1  Morphology of (a) ZnO–TF, (b) ZnO–HA, (c and d) ZnO–NA, and (e and f) ZnO–UL structures. 
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the growth morphology of NA, HA, and UL structures showing that the growth stops because of the tilted growth of the nanorods. Region α is for light absorption and generation and diffusional transport of carriers. Region β has the additional role of carrier conductor in the external circuitry. The equivalent circuit components for the conduction channel β are also shown for each of the structures (gseed, gHA, gR-R: conductance of the seed-layer film, hemisphere array, and rod-to-rod path, respectively). 
The nanorod diameters of the NA and UL structures did not differ markedly, and the morphologies of the NA and the UL structures merged when the nanorods were grown for a very long time, for example, 12 h. This result is understandable because only the rods growing with relatively small tilt angles will survive until the late stage of the synthesis if the rod density is controlled by the block-and-survive mode. We demonstrate how this convergence in morphology between the NA and UL structures with prolonged synthesis time results in the convergence of the measured properties. The difference between the structures was remarkable at an intermediate synthesis time of 4 h; thus, the investigations were carried out with the NA and UL samples grown for 4 h unless otherwise specified.
Fig. S3† summarizes the structural properties of the chemically synthesized ZnO nanorods measured by XRD and TEM. All the synthesized HA, NA, and UL structures had a hexagonal wurtzite ZnO structure with lattice parameters of a = 3.25 Å and c = 5.21 Å [JCPDS 36-1451]. The high-resolution TEM image and selected area diffraction pattern showed that the nanorods were single crystals grown along the [0001] direction, as determined by interplanar spacing of 0.52 nm corresponding to the (0002) plane of the hexagonal ZnO.
3.2 Optical absorption properties
The optical properties of the ZnO nanostructure films were examined by UV-vis spectroscopy of transmittance (T) and reflectance (R) in the normal direction for the samples of ZnO–TF, ZnO–HA, ZnO–NA, and ZnO–UL. The absorption (A) was calculated by A = 100T − R, as summarized in Fig. 3.16
 Fig. 3  (a) Light transmission (T) and (b) reflectance (R) spectra of the ZnO–TF, ZnO–HA, ZnO–NA, and ZnO–UL structures. (c) Absorption was calculated by 100T − R. All the measurements are for the normal direction of the samples. 
The light absorption rate of the various ZnO films exhibited an absorption edge around 380 nm, confirming previous reports.20–22 With regard to the UV light of the energy greater than the bandgap, all the array structures (HA, NA, and UL) revealed zero reflectance that can be compared with the 5% reflectance of the thin film structure. The enhanced antireflection effect with the 3D nanorod structures18 and the textured surfaces13,14 was thus confirmed. The difference in reflectance caused by geometry was at most ∼5%. The finite transmittance of 30% to 35% with the TF and HA structures was caused by the thinness of the films (∼70 nm). Therefore, the almost complete absorption (∼98%) with the NA and UL structures suggests that the nanorod array of ∼1 μm length is sufficient to collect the transmitting light.
The difference in absorption among the structures was more pronounced in the visible region where the ZnO bandgap is greater than the incident light energies. Compared with the almost zero absorption with the thin film geometry, finite absorption with the nanostructure arrays was observed. The reflectance rates were 17%, 5%, 3%, and 0% at 550 nm wavelength for TF, HA, NA, and UL, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3b. This result confirms the finite enhanced antireflection effects with the textured surface (HA) and 3D hierarchical structures (NA and UL). However, the effect decreases as the wavelength increases. The zero reflectance of the UL structure throughout the entire wavelength region is remarkable. The absorption rates were 2%, 18%, 25%, and 60% at 550 nm and 0%, 2%, 9%, and 51% at 700 nm for TF, HA, NA, and UL, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3c. The UL structure exhibited remarkable enhanced absorption at a longer wavelength. The practically zero reflectance over the visible range is correlated with the random orientation of the nanorods with the omnidirectional growth morphology that randomizes and multiplies light scattering. However, the mechanism through which such enhanced trapping of visible lights leads to enhanced absorption with large bandgap energy is still unclear. The significant absorption enhancement with UL rather than NA suggests that the broad tilt angles of the nanorods and the frequent exposure of the nanorod walls to the incident light enhance the photo-excitation of the valence electrons via the surface defect traps. This model is effective when the defects are concentrated on the surfaces and when more than two photons contribute to the excitation of an electron. The decrease in absorption efficiency with longer wavelength qualitatively coincides with this photo-generation model but remains an issue that needs to be explored intensively.
3.3 Photo-conduction properties
High light absorption and transport without loss of the photo-generated carriers is necessary for PEC cell electrodes to achieve high efficiency. The transport of photo-generated carriers is presented in Fig. 4. The carrier collection efficiencies among the structures are distinguished from the light absorption efficiencies. The ohmic I–V curves measured through biasing in the dark and under UV light (λ = 365 nm) for the ZnO–UL structure is shown in Fig. 4a. The other array structures of HA and NA also exhibited good ohmic behavior (not shown). Fig. 4b summarizes the currents measured at 1 V biasing in the dark and under UV light for the HA, NA, and UL structures.
 Fig. 4  (a) I–V characteristics of ZnO–UL measured in the dark and under UV light, illustrating the ohmic property of the electrode. ZnO–HA and ZnO–NA structures showed similar ohmic behavior. (b) The current at 1 V shown in (a) is plotted for HA, NA, and UL. The photoresponses of the samples are also compared. (c) Dark current and photoresponse variation in the ZnO–UL electrodes grown at different nanorod lengths. (d) Model for the photocurrent measurement. Regions α and β are explained in Fig. 2. 
First, the dark currents flowing through the electrode films are different in terms of magnitude, leading to a conductance ratio of HA:NA:UL = 1:20:400. This is the ratio of the effective thickness of the conduction channels (β) composed of the same materials. According to the equivalent circuits of the structures shown in Fig. 2, the thick channel of the NA structure compared with the TF structure (similar UL compared with HA) consists of the rod-to-rod contacts (gR-R) established during the initial block-and-survive growth stage. The comparison shows that the conductance of HA and TF (gHA and gseed, respectively) or the thickness of their channels is relatively small.
Second, the 20-fold channel thickness of the UL structure indicates that gR-R in the UL structure is 20 times greater than gR-R in the NA structure. This thick channel of the UL structure is explained by the following: (i) the nanorods grow above and below the ZnO hemisphere layers because the solution leaks from the hemisphere wall during nanorod synthesis;19 and (ii) the rods growing with large tilt angles (which may be θ > 30°) soon hit other rods and/or hemispheres and stop growing, which establish thicker rod-to-rod contact channels. In conclusion, the high conductance or the thick channel of the UL structure was established by numerous rod-to-rod contacts created during the solution growth of nanorods on the hollow HA with a broad distribution of the tilt angles. This explanation is confirmed by Fig. 4c, which shows the current measurements after varying the nanorod growth time in the UL structure. The current increases from ∼10−8 A for HA to ∼10−5 A for UL. The ∼2 μm nanorod lengths reveal the thickening of the channel (or the increasing rod-to-rod contacts) as the growth progresses. The current saturation at prolonged growth indicates the abortion of the rod-to-rod encounters, which happens because only the nanorods with small θ survive and grow until the late stage without the rod-to-rod contacts.
Based on the analysis of the channel conductance of the structures, we observe that the photoresponse [defined by the increment in % of current because of UV light (λ = 365 nm) illumination with respect to the dark current] of ZnO–UL was ∼210%, which is much higher than that of ZnO–NA (75%) and ZnO–HA (47%), as shown in Fig. 4b. Fig. 2 and 4d show that the light is absorbed in regions α and β of the structure. Photo-carriers are generated, but the geometry of the structures confines the conduction channel to region β. Therefore, the photo-carriers generated in region α need to be transported to region β to contribute to the current.
The comparison of the photoresponses of the electrode structures is tantamount to the comparison of the photo-generated excess carriers that reached the transport channel and were normalized to the equilibrium carriers in the channel. Photoresponse is a combined result of the generation of carriers by light absorption and their transport to the conduction channel. If the photoresponse purely reflects the efficiency of light absorption with 100% quantum efficiency, the photoresponse of the UL and NA structures should be about 1.5 times that of HA in Fig. 3c (because the absorption efficiency ratio is TF:HA:NA:UL = 65:65:99:99 at 365 nm). The 4.5- and 2.8-fold higher photoresponse of UL compared with HA and NA, respectively, cannot be explained solely by the difference in the light absorption. The HA and TF structures do not distinguish region α and region β, but the NA and UL do. The additional carriers transported from region α to region β produced high photoresponses. This phenomenon led to high carrier collection efficiencies for the 3D hierarchical structures of NA and UL. The difference between the UL and NA structures is attributed to the morphology of the omnidirectionally grown nanorods, which provides more exposure of the nanorod root regions and a larger exposed surface area. The condition provides the transport channel shorter diffusion lengths for higher photo-generated carrier concentrations. Given the array of quasi-vertical nanorods in the NA structure, light absorption would occur more likely near the tip of the nanorods. The electron transport distance would thus be longer, leading to lower electron collection efficiency.

Fig. 4c shows that the photoresponse of the UL structure increased with growth time (showing its maximum at 4 h growth) because of the increasing surface area of nanorods with high light absorption. This increase indicates that the supply rate of photo-carriers from region α is higher than the channel thickening rate as the growth proceeds. However, at prolonged growth, the morphology of the UL structure with long nanorods approaches that of the NA structure (Fig. S1f and S2f†), and region α moves to the top of the nanorods when the channel thickening is stopped. The lowered light absorption efficiency owing to the degraded omnidirectional morphology and increased diffusion length reduces the photoresponse with the 12 h-grown UL structure. In conclusion, the highest photoresponse from the 4 h-grown UL structure is realized by enhanced light absorption and carrier collection efficiencies by optimizing the nanorod length of the omnidirectional growth morphology. The results suggest that the electron diffusion length in the ZnO nanorods is on the order of hundreds of nanometers.
3.4 PEC properties of ZnO and CdS/ZnO nanostructures
We directly measure the PEC properties of the electrode structures in a solution by water splitting. The photoresponse measurement discussed above is a simple and useful technique to estimate in advance the PEC performance of the electrodes. The PEC properties of the ZnO–TF, ZnO–HA, ZnO–NA, and ZnO–UL structures were examined again under UV light (λ = 365 nm). The anodic photocurrents measured with varying potential biases on the UL structures grown with different synthesis times are shown in Fig. 5a. A similar series of curves was obtained for the ZnO–NA series (not shown). The photoconversion efficiencies under UV light (UV-CEs) are calculated in Fig. 5a through eqn (1). The results are shown in Fig. 5b. The maximum photocurrent density and UV-CEs for the electrodes with different growth times are summarized in Fig. 5c. The Figure presents the highest photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 65% at growth of 4 h. This value was compared with the values of the other electrodes of ZnO–NA (3 h growth), ZnO–HA, and ZnO–TF (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical properties of the ZnO–UL structures with different nanorod lengths measured under UV light. (a) Photocurrent density and (b) photoconversion efficiency (UV-CE) were measured as a function of applied potential (vs. SCE) under UV light. Plots of (a) and (b) are redrawn in (c) against the nanorod growth time. (d) Comparison of the UV-CE of the best ZnO–TF, HA, NA, and UL structures. 
The observed 65% efficiency of the ZnO–UL structure is the highest value obtained from ZnO films and nanostructures.23,24 The UV-CE ratios of the structures are HA:NA:UL = 11.5%:23%:65% = 18:35:100, which roughly coincide with the photoresponse measurements (47%:75%:210% = 22:36:100). This result is expected because all the photo-generated electron–hole pairs contribute to the electrochemical reactions that occur at the electrode–electrolyte interface during water splitting. The photoresponse measurement with an electrode in ambient air may thus be a convenient tool to estimate the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the ZnO electrodes in the PEC cell of a liquid solution. The result also leads to the conclusion that the high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the UL structure as a PEC cell electrode is the combined effect of high light trapping and carrier collection efficiencies achieved by the omnidirectional growth of the nanorods.
Motivated by the success of previous studies, we attempted to create a practical PEC cell electrode of high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency by incorporating a narrow bandgap material, namely, CdS (2.4 eV) with ZnO (3.37 eV), to enhance further the absorbance in the visible-light region of the solar spectrum.30,31 The CdS sensitization time in the solution for the ZnO–TF, NA, and UL structures was varied to achieve the optimized soaking time of 30 min for the highest efficiencies. Fig. 6a–d show the corresponding morphology of the CdS/ZnO–UL structures as the dipping time in the CdS solution increased from 15 min to 90 min. They revealed increasing diameter of the nanorods. Actually, clogging of nanorod–nanorod gaps was observed at 90 min growth with the NA structure while it could be avoided with the open structure of UL. The CdS-decoration effect could be seen more dramatically with UV-vis absorption spectra measurements, as summarized in Fig. 6e in which the CdS thickening is clearly shown by the absorption intensity increase and shift of the absorption edge as the dipping time increased. However, the maximum solar photoconversion efficiency was obtained at a dipping time of 30 min, and the efficiency decreased at thicker CdS as shown in Fig. 6f, which present the photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies measured with a solar simulation source of a 150 W Xe lamp with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 passing through an AM 1.5 G filter (solar-CE). The increasing thickness of CdS layer will increase the light absorption leading to a greater amount of electron–hole carriers. However, at the same time, the length for the carriers to transport until collected also increases. While the trade-off may have to be explored in more detail, the optimized solar cell efficiency was 4.5% with the UL structure. The XRD and TEM measurements for the CdS/ZnO–UL structure are shown in Fig. S4.† The size of the CdS particles coated on the ZnO nanorods was ∼9 nm, as determined by the Scherrer formula.25
 Fig. 6  (a–d) FESEM images of CdS/ZnO–UL structures as the dipping time was varied; 15, 30, 60, and 90 min, respectively. (e) and (f) show the corresponding UV-vis absorption spectra and solar photoconversion efficiency as a function of applied potential (vs. SCE). 

Fig. 7a and b summarize and compare the measured photocurrent density and solar photoconversion efficiencies of the CdS-decorated structures of CdS/ZnO–TF, CdS/ZnO–NA, CdS/ZnO–UL, as well as the ZnO–UL. The CdS/ZnO–UL structure exhibited the highest photocurrent density and solar CE of 12 mA cm−2 and 4.5%, respectively. The latter value can be compared with 2.7% for the CdS/ZnO–NA electrode, 1.4% for the CdS/ZnO–TF electrode, and 0.48% for the ZnO–UL electrode. The comparison reveals the effects of the nanostructural geometry of the material on the conversion efficiency. The addition of CdS improved the efficiency of ZnO by about 10 times, and the UL geometry improved to threefold that of the planar thin film-type electrode. The efficiencies obtained are comparable with or higher than the recently reported values for ZnO/CdS and TiO2/CdS structures. For example, ZnO/CdS core–shell nanowire arrays have a solar CE value of 3.53%.26 ZnO/CdS nanotube arrays synthesized by electrochemical methods show a slightly lower photocurrent density of 10.64 mA cm−2.27 TiO2/CdS nanotubes show a slightly lower photoconversion efficiency of 4.15% under a high-intensity light source (138.4 mW cm−2).28 The stability of the PEC performance of the electrode was good as measured by the cyclic photoresponse under on-and-off of the illumination, as illustrated in Fig. S5.† However, the long-term chemical stability has to be tested for practical application.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of (a) photocurrent density and (b) solar photoconversion efficiency as a function of applied potential (vs. SCE). 
4 Conclusions
The effect of the morphology of the 3D hierarchical nanostructures was systematically examined for application to the photon-to-electron conversion electrodes for PEC water-splitting cells. ZnO nanostructural electrodes composed of a HA, vertically grown nanorods, omnidirectionally grown urchin-like nanorods, and thin film electrodes were compared with respect to light absorption and carrier collection efficiency. The important results are as follows:
(1) The 3D hierarchical nanorod array structures (NA and UL) showed higher light absorption efficiency compared with planar structures (HA and TF) because of enhanced light trapping by multiple scattering.
(2) In terms of the visible light of the energy smaller than the ZnO bandgap, the UL structure with omnidirectionally grown nanorods revealed remarkably enhanced light trapping efficiency compared with NA. Such ZnO–UL morphology led to high photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies (65% under UV light and 0.48% under a solar simulator). The sensitization of the ZnO–UL structure with CdS particles maintained its morphological advantages and caused an increased photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 4.5% under a solar simulator. The result is the highest among the ZnO-based electrodes.
(3) The photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of an electrode in the PEC cell of a liquid solution can be estimated in advance by simple photo-current measurement in air. This study proved that the geometry of the UL structure led to higher carrier collection efficiency compared with NA.
(4) The morphology of omnidirectionally grown nanorods on hemisphere substrates provided an environment of random light incidence angles and multiple scattering, leading to high light trapping and carrier collection efficiencies. The morphology also produced a thick channel of high conductance, leading to high current density in the PEC cell. This occurrence is a morphological improvement over the conventional vertically aligned nanorods morphology, applicable in general to any material system.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the WCU (R32-20026) and the Basic Research program (No. 2012R1A1A4A01011671) of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Korea.
Notes and references
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe and J. Photochem, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, R. Liu, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 507, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, R. S. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5654–5671 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2009, 4, 517–528 CrossRef .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, Q. Lin, S. F. Leung and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 57–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249–3252 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, C. M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1979–1984 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, G. F. Burkhard, C. M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, M. McGehee, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 279–282 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Hara, C. Sun, M. A. Anderson and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3413–3419 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, K. Yan, H. Deng and S. Yang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 407–413 CrossRef CAS ; Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 279–282 CrossRef .
B. Silke, L. Diedenhofen, G. Vecchi, R. E. Algra, A. Hartsuiker, O. L. Muskens, G. Immink, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, W. L. Vos and J. G. Rivas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 973–978 CrossRef .
H. N. Hieu, N. M. Vuong, H. Jung, D. M. Jang, D. Kim, H. Kim and S.-K. Hong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1127–1134 RSC .
S. Cho, J. W. Jang, J. S. Lee and K. H. Lee, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3929–3935 RSC .
M. F. Ogawa, Y. Natsume, T. Hirayama and H. Sakata, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1990, 9, 1354–1356 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Studenikin, N. Golego and M. Cocivera, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2104–2111 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. T. Landberg, J. Inst. Electr. Eng., 1958, 2964E, 908 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2331–2336 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shi, X. Pan, W. Qiu, D. Zheng, M. Xu and H. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15153–15159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tak, S. Hong, J. Lee and K. Yong, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5945–5951 RSC .
X. Qi, G. She, Y. Liu, L. Mu and W. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 242–244 RSC .
W. T. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, A. Wang and D. P. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2853–2857 RSC .
D. Liu and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 10769–10773 CrossRef CAS .
N. Z. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata, K. Domen, A. Gupta, K. Yanagisawa and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17527–17534 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr00889dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Morphology of (a) ZnO–TF, (b) ZnO–HA, (c and d) ZnO–NA, and (e and f) ZnO–UL structures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the growth morphology of NA, HA, and UL structures showing that the growth stops because of the tilted growth of the nanorods. Region α is for light absorption and generation and diffusional transport of carriers. Region β has the additional role of carrier conductor in the external circuitry. The equivalent circuit components for the conduction channel β are also shown for each of the structures (gseed, gHA, gR-R: conductance of the seed-layer film, hemisphere array, and rod-to-rod path, respectively).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Light transmission (T) and (b) reflectance (R) spectra of the ZnO–TF, ZnO–HA, ZnO–NA, and ZnO–UL structures. (c) Absorption was calculated by 100T − R. All the measurements are for the normal direction of the samples.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) I–V characteristics of ZnO–UL measured in the dark and under UV light, illustrating the ohmic property of the electrode. ZnO–HA and ZnO–NA structures showed similar ohmic behavior. (b) The current at 1 V shown in (a) is plotted for HA, NA, and UL. The photoresponses of the samples are also compared. (c) Dark current and photoresponse variation in the ZnO–UL electrodes grown at different nanorod lengths. (d) Model for the photocurrent measurement. Regions α and β are explained in Fig. 2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical properties of the ZnO–UL structures with different nanorod lengths measured under UV light. (a) Photocurrent density and (b) photoconversion efficiency (UV-CE) were measured as a function of applied potential (vs. SCE) under UV light. Plots of (a) and (b) are redrawn in (c) against the nanorod growth time. (d) Comparison of the UV-CE of the best ZnO–TF, HA, NA, and UL structures.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–d) FESEM images of CdS/ZnO–UL structures as the dipping time was varied; 15, 30, 60, and 90 min, respectively. (e) and (f) show the corresponding UV-vis absorption spectra and solar photoconversion efficiency as a function of applied potential (vs. SCE).	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of (a) photocurrent density and (b) solar photoconversion efficiency as a function of applied potential (vs. SCE).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr00889d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
