Visible light-driven water  oxidation —from molecular catalysts to photoelectrochemical cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01276B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01276B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296-3313Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsVisible light-driven water oxidation—from molecular catalysts to photoelectrochemical cells

        
          
            Lele 
            Duan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lianpeng 
            Tong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunhua 
            Xu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Licheng 
            Sun
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry, School of Chemical Science and Engineering, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, 10044, Sweden. E-mail: lichengs@kth.se;  Fax: (+)46-8-791 2333
bDUT-KTH Joint Education and Research Center on Molecular Devices, State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology (DUT), Dalian, 116024, China
Received 
      9th March 2011
    , Accepted 2nd June 2011First published on 28th July 2011AbstractThis perspective article reports the most significant advances in the field of water oxidation—from molecular water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) to photoelectrochemical cells. Different series of catalysts that can be applied in visible light-driven water oxidation catalysis are discussed in details and several key aspects of their catalytic mechanisms are introduced. In order to construct a water oxidation electrode from molecular catalysts, proper immobilization methods have to be employed. Herein, we present one section about how to attach catalysts onto an electrode/material surface. Finally, the state of the art photoelectrochemical cells that achieve visible light-driven water splitting are described.

Broader context
Visible light-driven water oxidation is still the bottleneck of the whole artificial water splitting processes. In the past decades, remarkable research advances have been made in the development of efficient water oxidation catalysts based on transition metals (Ru, Ir, Mn, Co and Fe). The understanding of water oxidation mechanisms in turn guides chemists to design more efficient catalysts. However, none of the reported water oxidation catalysts have fulfilled the following criteria: (i) fast reaction rate; (ii) low overpotential; (iii) high stability against oxidative and hydrolytic decomposition; and (iv) affordable cost for large-scale application. Therefore, the development of water oxidation catalysts, particularly earth abundant transition metal-based catalysts capable of working in an artificial photosystem, is urgently required.

1. Introduction
Through billion years of evolution, green plants and some other organisms have developed a remarkable function, the photosynthesis, to store solar energy in the form of chemical bonds by converting carbon dioxide into organic compounds, especially glucose.1,2 It is the original life on earth that made the choice of utilizing sunlight as an inexhaustible energy source and water as a nearly unlimited electron donor for its surviving and thriving. Since then, the photosynthetic reaction has supported nearly all kinds of life forms having ever appeared on earth. The photosystem carrying out the amazing photosynthetic reaction consists of two families of protein complexes: Photosystem II (PS II) where sunlight is used to extract protons and electrons from water (eqn (1)), and Photosystem I (PS I) where electrons and protons from PS II are used to generate carbohydrates (eqn (2)). 12 H2O + 12 NADP+ + 48 hv → 6 O2 + 12 NADPH + 12 H+(eq 1) 6 CO2 + 12 NADPH + 18 ATP + 12 H+ → C6H12O6 + 12 NADP+ + 18 ADP + 18 Pi + 6 H2O(eq 2)
The photochemical processes that happen in PS II are schematized in Fig. 1:3,4 (i) P680 is excited by absorption of photons or energy transfer from light-harvesting antenna chlorophylls, and then the electrons are transferred from P680* to pheophytin (Phe), then quinones A and B (QA and QB) and finally PS I, generating P680+ with a highly oxidizing potential close to +1.2 V vs. NHE; (ii) a redox active amino acid tyrosine (Tyrz, E < 1.0 V) is readily oxidized by P680+, forming a relatively mild oxidant Tyrz radical species; (iii) the Tyrz radical extracts an electron from the nearby oxygen evolving complex (OEC, a Mn4O5Ca cluster) where water oxidation (2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−) happens after four electron transfers. The natural photosynthesis system has provided human beings a blueprint of how to effectively utilize and store solar energy.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (i) electron transfer sequence in PS II, (ii) working principle of a photoelectrochemical cell. 
Light-driven water splitting (H2O + hv → H2 + O2) that replicates the function of natural photosynthesis has been under extensive research for many years because the direct photonic-to-chemical energy conversion is probably the most promising approach to power our planet in the future.5–9 The water splitting process consists of two half reactions: (i) proton reduction (2H+ + 4e− → H2) and (ii) water oxidation (2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−). The latter half reaction is usually considered as the bottleneck of the whole process. For instance, effective and noble metal-free proton reduction catalysts have been reported to achieve high TOFs up to 1850 s−1 while WOCs no more than 5 s−1.10,11 The difficulties in developing effective WOCs derive from the complexity of the water oxidation reaction itself that involves transfer of four protons and four electrons and the formation of O–O bond. Thereby water oxidation is extremely energy-demanding and needs thermodynamically 0.82 V and 1.23 V vs. NHE in pH 7 and 0, respectively. Additionally, there is always an overpotential leading to higher potentials in experiments than the thermodynamic ones. Compared with direct chemically- and electrochemically-driven water oxidation/splitting, light-driven water oxidation is even more challenging due to the requirement of accumulatively photo-induced electron transfer from WOCs to photosensitizers. Although many transition metal complexes, including Ru, Ir, Co, Fe and Mn complexes, were reported capable of catalyzing water oxidation using CeIV as chemical oxidant, only few of them could promote visible light-driven water oxidation in a homogeneous, three-component system composed of photosensitizer, sacrificial electron acceptor and WOC.12–20
In practice, artificial water splitting could be realized by using a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) which carries out water oxidation and proton reduction at separate electrodes (Fig. 1, photoelectrochemical cell).21–26 These two half-reactions are connected through an external circuit of electron flow. The potential required to drive these reactions is provided by a light harvesting component (photosensitizer) which can be integrated with either the cathode or the anode of the cell. The generated hydrogen and oxygen are separated from each other by a membrane. Lack of efficient and robust WOC with a low overpotential is now considered as one of the major challenges to build PECs.
A few heterogeneous WOCs, including Mn-, Ru-, Ir- and Co-based metal oxidizes, have been reviewed recently.27–30 Usually these heterogeneous WOCs bear good catalytic durability but moderate reactivity. Meanwhile, their catalytic mechanisms are poorly understood and it is difficult to systematically conduct structural modifications on these heterogeneous WOCs to improve their catalytic reactivity. In comparison, the advantages of molecular WOCs could be seen in several aspects: (i) their simple structures could be easily tailored on the purpose of tuning their catalytic properties; (ii) common spectrum techniques can be applied in homogeneous water oxidation medium, and thus more insight could be obtained toward the reaction mechanisms. Importantly, effective development of WOCs will require detailed mechanistic knowledge. In this review, we focus on (i) molecular WOCs and their reaction mechanisms, especially those catalysts capable of promoting light-driven water oxidation; (ii) the immobilization of molecular WOCs and (iii) the PECs.
2. The structure of OEC in PS II
Several crystal structures of PS II have been resolved during the last decades, providing an invaluable overall map of PS II proteins as well as structural models of the OEC and its ligand environment.31–33 In 2004, Ferreira et al. reported the X-ray crystal structure of the cyanobacterial PS II complex at 3.5 Å resolutions and concluded a cuboidal geometry of the OEC which consists of three manganese and one calcium atoms, besides a fourth manganese atom positioned outside of the cubane.32 Later on, Loll et al. presented the PS II complex with a higher resolution of 3.0 Å.31 Five carboxylates are suggested to bind bidentately with manganese and calcium atoms. The presence of bridging oxygen in Mn4OxCa was identified by X-ray emission spectroscopy.34 Very recently, Umena, Kawakami and their co-workers reported a PS II structure at a resolution of 1.9 Å.35 From their electron density map, all the metal atoms of the Mn4CaO5 cluster together with all of their ligands were located unambiguously. Fig. 2 depicts the structure of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and its ligand environment. Three manganese, one calcium and four oxygen atoms form a cubane-like structure and the forth manganese atom dangles outside the cubane and is linked to two manganese atoms by two oxygen bridges. Meanwhile, four water molecules were found to coordinate to the Mn4CaO5 cluster: two to the dangling Mn and the other two to the calcium atom. In addition, all of the amino-acid residues coordinated to the Mn4CaO5 cluster were identified.
 Fig. 2  Structure of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and its ligand environment.35 
The presence of mono- or di-μ-oxo and carboxylate ligands in the OEC is essential for stabilizing the OEC by neutralizing the positive charges on Mn metal cations, in which way the OEC could be readily oxidized by Tyrz radical. The OEC provides an excellent blueprint for the design of active, robust and low-cost WOCs. A few man-made WOCs have been developed and they are mainly based on transition metals (Ru, Ir, Mn and Co) and strong electron donating ligands (O- and N-rich ligands).36–39
3 Commonly used oxidizing equivalents in water oxidation studies
The most commonly used sacrificial electron acceptor in experimental water oxidation catalysis is Ce(NH4)2(NO3)6 (CeIV), which is a strong one-electron transfer oxidant but not an oxygen atom transfer reagent (such as oxone or peroxide). In addition, CeIV has weak absorption in the UV-vis region and thus allows carrying out spectroscopic measurements of catalytic intermediates. Therefore, a study on CeIV-driven water oxidation (eqn (3)) is a typical way to investigate water oxidation mechanisms and catalysts' activities.40–42 (eq 3)
For homogeneous light-driven water oxidation, a three-component system composed of photosensitizer, sacrificial electron acceptor and WOC, is generally applied. [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) derivatives are the most commonly used sensitizers because they own intense 3MLCT absorption bands in the range of visible light, outstanding thermo-stability and high enough oxidation potentials (E > 0.82 V vs. NHE) to drive water oxidization reaction thermodynamically at pH 7.43 Sometimes, the highly oxidizing RuIII complex is also used as an oxidant instead of CeIV in chemical-driven water oxidation. Fig. 3 shows several well studied Ru-bpy type complexes (P1–P5) with the oxidation potentials ranking from 1.10 to 1.54 V vs. NHE, which are higher than the values of P680 and Tyrz. In terms of sacrificial electron acceptors, S2O82− and [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ are usually employed for generating oxidizing equivalent that is the oxidized state of a photosensitizer.
 Fig. 3  Structures of Ru-based photosensitizers P1–P5 and their oxidation potentials. 
In a typical case of [Ru(bpy)3]2+/S2O82− system, S2O82− reacts with the excited dye [Ru(bpy)3]2+* to form [Ru(bpy)3]3+ following an oxidative quenching reaction (eqn (4)) and a thermal reaction (eqn (5)).44 [Ru(bpy)3]3+ with a reduction potential of 1.26 V drives WOCs to oxidize water to O2 (eqn (6)). The net chemistry of persulfate-based visible light-driven water oxidation is expressed in eqn (7). [Ru(bpy)3]2+* + S2O82− → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO4• − + SO42−(eq 4) [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + SO4• − → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO42−(eq 5) (eq 6) 2 S2O82− + 2 H2O + 2 hv → O2 + 4 H+ + 4 SO42−(eq 7)
For the [Ru(bpy)3]2+/[Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ system, oxidant [Ru(bpy)3]3+ is generated by oxidative quenching of [Ru(bpy)3]2+* (eqn (8)).45,46 [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+, as a sacrificial reagent, decomposes to Co2+, NH3 and Cl− after electron transfer. The related net reaction of light-driven water oxidation is expressed in eqn (9). [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ + [Ru(bpy)3]2+* → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + Co2+ + 5 NH3 + Cl−(eq 8) 4 [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ + 2 H2O + 4 hv → O2 + 4 H+ + 4Co2+ + 20 NH3 + 4 Cl−(eq 9)
4 WOCs and their reaction mechanisms
WOCs have to manage to generate high valence metal-oxo species via proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) steps, which is essential for water oxidation. Two widely accepted O–O bond formation mechanisms are (i) water nucleophilic attack (WNA) and (ii) interaction of two M–O units (I2M) (Fig. 4).47 In the WNA pathway, an oxygen of solvent water molecule nucleophilically attacks the metal-oxo group, leading to a 2e− reduction of the metal center and O–O bond formation. In the I2M pathway, the O–O bond formation is achieved through the interaction of two mono-radical M–O units, affording a peroxo intermediate.
 Fig. 4  Representation of WNA and I2M mechanisms. 
In this section, we will discuss selected catalysts and focus on their catalytic properties as well as reaction mechanisms.
4.1 Ru-based WOCs: the most extensively studied

4.1.1 Polynuclear Ru complexes. 
In the early 1980s, Meyer and co-workers reported the first homogeneous and non-protein WOC, the blue dimer cis,cis-[Ru(bpy)2(H2O)]2(μ-O)4+ (1; Fig. 5).48,49 Although its turnover frequency (0.24 min−1) and turnover number (>13 turnovers) are moderate toward water oxidation using CeIV as oxidant in pH 1.0 aqueous solution,50,51 fruitful mechanistic results have been obtained via structural, kinetic studies and isotope labeling experiments.52,53 The 18O labeling experiments on blue dimer have been conducted by Meyer, Hurst and their co-workers, and controversial results were obtained.54,55 Both water nucleophilic attack pathway (WNA; Pathway A in Fig. 5) and bimolecular pathway (I2M) via direct coupling of Ru–O⋯O–Ru (Pathway B in Fig. 5) were proposed in the O–O bond formation step. Essentially, the study on this model complex elucidated the role of PCET in stabilizing high valent Ru states, lowering the oxidation potentials and accelerating electron transfer. These structural and mechanistic studies have motivated the design of other Ru-based molecular WOCs.
 Fig. 5  Structure of blue dimer 1 and the representative pathways of O–O bond formation involving RuV(=O)(μ-O)RuV(=O) species. 
Because of the low overpotential of blue dimer, light-driven water oxidation was successfully demonstrated by Hurst and co-workers in a three-component system consisting of the Ru-trisbipyridyl complex as photosensitizer, S2O82− as sacrificial electron acceptor and blue dimer as WOC, namely an A-P-C system (A stands for sacrificial electron acceptor, P for photosensitizer and C for WOC).14 The authors focused on mechanistic investigation and therefore no TON and TOF values were presented. Their study suggested another pathway (different from pathways A and B in Fig. 5) in which the bpy ligand is involved in the catalytic cycle (Fig. 6). The active species (μ–O)[Ruv(bpy)2O]24+, namely [V,V], undergoes two steps of covalent hydration to form [IV,V]-(OH)• radical and further to [IV,IV]-(OH)2. This diol complex releases dioxygen and goes back to the starting point [III,III].
 Fig. 6  Proposed mechanism of O–O bond formation involving bpy-diol. 
Another well studied dinuclear Ru complex is [(Ru(tpy)2(H2O))2(μ-bpp)]3+ (2; Hbpp = 2,6-bis(pyridyl)pyrazole; tpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) (Fig. 7). One of the deactivation pathways of blue dimer is the cleavage of the μ-oxo bridge which limits the lifetime of this catalyst. To prevent this process, Llobet and co-workers used a rigid dinucleating bridging ligand (bpp−) instead of the flexible μ-oxo bridge. The bpp− ligand binds to each Ru atom in a bidentate manner which has higher binding affinity compared with Ru–O–Ru in a monodentate manner. Moreover, two Ru–OH2 moieties are placed cis to each other in close proximity. A recent oxygen labeling study has shown that the O–O bond formation by Ru-Hbpp catalyst occurs solely via the I2M pathway (Fig. 7), which is different from the blue dimer. The coupling process benefits from preorientation of two RuO moieties delivered by the bpp− ligand. Under optimized conditions, a high TON of 250 was achieved.42 This is a good example to demonstrate that the ligand modification could influence not only the catalytic activity but also the reaction mechanism of water oxidation.
 Fig. 7  Structure of 2 and its catalytic mechanism. 
Later on, Thummel and coworkers published a series of dinuclear Ru complexes, such as [(μ-Cl)Ru2(L1)(4-R-py)4]3+ (3; Fig. 8), also containing rigid polypyridyl bridging ligands. These complexes show higher TONs (up to 600) compared with the aforementioned blue dimer and Ru-Hbpp complexes.56 Inspired by the oxygen-evolving center in PS II that contains oxygen-rich ligands, our group designed a new type of ligand by introducing carboxylic groups and synthesized H2L2 (Fig. 8) with two carboxylic groups at 6-position of pyridyl motifs. Complexation of H2L2 with Ru precursor resulted in an unexpected trans-dimeric complex 4 (Fig. 8).57 With CeIV (330mM) as oxidant, 4 gave a high TON of 1690 which is twice more than that of Thummel's dinuclear Ru catalyst bearing L1. Complex 4 shows, at both pH 7.0 and 7.2, pronounced catalytic currents toward water oxidation when the potential was higher than 1.3 V vs. NHE. Although the negatively charged ligands lower the redox potential of 4, the overpotential toward water oxidation was not low enough to allow photo-generated [Ru(bpy)3]3+ to drive 4 to catalyze water oxidation. Three [Ru(bpy)3]2+ derivatives P3–P5 (Fig. 3) that exhibit 3MLCT bands at 430–486 nm and have oxidation potentials spanning from 1.37 to 1.54 V vs. NHE were thus employed as sensitizers for light-driven water oxidation. A high turnover number of 1270 has been achieved by the molecular catalyst 4 in the A-P-C system containing P5 and S2O82−.17
 Fig. 8  Structure of dinuclear Ru catalysts 3–5. 
In order to get a cis-configuration of a dimeric Ru complex, we prepared ligand H2L3 (1,4-bis(6′-COOH-pyrid-2′-yl)phthalazine; Fig. 8) by installing an aromatic ring at the 4,5-positions of pyridazine moiety of H2L2. As expected, using L32− as a bridging ligand blocked the formation of a trans complex and a cis-dinuclear ruthenium complex 5 was successfully obtained.16 Catalytic studies indicate that complex 5 is a very stable and efficient catalyst for both chemical and light-driven water oxidation, far superior to complex 4 and other catalysts. Under the same conditions used by Thummel and co-workers ([CeIV] = 330 mM), complex 5 gives a TON value of 3540, over five times higher than Thummel's dinuclear catalysts. Under optimized conditions ([CeIV] = 5 mM), complex 5 achieves an extremely high TON of 10400. By far, this value is the highest among homogeneous WOCs. Meanwhile, the initial TOF of 5 is about 72 min−1, over ten times higher than for other reported dimeric Ru WOCs.
Interestingly, at pH 7.2, complex 5 shows a low overpotential for water oxidation with an onset of catalytic current at ca. 1.20 V which is lower than that of complex 4, even though E1/2(RuIII;II/RuII;II) of 5 is higher than that of 4. Light-driven water oxidation catalyzed by 5 has therefore been achieved in the presence of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as sensitizer with a TON of ca. 60 and a TOF of 6 min−1.16 It was noteworthy that catalysts 4 and 5 were still active when oxygen evolution had stopped for the first run. The cease of oxygen evolution is mainly due to the pH-decrease and consumption of sensitizer or electron acceptor, indicating that those dimeric catalysts are photo-stable in aqueous solutions.
To avoid applying organic ligands in the construction of WOCs, the Hill group and the Bonchio group independently developed a new purely inorganic water soluble catalyst, [Ru4O4(OH)2(H2O)4(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− (6, Fig. 9), which achieved a TON of 500 and a TOF of 7.5 min−1 using CeIV as oxidant (the TON is limited by the amount of oxidant).58,59 Owing to the oxo bridging ligands, this catalyst could mediate the four-electron/four-proton overall process in a relatively narrow potential range and exhibits a low overpotential toward water oxidation, allowing [Ru(bpy)3]3+ to drive RuIV4 to catalyze water oxidation.60 The related mechanism is proposed as follows, [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIV4] → [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuIV3RuV] fast(eq 10) [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIV3RuV] → [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuIV2RuV2] fast(eq 11) [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIV2RuV2] → [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuIVRuV3] fast(eq 12) [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIVRuV3] ↔ [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuV4](eq 13) [RuV4] + 2H2O → [RuIV4] + O2 + 4H+(eq 14)with fast reactions in eqn (10)–(12), a pre-equilibrium in eqn (13) and a rate determining step in eqn (14). The equilibrium constant was found to be K(Ru4) ≈ 2 under the experimental conditions, with a rate constant of 0.25 s−1 for the rate limiting step (eqn (14)).
 Fig. 9  Structures of Ru polyoxometalate 6 and Ru4 dendrimer photosensitizer P6. 
Hill and co-workers have reported light-driven water oxidation using 6 as WOC and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as photosensitizer.12 A TON of 350 was achieved under optimized conditions. To alter the catalytic properties of this tetraruthenium complex, Hill and co-workers replaced the central heteroatom of the POM template from Si4+ to P5+, thereby changing the overall charge of the complex and affecting the redox properties.61 Unfortunately, negative effect on catalytic activity was observed, with a decreased TON of 150. Aiming at utilizing the long-wave length visible light for O2 production, Puntoriero, Campagna, Bonchio and their co-workers reported a A-P-C system using a tetra-nuclear Ru dendrimer as photosensitizer (P6; Fig. 9; MLCT bands from 400–750 nm) and 6 as WOC, which produce O2 with an outstanding quantum yield (Φ = 0.30) under irradiation of λ = 550 nm.62 Under their experimental conditions, the TOF and TON were calculated to be respectively 0.33 min−1 and 48 based on P6, and 0.55 min−1 and 80 based on Ru4-POM. It is noteworthy that the decomposition of Ru4 sensitizer is less than 5% after 180 min irradiation of the reaction system.


4.1.2 Mononuclear Ru catalysts: simple and efficient. 
Thummel and co-workers developed a series of non-aqua Ru(II)N6 complexes bearing six coordinating nitrogen atoms which saturate their first coordination sphere of RuII.63–65 These non-aqua complexes are different from the above mentioned aqua Ru complexes in structural configuration but also exhibit high activity and stability toward water oxidation using CeIV as oxidant. Complex [Ru(dpp)(pic)2]2+ (7; dpp = 2,9-dipyrid-2′-yl-1,10-phenanthroline; pic = 4-picoline; Fig. 10), a typical model of RuIIN6, gives a TON of 416 using CeIV as oxidant. Two-electron oxidation of [RuIIN6] generates a 16-electron [RuIVN6] which is electrophilic and susceptible to attack by a water molecule. Subsequently, two-step PCET oxidation of the RuIV-aqua complex affords a high-valent RuVI oxo, followed by a WNA reaction resulting in the formation of a [RuIVN6(OOH)] hydroperoxide intermediate. Intramolecular electron transfer from peroxide to RuIV causes the generation of oxygen (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Structure of complex 7 and the proposed catalytic mechanism. 
[Ru(tpy)(pic)3]2+ (8a) (Fig. 11), another non-aqua Ru complex, is a readily obtainable model complex with a TON around 100 in CeIV-driven water oxidation.65 Very recently, we found that this catalyst needs long induction time before O2 evolves in CeIV-driven water oxidation, implying that it is not the real WOC.19 In the light of one site WOCs such as [Ru(tpy)(bpz)(OH2)]2+ (bpz = 2,2′-bipyrazine) and Thummel's trans-[Ru(pbn)(pic)2(OH2)]2+ (pbn = 2,2′-(4-(tert-butyl)pyridine-2,6-diyl)bis(1,8-naphthyridine)), we demonstrated that trans-[Ru(tpy)(pic)2(OH2)]2+ (8-OH2; Fig. 11) is an electrochemical active WOC and has higher catalytic activity than [Ru(tpy)(pic)3]2+ (450 turnovers for 8-OH2versus 89 turnovers for 8a in 22 h) and needs no induction time for oxygen generation. Thereby, we propose the Ru-aqua complex is the real catalyst in [Ru(tpy)(pic)3]2+ type of the RuN6-CeIV catalytic system.
 Fig. 11  Structures of mononuclear ruthenium complexes 8a–c and 8-OH2. 
The onset catalytic potential of water oxidation by 8-OH2 was observed at about 1.31 V vs. NHE. Accordingly, we chose P5 (E1/2(RuIII/II) = 1.54 V) as a sensitizer for the study of light-driven water oxidation. Upon 45 min of irradiation, a TON of 84 based on trans-[Ru(tpy)(pic)2(OH2)]2+ was achieved. Under similar conditions, complexes 8a–8c (Fig. 11), respectively, exhibit 2, 9 and 14 turnovers.19
Using the same protocol in designing dimeric complexes, we replaced tpy ligand with pdc2− (H2pdc = 2,6-pyridine dicarboxylic acid) and bda2− (H2bda = 2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylic acid) ligands, and synthesized complexes [Ru(pdc)(pic)3] (9) and [Ru(bda)(pic)2] (10) (Fig. 12).18,66 Similar to the observation we got from the study of [Ru(tpy)(pic)3]2+, [Ru(pdc)(pic)3] readily releases a pic ligand at RuIII state and thereby the real WOC, a Ru-aqua (Fig. 13), is generated in situ, which has been proved by a cyclic voltammogram and the MS isolation of the catalytic intermediates. A high TON of 550 and a fast TOF of 13.8 min−1 were achieved using CeIV as oxidant. Photochemical water oxidation was carried out under pH 7.2 conditions in the A-P-C system composed of P3 as a photosensitizer, S2O82− as a sacrificial electron acceptor and 9 as a WOC. A maximum amount of dioxygen was obtained after about 1 h of illumination, corresponding to a TON of 62 based on catalyst.18
 Fig. 12  Structures of mononuclear ruthenium complexes 9 and 10. 
 Fig. 13  Formation of the real WOC [Ru (pdc)(pic)2(OH2)]+ under catalytic conditions. 
[Ru(bda)(pic)2] (10) containing a negatively charged tetradentate ligand and possessing a big O–Ru–O bite angle (122.99°), is so unique that it enables us to isolate a seven-coordinate RuIV dimeric complex with a (HOHOH) bridging ligand coordinating to Ru cores at the big O–Ru–O cleft (Fig. 14).66 The involvement of seven coordinate ruthenium intermediates during water oxidation was also considered by Meyer and Thummel, but without any experimental proof.65,67 The kinetic study shows the CeIV loss is second order in the concentration of the catalyst, implying a binuclear catalytic pathway. DFT calculations on the direct O–O coupling of two RuIV–O˙ radicals (I2M pathway) result in an activation energy of about 12 kcal per mol.68 We have recently shown that dissolving 10 in an aqueous solution generates a RuII–OH2 species, from which the removal of protons and electrons takes place in a sequential manner (Fig. 15).69 The active species was proved as RuV = O ↔ RuIV–O˙. Treated with stoichiometric CeIV, O2 releases from the RuIV–OO–RuIV species which is regarded as the rate determining step. In the presence of excess CeIV, RuIV–OO–RuIV is further oxidized to  (E = 1.0 V vs. NHE, based on DFT calculations), which decomposes fast to RuIII, RuIV and O2. Moreover, this catalyst is extremely active and a TOF > 2500 min−1 and a TON ≈ 2000 were recently achieved using CeIV as oxidant.69
 Fig. 14  Crystal structure of the seven-coordinate RuIV complex (hydrogen atoms of C–H type were omitted for clarity) as intermediate for catalytic water oxidation. 
 Fig. 15  Proposed catalytic cycles for 10 in CeIV-pH 1 conditions. 
Due to the strong electron donating ability of bda2− ligand and the seven coordinate intermediates, complex 10 owns a very low onset potential toward water oxidation (about 1.0 V vs. NHE at pH 7.0, corresponding to an overpotential of 0.18 V). Photogenerated [Ru(bpy)3]3+ could drive 10 to oxidize water with a TON = 100 and a TOF = 3.7 min−1 when [Co(NH3)5Cl]Cl2 was used as sacrificial electron acceptor.20 The catalytic performance of complex 10 is strongly pH-dependent, with onset catalytic potentials of 1.0 V at pH 7.0 and 1.5 V at pH 1.0. When S2O82− was used as electron acceptor, molecular oxygen was generated quickly with a TOF = 20.8 min−1. Unfortunately, in this case the catalytic system was deactivated very quickly (ca 50 s), and the pH value of the solution dropped quickly from 7.1 to 2.9. The control experiments showed that deactivation was mainly caused by a pH drop. The catalytic system could be revived several times simply by neutralizing the solutions. According to the good photo-stability of the catalyst, ligand photodissociation is unlikely responsible for degradation of the catalyst. Since methyl C–H bond oxidized Ru species has been isolated, ligand oxidative decomposition was proposed as the dominant degradation pathway.
By changing the backbone ligand from flexible bda2− to rigid PDA2−(H2PDA = phenanthroline dicarboxilic acid), the kinetics of catalytic water oxidation under CeIV-pH 1.0 conditions switches from second order in [Ru(bda)(pic)2] to first order in [Ru(PDA)(pic)2] (11; Fig. 16).15 Compared with the bda-Ru complex, PDA-based catalyst has a lower TOF (6 min−1), much longer lifetime (> 6 h for 11versus ca. 10 min for 10, under similar O2-evolving conditions) and a lower TON (336 for 11versus 2000 for 10). The optimized geometry at DFT level reveals that the O–Ru–O bite angle of 11 is slightly larger than that of 10. The hydroxide ligand could also bond to RuIV center through this big cleft, forming a seven-coordinate RuIV intermediate. DFT calculations indicate that the WNA pathway is favored over the I2M pathway for 11 (Fig. 16). Due to the low overpotential of 10 toward water oxidation under neutral conditions, light-driven water oxidation was demonstrated using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as sensitizer and persulfate as electron acceptor. A low TON of 6 based on catalyst was achieved after ca. 3 min of irradiation.
 Fig. 16  Structures of mononuclear Ru 11 and the O–O bond formation via WNA. 
Very recently, Llobet and co-workers reported a series of isomeric, mononuclear Ru-aqua complexes 12 and 13 (Fig. 17) containing the tridentate meridional tpy ligand and either a bidentate ligand H3p (H3p = 2-(5-phenyl-1H-pyrazol-3-yl)pyridine) or a Hbpp ligand. For CeIV-driven water oxidation, out-12 (TON = 12.7) and out-13 (TON = 14.0) exhibit better performance than in-12 (TON = 10) and in-13 (TON = 8).70 Complexes 12 and 13 were also tested for light-driven water oxidation in an A-P-C system. All of these complexes are capable of oxidizing water using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as a photosensitizer and [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ as a sacrificial electron acceptor. In the best case, in-12 gave a TON of 4. It is worth noting that RuII(tpy)(bpy)(OH2) (14; Fig. 14) is also photo-active under similar conditions although its catalytic performance is rather poor.
 Fig. 17  Structures of mononuclear Ru complexes 12–14. 
Extensive mechanistic studies of O–O bond formation catalyzed by mononuclear Ru aqua complexes were performed by the Meyer, Berlinguette, Sakai and Llobet groups.40,41,67,71–73 Generation of RuIII–OOH intermediate via water nucleophilic attack on RuV-oxo has been established (Fig. 18). This hydroperoxide species is rapidly oxidized to peroxo RuIV–OO which subsequently dissociates dioxygen. Releasing oxygen from RuIV–OO is regarded as the rate-determining step at pH 1. Low pH increases the oxidizing power of CeIV. At pH 0, RuIV–OO could be oxidized to RuV–OO which releases oxygen very quickly, leading to this oxidation step as the rate-determining step.
 Fig. 18  WNA mechanism of O–O bond formation catalyzed by one-site Ru WOCs; competing pathways are omitted for clarity. 
By considering the reduced synthetic work and the efficiency of Ru atoms (TON per Ru center) in comparison with multinuclear Ru WOCs, mononuclear Ru catalysts are promising for application in practice in the near future.

4.2 Ir-based WOCs: active and robust
In 2008, Bernhard and coworkers showed the first family of bis(cyclometalated) iridium(III) WOCs (15, Fig. 19).74 The surrounding ligand of this species could be easily tailored with various electron-donating and -withdrawing substituents, thereby tuning the redox properties of respective Ir catalysts. Most interestingly, these catalysts are exceptionally robust under harsh working conditions (strong oxidizing CeIV plus pH < 1), probably due to the strong C–Ir bonding. Several catalysts have been shown to work over one week and overall TONs are up to 2760. However, their catalytic rates turn out to be relatively slow. Later on, Crabtree and coworkers found that another family of Ir complexes based on Cp* (Cp* = C5Me5) which was supposed to have strong electron donating ability were capable of catalyzing the oxidation of water.75,76 These Cp*–Ir complexes (such as 16 and 17, Fig. 19) showed better catalytic activity but worse robustness compared with Bernhard and colleagues' catalysts. The analogues of 16, formally [Cp*Ir(N⁁C)X], [Cp*Ir(N⁁N)X]+ and [CpIr(N⁁N)X]+ (Cp = C5H5), were concluded as precatalysts. Oxygen evolution under CeIV-pH 1 conditions was found to be first order in Ir catalysts. Most likely, the WNA pathway as discussed for [Ru(tpy)(bpy)(OH2)]2+ is involved. A plausible catalytic mechanism of O–O bond formation was proposed as shown in Fig. 20. The coordinating X− ligand is replaced by a H2O molecule, generating an Ir aqua complex. This aqua complex is oxidized by CeIV to the Ir = O state which is then attacked by a water molecule forming the O–O bond. Oxidation of the resulting peroxo intermediate produces O2.
 Fig. 19  Structures of Ir complexes 15–18. 
 Fig. 20  Proposed reaction mechanism for Cp*Ir-catalyzed water oxidation. 
Further development of Ir WOCs is achieved by replacing the phenylpyridine ligand in complex 16 by an abnormal pyridinium-carbene ligand. Complex 18 was obtained and showed a remarkably high TON of ca. 10000 within 5 days.77 The authors suggested that the excellent activity of 18 originates from the high electronic flexibility of the mesoionic ligand: the neutral carbine-type resonance form stabilizes low metal oxidation states while the charge separate form, that is a cationic iminium plus a metal-bound carbon anion, stabilizes high metal oxidation states. In addition, the ligand is not innocent at high oxidation potentials, implicating that cooperative behavior between the Ir center and the ligand may also contribute to the observed high activity.
4.3 First row transition metal-based WOCs
Water splitting catalyzed by earth abundant, environmentally friendly and inexpensive elements, such as Mn, Co and Fe, is ideal for the sustainable development of our energy system. Although nature chooses the manganese complex as its oxygen evolving center, few synthetic manganese complexes have so far achieved water oxidation.39 Only two Mn complexes [(tpy)2Mn2O2(H2O)2](NO3)3 (19; Fig. 21),78 and [Lb6Mn4O4]+ cubanes (20; Lb = (p-R-C6H4)2PO2−, R = H, Me, OMe; Fig. 23),79 were reported to catalyze water oxidation without using an oxygen-transferring oxidant.
 Fig. 21  Structure of dimeric Mn complex 19 and its representative O–O bond formation pathway. 
Water oxidation catalyzed by 19 using hypochlorite and peroxymonosulfate as oxygen-transferring oxidants, was firstly reported by Crabtree, Brudvig and co-workers, resulting in 4 turnovers during 6 h reaction.78 Later on, Yagi and co-workers demonstrated CeIV-driven water oxidation by 19 when the catalyst was adsorbed on Kaolin, mica and montmorillonite K10. Moderate TONs up to 17 were achieved.80 Oxygen labeling experiments confirmed that the oxygen atoms in evolved O2 originated from water. Kinetic measurements showed that the rate of catalytic water oxidation is second order in the catalyst, suggesting that O–O bond formation involves intermolecular coupling of manganyl oxoes. Very recently, Yagi and co-workers reported visible light-driven water oxidation by combination of WOC 19 and photosensitizer [Ru(bpy)3]2+ at an interlayer of mica.81 Fewer than 4 turnovers were achieved after 17 h irradiation of the mica/19/[Ru(bpy)3]2+ adsorbate in buffer solution of S2O82−. In control experiments without photosensitizer or an electron receptor component, no O2 was evolved. A second order dependency of oxygen evolution with respect to the concentration of the catalyst was observed, consistent with the cooperative catalysis reported in the CeIV-driven water oxidation. Oxygen labeling experiments suggested that water is the only oxygen source for evolved O2. The electron transport for light-driven water oxidation in the mica/19/[Ru(bpy)3]2+ adsorbate was proposed as following (Fig. 22): (1) [(tpy)2Mn2O2(H2O)2]3+ was oxidized via reductive quenching of [Ru(bpy)3]2+*; (2) electron hoping might occur from the generated [Ru(bpy)3]+ to the adjacent [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and further to the edge [Ru(bpy)3]2+ at the mica and those electrons were finally captured by S2O82− in the solution.
 Fig. 22  Illustration of possible electron transport for light-driven water oxidation by the mica/19/[Ru(bpy)3]2+ adsorbate. 
Another rare Mn-based WOC, the tetramanganese complex [Lb6Mn4O4]+ (20; Fig. 23) was synthesized and reported by Dismuckes and coworkers. It was found that under UV light irradiation two of the corner oxoes in [Lb6Mn4O4]+ could couple to each other forming a molecular O2 and at the same time one of the chelating ligands (Lb) would be released (Fig. 23). The suggested intramolecular O–O coupling of two bridging oxoes was proven by the detection of 18O2 from [Lb6Mn4(18O4)]+. Later on, [Lb6Mn4O4]+ complexes were successfully applied in preparing electrochemical electrodes and photoelectrochemical cells. Most recently, Hocking, Spiccia and co-workers found that the [Lb6Mn4O4]+ cluster dissociates into MnII compounds in the Nafion, and then MnII compounds are reoxidized to form dispersed nanoparticles of a disordered, mineral-like MnIII/IV-oxide which is the real WOC.82 This MnIII/IV oxide could realize self-repair through a dissolution-reformation mechanism just as the self-healing Co-Pi catalyst does. The [Lb6Mn4O4]+ cluster only serves as a precursor of a Mn source. Two alternative Mn complexes [(bpy)2Mn(O)2Mn(bpy)2]3+ and [Mn(OH2)6]2+ were doped in Nafion membranes and each precursor generates a catalyst with similar activity as [Lb6Mn4O4]+ cubane. All these three manganese precursors generate a similar MnIII/IV-oxide material. This significant discovery implicates that many other structurally simple manganese complexes could be used to prepare Mn-Nafion-based water oxidation electrodes and thereby is of importance in developing robust, active and low-cost water oxidation devices.
 Fig. 23  Structure of 20 and the related O–O bond formation step. 
On the basis that the Co ion can promote water oxidation, Nocera and co-workers demonstrated that Co oxide film formed in situ on ITO surface in phosphate derivative buffers could efficiently catalyze water oxidation in an electrochemical way.83 The XAS studies on the Co oxide film indicated that cobalt and oxygen formed a cubane-like structure (Fig. 24, left) on the electrode surface.84 Very recently, Hill and co-workers reported a cubane-like Co4-POM complex, B-type [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10− (21; Fig. 24, right), which efficiently catalyzes water oxidation (initial rate ≥ 300 min−1) using [Ru(bpy)3]3+ as a sacrificial oxidant at pH = 8.11 [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10− only contains earth-abundant elements and is free of carbon-based ligands and is thus stable against oxidative degradation under strong oxidizing conditions. More importantly, it is stable under catalytic conditions: neither hydrated cobalt ions nor cobalt hydroxide/oxide particles generate during the catalytic water oxidation. Computational studies on the electronic properties of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10− show that the four HOMOs of a high-spin ground state [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10− are located on Co core without involvement of W atoms, indicating Co is the real water oxidation center and W is catalytically inert. An attachment of such an active, robust and inexpensive WOC on the electrode could be a promising way toward realistic application.
 Fig. 24  Left: proposed structure for the bulk of the Co catalyst film; right: core structure of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−. 
Later on, Lian, Hill and their co-workers reported light-driven water oxidation using this Co4-POM complex.13 With persulfate as sacrificial electron acceptor and [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as photosensitizer, catalyst 21 exhibits a high photon-to-O2 quantum yield (15%) and a relatively high TON (>220) at pH 8. The TON is limited mainly by the depletion of a sacrificial electron acceptor. This noble metal-free Co4-POM catalyst is more efficient than the Ru-based polyoxometalate WOC [Ru4O4(OH)2(H2O)4(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− (6).
Iron(III)-tetraamido macrocyclic ligand catalysts (FeIII-TAMLs) were recently discovered to be able to catalyze the oxidation of water using CeIV as oxidant. The oxygen evolution behavior is biphasic: oxygen release is rapid in the first ca. 20 s (TOF = 78 min−1) and then becomes very slow but steady (a few hours). The TONs are thus low; for the best catalyst 22d, 16 turnovers were achieved (Fig. 25). Both oxidative and hydrolytic decomposition pathways could limit the catalytic performance of FeIII-TAMLs. It is obvious that electron withdrawing substituents increase the reaction rate. Therefore, structural fine tuning of FeIII-TAML is available to discover more rugged and active Fe-based WOCs, which is an attractive research project since iron is the most abundant transition metal. More details of the reaction mechanisms are needed.
 Fig. 25  Structures of complexes 22a–22d. 
5. Immobilization of molecular WOCs
When people consider applying the molecular catalysts discussed above into any electrocatalytic or photoelectrocatalytic device, towards achievement of sustained water oxidation in practice, a key problem that has to be confronted is how to immobilize the catalyst on the semi-conductive/conductive surface of the electrode. This issue, however, is usually overlooked, since most attention has been drawn on the development of highly efficient WOCs. To find an ideal method of grafting molecular WOCs on the electrode surface is definitely challenging if the following requirements for a qualified ‘connection’ between a molecular WOC and an electrode are taken into account: (i) stability in harsh oxidative conditions. The practical electrical potential required to drive water oxidation is typically 1.29–1.8 V,36,85 and the existence of dioxygen is certainly inevitable in the reaction medium, so the WOC has to be immobilized in a way strong enough to survive in the water electrolysis conditions. (ii) Resistance against acidic aqueous conditions. The protons generated from O2 evolution could accumulate close to the electrode surface and dramatically decrease the pH value of the microenvironment around the catalysts. (iii) An efficient transfer of electrons from catalyst to electrode, which is of course essential for the efficiency of electrochemical catalysis.
From the aspect of molecular interaction force, the modes of molecular absorption on a host surface can be summarized in the following categories: “(a) covalent attachment brought about by directly linking groups of interest or via linking agents, (b) electrostatic interactions, brought about via ion exchange, ion-pairing or donor–acceptor interactions, (c) hydrogen bonding, especially important in biological systems, (d) hydrophobic interactions leading to a self-assembly of long chain fatty acid derivatives, (e) van der Waals forces involved in the physisorption of molecules on solid surfaces, and (f) physical entrapment inside the pores or cavities of hosts such as cyclodextrins, micelles, etc.”.86 Several approaches have been developed during the past couple of years, aiming to immobilizing well-defined molecular WOCs on the electrode surface, which will be briefly reviewed below.
5.1. Covalent attachment
The covalent bond, in terms of bond energy, can certainly provide a stronger interlinkage between molecules and the host surface rather than other binding modes. This binding strategy has been successfully adopted in the construction of DSCs (dye-sensitized solar cells), at the photoanodes of which sensitizers bearing anchoring groups, carboxylic acid group in most situations, react with the surface hydroxyl groups of the semiconductor oxide to form a covalent bond.87 It has been verified that electrons can efficiently transfer from the sensitizers to the semiconductor surface through the carboxylic binding bridge. It is also found that a phosphonic acid group can bind onto a semiconductor oxide surface in a stronger manner than that of a carboxylic acid group.88 Meanwhile, the phosphonate binding linkage is more resistant against desorption in the presence of water compared with carboxylate linkage.
There are, however, two major difficulties in applying the same method in the immobilization of molecular WOCs on the oxide surface. One is the complication of preparing WOCs with a carboxylic or phosphonic anchoring group. The other is hydrolysis of carboxylate- or phosphonate-oxide linkages in acidic aqueous environment of water oxidation.
In 2007, Meyer's group reported the synthesis of a phosphonate-modified water oxidation complex, [(tpy-PO3H2)(H2O)2RuIII]2O4+ (23; tpy-PO3H2 = 4′-phosphonat-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine), and its immobilization on a range of metal oxide electrode surfaces including ITO (tin-doped indium oxide), TiO2, ZrO2 and SnO2 (Fig. 26a).89 Electrocatalytic water oxidation could be initiated by stepping the applied potential to either 1.52 or 1.35 V vs. NHE at pH = 6.0, depending on different oxidized intermediates. Due to the limited catalytic activity of the tpy-Ru complex,90 the calculated turnover numbers based on the O2 evolution were not higher than 3. A dramatic drop of catalytic currents was also observed during the electrocatalysis. Nevertheless, this work provided the possibility of covalent molecular WOCs attachment on the electrode surface. As subsequent achievement of their exploration, Meyer and coworkers reported another two remarkable examples of molecular WOC-electrode assemblies via phosphonate linkages very recently. The first case is immobilization of [Ru(Mebimpy)(4,4′-(CH2PO3H2)2bpy)(OH2)]2+ (24; Mebimpy = 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)-pyridine) on FTO (fluorine-doped tin oxide) substrates (Fig. 26b), which could undergo electrocatalytic water oxidation at 1.85 V vs. NHE in a pH 5 buffer with a current density of ∼14.8 μA cm−2, corresponding to a turnover frequency of ∼21.6 min−1.91 There was no obvious decay in the catalytic current for a period of more than 8 h electrolysis, corresponding to ∼11000 turnovers. In the second case, a phosphonate-modified ruthenium trisdiimine moiety was introduced as an electron transfer mediator between the catalytic center [(bpm)RuII(Mebimpy)(OH2)]2+ (bpm is 2,2′-bipyrimidine) and the electrode surface ([((4,4′-CH2PO3H2)2bpy)2RuII(bpm)RuII(Mebimpy)(OH2)]4+ (25; Fig. 26c).92 The electrolysis was performed at 1.8 V vs. NHE in 1.0 M HClO4 resulting in a sustained catalytic current for more than 13 h without any sign of decrease in catalytic activity. A TOF of 36 min−1 and a TON of 28000 were achieved according to the catalytic current density. It should be noted that in both situations, the surface-bound complexes retain their chemical and physical properties, as well as the defined water oxidation mechanism of the corresponding single-site WOCs in homogeneous catalysis.93
 Fig. 26  Schematic diagram for immobilization of molecular WOCs on a semiconductive/conductive surface. (a) [((tpy-PO3H2)(H2O)2RuIII)2O]4+ anchored to metal oxide electrodes. (b) [RuII(Mebimpy)(4,4′-(CH2PO3H2)2bpy)(OH2)]2+ anchored to a metal oxide electrode. (c) [((4,4′-CH2PO3H2)2bpy)2RuII(bpm)RuII(Mebimpy)(OH2)]4+ anchored to a metal oxide electrode. (d) [RuII2(H2O)2(bpp-methylbenzoate)(tpy)2]3+ anchored to TiO2 nanoparticles. 
Alternatively, Llobet and colleagues successfully anchored the comprehensively-studied dinuclear Ru-Hbpp complex [RuII2(H2O)2(bpp-methylbenzoate)(tpy)2]3+(26) to TiO2 nanoparticles via a methylenebenzoic acid group (Fig. 26d).94 When treated with CeIV, this Ru-Hbpp-TiO2 hybrid material could oxidize water to dioxygen in a heterogeneous manner. The material, however, completely lost its catalytic activity in 2 h. The authors suggested that oxidation of the organic ligands led to catalytic deactivation. No application of the material in electrochemical water oxidation has been reported yet.
5.2. Electrostatic interaction
Taking advantage of the highly negative charge, [Ru4(H2O)4(μ-O)4(μ-OH)2·(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− (6; vide supra) can assemble with polycationic dendrons decorated multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) through electrostatic scavenging, affording a catalyst-MWCNT composite (Fig. 27).95 When doped on an ITO electrode, the hybrid composite was able to catalyze water oxidation electrochemically. In a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer, an appreciable catalytic current with a TOF of 36 h−1 was observed at 1.17 V vs. NHE, while a peak performance with a TOF of 306 h−1 was reached at 1.42 V vs. NHE. Although the long-term durability of the composite was not addressed in this work, the low catalytic overpotential of this composite and the mechanical properties of MWCNT provide an enormous potential for the fabrication of a rugged electrode for O2 evolution.
 Fig. 27  Electrostatic capture of [Ru4(H2O)4 (μ-O)4(μ-OH)2 (γ-SiW10O36)2]10− by polycationic dendrons on the MWCNT surface. 
Unlike the Ru4-POM2 complex, the most known molecular WOCs bear positive charges. Thus these catalysts can be captured by a supporting matrix carrying negative charge, of which a well-studied example is the cation permeable Nafion membrane. Nafion is a polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon)-type polymer with a hydrophobic fluorinated backbone and hydrophilic perfluorovinyl pendant side chains ending with sulfonic acid groups (the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 28a).96 Within the Nafion membrane, there are hydrophilic nano channels which can trap a positively charged catalyst by cation exchange in aqueous solution. Meanwhile, the inert Teflon backbone of Nafion ensures long-term chemical stability in oxidizing environments. Yagi et al. have reported the incorporation of Ru-Red, [(NH3)5RuIII(μ-O)RuIV(NH3)4(μ-O)RuIII(NH3)5]6+ (27; Fig. 28b), into a Nafion membrane coated over a platinum plate electrode.97,98 The immobilized complex was demonstrated to be active under 1.61 V vs. NHE (1.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl) in pH 5.4 potassium nitrate electrolyte solution. A maximum TON of 11 was achieved according to the amount of O2 evolved after 1 h electrolysis. A similar Nafion modified electrode was also applied in the adsorption of tetramaganese cubanes [L6Mn4O4]+ (20; L = (p-MeO-C6H4)2PO2−; Fig. 23).99,100 Continuous photocurrent was observed upon irradiation (273–750 nm) of the [L6Mn4O4]+/Nafion/glassy carbon electrode polarized at 1.21 V vs. NHE (1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl).101,102 The calculated TON based on Mn cubane is approximately 1000 after 65 h of photoelectrocatalysis. Light irradiation is necessary to achieve catalytic cycles since O2 only releases upon photodissociation of the MnIII/IV-oxide particles as mentioned in section 4.3.
 Fig. 28  Chemical structures of (a) Nafion; (b) Ru-red, [(NH3)5RuIII(μ-O)RuIV(NH3)4(μ-O)RuIII(NH3)5]6+. 
5.3. Electropolymerization
Comparing with adsorption of complexes by a polymer support, a more straightforward strategy for catalyst immobilization is electropolymerization of molecular WOCs, as monomers, directly on the electrode surface. A recent example in this approach includes the endeavor of anchoring the Hbbp-based dinuclear Ru complex on a conductive surface by the Llobet group.103 They utilized the modified tpy ligand to synthesize complex [RuII2(μ-bpp)(H2O)2(pp-tpy)2]2+ (28; pp-tpy = 4′-(para-pyrrolylmethylphenyl)-2,2′;6′,2′′-terpyridine; Fig. 29) which could electrochemically polymerize via radical cation coupling of N-substituted pyrroles at a potential of 1.44 V vs. NHE (1.2 V vs. SSCE). Both vitreous carbon sponges (VCS) and FTO electrodes were chosen for this electropolymerization. Furthermore, a non-active pyrrole-functioned cobalt bis(dicarbollide) derivative was added as a co-polymer in order to dilute the Ru WOCs and inhibit polypyrrole backbone oxidation. The authors compared the catalytic activity of [RuII2(μ-bpp)(H2O)2(pp-tpy)2]2+ in a homogeneous phase with that of polymer hybrid materials (VCS/polymer and FTO/polymer) in a heterogeneous phase, using CeIV as oxidant. They found that the polymer hybrid material catalyzes O2 evolution in a less efficient but more durable way. This polymer material, as expected, was capable of oxidizing water to molecular dioxygen electrocatalytically under 1.41 V vs. NHE (1.17 V vs. SSCE). A TON of 120 was obtained according to the catalytic current after 5000 s electrolysis. However, the details about the electrocatalytic water oxidation were not discussed in this work.
 Fig. 29  Structure formula of [RuII2(μ-bpp)(H2O)2(pp-tpy)2]2+. 
5.4. Direct deposit
Physical adsorption of molecules on solid surfaces is a simple method for immobilization of water insoluble WOCs. In this way, the complexes are attached to the electrode mainly through a van der Waals force which, however, is not strong enough to construct a durable and robust interlinkage between the molecule and the surface. One application of this strategy involved the direct deposit of dinuclear Ru complex [RuII2(OH)2(3,6-tBu2sq)2(btpyan)]2+ (29; btpyan = bis(terpyridyl)anthracene; tBu2sq = di(tert-butyl)-1,2-semiquinone; Fig. 30) onto the ITO electrode, reported by Tanaka's group.104,105 This modified electrode was able to electrochemically oxidize water to dioxygen under an applied potential of 1.91 V vs. NHE (1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl) in pH 4.0 phosphate buffer. The electrocatalysis completely ceased after 40 h due to exfoliation of the catalyst. A spectacular TON of 33500 was achieved according to the amount of O2 evolution.
 Fig. 30  Structure formula of [RuII2(OH)2(3,6-tBu2sq)2(btpyan)]2+. 
6. PEC device
The light-driven water oxidation discussed in section 4 implies that essential building blocks (WOCs and photosensitizers) are already in hand for the construction of PECs. However, efficient water oxidation/proton reduction catalysts and matched photosensitizers are necessary but not sufficient for developing fulfilled PECs. The complexity of such a device is that there is an electron transfer chain for each cycle of water molecule splitting, which includes a sequential ET process from water to catalyst, catalyst to photosensitizer, photosensitizer to anode, and anode to cathode. So the challenge now is how to arrange all these components in such a way that fast electron transfer occurs at every step of the process while charge recombination can be efficiently suppressed. For instance, fabrication of photosensitizer and catalyst that keeps the electron flow in the right direction is still a problem. To date, feasible PECs are rarely reported. One creative example of PECs was reported by Mallouk and co-workers, in which TiO2 semiconductor particles, [Ru(bpy)3]2+ photosensitizer, and heterogeneous IrO2 were assembled via phosphonate and carboxylate anchoring groups (Fig. 31).25 The purpose of this organization is to promote long-lived charge separation between the WOC and the electron acceptor section. Irradiation of the working electrode with visible light (> 410nm) under a bias potential of 325 mV vs. Ag/AgCl produced a pronounced photo-current (about 30 μA). Very recently, Hou, Wang and co-workers reported a heteronanostructured photoanode fabricated by atomic layer deposition of WO3 and coated with a Mn-based oxygen-evolving catalyst.106 The coating was prepared by thermal decomposition of [(tpy)2Mn2O2(H2O)2](NO3)3 (19). The thermal decomposition product is not identified yet although it is clear that the Mn-containing material is not MnO2 according to elemental analysis, EPR, FTIR and atomic absorption spectroscopy. Since this review focuses on characterized molecular WOCs, here we will discuss only two examples that involved application of molecular WOCs as anodic building blocks reported respectively by the Spiccia and Sun groups.24,26 These two PECs have a similar architecture concept as illustrated in Fig. 32 but with different WOCs. The photo-anode consists of WOC on the Nafion membrane attached on a dye sensitized TiO2 film.
 Fig. 31  Schematic of a TiO2/dye/IrO2 photoanode. 
 Fig. 32  Illustration of (a) the working principle of a PEC consisting of a photoanode and a Pt cathode. (b) Photo-anode of WOC-Nafion/dye-TiO2. 
Dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2, which has been successfully applied in dye-sensitized solar cells, is an attractive solution for generating long-lived photo-induced charge separation states. Due to the properties of semiconductive TiO2 nanoparticles, an electron injection from the excited dye into the conductive band of TiO2 is much faster than the reverse electron recombination process resulting in a long-lived oxidized state of photosensitizer.87 The long-lived electron-deficient photosensitizer is a premise for efficient electron extract from WOCs. Although TiO2 itself was reported to split water into H2 and O2, it only works at UV region due to its large band gap (3–3.2 eV).87,107 Therefore dyes that could absorb visible light are needed to assist a visible light-driven reaction. Thus, nanocrystalline TiO2 sensitized with [Ru(bpy)3]2+ derivatives was chosen as a visible light absorption system in the above mentioned PEC devices. A layer of the Nafion membrane, coated onto dye sensitized TiO2, was employed to immobilize WOCs through electrostatic attraction (vide supra). In an aqueous solution, Nafion is penetrable for both electrons and protons (Fig. 32b).
The working principle of the PEC is similar to that in DSSC: the photosensitizer is excited by photons and injects an electron into the conduction band of TiO2; the oxidized photosensitizer is then regenerated by transferring the hole to the WOC which reaches its active state after multi-hole transfer processes and subsequently oxidizes water to dioxygen. The current is generated by an electron flow through the external circuit from anode to Pt cathode, where protons are reduced.
In Spiccia's system,26 the WOC is a mono-cationic Mn-oxo cluster, [L6Mn4O4]+ (20) and the photosensitizer is [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-(COOH)2bpy)]2+ (P7). The dye/catalyst ratio of 20-Nafion/P7-TiO2 is 4.5. The maximum value of the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is 1.7% at 450 nm (the maximum absorption band of P7). The average peak current density is 31 ± 7 μA cm−2, corresponding to a turnover frequency of 47 ± 10 per Mn cluster per hour. After 2 h of irradiation, a TON of 13 per Mn cluster was obtained.
In our system,24 [Ru(bda)(pic)2]+ (10+) is applied as WOC, because it exhibits a low overpotential toward water oxidation under neutral conditions, and [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-(PO3H2)2bpy)]2+ (P8) is employed as sensitizer due to its stronger attaching ability onto the TiO2 surface than P7. On the 10+-Nafion/P8-TiO2 photoanode, the dye/catalyst ratio is 1.06. Aqueous buffer (pH 7.0 and 9.8) solutions were used as electrolytes to decrease the catalytic overpotential of 10+ and enhance the ET from 10+ to P8+. Under illumination with a light emitting diode (100 mW cm−2), a current density of 43 μA cm−2 was observed at pH 9.8 conditions. Light driven oxygen evolution under 300 mW cm−2 light illumination was measured with a Clark-type oxygen electrode, resulting in 280 nmol oxygen after 60 min illumination, corresponding to a TON of 16 and a TOF of 27 h−1 based on the catalyst.
7. Concluding remarks
After decades of endeavors by the chemists, the field of water oxidation catalysis has been promoted to a new level. WOCs based on different transition metals, including Ru, Ir, Mn, Co and Fe, are being rapidly developed. Some catalysts exhibit promising catalytic activities, such as Ru complex 10 (TOF > 2500 min−1), Co4 complex 21 (TOF = 300 min−1) and Fe complex 22d (TOF = 78 min−1); some show impressive robustness, for instance Ir complex 18 (TON ≈ 10000, TOF ≈ 5 min) and Ru dimer 5 (TON = 10400, TOF = 72 min−1). Importantly, fundamental mechanistic studies on water oxidation have helped the chemists to understand the overall process, from well-studied molecular WOCs, such as the blue dimer, the Ru-Hbpp complex and the one-site Ru-aqua complexes.
Light-driven water oxidation plays a crucial role in the final goal of artificial water splitting and is currently more striking. Despite all the above advances, the development of efficient and durable catalysts for visible light water splitting is still a challenging problem. Although many WOCs are capable of catalyzing water oxidation using CeIV as oxidant or driven directly by electrical power, only a few of them have low overpotentials. Consequently, visible light-driven water oxidation using sensitizers with mild oxidation potentials is rarely reported. In the three-component light-driven water oxidation system, the intermolecular electron transfer from catalysts to sensitizers is not efficient enough to compete with the ET from sensitizer to the sacrificial acceptor so that photosensitizers tend to decompose in an oxidative way. To overcome these problems and improve the light-driven water oxidation system, an enhanced catalytic rate and electron transfer efficiency have to be considered.
Yet, there is still no clear recognition of the structure–correlation of WOCs, which is necessary for designing effective catalysts. In the light of well documented literature sources, some empirical principles could be considered to minimize the overpotential and to increase the reactivity of WOCs: (i) lowering the oxidation potentials by stabilizing the high energy intermediates via introducing strong electron donating ligands, such as negatively charged ligands, while keeping the redox potentials of the designed metal oxoes in proper positions (>0.82 V); (ii) optimizing the surrounding ligands of the metal center to minimize the reorganization energy of the transition states; (iii) introducing an internal basic site to facilitate concerted proton-coupled electron transfer and/or to pre-orientate water molecules for attacking of metal oxo from the right direction (Fig. 4); (iv) in addition, using all-inorganic, carbon-free templates (such as polyoxometalate) instead of organic ligands for complexation with transition metals is an alternative to producing robust WOCs. More detailed knowledge on the reaction mechanism is always desired for further development of WOCs.
Immobilization of homogeneous WOCs on the electrode surface allows to carry out water oxidation under milder conditions (high pH solution, for instance, which favors water oxidation), protects the ligand from oxidative decomposition via collision between ligands and strong oxidants (CeIV and high valent Ru = O species), and ultimately increases the durability of WOCs.91,103 For instance, as mentioned in section 5.3, the polymer hybrid material based on complex [RuII2(μ-bpp)(H2O)2(pp-tpy)2]2+ is more durable than the monomer itself under CeIV-pH 1 working conditions. We have summarized the most commonly used methods to attach molecular WOCs to electrode and semiconductor surfaces (section 5). These include covalent attachment, electropolymerization, electrostatic interaction and direct deposit. The former two methods obviously have stronger bonding between the catalyst and material surface. However their relatively complex synthetic requirement is of disadvantage. There is no doubt that advances in material science will motivate novel methodologies for immobilization of molecular WOCs.
Construction of PECs which is the way of applying the artificial photosynthesis concept into practice is developing in parallel with the process of material and supramolecular chemistry. An ideal design of a PEC should facilitate the ET from the catalyst to the surface and avoid the backward charge recombination at the same time, which seems to be a paradox. The successful development of DSSCs, especially the application of dye sensitized crystalline TiO2, have been a great inspiration in the design of PECs. Under the current stage, the oxidative decomposition of photosensitizers due to slow ET from WOCs to sensitizers is still a serious problem. With a view to developing water splitting PECs with high efficiency and long term stability, the building blocks of PECs, including water oxidation/reduction catalysts, light harvesting unit and electrode materials, have to be significantly improved. Overcoming these large challenges will promise us a bright future of artificial photosynthesis.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by K & A Wallenberg Foundation, the Swedish Energy Agency, China Scholarship Council (CSC), National Natural Science Foundation of China (20633020) and National Basic Research Program of China (2009CB220009).
References

          R. E. Blankenship, Oxford, UK,  2002 .

          S. M. Danks, E. H. Evans and P. A. Whittaker, Photosynthetic Systems: Structure, Function, and Assembly, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  1985 Search PubMed .

          B. A. Dinner and G. T. Babcock. Oxygenic Photosynthesis: The Light Reactions, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1996 Search PubMed .
R. Danielsson, M. Suorsa, V. Paakkarinen, P. A. Albertsson, S. Styring, E. M. Aro and F. Mamedov, J. Biol. Chem., 2006, 281, 14241 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Alstrum-Acevedo, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6802 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252 CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, L. Hammarström, B. Åkermark and S. Styring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 36 RSC .
U. J. Kilgore, J. A. S. Roberts, D. H. Pool, A. M. Appel, M. P. Stewart, M. R. DuBois, W. G. Dougherty, W. S. Kassel, R. M. Bullock and D. L. DuBois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5861 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yin, J. M. Tan, C. Besson, Y. V. Geletii, D. G. Musaev, A. E. Kuznetsov, Z. Luo, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Science, 2010, 328, 342 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, Z. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Cape and J. K. Hurst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 827 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, L. Duan, Y. Xu, T. Privalov and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, A. Fischer, L. Duan, L. Tong, E. Gabrielsson, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, L. Duan, L. Tong, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6506 RSC .
L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, L. Tong, S. Andersson and L. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4659 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, Y. Xu, L. Tong and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 238 CAS .
L. Duan, Y. Xu, P. Zhang, M. Wang and L. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 209 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6549 CrossRef .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307 RSC .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, J. A. Villoria de la Mano, S. M. Al-Zahrani and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1865 CAS .
J. Sun, D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1252 CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018 CAS .
H. G. Park and J. K. Holt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1028 CAS .
B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kamiya and J.-R. Shen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 100, 98 CrossRef .
Y. Pushkar, X. Long, P. Glatzel, G. W. Brudvig, G. C. Dismukes, T. J. Collins, V. K. Yachandra, J. Yano and U. Bergmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 800 CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodríguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Mullins and V. L. Pecoraro, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 416 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, M. K. Tsai, J. T. Muckerman and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1545 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, M. A. Henderson, B. D. Koivisto, H. D. Osthoff and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16094 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozoglian, S. Romain, M. Z. Ertem, T. K. Todorova, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. Rodríguez, I. Romero, J. Benet-Buchholz, X. Fontrodona, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15176 CrossRef CAS .
A. Juris, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, S. Campagna, P. Belser and A. Vonzelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1988, 84, 85 CrossRef CAS .
K. Henbest, P. Douglas, M. S. Garley and A. Mills, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1994, 80, 299 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Gafney and A. W. Adamson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 8238 CrossRef CAS .
G. Navon and N. Sutin, Inorg. Chem., 1974, 13, 2159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Romain, L. Vigara and A. Llobet, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1944 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Gersten, G. J. Samuels and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4029 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gilbert, D. S. Eggleston, W. R. Murphy, D. A. Geselowitz, S. W. Gersten, D. J. Hodgson and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 3855 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagoshi, S. Yamashita, M. Yagi and M. Kaneko, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1999, 144, 71 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collin and J. P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 135 CrossRef CAS .
T. Meyer, M. Huynh and H. Thorp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5284 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, T. Cardolaccia, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1727 CrossRef CAS .
D. Geselowitz and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1990, 29, 3894 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamada and J. K. Hurst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, H.-W. Tseng, R. Zong, D. Wang and R. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1835 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, T. Åkermark, V. Gyollai, D. Zou, L. Eriksson, L. Duan, R. Zhang, B. Åkermark and L. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Köerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. D. Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, C. Besson, Y. Hou, Q. Yin, D. G. Musaev, D. Quiñonero, R. Cao, K. I. Hardcastle, A. Proust, P. Kögerler and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17360 CrossRef CAS .
C. Besson, Z. Q. Huang, Y. V. Geletii, S. Lense, K. I. Hardcastle, D. G. Musaev, T. Q. Lian, A. Proust and C. L. Hill, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2784 RSC .
F. Puntoriero, G. La Ganga, A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, M. Bonchio and S. Campagna, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4725 RSC .
R. Zong and R. P. Thummel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12802 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, R. Zong, H.-W. Tseng and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 990 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Tseng, R. Zong, J. T. Muckerman and R. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11763 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, A. Fischer, Y. Xu and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10397 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nyhlén, L. Duan, B. Åkermark, L. Sun and T. Privalov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1773 CrossRef .

          L. Sun; M. Wang; X. Yang; T. Privalov; L. Duan; Y. Xu, Presented in part at JSPS-RSAS Joint Conference “Capturing the Sun”,Stockholm, Sweden,  May 30–31, 2011 Search PubMed.
S. Roeser, P. Farràs, F. Bozoglian, M. Martínez-Belmonte, J. Benet-Buchholz and A. Llobet, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, S. Masaoka and K. Sakai, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 702 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, S. Masaoka, J. Abe and K. Sakai, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 2369 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, M. Z. Ertem, L. Vigara, T. K. Todorova, W. Chen, R. C. Rocha, F. Aquilante, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7745 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. McDaniel, F. J. Coughlin, L. L. Tinker and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 210 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Blakemore, N. D. Schley, D. Balcells, J. F. Hull, G. W. Olack, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16017 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lalrempuia, N. D. McDaniel, H. Müller-Bunz, S. Bernhard and M. Albrecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9765 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi and K. Narita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8084 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi, M. Toda, S. Yamada and H. Yamazaki, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8594 RSC .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L.-Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011 DOI:10.1038/nchem.1049 .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS .
M. Risch, V. Khare, I. Zaharieva, L. Gerencser, P. Chernev and H. Dau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6936 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Gräzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 347 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pechy, F. P. Rotzinger, M. K. Nazeeruddin, O. Kohle, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Gratzel, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 65 RSC .
F. Liu, T. Cardolaccia, B. J. Hornstein, J. R. Schoonover and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2446 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Lebeau, S. A. Adeyemi and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 6476 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15580 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9473 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. J. Concepcion and T. J. Meyer, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 3789 RSC .
L. Francàs, X. Sala, J. Benet-Buchholz, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 321 CrossRef .
F. M. Toma, A. Sartorel, M. Iurlo, M. Carraro, P. Parisse, C. Maccato, S. Rapino, B. R. Gonzalez, H. Amenitsch, T. Da Ros, L. Casalis, A. Goldoni, M. Marcaccio, G. Scorrano, G. Scoles, F. Paolucci, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 826 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Mauritz and R. B. Moore, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4535 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi, K. Kinoshita and M. Kaneko, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 11098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi, K. Nagoshi and M. Kaneko, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5143 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 7445 CrossRef .
R. Brimblecombe, D. R. J. Kolling, A. M. Bond, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7269 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Robinson, Y. B. Go, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mola, E. Mas-Marza, X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodríguez, C. Viñas, T. Parella and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5830 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, K. Tsuge and K. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, K. Tsuge and K. Tanaka, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 329 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Y. Lin, L.-Y. Chou, S. W. Sheehan, W. He, F. Zhang, H. J. M. Hou and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 499 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Visible light-driven water oxidation is still the bottleneck of the whole artificial water splitting processes. In the past decades, remarkable research advances have been made in the development of efficient water oxidation catalysts based on transition metals (Ru, Ir, Mn, Co and Fe). The understanding of water oxidation mechanisms in turn guides chemists to design more efficient catalysts. However, none of the reported water oxidation catalysts have fulfilled the following criteria: (i) fast reaction rate; (ii) low overpotential; (iii) high stability against oxidative and hydrolytic decomposition; and (iv) affordable cost for large-scale application. Therefore, the development of water oxidation catalysts, particularly earth abundant transition metal-based catalysts capable of working in an artificial photosystem, is urgently required.

12 H2O + 12 NADP+ + 48 hv → 6 O2 + 12 NADPH + 12 H+	(eq 1)
6 CO2 + 12 NADPH + 18 ATP + 12 H+ → C6H12O6 + 12 NADP+ + 18 ADP + 18 Pi + 6 H2O	(eq 2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (i) electron transfer sequence in PS II, (ii) working principle of a photoelectrochemical cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and its ligand environment.35	 
	(eq 3)

 	Fig. 3  Structures of Ru-based photosensitizers P1–P5 and their oxidation potentials.	 
[Ru(bpy)3]2+* + S2O82− → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO4• − + SO42−	(eq 4)
[Ru(bpy)3]2+ + SO4• − → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + SO42−	(eq 5)
	(eq 6)
2 S2O82− + 2 H2O + 2 hv → O2 + 4 H+ + 4 SO42−	(eq 7)
[Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ + [Ru(bpy)3]2+* → [Ru(bpy)3]3+ + Co2+ + 5 NH3 + Cl−	(eq 8)
4 [Co(NH3)5Cl]2+ + 2 H2O + 4 hv → O2 + 4 H+ + 4Co2+ + 20 NH3 + 4 Cl−	(eq 9)

 	Fig. 4  Representation of WNA and I2M mechanisms.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of blue dimer 1 and the representative pathways of O–O bond formation involving RuV(=O)(μ-O)RuV(=O) species.	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed mechanism of O–O bond formation involving bpy-diol.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of 2 and its catalytic mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of dinuclear Ru catalysts 3–5.	 
[Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIV4] → [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuIV3RuV] fast	(eq 10)
[Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIV3RuV] → [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuIV2RuV2] fast	(eq 11)
[Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIV2RuV2] → [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuIVRuV3] fast	(eq 12)
[Ru(bpy)3]3+ + [RuIVRuV3] ↔ [Ru(bpy)3]2+ + [RuV4]	(eq 13)
[RuV4] + 2H2O → [RuIV4] + O2 + 4H+	(eq 14)

 	Fig. 9  Structures of Ru polyoxometalate 6 and Ru4 dendrimer photosensitizer P6.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of complex 7 and the proposed catalytic mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structures of mononuclear ruthenium complexes 8a–c and 8-OH2.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structures of mononuclear ruthenium complexes 9 and 10.	 

 	Fig. 13  Formation of the real WOC [Ru (pdc)(pic)2(OH2)]+ under catalytic conditions.	 

 	Fig. 14  Crystal structure of the seven-coordinate RuIV complex (hydrogen atoms of C–H type were omitted for clarity) as intermediate for catalytic water oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 15  Proposed catalytic cycles for 10 in CeIV-pH 1 conditions.	 

 	Fig. 16  Structures of mononuclear Ru 11 and the O–O bond formation via WNA.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structures of mononuclear Ru complexes 12–14.	 

 	Fig. 18  WNA mechanism of O–O bond formation catalyzed by one-site Ru WOCs; competing pathways are omitted for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 19  Structures of Ir complexes 15–18.	 

 	Fig. 20  Proposed reaction mechanism for Cp*Ir-catalyzed water oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 21  Structure of dimeric Mn complex 19 and its representative O–O bond formation pathway.	 

 	Fig. 22  Illustration of possible electron transport for light-driven water oxidation by the mica/19/[Ru(bpy)3]2+ adsorbate.	 

 	Fig. 23  Structure of 20 and the related O–O bond formation step.	 

 	Fig. 24  Left: proposed structure for the bulk of the Co catalyst film; right: core structure of [Co4(H2O)2(α-PW9O34)2]10−.	 

 	Fig. 25  Structures of complexes 22a–22d.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic diagram for immobilization of molecular WOCs on a semiconductive/conductive surface. (a) [((tpy-PO3H2)(H2O)2RuIII)2O]4+ anchored to metal oxide electrodes. (b) [RuII(Mebimpy)(4,4′-(CH2PO3H2)2bpy)(OH2)]2+ anchored to a metal oxide electrode. (c) [((4,4′-CH2PO3H2)2bpy)2RuII(bpm)RuII(Mebimpy)(OH2)]4+ anchored to a metal oxide electrode. (d) [RuII2(H2O)2(bpp-methylbenzoate)(tpy)2]3+ anchored to TiO2 nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 27  Electrostatic capture of [Ru4(H2O)4 (μ-O)4(μ-OH)2 (γ-SiW10O36)2]10− by polycationic dendrons on the MWCNT surface.	 

 	Fig. 28  Chemical structures of (a) Nafion; (b) Ru-red, [(NH3)5RuIII(μ-O)RuIV(NH3)4(μ-O)RuIII(NH3)5]6+.	 

 	Fig. 29  Structure formula of [RuII2(μ-bpp)(H2O)2(pp-tpy)2]2+.	 

 	Fig. 30  Structure formula of [RuII2(OH)2(3,6-tBu2sq)2(btpyan)]2+.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic of a TiO2/dye/IrO2 photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 32  Illustration of (a) the working principle of a PEC consisting of a photoanode and a Pt cathode. (b) Photo-anode of WOC-Nafion/dye-TiO2.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
