Catalytic conversion of biomass to biofuels  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C004654J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C004654J
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1493-1513Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCatalytic conversion of biomass to biofuels

        
          
            David Martin 
            Alonso
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jesse Q. 
            Bond
          
        
       and 

        
          
            James A. 
            Dumesic
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering University of Wisconsin Madison, WI 53706
Received 
      25th March 2010
    , Accepted 14th July 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      6th August 2010
    AbstractBiomass has received considerable attention as a sustainable feedstock that can replace diminishing fossil fuels for the production of energy, especially for the transportation sector. The overall strategy in the production of hydrocarbon fuels from biomass is (i) to reduce the substantial oxygen content of the parent feedstock to improve energy density and (ii) to create C–C bonds between biomass-derived intermediates to increase the molecular weight of the final hydrocarbon product. We begin this review with a brief overview of first-generation biofuels, specifically bioethanol and biodiesel. We consider the implications of utilizing starchy and triglyceride feedstocks from traditional food crops, and we provide an overview of second-generation technologies to process the major constituents of more abundant lignocellulosic biomass, such as thermochemical routes (gasification, pyrolysis, liquefaction) which directly process whole lignocellulose to upgradeable platforms (e.g., synthesis gas and bio-oil). The primary focus of this review is an overview of catalytic strategies to produce biofuels from aqueous solutions of carbohydrates, which are isolated through biomass pretreatment and hydrolysis. Although hydrolysis-based platforms are associated with higher upstream costs arising from pretreatment and hydrolysis, the aqueous solutions of biomass-derived compounds can be processed selectively to yield hydrocarbons with targeted molecular weights and structures. For example, sugars can be used as reforming feedstocks for the production of renewable hydrogen, or they can be dehydrated to yield furfurals or levulinic acid. For each of the platforms discussed, we have suggested relevant strategies for the formation of C–C bonds, such as aldol condensation of ketones and oligomerization of alkenes, to enable the production of gasoline, jet, and Diesel fuel range hydrocarbons. Finally, we address the importance of hydrogen in biorefining and discuss strategies for managing its consumption to ensure independence from fossil fuels.
1. Introduction
An important current focus of research in chemistry, engineering, agriculture, and environmental policy is the development of clean technologies that utilize a sustainably produced feedstock to the largest extent possible.1 This research is especially important in the transportation fuel sector which is strongly dependent on petroleum, a non-renewable fossil source of carbon. However as the worldwide supply of petroleum diminishes, it is becoming increasingly expensive and, accordingly, less attractive as a carbon source. Furthermore, the combustion of fossil fuels or their derivatives for the production of heat and power is associated with a net increase in greenhouse gas levels worldwide.2–4 In contrast to the present situation, where the entirety of demand is met by a single source (i.e., petroleum), a more flexible system drawing from multiple energy sources should be an attractive long term solution. Vehicles powered by electricity, solar energy, hydrogen fuel cells, and biofuels are all being actively researched to reduce our dependence on petroleum as a source of energy. Nevertheless, these new technologies require time to be economically and technically viable. The situation is further exacerbated by the lack of an infrastructure to support cutting-edge technologies like hydrogen fuel cells, and change will thus come slowly to a market currently governed by preferences and habits that are based on widespread availability of liquid hydrocarbon fuels. In this respect, liquid biofuels derived from renewable plant mass, are unique in their similarity to the currently preferred fuel sources. As such, their implementation does not require extensive changes to the transportation infrastructure and the internal combustion engine. Thus, the use of biomass as a renewable source of carbon for the production of transportation fuels is a promising alternative that is realizable on short time scales. For example, bioethanol and biodiesel are currently used commercially as blending agents for petroleum-derived gasoline and Diesel fuels.
Presently in the petrochemical industry, crude oil is fractionated and refined to produce various grades of liquid transportation fuel, and hydrocarbon feedstocks are functionalized to produce intermediates and speciality chemicals. The analogous concept of biorefining would be similar in scope, with the key difference being that biomass—rather than petroleum—would be utilized as a renewable source of carbon5,6 that can be transformed into fuels and valuable chemicals within a single facility. Furthermore, in the production of heat and power, the utilization of biomass derivatives mitigates the release of greenhouse gas emissions through cycles of regrowth and combustion,2,7 as illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  CO2 cycles for petroleum- and biomass-derived fuels. 
We can consider three general classes of feedstocks derived from biomass that are appropriate for the production of renewable fuels:8 starchy feedstocks (including sugars), triglyceride feedstocks, and lignocellulosic feedstocks. In Fig. 2, representative chemical structures for starches and triglycerides are compared to that of cellulose—the predominate component of lignocellulosic biomass. Fig. 3 shows different biofuels that can be obtained with each of these feedstocks. Starchy feedstocks are those comprised of glucose polysaccharides joined by α-glycosidic linkages, such as amylase and amylopectin, which are easily hydrolyzed into the constituent sugar monomers, making them easy to process such as in first generation bioethanol facilities. Trigylderide feedstocks are those comprised of fatty acids and glycerol derived from both plant and animal sources. Sources of triglycerides for the production of biodiesel include various vegetable oils, waste oil products (e.g., yellow grease, trap grease), and algal sources.8 Lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant class of biomass. While starch and triglycerides are only present in some crops, lignocellulose contributes structural integrity to plants and is thus always present. In general, most energy crops and waste biomass considered for energy production are lignocellulosic feedstocks, with examples including switchgrass, miscanthus, agricultural residues, municipal wastes, and waste from wood processing. Lignocellulose is comprised of three different fractions: lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structure of biomass feedstocks. 
 Fig. 3  Biomass-derived feedstocks and platforms for conversion to biofuels. 
In this review we consider various processes by which biomass can be transformed into biofuels, giving special attention to utilization of lignocellulosic biomass. Without underestimating the contributions of other possible feedstocks and processes, this review will focus primarily upon upgrading strategies for the production of fuels from aqueous solutions of lignocellulose-derived carbohydrates. With the examples discussed in this work, we hope to outline various alternatives for biomass processing, providing options such that each feedstock can be processed in the most efficient way possible.
2. Lignocellulosic biomass
While attractive as an inexpensive and abundant feedstock, lignocellulosic biomass must be broken into its constituent parts to be efficiently processed by specific refining strategies. Biomass fractionation is a difficult process and has contributed to the high cost of processes utilizing lignocellulosic feedstocks. For example, at present, the cost of cellulosic ethanol is approximately two times higher than the cost of corn ethanol, with the higher price being attributed to the complexity of the isolation of sugars from lignocellulosic biomass.9 Lignocellulosic biomass is generally composed of hemicellulose (25 –35%), cellulose (40 – 50%), and lignin (15 – 20%),10 and these structures are illustrated in Fig. 4. The isolation of biomass fractions typically proceeds through pretreatment followed by hydrolysis. The pretreatment stage is comprised of both physical (e.g., milling, comminuting, steam) and chemical (e.g., acid or base hydrolysis) methods, and is intended as a means of increasing the susceptibility of crystalline cellulose to degradation in subsequent hydrolysis steps. Pretreatment achieves this objective by penetration/depolymerization of the lignin seal and extraction/preservation of the pentose (hemiceullose-derived) fraction of biomass.11 In the following sections, we address briefly the composition of each biomass fraction and the potential application of each as a feedstock for biofuels.
 Fig. 4  Lignocellulose composition: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. 
2.1. Lignin
The lignin fraction of biomass is an amorphous polymer composed of methoxylated phenylpropane structures, such as coniferyl alcohol, sinapyl alcohol, and coumaryl alcohol,2,12 which provide plants with structural rigidity and a hydrophobic vascular system for the transportation of water and solutes.13 Lignin surrounds the hemicellulose and cellulose fractions, and one function of biomass pretreatment is to de-polymerize the lignin seal such that the carbohydrate portions can be accessed.2,11 If desired, lignin can be removed from biomass to isolate the carbohydrate fraction through depolymerization/solubilization in alkaline-alcohol solutions, similar in effect to the Kraft paper pulping process.11,12 Alternatively, residual lignin can be collected following pretreatment and acid or enzymatic hydrolysis for the extraction of pentose and hexose sugars from hemicellulose and cellulose, respectively.14,15 Although lignin can be isolated, it is not readily amenable to upgrading strategies. As such, one option for lignin utilization is to burn it directly for the production of heat and electricity. A report by the U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) suggests that in an integrated biorefinery for the production of cellulosic ethanol, lignin and residual solids can be used to provide process heat and power at a rate in excess of the energy required to drive the process.16,17 In addition, alternatives have been suggested that allow for the production of functional intermediates from lignin to make valuable chemicals. For example, given that it is rich in oxygenated aromatic species, lignin can be used as a feedstock in the production of phenolic resins,18 and several studies report pyrolysis strategies for the production of bio-oils19 and aromatics20,21 from lignin.
2.2. Hemicellulose
The hemicellulose fraction of lignocellulosic biomass is an amorphous polymer that is generally comprised of five different sugar monomers, D-xylose, L-arabinose, D-galactose, D-glucose, and D-mannose, with xylose being the most abundant.3 Hemicellulose is bound to lignin, and cellulose strands are interlaced with hemicellulose. Generally, it is preferable to remove the hemicellulose fraction of biomass during pretreatment, such that subsequent hydrolysis steps to recover glucose from cellulose are more effective. Ideally, the pretreatment process preserves the xylose obtained from hemicellulose, and conditions favoring the formation of degradation and dehydration products are not used.11 Hemicellulose extraction can be achieved through either physical methods or a mixture of physical and chemical methods. In general, physical methods, such as steam explosion or hot water treatment, yield polymeric xylans that can be subsequently hydrolyzed under mild conditions to produce xylose monomers. Pretreatment methods that combine chemical treatments such as dilute acid hydrolysis typically produce xylose monomers in good yield. In comparison to the digestion of crystalline cellulose, hemicellulose extraction/hydrolysis is regarded as a straightforward process that can be carried out with high yields of sugar. For example, hemicellulose is readily depolymerized to yield xylose monomers through dilute acid hydrolysis with H2SO4 being the most commonly used acid.6,22 Once extracted and hydrolyzed, xylose monomers are appropriate feedstocks for ethanol production via fermentation23,24 or for preparation of furfural via dehydration.22
2.3. Cellulose
Cellulose is a polymer of glucose units linked via β-glycosidic bonds, imparting the structure with rigid crystallinity that impedes hydrolysis.3 Cellulose is typically isolated within the complex lignin/hemicellulose matrix, and it is largely inaccessible to hydrolysis in untreated biomass. Biomass pretreatment via milling and physical/chemical treatments serves to permeate lignin and extract hemicelluloses, such that subsequent hydrolysis steps to isolate the glucose monomers of cellulose are more effective.2,11 Once isolated, the hydrolysis of cellulose for the production of glucose is considered more difficult than the analogous production of xylose from hemicellulose. High glucose yields (>90% of theoretical maximum) are achieved via enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose following biomass pretreatment.14,15 Cellulose hydrolysis can also be achieved under harsher conditions using solutions of mineral acids (H2SO4) at elevated temperatures; however, the harsh conditions required for non-enzymatic deconstruction of cellulose favor the formation of degradation products such as hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), levulinic acid, and insoluble humins.25,26 The selectivity for production of glucose can be optimized through proper selection of acid concentration and reaction temperature, and by operating reactors at short residence times.
3. Developed processes for conversion of biomass to fuels
Apart from burning wood as a source of heat, biomass-derived alcohols and oils have been used as liquid energy sources since 6000 BC.27 Alcohols have been used as transportation fuels since the invention of the internal combustion engine in 1897,28 while the Diesel engine was initially designed to work with oils.29 However, the increased availability of inexpensive petroleum almost completely replaced these green alternatives. Presently, given the diminishing worldwide supply of petroleum, the interest in conversion strategies for the production of liquid fuels from biomass is receiving renewed attention, and many options are under consideration. First generation biofuels use conventional technologies to process food crops (e.g., sugar, starch and oils) and consist mainly of alcohols (bioethanol) and oils (biodiesel). These fuels are readily available, because the processes to obtain them are well understood technologies and have been refined over many years of development. The main challenge in research involving first generation biofuels is not in the development of new technologies, but in the optimization of processes to reduce cost, such that green fuels can be competitive with those produced from petroleum.
Bioethanol is the most abundantly produced biofuel. With a production scale of 13.5 billion gallons in 2006, it accounts for more than 94% of total biofuel production,30 and ethanol production continues to increase, with 17.2 billion gallons produced in 2008.31 This fast growth is possible because blends of ethanol and gasoline can be used in modern gasoline engines without requiring any modifications.32 The production of bioethanol, outlined in Fig. 5, begins with biomass pretreatment to produce sugar monomers, such as glucose, that can be converted to ethanol by fermentation using a variety of microorganisms (e.g., yeast, bacteria and mold). The ethanol product is then purified by distillation, whereupon it is appropriate for direct use as a fuel or additive. Food crops, such as sugarcane in Brazil and corn in the USA, are the preferred feedstocks for bioethanol production, because they are rich in sugars and starches that are easily hydrolyzed (as compared to cellulosic feedstocks).
 Fig. 5  Process schematic: bioethanol production. 
Lignocellulosic biomass has been considered an appropriate feedstock to produce sustainable, second generation bioethanol. Presently, one of the main challenges in the utilization of lignocellulosic biomass is pretreatment and hydrolysis for the production of sugars, and these steps are considered the greatest impediment to economic viability of strategies involving the production of sugars from lignocellulosic biomass. As such, an active area of research is the optimization of biomass pretreatment and hydrolysis to improve the suitability of this feedstock.16,33 More recently algae crops have been considered as a sustainable source of feedstocks for bioethanol and biodiesel, and these algae-derived fuels are generally called third generation biofuels. However, these potential alternatives are still at an early stage of development, and more research on feedstock availability and process optimization is necessary. The energy balance of ethanol production depends strongly on the raw materials used, and some authors claim that the production of ethanol has a negative energy balance because more fossil energy is required in the process than the energy released by the ethanol produced.34,35 Other authors defend that the energy balance is slightly positive considering the advances achieved in ethanol production in recent years.2,36
Biodiesel is the second most abundant renewable liquid fuel, with an annual production of 4.3 billion gallons in 2008.31 Biodiesel can be used in current injection engines in a wide range of blends with petrol-diesel or as a pure fuel (without petrol-diesel), and its preparation is outlined schematically in Fig. 6. First generation biodiesel37,38 is produced by esterification of fatty acids or transesterification of oils (triglycerides) with alcohols (normally methanol and ethanol) using a basic39–41 or acidic catalyst.42,43 The fatty esters are separated from glycerol by decantation and purified for direct use as fuels. Another alternative to process oil into biofuels is hydro-treating,44 which can be carried out synergistically in the existing petroleum refinery infrastructure through mixing and co-processing of vegetable oils with petroleum derived feedstocks.8,45 The main drawback of oil-based processes is the availability of inexpensive feedstocks. Normally palm, sunflower, canola, rapeseed and soybean oils are used, but they are expensive and can otherwise be used as food sources. Challenges in biodiesel research are focused on the development of new catalytic processes that allow the use of low quality or waste oils (e.g., used fryer oil), such that biodiesel production is less expensive and does not directly compete with the food supply. The use of these low quality oils has been proposed as an avenue for cost reduction; however, uncertainty regarding the composition of these used oils, which often contain large quantities of water and other impurities, can complicate their utilization. As an alternative, different non-edible oils have been proposed as appropriate feedstocks (e.g., cynara,46 Jatropha, Karanja47). Additionally, researchers are focusing on the production of third generation biodiesel, which is produced from triglycerides derived from algae.48
 Fig. 6  Process schematic: biodiesel production. 
A drawback of using only the easily processed sugar and triglyceride fractions of a plant is that these fractions are only a small part of the biomass. Accordingly, the net energy yield that can be achieved using only these fractions is poor,49 and only specific crops can be used. To improve energy yield of fuels from biomass, lignocellulosic feedstocks must be utilized despite their complexity. Additionally, it is preferable to utilize non-edible biomass as a feedstock for the production of fuels and chemicals, such that the production of transportation fuels does not interfere with either the food supply or disrupt land use unduly.3,50,51 Accordingly, the following section will be devoted to an overview of various processing options currently available for lignocellulosic feedstocks.
4. General approach for conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to liquid fuels
The overall goal of converting lignocellulosic biomass to hydrocarbon fuels is the removal of oxygen, combined with the formation of C–C bonds to control the molecular weight of the final hydrocarbons, and requiring the least amount of hydrogen from an external source (such as the steam reforming of petroleum). The strategy for achieving this goal is typically comprised of two broad types of steps: (i) conversion of the solid lignocellulosic biomass feedstock to a gaseous or liquid-phase chemical platform, involving partial removal of oxygen; and (ii) catalytic upgrading of this chemical platform to the final hydrocarbon fuel by controlled C–C coupling reactions and removal of the remaining oxygen functionality. In the following sections we will illustrate this general strategy for various specific approaches.
First, we will briefly explore gasification combined with Fischer–Tropsch synthesis, in which the first step in lignocellulosic biomass conversion is gasification to produce synthesis gas (i.e., CO:H2 gas mixtures), and the second step is the catalytic conversion of synthesis gas platform to linear hydrocarbons in the Diesel fuel range. Second, we will consider pyrolysis and liquefaction, where the first step involves anaerobic thermal treatment of lignocellulosic biomass to form liquid bio-oil, leading to the removal of ∼80% of the oxygen in the feed, and the second step involves the catalytic upgrading of this bio-oil in the presence of H2 to achieve C–C coupling and to remove the remainder of the oxygen moieties. Third, we will address aqueous-phase reforming, in which the lignocellulosic biomass must first undergo treatment to produce an aqueous solution of sugars or polyols. This platform of aqueous compounds having a C:O stoichiometry of 1:1 is then converted by a combination of C–C and C–O cleavage reactions to produce a mixture of mono-functional organic compounds (alcohols, ketones, carboxylic acids, heterocyclics). These mono-functional intermediates then undergo catalytic upgrading to hydrocarbon fuels by various routes to control C–C coupling and oxygen removal, such as dehydration, aromatization and alkylation over acid zeolite catalysts, aldol-condensation of alcohols and ketones over bifunctional catalysts containing metal and basic sites, and ketonization of carboxylic acids over basic oxides. Fourth, we briefly consider an approach in which aqueous solutions of sugars formed by treatment of lignocellulosic biomass undergo catalytic dehydration to produce furan compounds, such as furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF). These furanic aldehydes can then be used as feedstocks for aldol-condensation reactions over basic catalysts to produce hydrocarbons suitable for Diesel fuel applications by achieving controlled C–C coupling reactions while minimizing undesirable branching processes. Finally, we consider the levulinic acid platform, in which lignocellulosic biomass first undergoes treatment in acid solutions to produce levulinic acid. The aqueous solution of levulinic acid (in the presence of formic acid) then undergoes catalytic reduction to γ-valerolactone (GVL), which serves as an intermediate for the production of nonane for Diesel fuel or the production of branched alkanes with molecular weights appropriate for jet fuel. In particular, GVL can undergo ring-opening and reduction to pentanoic acid, followed by ketonization to form 5-nonanone, and completed by hydrodeoxygenation to nonane. Alternatively, GVL can undergo catalytic conversion to butene and CO2, combined with butene oligomerization to form C8 – C20 alkenes.
5. General approaches for conversion of cellulosic biomass: thermochemical and hydrolysis pathways

Fig. 7 presents two of the most frequently considered strategies for biomass processing. The first approach involves thermochemical routes that process whole lignocellulose at high temperatures and/or pressures (e.g., pyrolysis, gasification, liquefaction). The thermal deconstruction of biomass yields upgradeable intermediates such as bio-oils by pyrolysis and synthesis gas by gasification (CO:H2 gas mixtures, denoted as syngas). Thermal processing is typically coupled with subsequent chemical/catalytic upgrading (Fischer–Tropsch synthesis, hydrodeoxygenation) to produce fuel range hydrocarbons. The second processing option for lignocellulosic biomass is fractionation/hydrolysis, an option by which sugars and lignin are isolated from lignocellulosic biomass and processed selectively through either biological or chemical pathways. In general, biomass hydrolysis is more complex than thermochemical conversion and is carried out at higher cost. However, hydrolysis based strategies offer selective processing options and chemical platforms unavailable using thermochemical technologies. In this section, we examine both the predominate thermochemical pathways and general approaches for the hydrolytic conversion of biomass.
 Fig. 7  Strategies for conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to liquid biofuels by thermochemical and hydrolysis routes. 
5.1. Gasification
Gasification is carried out through partial combustion of biomass to produce syngas or producer gas, which typically has some quantity of CO2, CH4 and N2 (producer gas).2 Syngas can be upgraded to liquid fuels such as Diesel and gasoline by Fischer–Tropsch (FT) synthesis,52 and large scale gasification-FT production facilities are in use in South Africa (SASOL). Gasification is normally carried out at temperatures over 1000 K, but recently is has been demonstrated that H2 and CO can be produced through the aqueous phase reforming of glycerol at lower temperatures (<620 K),53,54 at which integration of syngas production with FT upgrading is feasible.54 The ratio of CO/H2 can be modified by the water gas shift reaction (CO+H2O → CO2+H2). Fig. 8 shows a typical biomass gasification process. The advantage of gasification is that it is not constrained to a particular plant-based feedstock, and thus any lignocellulosic biomass can be considered appropriate. However, the amount of water in the biomass2 and impurities in the gases produced55 can be problematic in downstream FT processes, where a clean gas feed is required.
 Fig. 8  Process schematic: biomass gasification and upgrading. 
5.2. Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis takes place through thermal, anaerobic decomposition of biomass (at temperatures from 650 to 800 K). At these elevated temperatures, vapor phase products react and subsequently condense upon cooling to produce a liquid mixture of more than 350 compounds such as acids, aldehydes, alcohols, sugars, esters, ketones, and aromatics, which are collectively referred to as “bio-oil.” Yields of bio-oil up to 70% of the initial mass fed into the reactor have been reported.56 Typically, short residence times (seconds) are necessary for the production of liquid bio-oils. At longer reaction times, the main product of pyrolysis is solid coke (slow pyrolysis) that can be used to generate energy by combustion. Catalytic fast pyrolysis has recently been developed as a means for producing aromatic compounds, rather than bio-oil, from direct pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass, and yields of 20–30% aromatics have been reported when pyrolysis takes place in the presence of H-ZSM-5.57 Pyrolysis has received considerable attention as an inexpensive processing option that allows for the total utilization of lignocellulosic biomass, and can be used for processing lignin after extraction of carbohydrates from lignocellulosic biomass.19,21 Given that pyrolysis pathways, illustrated in Fig. 9, do not require the extensive pretreatment steps common to hydrolysis/sugar platforms, the cost of producing a bio-oil is considerably less than the cost of sugar-based products. However, the bio-oil product is not particularly well suited for use as a fuel and must be treated extensively before it can be used in internal combustion engines. The main limitations to direct bio-oil utilization are the high acidity and oxygenate content of the bio-oil, leading to a low energy density liquid and corrosive properties that are detrimental to equipment lifetime when used in existing engines.58
 Fig. 9  Process schematic: biomass pyrolysis and upgrading. 
5.3. Liquefaction
Liquefaction is an alternative pathway for the production of bio-oils, and this approach is summarized in Fig. 10. Liquefaction consists of the catalytic thermal decomposition of large molecules to unstable shorter species that polymerize again into a bio-oil. Biomass is mixed with water and basic catalysts like sodium carbonate, and the process is carried out at lower temperatures than pyrolysis (525–725 K) but higher pressures (5–20 atm) and longer residence times. These factors combine to make liquefaction a more expensive process; however, the liquid product obtained contains less oxygen (12–14% 59) than the bio-oil produced by pyrolysis2 and typically requires less extensive processing.
 Fig. 10  Process schematic: biomass liquefaction and upgrading. 
Bio-oils, in general, have been successfully tested in engines, turbines and boilers, that required small modifications.60 However, problems exist associated with the complexity of the bio-oil product, leading to unsuitability for long term storage.61 Different approaches such as hydrodeoxygenation or steam reforming59 have been proposed to upgrade the bio-oils and to solve the stability issues. The hydrogen required by these upgrading strategies can be obtained by aqueous reforming of biomass releasing CO2,62–64 thereby decreasing the dependence on external sources of hydrogen. It has also been proposed that bio-oils can serve as appropriate feedstocks for co-processing in petroleum refineries, particularly as both hydrotreating and steam reforming are common practices in petroleum processing.8
5.4 Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis pathways are appropriate for lignocellulose processing if higher selectivity is desired in biomass utilization, for example, in the production of chemical intermediates or targeted hydrocarbons for transportation fuel. Selective transformations require isolation of sugar monomers, a step which is complex and expensive for lignocellulosic feedstocks. Once sugar monomers are isolated, however, they can be processed efficiently at relatively mild conditions by a variety of catalytic technologies. Lignin utilization remains a challenge, although it makes a suitable feedstock for phenolic resins18 bio-oil/aromatic production through pyrolysis or catalytic fast pyrolysis,21 or heat and power production.16 Aqueous phase processes for the conversion of carbohydrate-derived compounds are potentially attractive in that they do not require concentration of the aqueous solution and generally yield a gas phase or hydrophobic product that separates spontaneously from water, which reduces the cost of separation steps in the catalytic processing strategies. The primary motivation of the chemical route is the targeted reduction of the high oxygen content of carbohydrates (10 to 44%)27 by different reactions such as hydrogenolysis, dehydration or hydrogenation to obtain hydrocarbons with increased energy density.65,66 One of the main drawbacks of this alternative is that, as in the production of cellulosic ethanol, aqueous phase catalytic processing requires a pretreatment step to hydrolyze solid lignocellulose to soluble carbohydrates.56,67 However, an advantage in using catalytic chemical approaches is decreased processing times compared to biological approaches. For example, following the pretreatment step, the time to convert cellulose to levulinic acid in the Biofine process (30 min) is shorter than the time to convert cellulose (7 days) and starch (2 days) to ethanol.68 Finally, catalytic/chemical routes for aqueous phase processing can be targeted for the production of hydrophobic compounds that separate spontaneously from water not requiring distillation processes to purify the final products, compared to fermentation/distillation that accounts for approximately 67% of the ethanol production cost.69
Depending on the available feedstock and desired product, thermochemical and hydrolysis pathways may both be important in the production of sustainable fuels and chemicals. The advancement of both technologies reduces the dependence upon one process or one kind of biomass, and an integrated biorefinery must ultimately be more adaptable than an analogous petroleum refinery with its dependence on a single feedstock. Recently, studies have examined potential synergies between pyrolysis and hydrolysis pathways and concluded that there is little difference in carbon yields to upgradeable products.21 The authors suggest that a combination of hydrolysis and pyrolysis pathways can, in fact, be more efficient provided that appropriate upgrading strategies are in place for hydrolysis products (i.e., sugars such as glucose and xylose), and they conclude that there are potential applications for pyrolysis of lignins to produce value-added chemical intermediates or fuel additives.21 In general, we anticipate that important contributions will be made by biological, hydrolysis, and thermal pathways in biorefineries of the future, where a combination of all these processes will be necessary to process 100% of the biomass with the maximum yield possible, though the remainder of this review shall focus upon hydrolysis based strategies for the production of fuels.
The following sections provide a discussion of various aqueous phase catalytic strategies available for processing a variety of biomass derivatives including sugars, polyols, furfurals, levulinic acid, and γ-valerolactone, to yield hydrocarbon fuels.
6. Aqueous phase reforming and derivative technologies
Initially presented as a strategy for the production of renewable hydrogen,64 aqueous phase reforming (APR) has branched into strategies for the production of light alkanes,70 syngas 53 and monofuctional compounds.71 Aqueous phase reforming and its derivatives have provided the various alternative strategies shown in Fig. 11.
It has been demonstrated that oxygenated feedstocks such as glucose, sorbitol, glycerol, ethylene glycol, and methanol can be processed to produce renewable hydrogen. This hydrogen can be used directly as energy, in hydrogen fuel cells for example, or indirectly, as an external source of hydrogen required in biomass upgrading processes (e.g., aldol condensation, hydrodeoxygenation). The process is typically carried out in the presence of supported Pt catalysts.64 The nature of both the metal and support has an important influence on APR reactions of aqueous solutions of oxygenates with C:O stoichiometric ratio equal to 1:1 (sorbitol, glycerol, ethylene glycol, methanol), and the product selectivity can be tuned depending on the metal, support, and promoter.72 Pt-black and Pt supported on Al2O3, TiO2, and ZrO273 have been demonstrated to be active and selective for the aqueous phase reforming of methanol and ethylene glycol to produce hydrogen. Catalysts based on Pd have shown similar selectivity, although lower activity compared to Pt analogs. It has also been observed that Rh, Ru, and Ni favor the production of alkanes from polyols as opposed to hydrogen.74 The reason for this difference is that these metals favor cleavage of C–O bonds rather than C–C bonds. Acidity also has an important effect on reaction selectivity through the catalytic cleavage of C–O bonds by dehydration. The addition of specific promoters can also enhance reforming activity and selectivity for hydrogen production. For example, nickel supported on SiO2 or Al2O3 was found to have low selectivity for hydrogen production; rather, it favored the formation of light alkanes. However, the addition of a Sn promoter to RANEY®-Ni based catalysts enhanced the production of hydrogen from sorbitol, glycerol, and ethylene glycol using low-cost catalysts.75 As the acidity of the reaction system is increased, either through the use of solid acid catalyst supports (i.e., SiO2/Al2O3) or the addition of mineral acids to the feed (HCl), the selectivity to alkanes increases73 due to the increased rates of dehydration and hydrogenation pathways compared to hydrogenolysis and reforming reactions. This tendency can be exploited to selectively produce alkanes (butane, pentane, and hexane) from sorbitol over Pt–SiO2/Al2O3 catalysts70 (eqn (1)). The formation of smaller alkanes is requisite without an external source of hydrogen, because at least a portion of the 6-carbon sorbitol feedstock must be reformed (by cleavage of C–C bonds) to provide the hydrogen necessary for complete deoxygenation (eqn (2)).  C6H14O6 + 6 H2 → C6H14 + 6 H2O(1) (2)
If desired, the selectivity to n-hexane can be improved through the introduction of an external hydrogen co-feed. However, the alkanes produced in this manner are limited to a maximum of six carbon atoms and are too volatile to be used in high concentrations as liquid fuels.
Advances in aqueous phase reforming of polyols using Pt-based catalysts have been made toward the low temperature production of syngas from glycerol feedstocks.53 In this process, it is necessary to utilize a catalyst that favors the cleavage of C–C bonds over C–O bonds, with earlier studies supporting Pt as an appropriate noble metal for this requirement.64,76 However, at the reaction conditions studied for the gas phase conversion of glycerol (498–548 K) the Pt surface is predominately covered by adsorbed CO molecules, which inhibits catalyst performance.77 PtRu and PtRe were identified78,79 as alloys that could offer the reforming activity of Pt but that bind CO less strongly, thus mitigating reaction inhibition in the presence of desired products. Results from experimental studies demonstrated that both of these alloys were active in the production of syngas from glycerol with less susceptibility to poisoning arising from adsorbed CO.80 The production of syngas from aqueous solutions of glycerol differs in product selectivity from the reforming of glycerol (or other polyols) in that syngas production is carried out at low system pressure, such that water gas shift is not equilibrated and production of CO and H2 is favored (eqn (3)), whereas at the elevated pressures typical of APR, high partial pressures of water favor the formation of CO2 and H2. Accordingly, by operating the reactor at lower system pressures, the selectivity can be tailored toward the production of syngas as opposed to the production of H2 and CO2.80 C3H8O3 → 3 CO + 4 H2(3) (4)
Moreover, by producing a catalyst that is less susceptible to inhibition by CO at low temperatures, it is possible to integrate the production of syngas with Fisher–Tropsch synthesis with minimal intermediate processing54 (eqn (4)).
In addition to decreasing the binding energy of CO on the catalyst surface, leading to higher rates of reforming at low temperatures, the addition of Re to carbon-supported Pt catalysts promotes the water gas shift reaction, as evidenced by an increase in the H2/CO ratio and a decrease in the CO/CO2 ratio with increasing rhenium content of the catalyst.81 Characterization studies of Pt–Re/C catalysts were carried out to determine that PtRe alloy particles were present on the carbon support.82 Moreover, microcalorimetric studies indicate a lower binding energy for CO adsorption on Pt–Re alloy, consistent with results from DFT calculations.79,83–85 Results from reaction kinetics studies of the vapor phase conversion of glycerol over Pt–Re catalysts show that increasing the system pressure shifts the product selectivity away from typical reforming products of H2, CO, and CO2 and favors the production of alkanes and partially deoxygenated reaction intermediates,82 such as alcohols and ketones, suggesting that it is possible to selectively deoxygenate polyols. Importantly, this result indicates that it is possible to couple biomass reforming strategies with those of hydrodeoxygenation to improve energy density without an external source of hydrogen.
By operating under conditions that favor C–O bond cleavage (e.g., high oxygenate feed concentration, elevated system pressure, low temperature) a Pt–Re/C catalyst is able to partially deoxygenate polyols and produce monofunctional intermediates, which are predominately 2-ketones, secondary alcohols, heterocycles, and carboxylic acids. These monofunctional intermediates can be used as a feedstock for a variety of upgrading strategies that are not limited to the production of shorter alkanes (hexane) or syngas. In this respect, C–C coupling is employed along with oxygen removal to obtain larger hydrocarbons starting from biomass-derived C5 and C6 compounds,86 as depicted in Fig. 12. Ketones can subsequently be coupled via aldol condensation using basic catalysts such as MgAlOx,69,87,88 MgAl, Pd-MgO/ZrO2, Mg/ZrO2, La/ZrO2, Y/ZrO2, and Mg/TiO2.89,90 Furthermore, introduction of bifunctional metal-basic catalysts allows for the coupling of secondary alcohols in the presence of H2. In particular, an equilibrium is established over the metal component of the catalyst between secondary alcohols and 2 ketones, the latter of which can react via acid or base catalyzed condensation with other ketones present in the monofunctional products to yield larger methyl ketones (condensation products).91,92 In addition, the presence of H2 is employed in aldol condensation processes to drive the equilibrium toward condensation products by hydrogenation of CC double bonds formed in dehydrated aldol-adducts. Another effective strategy for achieving C–C coupling between biomass-derived compounds is the ketonization of carboxylic acids, in which two CnOOH acids can be converted nearly quantitatively to ketones containing 2n−1 carbon atoms, plus CO2 and water, in the presence of basic catalysts such as ceria and BaOH.93–95 For example, CeZrOx has been shown to be an active catalyst for ketonization of propionic acid (derived from lactic acid).96
The monofunctional compounds produced by conversion of glucose or sorbitol over Pt–Re/C catalysts can also be converted to gasoline by fully hydrogenating these compounds to alcohols, which can subsequently be upgraded over H-ZSM-5, which has been demonstrated to be effective in the catalytic upgrading of bio-oil components.97 Alternatively, alcohols produced by hydrogenation can be dehydrated over various solid acid catalysts98 to produce olefins. Kunkes et al.71 designed a cascade process where monofunctional oxygenates are first hydrogenated to form alcohols (e.g., pentanol, hexanol) and then converted directly over H-ZSM-5 at 673 K, during which 40% of the carbon in the monofunctional products is transformed into C6+ gasoline range components. In a two step process, the alcohols can be dehydrated over an acidic niobia catalyst and the resulting olefins coupled over H-ZSM-5, leading to branched olefins centered at C12. To produce less extensively branched compounds appropriate for Diesel fuels, the authors suggest a process by which monofunctional intermediates are condensed directly over CuMg10Al7Ox catalysts to produce C8–C12 ketones, accounting for 45% of the carbon in the monofunctional mixture. However, basic CuMg10Al7Ox catalysts deactivate with time on stream, attributed to the poisoning of basic sites necessary for aldol condensation by organic acids present in the feed of monofunctional compounds derived from glucose and sorbitol. Neutralization of these acids represents an appropriate strategy for feedstocks with small quantities of acids (i.e., those derived from processing of sorbitol); however, feedstocks derived from glucose were rich in carboxylic acids (30% of the monofunctional compounds), and neutralization of these acids represents both a large consumption of a non-renewable species (NaOH) and a loss of carbon. Accordingly, ketonization can be carried out to achieve C–C coupling and thereby remove the carboxylic acids prior to the aldol condensation step, in which the ketones subsequently undergo C–C coupling over basic sites. According to this strategy, a mixture of monofunctional compounds derived from either glucose or sorbitol would first be fed to a fixed bed reactor containing CeZrOx and operating at 573 K and 20 bar. Under these conditions, the acids present in the feed are converted quantitatively to larger ketones (C7–C11), CO2, and water. The C3–C6 ketones present in the feed are not reactive over CeZrOx and remain unconverted. By operating at high pressures and low temperature, product vaporization can be minimized, and the effluent from ketonization can be fed to a reactor containing a bifunctional aldol condensation catalyst, such as Pd/CeZrOx, which shows good condensation activity and improved resistance to organic acids. Using a combination of ketonization and aldol condensation, the authors report a yield of 63% to C7+ oxygenates from a glucose-derived stream of monofunctional compounds. The production of liquid alkane fuels through similar avenues based on a monofunctional platform has also been reported elsewhere by Blommel et al.99
The combined use of CeZrOx and Pd/CeZrOx catalysts to achieve ketonization and aldol-condensation of biomass-derived monofunctional compounds has been studied in detail.100 In particular, CeZrOx demonstrated high activity for ketonization of carboxylic acids to form CO2 and water, whereas Pd/CeZrOx demonstrated high activity for aldol-condensation of 2-hexanone, secondary alcohols, and other ketones introduced as co-feeds with 2-hexanone. Primary alcohols are detrimental to catalytic activity for aldol-condensation, which can be attributed to the formation of aldehydes. The presence of carboxylic acids (e.g., butyric acid) in a 2-hexanone feed strongly inhibits the aldol condensation of the ketone over Pd/CeZrOx, thus requiring ketonization of the biomass-derived feedstock prior to aldol-condensation. However, the water and CO2 products of ketonization may also potentially serve to inhibit the rate of aldol-condensation over Pd/CeZrOx in the downstream reactor, and experiments were designed to study the aldol-condensation of ketones over Pd/CeZrOx in a feed prepared to simulate the effluent from an upstream ketonization step over CeZrOx, thus containing water and CO2. Whereas aldol condensation over Pd/CeZrOx was weakly inhibited by water, the rate was strongly inhibited by the presence of CO2, which binds to the strong basic sites of CeZrOx. Accordingly, the coupling of ketonization/condensation processes to achieve C–C coupling of mixtures containing carboxylic acids and ketones is best achieved with an intermediate separation stage to remove water and CO2 between the two catalyst beds.100 Inhibition of aldol condensation by CO2 was shown to be reversible at reaction conditions, and subsequent temperature programmed reaction studies demonstrated that Pd/CeZrOx catalyzes the reduction of surface bound CO2 to form CO and methane.
In more recent studies, Gurbuz et al. studied the coupling between ketonization and aldol-condensation by varying the composition of the downstream aldol-condensation catalyst.101 Importantly, they found that the inhibiting effects of both CO2 and water can be suppressed by decreasing the amount of cerium in the ceria/zirconia mixed oxide aldol-condensation catalyst, such that a Pd/ZrO2 catalyst (in which the strong basic functionality has been largely removed) was effective for aldol-condensation in the presence of CO2 and water. Ketonization and aldol condensation can thus be achieved in a single reactor using stacked catalyst beds of CeZrOx followed by Pd/ZrO2, thus eliminating the need for an intermediate separation step between catalysts. Additionally, the acidic ZrO2 support shows improved conversion of heterocyclic compounds present in the mixture of monofunctional compounds produced by conversion of glucose or sorbitol over Pt–Re/C catalysts. The overall conversion and yield to C7+ products using a stacked bed system were comparable to those obtained using a two-reactor system with intermediate separation between reactors.
Studies of the acid/base properties of ceria/zirconia mixed oxide catalysts were carried out using temperature programmed desorption of ammonia and CO2. Catalysts with greater proportions of ceria adsorb larger amounts of CO2 and also show sites that adsorb CO2 more strongly (leading to catalysts that display both strong and weak binding sites). Catalysts with greater proportions of zirconia adsorb larger amounts of ammonia. Pd/ZrO2 catalysts show higher activity for aldol condensation of 2-hexanone compared to Pd/CeZrOx catalysts102 (90% conversion of 2 hexanone versus 58% conversion, respectively). Additionally, because the ZrO2-rich catalyst binds CO2 weakly, the extent of inhibition by CO2 is lower compared to catalysts rich in CeO2. In particular, the introduction of 10 mol% CO2 into a 2-hexanone feed decreases the conversion from 58% to 5% over a Pd/CeZrOx catalyst, while the conversion over the Pd/ZrO2 catalyst decreases from 90% to 72%. Indeed, experiments using stacked beds of CeZrOx and Pd/ZrO2 and a feed containing 20% butyric acid in 2-hexanone demonstrated that the upstream CeZrOx catalyst can achieve complete conversion of the butanoic acid, and the downstream Pd/ZrO2 catalyst can convert the 2-hexanone feed (75%) to larger oxygenates.102
The aforementioned studies of APR have mainly been carried out using C6 polyols and glucose. Blommel and coworkers suggest that APR processing is sufficiently robust to accommodate the processing of C5 sugars, and that the inclusion of the hemicellulose fraction of biomass would improve the production capacity of hydrocarbons from sugar cane bagasse by approximately 30%.99
7. Selective transformations of platform chemicals
Given the chemical disparity that exists between feedstock and end product, the preparation of fuels or chemicals from biomass will typically occur through partially deoxygenated biomass derivatives, as outlined in section 4. In general, a greater degree of selectivity in the preparation of these intermediates—referred to here as platform chemicals—will afford a greater degree of flexibility in downstream processes. Conversion of biomass into functionalized, targeted platform molecules is unique to hydrolysis based methods and allows for the production of a wide range of fuels and chemicals. In the following sections, we describe methods for production and processing of several important platform molecules, furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), levulinic acid (LA) and γ-valerolactone (GVL).
7.1. Furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF)
The use of furans, such as HMF and furfural, as precursors of liquid hydrocarbon fuels is an option for the production of linear alkanes in the molecular weight range appropriate for Diesel or jet fuel. Polysaccharides can be hydrolyzed to their constituent monomers, which can subsequently be dehydrated over an acid catalyst (HCl, 423 K103) to furan compounds with a carbonyl group such as HMF, 5-methylfurfural, or 2 furaldehyde (furfural). Furthermore, furans can be produced from both cellulose and hemicellulose fractions of biomass; thus, furan platforms utilize a large fraction of the available lignocellulosic feedstock. Furfural and HMF can be produced with good selectivity (e.g., 90%) from xylose and fructose respectively in biphasic reactors,90,104 whereas yields are lower for glucose (42% at low concentrations of 3 wt%).105 The addition of aprotic solvents, such as DMSO, improves the selectivity to HMF from fructose, with final yields of over 90%.105 Reducing the water concentration is critical to the selective preparation of HMF, because it is readily hydrated in water to form levulinic acid and formic acid.106 To minimize the incidence of side reactions, such as condensation, furfural compounds can be extracted from the aqueous layer using organic solvents such as THF, butanol, and methyl isobutyl ketone103,107 and by addition of salts to the aqueous phase,108 which decreases the solubility of organic species in water. A potential drawback of this approach is that the use of solvents requires a downstream separation step, which increases the total cost of the process.109 Roman-Leshkov et al. reported a process where they separate the HMF produced using 2-butanol and methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK), thereby decreasing the energy requirements of downstream purification.107 The use of DMSO and an extracting solvent can also be employed to increase HMF selectivity to 55% when glucose is used as the feed,110 compared to 11% in water. Fig. 13 shows different strategies for upgrading HMF to liquid fuels. HMF can be transformed by hydrogenolysis to 2,5-dimethyl furan (DMF) with 76–79% yields over a Cu–Ru/C catalyst or over CuCrO4 with 61% yield.108 DMF is not soluble in water and can be used as blender in transportation fuels. To form larger hydrocarbons, HMF and other furfural products can be upgraded by aldol condensation with ketones, such as acetone, over a basic catalyst (NaOH) at 298 K.103 Single condensation of HMF and acetone produces a C9 intermediate, which can react with a second molecule of HMF to produce a C15 intermediate. Condensation products can then undergo hydrogenation/dehydration over bifunctional catalysts with metal and acid sites (Pd/γAl2O3 at 373–413 K and 25–52 bar; Pt/NbPO5 at 528–568 K and 60 bar)69 to produce linear C9 or C15 alkanes that are hydrophobic and separate spontaneously from water, reducing the cost of purification. Aldol condensation can be coupled with hydrogenation steps using a bifunctional catalyst like Pd/MgO–ZrO2, leading to high yields of condensation products (>80%) at 326–353 K.89 By selective hydrogenation, HMF and furfural can be converted to 5-hydroxymethyltetrahydrofurfural (HMTHDA) and tetrahydrofurfural (THF2A) that after self-condensation and hydrogenation/dehydration steps produce C12 or C10 alkanes, respectively.
 Fig. 11  Processing options to convert sugars and polyols to biofuels by aqueous phase reforming approaches. 
7.2. Levulinic acid
The Biofine process,111,112 see Fig. 14, (which has been scaled to pilot level production) provides an interesting approach to convert lignocellulose to valuable platform chemicals, specifically levulinic acid (C6 fraction) and furfural (C5 fraction), that can subsequently be upgraded to liquid biofuels by different routes.113 The biomass feedstock is mixed with sulfuric acid (1.5–3 wt%) and introduced into a first plug-flow reactor where hydrolysis of the carbohydrates to intermediates (HMF) takes place at 483–493 K and 25 bar with a short residence time (12 s) to minimize the formation of degradation products. Subsequently in a second reactor, the intermediates are converted to levulinic acid and formic acid at 463–473 K and 14 bar, with a residence time close to 20 min. These conditions have been optimized to remove formic acid, as well as remove the furfural arising from dehydration of the C5 sugars present in biomass. Final yields to levulinic acid are around 70–80% of the theoretical maximum, and correspond to 50% of the mass of the C6 sugars. The remaining mass is collected as formic acid (20%) and a solid residue called humins (30%), produced by degradation reactions of the large number of intermediates114 and Klason lignin. The properties and the amount of this solid residue depend on the feedstock used, and normally this solid is burned to produce heat and electricity. Optimization of the Biofine process for use with inexpensive raw materials could decrease the price of LA to 8–20 ¢/kg,115 increasing the scope of its potential uses. Pilot plants in the United States and Italy have used paper waste, agricultural residues, and organic municipal wastes 56,116 with successful results. Fig. 15 shows the different pathways to upgrade levulinic acid into different liquid fuels, and the following sections expand upon these applications.
 Fig. 12  Schematic pathways to convert sugars and polyols to biofuel through production of monofunctional intermediates. Adapted from ref. 71. 
 Fig. 13  Reaction pathways to upgrade HMF by aldol-condensation to liquid alkanes. Adapted from ref. 69. 
Levulinic acid (LA) can be converted to methyltetrahydrofuran, a fuel extender and part of P-series fuels. MTHF can be blended up to 70% with gasoline without modification of current internal combustion engines. The lower heating value of MTHF compared with gasoline is compensated by its higher specific gravity, which results in similar mileage to that achieved with gasoline. Direct conversion of levulinic acid to MTHF is possible; however, improved yields can be achieved through indirect routes, which proceed through the production of γ-valerolactone as an intermediate. γ-valerolactone can be reduced to 1,4-pentanediol and subsequently dehydrated to MTHF115 with a total consumption of 3 moles of external H2 from LA to MTHF.68 High yields (approximately 63 kg of MTHF for 100 kg of LA at 513 K and 100 bar) have been reported by the U.S. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory using a bimetallic catalyst (Pd(5%)Re(5%)/C).117
Another processing option for LA is the production of methyl and ethyl esters that can be blended with Diesel fuel. This esterification can be carried out at room temperature during LA storage in the presence of methanol or ethanol. Various acid catalysts have been studied to increase yields and reaction rates.118 Studies conducted by Biofine and Texaco119 have demonstrated that the 21:79 formulation, a mixture containing 20% ethyl levulinate, 79% Diesel and 1% of other co-additives, can be used in Diesel engines. The blend is a cleaner burning Diesel fuel (improved by the increased oxygen content of the blend (6.9% w/w)) that results in reduced sulfur emissions.120
LA can be converted to γ-valerolactone by dehydration to angelica lactone and subsequent reduction, or by reduction to 4-hydroxy-pentanoic acid and subsequent dehydration. These reactions are carried out at relatively low temperatures (373–543 K) and high pressures (50–150 bars), and both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts have been studied for this process.121 LA is solid at room temperature (melting point = 303 K) and different solvents, such as ethylether, dioxane and water, have been used to facilitate pumping. The highest yields of GVL (97%) have been obtained using Ru/C catalysts at 423 K and 34.5 bar using dioxane as solvent.122 This reduction is normally carried out using external H2; however, in situ hydrogen production through decomposition of the formic acid, produced as a by-product in the production of levulinic acid, is a promising alternative. The use of formic acid as a hydrogen donor in aqueous solutions reduces the need for external H2 in the production of GVL and eliminates the need for LA purification strategies. Both effects ultimately contribute to a lower overall cost for the production of GVL. The mechanism of the hydrogen transfer has not been definitively established. One alternative is that a metal-formate is formed which decomposes into CO2 and a metal-hydride that reacts with LA to form 4 hydroxypentanoic acid, which then forms GVL by cyclisation. A second alternative is that formic acid is decomposed into CO2 and molecular H2, the latter of which then carries out the hydrogenation.123
Recently, several works report a simple process for the production of GVL which integrates hydrolysis/dehydration of the carbohydrates to form LA and the subsequent hydrogenation to GVL in a single vessel.121,123 It has been reported that sulfuric acid (commonly used in cellulose hydrolysis) poisons the Ru catalyst (used in levulinic acid hydrogenation). Thus, to allow the integration of both reactions in the same vessel, other acids for cellulose hydrolysis have been investigated, such as trifluoroacetic acid. Heeres et al.121 have worked extensively in this area using Ru/C as a catalyst. They report that the overall reaction rate is limited by the hydrogenation of LA to GVL. Using fructose as a raw material, a final yield of 39% for LA and 32% for GVL is achieved in 8 h at 453 K and 50 bars. The yield of GVL can be increased to 43% with 17% yield to LA by increasing the reaction time to 16 h, which indicates that the final products are stable at these reaction conditions. Further improvement to 52% and 11%, respectively, can be achieved if external formic acid is added at the beginning of the reaction. These numbers are close to the maximum yield of LA from fructose reported in the literature, indicating that the reaction rate of fructose hydrogenation to sorbitol/mannitol is slower than dehydration, and the presence of H2 at the beginning of the reaction does not increase by-product formation. The yields are limited by the maximum yields in LA dehydration, 46% for glucose,122 40% for sucrose113 and 29% for cellulose.124 When comparing different feeds using formic acid and additional external hydrogen to increase reaction rates, they observe that the maximum yield is reached using fructose (62% GVL, 4% LA) and sucrose (52% GVL, 9% LA), and the yields are lower when using glucose (38% GVL, 4% LA) and cellulose (29% GVL, 6% LA). At low temperatures, the rate of glucose hydrogenation to sorbitol is higher than the rate of dehydration, which results in increased by-product formation. This problem can be addressed through optimization of heat transfer to the reaction medium. Better results have recently been reported using only formic acid as a hydrogen donor, HCl for sugar degradation, and a mixture of RuCl3–3H2O and PPh3 as hydrogenation catalyst.123 The authors observed that using a stronger base as a ligand increases the reaction rate at 423 K, and they suggest that the presence of specific concentrations of water and CO2 have a positive effect on the final yield to GVL. They observed that with less than 25% water, the conversion of LA during hydrogenation increased from 78% to 100% when CO2 was added at 4 MPa. A similar but more pronounced effect is observed at 50% water. However, the positive effect of water is no longer observed at concentrations above 75%. The mechanism of rate enhancement in the presence of CO2 and water remains unclear.
 Fig. 14  Levulinic acid production. Biofine process. 
 Fig. 15  Schematic pathways to upgrade levulinic acid to liquid fuels. 
7.3. γ-valerolactone
As depicted in Fig. 16, γ-valerolactone can be used in a number of applications, ranging from direct use as a fuel additive or solvent to diverse upgrading strategies for the production of fuels and chemicals.126 There are limitations to its direct application as a transportation fuel in the present infrastructure, such as low energy density, blending limits, and high solubility in water. Because GVL is derived from levulinic acid in aqueous media, the direct use of GVL as a fuel necessitates purification of the GVL, by separation/purification steps and distillation/extraction methods that remove water and increase the overall cost of the process. The use of solvents, such as ethyl acetate113 or supercritical CO2127 have been proposed to extract GVL, although they can be difficult to operate on large scales. Another alternative is to directly process the aqueous solutions of GVL to produce hydrophobic liquid alkanes with the appropriate molecular weight to be used as liquid fuels. Fig. 17 presents some of the alternatives for converting GVL to liquid hydrocarbons.
 Fig. 16  γ-valerolactone applications. Adapted from ref. 125. 
 Fig. 17  Reaction pathways to convert γ-valerolactone to liquid fuels. 
Serrano-Ruiz et al.128 have demonstrated that aqueous solutions of GVL (50 wt%) can be upgraded to C9 hydrocarbons using a flow reactor. GVL can be converted by ring opening to pentenoic acids,129 and this mixture of pentenoic acids can subsequently be hydrogenated to produce pentanoic acid. Pd/Nb2O5 has been identified as a water stable catalyst that is able to carry out both of these reactions. The yield to pentanoic acid is controlled by the amount of metal incorporated in the catalyst and the partial pressure of H2. Increased metal loadings and high partial pressures of H2 favor the formation of byproducts, such as butane and COx species, that form through pentanoic acid decarboxylation/decarbonylation, and pentane, which forms through hydrogenation/dehydration of pentanoic acid. The best yields to pentanoic acid (92%) were obtained with 0.1% Pd at 598 K and 35 bars (50% H2, 50%He). Pentanoic acid can be upgraded to 5-nonanone by ketonization93 over CeZrOx at 698 K and pressures from 1 to 20 bar. The ketonization of two molecules of pentanoic acid releases CO2 and water, and this reaction is thermodynamically favored ((ΔG = −65 kJ mol−1) at 523 K.130 At 623 K the yield to 5-nonanone is approximately 60% and the authors report formation of other ketones of lower molecular weight (2-hexanone and 3-heptanone), which form by α and β scission of 5-nonanone. Ceria-zirconia is an active catalyst for ketonization of organic acids.96 Accordingly, using a dual catalyst bed system, it is possible employ the best conditions reported for 0.1%Pd/Nb2O5 to produce pentanoic acid in the first catalytic bed at 698 K, and to employ the best conditions for ceria-zirconia in the second bed to produce 5-nonanone (698 K and 20 bars). The authors report a final yield of 84% to 5-nonanone with 6% yield to other lower ketones. This 5-nonanone can be hydrogenated/dehydrated to nonane over Pt/Nb2O5 at 528 to 568 K and 60 bar.103 Lower ketones are converted to C6–C7 alkanes that can be removed in the gas phase and nonane remains in the liquid phase to be used as a blender in Diesel fuels. Another alternative is to hydrogenate the ketones over Ru/C at 423 K and 50 bar to produce alcohols which can be subsequently dehydrated over an acid catalyst, such as Amberlyst 70 (423 K), to produce nonene, which can be coupled by acid catalyzed oligomerization.131 In this case, smaller ketones would also be converted to alkenes that would undergo oligomerization along with nonene to produce C6–C27 alkenes that can be hydrogenated over Pt/Nb2O5 to liquid alkanes to be used as a jet fuel or Diesel blenders. The molecular weight range for the final alkanes can be modified by varying reaction conditions of temperature, pressure or WHSV.131
A recent alternative approach to upgrade aqueous solutions of GVL to liquid hydrocarbon fuels is based on a dual reactor system reported by Bond et al.132 In the first catalytic reactor, GVL undergoes ring opening to pentenoic acid isomers which subsequently undergo decarboxylation to produce an equimolar mixture of butenes and CO2. Both reactions take place over a solid acid catalyst, with good butene yields (e.g., 95%) reported for SiO2/Al2O3. This reaction proceeds selectively to butene and is thermodynamically favored (ΔG = −123 kJ mol−1) at 523 K.130 In a second reactor connected in series, butene monomers can be coupled by oligomerization over an acid catalyst to form C8+ alkenes that can be used as jet fuel upon hydrogenation. Excellent yields for butene oligomerization have been reported in the presence of CO2 and trace quantities of water using Amberlyst 70 as a catalyst. There are several advantages to this processing option. One advantage is that, except for the last mole of H2 required for alkane production, the process does not require an external source of H2. This advantage is unique when compared to other biomass processing options that require significant amounts of external hydrogen, such as hydrotreating of bio-oils or aldol condensation/dehydration-hydrogenation pathways for the production of alkanes. Another interesting advantage that can be leveraged for mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions is the production of a high pressure stream of pure CO2, produced through the combination of GVL decarboxylation and butene oligomerization.
Butene oligomerization is favored at elevated pressures, and good yields (e.g., 90%) are reported over Amberlyst 70 at 35 bar. In an integrated, two-reactor process for conversion of GVL to alkene oligomers, it would be desirable to produce butene in the first reactor at the same pressure employed for olefin oligomerization in the second reactor. GVL ring opening is not affected by pressure; however, pentenoic acid decarboxylation is hindered at elevated pressures. For example, at 648 K using a 30% solution of GVL in water, the yield of butene is 75% at 1 bar and only 35% at 35 bars. Working at 673 K, 60% yield of butene can be reached, but catalyst deactivation is observed. Higher rates of GVL conversion can be achieved at higher GVL concentrations in the feed, and the yield of butene increases to 67% for an aqueous feed solution containing 60 wt% GVL. Further increases in the concentration of GVL cause catalyst deactivation, indicating that the presence of water is necessary to maintain catalyst stability in the first reactor.
The butene produced by the decarboxylation of an aqueous solution of GVL contains an equimolar quantity of CO2 and a significant amount of water (40 wt%). Whereas the presence of CO2 leads to a decrease in the rate of olefin oligomerization, this decrease is caused simply by a dilution effect, leading to a decrease in the butene partial pressure. For example, using HZSM5 as a catalyst for olefin oligomerization at 498 K and total pressure of 36 bar, the introduction of an equimolar amount of CO2 decreases the butene conversion from 87% to 64%. Water has a far more pronounced effect on butene oligomerization, and an equimolar co-feed of water is sufficient to decrease the butene conversion to ∼50% over H-ZSM-5 and to 0% over Amberlyst 70. However, more than 98% of the water can be removed prior to the butene oligomerization reactor using a gas-liquid separator operating at the reaction pressure (36 bar) and at temperatures near 373–398 K. Amberlyst 70 is an active catalyst for olefin oligomerization at relatively low temperatures (423 K), a feature that leads to minimal selectivity to undesired cracking products. Using this catalyst for olefin oligomerization, combined with a silica/alumina catalyst for decarboxylation of GVL, an overall yield of approximately 75% can be achieved for the production of C8+ liquid alkenes from GVL.
8. Hydrogen management in the production of biofuels
Hydrogen is broadly utilized in the deoxygenation of biomass derived feedstocks; however, it is desirable to minimize the extent that external H2 is required for biofuels production, especially if this H2 is produced from petroleum feedstocks. The initial phase of converting biomass to fuels (the production of an upgradeable platform as outlined in section 4) can proceed in all cases (gasification, pyrolysis, liquefaction, and hydrolysis) without the input of hydrogen. Hydrogen management becomes a more critical issue in the second stage of biofuel production wherein the upgradeable platforms are transformed to liquid hydrocarbon fuels. In the previous sections, we have outlined multiple strategies for each platform and elucidated the underlying chemical transformations. In this section, we outline topics that are important when considering the management of hydrogen in these processes. Generally, the strategies we have presented can be classified as hydrogen producing, hydrogen consuming, and hydrogen neutral.
8.1. Hydrogen producing processes
In general, two catalytic options can be employed for the production of renewable hydrogen from biomass. The most basic option is from the gasification platform, which can be combined with the water-gas shift reaction to favor hydrogen production from CO and H2O (eqn (5)). The second option is aqueous phase reforming of oxygenates, such as polyols62–64 (eqn (6) and (7)). These strategies can be considered analogs to the production of hydrogen by steam reforming of petroleum derived feedstocks.  CO + H2O → CO2 + H2(5) C3H8O3 + 3 H2O → 3 CO2 + 7 H2(6) C6H14O6+ 6 H2O → 6 CO2 + 13 H2(7)
8.2. Hydrogen neutral processes
In the conversion of biomass, many important reactions proceed without the input of hydrogen. Dehydration strategies for the production of HMF and furfural are acid catalyzed reactions that lead to removal of oxygen and produce condensation feedstocks without hydrogen consumption (eqn (8)). Ketonization is a highly selective strategy for the coupling of carboxylic acids, which are readily obtained from biomass derived sources. Ketonization achieves deoxygenation (formation of CO2) and C–C coupling simultaneously in the absence of hydrogen (eqn (9)). Alcohols are important intermediates in several biomass derived platforms. In the presence of an acid catalyst, the C–O bond of an alcohol is readily cleaved to produce alkenes (eqn (10)). Additionally, alkenes can be produced through decarboxylation of cellulose derived lactones (e.g., GVL) eqn (11). Neither of these strategies for alkene production consume hydrogen.  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12)
Furthermore, alkenes can be coupled by oligomerization over acidic catalysts without hydrogen input (eqn (12)). Thus, alkene platforms for biomass conversion are particularly attractive from the standpoint of hydrogen management, as the alkenes can be both produced and coupled without hydrogen. Additionally, as the molecular weight of the alkene product is increased by oligomerization, the quantity of hydrogen required per mole of carbon for the production of the final alkane fuel is smaller.130 Finally, the product of olefin oligomerization is typically a broadly distributed mixture of branched hydrocarbons, which is an important component of jet fuels that is difficult to produce by existing methods such as Fischer–Tropsch synthesis or hydrodeoxygenation of triglycerides. Thus, oligomerization of renewable olefins provides an excellent complementary strategy for the preparation of surrogate jet fuels.
Aldol condensations can be either catalyzed by acid or base, serving to couple ketones, aldehydes, and alcohols, forming large oxygenates. The initial condensation does not consume an equivalent of hydrogen; however, condensation products typically require extensive hydrogenation and hydrodeoxygenation. Thus, condensations are considered again in the following section.
8.3. Hydrogen consuming processes
Coupling strategies of sugar derived intermediates (C3–C6) to form larger hydrocarbons typically rely on the formation of reactive intermediates having a functional group (ketone, alcohol, olefin) that can elicit the formation of new C–C bonds, and the product of C–C bond formation retains some degree of functionality. Thus, the final stage in the production of liquid alkanes is typically the hydrogenation of large, functionalized species, most commonly ketones, alkenes, or some combination thereof, requiring 2 moles of H2 for each C–O group and 1 mole of H2 for each C–C bond (eqn (13)).  (13)
Strategies for the production of n-alkanes based on triglycerides achieve hydrodeoxygenation by decarboxylation (eqn (14)), decarbonylation (eqn (15)) and reduction (eqn (16)) and consume large quantities of hydrogen (10–15 moles H2) for each equivalent of triglyceride.44 Pyrolysis and thermochemical processes are attractive, low cost strategies for the production of upgradeable liquid feedstocks (bio-oils) from lignocellulose. They do not require biomass pretreatment and fractionation, and they offer potential for lignin utilization. However, bio-oils require extensive hydrodeoxygenation before use in internal combustion engines or selective upgrading to larger hydrocarbons. Fischer–Tropsch (eqn (17)) is another strategy for the production of linear alkanes which has a large demand for hydrogen as (2n+1) moles are required per mole of carbon in the final alkane; however, this H2 is provided as synthesis gas from biomass gasification, such that gasification combined with FT synthesis is hydrogen neutral.  (14) (15) (16) (17)
Aldol condensation reactions are used in the formation of C–C bonds to increase the molecular weight of the final hydrocarbons, for example in the conversion of sugar-derived furans (HMF, furfural) and monofunctional species (alcohols, ketones) to Diesel fuel components. Although aldol condensation is not itself a hydrogen consuming reaction, it is typically equilibrium limited and products are generally hydrogenated to achieve high yields. Thus, aldol condensations utilize high pressures of hydrogen and bi-functional (metal/base) catalysts. Additionally, biomass derived condensation products, particularly those derived from furfural or HMF, are extensively oxygenated and require a large input of hydrogen to produce alkane fuels. It is estimated that the production of C9 alkanes through condensation of HMF and acetone, for example requires 8 moles of hydrogen per mole of alkane product69 (eqn (18)). A major benefit accompanying this large consumption of hydrogen, however, is that strategies based on aldol condensation allow for selective production of jet fuel and Diesel range linear alkanes with minimal carbon branching, which is not possible with hydrogen-neutral strategies such as oligomerization.  (18)
9. Summary and conclusions
Biomass is a renewable carbon source that can be processed in an integrated biorefinery, in a manner similar to petroleum in conventional refineries, to produce fuels and chemicals. While commercial scale biofuel production has been established with bioethanol (corn, sugar cane) and biodiesel (canola, soybeans), these first generation processes utilize only the edible fraction of certain food crops, thereby decreasing their widespread applicability. The development of second and third generation biofuels that utilize lignocellulosic biomass and algae could allow for the large scale production of sustainable fuels and chemicals. The conversion of biomass to hydrocarbon biofuels faces two general chemical challenges: increasing the energy density of renewable feedstocks by reducing their high oxygen content, and the formation of C–C bonds such that parent monomers (generally limited to 6 carbon atoms) can be coupled to form hydrocarbons of appropriate molecular weight and volatility for use as transportation fuels.
The process of refining lignocellulosic feedstocks to hydrocarbon biofuels can be subdivided into two general portions. First, whole biomass is deconstructed to produce upgradeable gaseous or liquid platforms. This step is typically carried out through thermochemical pathways to produce synthesis gas (by gasification) or bio-oils (by pyrolysis or liquefaction), or by hydrolysis pathways to produce sugar monomers which are then deoxygenated to form upgradeable intermediates. Functional species from each platform are subsequently upgraded by C–C coupling reactions and finally reduced (if necessary) to form the desired liquid hydrocarbon fuel. For example, in strategies based on aqueous phase reforming, sugars/polyols are partially deoxygenated to form monofunctional compounds that are then upgraded by C–C bond forming strategies such as aldol condensation or ketonization to form targeted alkanes. Aqueous solutions of sugars can alternatively be dehydrated to form furfurals that can be coupled using aldol condensation strategies to form larger oxygenates that yield linear C9–C15 alkanes upon dehydration/hydrogenation. Finally, cellulose can be converted into levulinic acid and subsequently into GVL which can be upgraded by ring-opening/ketonization or decarboxylation/oligomerization into targeted alkenes. In each of these strategies, the management of hydrogen plays a key role in eliminating the dependence upon external fossil fuels. In this respect, biorefining steps can be divided into those processes that generate H2, such as aqueous phase reforming, those that consume no hydrogen, such as ketonization or oligomerization, and those that consume hydrogen, such as hydrodeoxygenation. Frequently, it is possible to couple strategies that consume hydrogen with those that produce hydrogen such that the net demand of a process is reduced, affording strategies by which lignocellulosic biomass can be utilized efficiently in the production of fuels, chemicals, hydrogen, and any necessary process heat and power.
10. Future prospectives
Currently, the transportation fuel sector depends predominately on a single non-renewable source of energy, namely petroleum. The present situation is not sustainable, and global energy concerns would be greatly alleviated by the adoption of a more flexible system that draws upon multiple resources and technologies. In the long term, solar energy, sustainable electricity, and hydrogen fuel cells may have an impact in the transportation sector as technologies whose efficiencies and environmental impact surpass those of the current combustion engine. However, more research and development are necessary before such alternatives become economically and technically viable. In addition, the current availability and relatively low cost of petroleum, the existing transportation infrastructure, and general consumer preferences all favor continued reliance on liquid alkane fuels.
Carbon-based biofuels serve as a promising short term alternative to petroleum-derived fuels. These biofuels can be derived from renewable carbon sources to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, and the end products can be employed as drop-in replacements for petroleum fuels. The applicability of biomass as a renewable resource for transportation fuels has been demonstrated by the successful integration of first generation bioethanol and biodiesel into the current infrastructure, and the application of these biofuels has facilitated a reduced dependence upon fossil fuels. However, first generation technologies have drawbacks in that they rely on feedstocks that are not sufficiently available to satisfy the demands presently met by petroleum, and they rely on easily accessible edible biomass fractions, thereby impacting the supply of food for humans and animals. A more sustainable biofuels strategy would utilize widely available biomass feedstocks to the largest extent possible, ultimately drawing upon lignocellulosic biomass instead of only the sparse, edible starch and triglyceride fractions. However, as described thoroughly in this review, lignocellulose processing is less straightforward, owing to its inherent complexity and the diversity of lignocellulosic feedstocks available.
We believe that a successful lignocellulosic biorefinery can be realized through a combination of different technologies and biomass processing strategies for the flexible production of varied fuel and chemical products. As such, catalysis research should focus on (a) continued development of robust strategies for the production of flexible chemical platform molecules, such as levulinic acid and γ-valerolactone, (b) applications for interesting platform chemicals, specifically for the production of speciality chemicals and hydrocarbon fuels, (c) facile strategies for biomass deconstruction, such as fast pyrolysis, (d) methods for the synergistic coupling of hydrolytic and thermochemical methods into a fully integrated biorefinery, (e) implementation of cascade processes combined with the development of straightforward separation and purification schemes, and (f) strategies for lignin utilization. Ideally, advances made toward renewable transportation fuels through catalytic chemistry will be complemented by continuing development in biological arenas as well, such that future biorefineries can call upon multiple technologies for biomass conversion.
The best strategies are likely to be a combination of technologies that may currently be viewed as competing. Biomass hydrolysis is best suited to the production of targeted fuels or chemicals. For example, levulinic acid and γ-valerolactone are readily prepared in a hydrolysis based system, and they are building blocks that introduce a high degree of flexibility in the system. However, hydrolytic strategies are not well suited to all types of biomass, particularly those containing large fractions of triglycerides and/or lignin. When processing fractions with a low carbohydrate content, other technologies such as hydrotreating, pyrolysis, and gasification can be used to create value. Finally, the development of more robust biological processing options could allow for straightforward production of alcohols and speciality chemicals, both of which could add flexibility and value to an integrated biorefinery. Ultimately, we hope to see a holistic utilization of lignocellulosic biomass through the most efficient processes available, resulting in a cleaner, more sustainable basis for the production of fuels and chemicals.
Acknowledgements
Two of the authors (DMA and JQB) were supported through funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Surf-cat: Catalysts for Production of JP-8 range molecules from Lignocellulosic Biomass). The results from the University of Wisconsin reported here were supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Basic Energy Sciences, by the National Science Foundation Chemical and Transport Systems Division of the Directorate for Engineering, by the DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center (www.greatlakesbioenergy.org), and by the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency. The views, opinions, and/or findings contained in this article/presentation are those of the author/presenter and should not be interpreted as representing the official views or policies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency or the Department of Defense.
References
D. Tilman, R. Socolow, J. A. Foley, J. Hill, E. Larson, L. Lynd, S. Pacala, J. Reilly, T. Searchinger, C. Somerville and R. Williams, Science, 2009, 325, 270–271 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044–4098 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Lynd, J. H. Cushman, R. J. Nichols and C. E. Wyman, Science, 1991, 251, 1318–1323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhang, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 35, 367–375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng and S. Zhu, BioResources, 2009, 4, 456–457 Search PubMed .
F. Carvalheiro, L. C. Duarte and F. M. Girio, J. Sci. Ind. Res., 2008, 67, 849–864 Search PubMed .
M. Stocker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9200–9211 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber and A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7184–7201 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Regalbuto, Science, 2009, 325, 822–824 CrossRef .
C. E. Wyman, B. E. Dale, R. T. Elander, M. Holtzapple, M. R. Ladisch and Y. Y. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 1959–1966 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mosier, C. E. Wyman, B. E. Dale, R. T. Elander, Y. Y. Lee., M. Holtzapple and M. R. Ladisch, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 673–686 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Chakar and A. J. Ragauskas, Ind. Crops Prod., 2004, 20, 131–141 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vanholme, K. Morreel, J. Ralph and W. Boerjan, Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., 2008, 11, 278–285 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Wyman, B. E. Dale, R. T. Elander, M. Holtzapple, M. R. Ladisch and Y. Y. Lee., Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 2026–2032 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Lloyld and C. E. Wyman, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 1967–1977 CrossRef CAS .

          A. R. Aden M., K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, B. Wallace, L. Montague, A. Slayton, J. Lukas, Lignocellulosic Biomass to Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic Hydrolysis for Corn Stover, NREL/TP-510-32438, Golden, CO, 2002. www.nrel.gov/docs/fy02osti/32438.pdf.
A. Aden and T. Foust, Cellulose, 2009, 16, 535–545 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. A. Gosselink, E. D. Jong, B. Guran and A. Abachelir, Ind. Crops Prod., 2004, 20, 121 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Evans, T. A. Milne and M. N. Soltys, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1986, 9, 207–236 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Carlson, J. Jae, Y.-C. Lin, G. A. Tompsett and G. W. Huber, J. Catal., 2010, 270, 110–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jae, G. A. Tompsett, Y. Lin, T. R. Carlson, J. Shen, T. Zhang, B. Yang, C. E. Wyman, W. C. Conner and G. W. Huber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 358–365 RSC .
A. S. Mamman, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2008, 2, 438–454 Search PubMed .
B. C. Saha, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2003, 30, 279–291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zaldivar, J. Nielsen and L. Olsson, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2001, 56, 17–34 CrossRef CAS .

          C. E. Wyman, S. R. Decker, M. E. Himmel, J. W. Brady, C. E. Skopec, L. Viikari in Hydrolysis of cellulose and hemicellulose. in Polysaccharides: Structural Diversity and Functional Versatility. ed.S. Dumitriu. Marcel Dekker INC., New York, 2nd edn,  2005, pp. 995–1033 Search PubMed .
R. Rinaldi and F. Schuth, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 1096–1107 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Demirbas, Appl. Energy, 2009, 86, S151–S161 CrossRef .

          G. R. Rothman H, F. R. Calle in The alcohol economy:fuel ethanol and the Brazilian experience. Francis Printer, London,  1983 Search PubMed .
E. G. Shay, Biomass Bioenergy, 1993, 4, 227–242 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balat, H. Balat and C. Öz, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2008, 34, 551–573 CrossRef CAS .
ENERS Energy Concept. Production of biofuels in the world. Lausanne, 2009. http://www.plateforme-biocarburants.ch/en/infos/production.php?id = bioethanol.
M. Balat, Energy Sources, Part A: Recovery, Util. Environ. Eff., 2005, 27, 569–77 Search PubMed .
C. Piccolo and F. Bezzo, Biomass Bioenergy, 2009, 33, 478–491 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Lange, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2007, 1, 39–48 Search PubMed .
D. Pimentel, T. Patzek and G. Cecil, Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2007, 189, 25–41 CAS .

          H. D. Shapouri, J. A. Wang, M. Shapouri, H. Duffield, J. A. Wang, M, The Energy Balance of Corn: An Update; Agricultural Economic Report 814; U. S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Chief Economist, Washington, DC,  2002 Search PubMed .
H. Fukuda, A. Kondo and H. Noda, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2001, 92, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Ma and M. A. Hanna, Bioresour. Technol., 1999, 70, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, B. S. Kang, M. J. Kim, Y. M. Park, D. K. Kim, J. S. Lee and K. Y. Lee, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 315–320 CrossRef CAS .
M. Di Serio, M. Ledda, M. Cozzolino, G. Minutillo, R. Tesser and E. Santacesaria, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 3009–3014 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Granados, M. D. Z. Poves, D. M. Alonso, R. Mariscal, F. C. Galisteo, R. Moreno-Tost, J. Santamaria and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 73, 317–326 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lotero, Y. J. Liu, D. E. Lopez, K. Suwannakarn, D. A. Bruce and J. G. Goodwin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 5353–5363 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Melero, J. Iglesias and G. Morales, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1285–1308 RSC .
G. W. Huber, P. O'Connor and A. Corma, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 329, 120–129 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Li, E. Coppola, J. Rine, J. L. Miller and D. Walker, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1305–1315 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fernández, M. D. Curt and P. L. Aguado, Ind. Crops Prod., 2006, 24, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Patil and S. Deng, Fuel, 2009, 88, 1302–1306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chisti, Biotechnol. Adv., 2007, 25, 294–306 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hill, E. Nelson, D. Tilman, S. Polasky and D. Tiffany, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11206–11210 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber and B. E. Dale, Sci. Am., 2009, 301, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bartle and A. Abadi, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 2–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Dry, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 227–241 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Soares, D. A. Simonetti and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3982–3985 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Simonetti, J. Rass-Hansen, E. L. Kunkes, R. R. Soares and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 1073–1083 RSC .
W. Torres, S. S. Pansare and J. G. Goodwin, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 2007, 49, 407–456 CAS .
D. J. Hayes, Catal. Today, 2009, 145, 138–151 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Carlson, G. A. Tompsett, W. C. Conner and G. W. Huber, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 241–252 CrossRef CAS .

          G. W. Huber, Breaking the Chemical and Engineering Barriers to Lignocellulosic Biofuels: Next Generation Hydrocarbon Biorefineries, U. Massachusetts Amherst,  2007. http://www.ecs.umass.edu/biofuels/Images/Roadmap2--08.pdf Search PubMed .
D. C. Elliott, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 1792–1815 CrossRef CAS .
S. Czernik and A. V. Bridgwater, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 590–598 CrossRef .

          J. P. Diebold
          A Review of the Chemical and Physical Mechanisms of the Storage Stability of Fast Pyrolysis Bio-Oil.
           2000 Report No. NRREL/SR-570-27613: National Renewable Energy Laboratory: Golden, CO.  Search PubMed .
R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Commun., 2004, 36–37 RSC .
R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4068–4071 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Cortright, R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumesic, Nature, 2002, 418, 964–967 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Simonetti and J. A. Dumesic, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 725–733 CrossRef CAS .
L. Petrus and M. A. Noordermeer, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 861–867 RSC .
P. Kumar, D. M. Barrett, M. J. Delwiche and P. Stroeve, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 3713–3729 CrossRef CAS .

          D. J. Hayes, S. Fitzpatrick, M. H. B. Hayes, in Biorefineries-Industrial Processes and Products. Status Quo and Future Directions. ed B. Kamm, P. R. Gruber, M. Kamm. WILEY-VCH, Weinheim,  2006, Vol 1. pp. 139–164 Search PubMed .
G. W. Huber, J. N. Chheda, C. J. Barrett and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2005, 308, 1446–1450 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber, R. D. Cortright and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1549–1551 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Kunkes, D. A. Simonetti, R. M. West, J. C. Serrano-Ruiz, C. A. Gartner and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2008, 322, 417–421 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Shabaker, R. R. Davda, G. W. Huber, R. D. Cortright and J. A. Dumesic, J. Catal., 2003, 215, 344–352 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Davda, J. W. Shabaker, G. W. Huber, R. D. Cortright and J. A. Dumesic, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 171–186 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Davda, J. W. Shabaker, G. W. Huber, R. D. Cortright and J. A. Dumesic, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 43, 13–26 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber, J. W. Shabaker and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2003, 300, 2075–2077 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alcala, M. Mavrikakis and J. A. Dumesic, J. Catal., 2003, 218, 178–190 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, R. R. Davda and J. A. Dumesic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2810–2820 CrossRef CAS .
E. Christoffersen, P. Liu, A. Ruban, H. L. Skriver and J. K. Norskov, J. Catal., 2001, 199, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 810–815 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Simonetti, E. L. Kunkes and J. A. Dumesic, J. Catal., 2007, 247, 298–306 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sato, K. Terada, S. Hasegawa, T. Miyao and S. Naito, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Kunkes, D. A. Simonetti, J. A. Dumesic, W. D. Pyrz, L. E. Murillo, J. G. G. Chen and D. J. Buttrey, J. Catal., 2008, 260, 164–177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 52–58 CrossRef .
A. Ramstad, F. Strisland, S. Raaen, A. Borg and C. Berg, Surf. Sci., 1999, 440, 290–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishikawa, M. S. Liao and C. R. Cabrera, Surf. Sci., 2002, 513, 98–110 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. West, E. L. Kunkes, D. A. Simonetti and J. A. Dumesic, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sasaki, K. Goto, K. Tajima, T. Adschiri and K. Arai, Green Chem., 2002, 4, 285–287 RSC .
M. J. Climent, A. Corma, S. Iborra, K. Epping and A. Velty, J. Catal., 2004, 225, 316–326 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barrett, J. N. Chheda, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Chheda and J. A. Dumesic, Catal. Today, 2007, 123, 59–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Di Cosimo, G. Torres and C. R. Apesteguía, J. Catal., 2002, 208, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Nikolopoulos, B. W. L. Jang and J. J. Spivey, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 296, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Renz, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 979–988 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, M. Renz and C. Schaverien, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 739–741 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Dooley, A. K. Bhat, C. P. Plaisance and A. D. Roy, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 320, 122–133 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Serrano-Ruiz and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1101–1104 RSC .
A. G. Gayubo, A. T. Aguayo, A. Atutxa, R. Aguado and J. Bilbao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 2610–2618 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. West, D. J. Braden and J. A. Dumesic, J. Catal., 2009, 262, 134–143 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Blommel, G. R. Keenan, R. T. Rozmiarek and R. D. Cortrigth, Int. Sugar J., 2008, 110, 672 Search PubMed .
E. L. Kunkes, E. I. Gurbuz and J. A. Dumesic, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 236–249 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Gurbuz, E. L. Kunkes and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 223–227 RSC .
E. I. Gürbüz, E. L. Kunkes and J. A. Dumesic, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 134–141 CrossRef .
R. M. West, Z. Y. Liu, M. Peter and J. A. Dumesic, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Chheda, Y. Roman-Leshkov and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 342–350 RSC .
H. H. Szmant and D. D. Chundury, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1981, 31, 135–145 Search PubMed .
H. E. Vandam, A. P. G. Kieboom and H. Vanbekkum, Starch/Staerke, 1986, 38, 95–101 Search PubMed .
Y. Roman-Leshkov, J. N. Chheda and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2006, 312, 1933–1937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Roman-Leshkov, C. J. Barrett, Z. Y. Liu and J. A. Dumesic, Nature, 2007, 447, 982–U985 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kamm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5056–5058 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Chheda, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7164–7183 CrossRef CAS .

US Pat, 4897497,  1990 Search PubMed.

US Pat, 5608105,  1997 Search PubMed.
H. Mehdi, V. Fabos, R. Tuba, A. Bodor, L. T. Mika and I. T. Horvath, Top. Catal., 2008, 48, 49–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Horvat, B. Klaic, B. Metelko and V. Sunjic, Tetrahedron Lett., 1985, 26, 2111–2114 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Bozell, L. Moens, D. C. Elliott, Y. Wang, G. G. Neuenscwander, S. W. Fitzpatrick, R. J. Bilski and J. L. Jarnefeld, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2000, 28, 227–239 CrossRef .
Biometics Inc., Munipal Solid Waste Conversion Project, Final Report, Contract No:4204-ERTER-ER-96., Biometics Inc., Boston, Ma, 1996.

US pat, 5883266,  1999 Search PubMed.
B. V. Timokhin, V. A. Baransky and G. D. Eliseeva, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1999, 68, 73–84 RSC .
Texaco/NYSERDA/Biofine, Ethyl levulinate D-975 Diesel Additive Test Program, 2000.
C. K. Shu and B. M. Lawrence, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1995, 43, 782–784 CrossRef CAS .
H. Heeres, R. Handana, D. Chunai, C. B. Rasrendra, B. Girisuta and H. J. Heeres, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 1247–1255 RSC .
L. E. Manzer, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 272, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, J. Li, D. M. Lai, Y. Fu and Q. X. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6529–6532 CrossRef CAS .
B. Girisuta, L. Janssen and H. J. Heeres, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 1696–1708 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Q. Bond, D. M. Alonso, R. M. West, J. A. Dumesic, Langmuir,  DOI:10.1021/la101424a. Publish online 1st June.
I. T. Horvath, H. Mehdi, V. Fabos, L. Boda and L. T. Mika, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 238–242 RSC .
R. A. Bourne, J. G. Stevens, J. Ke and M. Poliakoff, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4632–4634 RSC .
J. C. Serrano-Ruiz, D. Wang and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 574–577 RSC .
World Patent WO/2008/142127, 2008.
J. C. Serrano-Ruiz, R. M. West and J. A. Dumesic, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng, 2010, 1, 79–100 Search PubMed .
D. M. Alonso, J. Q. Bond, J. C. Serrano-Ruiz and J. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 992–999 RSC .
J. Q. Bond, D. M. Alonso, D. Wang, R. M. West and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2010, 327, 1110–1114 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  CO2 cycles for petroleum- and biomass-derived fuels.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structure of biomass feedstocks.	 

 	Fig. 3  Biomass-derived feedstocks and platforms for conversion to biofuels.	 

 	Fig. 4  Lignocellulose composition: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin.	 

 	Fig. 5  Process schematic: bioethanol production.	 

 	Fig. 6  Process schematic: biodiesel production.	 

 	Fig. 7  Strategies for conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to liquid biofuels by thermochemical and hydrolysis routes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Process schematic: biomass gasification and upgrading.	 

 	Fig. 9  Process schematic: biomass pyrolysis and upgrading.	 

 	Fig. 10  Process schematic: biomass liquefaction and upgrading.	 
C6H14O6 + 6 H2 → C6H14 + 6 H2O	(1)
	(2)
C3H8O3 → 3 CO + 4 H2	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 11  Processing options to convert sugars and polyols to biofuels by aqueous phase reforming approaches.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic pathways to convert sugars and polyols to biofuel through production of monofunctional intermediates. Adapted from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 13  Reaction pathways to upgrade HMF by aldol-condensation to liquid alkanes. Adapted from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 14  Levulinic acid production. Biofine process.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic pathways to upgrade levulinic acid to liquid fuels.	 

 	Fig. 16  γ-valerolactone applications. Adapted from ref. 125.	 

 	Fig. 17  Reaction pathways to convert γ-valerolactone to liquid fuels.	 
CO + H2O → CO2 + H2	(5)
C3H8O3 + 3 H2O → 3 CO2 + 7 H2	(6)
C6H14O6+ 6 H2O → 6 CO2 + 13 H2	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
