Doping mechanism directed graphene applications for energy conversion and storage  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11939C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11939C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7366-7395Doping mechanism directed graphene applications for energy conversion and storage

        
          
            Trang H. 
            Nguyen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Zhu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tianyi 
            Ma
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Baohua 
            Jia
          
        
      *ac
aCentre for Translational Atomaterials, School of Science, Swinburne University of Technology, P.O. Box 218, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia. E-mail: bjia@swin.edu.au
bCarbon Fiber Engineering Research Center, Shandong University, Jinan, 250061, China
cThe Australian Research Council (ARC) Industrial Transformation Training Centre in Surface Engineering for Advanced Materials, Swinburne University of Technology, P.O. Box 218, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia
Received 
      9th December 2020
    , Accepted 15th February 2021First published on 17th February 2021AbstractDue to its ultrabroadband optical absorption, large theoretical surface area, outstanding thermal conductivity and massless electron transportation, graphene has been considered as a prospective candidate in the applications of energy conversion and storage. However, the gapless energy band structure and the limited electrical conductivity restrict the capability of pristine graphene in catalytic reactions, which holds the key in energy conversion applications. Doping graphene with metals and non-metals individually or synergistically could create a highly porous structure and open a critical bandgap to enhance the electrical and photocatalytic properties of graphene, and thus enable a broad range of energy-related applications. Herein, we comprehensively review the recent advances in the research field of doping graphene and related applications in energy conversion and storage. We first introduce the motivation for doping graphene, and then present an in-depth understanding of different doping mechanisms, and discuss the resultant structural modifications and novel properties of doped graphene materials. The review also discusses and compares the principles and the developments in various synthesis methods for efficiently doping different types of graphene materials, including pristine graphene and graphene oxide. Following that, the recent applications of doped graphene in energy conversion and storage devices, namely hydrogen generation, fuel cells, CO2 reduction, secondary batteries, and supercapacitors, are demonstrated. Finally, the remaining challenges in the research field and an outlook on the future research directions of doped graphene for energy-related applications are presented.
1. Introduction
The energy crisis has emerged as a widespread global concern. To address this critical issue, extensive efforts are devoted to exploring state-of-the-art energy conversion applications, such as hydrogen generation to provide solar-to-hydrogen power,31 portable fuel cells converting chemical potential energy to useable electricity,39 and electrochemical CO2 reduction to produce hydrocarbon fuels and useable chemicals.17 Most feasible power conversion devices require well-suited catalysts with high photo-absorption, a large number of active sites, decent stability and fast charge transfer for highly efficient photochemical reactions. Apart from that, high-performance energy storage devices have also been investigated, notably supercapacitors50–52 and secondary batteries.13,32,53 Electrode materials in storage devices necessitate good specific capacity, a highly conductive porous structure for better ion transportation, and good electrode/electrolyte wettability. Therefore, the development of cutting-edge materials with outstanding characteristics for both energy conversion and storage is highly desirable.
Carbonaceous materials, featuring excellent conductivity, low cost, good stability and a large potential window, play a pivotal role in both scientific research and industrial applications. Carbon has been explored in different allotropes, namely graphite, amorphous carbon, diamond, fullerene, carbon nanotubes, carbon onions and graphene.54 Graphene, a single atomic layer of graphite, is the thinnest, lightest and strongest material. The high transparency, large specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), and structural flexibility endow graphene-based materials with outstanding thermal and electrical conductivities, as well as unique physicochemical, photo/electrochemical and photo/electrocatalytic properties.55,56 Given these merits, graphene-based materials play a critical role in next-generation energy conversion and storage applications, including hydrogen generation, fuel cells, CO2 reduction, secondary batteries, and supercapacitors.17,57–62
Recent developments in graphene-based materials for energy conversion and storage devices have highlighted the need to further improve their electronic and photocatalytic properties. However, zero-bandgap pristine graphene behaves as a semimetal with massless electrons because the valence band is adjacent to the conduction band. This means that there is no electronic state and electron–hole separation inside the pristine graphene energy structure, and catalytic reactions for energy conversion cannot occur. Additionally, the defect-free structure of pure graphene is unfavourable for ion transportation in storage applications.63 To improve the performance of graphene for energy conversion applications, it is desirable to regulate the electronic structure and achieve more efficient charge separation and more reactive sites participating in catalytic reactions. For energy storage, a highly porous structure with excellent conductivity is more favourable for charge and ion transportation through the graphene network, leading to a higher energy/power density of devices. As well documented, chemical doping is an effective strategy featuring low cost, scalable production and high efficiency. It can create more charge carriers (electrons and holes) by shifting the Fermi level and creating a sizable bandgap in the graphene electronic structure.45,64–66 The foreign elements can bond with carbon atoms by either sharing valence electrons or transferring electrons to make graphene more conductive, create efficient electrochemically active sites and defects in the carbon backbone. Consequently, the charge carriers at active sites directly participate in chemical reactions to boost catalytic abilities for energy conversion, whereas higher conductivity and structural imperfection inducing channels for ion diffusion and transportation are suitable for energy storage.
To date, various types of dopants, including metalloids (e.g., B and Si), non-metals (e.g., N, P, and S), halogens (e.g., F, Br, and I), and metals (e.g., Co, Fe, Mn, Ni, Au, and Bi), have been studied.25,67–76 There have been several review articles on the synthetic approaches, properties and applications of doped graphene for energy conversion and storage.75,77–80 Nonetheless, they only covered the doping mechanism and properties of doped graphene in brief, focusing the discussion mainly on the conventional synthesis approaches and applications of metal-free dopants, such as B, N, P, and S. A more focused review in terms of fundamental doping mechanisms and related energy applications is critical and urgently needed for the field but remains missing.
In this article, we aim to cover not only substitutional metal-free dopants but also metal dopants, providing an in-depth understanding of structure and property transformation based on different doping mechanisms. Next, we also review the latest synthesis methods, photo/electrochemical and photo/electrocatalytic properties, followed by the comparison of the performance of doped graphene for energy conversion and storage.
As shown in Fig. 1, the main objective of this review is to provide an insight into two major mechanisms of chemically doped graphene, which are substitutional doping and surface transfer doping.80 It will then go on to the structure and properties of doped graphene and recent synthesis methods. Several latest applications of doped graphene, particularly in energy conversion and storage areas, such as hydrogen generation, fuel cells, CO2 reduction, secondary batteries, and supercapacitors, are systematically summarized. Finally, the conclusion and prospects for future research on doped graphene in energy-related fields are identified.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the mechanisms, structures, properties and synthesis of doped graphene in energy conversion and storage applications. 
Scientific research progress on doped graphene has significantly increased over the last two decades, as evidenced by Fig. 2. Data obtained from a Web of Science search on 29/01/2021 have shown the number of doped graphene related publications since 1997. The published articles in this research area have grown 11-fold over the period from 2010 to 2020.
 Fig. 2  Number of publications extracted from a Web of Science search for “title” with “doped graphene” as keywords (accessed on 29/01/2021). 
2. Doping mechanism, structure and properties
2.1 Mechanism
Pristine graphene originally is a gapless semiconductor having the Fermi level at the precise Dirac point of the energy band structure (Fig. 3a). This Fermi level can be downshifted or upshifted through chemical doping, forming either p-type or n-type doped graphene and creating a tuneable bandgap between the valence and conduction bands.66,81,82 Besides, the incursion of dopants in the carbon lattice could modulate the structure that influences the electrical, electrochemical, optical and photo/electrocatalytic properties of doped graphene.83 Therefore, a profound understanding of the mechanisms, structure and properties of doped graphene is of essence for the future commercialization of graphene-based materials. This section reviews the key aspects of doping mechanisms that affect the structure and electrical and photo/electrocatalytic properties of doped graphene, which determine their performance in energy conversion and storage applications.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of the energy diagram of (a) p-type doped graphene and expanded work function; (b) n-type doped graphene and reduced work function. Structure of doped-graphene by: (c) substitutional doping; (d) p-type surface transfer doping; (e) n-type surface transfer doping. 
Chemical doping refers to covalent or non-covalent incorporation of heteroatoms into the graphene network. It can be categorised into: (i) substitutional doping and (ii) surface transfer doping.81,84 Both mechanisms are illustrated by energy diagrams in Fig. 3a and b. Substitutional doping means substituting carbon atoms with heteroatoms, which form covalent bonds between host carbon and doped atoms. Capable heteroatoms for substitutional doping include metalloids and non-metals, such as B, Si, N, P, S, F and Cl. The number of valence electrons of these elements compared to that of C atoms decides the formation of p-type and n-type doped graphene semiconductors. Particularly, B, with fewer valence electrons as seen in Fig. 3a, induces charge polarization in the carbon network and generates holes in the valence band, shifting the Fermi energy towards the valence band, results in p-type doping. Conversely, most non-metal elements (such as N and P) with more valence electrons than C will serve as electron-donors to the conduction band of graphene, shifting the Fermi level upwards (Fig. 3b), resulting in n-type doping. Accordingly, the work function (WF), defined by the difference between vacuum energy and the Fermi level, is expanded if the Fermi energy downshifts or narrowed if the Fermi energy upshifts. It was confirmed by Lazar et al. that the WF increased by 1.26 eV after p-type B-doping and the WF decreased by 1.21 eV after n-type N-doping.64 Freire and co-workers found that Fermi energy was ineffectively altered by Si doping, with only 10% reduction of the WF.85 It might be attributed to the similar number of valence electrons in Si and C. The variation of the WF is one of the essential parameters to develop a catalytic material for specific energy applications, for instance, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells.86–88 Cheon et al. presented that lowering the WF of graphene by chemical doping can reduce the energetic barrier for electron withdrawing from the catalyst surface to reduce adsorbed O2, thereby enhancing the activity of the ORR.87
In contrast to substitutional doping, surface transfer doping relies on charge separation at interfaces by adsorbing dopants on the graphene surface. Electrons can be donated or extracted from carbon atoms to nearby adsorbates, so carbon atoms and dopants are non-covalently bonded. Most metals, metal compounds (e.g., metal oxides and metal sulfides) and heavy halogens (Br and I) can physically adsorb onto graphene through surface transfer doping by hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interaction, π-stacking interaction and van der Waals force.71,72,89–93 Additional elements can convert graphene into p-type or n-type semiconductors based on the energy positions of molecular orbitals compared to the Fermi energy of graphene. If the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of dopants is lower than the Fermi energy of graphene, these doping atoms will extract electrons from the graphene energy structure to form p-type semiconductors, lowering the Fermi level and expanding the WF (Fig. 3a). On the other hand, graphene will receive electrons from dopants to behave as an n-type semiconductor if its Fermi level is lower than the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of dopants, leading to the reduction of the WF (Fig. 3b). The non-covalent bonds between adsorbates and carbon elements do not disturb the graphitic structure and thus induce fewer defects as compared to substitutional doping.94 On the other hand, these non-covalent bonds still maintain a high surface area and induce active sites for excellent electrocatalytic activity. However, the main limitation of surface transfer doping is the instability of chemical adsorbates at elevated temperature because dopants may detach from the graphene surface.81
2.2 Structure
The structure of doped graphene, including dopant configurations and concentration, can be tailored to modulate the electrical properties for energy storage and engineer a crucial bandgap for energy conversion.36,45,66,95 The structure of doped graphene is varied with different doping atoms and mechanisms.
In substitutional doping, doped atoms typically supersede localized carbon atoms in-plane, on edges and on defect sites of the graphene lattice (Fig. 3c). Depending on their electronegativity and atomic sizes, dopants can generate different configurations and bond lengths with carbon. Table 1 compares of valence electrons, sizes, electronegativity, bond lengths, and possible configurations between C and various substitutional doping elements, including P, Si, N, P, S, F, and Cl. As provided in Table 1, B, N, and F with resemblance in atomic size to the C atom can easily incorporate into the carbon network and cause less distortion than other doping elements owing to their shorter bond lengths with C. In contrast, Si, P, S, and Cl can form a longer bond with C, so they induce more structural distortion in the graphene network. Chang et al. observed that B and N elements tend to replace in-plane C atoms, while S and Si inevitably protrude out of the lattice due to their longer bond lengths. Besides, different electronegativity can induce polarization, thereby affecting the electrical and photocatalytic properties of doped graphene.96
Table 1 Different valence electron numbers, sizes, electronegativity, bond lengths, and configurations of substitutional doping atoms (B, Si, N, P, S, F, Cl, and I), compared to C




Atoms
Valence electrons
Radii [Å]
Electronegativity
Bond length [Å]
Configurations
Ref.




B
3
0.88
2.0
1.49
BC3, BC2O, and BCO2

104 and 105



C
4
0.77
2.5
1.42
—
—


Si
4
1.17
1.8
1.75
Single Si atom and Si chain at graphene edges

68 and 106



P
5
1.10
2.1
1.76
PC3G, PC4G, OPC3G, OPC4G

6



S
5
1.04
2.5
1.75
Adsorbed-S, graphitic-S, pyridinic-S, pyrrolic-S

107 and 108



N
5
0.74
3.0
1.41
Graphitic-N, pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, nitrilic-N, oxidized-N

4 and 105



F
7
0.71
4.0
1.36
Covalent and semi-ionic C–F

109



Cl
7
0.99
3.0
1.77
−C–Cl, −ClO3, −ClO4

110





Regarding non-metal atoms, various coordination numbers, bond lengths and configurations can be formed, as shown in Table 1. The configuration of dopants within the graphene network determines the properties of the material. For example, P configurations including three-coordinated P-doped graphene (PC3G), oxidized-PC3G (OPC3G), four-coordinated P-doped graphene (PC4G) and oxidized-PC4G (OPC4G) have been presented by Yang et al. (Fig. 4a–d).6 Among them, PC3G and OPC3G induce the most drastic distortion in the graphene network due to their sp3 hybridized structure. With density functional theory (DFT), the authors revealed that OPC3G exhibited lowest formation energy and binding energy, suggesting the high feasibility and stability of OPC3G (Fig. 4e). Moreover, OPC3G possessed half-metallic behaviour with more active sites and minimum free energy changes (ΔGRDS), which implies the highest ORR catalytic activity of the OPC3G configuration in P-doped graphene.
 Fig. 4  Four P configurations of P-doped graphene. Top and side views of P configurations: (a) PC3G, (b) OPC3G, (c) PC4G, and (d) OPC4G; (e) comparison of the binding energy, formation energy, conductivity and ΔGRDS of four P configurations adapted with permission from (ref. 6). Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 
N-Doping into the graphene structure can also result in five possible configurations: graphitic-N, oxidized-N, pyrrolic-N, nitrilic-N, and pyridinic-N (Fig. 5a).4,15,97 Tai et al. presented that graphitic-N and pyridinic-N were more reactive than pyrrolic-N for the ORR.97 Among them, pyridinic-N in thermal-annealing derived N-doped graphene was also more reactive for the ORR. According to Miao et al., pyridinic-N can act as an active centre to facilitate the ORR through a four-electron pathway (Fig. 5b).23 Zhan et al. demonstrated that graphitic-N and pyridinic-N both significantly enhance the total capacitance for electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs).98 Hence, controlling the configuration of doped graphene could lead to desirable properties for targeted energy applications.
 Fig. 5  (a) Five N configurations: graphitic-N, pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, nitrilic-N and oxidized-N.4 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) ORR mechanism of N-doped graphene with a dominant pyridinic-N (pyridinic-N) configuration.23 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) N configurations depending on selected precursors.15 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) N configurations depending on CVD operation temperature.45 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
To date, doping configurations can be controlled through varying synthesis parameters, such as the dopant precursor and operation temperature.16 Santhosh et al. altered the plasma environment and obtained high graphitic-N and pyridinic-N configurations (Fig. 5c).15 They observed that the treatment of NH3 plasma can lead to a higher N concentration in comparison with N2 plasma (8.0 at% vs. 2.8 at%, respectively). Zhang et al. successfully synthesized N-doped graphene dominated by graphitic-N at 230–300 °C through the CVD method.45 In contrast, the sample was dominated by pyrrolic-N at 400–600 °C (Fig. 5d). The sample dominated by graphitic-N exhibited stronger n-type behaviour and higher carrier mobilities as compared with the pyrrolic-N dominated counterpart owing to the presence of fewer vacancies and defects.
In contrast to substitutional doping, surface transfer doping results in the interchange of electrons between dopants and carbon. Heavy halogens (e.g., Br and I) can physically adsorb on the graphene surface and cause minimum disruption of the basal plane of graphene.12,38,91,99 However, they still enrich reactive sites for efficient electrocatalytic reactions. Kalita et al. presented that I-doped graphene can retain the sp2 hybridized structure, evidenced by the unchanged graphene interlayer spacing of 0.34 nm (Fig. 6a).12 Hamdan et al. revealed that the intercalation of Br atoms inside the graphene structure did not disturb the honeycomb carbon network.91 Br atoms were inserted into carbon layers, forming ionic bonds with C atoms via the surface transfer doping mechanism.24 Likewise, surface transfer doping is also the main mechanism to introduce metal ions into the graphene structure and dope metal nanoparticles into doped graphene. The surface transfer or charge transfer (CT) mechanism of Au ions into the graphene surface is described in Fig. 6c.38 Electrons were extracted from graphene to reduce AuIII to Au nanoparticles (AuNPs), creating p-type Au-doped graphene without the infliction of damage to the graphene structure. In another study, ruthenium (Ru) cations were strongly adsorbed into graphene oxide (GO).46 They interacted with the abundant oxygen functional groups of GO, while N atoms interfered in the GO structure and created most defects in Ru/N-doped graphene (Fig. 6d). The crumped morphology of Ru/N-doped graphene and the existence of Ru atoms are clearly shown in Fig. 6d.
 Fig. 6  (a) Intercalation of iodine atoms in few-layer graphene sheets.12 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) six adsorption sites of Br and Br2 in graphene.24 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) Au-doped graphene based on charge transfer interaction (CT).38 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) the structure and morphology of Ru/N-doped graphene. Ru cations adsorb into the graphene structure via interaction with oxygen functional groups. O2 then converts to water.46 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
Recently, the synergistic effects brought about by the co-doping of different dopants have drawn extensive research interest.34,100–102 Co-doping elements with different electronegativity (according to the Pauling scale) can alter the charge distribution and lead to a tuneable electronic band structure, the so-called synergistic coupling effect.100 For example, N and B dual-doped graphene can create a B–N–C structure, neutralizing the electron withdrawing and donating characteristics of B and N, respectively.103 Besides, the presence of co-dopants in carbon networks can facilitate the charge transfer within the graphene network.3 Wang et al. observed that N,S dual-doped graphene displays a looser structure with interconnected pores (inset A of Fig. 7a), as compared to N-doped and S-doped samples (insets B and C of Fig. 7a).3 Such a highly porous structure enables faster charge transfer and favours the application of doped graphene as an electrode for energy storage devices. Zhou et al. revealed the higher specific surface area (171.4 m2 g−1 at a relative pressure of 0.9) (Fig. 7b), richer porosity with a large average pore size (2–8 μm) and large total pore volume (1.28 cm3 g−1) of N,S co-doped graphene as compared with mono-doped ones.20Fig. 7c compares the pore size distributions of N,S co-doped graphene, N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene and undoped reduced graphene oxide (rGO), of which mesopores and macropores dominated in the dual doped samples. The successful introduction of both S and N was verified by XPS spectroscopy and the concentration of N and S was even higher (N: 5.4 at%; S: 3.9 at%) than that of mono-doped ones (N: 5.1 at%; S: 0.6 at%). Besides, the dual-doped sample showed a higher C/O ratio (Fig. 7d), which indicates more effective reduction of N,S-graphene. Recently, multi-doped graphene with B, N, P and Fe for ORR electrocatalysts and metal-doped graphene with Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni were also reported.71,77 Multi-doped graphene samples, especially with the addition of transition metal atoms, outperformed mono-doped and dual-doped samples. The introduction of metal elements not only improves the content of doped heteroatoms but also increases the electrochemical and electrocatalytic performance of doped graphene because the charge transfer between metal atoms and graphene is promising to open a suitable bandgap, while retaining electron mobility for energy-related applications. However, the specific surface area may slightly decrease due to an excessive number of heteroatoms, which may create clusters and block some effective porosity in the graphene structure.
 Fig. 7  Morphology, structure, and compositions of doped graphene. (a) SEM image of S/N co-doped graphene (A), N-doped graphene (B), and S-doped graphene (C).3 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) N2 adsorption deposition isotherms; (c) pore size distributions; (d) comparison of the C/O ratio in S/N co-doped graphene, N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene and undoped rGO.20 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
2.3 Properties

2.3.1 Electrical and electrochemical properties. 
Doping with different foreign atoms not only modifies the structure but also intrinsically manipulates the electrical and electrochemical properties of doped graphene, which is critical for its applications in energy conversion and storage.2,66 In general, the electrical and electrochemical properties of doped graphene can be evaluated from the electrical sheet resistance, the charge transfer resistance and the charge carrier mobility.
As well documented, the difference in electronegativity between C and dopants effectively promotes charge transfer, improves the electrical conductivity and reduces the energy barrier for ion intercalation. Wen et al. demonstrated the enhancement of electrical conductivity of N-doped graphene paper (6.81 at% N) for Li-ion batteries.2 As can be seen from Fig. 8a, the semicircles in the Nyquist plots of N-doped graphene are smaller than that of undoped graphene paper, implying smaller impedance, better ionic conductivity and lower charge transfer resistance (Rct). Calculations from the equivalent circuit of N-doped graphene revealed a decrease of up to one-half (from 110.56 Ω to 54.97 Ω) of the total impedance resistance and interface resistance. The electrical conductivity of graphene paper also improved from 900 S m−1 to 2000 S m−1 after N doping. Likewise, Thirumal et al. discovered that the Rct of graphene decreased to one-half after doping of 2.56% B (from 7.22 Ω to 3.52 Ω), implying facilitated charge transfer and improved conductivity as compared to the undoped counterparts.52 N-Doped graphene (1.4 at% N) with a high carrier mobility of up to 8600 cm2 V−1 s−1 was fabricated even at room temperature by Lin and co-workers.111 This improvement can be attributed to additional hole or electron impurities in the energy band structure of graphene, facilitating the movement of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band.
 Fig. 8  Nyquist diagrams of: (a) N-doped graphene (N-GP) and undoped graphene (GP).2 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) N-doped graphene under different pressure conditions (200, 400, and 600 kPa).18 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) B/N dual-doped graphene compared to mono-doped and undoped graphene.34 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) comparison of the electrical properties of N,S-codoped graphene, N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene and rGO.20 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
It is worth mentioning that both n-type and p-type doping from substitutional and surface transfer doping also improve the electrical conductivity of graphene owing to the charge redistribution after doping. The electrical conductivity is closely related to the synthesis parameters and dopant sources. The electrical conductivity of N-doped carbon paper (2.1 S cm−1) under a high pressure of 600 kPa was proved to be 35 times higher than that of doped samples without compression (0.06 S cm−1) on account of its higher density.18 With a highly dense structure, N atoms prioritized to dope on the edges and defect sites of graphene honeycomb networks and generate more pyridinic-N, which had a lower energy barrier and served as the most effective position to improve energy storage performance. Thus, an N-doped graphene film at 600 kPa (NCP-600k) showed much lower resistance, faster charge transfer and higher electrical conductivity (Fig. 8b). In another research study, Zhu et al. prepared B,N co-doped rGO (BN-rGO) with massively reduced resistance (Fig. 8c).34 A study of N,S dual-doped rGO by Zhou et al. reported a significant improvement in electrical conductivity, compared to mono-doped graphene (Fig. 8d).20 The reason is that it possesses a highly porous structure and synergistical dual-doping effect. Both N and S heteroatoms were inserted into the graphene honeycomb structure, decomposed a larger number of oxygen functional groups and formed more defects than mono-doped and undoped graphene.


2.3.2 Optical and photocatalytic properties. 
For energy conversion applications, the photocatalytic properties of materials play a critical role. The typical photocatalytic reactions involve two steps: (i) catalyst absorbs the energy of light that is higher than its band gap to generated electron–hole pairs and (ii) photogenerated electrons and holes reach reactive sites and participate in catalytic reactions which enable energy conversion similar to electrocatalysis. The former requires a suitable band gap for effective light absorption, while the latter is dependent on the mobility of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, i.e., the light conversion efficiency. Under light irradiation, the valence electrons of doped graphene can absorb the photon energy of light and be excited to higher energy levels, leaving holes in previous positions. The photon energy that can be absorbed depends on the number of free electrons. Therefore, doped graphene with more charge carriers via both substitutional and surface transfer from heteroatoms and metal nanoparticles can control the bandgap width and induce more electron–hole pairs with the same amount of irradiation, leading to the enhancement of optical absorption and catalytic activities for high energy conversion efficiency. The light absorption of doped graphene can be extended from the ultraviolet to the visible region by changing the absorption intensity, frequency and spectral structure and was investigated by theoretical and computational studies.66,112 This can be effectively controlled by dopant types and concentrations. Rani et al. observed that B and N co-doped graphene can cause a significant red-shift in the visible spectrum.112Fig. 9a compares the absorption spectra of GO and B-doped rGO (BR-GO).10 The absorption peak shifted from 232 nm to 268 nm after B doping, indicating the restoration and deoxygenation of the conjugated structure of GO.10 The absorption spectra and the bandgap of GO, N-doped, B-doped and N,B co-doped graphene are investigated.21 As illustrated in Fig. 9b, light absorption after B, N and NB doping has been significantly improved. Among them, N-doped graphene displayed the strongest absorbance in the UV to visible light region. The co-doped graphene showed the largest band gap (2.04 eV) as compared with B-doped and N-doped graphene (1.9 eV and 1.68 eV, respectively), which restricted the optical absorption of graphene, adversely affecting the photocatalytic ability. Previous studies indicated that a smaller band gap value is preferred for photocatalysts and it should be between 1.6 and 2.2 eV for high efficiency.113
 Fig. 9  Absorption spectra of: (a) B-doped GO (BR-GO) and GO.10 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) N-doped graphene (NG), B-doped graphene, NB co-doped graphene (NBG) and GO.21 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. Quantum efficiency of: (c) B-doped graphene.36 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) N-doped graphene (NG), B-doped graphene (BG), and NB dual-doped graphene (NBG).21 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
After charge carrier separation, they will migrate to reactive sites on the surface of the catalyst and participate in chemical redox reactions which enables energy conversion. The mobility of charge carriers decides the energy conversion efficiency because the recombination of pairs may limit the catalytic activity of doped graphene. A previous study presented that the combination of B-doped rGO and ZnO created a p–n heterojunction, which lowered the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs, resulting in superior photocatalytic activity.114
The photocatalytic ability of doped graphene can be quantified by the quantum efficiency or incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE), which refers to the incident light to current conversion efficiency of materials. Wu et al. recently found that the IPCE of B-doped graphene could be around 60% at wavelengths from 750 nm to 980 nm (Fig. 9c), suggesting the outstanding light response of B-doped graphene.36 By contrast, pure graphene did not show any response under visible light irradiation during photocatalytic reactions due to the deficiency of the energy bandgap. The same trend was observed by Mohamed et al. for N-doped graphene with the highest IPCE of 60% at 600 nm, and doped graphene samples showed the highest charge concentrations between 450 and 850 nm (Fig. 9d).21 In general, B and N dopants served as charge accepting and donating centers, respectively, inhibiting the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. Their presence not only tailors the bandgap but also enhances the quantum efficiency of doped graphene, which plays an important role in photocatalytic reactions in energy conversion.

3. Synthesis
To date, various doping methods have been introduced to regulate the structure and properties of graphene. The latest approaches are direct chemical vapour deposition, solvothermal reflux, arc discharge, thermal annealing, plasma treatment, and wet chemical treatment.7,8,27,38,43,44,58,72,115–121 In general, the selection of doping methods is based on the desired quality of doped graphene and the targeted applications. This section discusses the recent synthesis methods of doped graphene and controllable parameters. The strengths and limitations of each method are also included. Table 2 summarizes and compares the different synthesis methods of doped graphene with respect to raw materials, operating parameters, doping mechanisms, doping concentrations and suitable applications.
Table 2 Summary and comparison of different graphene doping methods




Methods
Precursors
Parameters
Doping mechanism
Dopants
Suitable applications
Ref.


Carbon source
Dopant source
Substitutional
Surface transfer





a DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide.
b DMF: dimethylformamide.
c AHF: anhydrous hydrogen fluoride.
d PBI: polybenzimidazole.





CVD
Ethanol
Methylamine
1040 °C, 470 Pa
✓


1.7 at% N
Smart window

125



Pyridine (single precursor)
930 °C
✓


3 at% N
Solar cell

126



1,3,5-Triazine (single precursor)
700–900 °C
✓


5.6 at% N
—

16



Solvothermal/hydrothermal
GO solution
KI
200 °C, 12 h
✓


0.52 at% I
HER

160



GO solution
DMSOa
180 °C, 18 h
✓


5.3 at% S
ORR

9



GO solution
AgNO3, urea, thiourea
120 °C, 10 h
✓
✓
7.3 wt% N, 1.82 wt% S, 34.27 wt% Ag
Supercapacitor

42



Graphene
B2O3, NH3
180 °C, 12 h
✓


19.8 at% B, 11.7 at% N
Supercapacitor

118



Arc discharge
Pure graphite
SiO2, N2
55–65 A, 10–25 A, 90 s
✓


5.91 at% Si, 4.38 at% N
Energy storage and conversion

162



GO powder
Polyaniline
150 A, 30 V
✓


3.5 at% N
Supercapacitor

44



Pure graphite
(NH4)3PO4
120 A, 15 V, <1 Pa
✓


3.2 at% N, 1.3 at% P
Capacitor

163



Thermal treatment
GO solution
B2O3
1000 °C
✓


6.04 at% B
Supercapacitor

7



GO slurry
I2
950 °C, 1 h


✓
0.06 at% I
Lithium-ion battery

92



GO foam
NH3
800 °C, 1 h
✓


6.8 at% N
Sodium-ion battery

164



GO solution
DMF,b NH3
800 °C, 1 h
✓


6.0 at% N
CO2 reduction

165



GO solution
Polyaniline, AHFc
950 °C, 1 h
✓


7.11 at% N, 0.37 at% P, 0.33 at% F
HER, OER, ORR

166



Flash heating
GO solution
Melamine
1500 °C, a few milliseconds, xenon lamp: 0.7–14 μm, 0.16–1.5 kJ cm−2
✓


26 at% N
Energy storage

43



Laser photoreduction
GO solution
Urea
3.2 W, 70 mm s−1, 10.64 μm
✓


6.37 at% N
Supercapacitor

49



PBI,d DMSO (single precursor)
100 mm s−1, 355 nm UV laser
✓


N, S
Lithium-ion battery

167



Plasma treatment
GO solution
Boric acid
3 min, 80 V, 1.6 A
✓


1.4 at% B
Supercapacitor

33



GO solution
(NH4)2CO3
10 min, 60 V, 1.5 A
✓


5.26 at% N
ORR

48



Chemical treatment
GO solution
NaSH·xH2O
Room temperature, 10 min
✓


2.5 wt% S
HER, ORR, OER

8



GO solution
C5H7N3
110 °C, 24 h
✓


3.27–15.28 wt% N
ORR

27



GO solution
H3BO3, AgNO3
B-doping at 700 °C for 4h, followed by Ag-doping via chemical treatment


✓
B, Ag
Lithium-ion battery

233





3.1 Chemical vapour deposition
Chemical vapour deposition (CVD) has been a prominent technique to prepare high-quality pristine graphene and doped graphene thin films over large areas.122,123 The flexible, highly transparent conductive and uniformly doped graphene thin films from CVD are mostly suitable for hydrogen evolution technologies, transparent electrodes for solar cells and smart windows.116,124,125 The resultant doped graphene is formed via substitutional doping by CVD. As illustrated in Fig. 10a, CVD offers various choices of precursors (gas, solid, and liquid raw materials). These precursors are put into a vacuum quartz tube, and then decomposed to radicals under decomposition conditions. The temperature required to decompose common precursors is in the range of 900–1000 °C. Therefore, metal substrates (such as copper and nickel foil) are typically used for radical absorption to lower the growth temperature, making it more feasible to grow high-quality doped graphene. Moreover, the dependence of doping concentration on the precursor types, flow rate, surrounding pressure, and deposition temperature is also reported by some research groups.116,126–128
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the common CVD setup for the synthesis of doped graphene; (b) CVD-derived N-doped graphene with a 1,3,5-triazine precursor.16 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) CVD-derived N-doped graphene on a Cu substrate with a pyridine precursor.28 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) experimental setup of HFCVD.40 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (e) experimental setup of PECVD.47 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
To fabricate and improve the quality of doped graphene-based materials for energy harvesting devices, lowering the deposition temperature for the CVD substrate below 1000 °C is the key target to reduce the limitations of CVD. Reducing the growth temperature can prevent damage to the substrate and induce a sufficient doping level since the high temperature of 1000 °C prioritizes C–C formation over the bonding between C and doping atoms.28,129 Additionally, structural contamination and the disruption of graphene layers when transferring from a metal catalytic substrate to its insulating counterpart are also critical issues.130 Thus, to lower the growth temperature, CVD approaches are modified, through using low temperature-activated precursors, a metal-free substrate and providing a CVD chamber with a plasma environment. Lu et al. utilized 1,3,5-triazine as a single source of both carbon and the dopant on account of its lower activation energy to prepare N-doped graphene via CVD (Fig. 10b).16 N concentration increased from 2.1 at% to 5.6 at% by reducing CVD growth temperature from 900 °C to 700 °C, confirming the preference of C–C formation at the higher temperature. Pyridine was also employed as an individual precursor to produce N-doped graphene at a very low temperature of 300 °C due to its low dehydrogenisation temperature (Fig. 10c), achieving a small defect density of N-doped graphene and an extremely high N concentration of 16.7 at%.28 Zhai et al. synthesized B-doped graphene on a glass substrate by hot-filament CVD (HFCVD), as described in Fig. 10d.40,116 The carrier gas (H2) and precursors (C2H2 and B2H6) were mixed in a gas shower and decomposed to reactive radicals under the hot filament. These radicals then diffused to low-temperature glass substrates to form B-doped graphene by opening the shutter. This new metal-free CVD method can provide a relatively low deposition temperature and high growth rate of doped graphene. Alternatively, Wei et al. proposed plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD) that promotes low-temperature growth of N-doped graphene on a dielectric substrate (SiO2/Si) at only 435 °C.47 The PECVD setup is described in Fig. 10e. The presence of plasma coil can provide a high energy environment in the CVD chamber to reduce the growth temperature of precursor species on metal and even dielectric substrates. Despite advantages, a challenge for these metal-free methods still exists, i.e., the insufficient deposition of precursors on insulating substrates. Besides, CVD methods suffer from drawbacks such as a high cost, high operation temperature, and low production yield with toxic precursors involved, thereby hindering their application for industrial-scale production of doped graphene.
3.2 Solvothermal reflux
Solvothermal (hydrothermal) reflux has been widely employed as an economical method to synthesise doped graphene directly at the gram scale and under mild conditions (relatively low temperature and pressure). During solvothermal and hydrothermal processes, doping atoms can covalently bond with C atoms, forming reaction intermediates. These groups subsequently assemble into doped graphene, resulting in substitutional doping. Additionally, metal ions can also absorb onto the surface of substitutionally doped graphene, forming a hybrid structure. A solvothermal approach in the production of graphene was first introduced by Choucair et al.131 As shown in Fig. 11a, a liquid substance containing carbon and dopant sources is used as the precursor and sealed in a high pressure stainless-steel autoclave heated with controllable reaction time and temperatures. Doped graphene via solvothermal reflux can be prepared from either a mixture of different doping precursors or single precursors. For instance, S-doped graphene was produced from a mixture of GO and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Fig. 11b), or from only DMSO as a single precursor for both C and S sources.9,120,132 S-Doped graphene was produced via the substitutional doping mechanism through the assembly of CC, C–S–C and C–S intermediates. Recently, Bhushan et al. presented that a long reaction duration, mild treatment temperature and high vessel pressure are more favourable to introduce dopants.118 Sun et al. applied a hydrothermal, followed by calcination route to prepare Co–Ni pyrophosphates/N-doped graphene at only 140 °C (Fig. 11c).26 Under hydrothermal conditions, PO43+, NH4+, Ni2+, and Co2+ well interacted with oxygen functional groups on the GO basal plane. Simultaneously, the O content was reduced, leaving an intermediate product for a further calcination stage to obtain Co–Ni pyrophosphates/N-doped graphene.
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of solvothermal reflux synthesis for doped graphene; (b) solvothermal synthesis of S-doped rGO. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2017, Elsevier; (c) hydrothermal synthesis of Co–Ni pyrophosphates/N-doped graphene at 140 °C. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In comparison with other methods, the solvothermal approach is potential and repeatable owing to its relatively mild and simple conditions and low cost along with gram-scale production.120,131,132 The yield is only restricted by the capacity of the flask or autoclave and the doping concentration mainly depends on the selected precursors. Typically, the doped graphene prepared from solvothermal reflux shows more defects and comprises a large number of active sites with a broad interlayer spacing.120,161 These active sites and interlayer distance can accommodate intercalated ions and boost the catalytic capabilities of doped graphene. Therefore, solvothermal-derived doped graphene is suitable for future energy-related technologies. The main limitation of solvothermal methods is that they are time-consuming and toxic chemical dopants are involved.
3.3 Arc discharge
Arc discharge is another feasible, low-cost and high-yield approach to synthesize pure graphene and doped graphene by the evaporation of solid-phase precursors, such as graphite powder and GO powder, at high temperature. The doping mechanism under arc discharge is substitutional doping. Since it was first introduced in 1990 by Krastchmer's group, arc discharge has been applied to fabricate a broad range of carbonaceous materials, including carbon nanotubes and doped graphene materials.133 The scheme of arc discharge synthesis is depicted in Fig. 12a.1 The system comprises two electrodes (anode and cathode) in a vacuum chamber filled with pure helium. A resistance spring made of NiCr is used to generate an arc discharge voltage. Typically, external DC power supply is applied at a specific arc current and the product can be collected at the substrate within only a few minutes.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of experimental arc discharge synthesis.1 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) schematic illustration of arc discharge synthesis of F-doped graphene sheets (120 A, 15–15 V).22 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) arc discharge synthesis of B/N doped graphene quantum dots.37 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) arc discharge synthesis of N-doped graphene flakes.44 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
Luan et al. prepared an F-doped graphene anode for lithium-ion batteries by arc discharge (Fig. 12b), and obtained 2 g F-doped graphene, suggesting the potential of this method for large-scale production. Likewise, arc discharge can be effectively utilized to introduce multiple dopants.22 Dey et al. produced B,N co-doped graphene quantum dots via the arcing methodology.37 As described in Fig. 12c, B-doped and N-doped graphene were first fabricated through arcing (step 1), followed by chemical scissoring by acid treatment of H2SO4 and HNO3 (step 2). Pham et al. prepared N-doped graphene from GO and polyaniline by arc discharge (Fig. 12d) and N concentration reached 3.5 at%, far above the value reported earlier (i.e., only 1–1.5 at% N).44
The arc discharge method enables the homogenous distribution of heteroelements into the graphene lattice. The main advantages of this doping method are a short duration, a simple procedure with scalable products, and the absence of any catalyst or toxic by-product. Nevertheless, gaseous and liquid-phase precursors are not available to prepare doped graphene via this method. Besides, low doping concentration, low specific surface areas, and high values of the DC current and voltage also limit this method for industrial production.
3.4 Thermal annealing
Thermal treatment, especially thermal annealing of GO, is extensively applied to fabricate three-dimensional electrodes in high yield for energy conversion and storage devices. In general principle, it requires initial exfoliation of GO mixed with the dopant precursor, followed by an annealing process at a very high temperature around 600–1000 °C to obtain heteroatom-doped graphene. Under elevated temperature (in the range of 200–800 °C), most of the oxygen-containing groups decompose into active sites to anchor dopants. Therefore, GO can be effectively reduced with the most sp2 structure recovered, providing both high electrical conductivity and catalytic activities which are favourable for energy-related applications.
Yeom et al. applied two-step thermal annealing of GO mixed with B2O3 as a boron precursor to produce B-doped graphene nanoplatelets (BT-rGO) via the substitutional doping mechanism (Fig. 13a).7 The concentration of the B dopant was reported to be as high as 6.04 at%. Thermal annealing can also be an effective method to produce multi-doped graphene. Zhang et al. annealed a mixture of NH4SCN and Co(OAC)2 to prepare Co–S/N,S multi-doped rGO (Co–S/NS-rGO), as shown in Fig. 13b.19 In the structure of the resultant sample, N and S were doped into the graphene network via the substitutional doping mechanism, whereas Co atoms were trapped into the graphene surface via surface transfer doping.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagrams of thermal treatment methods to prepare doped graphene. (a) Thermal annealing of B-doped graphene nanoplatelets at 1000.7 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) thermal annealing of the Co–S/NS-rGO composite at 400–600 °C.19 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) microwave-assisted thermal annealing of B,N co-doped graphene.35 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) synthesis processes of N-doped graphene through flash heating (FH-NrGO) and normal thermal heating (TH-NrGO) (left); and the dependence of N content on treatment temperature (right).43 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (e) Direct laser writing of N-doped graphene oxide.49 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
In thermal annealing, the type and mass ratio of precursors, and annealing temperature and duration significantly influence the doping efficiency, doping concentration and configurations of doped graphene.7,134,135 Although a high annealing temperature is necessary for the synthesis of doped graphene, overheating could lead to unstable bonding between C and dopants and limit the doping concentration. Moreover, Ngidi's work showed a decrease in the surface area of N-doped graphene at 800 °C in comparison with the same sample treated at 600 °C due to the collapse of the graphene backbone upon thermal annealing.128 For this reason, thermal-driven reduction has been modified to produce high-quality doped graphene, such as microwave-assisted thermal annealing, laser writing and flash heating.35,43,49,136–141 These methodologies are proven as non-toxic and highly efficient approaches to simultaneously dope and reduce the mixture of GO with heteroatom-enriched sources. Umrao et al. proposed microwave-assisted thermal annealing to prepare B,N co-doped graphene.35 As described in Fig. 13c, the product was simultaneously reduced and doped in a very short duration at a high doping concentration by microwave irradiation without the use of hazardous reducing agents. Recently, Yoo et al. introduced an ultrafast flash heating method to prepare flash-heated N-doped graphene from GO and melamine in a few milliseconds.43 The flash-heated N-doped graphene showed a much higher N concentration (26 at% N) in comparison with the normal thermal-heated N-doped graphene (0.8 at% N) (Fig. 13d). Alternatively, Fu et al. introduced laser writing photoreduction of GO and urea to produce N-doped GO with a N content of 6.37 at%.49 The schematic illustration of the laser writing setup is provided in Fig. 13e. Under a high power laser, the as-prepared GO/urea mixture was reduced and doped, resulting in N-doped rGO.
In general, thermal annealing is an effective pathway of both reducing and doping GO with a controllable doping content and various choices of precursors (solid, liquid, and gaseous sources). Doping atoms either can insert into the graphene honeycomb network via substitutional doping or induce charge-transfer by annealing. On the other hand, the required high temperature for the normal thermal annealing method might lead to large energy consumption for industrial-scale energy-related technologies. Modified thermal-driven strategies with a short duration and high yield will be potential alternatives for future graphene doping.
3.5 Plasma treatment
In contrast to thermal annealing, plasma treatment has been widely used as a low energy consumption route to prepare doped graphene within only a few minutes at low pressure. On one hand, plasma treatment is widely used to produce doped graphene via substitutional doping. On the other hand, plasma technology can also modify the surface properties of graphene through etching. Therefore, deposition under a plasma environment can potentially be used for surface transfer doping. Defect sites are created by pulling carbon atoms out of the basal plane with the plasma treatment so that dopants can be incorporated into these vacancies with various configurations.15Fig. 14a shows a typical N doping graphene process using NH3 plasma.
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the doping mechanism of N-doped graphene using NH3 plasma treatment: (1) the interaction between plasma species and defects; (2) the formation of graphitic-N and pyrrolic-N configurations; (3) the transformation of pyrrolic-N into pyridinic-N.15 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) schematic of plasma treatment synthesis of B-rGO.33 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) schematic diagram of a radio frequency plasma chemical reactor to prepare N-doped graphene.41 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) experimental setup and synthesis of N-PEGO by DBD plasma technology.48 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 

Fig. 14b illustrates the synthesis of B-doped graphene under plasma treatment, including mixing of GO with boric acid as the B precursor, and plasma treatment in a working reactor.33 The general radio frequency plasma chemical reactor for N-doped graphene is shown in Fig. 14c.41 To date, dielectric barrier discharge plasma (DBD plasma) has been the most common non-thermal plasma technology to synthesize catalysts for energy conversion.142 Wang et al. utilized DBD plasma to produce an N-doped plasma exfoliated GO (N-PEGO) electrocatalyst (5.26 at% N) from GO and (NH4)2CO3, as described in Fig. 14d.48 The movement and collision of the high-energy charges can create high electric and magnetic fields to reduce and introduce dopants into graphene. Apart from energy conversion, DBD plasma can be applied to synthesize electrodes for energy storage. Li et al. prepared B-rGO (1.4 at% B) as a potential electrode for high-performance supercapacitors within only 3 minutes through DBD plasma.33
The plasma treatment method is a potentially alternative strategy to develop doped-graphene materials via substitutional doping and surface transfer doping mechanisms for energy technologies such as fuel cells, supercapacitors because of environmental sustainability, a short plasma exposure time and low energy consumption.34,143,144 Nonetheless, the limitation of plasma treatment for doped graphene is a low doping concentration as compared with other conventional methodologies.
3.6 Chemical treatment
Because GO is water-dispersible, a solution-based chemical reaction method has been widely used to produce doped graphene owing to its versatility and simplicity. Under chemical treatment, the oxygen functional groups in the GO lattice can be reduced and doping atoms can either easily get trapped into the graphene honeycomb framework via substitutional doping or form a charge transfer complex via the surface transfer mechanism.
Recently, Guo et al. used hydrosulphide hydrate (NaSH·xH2O) as the reagent and S source to prepare S-doped graphene at room temperature (Fig. 15a).8 The substitution of S atoms in graphene networks (2.5 wt% of S) was confirmed by a clear S 2p signal through XPS analysis. The mechanism of S doping can be illustrated in Fig. 15b: (1) the –SH of the dopant first reacted with the carbonyl group of GO to form thiol and hydroxyl groups; (2) these groups detached from the graphene network, generating carbocations; (3) the C–H bond was broken to form a new carbocation; (4) C–SH attached to the as-produced carbocation to form an S configuration.
 Fig. 15  (a) Digital image of a mixture of GO and NaSH·xH2O after 10 min, 1 h, 1 day and 7 days. Various mass ratios of NaSH·xH2O and GO are indicated with a blue line; (b) doping mechanism of S-doped rGO by chemical treatment of GO with NaSH·xH2O.8 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) schematic illustration of chemical treatment between GO and 2,3-diaminopyridine to synthesize N-doped graphene.27 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
The presence of N precursors, e.g., hydrazine hydrate and 2,3-diaminopyridine, helps to simultaneously reduce most of the oxygen functional groups on the graphene structure and introduce N atoms into the graphene structure. Chang et al. confirmed that 2,3-diaminopyridine with enriched pyridinic-N moieties removed most of the oxygen functional groups in the GO structure and attach to the graphene network via a wet chemical reaction at 110 °C (Fig. 15c).27 Bi et al. fabricated Bi-doped rGO by mixing GO, hydrazine hydrate and BiCl3.72 Because of the highly hazardous characteristics of hydrazine hydrate, Ahmed et al. proposed human urine as a simple, harmless and cost-free natural N source. The N-doped product attained a doping concentration of 11.1 at% and can be applicable in fuel cells.
As compared to other methods, chemical treatment is a low-cost approach to dope graphene on a large scale with little demand of thermal treatment and special equipment. However, shortcomings still exist such as low homogeneity, high toxicity and instability of doped graphene under excessive addition of reagents.145 Hence, it is necessary to find alternative dopants with a good reduction degree and less toxicity to develop sustainable solution materials for future energy devices.
4. Applications
Doped graphene materials have recently prevailed in many energy conversion and storage applications on account of their high electron mobility, a sizable bandgap and structural defects. In this section, different energy-related applications of doped graphene are discussed. Fig. 16 displays five current energy conversion and storage applications using doped graphene. The recent development, some remaining challenges and an outlook for future research on doped graphene-based materials for these applications are discussed.
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of energy conversion and storage applications using doped graphene, namely hydrogen generation, fuel cells, CO2 reduction, secondary batteries and supercapacitors. 
4.1 Energy conversion

4.1.1 Hydrogen generation. 
Hydrogen energy represents a sustainable alternative to commercial fossil fuels on account of its high calorific value (144 MJ kg−1) and high mass-energy density.146,147 Hydrogen generation in water splitting allows the conversion of electricity to hydrogen energy through electrocatalytic and photocatalytic processes. Electrocatalysis is a conventional catalytic process, including the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), conducted at an electrode/electrolyte interface with the participation of electrocatalysts. A small overpotential, which refers to the energy barrier of these redox reactions, is essential to facilitate energy conversion.148 Doped graphene has been identified as a promising electrocatalyst to decrease the overpotential for highly efficient hydrogen generation. Apart from electrolysis, photocatalytic water splitting could directly generate hydrogen from water by using sunlight. In photocatalysis, doped graphene serves as a semiconductor photocatalyst excited by photons from sunlight to generate electrons and holes. These photogenerated charge carriers reach the reactive sites and facilitate water splitting reactions to produce hydrogen similar to electrocatalysis.149
Although noble metals (Pt) and transition metals (Co, Ni, etc.) have shown superior photo/electrocatalytic performance for water splitting reactions, their scarcity, high cost, corrosion, and passivation greatly hamper their practical application.150 Therefore, heteroatom-doped graphene and its hybrids with metals and metal compounds, such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, and metal alloys, have been the subject of extensive investigation to achieve excellent photocatalytic performance for hydrogen production.146,151–154 Doped graphene and its hybrids can provide geometric defects and a highly active surface for efficient photo/electrocatalysts towards the HER and OER.57,148,155 Particularly, dopants can activate the surrounding C atoms in the graphene lattice, supplying abundant active sites for the HER and anchoring sites for metal components owing to the modification of valence orbital energy levels. The cooperation of doped graphene with metal components is expected to not only enhance the light absorption, but also improve electrocatalytic activity towards the HER.57,156 Zhao et al. revealed an improvement in the photocatalytic hydrogen generation of a Ni/N-doped graphene cocatalyst up to 3.4 times with 0.0013 wt% Ni, compared to N-doped graphene.157 The presence of Ni/N-doped graphene coupling with CdS significantly reduced the photoluminescence intensity. As a result, the recombination rate of charge carriers was hampered. Dong et al. presented that the incorporation of N atoms and MoS2 nanoparticles into the graphene structure exhibited a small onset overpotential and Tafel slope (112 mV and 44 mV, respectively), demonstrating efficient electrocatalysis.158 Moreover, the introduction of these dopants into the doped graphene honeycomb structure regulates the charge density and distribution of neighbouring C due to their differences in electronegativity between metal elements and C atoms, subsequently lowering the activation energy required for both the HER and the OER. So far, developing strong interaction between metal nanoparticles and doped graphene has still been a challenge to obtain long-term stability.
Tsai et al. obtained N-doped graphene quantum dots (N-GQDs, 6.85 at% N) with enhanced photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production.5 Under illumination, the N-GQDs exhibited a two times higher hydrogen production rate than the undoped counterpart (Fig. 17a). This can be attributed to C–N bonds. As shown in Fig. 17b, all N-GQD samples display a tenfold increase in the photocurrent generation, compared to undoped GQDs. In another research study, Tian et al. utilized solvothermal doping, followed by plasma etching in Ar, to maximize the activity of S-doped graphene (Fig. 17e).25 As a result, doping structures were created by S doping and topological defects were maintained by plasma etching technology, leading to the improvement of HER performance. As shown in Fig. 17c, plasma-etched S-doped graphene (SG-P) showed the smallest overpotential, indicating its superior activity towards the HER (Fig. 17c and d). Woldetinsay et al. developed a Pd/MoS2/N,S dual-doped graphene hybrid for efficient hydrogen generation.159 The co-doped graphene exhibited an unprecedentedly small overpotential of −42 mV and Tafel slope of 38 mV dec−1. Table 3 compares the different electrocatalytic activities of doped graphene and its hybrids with commercial Pt/C catalysts and pristine graphene towards the HER in an acidic medium. From Table 3, co-doped graphene and doped graphene hybrids with metal compounds show better electrocatalytic activities, represented by a smaller overpotential and Tafel slope, suggesting promising approaches for future development of doped graphene catalysts for hydrogen generation.
 Fig. 17  (a) Hydrogen production rate of pristine GQDs and 2N-GQDs using 2 g urea as the N precursor in photocatalysis; (b) chronoamperometry scans (I–t curves) of pristine GQDs and five N-GQDs under irradiation.5 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) polarization curves; (d) Tafel plots of GO, SG, SG-P, and normal Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 5 mV s−1; (e) illustration of synthesis of S-doped graphene (SG-P) by plasma etching.25 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
Table 3 Comparison of the electrocatalytic activities of pristine graphene, commercial Pt/C (20%) and recently reported doped graphene in an acidic electrolyte towards the HER




Electrocatalysts
Dopants
Doping mechanism
Overpotential [V] vs. RHEa
Tafel slope [mV dec−1]
Ref.


Substitutional
Surface transfer





a RHE: reversible hydrogen electrode.





Pristine graphene
—
—
—
746
263

25



S-Doped graphene
S
✓


423
148

25



P,N co-doped graphene
N, P
✓


379.73
125.5

150



MoS2/P-rGO
P, S, Mo
✓
✓
300
35

73



I-Doped graphene
I
✓


245
96

160



S-Doped graphene
S
✓


218
97

179



S-Doped graphene
S
✓


178
86

25



CoSe2/N-rGO
N, Co, Se
✓
✓
172
35.2

180



CoP-CNT/N-doped graphene
N, P, Co
✓
✓
155
69.1

181



P-Doped/Fe3O4 on 3D graphene
P, Fe
✓
✓
123
65

182



MoS2/N-rGO
N, S, Mo
✓
✓
112
44

158



MoS2/graphene functionalized N-GQDs
N, S, Mo
✓
✓
99
49.3

183



PtNi/N-rGO
N, Pt, Ni
✓
✓
98
42.7

152



Ni3Cu1/N-doped graphene
N, Ni, Cu
✓
✓
95
77.1

184



NiFe/N-doped graphene microtube
N, Ni, Fe
✓
✓
70.5
63.4

185



CoRu/N-doped graphene
N, P, Co, Ru
✓
✓
52
38

186



Ni-Doped graphene
Ni


✓
50
45

187



Commercial Pt/C (20 wt%)
—
—
—
38
34

25



Pt nanocrystals/N-doped graphene
N, Pt
✓
✓
24
28

188



S-Doped graphene/WS2
S, W
✓
✓
0.25
53

189



Pd/MoS2/N,S-rGO
N, S, Pd, Mo
✓
✓
−42
38

159



N-GQDs/graphene foam
N
✓


−72
84

190



SnS/N-doped graphene
N, S, Sn
✓
✓
−125
38

191







4.1.2 Fuel cells. 
Hydrogen-powered fuel cells have been intensively investigated to reduce oxygen and generate electricity with water as the by-product. This process includes the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) in the anode and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in the cathode, which are accelerated by using catalysts.168 However, the slow kinetics of ORR activity has restricted the overall energy conversion efficiency of reactions. Hence, discussions regarding different types of electrocatalysts have dominated research in recent years to promote the ORR activity, especially metal-free and nonprecious-metal doped graphene catalysts. These materials are cost-efficient and highly durable with an abundance of active sites.169–173Table 4 shows the electrocatalytic performance of different doped graphene towards the ORR. It can be clearly seen that most of the doped graphene catalysts exhibit high selectivity with four electrons transferred per molecule of oxygen, which resembles the ORR pathway of commercial Pt/C.
Table 4 Comparison of the ORR performance of different doped graphene catalysts




Catalyst
Dopants
Doping mechanism
Reference electrode
Electrolyte
Onset potential [V] vs. RHEa
Electron transfer number
Ref.


Substitutional
Surface transfer





a RHE: reversible hydrogen electrode.
b NHE: normal hydrogen electrode.





N-Doped graphene frameworks
N
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.98
3.9

69



N-Doped graphene
N
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
−0.08
3.9

196



N-Doped graphene
N
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
−0.13
3.7

197



N-Doped graphene layers
N
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.98
3.5

198



B-Doped graphene
B
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
−0.05
3.5

199



P-Doped graphene
P
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.92
3.0–3.8

200



I-Doped graphene
I


✓
Ag/AgCl
KOH
−0.14
3.9

201



F-Doped graphene
F
✓


Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.991
3.95–4.01

171



N/S dual-doped graphene
N, S
✓


Hg/HgO
KOH
−0.015
3.5

14



N/S dual-doped graphene
N, S
✓


Hg/HgO
KOH
0.09
3.47–3.72

202



N/S dual-doped graphene
N, S
✓


Ag/AgCl
PBS
−0.12 [mV]
3.75

203



I/N-doped graphene
N, I
✓
✓
Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.945
4.51

204



Co4N/N-doped graphene
N, Co
✓
✓
Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.91
3.6

168



Fe3C/Fe/N-graphene
N, Fe
✓
✓
Hg/HgO
KOH
0.003
3.6

58



B/N/P-doped graphene foam
N, B, P
✓


Calomel
KOH
0.88
3.5

77



B/N/P/Fe-doped graphene foam
N, B, P, Fe
✓
✓
Calomel
KOH
0.95
3.8

77



Co–S/N,S-rGO
N, S, Co
✓
✓
Hydrogen
KOH
0.979
3.61–3.79

19



NiFe/N-doped graphene
N, Ni, Fe
✓
✓
Ag/AgCl
H2SO4
0.825 vs. NHEb
3.46

178



NiCo2O4/N-doped rGO
N, Ni, Co
✓
✓
Calomel
KOH
−0.12
3.93

205



CoTiO3/N-doped rGO
N, Co, Ti
✓
✓
Hydrogen
NaOH
0.93
3.5

206



CoFe carbide/N-doped graphene
N, Co, Fe
✓
✓
Ag/AgCl
KOH
−0.04
3.65–3.83

175



MnO2/B-doped graphene nanosheets
B, Mn
✓
✓
Ag/AgCl
KOH
0.96
3.75

207





Bag and co-workers fabricated metal-free S,N dual-doped rGO (SN-rGO) through chemical treatment (Fig. 18a).14 The dual-doped graphene exhibited the highest activity towards the ORR in alkaline medium, evidenced by more positive onset potential and larger kinetic current density than mono-doped samples (Fig. 18b). In particular, the onset potential of SN-rGO was 40–80 mV higher than that of undoped rGO, and very close to that of the benchmark Pt/C (10 wt% Pt) catalyst (inset of Fig. 18b). Moreover, the co-doping also brought about higher kinetic current density (Fig. 18c). Besides, SN-rGO showed a lower yield of the HO2− intermediate (12%) and 3.5 electrons transferred per molecule of oxygen (Fig. 18d), highlighting its direct reduction of O2 to H2O via a four-electron pathway by simultaneous S and N doping.
 Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of synthesis of SN-rGO via chemical treatment; (b) ORR polarization curve of rGO, S-rGO, N-rGO, SN-rGO, and Pt/C (10%) in oxygen saturated solution at 1600 rpm with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1; (c) plot of kinetic current density (at −0.6 V) for S-rGO, N-rGO, SN-rGO and Pt/C catalysts; (d) the electron transfer number and the content of the generated HO2− intermediate during the ORR process.14 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (e) illustration of fabrication of the Fe3C/NG catalyst via thermal treatment at ≥700 °C; (f) LSV curves illustrating the stability of Fe3C/NG before and after 3000 cycles for the ORR in oxygen-saturated 0.1 M KOH; (g) Tafel plot of Fe3C/NG, NG thermal-treated at 800 °C and Pt/C catalysts.29 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
To further improve the ORR activity and durability of fuel cells, doped graphene is also used as the support to disperse metal nanoparticles (such as Fe, Ni, Co, etc.).174–177 Jiang et al. reported that Fe3C encapsulated in mesoporous N-doped graphene (Fe3C/NG) exhibited comparable ORR activity with the benchmark Pt/C catalyst.29Fig. 18e illustrates the fabrication diagram of Fe3C/NG by thermal annealing using urea, glucose and Fe3+ salt as precursors. Fe3C/NG then showed excellent long-term stability for up to 3000 cycles in a KOH medium (Fig. 18f). As illustrated in Fig. 18g, the Tafel slopes of all catalysts follow the order of Fe3C/NG < Pt/C < NG, suggesting the comparable activity of Fe3C/NG with commercial Pt/C. Barakat et al. also proved the remarkable electrocatalytic activity and long-term stability of FeNi-decorated N-doped graphene (FeNi–N-Gr) for the ORR in an acidic electrolyte.178 As well explained, N atoms showed good affinity to hydrogen ions due to their electron-donating nature; metallic atoms, Fe and Ni, attracted more molecular oxygen. The combination of the as-adsorbed hydrogen and oxygen subsequently formed water for the completion of the ORR. Moreover, FeNi alloys with high corrosion resistance can significantly improve the stability of the electrocatalyst (a retention of 98% after 1000 cycles).
In summary, graphene tailored by mono-doping and multi-doping with metal nanoparticles has become a long-term solution for the development of fuel cells. Future research can focus on the development of doped graphene catalysts under both under alkaline and acidic conditions.


4.1.3 CO2 reduction. 
The CO2 reduction reaction (CRR) refers to a potential energy conversion technology to alleviate the energy crisis by capturing and converting atmospheric CO2 into useable chemicals and hydrocarbon fuels (such as carbon monoxide, formic acid, methanol, ethanol, ethylene, etc.).68,93,146 To date, the prospects of direct catalytic conversion of CO2 to one-carbon (C1) products under mild temperatures (lower than 200 °C) have been promising, while two-carbon (C2) products remain challenging.192 The mechanism of the CRR includes three main steps: (i) CO2 absorption on the catalyst surface, (ii) C–H bond formation and C–O bond destruction via proton-electron transfer, and (iii) desorption and product formation.93 Therefore, the efficient CRR performance necessitates high-performance catalysts with strong interaction with CO2. So far, doping graphene with both metal-free atoms (e.g., B, N, and Si) and metal nanoparticles (e.g., Ni, Fe, and Cu) has been widely studied to tune electronic properties and generate catalytic functional groups for graphene-based materials for the CRR.93,174,193
Ju et al. reported transition metal- and N-doped nanoporous carbon (M–N–C, where M can be Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) as potential catalysts towards the CRR.194 All M–N–C catalysts are reported with a macroporous structure and average pore distribution of 0.7–0.8 nm, which is 2.5–2.9 times larger than that of CO2 molecules, allowing favourable space to trap CO2. Zhang et al. synthesized an Fe/N-doped graphene catalyst for CO2 reduction to CO via thermal annealing (700–800 °C) with GO, FeCl3 and NH3 precursors (Fig. 19a).17 The as-prepared Fe/N-doped graphene manifested a small overpotential of −0.60 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) and a comparable faradaic efficiency of 80% towards CO, indicating the major CO product after reduction (Fig. 19b). Remarkably, the Fe/N-doped graphene catalyst showed high selectivity and excellent stability throughout 10 h testing. This enhancement is due to the presence of N, which lowered the energy barrier of the CRR process due to high charge density and charge delocalization of the doped graphene structure. The combined effect of N and Fe atoms on the improvement of CO2 absorption and activation is also uncovered by free energy diagrams, as shown in Fig. 19c. In short, Fe–N4 moieties in Fe/N-doped graphene acted as active centres to trap toxic CO2 molecules. The absorption of CO2 on the catalyst surface initiated COOH* intermediate and CO* adduct formation through proton-electron transfer. Then, CO was created after the desorption of CO*. Likewise, Su et al. demonstrated Ni/N-doped graphene revealing outstanding CRR performance to produce the CO product.195 Under optimized conditions, the faradaic efficiency of Ni/N-doped graphene can reach up to 90% towards CO with a low onset potential value of −0.5 V and a small Tafel slope of 126 mV dec−1. Table 5 compares the recent achievement of doped graphene catalysts for the reduction of CO2. It is apparent from this table that co-doping graphene with metal atoms could significantly enhance the stability of catalysts while they still achieve outstanding CRR performance.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic synthesis of the Fe/Ni-doped graphene catalyst; (b) chronoamperometric curves showing faradaic efficiency towards major CO products and the stability of Fe/N-doped graphene in CO2-saturated KHCO3 (0.1 M); (c) Gibb free energy diagrams illustrating the CRR mechanism of the Fe/N-doped graphene catalyst (* indicates absorption sites).17 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
Table 5 Comparison of the electrolyte, main products, Tafel slope, onset potential, faradaic efficiency and stability of recently reported doped graphene catalysts for CO2 reduction




Catalyst
Dopants
Doping mechanism
Electrolyte
Main products
Tafel slope [mV dec−1]
Onset potential [V] vs. RHEa
Faradaic efficiency [%]
Stability [h]
Ref.


Substitutional
Surface transfer





a RHE: reversible hydrogen electrode.
b SCE: saturated calomel electrode.
c NHE: normal hydrogen electrode.





N-Doped carbon
N
✓


KHCO3
CO
138
−0.58
92
16

165



B-Doped graphene
B
✓


KHCO3
HCOOH
—
−1.4 (vs. SCE)b
66
4

208



N-Doped graphene foam
N
✓


KHCO3
CO
222
−0.19
85
5

209



N-Doped graphene nanoribbons
N
✓


KHCO3
CO
129.8
100 mV
87.6
10

210



Cu-rGO
Cu


✓
NaHCO3
CO
—
−0.4
21.7
15

211



Ni–N-Gr
N, Ni
✓
✓
KHCO3
CO
126
−0.5
90
5

195



N-Doped GQDs
N
✓


KOH
C2H4, C2H5OH, CO, HCOO−, CH4
198
—
90
—

212



N,P-Doped graphene
N, P
✓


NaHCO3
CO
122
−0.38
92
24

213



N,S-Doped graphene
N, S
✓


KHCO3
CO
94
−0.6
91
20

214



Ni/N-doped graphene
N, Ni
✓
✓
KHCO3
CO
110
−0.5
95
20

215



Ni/N-doped GO
N, Ni
✓
✓
KHCO3
CO
—
0.18
89
21

216



Au/N-doped GQDs
N, Au
✓
✓
KHCO3
CO
109
−0.15
93
24

217



Ni2+/N-doped graphene
N, Ni
✓
✓
KHCO3
CO
142
−0.68
92
20

218



Bi/N-doped graphene
N, Bi
✓
✓
KHCO3
HCOO−
119
−1.5 (vs. SCE)
92
20

219



SnO2/N-doped rGO
N, Sn
✓
✓
NaHCO3
HCOO−, CO


−0.48
89
20

220



Fe/B, N-doped graphene
N, B, Fe
✓
✓
KHCO3
HCOOH
73
−0.33 (vs. NHE)c
94
1.1

221



Co/N-doped graphene
N, Co
✓
✓
NaHCO3
CH3OH
—
−0.7 (vs. SCE)
71.4
10

222



Sn/N-doped graphene
N, Sn
✓
✓
KHCO3
HCOO−
84
−0.45
92
5

223



Fe–N/CNT@GNR
N, Fe
✓
✓
KHCO3
CO
118
−0.3
98
5

224





In the CO2 reduction reaction, the doping type and configuration of doped graphene catalysts will decide hydrocarbon products. For example, Si chain configuration in Si-doped graphene is capable of reducing CO2 to C2H5OH and C2H4 based on the multiple active sites on the doped chain at graphene edges, whereas single Si atom configuration provides only active sites to interact with CO2 and form C1 products, such as CO, HCOOH, and CH4.68 Therefore, controlling the preparation parameters of doping graphene with precise configurations for targeted hydrocarbon products is a challenge for future research. Additionally, highly durable and low-cost doped graphene catalysts are desirable for further economical CO2 conversion.
In general, doped graphene via substitutional doping and surface transfer doping can increase its catalytic performance towards the CRR owing to the enhancement of electrical and optical properties. Multi-doped graphene, especially with transition metal atoms, has recently shown potential to improve CO2 conversion efficiency.

4.2 Energy storage

4.2.1 Secondary batteries. 
In recent years, secondary batteries, e.g. lithium- and sodium-ion batteries, have been widely studied and applied in areas ranging from consumer electronics to electric vehicles.225 Doped carbon materials, especially doped graphene, are used as electrodes to achieve a higher energy density and longer cycle-life stability of these batteries.63,164,226Table 6 presents the performance of representative doped graphene electrodes for lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries.
Table 6 Comparison of doped graphene electrodes in secondary batteries




Electrode
Dopants
Doping mechanism
Synthesis method
Surface area [m2 g−1]
Capacity [mA h g−1]
Current density [A g−1]
Retention [%]
Cycles
Ref.


Substitutional
Surface transfer





Lithium-ion batteries



S-Doped graphene
5.3 at% S
✓


Chemical treatment
537
1697
0.1
—
—

228



I-Doped rGO
0.06


✓
Thermal treatment
—
1690
0.1
92.6
200

92



N-Doped graphene particles
2.1 at% N
✓


CVD
768
774
0.44
>99
500

13



N-Carbon/rGO
15.4 wt% N
✓


Thermal annealing
327
1100
0.1
60.8
200

230



N-G carbon nanofiber webs
16 wt% N
✓


Chemical treatment
2381
943
2
100
600

227



F-Doped graphene
19.17 at% F
✓


Arc-discharge
454.7
783.2
0.1
>91
1000

22



N-Doped graphene
5.8 at% N
✓


Thermal annealing
1170
672
0.1
100
200

231



B-Doped graphene
5.93 at% B
✓


Hydrothermal
213.68
548
0.1
∼76
30

232



Ag/B-doped graphene
—
✓
✓
Chemical treatment
—
540
0.1
100
100

233



P-Doped graphene
1.81




Thermal annealing
—
460
0.1
100
80

200



S,N-G/Si
5.07 at% S, 2.36 at% N
✓
✓
Hydrothermal
226
2020
0.4
97
100

234







Sodium-ion batteries



N-Doped graphene foam
6.8 at% N
✓


Thermal annealing
357
852.6
0.5
69.7
150

164



S-Doped graphene
5.3 at% S
✓


Chemical treatment
537
472
0.05
—
—

228



N-Doped graphene
8.9 wt% N
✓


Thermal annealing
652.3
405
0.05
100
3700

235



S-Doped graphene
21.8 wt% S
✓


Solvothermal
308
380
0.1
100
1000

120



S-Doped graphene
2.52 at% S
✓


Flash heat treatment
280
291
1
80
200

236



N-Doped rGO aerogels
—
✓


Hydrothermal, annealing
316
287.9
0.1
98.6
200

237



F,N-Doped graphene paper
1.54 at% F, 3.02 at% N
✓


Solvothermal
—
203
0.05
95
100

119





In lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), doped graphene can deliver higher specific capacity for Li+ ion storage with a large surface area, high conductivity, and shortened charge transport distance.227 Using S-doped graphene (5.3 at% S) as an electrode, Islam et al. reported LIBs with an outstanding capacity of 1697 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, which is 8 times higher than that of undoped graphene.228 In another study, an N-doped graphene anode for LIBs has been investigated by Mo et al.13 The authors prepared N-doped graphene particles through the CVD method using a mesoporous MgO template (Fig. 20a). N-Doped graphene was then developed on the surface of MgO, forming N-doped graphene with a mesoporous structure. This unique structure could enhance the electrical conductivity and facilitate fast charging and outstanding electrochemical performance. As can be seen from Fig. 20a, 3D mesoporous N-doped graphene can accommodate storage space for Li+, and thus improve the cycle-life stability of LIBs. Besides, the electrode reached a capacity of 774 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1 and 99% of this capacity could be maintained after 500 cycles (Fig. 20b). The electrode also demonstrated remarkable rate performance (Fig. 20c).
 Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of CVD synthesis of high-quality N-doped graphene for LIBs; (b) cycle-life performance of HNMG, NMG and graphite at 1C over 500 cycles (mass loading of 1 mg cm−2); (c) rate performance of HNMG, NMG and graphite from 0.2 to 60C.13 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (d) Sodium adsorption energy of graphene, N-doped graphene and N,S-co-doped graphene in SIBs; (e) geometric configuration of graphene, N-doped graphene and N,S-co-doped graphene with Na+ ion adsorption; (f) cycle-life stability of N,S-co-doped graphene over 10000 cycles at 1 A g−1; (g) illustration of a sodium-ion cell using the N,S-co-doped graphene anode.32 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
For sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), as Na possesses a larger radius (1.02 Å) than Li (0.76 Å), Na+ ions cannot intercalate well in graphene layers.146 Doping graphene can create more voids for Na+ ion transport. Using DFT calculations, Ling et al. presented that the capacity of B-doped graphene was 2.52 times higher than that of hard carbon in SIBs and 2.04 times higher than that of a graphite anode in LIBs.60 The maximum capacity was 762 mA h g−1 for sodium absorption at 0.44 V. Using first-principles computation, Ma et al. presented that N and S co-doped graphene showed the lowest sodium adsorption energy (Fig. 20d), suggesting that Na+ ions can be readily adsorbed onto the defect sites of graphene networks.32 The synergistic effect of N and S created more structural distortion of the carbon plane due to the larger difference in the atomic sizes of S and C (Fig. 20e), enhancing the electrochemical performance. Interestingly, in practice N,S co-doped graphene showed a negligible capacity loss over 10000 cycles at 1 A g−1 during the test (Fig. 20f). Fig. 20g illustrates the configuration of a sodium-ion cell using the N,S co-doped graphene anode. Despite the outstanding properties of doped graphene electrode, SIB performance still has limitations due to low specific capacity and low energy density as compared with LIB performance, requiring future work to improve the structure and properties of doped graphene for SIBs.
Overall, doping graphene with heteroatoms can enhance the storage of Li+ and Na+ ions and minimize the volume expansion during intercalation. This leads to better charge transfer, higher rate performance and superior cycling stability of LIBs and SIBs.


4.2.2 Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors have great potential in energy storage applications owing to their stable lifecycle, ultrafast charging speed and notable specific capacitance.11,51,141,229 Suitable electrode materials with large surface areas and high electrical conductivity are essential to achieve high-performance supercapacitors. Doping graphene with foreign atoms could enhance the electrical and electrochemical properties and the surface wettability, and thus improve the performance.42,50,243Table 7 compares the performance of recently reported outstanding doped graphene electrodes applied in supercapacitors.
Table 7 Comparison of the capacitive performance of different doped graphene electrodes in supercapacitors




Electrode
Dopants
Synthesis method
Doping mechanism
Electrolyte
Surface area [m2 g−1]
Specific capacitance [F g−1]
Current density [A g−1]
Retention [%]
Cycles
Energy density [W h kg−1]
Ref.


Substitutional
Surface transfer





a HGA: holey graphene aerogels.
b GHPCF: graphene-enhanced hierarchical porous carbon foam.






Mono-doped graphene



B-G nanoplatelets
6.04 at% B
Thermal annealing
✓


KOH
122.4
448
—
100
3000
—

7



B-rGO
1.4 at% B
Plasma treatment
✓


KOH
276.7
446.24
0.5
—
—
—

33



3D sponge NG
2.5 at% N
Thermal annealing
✓


KOH
702
405
1
87.7
5000
68.1

238



3D porous N-G
—
Hydrothermal
✓


BMIMBF4
203
390
1
96.6
20000
55

211



N-G nanosheets
10.13 at% N
Hydrothermal
✓


KOH
593
326
0.2
99.58
2000
25.02

239



F-G aerogels
4.5 at% F
Hydrothermal
✓


KOH
312.6
279.8
0.5
94.3
5000
26.2

109







Co-Doped graphene



Ag/N/S-rGO
7.23 wt% N, 1.82 wt% S, 34.27 wt% Ag
Hydrothermal
✓
✓
KOH
294.8
1010.6
—
90.5
10000
40.69

42



B/N-HGAa
4.15 at% N, 9.17 at% B
Hydrothermal
✓


H2SO4
249
456
1
75
10000
—

100



N/S-GHPCFb
6.67 at% N, 2.08 at% S
Thermal annealing
✓


KOH
2279.2
405
1
98.8
10000
18.4

30



B/N-G
19.8 at% N, 11.7 at% B
Solvothermal
✓


KCl
—
368
3
98
5000
170

118



B/N-carbon nanosheets
8.6 at% N, 3.3 at% B
Thermal annealing
✓


H2SO4
416
358
0.1
105
10000
—

240



B/N-rGO
2.69 at% N, 1.41 at% B
Plasma treatment
✓


KOH
269.48
350
0.5
—
—
—

34



P/N-G
3.59 at% N, 2.37 at% P
Hydrothermal
✓


Li2SO4
321
348
1
91.4
20000
34.7

50



N/S-rGO
11.9 at% N 4.25 at% S
Plasma treatment
✓


KOH
218.57
307.4
1
83
10000
9.33

144



N/S-G aerogels
5.4 at% N, 1.1 at% S
Solvothermal
✓


[Emim]BF4
146
169.4
1
77.2
3000
84.5

241



N/S-G aerogels
5.24 at% N, 0.52 at% S
Solvothermal
✓


BMIMBF4
242.5
203.2
1
90
3000
100.7

242





Dai and co-workers fabricated N-doped porous graphene (N-rGO) with high porosity and defect density (Fig. 21a).11 This N-rGO electrode offered an outstanding capacitance of 390 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, higher than that of undoped rGO (Fig. 21b). Moreover, it retained 96.6% of the capacitance after 20000 cycles at 10 A g−1 (Fig. 21c). Yeom et al. reported that a B-doped graphene electrode (6.04 at% B) showed an exceptional capacitance of 448 F g−1, which is a three-fold increase compared to the capacitance of the undoped sample.7 The B-doped graphene exhibited high stability with no degradation of capacitance after 3000 cycles. Noha et al. demonstrated that N-doped graphene (2.5 at% N) can achieve a high capacitance of 405 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 with an energy density of 68.1 W h kg−1 in a KOH electrolyte.238 As reported, the stability of the N-doped electrode went up to 87.7% after 5000 cycles. The enhanced electrochemical performance can be attributed to the presence of dopant atoms that increase the surface area and provide a favourable porous structure for ion transport and electron transfer.
 Fig. 21  (a) SEM image of N-rGO prepared by a hydrothermal method; (b) specific capacitance of rGO and N-rGO at 1 A g−1; (c) cycle life of a capacitor using the N-rGO electrode (at 10 A g−1).11 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (d) SEM image of N/S-GHPCF; (e) specific capacitance of N/S-GHPCF, HPCF, N/S-HPCF and N-GHPCF; (f) stability of a capacitor using the N/S-GHPCF electrode (at 10 A g−1); inset of (f) illustrates the GCD curves of N/S-GHPCF for 10 cycles.30 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (g) FESEM image of Ag/N/S-rGO35 (35 wt% Ag) prepared by a hydrothermal method; (h) specific capacitance of Ag/N/S-rGO35, rGO, Ag-rGO, and Ag/N-rGO. (i) Cycle life of a capacitor using the Ag/N/S-rGO electrode (at 10 A g−1); insets of (i) illustrate GCD curves for 10000 cycles (left) and a LED lit by the capacitor having the Ag/N/S-rGO electrode (right).42 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. 
Dual-doping graphene with N and S atoms was proved to enlarge the surface area to 2279.2 m2 g−1 and enhance the electrical conductivity to 438 S m−1 30. Fig. 21d shows the SEM image of N,S co-doped graphene (35 wt% Ag). The resultant co-doped graphene displayed abundant interconnected pores with superior mechanical strength. As a result, the co-doped sample achieved a specific capacitance of 405 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 21e) and retained 98.8% of the capacitance after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1 (Fig. 21f). In another report, Zhu et al. used boric acid and ammonium bicarbonate dopant sources to synthesize B/N co-doped rGO (BN-rGO) by plasma treatment.34 They achieved 2.36 times higher capacitance than that of undoped rGO. With multiple dopants (Ag, N, and S) in the rGO structure, Li et al. produced an Ag/N/S-rGO hybrid electrode (right inset of Fig. 21i).42 As can be seen from Fig. 20g, Ag nanoparticles are evenly distributed in the porous graphene structure. The presence of Ag helps to avert the agglomeration of carbon layers and then enhance the capacitance to 1010.6 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 21h). Additionally, the maximum energy density of Ag/N/S-rGO was 40.69 W h kg−1 in a KOH electrolyte, whereas the capacitance retention at 10 A g−1 was 90.5% after 10000 cycles (Fig. 21i).

5. Conclusion and prospects
In summary, doped graphene has attracted enormous interest in energy conversion and storage areas. The doping has altered the electrical, electrochemical, and photo/electrocatalytic behaviours of pristine graphene, which contributes to an outstanding performance for future energy-related devices. This review discusses doped graphene based on two doping mechanisms, including substitutional doping and surface transfer doping. The properties and structural modification of doped graphene have been compared to that of its undoped counterpart to clarify differences and important features favourable for energy-related applications. The prevailing doping methods have also been highlighted in this review to achieve doped graphene with high dopant concentration and desirable configurations. In addition, the recent energy-related applications of doped graphene have been summarized, and a significant improvement in the performance and stability of doped graphene materials has been demonstrated.
Despite the superior electrochemical and catalytic performance of energy-related devices using doped graphene, there are still several remaining challenges. At present, co-doping graphene with substitutionally doped atoms could enhance the performance of energy-related devices, but an excessive number of dopants may create an unnecessarily wide band gap for the required photocatalyst. These excessive dopants may also block the effective porosity, inhibit the charge transport in doped graphene, and create an exceedingly large number of defects in the graphene structure, suppressing some critical optical properties of graphene. For example, doping GO with N and B individually could narrow its bandgap from 2.6 eV to 1.69 and 1.9 eV, respectively, whereas the bandgap of N,B co-doped GO is still relatively large (2.04 eV), restricting the light harvesting abilities of catalyst materials.21 In terms of energy conversion and storage, safety issues play a critical role. Overheating doped graphene during the synthesis process may cause an explosion and thermal runaway, which refers to the failure of the energy storage system at high temperature. Therefore, thermal management, especially reducing the synthesis temperature, is always critical. However, the correlation between thermal properties, the structure of doped graphene, and the thermal deformation of doped graphene during the synthesis process is still rarely discussed.
Further studies on doped graphene for energy conversion and storage may focus on the following aspects:
5.1 Doping graphene with the existence of metal atoms
Doping graphene needs to open a suitable bandgap, while maintaining the electron mobility for energy storage, and obtain highly efficient catalytic properties for energy conversion. For example, doping graphene with metal elements can be a promising strategy. Metal compounds, such as metal oxides/hydroxides and metal alloys from the transition metal group (e.g., Ni, Fe, FeNi, Co, CoTa2O6, MoO3, and Zn–Ni–Co hydroxide), are highly recommended to support substitutionally doped graphene.178,244–247 They could adsorb into graphene lattices and cause less distortion than substitutional dopants, but still maintain most of the salient properties and excellent stability for conversion and storage applications. Doped-graphene integrated with core–shell nanoparticles on the surface is also reported as a bifunctional catalyst, enhancing the overall efficiency of electrocatalytic reactions.248
5.2 Investigation of new energy-efficient and fast doping methods
Recently, new synthesis methods such as microwave irradiation, laser writing, and flash heating stood out with a lower cost, short duration, better safety, and lower energy consumption, and would serve as novel doping strategies worthy of future investigation. The production of doped graphene through these routes on a large scale is a challenging task and needs to be further developed.
5.3 Improving electron–hole generation and mobilities of doped graphene
The mobility of electron–hole pairs of doped graphene is a prerequisite for the occurrence of energy conversion reactions and it guarantees the high efficiency of catalytic performance. Hence, enhancing the carrier separation and its mobility is essential. Future research efforts may focus on dual-doping both n-type and p-type elements on graphene to enable p–n nanoscale heterojunction formation for more efficient electron–hole separation.114 As reported by Zhang et al., N-doped graphene dominated by graphitic-N possesses higher carrier transport characteristics than its pyrrolic-N dominated counterpart.45 Therefore, controlling the dominant doping configurations is a feasible approach to not only enhance electron–hole mobilities but also boost the electrical conductivity. The improvement in electron–hole generation and mobilities reduces the recombination rate of charge carriers for more efficient photo/electrocatalytic reactions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors appreciate the financial support from the Swinburne University of Technology through Swinburne University Postgraduate Research Awards (SUPRAs). Baohua Jia acknowledges the Australia Research Council through the Discovery Project scheme (DP190103186) and the Industrial Transformation Training Centres scheme (Grant No. IC180100005).
References
X. Fang, A. Shashurin and M. Keidar, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 103304 CrossRef .
H. Wen, B. Guo, W. Kang and C. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 14032–14039 RSC .
T. Wang, L.-X. Wang, D.-L. Wu, W. Xia and D.-Z. Jia, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-N. Tomotaroh, F. Kazunori, A. Vivek, T. Mauricio and Y. Yin-Ting, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 425 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-A. Tsai, P.-Y. Hsieh, T.-H. Lai, C.-W. Tsao, H. Pan, Y.-G. Lin and Y.-J. Hsu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5322–5332 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, X. Zheng, L. Li, J. Li and Z. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19321–19328 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Da-Young, J. Woojin, T. Nguyen Dien Kha, Y. So Young, L. Sang-Soo, S. Bong June, C. Hyejung, L. Jung Ah and K. Heesuk, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9817 CrossRef .
J. Guo, W. Wang, Y. Li, J. Liang, Q. Zhu, J. Li and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 26460–26466 RSC .
C. Zhai, M. Sun, M. Zhu, S. Song and S. Jiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 407, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, S. Kaushal, P. Singh and J. Sharma, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 364, 130–139 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, Z. Liu, B. Zhao, J. Zeng, H. Hu, Q. Zhang, D. Chen, C. Qu, D. Dang and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 387, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kalita, K. Wakita, M. Takahashi and M. Umeno, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15209–15213 RSC .
R. Mo, F. Li, X. Tan, P. Xu, R. Tao, G. Shen, X. Lu, F. Liu, L. Shen, B. Xu, Q. Xiao, X. Wang, C. Wang, J. Li, G. Wang and Y. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1474 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bag, B. Mondal, A. K. Das and C. R. Raj, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 163, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kovacevic, J. Berndt, T. Strunskus and C. Uroš, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 53 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu-Fen, S.-T. Lo, J.-C. Lin, W. Zhang, L. Jing-Yu, L. Fan-Hung, L. Yi-Hsien and L. Lain-Jong, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6522–6532 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Wu, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, M. Ren, J. Sha, J. Zhong, K. Nie, A. S. Jalilov, Z. Li, H. Li, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Wu, E. Ringe, H. Xu, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703487 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, J. Yang, H. Hou, S. Chen and H. Yao, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7769 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, P. Li, X. Yin, Y. Yan, K. Zhan, J. Yang and B. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 50246–50253 RSC .
Z. Guangmin, P. Eunsu, S. H. Gyeong and M. Arumugam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mohamed Mokhtar, A. M. Mahmoud, K. Mohamed and A. A. Ahmed, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 1801–1814 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Luan, J. Yin, K. Zhu, K. Cheng, J. Yan, K. Ye, G. Wang and D. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 392, 123668 CrossRef .
H. Miao, S. Li, Z. Wang, S. Sun, M. Kuang, Z. Liu and J. Yuan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 28298–28308 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, L. Liu, J.-L. Kuo and Z. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14939–14945 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Z. Wei, X. Wang, S. Peng, X. Zhang and W.-M. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 4184–4192 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sun, Z. Li, L. Zhang, C. Dong, Z. Li, H. Yao, J. Wang and G. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 750, 607–616 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Chang, H.-J. Choi and J.-B. Baek, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7659–7665 RSC .
Y. Xue, B. Wu, L. Jiang, Y. Guo, L. Huang, J. Chen, J. Tan, D. Geng, B. Luo, W. Hu, G. Yu and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, Y. Yao, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Su, X. Yang and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, J. Liu, S. Lv, Q. Zhou, X. Shen, S. Mo and H. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7591–7603 RSC .
F. Huilong, D. Juncai, M. J. Arellano-Jiménez, Y. Gonglan, K. Nam Dong, L. G. S. Errol, P. Zhiwei, Z. Zhuan, Q. Fan, B. Jiming, Y. Miguel Jose, M. A. Pulickel, C. Dongliang and M. T. James, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, Q. Guo, M. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Chen, Q. Chen, X. Zhu, Q. Xia, S. Li and H. Xia, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 134–141 CrossRef .
S. Li, Z. Wang, H. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Ren, M. Zheng, L. Dong and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10988–10991 RSC .
T. Zhu, S. Li, B. Ren, L. Zhang, L. Dong and L. Tan, J. Mater.
Sci., 2019, 54, 9632–9642 CrossRef CAS .
S. Umrao, H. Mishra, A. Srivastava and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 023106 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, Z. Han, W. Younas, Y. Zhu, X. Ma and C. Cao, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5145–5153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dey, A. Govindaraj, K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 595–596, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .
A. Krajewska, K. Oberda, J. Azpeitia, A. Gutierrez, I. Pasternak, M. F. López, Z. Mierczyk, C. Munuera and W. Strupinski, Carbon, 2016, 100, 625–631 CrossRef CAS .
J. Balamurugan, S. G. Peera, M. Guo, T. T. Nguyen, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17896–17908 RSC .
Z. Zhai, H. Shen, J. Chen, X. Li and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2805–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rybin, A. Pereyaslavtsev, T. Vasilieva, V. Myasnikov, I. Sokolov, A. Pavlova, E. Obraztsova, A. Khomich, V. Ralchenko and E. Obraztsova, Carbon, 2016, 96, 196–202 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Wang, Z. Yin, J. Zhao, M. Song, Z. Wu, H. Li and X. Wang, Carbon, 2020, 161, 726–735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, S. Y. Jeong, J.-W. Lee, J. H. Park, D.-W. Kim, H. J. Jeong, J. T. Han, G.-W. Lee and S. Y. Jeong, Carbon, 2019, 144, 675–683 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Pham, J. G. Kim, J. Y. Jung, J. H. Kim, H. Cho, T. H. Seo, H. Lee, N. D. Kim and M. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905511 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jia, Z. Chao, L. Na, Z. Huanxi, L. Jingjing, F. Yong Qing, G. Bin, W. Zhenlong, L. Shengbin and H. Pingan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 28330 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, J. Sha, H. Fei, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, X. Zou, N. Zhao, H. Yu, Z. Jiang, E. Ringe, B. I. Yakobson, J. Dong, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, L. Peng, M. Li, H. Mao, T. Niu, C. Han, W. Chen and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Yu, M. Zhu, C. Ma, D. Zhao, C. Wang, A. Zhou, B. Dai, J. Ji and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2011–2017 RSC .
X. Fu, S. Xu, Y. Luo, A. Li and H. Yang, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2019, 35, 879–883 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Li, J. Deng, H. Lin, X. Hou and L. Jia, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 2704–2715,  10.1039/d0qm00392a .
J.-C. Liu, Z.-H. Huang and T.-Y. Ma, Small Structures, 2020, 1, 2000020 CrossRef .
V. Thirumal, A. Pandurangan, R. Jayavel and R. Ilangovan, Synth. Met., 2016, 220, 524–532 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, W. Tian, D. Liu, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 257–267 CrossRef CAS .
H. Badenhorst, Sol. Energy, 2019, 192, 35–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong, H. Kum, S.-H. Bae, J. Shim, H. Kim, L. Kong, Y. Meng, K. Wang, C. Kim and J. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 927–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal′ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Chang and J. B. Baek, Chem.–Asian J., 2016, 11, 1125–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Niu, X. Huang and W. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Liu and B. Yang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 53, 20–25 CrossRef .
C. Ling and F. Mizuno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10419–10424 RSC .
J. Li, G. Zhang, C. Fu, L. Deng, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 345, 146–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chang, D. Geng, X. Li, J. Yang, Y. Tang, M. Cai, R. Li and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 839–844 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Z. F. Hou, B. Gao and T. Frauenheim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13407–13413 RSC .
P. Lazar, R. Zboil, M. Pumera and M. Otyepka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14231–14235 RSC .
S. Naghdi, G. Sanchez-Arriaga and K. Y. Rhee, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 805, 1117–1134 CrossRef CAS .
P.-H. Shih, T.-N. Do, G. Gumbs and M.-F. Lin, Phys. E, 2019, 118, 113894 CrossRef .
Y. Bleu, F. Bourquard, V. Barnier, Y. Lefkir, S. Reynaud, A. S. Loir, F. Garrelie and C. Donnet, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 513, 145834 CrossRef .
X. Mao, G. Kour, L. Zhang, T. He, S. Wang, C. Yan, Z. Zhu and A. Du, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 6800–6807 RSC .
H. J. Cui, H. M. Yu, J. F. Zheng, Z. J. Wang, Y. Y. Zhu, S. P. Jia, J. Jia and Z. P. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2795–2803 RSC .
H. L. Poh, P. Šimek, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2655–2662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Toh, H. L. Poh, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 1295–1300 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bi, G. Luo, W. Li, J. Zhang, L. Wu, B. Li, G. Zeng and W. Wang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 170, 820 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, M. Chen, X. Zhang, W. Liu and Y. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 4043–4053 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800443 CrossRef .
H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Tang, L. Pan, M. Eguchi, J. Na and Y. Yamauchi, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100043 CrossRef .
F. Dong, Y. Cai, C. Liu, J. Liu and J. Qiao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 12661–12670 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
R. Kumar, S. Sahoo, E. Joanni, R. K. Singh, K. Maegawa, W. K. Tan, G. Kawamura, K. K. Kar and A. Matsuda, Mater. Today, 2020, 39, 47–65 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, K. Paeng and I. S. Kim, Synth. Met., 2018, 244, 36–47 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 RSC .
A. Omidvar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 202, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
L. Misseeuw, A. Krajewska, I. Pasternak, T. Ciuk, W. Strupinski, G. Reekmans, P. Adriaensens, D. Geldof, F. Blockhuys, S. Van Vlierberghe, H. Thienpont, P. Dubruel and N. Vermeulen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 104491–104501 RSC .
P. Hugo and M. Alexander, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 1842–1848 CrossRef .
E. Freire, J. Mendonça, S. Ullah, G. Junqueira and F. Sato, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2018, 53, 7516–7526 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akada, S. Obata and K. Saiki, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 16531–16535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. C. Goddeti, J. Y. Park and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8875–8878 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharma, J.-H. Jang, D. Y. Shin, J. A. Kwon, D.-H. Lim, D. Choi, H. Sung, J. Jang, S.-Y. Lee, K. Y. Lee, H.-Y. Park, N. Jung and S. J. Yoo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2200–2211 RSC .
H. Shin, H. Lim, H. Song, H. Shin, S. M. Park and H. C. Choi, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7183–7188 RSC .
A. Marinoiu, M. Raceanu, E. Carcadea and M. Varlam, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 456, 238–245 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hamdan, A. F. Kemper, C. Cao and H. P. Cheng, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 164702 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhan, B. Zhang, L. Cao, X. Wu, Z. Lin, X. Yu, X. Zhang, D. Zeng, F. Xie, W. Zhang, J. Chen and H. Meng, Carbon, 2015, 94, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hasani, M. A. Teklagne, H. H. Do, S. H. Hong, Q. Van Le, S. H. Ahn and S. Y. Kim, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 158–175 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mehta, W. Mu, M. Murugesan, Y. Jiao, Y. Fu, P. Hyldgaard and J. Liu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 5239–5252 CrossRef CAS .
K. Singh and V. Mittal, Electronics, 2016, 5, 91 CrossRef .
C. Chang, S. Yin and J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 13662–13668 RSC .
S.-H. Tai and B. K. Chang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 6035–6041 RSC .
C. Zhan, Y. Zhang, P. T. Cummings and D.-E. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4668–4674 RSC .
M. D. Esrafili, F. Sharifi and L. Dinparast, J. Mol. Graphics Modell., 2017, 77, 143–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou, D. Wu, Y. Mu, L. Xing, W. Zhang, Z. Gao, F. Xu and K. Jiang, Carbon, 2020, 159, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Zheng and Y. Wang, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 136, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Sofer, R. Zboril, K. Cepe and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 15444–15450 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schiros, D. Nordlund, L. Palova, L. Zhao, M. Levendorf, C. Jaye, D. Reichman, J. Park, M. Hybertsen and A. Pasupathy, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6574–6584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nankya, J. Lee, D. O. Opar and H. Jung, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 552–559 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Abdullah, H. O. Rashid, M. T. Kareem, C.-S. Tang, A. Manolescu and V. Gudmundsson, Phys. Lett. A, 2020, 384, 126350 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Kuzmin and B. A. Shainyan, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 15268–15279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-e. Park, Y. J. Jang, Y. J. Kim, M.-s. Song, S. Yoon, D. H. Kim and S.-j. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 16, 103–109 RSC .
Y. Li, C. He and L. Zhang, Solid State Commun., 2017, 267, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jin, J. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Qian and L. Lu, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 12103–12113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gursu, M. Gençten and Y. Sahin, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 3303–3314 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, J. Li, Q. Yuan, Q. Li, J. Zhang, L. Sun, D. Rui, Z. Chen, K. Jia, M. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. H. Rummeli, N. Kang, H. Q. Xu, F. Ding, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw8337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rani, G. S. Dubey and V. K. Jindal, Phys. E, 2014, 62, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jang, H. G. Kim and J. S. Lee, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 270–277 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Liu, J. Tang, Z. Zhang, X. Cao, M. Fang, Y. Xu, W. Zhu, Z. Wu and C. Li, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2018, 28, 1520–1527 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hassani, H. Tavakol, F. Keshavarzipour and A. Javaheri, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 27158–27163 RSC .
Z. Zhai, H. Shen, J. Chen, X. Li and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12038–12049 RSC .
J. F. Bao, N. Kishi and T. Soga, Mater. Lett., 2014, 117, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhushan, P. Kumar and A. K. Thakur, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 353, 115371 CrossRef CAS .
H. An, Y. Li, Y. Gao, C. Cao, J. Han, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Carbon, 2017, 116, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
B. Quan, A. Jin, S. H. Yu, S. M. Kang, J. Jeong, H. D. Abruña, L. Jin, Y. Piao and Y. E. Sung, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 17008800 Search PubMed .
V. K. Abdelkader-Fernández, M. Domingo-García, F. J. López-Garzón, D. M. Fernandes, C. Freire, M. D. López de La Torre, M. Melguizo, M. L. Godino-Salido and M. Pérez-Mendoza, Carbon, 2019, 144, 269–279 CrossRef .
D. A. C. Brownson, S. A. Varey, F. Hussain, S. J. Haigh and C. E. Banks, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1607 RSC .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wei, Q. Li, S. Cong, H. Ci, Y. Song, Q. Yang, C. Lu, C. Li, G. Zou, J. Sun, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4813–4822 RSC .
L. Cui, X. Chen, B. Liu, K. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. Qi, H. Xie, F. Zhou, M. H. Rümmeli, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Capasso, T. Dikonimos, F. Sarto, A. Tamburrano, G. De Bellis, M. S. Sarto, G. Faggio, A. Malara, G. Messina, N. Lisi and J. Lau, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 2028–2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, C. Christodoulou, M. V. Nardi, N. Koch, H. Sachdev and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. D. Ngidi, M. A. Ollengo and V. O. Nyamori, Materials, 2019, 12, 3376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jang, M. Son, S. Chung, K. Kim, C. Cho, B. H. Lee and M.-H. Ham, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17955 CrossRef CAS .
S. Naghdi, K. Y. Rhee and S. J. Park, Carbon, 2018, 127, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mohammad, T. Pall and A. S. John, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 4, 30 Search PubMed .
B. Quan, S.-H. Yu, D. Y. Chung, A. Jin, J. H. Park, Y.-E. Sung and Y. Piao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Krätschmer, L. D. Lamb, K. Fostiropoulos and D. R. Huffman, Nature, 1990, 347, 354–358 CrossRef .
Z.-H. Sheng, L. Shao, J.-J. Chen, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, J. Zhang, N. Li, C. Liu, Y. Zhou, X. Yu, L. Sun, Y. Song, S. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 3530–3537 CrossRef CAS .
S. Umrao, T. K. Gupta, S. Kumar, V. K. Singh, M. K. Sultania, J. H. Jung, I.-K. Oh and A. Srivastava, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19831 CrossRef CAS .
L. Keng-Te, L. Han, Y. Tieshan and J. Baohua, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Lin, B. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Zheng, A. Yu, M. Hong and B. Jia, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1033–1040 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, B. C. P. Sturmberg, K.-T. Lin, Y. Yang, X. Zheng, T. K. Chong, C. M. de Sterke and B. Jia, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, D. Yang, C. Lei, H. Lin and B. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2019, 442, 227224 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Wong, H. Lin, Y. Yang, J. Sunarso, B. T. Wong and B. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 228732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ju, M. Cunhua, Z. Shengjie, Y. Feng, D. Bin and Y. Dezheng, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1428 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Kumar, H. Nolan, N. McEvoy, E. Rezvani, R. L. Doyle, M. E. G. Lyons and G. S. Duesberg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4431–4435 RSC .
Y. Miao, Y. Ma and Q. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7597–7608 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Wong, J. Sunarso, B. T. Wong, H. Lin, A. Yu and B. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 182–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Liao, L. Yu, R. Lv, P. Li, W. Sun, R. Tan, X. Duan, L. Zhang, F. Li, J. Kim, K. H. Shin, H. Seok Park, W. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Tang, G. Gorgolis, C. Galiotis and J. Ma, Chem.–Asian J., 2020, 15, 995–1013 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jain and B. Kandasubramanian, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 1865–1903 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1554–1568 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, G. Han and Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5943–5955 RSC .
Y.-H. Hung, D. Dutta, C.-J. Tseng, J.-K. Chang, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C.-Y. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 22202–22211 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, C. Xiao, Y. Xiao, X. Lin, Y. Chen, B. Gao and B. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 12318–12330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bao, J. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Xue, C. Guo and Y. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 4961–4969 RSC .
L. M. Rivera-Gavidia, M. Luis-Sunga, M. Bousa, V. Vales, M. Kalbac, M. C. Arévalo, E. Pastor and G. García, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 340, 135975 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali and P. K. Shen, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 99–121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, S. Yang, K. Qian, W. Wei, C. Sun and J. Xie, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 29, 129–135 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, J. Sun, S. Li, C. Huang, W. Yao, W. Chen, T. Zeng, Q. Wu and Q. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11863–11874 CrossRef CAS .
D. Haifeng, L. Conghui, Y. Haitao, H. Linping, F. Bunshi, D. Wenhao, C. Yu, Q. Xueqiang, L. Huiting and Z. Xueji, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17542 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Woldetinsay, T. Refera, F. Olu and T. Maiyalagan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 251, 123106 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chu, F. Wang, X.-L. Zhao, X.-P. Wei, X.-W. Wang and Y. Tian, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 1155–1162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Xiang and L. Hong, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 6467–6473 RSC .
S. A. Shah, L. Cui, K. Lin, T. Xue, Q. Guo, L. Li, L. Zhang, F. Zhang, F. Hu, X. Wang, H. Wang, X. Chen and S. Cui, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 29230–29237 RSC .
Y. Luan, R. Hu, Y. Fang, K. Zhu, K. Cheng, J. Yan, K. Ye, G. Wang and D. Cao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. Dou and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042–2048 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, A. Guan, Z. Gu, P. Han, L. Qian and G. Zheng, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2324–2329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13296–13300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, L. Zeng, C. Liu, D. Zeng, Z. Liu, X. Liu, X. Zhong, W. Guo and L. Li, Small, 2018, 14, 1803143 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Varga, G. Ballai, L. Vásárhelyi, H. Haspel, Á. Kukovecz and Z. Kónya, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 826–834 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, G. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Bi, L. Dai and Z. Wen, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 393–402 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, J. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Fang, K. Ming, H. Huang, J. Chen and X. Wang, R. Soc. Open Sci., 2018, 5, 180925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Yin, H. Shen, H. Jiang, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, D. Li, W. Li and J. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 20687–20695 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Z. Wei, X. Gou and W. Xu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9978–9984 RSC .
M. D. Bhatt, G. Lee and J. S. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 619–627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gautam, T. D. Thanh, K. Maiti, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Carbon, 2018, 137, 358–367 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Nguyen, M. H. Nguyen and Q. B. Bui, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 780, 734–742 CrossRef CAS .
T. Patniboon and H. A. Hansen, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 996–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Barakat, A. El-Deen, Z. Ghouri and S. Al-Meer, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3757 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, F. Qi, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, B. Zheng and X. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 2018, 53, 7767–7777 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Z. Wang, S. Kang, L. Zhao, Z. Jiang and M. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1738–1747 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guan, J. Ma, K. Li, J. Liang, Z. Li, W. Peng, G. Zhang, X. Fan, F. Zhang and Y. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 30053–30061 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Jian, J. Liu, S. Guo, C. Zhou, P. Zhang, Y. Yang and L. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 4435–4443 CrossRef CAS .
T. Guo, L. Wang, S. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Chen, K. Zhang, D. Zhang, Z. Xue and X. Zhou, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 1253–1260 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Cheng, K. Zhang, D. Chen, D. Shen, S. Wu, T. Jiao, X. Kong, Q. Gao, S. Bu and W. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1901545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, X. Shen, G. Zhu, H. Zhou, Z. Ji, L. Ma, K. Xu, J. Yang and A. Yuan, Carbon, 2017, 116, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
L. An, W. Zhang, W. Ma, S. Wang, L. Ma, Q. Liu, J. Guo and X. Zhang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 104, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jiang, F. Liao, Y. Sun, Y. Cheng and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10138–10144 RSC .
A. Kagkoura, M. Pelaez-Fernandez, R. Arenal and N. Tagmatarchis, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1489–1496 RSC .
X. Guo, Y. Zhu, W. Han, X. Fan, Y. Li, F. Zhang, G. Zhang, W. Peng and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 194, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shinde, A. Sami, D.-H. Kim and J.-H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15716–15719 RSC .
X. Cui, R. Huang and D. Deng, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100050 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, Y. Tian, L. Yan and Z. Su, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 11824–11828 RSC .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, G.-P. Hao, A. Varela, I. Sinev, V. Bon, B. Roldan Cuenya, S. Kaskel, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 944 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Su, K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, Small, 2016, 12, 6083–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, H. J. Qiu, T. Fujita, Y. Tanabe, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4145–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Ge, L. Wang, D. Wang, F. Ding, X. Tao and W. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2771 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Liang, L. Wan, Z. Xie, C. D. Easton, L. Bourgeois, Z. Wang, Q. Bao, Y. Zhu, S. Tao and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 194, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Sheng, H.-L. Gao, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, M. Choi, J.-M. Seo, S.-M. Jung, M.-J. Kim, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, L. Dai, N. Park and J.-B. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1810 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Niu and W. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 505, 32–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, J. Li, Y. Chen and J. Chen, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 9389–9395 RSC .
Y. Zhan, J. Huang, Z. Lin, X. Yu, D. Zeng, X. Zhang, F. Xie, W. Zhang, J. Chen and H. Meng, Carbon, 2015, 95, 930–939 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Li, H. Wang, K. He, S. Wang, Y. Tang and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 640–648 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luque-Centeno, M. V. Martínez-Huerta, D. Sebastián, J. I. Pardo and M. J. Lázaro, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135396 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sookhakian, H. Ullah, M. A. Mat Teridi, G. B. Tong, W. J. Basirun and Y. Alias, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 737–749 RSC .
N. Sreekanth, M. A. Nazrulla, T. V. Vineesh, K. Sailaja and K. L. Phani, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16061–16064 RSC .
J. Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, R. M. Yadav, L. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Yang, X. Huang, L. Liu, W. Cai, J. Gao, X. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800499 CrossRef .
M. Hossain, J. Wen and A. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3184 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, S. Ma, J. Sun, J. Gold, C. Tiwary, B. Kim, L. Zhu, N. Chopra, I. Odeh, R. Vajtai, A. Yu, R. Luo, J. Lou, G. Ding, P. J. Kenis and P. Ajayan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, T. Liu, S. O. Olanrele, Z. Lian, C. Si, Z. Chen and B. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 54, 143–150 CrossRef .
F. Pan, B. Li, W. Deng, Z. Du, Y. Gang, G. Wang and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 252, 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, H. Li, S. He, J.-P. Veder, B. Johannessen, J. Xiao, S. Lu, J. Pan, M. F. Chisholm, S.-Z. Yang, C. Liu, J. G. Chen and S. P. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Y. Wang, J. Liu, K. Huang, Y. Chen, Y. Li and J.-J. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 946–951 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bi, X. Li, R. You, M. Chen, R. Yuan, W. Huang, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706617 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, Z. Tao, F. Feng, B. He, W. Zhou, J. Sun, J. Xu, Q. Wang and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135563 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Zuo, W. Pan and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 441–449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 559, 169–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Guo, G. Yue, Q. Hu and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Guo, Y. Wei, Q. Hu, X. Yu and L. Wang, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 166–170 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, B. Li, E. Sarnello, Y. Fei, Y. Gang, X. Xiang, Z. Du, P. Zhang, G. Wang, H. T. Nguyen, T. Li, Y. H. Hu, H.-C. Zhou and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804950 CrossRef .
M. Zheng, Y. Chi, Q. Hu, H. Tang, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, S. Zhang, H. Pang and Q. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17204–17241 RSC .
L. Qie, W. Chen, Z. Wang, Q. Shao, X. Li, L. X. Yuan, X. L. Hu, W. Zhang and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2047–2050 CrossRef .
M. M. Islam, C. M. Subramaniyam, T. Akhter, S. N. Faisal, A. I. Minett, H. K. Liu, K. Konstantinov and S. X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5290–5302 RSC .
X. Jiao, X. Xia, P. Liu, W. Lei, Y. Ouyang and Q. Hao, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 315403 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Guo and N. Pinna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1423–1431 RSC .
Z.-Y. Sui, C. Wang, Q.-S. Yang, K. Shu, Y.-W. Liu, B.-H. Han and G. G. Wallace, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18229–18237 RSC .
M. Sahoo, K. P. Sreena, B. P. Vinayan and S. Ramaprabhu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 61, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bindumadhavan, P.-Y. Chang and R.-a. Doong, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 243, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, J. Li, K. Qi, X. Ge, Q. Zhang and B. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 433, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, X. Xiong, J. Zheng, G. Wang and C. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 202, 123–126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Li, F. M. Hassan, J. Li, X. Fan, R. Batmaz, X. Xiao and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 746–754 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Li, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and D. Li, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 4886 CrossRef PubMed .
A. E. Noha, J. E. Nady, W. Wazeer and A. B. Kashyout, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. Sun, L. Wang, C. Tian, T. Tan, Y. Xie, K. Shi, M. Li and H. Fu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4498–4506 RSC .
Z. Ling, Z. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Dong, S. Liu, Y. Wang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, X. Xu, Y. Chen, X. Wang, L. Sun and K. Zhuo, Green Energy Environ, 2020, 5, 69–75 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Z. Lu and K. Zhuo, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xia, Z. Huang, L. Zheng, B. Han, Q. Gao, C. Zhou, H. Wang and J. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 365, 380–388 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Huang, F.-F. Sun, M. Batmunkh, W.-H. Li, H. Li, Y. Sun, Q. Zhao, X. Liu and T.-Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11826–11835 RSC .
J.-C. Liu, H. Li, M. Batmunkh, X. Xiao, Y. Sun, Q. Zhao, X. Liu, Z.-H. Huang and T.-Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23941–23948 RSC .
Q. Li, S. Qiu and B. Jia, Front. Phys., 2020, 16, 13503 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Wei, Q. Li, S. Zheng, Y. Xu, P. Du, C. Chen, J. Zhao, H. Xue, Q. Xu and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800886 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, X. Yu, F. Yan, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12046–12053 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the mechanisms, structures, properties and synthesis of doped graphene in energy conversion and storage applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Number of publications extracted from a Web of Science search for “title” with “doped graphene” as keywords (accessed on 29/01/2021).	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of the energy diagram of (a) p-type doped graphene and expanded work function; (b) n-type doped graphene and reduced work function. Structure of doped-graphene by: (c) substitutional doping; (d) p-type surface transfer doping; (e) n-type surface transfer doping.	 

B	3	0.88	2.0	1.49	BC3, BC2O, and BCO2	
104 and 105

C	4	0.77	2.5	1.42	—	—
Si	4	1.17	1.8	1.75	Single Si atom and Si chain at graphene edges	
68 and 106

P	5	1.10	2.1	1.76	PC3G, PC4G, OPC3G, OPC4G	
6

S	5	1.04	2.5	1.75	Adsorbed-S, graphitic-S, pyridinic-S, pyrrolic-S	
107 and 108

N	5	0.74	3.0	1.41	Graphitic-N, pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, nitrilic-N, oxidized-N	
4 and 105

F	7	0.71	4.0	1.36	Covalent and semi-ionic C–F	
109

Cl	7	0.99	3.0	1.77	−C–Cl, −ClO3, −ClO4	
110


 	Fig. 4  Four P configurations of P-doped graphene. Top and side views of P configurations: (a) PC3G, (b) OPC3G, (c) PC4G, and (d) OPC4G; (e) comparison of the binding energy, formation energy, conductivity and ΔGRDS of four P configurations adapted with permission from (ref. 6). Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Five N configurations: graphitic-N, pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, nitrilic-N and oxidized-N.4 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) ORR mechanism of N-doped graphene with a dominant pyridinic-N (pyridinic-N) configuration.23 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) N configurations depending on selected precursors.15 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) N configurations depending on CVD operation temperature.45 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Intercalation of iodine atoms in few-layer graphene sheets.12 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) six adsorption sites of Br and Br2 in graphene.24 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) Au-doped graphene based on charge transfer interaction (CT).38 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) the structure and morphology of Ru/N-doped graphene. Ru cations adsorb into the graphene structure via interaction with oxygen functional groups. O2 then converts to water.46 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 7  Morphology, structure, and compositions of doped graphene. (a) SEM image of S/N co-doped graphene (A), N-doped graphene (B), and S-doped graphene (C).3 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) N2 adsorption deposition isotherms; (c) pore size distributions; (d) comparison of the C/O ratio in S/N co-doped graphene, N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene and undoped rGO.20 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 8  Nyquist diagrams of: (a) N-doped graphene (N-GP) and undoped graphene (GP).2 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) N-doped graphene under different pressure conditions (200, 400, and 600 kPa).18 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) B/N dual-doped graphene compared to mono-doped and undoped graphene.34 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) comparison of the electrical properties of N,S-codoped graphene, N-doped graphene, S-doped graphene and rGO.20 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 9  Absorption spectra of: (a) B-doped GO (BR-GO) and GO.10 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) N-doped graphene (NG), B-doped graphene, NB co-doped graphene (NBG) and GO.21 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. Quantum efficiency of: (c) B-doped graphene.36 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) N-doped graphene (NG), B-doped graphene (BG), and NB dual-doped graphene (NBG).21 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 



CVD	Ethanol	Methylamine	1040 °C, 470 Pa	✓	
	1.7 at% N	Smart window	
125

Pyridine (single precursor)	930 °C	✓	
	3 at% N	Solar cell	
126

1,3,5-Triazine (single precursor)	700–900 °C	✓	
	5.6 at% N	—	
16

Solvothermal/hydrothermal	GO solution	KI	200 °C, 12 h	✓	
	0.52 at% I	HER	
160

GO solution	DMSOa	180 °C, 18 h	✓	
	5.3 at% S	ORR	
9

GO solution	AgNO3, urea, thiourea	120 °C, 10 h	✓	✓	7.3 wt% N, 1.82 wt% S, 34.27 wt% Ag	Supercapacitor	
42

Graphene	B2O3, NH3	180 °C, 12 h	✓	
	19.8 at% B, 11.7 at% N	Supercapacitor	
118

Arc discharge	Pure graphite	SiO2, N2	55–65 A, 10–25 A, 90 s	✓	
	5.91 at% Si, 4.38 at% N	Energy storage and conversion	
162

GO powder	Polyaniline	150 A, 30 V	✓	
	3.5 at% N	Supercapacitor	
44

Pure graphite	(NH4)3PO4	120 A, 15 V, <1 Pa	✓	
	3.2 at% N, 1.3 at% P	Capacitor	
163

Thermal treatment	GO solution	B2O3	1000 °C	✓	
	6.04 at% B	Supercapacitor	
7

GO slurry	I2	950 °C, 1 h	
	✓	0.06 at% I	Lithium-ion battery	
92

GO foam	NH3	800 °C, 1 h	✓	
	6.8 at% N	Sodium-ion battery	
164

GO solution	DMF,b NH3	800 °C, 1 h	✓	
	6.0 at% N	CO2 reduction	
165

GO solution	Polyaniline, AHFc	950 °C, 1 h	✓	
	7.11 at% N, 0.37 at% P, 0.33 at% F	HER, OER, ORR	
166

Flash heating	GO solution	Melamine	1500 °C, a few milliseconds, xenon lamp: 0.7–14 μm, 0.16–1.5 kJ cm−2	✓	
	26 at% N	Energy storage	
43

Laser photoreduction	GO solution	Urea	3.2 W, 70 mm s−1, 10.64 μm	✓	
	6.37 at% N	Supercapacitor	
49

PBI,d DMSO (single precursor)	100 mm s−1, 355 nm UV laser	✓	
	N, S	Lithium-ion battery	
167

Plasma treatment	GO solution	Boric acid	3 min, 80 V, 1.6 A	✓	
	1.4 at% B	Supercapacitor	
33

GO solution	(NH4)2CO3	10 min, 60 V, 1.5 A	✓	
	5.26 at% N	ORR	
48

Chemical treatment	GO solution	NaSH·xH2O	Room temperature, 10 min	✓	
	2.5 wt% S	HER, ORR, OER	
8

GO solution	C5H7N3	110 °C, 24 h	✓	
	3.27–15.28 wt% N	ORR	
27

GO solution	H3BO3, AgNO3	B-doping at 700 °C for 4h, followed by Ag-doping via chemical treatment	
	✓	B, Ag	Lithium-ion battery	
233


 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the common CVD setup for the synthesis of doped graphene; (b) CVD-derived N-doped graphene with a 1,3,5-triazine precursor.16 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) CVD-derived N-doped graphene on a Cu substrate with a pyridine precursor.28 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) experimental setup of HFCVD.40 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (e) experimental setup of PECVD.47 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of solvothermal reflux synthesis for doped graphene; (b) solvothermal synthesis of S-doped rGO. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2017, Elsevier; (c) hydrothermal synthesis of Co–Ni pyrophosphates/N-doped graphene at 140 °C. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of experimental arc discharge synthesis.1 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) schematic illustration of arc discharge synthesis of F-doped graphene sheets (120 A, 15–15 V).22 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) arc discharge synthesis of B/N doped graphene quantum dots.37 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) arc discharge synthesis of N-doped graphene flakes.44 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagrams of thermal treatment methods to prepare doped graphene. (a) Thermal annealing of B-doped graphene nanoplatelets at 1000.7 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) thermal annealing of the Co–S/NS-rGO composite at 400–600 °C.19 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) microwave-assisted thermal annealing of B,N co-doped graphene.35 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) synthesis processes of N-doped graphene through flash heating (FH-NrGO) and normal thermal heating (TH-NrGO) (left); and the dependence of N content on treatment temperature (right).43 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (e) Direct laser writing of N-doped graphene oxide.49 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the doping mechanism of N-doped graphene using NH3 plasma treatment: (1) the interaction between plasma species and defects; (2) the formation of graphitic-N and pyrrolic-N configurations; (3) the transformation of pyrrolic-N into pyridinic-N.15 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (b) schematic of plasma treatment synthesis of B-rGO.33 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) schematic diagram of a radio frequency plasma chemical reactor to prepare N-doped graphene.41 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (d) experimental setup and synthesis of N-PEGO by DBD plasma technology.48 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Digital image of a mixture of GO and NaSH·xH2O after 10 min, 1 h, 1 day and 7 days. Various mass ratios of NaSH·xH2O and GO are indicated with a blue line; (b) doping mechanism of S-doped rGO by chemical treatment of GO with NaSH·xH2O.8 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) schematic illustration of chemical treatment between GO and 2,3-diaminopyridine to synthesize N-doped graphene.27 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of energy conversion and storage applications using doped graphene, namely hydrogen generation, fuel cells, CO2 reduction, secondary batteries and supercapacitors.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Hydrogen production rate of pristine GQDs and 2N-GQDs using 2 g urea as the N precursor in photocatalysis; (b) chronoamperometry scans (I–t curves) of pristine GQDs and five N-GQDs under irradiation.5 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (c) polarization curves; (d) Tafel plots of GO, SG, SG-P, and normal Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 5 mV s−1; (e) illustration of synthesis of S-doped graphene (SG-P) by plasma etching.25 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 



Pristine graphene	—	—	—	746	263	
25

S-Doped graphene	S	✓	
	423	148	
25

P,N co-doped graphene	N, P	✓	
	379.73	125.5	
150

MoS2/P-rGO	P, S, Mo	✓	✓	300	35	
73

I-Doped graphene	I	✓	
	245	96	
160

S-Doped graphene	S	✓	
	218	97	
179

S-Doped graphene	S	✓	
	178	86	
25

CoSe2/N-rGO	N, Co, Se	✓	✓	172	35.2	
180

CoP-CNT/N-doped graphene	N, P, Co	✓	✓	155	69.1	
181

P-Doped/Fe3O4 on 3D graphene	P, Fe	✓	✓	123	65	
182

MoS2/N-rGO	N, S, Mo	✓	✓	112	44	
158

MoS2/graphene functionalized N-GQDs	N, S, Mo	✓	✓	99	49.3	
183

PtNi/N-rGO	N, Pt, Ni	✓	✓	98	42.7	
152

Ni3Cu1/N-doped graphene	N, Ni, Cu	✓	✓	95	77.1	
184

NiFe/N-doped graphene microtube	N, Ni, Fe	✓	✓	70.5	63.4	
185

CoRu/N-doped graphene	N, P, Co, Ru	✓	✓	52	38	
186

Ni-Doped graphene	Ni	
	✓	50	45	
187

Commercial Pt/C (20 wt%)	—	—	—	38	34	
25

Pt nanocrystals/N-doped graphene	N, Pt	✓	✓	24	28	
188

S-Doped graphene/WS2	S, W	✓	✓	0.25	53	
189

Pd/MoS2/N,S-rGO	N, S, Pd, Mo	✓	✓	−42	38	
159

N-GQDs/graphene foam	N	✓	
	−72	84	
190

SnS/N-doped graphene	N, S, Sn	✓	✓	−125	38	
191




N-Doped graphene frameworks	N	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.98	3.9	
69

N-Doped graphene	N	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	−0.08	3.9	
196

N-Doped graphene	N	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	−0.13	3.7	
197

N-Doped graphene layers	N	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.98	3.5	
198

B-Doped graphene	B	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	−0.05	3.5	
199

P-Doped graphene	P	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.92	3.0–3.8	
200

I-Doped graphene	I	
	✓	Ag/AgCl	KOH	−0.14	3.9	
201

F-Doped graphene	F	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.991	3.95–4.01	
171

N/S dual-doped graphene	N, S	✓	
	Hg/HgO	KOH	−0.015	3.5	
14

N/S dual-doped graphene	N, S	✓	
	Hg/HgO	KOH	0.09	3.47–3.72	
202

N/S dual-doped graphene	N, S	✓	
	Ag/AgCl	PBS	−0.12 [mV]	3.75	
203

I/N-doped graphene	N, I	✓	✓	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.945	4.51	
204

Co4N/N-doped graphene	N, Co	✓	✓	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.91	3.6	
168

Fe3C/Fe/N-graphene	N, Fe	✓	✓	Hg/HgO	KOH	0.003	3.6	
58

B/N/P-doped graphene foam	N, B, P	✓	
	Calomel	KOH	0.88	3.5	
77

B/N/P/Fe-doped graphene foam	N, B, P, Fe	✓	✓	Calomel	KOH	0.95	3.8	
77

Co–S/N,S-rGO	N, S, Co	✓	✓	Hydrogen	KOH	0.979	3.61–3.79	
19

NiFe/N-doped graphene	N, Ni, Fe	✓	✓	Ag/AgCl	H2SO4	0.825 vs. NHEb	3.46	
178

NiCo2O4/N-doped rGO	N, Ni, Co	✓	✓	Calomel	KOH	−0.12	3.93	
205

CoTiO3/N-doped rGO	N, Co, Ti	✓	✓	Hydrogen	NaOH	0.93	3.5	
206

CoFe carbide/N-doped graphene	N, Co, Fe	✓	✓	Ag/AgCl	KOH	−0.04	3.65–3.83	
175

MnO2/B-doped graphene nanosheets	B, Mn	✓	✓	Ag/AgCl	KOH	0.96	3.75	
207


 	Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of synthesis of SN-rGO via chemical treatment; (b) ORR polarization curve of rGO, S-rGO, N-rGO, SN-rGO, and Pt/C (10%) in oxygen saturated solution at 1600 rpm with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1; (c) plot of kinetic current density (at −0.6 V) for S-rGO, N-rGO, SN-rGO and Pt/C catalysts; (d) the electron transfer number and the content of the generated HO2− intermediate during the ORR process.14 Reproduced with permission from the publisher; (e) illustration of fabrication of the Fe3C/NG catalyst via thermal treatment at ≥700 °C; (f) LSV curves illustrating the stability of Fe3C/NG before and after 3000 cycles for the ORR in oxygen-saturated 0.1 M KOH; (g) Tafel plot of Fe3C/NG, NG thermal-treated at 800 °C and Pt/C catalysts.29 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic synthesis of the Fe/Ni-doped graphene catalyst; (b) chronoamperometric curves showing faradaic efficiency towards major CO products and the stability of Fe/N-doped graphene in CO2-saturated KHCO3 (0.1 M); (c) Gibb free energy diagrams illustrating the CRR mechanism of the Fe/N-doped graphene catalyst (* indicates absorption sites).17 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 



N-Doped carbon	N	✓	
	KHCO3	CO	138	−0.58	92	16	
165

B-Doped graphene	B	✓	
	KHCO3	HCOOH	—	−1.4 (vs. SCE)b	66	4	
208

N-Doped graphene foam	N	✓	
	KHCO3	CO	222	−0.19	85	5	
209

N-Doped graphene nanoribbons	N	✓	
	KHCO3	CO	129.8	100 mV	87.6	10	
210

Cu-rGO	Cu	
	✓	NaHCO3	CO	—	−0.4	21.7	15	
211

Ni–N-Gr	N, Ni	✓	✓	KHCO3	CO	126	−0.5	90	5	
195

N-Doped GQDs	N	✓	
	KOH	C2H4, C2H5OH, CO, HCOO−, CH4	198	—	90	—	
212

N,P-Doped graphene	N, P	✓	
	NaHCO3	CO	122	−0.38	92	24	
213

N,S-Doped graphene	N, S	✓	
	KHCO3	CO	94	−0.6	91	20	
214

Ni/N-doped graphene	N, Ni	✓	✓	KHCO3	CO	110	−0.5	95	20	
215

Ni/N-doped GO	N, Ni	✓	✓	KHCO3	CO	—	0.18	89	21	
216

Au/N-doped GQDs	N, Au	✓	✓	KHCO3	CO	109	−0.15	93	24	
217

Ni2+/N-doped graphene	N, Ni	✓	✓	KHCO3	CO	142	−0.68	92	20	
218

Bi/N-doped graphene	N, Bi	✓	✓	KHCO3	HCOO−	119	−1.5 (vs. SCE)	92	20	
219

SnO2/N-doped rGO	N, Sn	✓	✓	NaHCO3	HCOO−, CO	
	−0.48	89	20	
220

Fe/B, N-doped graphene	N, B, Fe	✓	✓	KHCO3	HCOOH	73	−0.33 (vs. NHE)c	94	1.1	
221

Co/N-doped graphene	N, Co	✓	✓	NaHCO3	CH3OH	—	−0.7 (vs. SCE)	71.4	10	
222

Sn/N-doped graphene	N, Sn	✓	✓	KHCO3	HCOO−	84	−0.45	92	5	
223

Fe–N/CNT@GNR	N, Fe	✓	✓	KHCO3	CO	118	−0.3	98	5	
224




Lithium-ion batteries

S-Doped graphene	5.3 at% S	✓	
	Chemical treatment	537	1697	0.1	—	—	
228

I-Doped rGO	0.06	
	✓	Thermal treatment	—	1690	0.1	92.6	200	
92

N-Doped graphene particles	2.1 at% N	✓	
	CVD	768	774	0.44	>99	500	
13

N-Carbon/rGO	15.4 wt% N	✓	
	Thermal annealing	327	1100	0.1	60.8	200	
230

N-G carbon nanofiber webs	16 wt% N	✓	
	Chemical treatment	2381	943	2	100	600	
227

F-Doped graphene	19.17 at% F	✓	
	Arc-discharge	454.7	783.2	0.1	>91	1000	
22

N-Doped graphene	5.8 at% N	✓	
	Thermal annealing	1170	672	0.1	100	200	
231

B-Doped graphene	5.93 at% B	✓	
	Hydrothermal	213.68	548	0.1	∼76	30	
232

Ag/B-doped graphene	—	✓	✓	Chemical treatment	—	540	0.1	100	100	
233

P-Doped graphene	1.81	
	
	Thermal annealing	—	460	0.1	100	80	
200

S,N-G/Si	5.07 at% S, 2.36 at% N	✓	✓	Hydrothermal	226	2020	0.4	97	100	
234



Sodium-ion batteries

N-Doped graphene foam	6.8 at% N	✓	
	Thermal annealing	357	852.6	0.5	69.7	150	
164

S-Doped graphene	5.3 at% S	✓	
	Chemical treatment	537	472	0.05	—	—	
228

N-Doped graphene	8.9 wt% N	✓	
	Thermal annealing	652.3	405	0.05	100	3700	
235

S-Doped graphene	21.8 wt% S	✓	
	Solvothermal	308	380	0.1	100	1000	
120

S-Doped graphene	2.52 at% S	✓	
	Flash heat treatment	280	291	1	80	200	
236

N-Doped rGO aerogels	—	✓	
	Hydrothermal, annealing	316	287.9	0.1	98.6	200	
237

F,N-Doped graphene paper	1.54 at% F, 3.02 at% N	✓	
	Solvothermal	—	203	0.05	95	100	
119


 	Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of CVD synthesis of high-quality N-doped graphene for LIBs; (b) cycle-life performance of HNMG, NMG and graphite at 1C over 500 cycles (mass loading of 1 mg cm−2); (c) rate performance of HNMG, NMG and graphite from 0.2 to 60C.13 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (d) Sodium adsorption energy of graphene, N-doped graphene and N,S-co-doped graphene in SIBs; (e) geometric configuration of graphene, N-doped graphene and N,S-co-doped graphene with Na+ ion adsorption; (f) cycle-life stability of N,S-co-doped graphene over 10000 cycles at 1 A g−1; (g) illustration of a sodium-ion cell using the N,S-co-doped graphene anode.32 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 




Mono-doped graphene

B-G nanoplatelets	6.04 at% B	Thermal annealing	✓	
	KOH	122.4	448	—	100	3000	—	
7

B-rGO	1.4 at% B	Plasma treatment	✓	
	KOH	276.7	446.24	0.5	—	—	—	
33

3D sponge NG	2.5 at% N	Thermal annealing	✓	
	KOH	702	405	1	87.7	5000	68.1	
238

3D porous N-G	—	Hydrothermal	✓	
	BMIMBF4	203	390	1	96.6	20000	55	
211

N-G nanosheets	10.13 at% N	Hydrothermal	✓	
	KOH	593	326	0.2	99.58	2000	25.02	
239

F-G aerogels	4.5 at% F	Hydrothermal	✓	
	KOH	312.6	279.8	0.5	94.3	5000	26.2	
109



Co-Doped graphene

Ag/N/S-rGO	7.23 wt% N, 1.82 wt% S, 34.27 wt% Ag	Hydrothermal	✓	✓	KOH	294.8	1010.6	—	90.5	10000	40.69	
42

B/N-HGAa	4.15 at% N, 9.17 at% B	Hydrothermal	✓	
	H2SO4	249	456	1	75	10000	—	
100

N/S-GHPCFb	6.67 at% N, 2.08 at% S	Thermal annealing	✓	
	KOH	2279.2	405	1	98.8	10000	18.4	
30

B/N-G	19.8 at% N, 11.7 at% B	Solvothermal	✓	
	KCl	—	368	3	98	5000	170	
118

B/N-carbon nanosheets	8.6 at% N, 3.3 at% B	Thermal annealing	✓	
	H2SO4	416	358	0.1	105	10000	—	
240

B/N-rGO	2.69 at% N, 1.41 at% B	Plasma treatment	✓	
	KOH	269.48	350	0.5	—	—	—	
34

P/N-G	3.59 at% N, 2.37 at% P	Hydrothermal	✓	
	Li2SO4	321	348	1	91.4	20000	34.7	
50

N/S-rGO	11.9 at% N 4.25 at% S	Plasma treatment	✓	
	KOH	218.57	307.4	1	83	10000	9.33	
144

N/S-G aerogels	5.4 at% N, 1.1 at% S	Solvothermal	✓	
	[Emim]BF4	146	169.4	1	77.2	3000	84.5	
241

N/S-G aerogels	5.24 at% N, 0.52 at% S	Solvothermal	✓	
	BMIMBF4	242.5	203.2	1	90	3000	100.7	
242


 	Fig. 21  (a) SEM image of N-rGO prepared by a hydrothermal method; (b) specific capacitance of rGO and N-rGO at 1 A g−1; (c) cycle life of a capacitor using the N-rGO electrode (at 10 A g−1).11 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (d) SEM image of N/S-GHPCF; (e) specific capacitance of N/S-GHPCF, HPCF, N/S-HPCF and N-GHPCF; (f) stability of a capacitor using the N/S-GHPCF electrode (at 10 A g−1); inset of (f) illustrates the GCD curves of N/S-GHPCF for 10 cycles.30 Reproduced with permission from the publisher. (g) FESEM image of Ag/N/S-rGO35 (35 wt% Ag) prepared by a hydrothermal method; (h) specific capacitance of Ag/N/S-rGO35, rGO, Ag-rGO, and Ag/N-rGO. (i) Cycle life of a capacitor using the Ag/N/S-rGO electrode (at 10 A g−1); insets of (i) illustrate GCD curves for 10000 cycles (left) and a LED lit by the capacitor having the Ag/N/S-rGO electrode (right).42 Reproduced with permission from the publisher.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
