3D printed graphene/nickel electrodes for high areal capacitance electrochemical storage    - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA11121A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA11121A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4055-40623D printed graphene/nickel electrodes for high areal capacitance electrochemical storage†‡

        
          
            Guijun 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyong 
            Mo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wing-Cheung 
            Law
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kang Cheung 
            Chan
          
        
      *
      Advanced Manufacturing Technology Research Centre, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. E-mail: kc.chan@polyu.edu.hk
Received 
      20th November 2018
    , Accepted 14th January 2019First published on 24th January 2019AbstractConsumer grade supercapacitors as power supply resources require outstanding electrode materials with large conductivity, high durability and retention rates, as well as large capacity. Graphene is a promising functional material as an electrical double layer capacitance electrode due to its large surface area, high chemical stability and moderate conductivity. However, the existing graphene synthesis methods, including CVD and chemical exfoliation, are limited to lab scale production. Although laser induced graphene has demonstrated outstanding performance as an electrode material for microsupercapacitors, its difficulty to attach to the metallic current collector limits its application as a large capacity electrode material. Herein, laser induced forward transfer of graphene is developed for additively depositing laser induced graphene onto nickel foam as a composite electrode. The laser annealing enhanced the lattice matching between the extended Basal plane of graphene and Ni (111) resulting in its high electrical conductivity (359712 S m−1), high retention rate (over 98% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles), and large areal specific capacitance (995 mF cm−2) and power density (9.39 mW cm−2). The assembled supercapacitors with these additively printed electrodes can work as a USB charger with a stable 5 V output voltage, for charging smart phones and other smart devices.
Introduction
Although the development of mobile devices (such as mobile phones, smart watches, wearable sensors, RFID tags and other portable devices) is booming, the technologies of the powering units for such devices are progressing slowly.1 The long charging duration, up to hours, usually leads to an unsatisfactory user experience. Although power banks can partially solve the slow charging issues by charging the devices during use, these power banks themselves, usually made of batteries, need a rather long charging time.2 Compared to batteries, supercapacitors are energy storage devices with fast charging features. Instead of utilizing the faradaic redox reaction, like batteries, supercapacitors make use of the electrical double layer capacitance (EDLC) for storing energy.3 The electrostatic Helmholtz double layer at the electrolyte and electrode interface ensures the fast charging of supercapacitors. The porous structures of electrode materials are crucial for supercapacitors, and the recently developed novel carbon-based materials have demonstrated outstanding performance as supercapacitor electrodes.4–7
Laser-induced graphene (LIG) has been intensively studied in regard to its application in supercapacitor electrodes during the past four years, due to one-step easy processing and roll-to-roll manufacturing compatibility.8 Although these LIG supercapacitors have demonstrated high performance in micro-supercapacitor applications, their inner resistances increase significantly when used as larger capacitance devices due to the relatively poor conductivity of semiconducting graphene compared to that of metals. Common metal current collectors can barely come into contact with LIG electrodes (due to the remaining insulating polyimide beneath the LIG), so only silver paste can be applied to such microsupercapacitors for in-lab demonstration.9 For optimizing supercapacitor electrodes with low resistance and high volume, composite electrodes with carbon active material and metal current collector architectures are usually used.10 Ultrahigh power density was achieved with onion-like carbon on patterned gold current collectors on silicon wafers.11 Monolithic carbide-derived carbon supercapacitors have also been fabricated with patterned gold current collectors.12 Furthermore, nickel also possesses high performance with significantly low cost, and has been intensively studied as a current collector and electrode for supercapacitor and battery applications.13–17 For achieving high performance, a fast charging graphene supercapacitor has been fabricated with CVD grown graphene on a nickel substrate.18
Laser induced forward transfer (LIFT) is a novel type of 3D printing, enabling high resolution printing of functional materials onto desired locations.19 Recently, we developed a continuous wave (CW) LIFT method for simultaneous photosynthesis and additive deposition of copper onto various substrates.20 We also demonstrated the capability of using a 1064 nm CW laser for fabricating graphene Janus wetting membranes for solar-driven desalination.21 By artificially controlling the superhydrophilic arrays, we fabricated wearable fluid capture devices for in situ measuring the glucose levels within sweat.22 In addition, we have undertaken an in-depth study of the photoreduction mechanism of graphene oxides and other oxides under laser scribing.23,24 Based on the above findings, herein we further develop a novel graphene deposition method, combining simultaneously laser synthesis and LIFT printing, for the additive manufacturing of scalable graphene/nickel based supercapacitor electrodes. The post-laser treatment significantly enhanced the lattice matching between the additively printed graphene and the nickel current collector. Capacity retention over 98% can be maintained after 10000 cycles of charging and discharging. The composite electrodes show high capacitance as well as low inner resistance, without significant degradation when stacking up to 100 layers of 3D printing.
Experimental
Polyimide films (Kapton) of 200 μm thickness and nickel foams of 0.1 mm thickness were used directly after purchase. A DMG Lasertec 40 with 1064 nm wavelength in the CW mode was used for the laser treatment. The output laser energy was set to 7 W with a writing speed of 800 mm s−1. After printing, the multi-layer nickel foams (Fig. S1‡) were pressed into thinner foams with 10 MPa pressure, as shown in Fig. S2.‡ A Tescan VEGA3 Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) with Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy was used for the morphology and elementary analysis. A Field Emission Electron TEM (JEOL Model JEM-2100F) was used for the high-resolution characterization. X-ray Photoemission Spectrometry (XPS) with an SKL-12 spectrometer, and a Mg Ka X-ray source, was used for characterizing the chemical elements. Raman spectra were collected with a LabRAM HR 800 Raman spectrometer with a 488 nm laser source. Electrochemical measurements were performed using a Princeton VersaSTAT III electrochemical station. CE8301 chips were used for the PWN step-up conversion. The input to output response of the step-up was measured using two Keithley 2450 SourceMeter SMU Instruments. Electrical conductivity tests were performed by four-point measurement using one Keithley 2450 SourceMeter SMU Instrument with a potential-probe spacing of 7 cm.
For measuring the specific capacitance, the composite electrodes were cut into 1 cm by 1 cm square shapes. The areal specific capacitance was calculated from GCD curves using the equation  where I is the constant discharge current, Δt is the discharging time, s is the area of the electrodes, ΔV is the potential range of the graphene/nickel electrode, and IR is the voltage drop due to the internal resistance.
Results and discussions
The additive manufacturing processes of graphene/nickel composite electrodes are schematic illustrated in Fig. 1. The crystalline structure of nickel is a face centered cubic phase with a lattice constant of 0.352 nm, as shown in Fig. 1a. Meanwhile, the lattice constant of pristine monolayer graphene is 0.246 nm, as shown in Fig. 1b. The structural parameter of the graphene can be extended up to 0.280 nm, when grown on the face (111) of nickel.25 The catalytic mechanism of Ni (111) for graphene growth was also evidenced using DFT calculations and SPM characterization.26 So if sufficient annealing (such as laser heating) is applied to graphene layers on nickel substrates, the crystalline lattices of graphene might match those of the underlying nickel substrate, denoted as an AOC shape in Fig. 1c, with stable electrochemical properties.27–29
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the LIFT printing process for fabricating the graphene/nickel electrodes. (a) The crystalline structure of face centered cubic phase nickel, with the face (111) highlighted. (b) The molecular structure of monolayer graphene. (c) The lattice matching of the Basal plane of graphene onto face (111) of nickel. (d) A piece of pristine nickel foam is placed below the polyimide as the first layer. (e) Initial deposition of graphene onto the nickel foam becomes the first layer. (f) Post-laser treatment of the first graphene layer ensures its firm contact with the nickel foam. (g) The second scribing deposits the graphene onto the second layer of nickel foam. (h) A laser scribing post treats the second layer of graphene. (i) For printing more layers, similar steps are repeated. 
In order to fabricate the graphene/nickel composites with a high degree of lattice matching, a modified laser induced forward transfer process was introduced for additively depositing graphene onto a nickel foam substrate.20 A flexible polyimide film is placed on a roll-to-roll holder for reeling and a piece of pristine nickel foam is placed under the polyimide film. A laser beam spot of 1064 nm wavelength in the CW mode is focused onto the polyimide film, as shown in Fig. 1d. Then the laser beam scribes the polyimide film along the computer designed patterns. The high temperature from the focused laser spot carbonizes the polyimide film into graphene membranes. When the laser energy is sufficiently large, the high temperature outgoing gases (such as CO2) possess abundant kinetic energy to drive the graphene flakes towards the underlying nickel foam, as shown in Fig. 1e. Thus, the synthesized graphene can be LIFT printed onto the nickel current collector. Post-laser scribing on the as-printed graphene provides an annealing effect for promoting the extended lattice structure of graphene according to the lattice structure of the nickel foam as well as a wetting surface for the graphene, as shown in Fig. 1f.22 For the second layer printing, another piece of pristine nickel foam is placed onto the first layer. Then another LIFT printing of graphene and post-laser treatment are applied to the second layer, as shown in Fig. 1g and h, respectively. For continuously printing further layers, more pieces of pristine nickel foam are placed above the existing layers, followed by repeating the LIFT and post-treatment processes, as shown in Fig. 1i. Using this LIFT printing process, arbitrary shapes of LIFT printed graphene/nickel composite electrodes can be fabricated (as shown in Fig. S3‡).
The morphologies of the LIFT printed composite electrodes were characterized with electron microscopy. The pristine nickel foam shows 3D microscale porous structures (Fig. 2a), with relatively smooth surfaces (Fig. 2b). After the LIFT printing, fuzzy flakes of graphene were seen above the porous nickel foam as in Fig. 2c. The zoom-in observation of these additives reveals them as layered flakes, extending from the nickel foam underneath, as shown in Fig. 2d. After the post-laser treatment, the fuzzy layers disappear, as shown in Fig. 2e. Instead, a uniform coating of porous nanostructures was found on the 3D nickel foam as shown in Fig. 2f. The nanostructures of the post-laser treated graphene flakes were further examined with TEM as shown in Fig. 2g. Crystalline lattices with ∼0.35 nm d-spacing were clearly observed, indicating the polycrystalline nature of the graphene flakes. In addition, porous structures (highlighted in red) were randomly distributed among the graphene flakes, as shown in Fig. 2h, which benefit the access of electrolyte ions into these porous structures, which work as supercapacitor electrodes.
 Fig. 2  Electron microscopy images of the LIFT printed electrodes. SEM images of the pristine nickel foam show a smooth surface in the zoom-out (a) and zoom-in (b) view. As-printed graphene flakes distributed on the nickel foam: (c) zoom-out and (d) zoom-in views. Post-treated graphene distributed randomly on the nickel foam: (e) zoom-out and (f) zoom-in views. TEM image of the treated graphene (g) and its magnified view (h). 
The chemical composition of the LIFT printed graphene was examined using spectra characterization. The Raman shift spectra of the samples in Fig. 3a feature four prominent peaks. The G peak at 1580 cm−1 and the 2D peak at 2700 cm−1, originating from second order zone-boundary phonons, and the D peak at 1350 cm−1, representing the sp2-carbon bonds of both the as-printed and post-laser treated samples, indicate typical few-layer graphene flakes with random orientation. Thus, the aromatic and imide repeat units in the polyimide are chemically reduced to graphene under such laser treatment. A slightly weaker peak of G for the as-printed electrodes indicates a higher defect ratio than the post-laser treated sample. To verify such differences, XPS analysis was also performed on both samples. As shown in Fig. 3b, the as-prepared sample contains 90% carbon, while the oxygen and nitrogen peaks are still recognizable. Further, the post-laser treated sample showed higher carbon, less nitrogen and no oxygen signals (Fig. 3c). Hence, it can be inferred that the high temperature during the post-laser treatment can further break the remaining C–O, CO and N–C bonds, so that more graphene remains. These spectral changes indicate that post-treatment can further increase the graphene amount within the composites.
 Fig. 3  Spectra analysis of the LIFT printed graphene. (a) Raman spectra of the as-printed and treated graphene. (b) XPS spectra of the as-printed and treated graphene. (c) XPS O1s spectra of the as-printed and treated graphene. 
To study the performance of supercapacitors with the LIFT printed electrodes, symmetrical electrodes in 1 M KOH aqueous electrolytes were assembled, as shown in Fig. S4.‡ The CV curves of different layers of printing are shown in Fig. 4a with layer numbers ranging from 1 to 10. The quasi-rectangular shape of the CV curve proves the dominance of the EDLC mechanism. The increased number of layers did not compromise the EDLC performance, demonstrating its high scalability for 3D printing of thicker electrodes. To examine the charge transfer within the graphene/nickel electrodes with different layer numbers of 3D printing, classical electrochemical impedance spectroscopy is used with frequency ranging from 100 kHz to 0.01 Hz. The Nyquist plot of the device in Fig. 4b shows that all their equivalent series resistances (ESR) are small, suggesting that their high conductivity (359712 S m−1) is preserved even with 10 layers of printing. The connecting resistance between the graphene flakes and the nickel collectors was low, as suggested by the small ESR values ranging from 0.78 to 1.06 Ω as shown in Fig. S5a–d.‡ The charge transfer resistance Rct and the double layer capacitance Cd are represented by the semicircular diameter of the Nyquist curve at the high frequency zone. Short diffusion distances can be deduced according to the smaller semicircular diameters as the layers of printing increased. For the 3D printed electrode with 10 layers, the Rct is as low as 0.14 Ω, indicating the ultra-low inner resistance of the active graphene materials. At low frequencies, ideal capacitive behaviors were observed for all different layers, with a nearly vertical plot with frequency lower than 1 Hz.
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical characterization of the assembled 3D printed supercapacitor devices. (a) The measured cyclic voltammetry curves of the LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes, with different layers of 3D printing. (b) The EIS slope of the LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes, with different layers of 3D printing. (c) The galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes at 1 mA cm−2, with different layers of 3D printing. (d) Comparison of specific capacitances of LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes with different layers of 3D printing. (e) Ragone plots of the areal energy and power densities of the LIFT printed supercapacitor with different numbers of layers, compared to those in ref. 32. (f) Capacitance retention under repeated cycling at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 for 10000 cycles and the corresponding GCD plots for 10000 cycles (inset). 
The GCD plots of the devices show a linear charging and discharging curve, further proving their effective EDLC storage mechanisms, as shown in Fig. 4c. The specific capacitance of these 3D printed supercapacitor devices was calculated from the GCD plots using the equation C = It/V, and plotted according to the different current densities in Fig. 4d. When the layer number increased from 1 to 100, the specific capacitance of these supercapacitor devices increased from 10 to 995 mF cm−2 (∼27.47 mF cm−2 in the three-electrode configuration in Fig. S6‡ at 50 mV s−1), indicating its outstanding scalability for additive manufacturing. The areal capacitance of this composite electrode is significantly larger than that obtained with traditional techniques for EDLC supercapacitors, and even 6 times larger than that of the original laser induced graphene.9,30,31 The areal normalized Ragone plots show increased performance in terms of areal energy and power density as the number of layers of 3D printing increased, as shown in Fig. 4e. The highest device power density of 9.39 mW cm−2 was achieved at 55.9 μW cm−2 energy density with 100 layers of LIFT 3D printing. And even with one layer printed electrode, the performance was significantly enhanced compared to that of the reported LIG synthesized directly with a CO2 laser.32 A robust retention greater than 98% is shown in Fig. 4f, with quasi-linear charging and discharging slopes for 10000 cycles. The self-discharge curves for the 3D printed electrode show two significant effects as shown in Fig. S7.‡ Although a relatively quick 0.2 V voltage drop was observed in the first 10 minutes, the following voltage drop became much slower with another 0.2 V drop for the additional 50 minutes.
The electrical energy storage mechanism determines that the supercapacitor cannot provide a constant output voltage. Unlike batteries with fixed voltage windows defined by the redox reaction, the attaching and detaching of ions at the electrode/electrolyte interface is not able to maintain a constant electrical potential for the supercapacitors. Although pseudocapacitance can provide a similar flat stage within a certain voltage range, it cannot meet the requirement for practical use as a powering source.33 Usually, a DC–DC converter is recommended for using supercapacitors to power actual devices.34 In principle, there are two types of DC–DC converters, step-down and step-up ones. The step-down type DC–DC converter simply reduces the input potential from the supercapacitor down to a lower potential, providing a constant output voltage. However, when the output voltage of the supercapacitor is below the required voltage of the electrical appliance, the electrical loads cannot receive sufficient energy to work functionally. Recently, the development of the step-up DC–DC converter is booming, thanks to the progress in semiconductor technologies. Using pulse-width modulation (PWM) generators, lower input voltages can be increased to higher output voltages.35 Since the voltages of supercapacitors always decrease during discharge, we find that these PWM generators are very useful for powering electrical appliances at higher voltage from lower voltage supercapacitors.
The application of such a supercapacitor as a 5 V output voltage powering source is demonstrated using a USB adaptor combined with a PWM type step-up DC–DC converter. The anode and cathode of the punch cell type supercapacitor are connected to the positive and negative pins of the DC–DC converter circuits, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5a. The PWM block on the circuits can constantly provide an output voltage of 5 V to the USB adaptor, using the circuit shown in Fig. S8.‡ When the supercapacitor is discharging, the left and the right pin of the USB adaptor can supply a 5 V DC voltage, like commercial chargers, as shown in Fig. 5b. The actual output voltage of the in-series supercapacitor was monitored using a USB power meter, as shown in Fig. 5c. Although the voltage of the supercapacitor would decrease according to the GCD plots in Fig. 4c, the output voltage of the USB adaptor can be maintained at around 5 V until 80% of the capacitance (from 5 V to 1 V) is drained, thanks to the circuitry. The actual USB voltages according to different supercapacitor output voltages are plotted in Fig. 5d. For the five in-series supercapacitors with the output voltage ranging from 5 V to 1 V, the actual USB voltage fluctuates between 5.25 V and 4.98 V, which is below a 5% variation. So these 3D printed supercapacitors can successfully serve as powering sources for 5 V USB charging, with over 80% efficiency.
 Fig. 5  A supercapacitor connected to a DC–DC converter. The frontal (a) and side view (b) schematic illustration of the PWM DC–DC converter with a supercapacitor and a USB connector. (c) The photo of a USB multimeter measuring the output voltage of the supercapacitor powered USB charger. (d) The relationship of USB output voltage with different input voltages from the supercapacitor. 
Supercapacitors combine the advantages of both batteries and capacitors, with adequate charging rates and capacity. Although they have huge potential for powering a wide range of devices, the reported literature on supercapacitor research barely explores their constant-voltage powering functions. For example, most papers only mention their applications for powering up an LED, a lamp, or charging a phone for a very short duration. Although over two billion smartphones are used every day, unfortunately, very few studies have addressed the potential of using supercapacitors for USB charging devices.36
In this research, we successfully 3D printed graphene/nickel supercapacitor electrodes with high scalability, high capacitance and low resistance. Compared to the existing literature on EDLC supercapacitors, our current research provides advances in several aspects. Even though a pure graphene composite can demonstrate even larger volume capacitance, the relatively large overall resistance would decrease the performance when scaling up.37 The CVD growth of graphene on metal current collectors can provide even higher conductivity than in our study; however, the time and costs of CVD are higher than those of laser scribing under ambient conditions.18 Although hydrothermal methods can also deposit carbon materials onto metal current collectors, these labor-intensive procedures are not so straightforward compared to robotic fabrication processes.38 Although the existing LIGs on polyimide films can work as microsupercapacitors, as illustrated in Fig. S9,‡ their relatively low conductivity (92 S m−1 calculated with our four-probe measurement) limits their direct application as large capacity powering sources. The direct contact of graphene on the nickel current collector decreases the inner resistance of the electrode, so the performance of the supercapacitor can be sustained when stacking in higher performance devices.39
Although this research has addressed several issues related to the application of supercapacitors for 5 V USB charging, some improvements can still be made on the current research. Even though graphene can provide high capacitance, the EDLC mechanism still stores less energy than the pseudocapacitive supercapacitors. The actual lattice matching between the 3D printed graphene on the nickel surfaces is still not known. A more detailed study on a thinner layer of graphene on a single crystalline Ni (111) surface should be carried out to investigate its inner mechanism for such stable composite electrodes. Adding pseudocapacitive additives onto the existing 3D printed graphene/nickel electrodes might further enhance the capacitance of the supercapacitors.33,40 The scope of the current research is limited to aqueous electrolyte-based supercapacitors. Graphene might not fully cover the inner structures of the nickel foam surfaces, and specific consideration should be given for the selection of electrolyte, preventing the potential etching of the electrolyte on the exposed nickel surfaces. The application of a state-of-the-art organic electrolyte might further boost the performance of such capacitors.13 The laser parameters also play important roles in the influence of surface pore structures of the laser induced graphene. To correlate the specific capacitance and the rate performance of composite electrodes with these pore structures, a more systematic study will be carried out with different laser writing speeds and powers in the future.
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated a novel type of LIFT printed 3D supercapacitor electrode with a high degree of lattice matching between the functional graphene flakes and the nickel current collectors. These highly scalable graphene/nickel composite electrodes with optimized porosity can achieve high performance for practical supercapacitor applications. Because of their high electrical conductivity, stability, and specific capacitance they exhibit robust performances as supercapacitor electrodes. The high efficiency PWM step-up converter demonstrates great potential for producing supercapacitors with outstanding performance as portable powering sources with constant output voltages. We anticipate that the development of supercapacitors will benefit the end users of future portable devices, as fast charging powering sources.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The project was funded by the Postdoctoral Fellowship Scheme of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University with project number G-YW2R.
References
P. Huang, C. Lethien, S. Pinaud, K. Brousse, R. Laloo, V. Turq, M. Respaud, A. Demortiere, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, B. Chaudret, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2016, 351, 691–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C. J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dinca, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Zuo, J. Chen, W. J. Liu, X. Z. Li, Y. Kong, C. Yao and Y. S. Fu, Carbon, 2018, 129, 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Yang, D. Li, T. T. Yan, G. R. Chen, L. Y. Shi, Z. X. An and D. S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42494–42502 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Yan, D. Li, T. T. Yan, G. R. Chen, L. Y. Shi, Z. X. An and D. S. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5265–5272 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Duan, T. T. Yan, G. R. Chen, J. P. Zhang, L. Y. Shi and D. S. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7465–7468 RSC .
R. Ye, D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51(7), 1609–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Z. W. Peng, Y. Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Q. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Taberna, C. Portet and P. Simon, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 82, 639–646 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. H. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mourad, L. Coustan, P. Lannelongue, D. Zigah, A. Mehdi, A. Vioux, S. A. Freunberger, F. Favier and O. Fontaine, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 446–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Marcus, K. Liang, W. Niu and Y. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2746–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liang, K. Marcus, Z. Yang, L. Zhou, H. Pan, Y. Bai, Y. Du, M. H. Engelhard and Y. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702295 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liang, L. Ju, S. Koul, A. Kushima and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1802543 Search PubMed .
K. Liang, K. Marcus, S. Zhang, L. Zhou, Y. Li, S. T. De Oliveira, N. Orlovskaya, Y.-H. Sohn and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701309 CrossRef .
J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Visser, R. Pohl, C. Sun, G. W. Roemer, B. H. in 't Veld and D. Lohse, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4087–4092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. C. Yung, B. Sun, Z. Meng, J. Huang, Y. Jin, H. S. Choy, Z. Cai, G. Li, C. L. Ho, J. Yang and W. Y. Wong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, W.-C. Law and K. C. Chan, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3689–3695 RSC .
G. Li, X. Mo, W.-C. Law and K. C. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(1), 238–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. C. Yung, B. Sun, J. Huang, Y. Jin, Z. Meng, H. S. Choy, Z. Cai, G. Li, C. L. Ho, J. Yang and W. Y. Wong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31188 CrossRef PubMed .
W. K. C. Yung, G. Li, H. M. Liem, H. S. Choy and Z. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11294–11299 RSC .
R. Rosei, M. Decrescenzi, F. Sette, C. Quaresima, A. Savoia and P. Perfetti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 28, 1161–1164 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Patera, F. Bianchini, C. Africh, C. Dri, G. Soldano, M. M. Mariscal, M. Peressi and G. Comelli, Science, 2018, 359, 1243–1246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Li, C. W. Leung, Y. C. Chen, J. H. Hsu, A. C. Sun, K. W. Lin and P. W. T. Pong, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2013, 49, 3310–3313 CAS .
G. Li, C. W. Leung, Y.-C. Chen, K.-W. Lin, A.-C. Sun, J.-H. Hsu and P. W. T. Pong, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 110, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Li, C. W. Leung, Z. Q. Lei, K. W. Lin, P. T. Lai and P. W. T. Pong, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 8307–8311 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, C.-H. Kim, M. C. Hersam, L. F. Francis and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700285 CrossRef .
L. Wen, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4306–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Li, D. X. Luong, J. B. Zhang, Y. R. Tarkunde, C. Kittrell, F. Sargunaraj, Y. S. Ji, C. J. Arnusch and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700496 CrossRef PubMed .
H. G. Zhang, X. D. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Byen, C. H. Ban, Y. B. Lim and G. H. Choe, J. Power Electron., 2017, 17, 1413–1421 Search PubMed .
S. The Statistics Portal, Number of Mobile Phone Users Worldwide from 2015 to 2020, www.statista.com/statistics/274774/forecast-of-mobile-phone-users-worldwide/, 9 Jul 2018.
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. J. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Q. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. C. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. M. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Peng, J. Lin, R. Q. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel and J. M. Tour, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3414–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Video abstract: https://youtu.be/jehxkRtvmmE‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11121aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the LIFT printing process for fabricating the graphene/nickel electrodes. (a) The crystalline structure of face centered cubic phase nickel, with the face (111) highlighted. (b) The molecular structure of monolayer graphene. (c) The lattice matching of the Basal plane of graphene onto face (111) of nickel. (d) A piece of pristine nickel foam is placed below the polyimide as the first layer. (e) Initial deposition of graphene onto the nickel foam becomes the first layer. (f) Post-laser treatment of the first graphene layer ensures its firm contact with the nickel foam. (g) The second scribing deposits the graphene onto the second layer of nickel foam. (h) A laser scribing post treats the second layer of graphene. (i) For printing more layers, similar steps are repeated.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electron microscopy images of the LIFT printed electrodes. SEM images of the pristine nickel foam show a smooth surface in the zoom-out (a) and zoom-in (b) view. As-printed graphene flakes distributed on the nickel foam: (c) zoom-out and (d) zoom-in views. Post-treated graphene distributed randomly on the nickel foam: (e) zoom-out and (f) zoom-in views. TEM image of the treated graphene (g) and its magnified view (h).	 

 	Fig. 3  Spectra analysis of the LIFT printed graphene. (a) Raman spectra of the as-printed and treated graphene. (b) XPS spectra of the as-printed and treated graphene. (c) XPS O1s spectra of the as-printed and treated graphene.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical characterization of the assembled 3D printed supercapacitor devices. (a) The measured cyclic voltammetry curves of the LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes, with different layers of 3D printing. (b) The EIS slope of the LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes, with different layers of 3D printing. (c) The galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes at 1 mA cm−2, with different layers of 3D printing. (d) Comparison of specific capacitances of LIFT printed graphene/nickel electrodes with different layers of 3D printing. (e) Ragone plots of the areal energy and power densities of the LIFT printed supercapacitor with different numbers of layers, compared to those in ref. 32. (f) Capacitance retention under repeated cycling at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 for 10000 cycles and the corresponding GCD plots for 10000 cycles (inset).	 

 	Fig. 5  A supercapacitor connected to a DC–DC converter. The frontal (a) and side view (b) schematic illustration of the PWM DC–DC converter with a supercapacitor and a USB connector. (c) The photo of a USB multimeter measuring the output voltage of the supercapacitor powered USB charger. (d) The relationship of USB output voltage with different input voltages from the supercapacitor.	 
Footnotes
† Video abstract: https://youtu.be/jehxkRtvmmE
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta11121a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
