Research progress in the synthesis and biological application of quantum dots  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ02603A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ02603A
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 20515-20539Research progress in the synthesis and biological application of quantum dots

        
          
            Yuanjie 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zongming 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jinkai 
            Li
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, China. E-mail: mse_lijk@ujn.edu.cn; liuzm@ujn.edu.cn
bInfovision Optoelectronics (Kunshan)Co., Ltd, Kunshan 215300, China
Received 
      25th May 2022
    , Accepted 18th July 2022First published on 20th July 2022AbstractQuantum dots are an excellent choice for biomedical applications due to their special optical properties and quantum confinement effects. This paper reviews the research and application progress of several quantum dots in the biomedical field in recent years. Firstly, the advantages of quantum dots are explained, and then the potential toxic effects of quantum dots are explained, especially the harm to human health, which limits the expansion of applications of quantum dots. The variety of quantum dots has produced many synthesis methods, and the selection of a reasonable preparation strategy is beneficial to the performance of quantum dots. We selected several different quantum dots, including perovskite quantum dots, molybdenum disulfide quantum dots, zinc oxide quantum dots, carbon quantum dots and graphene quantum dots, and summarized the research on imaging, sensing, drug delivery and therapy, hoping to play a certain reference role and lay a foundation for future clinical application.
Yuanjie Zhang
Yuanjie Zhang is a master student at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, China. His research focuses on improving the stability of perovskite quantum dots and their applications in photocatalysis and sensing.
Bin Liu
Bin Liu is a doctor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, China. He is mainly engaged in the synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals, the construction of devices and the application of nanomaterials in biomedical therapy.
Zongming Liu
Zongming Liu joined the University of Jinan as a principal professor in 1985 and is the Young and Middle-aged Expert with Outstanding Contributions in Shandong Province. He is the author of over 60 journal papers. His group is focusing on nanomaterials, powder engineering, and thermal engineering.
Jinkai Li
Jinkai Li received his PhD degree from the Northeastern University, Shenyang City, China in 2014. After that, he has worked as a vice-professor at the University of Jinan. He is the author of over 30 journal papers. He is focusing on inorganic luminescent materials and devices, especially for LED devices and biological imaging treatments.
1 Introduction
Quantum dots (QDs) are nanoscale semiconductor materials whose physical size is no larger than twice the corresponding exciton Bohr radius in three dimensions. They are generally spherical or quasi-spherical in shape and are less than 10 nm in diameter. In 1986, Reed et al. first proposed the term ‘quantum dot’.1 Common quantum dots are composed of II B–VI A, III A–V A, IV A–VI A, I B–III A–VI A or IV A group elements, such as CdTe, InAs, PbS, CuInS2, C, etc. When visible light from the outside shines on such a semiconductor material, the photons stimulate some of the electrons to jump to higher energy levels, and then return to the stable ground state to emit light that is specific to the frequency of the material, and the optical properties depend on the size of the quantum dot. Compared with traditional organic dyes, quantum dots are larger in size and have excellent fluorescence characteristics such as stable fluorescence and brightness. In addition, they are similar in size to nucleic acids, proteins and other biological macromolecules, which have aroused extensive research interest. By changing their size, chemical composition and shape, quantum dots can exhibit a tunable emission spectrum that extends from the visible to the infrared region. Another benefit is that their photobleaching resistance and photostability are high, making them ideal for biological imaging applications. Compared with traditional fluorescence wavelengths (400–700 nm), near-infrared fluorescence (NIR, 700–1700 nm) has the advantages of deeper tissue penetration, high resolution and not being affected by the interference of the organism's own fluorescence. NIR QDs play an important role in biological imaging and cancer treatment. At present, a variety of NIR QDs, including Ag2Se,2 Ag2S,3 CuInS2,4 C,5,6etc., have been successfully prepared and used in biomedicine. Ge and colleagues synthesized glucose-functionalized near-infrared Ag2Se QDs, which can be used for long-term imaging of tumor cells in vivo.7 In the study of Liu et al., self-assembled Ag2S vesicles can be specifically activated in the acidic environment of tumor tissues, and can be used for NIR-II fluorescence image-guided cancer therapy.8 Qu et al. synthesized stable near-infrared carbon quantum dots using magnolia leaves as precursors, which can be used for cell imaging and monitoring of Pd2+ levels in Li-7 cells.9
So far, quantum dots have shown many unique properties, promoting applications in biomedicine,10–12 energy storage and catalysis,13–15 solar cells,16,17 sensing18 and other fields. In particular, quantum dots are widely used in bioscience and medicine due to their unique quantum confinement effect and electro-optical properties. For biomedical applications, quantum dots must be water-soluble, that is, they can be dispersed in water/liquid. Utilizing suitable binding approaches, quantum dots can be coupled with biological molecules such as antibodies, oligonucleotides, DNA and vitamins. After surface functionalization, the imaging, specific binding and targeting ability of quantum dots in vivo have been improved to a certain extent. The large surface area of quantum dots provides more surface attachment sites for conjugation, which is an advantage compared with organic dyes and other small molecules. Up to now, cadmium-based quantum dots have been widely used in biomedicine, but considering the toxic impact of cadmium on health and the environment, their further applications have been limited.19 To minimize the cadmium toxicity, a semiconductor material with a higher band gap, such as zinc sulfide (ZnS), is used to coat the CdSe core. Because of their wide excitation, narrow emission spectrum, high stability, high quantum yield and brightness, Cd-based quantum dots have become the focus of research. After many years of exploration and preparation, the utilization of these quantum dots has gradually become refined, and they can be used commercially for the analysis of different specific substances for short time periods.
In some applications, such as metal ion/biomolecular detection, a low quantum yield will lead to a decrease in detection sensitivity, so a high quantum yield is required for quantum dots to meet their requirements of use. The ‘quantum yield’ is an important index for measuring the performance of quantum dots, and is usually expressed as the ratio of the number of emitted photons to the number of absorbed photons. The quantum yield is affected by many factors. Generally, the following methods can be adopted to improve the quantum yield. (1) The use of core/shell quantum dots. For quantum dots such as IIIA–VA, they are usually composed of an outer material with a wider bandgap that coats metal core materials, such as InP/ZnSe20 and InP/ZnS. After ZnS has been coated, its quantum yield can be increased by 60%.21 In another study, the quantum yield of InP/ZnSe/ZnS quantum dots can reach 91% by passivating the vacancies in the InP nuclei to reduce surface defects.22 (2) Doping with other atoms. For many quantum dots, heteroatomic doping is an effective method to overcome the low quantum yield. Wang et al. synthesized Mn2+ and Eu3+ doped CsPbCl3 quantum dots, and their quantum yield increased by 29.83% and 45.48%, respectively.23 Juang and colleagues synthesized boron-doped graphene quantum dots (B-GQDs) to enhance the luminescence performance, and the QY values of green and red fluorescence under blue light irradiation were as high as 99.8 and 17.1%, respectively.24 (3) The selection of appropriate preparation methods and precursors. The quantum yield of quantum dots based on different preparation routes and precursors will be different. In particular for the synthesis of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and GQDs, different types of precursors or optimized synthesis methods can lead to higher QY. CQDs obtained using hydrothermal and microwave methods generally produce higher QY than other methods. Saljoughi and colleagues synthesized carbon quantum dots with a high quantum yield (50%) using citric acid as the carbon source via a one-pot hydrothermal method, and successfully used them for cell imaging of HeLa and MCF7 cells.25
On the one hand, quantum dots have important potential social benefits; on the other hand, they may also cause harm to human health. From in vitro studies, quantum dots have been proved to cause significant damage to cells.26 It has also been found that cadmium-based quantum dots will degrade in certain environments, and the released Cd2+ is highly cytotoxic.27,28 Other studies have further shown that the poor stability and poor packaging of quantum dots are the reasons for their degradation.29,30 Considering that Cd2+ is related to cytotoxic effects, the popularization and use of Cd-based quantum dots has been greatly limited. However, the most important aspect regarding quantum dots is their biomedical application in the human body, which requires that they must have the characteristics of low toxicity or even non-toxicity to replace cadmium-based quantum dots.31,32 At present, the research on quantum dots is focused on developing environmentally friendly, safe and healthy materials, which has become the main trend. There are many emerging semiconductor quantum dots. For example, perovskite quantum dots, molybdenum disulfide quantum dots and graphene quantum dots listed below have been proved to have low toxicity and good biocompatibility in medicine and biology.
2. Cytotoxicity of quantum dots
The toxicity of quantum dots is influenced by many factors, including their size, packaging materials, attached functional groups, dosage and process parameters.33,34 In the study of Lovrić et al., they synthesized CdTe quantum dots of two sizes, indicating that the ability of quantum dots to reduce cell activity was size-dependent, and the toxicity of smaller quantum dots in N9 and PC12 cells was stronger than that of larger quantum dots at the same concentration.35 The study also showed that the quantum dot size determines the cytotoxicity, where the smaller the particle, the more toxic it is. Quantum dots can affect physiological behavior such as cell growth, reproduction and vitality to a certain extent, and also damage DNA.36 At present, several different mechanisms have been established to explain the toxicity of QDs: (1) the degradation of the heavy metal core releases free Cd2+; (2) reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced and cause toxicity; and (3) QD–cell interactions. In order to transform quantum dots from preclinical research to biomedical application, the harmfulness of quantum dots to human health must be avoided as much as possible. In order to reduce the release of harmful ions, quantum dots can be protected with a shell to reduce the toxicity.37
2.1 Cytotoxicity of quantum dots to the respiratory system
One of the main ways for the human body to be exposed to nanoparticles is through inhalation, and the occurrence of lung diseases, including asthma, pulmonary edema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and even lung cancer, is related to exposure to inhaled nanoparticles.38–40 The lungs are the main absorbing organ of the respiratory tract, and quantum dots are mainly absorbed by alveolar macrophages.41 Unfortunately, when inhaled, it is easy for them to be deposited in the lungs, and because they are difficult to clear they can cause serious health problems over the long term. Currently, the characterization of lung response is often studied in rodents, but these experiments are long, expensive and not as relevant to humans as they are to primates, which raises questions as to their efficacy. Based on this, in vitro-grown lung cells are often used to study the toxicity mechanism of the human body after exposure to particles.42,43In vitro models, pulmonary epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages are usually selected as research objects to detect respiratory toxicity. In the study of Scoville et al., two mice strains showed symptoms of acute lung inflammation after quantum dot treatment.44 Tang et al. found that PDDA-coated CdSe/ZnS quantum dots would preferentially deposit in the lungs of mouse models, and PDDA-coated quantum dots would produce severe acute toxicity due to pulmonary embolism.45 Jigyasu and colleagues found that CdSe QDs in lung cancer A549 cells can induce oxidative stress and significantly increase ROS levels, further leading to nuclear enrichment and DNA breakage, and the effects of these toxic effects depend on the particle size.46 Choi et al. studied the genotoxic effects of cadmium-containing quantum dots in A549 cells and found that cadmium-based quantum dots could destroy genetic material, and the higher the dose, the more toxic this would be.47 Other studies have shown that QDs can upregulate genes associated with inflammation.48,49
2.2 Cytotoxicity of quantum dots to the digestive system
The digestive system plays an important role in nutrient absorption, endocrine and immune defense, and substance metabolism. As the main metabolic organ of the human body, the liver inevitably becomes the main accumulation site of quantum dots in the body. At the same time, there have been few studies on quantum dots in the intestine, and the toxic effects of quantum dots on the liver are mainly reported. In general, HeG2 cells and zebrafish liver cells are used in in vitro studies to assess the toxicity of QDs, whereas normal liver cells and more sensitive primary stem cells (which are difficult to obtain and culture) are used in cell models. Damage to cells caused by over-generated reactive oxygen species is one of the common toxic mechanisms. Proteins, DNA, lipids and other macromolecules will react with reactive oxygen species, and their functions and structures will be affected in this process, thus causing oxidative damage to cells.50–52 Mitochondria are the main organelles that produce reactive oxygen species, and QDs can damage the morphology and structure of mitochondria. Hao et al. investigated the toxic mechanism of oxidative stress induced by mercaptopropionic acid (MPA)-modified CdTe quantum dots (MPA-CdTe QDs) in mouse hepatocytes. The MPA-CdTe QDs can directly bind to catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) to affect their activity. As a result, the protein conformation of these two enzyme molecules changes, and the binding interaction between them is shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b).53 Excessive accumulation of ROS activates the ERK pathway, leading to apoptosis. Fig. 1(c) shows the presumed mechanism of QD-induced apoptosis. In addition, Cd2+ can damage the function and structure of proteins by binding to the sulfhydryl groups on proteins.54 Ca2+ plays an important role in various physiological activities of the human body, participating in the synthesis and release of neurotransmitters, the coagulation process and the regulation of enzyme activity. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is abundant in liver cells, which is associated with the occurrence of many liver diseases.55 Richter et al. found that activation of the SK2 channel can regulate ER Ca2+ uptake and retention and maintain a certain homeostasis to prevent ER-stress-induced cell death.56 In other studies, endoplasmic reticulum stress plays an important role in the cytotoxicity caused by nanomaterials in liver cells.57–59 Autophagy is an important physiological phenomenon of the turnover of intracellular material in eukaryotes, which stabilizes the intracellular environment. Zou et al. 's study showed that Cd can damage liver cells and induce autophagy; it can also prevent autophagy blockade caused by autophagosome–lysosomal fusion by inhibiting the expression of Rab7 in liver cells, thus intensifying liver injury (Fig. 1(d) and (e)).60
 Fig. 1  (a) Binding interaction between MPA-QDs and CAT, and (b) binding interaction between MPA-QDs and SOD, where the CAT and SOD molecules are shown as cartoon representations; and (c) proposed mechanism of QD-induced apoptosis and cell death involving oxidative stress, the ERK signaling pathway, caspases and lipid peroxidation in cells. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (d) Cd inhibits the autophagic flux, and the autophagy-blockage-aggravated Cd-induced cell injury in AML12 cells. After treatment with 5 μM Cd and/or 5 μM CQ (an autophagy inhibitor) for 12 h, the autophagic flux was analyzed via western blot analysis. Results are shown as the mean ± SD (n = 5). Compared with the control group, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Compared with the CQ-treated group, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01. (e) Cells were treated with 5 μM Cd and/or 5 μM CQ, and then the effect of autophagy blockage on Cd-induced injury in AML12 cells was analyzed via real-time cell analysis. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 4). Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
2.3 Cytotoxicity of quantum dots to the immune system
The immune system is considered to be an independent and complete circulatory system that maintains stability, including both innate immunity and adaptive immunity. The immune system plays the role of immune surveillance, defense and immune regulation, and cooperates with other systems to maintain the stability of the internal environment and the balance of physiological functions. The immune system is composed of immune organs, immune cells and immune active substances. Because the immune system plays an important role in disease prevention, it is also essential to study the toxic effect of quantum dots on the system. The harmful mechanism of Cd2+ on the body has been mentioned before, and this effect has also been mentioned in many literature reports. In addition, Cd is considered to be one of the most toxic substances to the immune system, which can directly interact with immune cells and change their state and function. This toxic effect acts on the immune system in a time- and dose-dependent manner.61 Cd (32 ppm) exposure will affect a variety of T-cell subsets, affect the normal function of immune cells, and significantly increase the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, thus enhancing the inflammatory response.62 As the place of B lymphocyte differentiation and maturation, the spleen is a very important immune organ. Nguyen and colleagues found that mice exposed to CdTe QDs would develop spleen injury, and there would be necrotic areas in the spleen at higher doses (6 mg per kg and above).63 In another study, compared with mice exposed to 1 nmol (2.85–3.33 nmol kg−1) CdTe quantum dots, mice subjected to 5 nmol (14.28–16.67 nmol kg−1) CdTe quantum dots showed splenic lymph node hyperplasia, inflammatory cell infiltration, splenic nodule damage, obvious splenic hyperplasia and nuclear and cytoplasmic division.64 This shows that there is a dose-dependent effect of Cd2+ on cell viability and function in immune cells.
2.4 Cytotoxicity of quantum dots to the cardiovascular system
Simply put, the cardiovascular system consists of the heart and blood vessels, where the blood vessels are divided into arteries, veins and capillaries. The heart is the main organ that provides power for blood circulation throughout the whole body. Quantum dots entering the human body will enter the heart and other internal organs through the blood circulation, which poses a great risk to health. Therefore, it is necessary to reasonably evaluate the potential toxicity of quantum dots to the cardiovascular system. A study found that CdSe/ZnS quantum dots can accumulate in the heart and cannot be completely excreted within 42 days, causing changes in some biochemical indexes, and inducing oxidative damage and toxic effects on the mouse heart.65 The zebrafish is a mature vertebrate developmental toxicity model, and is widely used to evaluate the toxic effects of nanoparticles (NPs).66 Chen et al. used zebrafish larvae to evaluate the distribution and accumulation of carboxyl quantum dots in the body and found that, after microinjection, the carboxyl quantum dots were rapidly transported to the cardiovascular system and deposited in the venous and capillary network system, which posed a great threat to health.67 Another study found that nitrogen-doped and nitrogen, sulfur co-doped carbon quantum dots showed significant toxicity to zebrafish in a dose-dependent manner. With the increase in concentration and exposure time, the zebrafish embryos showed pericardial edema, yolk sac edema and other phenomena, and the toxic effect of the nitrogen and sulfur co-doped CQDs was the strongest.68 In addition to zebrafish, the rainbow trout is also commonly used as a toxicity model in fish species. Studies have shown that the aggregation of CdSe/ZnS–COOH quantum dots blocks chorionic pores and leads to hypoxia, which will slow down the heartbeat of rainbow trout embryos and cause cardiotoxicity.69 In addition, some studies have used human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) to evaluate the toxic effects of quantum dots because they are a mature model to study the interaction between nanoparticles and endothelial cells.70 Among them, Zhu et al. found that human umbilical vein endothelial cells exposed to very high concentrations (100 or 200 μg mL−1) of Cu, N-doped CDs showed significant induced cytotoxicity, and endoplasmic reticulum stress was activated.71 Another study demonstrated that Ti3C2 quantum dots (100 μg mL−1) induce cytotoxicity in HUVECs through the mechanism of inducing autophagy dysfunction, and that they are more toxic than Nb2C Mxene quantum dots.72 On the other hand, these two studies show that the cytotoxicity is not obvious at low concentrations, and there is a dose-dependent relationship. Surface modification will affect the toxicity of quantum dots to a certain extent. Zheng et al. compared the in vivo toxicity of carboxyl (–COOH) and amino (–NH2) modified CdSe/ZnS quantum dots to zebrafish embryos, and found that both quantum dots could up-regulate the transcription level of genes related to heart development, causing developmental toxicity, leading to pericardial edema and cardiac insufficiency in zebrafish; they also noted that the carboxyl quantum dots were more toxic.73 In another study, CdSe quantum dots modified with polyethylene glycol (PEG) can reduce oxidative stress and ROS levels, protect the heart and blood vessels, and have good biocompatibility.74 Similarly, the protective effect of PEGylated GQDs on myocardial infarction is dose-dependent, which is mediated by strengthening the cardiac antioxidant defense system.75
2.5 Cytotoxicity of quantum dots to the nervous system
The nervous system plays a leading role in regulating various physiological activities. It is composed of glial cells and neurons, and the central nervous system is the main part of it. The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is highly selective in maintaining the stability of the central nervous system. It is the existence of the blood–brain barrier that limits the accessibility of the brain and brings challenges to drug delivery.76 However, quantum dots, by virtue of their size, can cross the blood–brain barrierblood–brain barrier into brain tissue or travel along neuronal pathways and deposit there.77,78 Therefore, it is necessary to systematically study the toxic effects of quantum dots after entering the brain. Yang et al. explored the toxic effect of PEGylated CuInS2/ZnS quantum dots on glial cells, and found that the quantum dots can enter cells and mainly locate in the cytoplasm, with low cytotoxicity, although they can also significantly change the gene expression profile.79Fig. 2(a) and (b) show the cytotoxicity of PC12 cells treated with quantum dots. The PC12 cell line is often used as an in vitro model to study neurotoxicity. In another study, CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs were internalized by PC12 layer cells and significantly inhibited neuronal growth and differentiation in the presence of nerve growth factor (NGF) because the QDs interfered with NGF signal transduction from external stimuli to internal signals.80 Microglia are important central-nervous-system-specific cells that play a key role in brain development and internal environment stability, and glial cell death is involved in many brain diseases.81
 Fig. 2  Cytotoxicity induced by CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs. (a) Cytotoxicity of CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs at concentrations up to 100 μg mL−1 in PC12 cells after 24, 48 and 72 h of incubation, where values represent the mean ± SD, n = 6; and (b) cytotoxicity of CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs at concentrations of more than 100 μg mL−1 in PC12 cells after 24 and 48 h of incubation, values are the mean ± SD, n = 6. (24 h, *P < 0.05 vs. the control, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. the control; 48 h, #P < 0.05 vs. the control, and ####P < 0.0001 vs. the control.) Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (c) In vitro fluorescence imaging results of the different brain regions, (d) radiant efficiency of the different brain regions (n = 3), and (e) amount of Cd in the different brain regions (n = 3). Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Microglia play an important role in the normal functioning of the central nervous system. Therefore, microglia are commonly used to evaluate the neurotoxicity and potential mechanisms of quantum dots, and relevant studies have provided important information. Studies have shown that MoS2 QDs induce apoptosis by activating the NLRP3 inflammasome in microglia, which can have potentially harmful effects on immune homeostasis in the central nervous system.82 Another study also found a similar phenomenon. Wu et al. found that CdTe quantum dots modified with a high concentration of MPA can activate microglia and promote interleukin-1β secretion, which is highly correlated with NLRP3 inflammatory body activation from overformed ROS.83 In addition, studies have compared the toxic effects of N-GQDs (nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots) with A-GQDs (amino-functionalized quantum dots). Studies have shown that low-dose exposure to N-GQDs can induce inflammatory responses in microglia, while high-dose exposure to both N-GQDs and A-GQDs can affect olfactory transduction and GABAergic synapses, and GQDs may cause changes in circular RNAs expression.84 Other studies have shown that N-GQDs can induce iron overload in microglia by inducing mitochondrial oxidative stress and that the A-GQDs caused less iron overload than N-GQDs for the same exposure method.85 In addition, studies have proved that CdTe/ZnS quantum dots can be phagocytosed by microglia to polarize them, thus causing inflammatory damage to mouse neurons. Fig. 2(c)–(e) show the distribution of CdTe/ZnS QDs in different regions of the mouse brain.86 Wu and colleagues found that when CdTe/ZnS QDs were injected into the tail vein of mice to observe the activation of hippocampal microglia, the microglia were transformed into M1 and M2 phenotypes, resulting in neuron damage.87Caenorhabditis elegans has emerged as a biological model for the study of neurotoxicity in vivo due to its strong reproductive capacity, transparent body, simple neural structure and low cost. CdTe quantum dots have been reported to cause damage to the nervous system of C. elegans.88 Studies have shown that N-GQD exposure at high doses (over 100 μg mL−1) can cause serious damage to the nervous system of nematodes by interfering with dopaminergic and glutaminergic neurons.89
As is well known, our central nervous system is very fragile, and damage to neurons is irreversible. Therefore, research on the neurotoxicity of quantum dots is aimed at finding non-toxic, efficient and widely used quantum dots, to lay a solid foundation for their further application in clinical medicine and biomedicine.
2.6 Cytotoxicity of quantum dots to the reproductive system
At present, there have been a lot of studies on the toxic effects of quantum dots, but their effects on the reproductive system are not very clear. Male and female reproductive systems are more sensitive to exogenous substances than other organs, and a comprehensive assessment of the reproductive toxicity of quantum dots is needed. Female reproductive organs mainly include the uterus and ovaries, which are responsible for the normal regulation of hormones and the stability of hormone levels. Moreover, women have just 400 follicles over their reproductive lifetime, so the chance of conception is limited. Therefore, research on female reproductive toxicity is particularly important. Studies have shown that exposure to graphene quantum dots destroys the spindle localization and actin cap formation of mouse oocytes, resulting in non-extrusion of the first polar body, which may be related to ROS accumulation and DNA damage.90 Other studies have confirmed this. Chen et al. found that intravenous injection of CdSe/ZnS quantum dots in mice would accumulate in the uterus and placenta, causing organ damage and abnormal fetal development, which was due to the excessive production of ROS leading to cell apoptosis affecting nutrient transport.91 In another study, high concentrations of InP/ZnS QDs (above 2.0 μg mL−1) significantly affected oocyte maturation, possibly because ingested QDs hindered the cell utilization of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), and the harmful effects were dose-dependent.92 Li et al. found that intravenously injected CdSe/ZnS quantum dots could distribute rapidly and exist for a long time in mouse testes; abnormal development in subsequent mouse progeny was consistent with the action of high doses of QDs leading to early apoptosis of testicular interstitial cells (see Fig. 3 for results of fertility and progeny development).93 Homologous recombination is a highly accurate DNA double-strand break-repair pathway in mammals, and the lack of homologous recombination can lead to the occurrence of tumors.94,95 Studies have shown that CdSe/ZnS quantum dot exposure can lead to sperm dysfunction, because enhanced autophagy can down-regulate the expression of homologous recombination genes, thus blocking the repair of double strand breaks (DSBs) in meiosis.96 As quantum dots become more widely used and their production increases, they will inevitably end up in water. Wang et al. found that exposure to CdTe quantum dots caused damage to crab gonads, which was manifested morphologically as the vacuolation of testicular tissue in male crabs and the infiltration of inflammatory cells in the ovary of female crabs.97 Quantum dots usually show a certain dose dependence, and studies have proved that CdTe quantum dots can bring about testicular tissue damage, hormone level disorder and a decline in sperm quality at high doses, although they are relatively safe at low doses.98 Interestingly, sex differences also exist in reproductive toxicity. Studies have shown that CdTe quantum dots have a sex-dependent effect on the reproductive toxicity of mussels via an oxidative damage mechanism, and that females are more affected.99
 Fig. 3  Reproductive ability and first litters of pups by male mice after intravenous injection of quantum dots or normal saline. (a) Fertility of male mice, number and body weight of their offspring. (b) Representative mouse parents and their litters of pups at 0–24 h after birth. (c) Changes in pup body weight within 30 days after birth. (d) Organ index of offspring mice on the post-natal day (PND) 10. (e) Organ index of offspring mice on PND 20. (f) Organ index of offspring mice on PND 30. (* Significantly different compared with the control group at the same sampling time, P < 0.05.) Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
2.7 Strategies for reducing the toxicity of cadmium-based quantum dots
When the harmful metals (Cd2+, Pb2+ and Hg2+) in quantum dots are released, they pose great potential risks to the environment and human health. Since cadmium-containing quantum dots are the most widely used, strategies to reduce the toxicity of Cd2+ are particularly needed. On the one hand, the surface of Cd-based quantum dots can be modified organically to improve their specific stability. The more common organic capping agents are mercaptan, hexadecylamine and polyethylene glycol. Guo et al. studied the effects of different surface modifications on cytotoxicity, and CdSe modified with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) reduced the cytotoxicity.100 On the other hand, a core/shell structure can be formed for inorganic modification, such as CdSe/ZnS, CdTe/CdS, CdSe/ZnTe, etc. Xu and colleagues synthesized water-soluble CdTe/CdS core–shell quantum dots for inhibiting drug resistance and the biological imaging of cancer cells, which reduced the biotoxicity of CdTe QDs and increased the quantum yield.101 Organic modifications have the advantage of retaining the ability of quantum dots to float in water and bind to biologically functional molecules. In contrast, core/shell QDs are better at reducing the toxicity by virtue of the protective effect of the shell.
3. Preparation method for quantum dots
Due to the wide variety of quantum dots, the properties and functions of each kind of quantum dot are different. Choosing the appropriate synthesis strategy is very important for the effective application of quantum dots. In general, the synthesis of quantum dots can be divided into ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’ syntheses. The top-down method is used to process large-size precursor materials into the required nanoparticles through various chemical, physical or electrochemical routes, which can retain the structure and properties of the raw materials to a certain extent, and their operation is simple. However, the control of particle size and shape is not very accurate, which is not conducive to the large-scale synthesis of quantum dots. The bottom-up route is used to further integrate small organic precursor molecules into target macromolecular substances. This method has the advantages of sustainability and green synthesis. By controlling the reaction process, the size of the particles can be limited well, giving them a higher performance. At present, the common synthesis routes in various studies have included hydrothermal,102 solvothermal,103 microwave-assisted,104 laser ablation,105 electrochemical,106 arc discharge,107 ultrasonic treatment,108 chemical oxidation,109 pyrolysis110 and sol–gel methods,111 among others. Among them, the hydrothermal method is widely used because of its simple operation and ease of repetition. Using a hydrothermal method, Gu et al. synthesized nitrogen-doped carbon quantum dots from Lycium barbarum, with a diameter of 1.55 ± 1 nm and good fluorescence from purple to yellow.112Fig. 4(a) shows the preparation process for N-CQDs. The solvothermal method is similar to the hydrothermal method. The solvent is not water but an organic solvent, and it is a simple and rapid method to produce quantum dots. Fang and his colleagues prepared new blue-green fluorescent phosphorus oxide quantum dots (PO QDs) via the solvothermal method. The average diameter of the particles was 6.4 ± 1.2 nm and the dispersion was good. Their QY was 28%, and they had the advantages of high inertia, good water solubility and excellent stability (Fig. 4(b)).113 Liu et al. prepared novel CuInZnS/ZnS quantum dots with a size of about 8 nm and a QY of 23% using a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method, and these showed a high quantum yield and good chemical stability.114 Zhang et al. synthesized AgCl QDs with an average diameter of 2.5 nm via ultrasonic treatment, and studied the effect of particle size on the photocatalytic activity.115 Monje and colleagues synthesized environmentally friendly CQDs using orange peel, mate tea and other industrial and agricultural waste matter as the raw materials via a pyrolysis method, and they studied the differences in physical and chemical properties caused by the different initial raw materials, so as to apply them to different fields.116Fig. 4(c)–(e) show some images of the resulting quantum dots and TEM photographs of all the samples.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the hydrothermal synthesis of N-CQDs from wolfberries. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of PO QDs and fluorescence screening of Fe3+ and I−, with the inset images showing a photograph of the PO QDs, and bioimaging applications in live bean sprout and HeLa cells. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (c)–(e) Several images of CQDs synthesized using different raw materials. (c) Yerba mate CQDs. From left to right: photograph of the calcined powder; TEM micrograph (with the particle size distribution inset); and photograph of an aqueous suspension of the CQDs irradiated at 365 nm using a UV lamp. On the micrograph, the scale bar is equivalent to 50 nm. (d) Avocado seed CQDs: (top) TEM micrograph (with the particle size distribution inset), and (bottom) photograph of an aqueous suspension of the CQDs as observed with the naked eye (left) and irradiated at 365 nm using a UV-lamp (right). (e) Orange peel CQDs: TEM micrograph (with the particle size distribution inset). Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
4. Biological applications of quantum dots
In recent years, quantum dots have attracted extensive attention due to their excellent optical properties, and they have shown considerable application prospects in the biomedical field. Here, we select four applications, including bioimaging, biosensing, drug delivery and biological therapy. Fig. 5 shows a schematic diagram of quantum dots in biomedical applications.117 Quantum dots have different chemical compositions and properties, and have their own unique functional properties in different fields. When quantum dots are applied to the human body, the first consideration is their toxicity and biocompatibility because this is directly related to human health.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of QDs in biomedical applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
4.1 Perovskite quantum dots
Recently, the excellent optical properties of perovskite quantum dots have attracted extensive attention and perovskite has become a new type of quantum dot material with development potential. The general formula of a perovskite is ABX3. In the ABX3 structure, A occupies the corner position, B is at the body centered position, and the face centered position is occupied by X atoms (Fig. 6).118 However, the disadvantages of perovskite quantum dots, such as poor stability and high toxicity in water and humid environments, hinder their biological applications and they have not yet realized their potential. In order to overcome the inherent disadvantages of perovskite quantum dots, they are generally stabilized using the core–shell design or encapsulated in other polymers. Kim et al. synthesized a highly dispersed MAPbBr3 QDs@SiO2 core/shell structure, which enhanced its stability in polar solvents and effectively inhibited the release of the heavy metal Pb2+.119 In addition, through doping with non-toxic metals (Cu, Mn, Bi, Sb, Sn, etc.) to replace lead, the reduced content of Pb2+ can also reduce the toxicity of the QDs. In recent years, the study of lead-free perovskites, such as CsSnX3 and Cs2AgBiX6, has also attracted great attention. Li et al. synthesized lead-free perovskite CsSnX3 QDs for the detection of Pb2+ with high sensitivity and selectivity.120
 Fig. 6  Structure of perovskites with the ABX3 formula. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 

Bioimaging applications. 
Wang et al. encapsulated CsPbBr3 quantum dots in poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and used them in HeLa cell imaging, and these experiments provided high-quality images, showed good cell uptake and uniform intracellular distribution, and demonstrated low toxicity, making them suitable for biological imaging.121 In addition, the obtained CPB@PMMA nanospheres had a QY of 73% and showed strong stability when exposed to an aqueous medium (Fig. 7(a)–(d)). In addition, Yang et al. reported the simple preparation of hydrocolloidal stabilized polystyrene-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PS-b-PEO) grafted MAPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots with a quantum yield and average photoluminescence lifetime of up to 43% and 164 ns, respectively; these QDs also showed a high luminescence efficiency, high color purity and a suitable size.122 Good stability paves the way for cell imaging applications. Ding et al. prepared water-soluble CsPbX3/SiO2 nanocomposites with high stability by coating CsPbX3 quantum dots with SiO2 nanosheets. SiO2 encapsulation can effectively inhibit the direct contact between the PQD and water. Confocal fluorescence images showed that PQDs can enter MCF-7 cells and have high biocompatibility, which has been explored in the application of cell imaging.123 Li et al. embedded CsPbBr3 QDs in a water-stable SiO2 matrix, which can maintain emission in water for more than six weeks, showing strong stability, which will expand their application in biological imaging and biosensing.124Fig. 7(e)–(h) show a comparison of the optical characteristics between water-resistant perovskite nanodots (wr-PNDs) and PQDs. Tan et al. reported a magnetofluorescence perovskite nanocomposite. CsPbBr3 showed a size of 10 ± 1 nm and CsPbBr0.9I2.1 TEM imaging showed a size of 11 ± 1 nm, and magnetic induction can be used to direct cell movement and imaging (Fig. 7(i)).125 Ryu et al. successfully prepared silica (SiO2) NPs containing CsPbBr3 QDs with the size of 8–11 nm. SiO2 encapsulation enhanced the stability of the CsPbBr3 QDs, and these were successfully used for carrying out real-time X-ray detection and imaging of 5 mm pancreatic tumors grown in mice.126 Chan et al. developed a nanocrystal with a SiO2 shell and phospholipid micelles to protect CsPbBr3 QDs. The synthesized material can be used for targeted single photon and multiphoton imaging of cancer cells. Furthermore, conjugation with folic acid can also increase the uptake of QDs by cells.127 Song et al. tightly encapsulated CsPbBr3 in a SiO2 nano shell to enhance its water stability. It could be used in CT26 tumor cell imaging with good biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity.128
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD spectra of the as-received CPB@PMMA (red), PMMA (blue), and CPB PQDs (green), and standard JCPDS data (card# 54-0752) of CsPbBr3 (black line); (b) TGA spectra of PMMA and CPB@PMMA; (c) PL and absorption spectra of CPB@PMMA in water, CPB PQDs in DCM, and CPB PQDs in PET; and (d) SEM images of CPB@PMMA nanospheres and photographs of the corresponding colloid solutions prepared via spraying and dripping, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. (e) Relative PL intensities of wr-PNDs and PQDs stored in water for different periods of time; (f) UV-visible absorption and PL spectra of PQDs in toluene and wr-PNDs in water; (g) time-resolved PL spectra of PQDs and wr-PNDs in toluene; and (h) open-aperture z-scan curves measured for toluene solutions of PQDs and wr-PNDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (i) Directed motion of tagged mammospheres. Snapshots of a cluster of cells exhibiting directed motion due to the magneto-fluorescent particle (glowing spot) embedded in the cell at different time points. The yellow arrows denote the relative locations of the magnets. Scale bar, 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 


Biosensing applications. 
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a carcinogenic glycoprotein with many important physiological functions, including transport function, immunosuppression, lymphocyte-induced apoptosis, etc.129,130 Kim et al. designed a test for human hepatitis B surface antigen, human immunodeficiency virus antibody, and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), a cancer biomarker. CsPbBr3 QDs with a highly uniform size (5 nm) were first prepared under thermodynamic control and then passivated using the polyparaxylene film to improve the stability and sensitivity of the light sensor, which can be used for detection of the above diseases.131 In another study, Qin et al. reported the synthesis of CsPbCl3 PQD-modified TiO2 inverse opal photonic crystals (IOPCs) for AFP detection with a detection limit as low as 30 pg mL−1. The linear range for AFP detection in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was 0.08–980 ng mL−1.132 Dopamine (DA) is a neurotransmitter that helps cells to send impulses, controls mood and hormone levels, and plays an important role in metabolism and cardiovascular and nervous system functions. Chen and colleagues developed a sensitive sensor for detecting serum dopamine based on perovskite quantum dots with an average size of 6.8 nm. The platform shows high sensitivity, high selectivity and an immediate response, with a good linear range (0.1–250 μM) and a low detection limit (0.012 μM).133 Huang et al. reported a novel fluorescence sensor for the rapid detection of dimethoate oxide (OMT) in vegetables and soil, which combined CsPbBr3 quantum dots with molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), with high sensitivity and high selectivity for OMT, and the detection range was 50–400 ng mL−1. The detection limit was 18.8 ng mL−1.134 In a recent study, Hu et al. prepared a Cs3Bi2Br9 QD/BiOBr biosensor with attached gold nanoparticles for the sensitive detection of H2O2.135 The linear detection range was from 0.002 to 200 μM, and the detection limit was as low as 0.89 nM. This platform has the advantages of good stability, good specificity and good reproducibility, and has a broad application prospect in the detection of H2O2 secreted by cells. A sensor prepared using hydrothermally synthesized FeTiO3 QDs (mean size 7.8 nm) for the detection of dopamine in the presence of uric acid was reported by Aparna. The detection limit of DA was 1.3 nM, and the linear ranges were 1–150 μM and 200–500 μM. This sensor has the advantages of high selectivity, stability and reproducibility.136

4.2 Molybdenum disulfide quantum dots
In recent years, transition metal disulfide materials have made great progress in biomedicine, physical chemistry, electronics and optoelectronics137,138 due to their special structure and good properties. Among all transition metal dichalcogenide compounds (TMDCs), the most famous is molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), which has great application prospects in various biomedical applications because of its higher surface volume ratio, more edge sites and water solubility. Fig. 8 shows the transition elements (in the yellow box) and chalcogenides (in the red box) that form TMDCs.139
 Fig. 8  Elemental composition, structure, and applications of TMDCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 

Bioimaging applications. 
MoS2 QDs have great development potential in imaging due to their excellent luminescence characteristics. Liu et al. reported a simple and green synthesis method for MoS2 QDs with an average diameter of 5.5 nm, which can be used for the biological imaging of HeLa cells. After being internalized by HeLa cells, the cytoplasmic region is mainly associated with good cell viability and normal morphology.140 Wu et al. reported a method to obtain MoS2 QDs via ultrasonic exfoliation in an alkaline environment, and observed using confocal fluorescence microscopy that alveolar cells could internalize MoS2 QDs, displaying the fluorescence magnification images of individual cells.141 Gu and colleagues obtained MoS2 QDs via a solvothermal method with high stability and low toxicity, and they were successfully used for two-photon fluorescence imaging of MDA-MB-468 cells, where it was shown that they could also enter the nucleus of HeLa cells, indicating that MoS2 QDs have a promising future in deep-tissue imaging.142 Lin et al. obtained spherical MoS2 QDs with a uniform thickness of about 3 nm using ammonium tetrathiomolybdate ((NH4)2MoS4) as the precursor and oleamine as the reducing agent. The prepared MoS2 QDs were ingested by 293T cells and large-scale fluorescence signals could be seen in the cytoplasm with good biocompatibility and low toxicity, which proved that the synthesized MoS2 QDs could be used in real-time optical cell imaging.143 Recently, Xu et al. developed a fluorescent probe for imaging and monitoring of the mitochondrial pH in living cells. MoS2 quantum dots, as the carrier of the pH fluorescence indicator rhodamine, showed high water dispersion, good biocompatibility and cell permeability in HeLa cells, human hepatoma cells HepG2 and normal liver cells LO2.144


Biosensing applications. 
Hyaluronidase (HAase) hydrolyzes hyaluronic acid (HA) to reduce the HA activity in vivo and cytoplasmic viscosity. HAase overexpression has been found in several cancers, such as brain and colorectal cancer, so HAase is considered as a potential tumor marker. In addition, HAase has been implicated in physiological effects such as embryogenesis, inflammation and wound healing. Gu et al. synthesized water-soluble MoS2 QDs (average diameter: 2.8 nm) from hydrazine hydrate via a hydrothermal method, and further assembled a MoS2 QDs/HA-AuNP fluorescence sensor for the detection of hyaluronidase (HAase), with a linear range of 1–50 U mL−1 and a detection limit of 0.7 U mL−1. In the presence of HAase, HA is broken into small fragments, and the AuNPs reconverge to restore the fluorescence of the MoS2 QDs.145 Glucose is an important nutrient in the human body and can provide a lot of energy. In another study, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were decorated on MoS2 QDs (AuNPs@MoS2 QDs) to synthesize a composite material for the detection of glucose, which catalyzes the formation of the blue-green product from the substrate 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) in the presence of H2O2. It acts like catalase. Under interference conditions, the sensor showed good selectivity, repeatability and stability for glucose detection, and was further applied to detect glucose levels in human biological body fluids (serum, saliva and tears).146 The quantum yield of the MoS2 QDs synthesized using a hydrothermal method by Wang et al. reached 13.4%, and the detection range for H2O2 ranged from 0.01 to 20 mM with a detection limit of 5 nM. The detection range and detection limit of glucose combined with glucose oxidase (GOD) were 0.01–30 mM and 7 nM, respectively.147 Mani et al. synthesized a hydrothermal biosensor for H2O2 detection based on MoS2 QDs with a detection range of 2–94 μM and a detection limit (LOD) of 2 μM, and further glucose detection with the addition of glucose oxidase.148 Chromium ion (Cr3+) is an essential trace element in the human body, and plays an important role in various physiological functions, e.g., as an important component of glucose tolerance factor (GTF), inhibiting cholesterol biosynthesis and protein metabolism. Desai et al. prepared MoS2 QDs via a hydrothermal method using ammonium hexamolybdate and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) as precursors; these QDs had an average size of 2.2 ± 0.6 nm and a fine spherical shape, with an estimated QY of 12.8%. When the synthetic MoS2 QDs were exposed to Cr3+, the characteristic blue emission was significantly quenched, and the detection limit was 0.08 μM. The fluorescence does not change significantly at various pH values, showing good stability.149 Bilirubin, a kind of bile pigment, is an important indicator to judge whether liver function is normal. Shanmugaraj and colleagues reported a sensor for the detection of bilirubin in body fluids using MoS2 QDs with a size of 2.4 nm; a high sensitivity to bilirubin was reported with a LOD of 2.1 nm, and these QDs were successfully used for the detection of bilirubin in human serum and urine.150 Cao et al. reported a novel ECL biosensing platform based on MoS2 QDs, which has been successfully used for the determination of microRNA-21 in human serum with a detection limit of 0.20 fmol L−1 and a recovery rate of 90.0–110.0%.151 Bian et al. reported that an MoS2 QDs adsorbent on a silica colloidal crystal barcode (SCCB) was used for the quantitative detection of miRNA in tumors (as shown in Fig. 9). Here, the measured quantum dot fluorescence signal positively correlated with the concentration of hybrid nucleic acid, showing that high sensitivity and high selectivity detection can be achieved. It has been successfully used for the detection of several pancreatic cancer-related miRNAs with a LOD of 4.2 ± 0.3 nM and a linear detection range of 10 nM to 2 mM.152 Ahmed et al. designed a simple bottom-up method to prepare ultra-small chiral MoS2 QDs (2.5 nm) with blue fluorescence emission, which can be used to detect avian influenza virus proteins and virus cultures from blood samples.153
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the microRNA detection process on the MoS2 platform, and (b) schematic diagram of multiplex microRNA detection using MoS2-integrated SCCBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 


Biotherapy applications. 
Human serum albumin (HSA) maintains a normal blood osmotic pressure and is involved in the transport of fatty acids, steroid hormones, and exogenous substances. Luo et al. found that MoS2 QDs can significantly reduce the thermal stability of human serum albumin (HSA) and inhibit the formation of HSA fibrils by reducing the hydrophobic environment and interfering with disulfide bonds in the structure of the HSA network, which may have some potential in preventing serious amyloid-related diseases.154 Liu et al. prepared a MoS2 QDs integrated reverse opal microcarrier to maintain cell growth in an anoxic environment and promote the repair of abdominal wall defects (AWDs), which can be used for controlled oxygen delivery and tissue repair.155 The emergence of photothermal therapy, photodynamic therapy and other new therapeutic methods has greatly improved the therapeutic effect of malignant tumors. A biodegradable nanomaterial was obtained by integrating MoS2 quantum dots into disulfide-based SiO2 nanoparticles, denoted as MoS2@ssSiO2. After that, hyaluronic acid (HA) and chlorin e6 (Ce6) were adsorbed on the shell to obtain MoS2@ss-SiO2-Ce6/HA nanoparticles with good stability, which proved that the accumulation of MoS2@ss-SiO2-Ce6/HA nanoparticles in tumors was higher than that in other organs and realized higher tumor absorption. This material has shown an excellent performance in combined photothermal therapy (PTT) and photodynamic therapy (PDT) guided by integrated fluorescence/CT/MSOT imaging, especially with higher anti-tumor efficacy when PTT and PDT are used in combination.156 Wang et al. prepared a polyaniline-modified MoS2 QDs-based nanomaterial (MoS2@PANI), where the MoS2@PANI nanoparticles can induce a photothermal effect in the near-infrared region, and the photothermal conversion efficiency can reach 31.6%, showing excellent biocompatibility in vivo and in vitro. Combined photothermal therapy/radiotherapy (PTT/RT) resulted in 78.4% cell death and improved the efficiency of the treatment. After hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, it was observed that the PTT/RT combined treatment group caused severe damage to tumor cells, which was manifested by a vacuolar increase, a cell-shape change and nuclear concentration in tumor slices.157 Liu et al. developed a highly integrated chitosan (CS) nanoplatform based on the phthalocyanine aluminum chloride (AlPc)-loaded MoS2 QDs core/SiO2 shell, which significantly inhibited the growth of cancer cells in 4T1-bearing mice after treatment. For in vivo and in vitro experiments, the near-infrared region can induce the photothermal effect, which accelerates the blood flow of tumor cells and increases the oxygen supply of the tumor, thus improving the effect of photodynamic therapy.158 Ding and colleagues demonstrated a simple bottom-up route for the preparation of uniformly sized MoS2 QDs (3.9 nm) at room temperature in water. In the in vitro model, MoS2 QDs were used as the photosensitizer agent for photodynamic cancer cell therapy, SW480 cells were used as the cancer cell model, and calcein (green fluorescence) and propidium iodide (red fluorescence) staining were used to determine living/dead cancer cells during visual treatment. The SW480 cells maintained a high cell viability with either light treatment or MoS2 QDs treatment alone. Under light exposure, compared with the MoS2-DM and MoS2-DL groups, cells treated with the higher sulfur deficiency MOS2-DH QDs showed a lower cell viability. Results showed that there was a strong positive correlation between the degree of sulfur deficiency in the MoS2 QDs and the photodynamic efficiency, and that MoS2 QDs with higher defects at the same concentration could be used as a more effective photodynamic agent for eliminating cancer cells and improving the therapeutic effect.159 Dong et al. synthesized MoS2 QDs with a good up- and down-conversion luminescence ability using tetrabutylammonium-assisted ultrasound processing, and they could generate singlet oxygen (1O2) for photodynamic therapy (PDT), which has great application prospects in cancer treatment and biological imaging.160


Drug-delivery applications. 
Liu et al. developed a PEGylated MoS2 QDs nanocarrier loaded with the anticancer drug doxorubicin (DOX). The average diameter of the MoS2 QDs obtained via the hydrothermal method was 1.6 nm with good dispersion, and the PEG functionalization gave the QDs a low cytotoxicity and good physiological stability. The MoS2-PEG-DOX nanocarrier showed pH-dependent drug-release behavior, and the drug release was accelerated in a lower pH environment. After uptake by cells, DOX and MoS2-PEG were well distributed in the nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively, and could effectively track and treat cancer cells.161

4.3 Zinc oxide quantum dots
In recent years, zinc oxide quantum dots have become a good choice in the biomedical field due to their antibacterial and biodegradable properties. In addition, zinc plays an important role in the human body, including promoting the proliferation of germ cells, maintaining normal eyesight, improving immunity, etc. It is an essential trace element that we need. Zinc oxide quantum dots have been used in imaging, sensing, drug delivery and disease treatment due to their tunable emission wavelength and high quantum yield.

Bioimaging applications. 
Lei et al. reported that ZnO QDs with blue fluorescence were synthesized in hyperbranched poly(ethylene imine) (HPEI), and that the QY could reach 30% by changing the [Zn2+]/[OH−] mole ratio and heating time. Due to the transfection characteristics of HPEI, ZnO/HPEI nanocomposites are easily endocytosed by cells, and only COS-7 cells without fluorescence show blue fluorescence under a fluorescence microscope, showing excellent biological imaging behavior.162 Liu et al. first synthesized ZnO QDs (5 nm) with yellow fluorescence, and then added them to peroxalate and hydrogen peroxide solution to modify them with a silane coupling agent. Bright blue photoluminescence (PL) was observed and the quantum yield was greatly improved (Fig. 10 shows the biological imaging capability). The formed ZnO@SiO2 nanocomposites were well dispersed in water, and their treatment of HeLa cells verified the feasibility of bioimaging.163 Li and colleagues coated the synthesized ZnO QDs with hydrophobic HDS and hydrophilic APS, and obtained ZnO@HDS@APS nanomaterials with tunable fluorescence from blue to green and yellow after this disilane modification. This material shows strong stability in water media, and the fluorescence intensity is about 10 times higher than that of bare ZnO QDs. Through the treatment of blood, yeast cells and mouse muscle tissue, the potential application prospect of ZnO@HDS@APS in cell and tissue imaging was preliminarily demonstrated.164 Liu et al. reported that ZnO QDs prepared via a sol–gel method using different solvents (methanol, ethanol and hexanol) showed visible emission from green to orange, which has broad application prospects in biological imaging.165 Jia et al. synthesized ZnO QDs (2–4 nm) with high sensitivity and specificity via chemical hydrolysis, which maintained long-term stability for up to 12 months. After the ZnO QDs were doped with a small amount of Mn2+, the original blue emission was adjusted to a greenish-yellow emission, which is close to the near-infrared biological window (about 650–770 nm), improving the imaging specificity and making them promising for application in living medical imaging.166
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of ZnO NPs@SiO2-based CL bioimaging, (b) and (c) CL images (b) and intensities (c) of HeLa cells cultured with ZnO@SiO2 NPs for 6 h and then added to a mixture of CPPO and different concentrations of H2O2, and (d) cell viability of HeLa cells after 24 h of incubation with different concentrations of ZnO@SiO2 NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 


Biosensing applications. 
Thrombin is an important serine protease in the human body, which can accelerate the coagulation process. Li et al. reported graphene oxide-coated copper-doped zinc oxide QDs as a photoelectrochemical (PEC) biosensing platform for the sensitive detection and specific screening of thrombin. The linear range of the sensor is 50–10000 fM, the detection limit is 29 fM, and the sensor still shows good selectivity under the interference of other biomolecules. Cu2+ doping can adjust the band gap of ZnO QDs and enhance their visible light absorption ability. Graphene shells can accelerate charge transfer and improve photocorrosion.167 As mentioned earlier, dopamine (DA) is a catecholamine neurotransmitter associated with mood and hormone levels. Verma et al. constructed a biosensor based on ZnO QDs for the sensitive detection of DA. The Tyr/ZnO–rGO nanocomposite system was obtained by covalently bonding tyrosinase (Tyr) on a ZnO–reduced graphene oxide (ZnO–rGO) surface. The sensor has a detection range of 0.1–1500 pM, a sensitivity of 39.56 ± 0.41 μA nM−1, and a detection limit of 8.75 ± 0.64 pM. It is highly selective for DA in human serum and can be stable for 3 months at 4 °C, showing great potential in clinical applications.168 Ali et al. prepared ZnO QDs with a size of 5–8 nm via a precipitation method, which were combined with uricase to form a highly sensitive biosensor for uric acid detection, with a response range of 1–10 mM and a sensitivity of 4.0 μA mM−1 cm−2.169 In one study, a fluorescent probe formed via conjugation of ZnO QDs with a peptide could be used to detect proteinase 3 (PR3), with the detection limit reduced from 43 pmol to 1.3 pmol, which is conducive to the detection of PR3 overexpression or neutrophil activation-related diseases.170


Biotherapy applications. 
Recently, Lin et al. reported a ZnO QD nanoplatform loaded with pDNA and nerve growth factor (NGF) that inhibits the expression of α-synuclein (SNCA) in the midbrain for the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD) (Fig. 11).171 Ye et al. synthesized a pH-sensitive ZnO-Gd-DOX nanoplatform by coordinating Gd3+ on the surface of ZnO QDs and loading DOX. The platform can emit strong red fluorescence (600–800 nm), which overcomes the limitations of the ultraviolet irradiation conditions of the visible light emitted by the ZnO QDs and changes from blue to yellow, making it more suitable for biological imaging. ZnO-Gd-DOX nanoparticles have a better therapeutic effect on cancer cells than free DOX and DOXIL, and can inhibit tumor growth due to their specificity for tumors. The proper coordination of Gd3+ with carboxyl groups results in high relaxation, so MRI and drug delivery can be used simultaneously. The nanoplatform is fully biodegradable, so no toxic side effects can be detected.172 Ghaemi et al. prepared Gd/Eu-doped ZnO QDs (8–9 nm) using a chemical precipitation method and fixed the optimum doping ratio of 5% to keep the crystal structure of the ZnO QDs stable. The cytotoxicity of the ZnO QDs and Gd/Eu-doped ZnO QDs on prostate cancer cells (PC3), cervical cancer cells (HeLa) and normal fibroblasts (L929) was evaluated using the MTT method under different irradiation conditions (dark conditions, ultraviolet, X-ray and γ radiation). In addition, the Gd/Eu-doped ZnO QDs can amplify the radiation effect of X-rays on cancer cells and reduce the dose of normal cells. The effect of a 20 μg mL−1 doped QD treatment on cancer cells exposed to 2 Gy X-rays was the same as that of untreated cells exposed to 6 Gy X-rays, indicating the use of prepared QDs to reduce the dose used for treatment. In addition, doped quantum dots can also be used in MRI/CT imaging, which has broad prospects for tumor treatment.173
 Fig. 11  (a) CLSM images of the cellular uptake of ZnO@Polymer-Np for different times (1, 3 and 5 h). ZnO QDs (green), Cy5-labeled pDNA (red), and merged images in a bright field. Scale bar, 10 μm. (b) Quantitative analysis of the fluorescence intensity from ZnO QDs and Cy5-pDNA in PC12 cells for various incubation times. (c) CLSM images of the release of pDNA loaded by ZnO@Polymer-Np in PC12 cells through lysosomal escape. Cy5-labeled pDNA (red), lysosomes (green) stained with Lyso Tracker. Non-overlapping parts of green and red areas (white arrows). (d) Differentiation of PC12 cells incubated with free NGF (100 ng mL−1), ZnO@Polymer or ZnO@Polymer-Np. Extended synapses in the PC12 cells (red arrows). Scale bar, 100 μm. (e) Total number of PC12 cells and (f) number of PC12 cells with synapses (>50 μm). (g) Cell viability of C6 and SH-SY5Y cells treated with ZnO@Polymer-Np at various Zn concentrations (from 0.25 to 3.00 mg mL−1), using PBS as a negative control. (h) Cell proliferation of two PD model cells after treatment with ZnO@Polymer-Np at various Zn concentrations (0.25, 0.50 and 0.75 mg mL−1), where cells pre-treated with MPP+ were used as a positive control. Significance, ns: p > 0.05, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 


Drug-delivery applications. 
Xiang et al. obtained a pH-sensitive drug-delivery system by functionalizing ZnO quantum dots with folic acid (ZnO–FA) and using them to cap titanium dioxide nanotubes (TNT) loaded with vancomycin (Van). The platform remained stable under normal physiological conditions, and the decrease in pH after bacterial infection caused dissolution of the ZnO QDs and the release of Zn2+, which showed an antibacterial effect and could inhibit the related bacterial infection after titanium implantation. FA has a protective effect on ZnO QDs in the acidic environment to ensure that they will not dissolve too quickly, and the combined action of Van and Zn2+ further enhances the bacteriostatic ability.174 Li et al. developed a novel β-1,3-D-glucan porous microcapsule (GPM) coated with folic acid conjugated liposome (FCL) as an oral drug delivery system, introducing ZnO QDs (4 nm) as an anticancer agent and for fluorescence imaging of the cancer cells. The GEF/ZnO-FCL@GPM system provides a 1.75-fold increase in bioavailability compared with the branded drug (Iressa®), and demonstrates a better anti-tumor efficacy and improved drug-absorption efficiency.175 Kim et al. developed an anticancer drug-delivery system by encapsulating the polylactic acid–glycolic acid copolymer (PLGA) with ZnO QDs. PLGA/ZnO QDs showed selective cytotoxicity at low concentrations (7.5 μg mL−1), that is, they had a large killing effect on cancer cells and a small effect on normal cells. The PLGA/ZnO QDs inhibit the invasion and proliferation of metastatic lung cancer cells (A549) by inducing DNA damage and initiating apoptosis.176 Roshini and colleagues successfully prepared pH-sensitive tangeretin-zinc oxide quantum dots (Tan-ZnO QDs) with anticancer properties. MTT assay results showed that the Tan-ZnO QDs could specifically target cancer cells, but had little effect on normal cells. The Tan-ZnO QDs can destroy the morphological structure of metastatic lung cancer cells (H358), induce DNA damage of the cancer cells and promote the apoptosis process, and they can also inhibit their proliferation and migration in an acidic environment, which has the potential as a drug carrier for the treatment of metastatic lung cancer.177 Zhang et al. loaded DOX by coupling cysteine (Cys) with lemon-like porous silica (L-pSiO2), and then used ZnO QDs to seal the drug-loaded pores on the carrier to obtain nanoparticles for drug delivery. This nanocarrier has good thermal stability and degradability, and exhibits degradation behavior in response to GSH and pH. Packaging with ZnO QDs reduces the premature release of DOX and improves the drug-delivery efficiency, and this system holds good prospects for targeted drug delivery to tumors.178 Cai et al. synthesized a pH-sensitive drug-delivery system (HA-Zn-DOX) based on ZnO QDs by combining polyethylene glycol (PEG) with synthesized ZnO QDs (3 nm) and modifying the final DOX with hyaluronic acid (HA). The ZnO QDs dissolve in an acidic environment, releasing DOX that targets A549 cancer cells, with a drug load of 30% and a load efficiency of 83.4%.179

4.4 Carbon quantum dots
Quasi-spherical carbon-based nanomaterials with particle sizes below 10 nm are called carbon quantum dots. Since their appearance, carbon quantum dots have been used in different biological fields due to their advantages of good biocompatibility, high chemical inertness, good water solubility, low toxicity, adjustable surface function and excellent optical stability. The optical properties of CQDs can be fine-tuned by changing the size and shape of the CQDs or via surface modification, making them the preferred choice in many applications. There are many options for synthesizing CQDs, in which a variety of precursors are used as the carbon source. Various raw materials from biomass have been reported in the literature, which include Tinospora cordifolia leaves,180 oil palm biomass,181 areca leaves,182 corn straw shells,183 shrimp shells,184 lemon juice,185 bread,186 carrots,187 gourds,188 banana peel,189 starch,190 Mexican mint leaves,191 maple leaves,192etc. However, the low quantum yield of carbon quantum dots limits their application in many fields, and some studies have been devoted to overcoming this limitation and improving the function of CQDs. Among them, different atomic doping can adjust their electronic structure and change their inherent properties. According to the number of doped atomic impurities, they can be divided into single-doped CQDs and co-doped CQDs. The more common doped atoms are nitrogen, boron, sulfur and phosphorus, which are also used to form the co-doped systems, e.g., nitrogen/sulfur, nitrogen/phosphorus and nitrogen/boron. Of course, other elements have also been used in doping studies, e.g., non-metallic elements such as F, Cl, Br and I, and metallic elements such as Fe, Mn, Zn, Ru and Hf.

Bioimaging applications. 
CQDs produced via a hydrothermal method using the volatile oil of thyme as a carbon source can be used to image SKOV3 cells, showing distinct blue and green emission in the microscopic images.193 The particle diameter is 8 nm, the maximum emission wavelength is 420 nm, and they can provide a 5.2% quantum yield. In a previous study, CQDs (3–8 nm in size) produced from carrots had a maximum emission wavelength of 450 nm and could be used for imaging in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial models.187 CQDs, with a particle diameter of 2.9 nm and a quantum yield of 15.8%, were synthesized by Qin et al. using Escherichia coli as a precursor via a hydrothermal method, and they were used for microbial imaging of living and dead cells. When applied to HeLa and U2OS cells, the images showed obvious red, green and blue fluorescence.194 Recently, polychromatic emission CQDs with an average size of 4.5 ± 0.5 nm and a QY of 15% were synthesized using areca leaves as the carbon source via a hydrothermal method, demonstrating that they can be used for the polychromatic imaging of mouse fibroblasts and human thyroid cancer cells.182 CQDs with a 12.45% quantum yield were prepared using a microwave-assisted method, which can illuminate fungal cells under confocal microscopy excited at 405 nm, and can be used as a fluorescent agent for fungal bioimaging and imaging of intracellular Fe3+.195 In addition, CQDs with high biocompatibility were synthesized from gourds via a hydrothermal method, and polychromatic emission characteristics were observed in SH-SY5Y cells, with blue, green and red emission at different excitation wavelengths.196 Li et al. synthesized CQDs with a uniform size distribution (1.2–3.2 nm) and strong blue fluorescence (405 nm) using a hydrothermal method and corn straw shells as the raw material for in vitro bioimaging of A549 cells, with a biocompatibility of over 75%.183 Atchudan et al. reported that banana peel-based CQDs (QY 20%) have a strong fluorescence stability and biocompatibility, with particle sizes between 4 and 6 nm, and can be used for the polychromatic imaging of nematodes.189 Deng et al. prepared CQDs (QY 25.8%) using waste grain as a raw material using a microwave-assisted method, with emission wavelengths from 442 to 510 nm, which showed bright blue fluorescence at 405 nm in confocal images of HeLa cells.197 N atoms are the most commonly doped heteroatoms of CQDs, due to their comparable atomic radius. Zhang et al. prepared N-CQDs from gourds via a hydrothermal method with quantum yield of 23% and an average particle size of 3.2 nm, and performed optical bioimaging on human prostate cancer (PC-3) cells, showing low cytotoxicity and good biocompatibility.188 Not long ago, Gracia et al. obtained N-CQDs with a QY of 19.9% and an average particle size of 3.56 nm using a hydrothermal method, and these can be used for imaging E. coli and SKMEL cells with good biocompatibility and low toxicity.198 Zheng et al. synthesized N-CQDs (QY 18.41%) from Panax notoginseng using a simple hydrothermal method with an average particle size of 6.66 nm, which can be used for imaging of E. coli, Bacillus subtilis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, onion inner epidermal cells, tongue coating leaves and the caudate nucleus.199 Su and colleagues successfully synthesized ultra-small sized (3.73 ± 0.62 nm) hafnium-doped carbon quantum dots (Hf-CQDs) with a QY of 18.4% via pyrolysis. Fluorescence imaging was successfully performed in HeLa cells and tumor bearing mice, and can also be used in the imaging of liver cancer using computed tomography (CT).200 There are many precursors and manufacturing procedures that can be used to prepare CQDs. Table 1 shows the CQDs for biological imaging produced using different preparation methods and precursors.
Table 1 CQDs for biological imaging produced using different preparation methods and precursors




Method
Precursor

Λ
emmax
Size (nm)
QY (%)
Cell line
Ref.




Hydrothermal carbonization

Tinospora cordifolia leaves
435
5.47
3.7
B16F10 and SiHa

180



Carbonization activation and hydrothermal carbonisation
Oil palm biomass
500
5–7
24.6
NA

181



Hydrothermal
Betel leaves
NA
4.5 ± 0.5
15
L929 and SW1736

182



Hydrothermal
Corn stalk shells
NA
1.2–3.2
NA
A549

183



Solvothermal
Polyurethane (PU) sponge
NA
2
NA
HeLa and MC3T3-E1

201



Microwave-assisted
Citric acid and metformin
450
5–6
8.4
HEK-293, DRG neurons and SJGBM2 cells

202



Microwave-assisted
Ibuprofen
455
6.99 ± 2.50
5.6
HeLa

203



Hydrothermal
Shrimp shells
450
8–10
27.14
Nematode cells

184



Hydrothermal
Sandalwood
458
2–4
12
MG-63

204



Solvothermal
Lemon juice
704
5.7
31
HeLa

185



Pyrolysis
Citric acid (CA), thiourea (TU) and hafnium chloride (HfCl4)


3.73 ± 0.62
18.4
HeLa

200



Thermal carbonization
Bread
600
<0
NA
C2C12

186



Hydrothermal

o-Phenylenediamine and urea
650
2.60 ± 0.68
20.1
HeLa

205



Carbonization
Ice biryani
432
2–5
41
A549

206



One-pot reflux
Carrots
450
3–8
4.56
Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli) and Gram-positive bacteria (S. aureus)

187







Biosensing applications. 
Melanoma is a highly malignant tumor caused by the mutation of melanocytes, mostly occurring in the skin, which has seen an increasing incidence and mortality in recent years. Tyrosinase (TYR) is an important enzyme that regulates melanin production and can be used as a biomarker in the diagnosis of melanoma. Huang et al. used levodopa and urea as precursors to prepare levodopa-functionalized carbon quantum dots (DoPa-CQDs), which were used as biosensors to detect tyrosinase. The linear range and detection limit are 0–1200 U L−1 and 7.3 U L−1, respectively. They are highly selective for tyrosinase and can resist the interference by various amino acids and proteases. In addition, TYR detection and inhibitor screening in human serum samples showed a good performance, as well as real-time monitoring of intracellular TYR.207 Too much or too little hemoglobin, which carries oxygen to red blood cells, can cause a range of diseases, including anemia, leukemia and blood clots. Singh and colleagues developed a device to detect hemoglobin (Hb) levels in the blood by coupling CDs with methylene blue (MB red) to form a reaction matrix that utilizes the redox reaction between Hb and MBred, in which colorless MBred is converted to blue MBox as the Hb concentration increases. The detection limit of this sensor is 2 g dL−1, and the reaction matrix can specifically select Hb and is independent of the influence of inorganic salts and proteins in the blood.208 Vitamin B12 is a compound containing cobalt ions, which are involved in the formation of red blood cells in the bone marrow and the prevention of pernicious anemia. Preethi and colleagues prepared CQDs using curry berries as a carbon source using ultrasonic treatment, and used them as a vitamin B12 sensor with a detection limit of 0.04 μM. The main element of vitamin B12 is Co2+, which can quench CQD fluorescence.209 Nitric oxide (NO) is an important messenger molecule that carries life information and maintains the normal physiological functions of cells. Unfortunately, the concentration of NO in biological samples is very low, at the level of nmol L−1, so the accurate and real-time detection of NO levels in biological samples is difficult. Wu et al. reported a biosensor for detecting the NO concentration based on CQDs. The mechanism is that NO can react with the o-phenylenediamine groups on the surface of the CQDs to generate the triazole structure, which can quench the fluorescence of CQDs. This sensor has a high specificity for NO in the presence of other substances and has a low detection limit of 9.12 nM. It is also used for the detection of NO in human serum samples with an average recovery of 97.25%.210 MiRNA is a kind of non-coding RNA molecule of about 22 nucleotides in length, and its abnormal expression is often found in tumors, so it can be used as a tumor marker for the early diagnosis of cancer. Mohammadi et al. combined CQDs synthesized using different aldehyde precursors with chitosan to form hydrogel composite materials, and then functionalized them with ssDNA to obtain sensors for detecting microRNA-21 in breast cancer cells, with a linear range and a detection limit of 0.1–125 fM and 0.03 fM, respectively. The probe showed specific selectivity for microRNA-21, even in the presence of the most serious interfering molecules.211 Diabetes is a chronic disease characterized by hyperglycemia. Early diagnosis can be achieved by detecting glucose levels in the blood, which is of great significance for people's health. Chen et al. synthesized mercaptan-functionalized CQDs via hydrothermal carbonization and surface modification to detect the glucose levels in human serum. CQDs can emit bright yellow-green fluorescence, they have good pH/salt stability, provide a detection limit as low as 0.03 μM, show high specificity for glucose in complex environments and can resist interference from other sugars. As a new strategy for the detection of glucose, the high sensitivity and good selectivity of this sensor have great potential for development in the diagnosis of glucose-related diseases.212 Recently, Rajalakshmi et al. successfully synthesized triaminoguanine-derived carbon sites for the detection of citrate in cells via a one-step hydrothermal method using triaminoguanidine as the sole carbon source. The probe shows good selectivity and high anti-interference to citrate, with a detection limit of 4 nM, and has been successfully used in the detection of citrate levels in living cells and human urine.213 Meng and colleagues prepared CQDs with a QY of 54.4% and orange emission using a solvothermal method, and these can detect morin and hypochlorite (ClO−) with a linear range of 5–125 μM and 2.5–90 μM, respectively, and a LOD of 0.84 μM and 0.46 μM, respectively.214 In addition, Ji et al. successfully synthesized NIR carbon dots using glutathione and poly(ethyleneimine) as the precursors via a solvothermal method, which can be used as a sensor to detect lysozyme (LYZ) in cells and human urine with a linear range of 0.03–10 μM and a LOD of 7 nM, showing the advantages of sensitive recognition and repeatable detection.215 Chellasamy et al. reported a highly stable and efficient biosensor for the detection of cesium ions using a one-step hydrothermal synthesis of CQDs from maple leaves. In this study, they were able to detect Cs+ over a wide range (100 nM to 100 μM) with a LOD of 24 nM.192 Even for the detection of the same substance, there are many choices of precursor sources and preparation methods for CQDs. Table 2 shows the biosensor CQDs prepared using different preparation methods and precursor systems.
Table 2 CQDs for biosensing produced using different preparation methods and precursors




Method
Precursor

Λ
emmax
Size (nm)
QY (%)
Analyte
LOD
Range
Ref.




Hydrothermal

o-Phenylenediamine and L-cysteine
NA
3–8
14
Cl−
2.817 μM
15–200 μM

216



Microwave-assisted
Glutathione (GSH) and p-phenylenediamine (PPD)
535
3.9 ± 0.4
63
Fe3+ and thiol
1.2 μM and NA
0–150 μM and NA

217



Hydrothermal
Tri-aminoguanidine (TAG)
396
2.8
11.3
Citrate
4 nM
NA

213



Solvothermal
Nile blue sulphate and citric acid
615
2.93
54.4
Morin and ClO−
0.84 μM and 0.46 μM
5–125 μM and 2.5–90 μM

214



Solvothermal
Glutathione and poly(ethylenimine)
NA
10
NA
Lysozyme
4 nM
0.03–10 μM

215



Hydrothermal
Starch
435
5.6
12.2
NO2− and SO32−
0.425 μM and 0.243 μM
NA

190



Hydrothermal
Basic fuchsin and sulfosalicylic acid
605
1.2–4.8
1.84
Tetracycline antibiotics and quercetin
32.36 nM and 6.87 nM/22.89 nM
1.24–165 μM and 0.98–34 μM/34–165 μM

218



Hydrothermal carbonization
Malic acid and neutral red
627
2.28 ± 0.17
24.9
MnO4−
14.5 nM
0–115 μM

219



Solvothermal pyrolysis
Citric acid and acrylamide
644
6.5–13.5
NA
Hg2+ and ziram
0.19 μM and 0.55 μg mL−1
0–40 μM and 0–5 μg mL−1

220



Hydrothermal
Chitosan and ethylenediamine
NA
2.3
NA
ALP
0.013 mU mL−1
0.09–0.8 mU mL−1

221



Microwave-assisted
Mexican mint leaves
436
2.43 ± 0.02
17
Fe3+
0.53 μM
0–15 μM

191



Hydrothermal
Maple tree leaves
445
2–10
NA
Cs+
24 nM
100 nm to 100 μM

192



Hydrothermal
Kanamycin sulfate (Kan)
425
3.87
5.26
Cr6+
0.36 μM
0–33 μM

222



Hydrothermal

Serratia marcescens KMR-3
413
4
21.6

p-Nitrophenol
80 nM
30–80 μM

223



Solvothermal
Glucose and dilute sulfuric acid
590
6 ± 2
NA
Al3+ and Fe3+
2.5 nM and 1.7 nM
0.75–52 μM and 0.38–67.5 μM

224







Biotherapy applications. 
Gao et al. developed a chiral carbon-dot glucose oxidase (GOx) nanoreactor (L/DGOx) for cancer therapy via the co-assembly of GOx and L/D-CDs.225 L/DGOx has pH sensitive release behavior, which can improve the enzyme activity. L/DGOx can be taken up by cancer cells and oxidize glucose to generate H2O2, which can effectively kill cancer cells and prevent tumor growth. The enzyme activity of DGOx is higher than that of LGOx, so the amount of H2O2 produced is higher, providing a platform for anti-cancer therapy using CQDs as the carrier. Liver cancer accounts for the sixth largest incidence of cancer in the world, but the death toll ranks as the third largest, with hundreds of thousands of people falling ill and dying every year, among which hepatocellular carcinoma accounts for 75–85% of all types of liver cancer.226 Liver transplantation is considered the best treatment, but it is also important to develop new drugs. Wang et al. synthesized CQDs with tricolor (red, green, and blue) emission from tryptophan and sorbitol using a hydrothermal method for the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma.227 Compared with normal L02 cells, the green fluorescence of the human hepatoma cell line Huh7 was stronger, indicating the tumor targeting ability of TC-WS-CQDS. Green luminescent TC-WS-CQDs inhibit cancer cells by inducing the p53-AMPK pathway to produce reactive oxygen to activate autophagy. Not long ago, Wu et al. synthesized fluorine and nitrogen co-doped carbon dots via pyrolysis that could be used as a type-I photosensitizer for photodynamic therapy (PDT).228 Water-soluble starch was selected as the carbon source, and the F-doped source was provided by levofloxacin. The F-doped starch was more soluble in water, had a higher quantum yield and was more effective for ROS generation. In the 3D MC model with the same illumination, ROS produced by F,N-CQDs has a better effect on 3D MCs, proving its inhibitory effect on tumors. Recently, Liu et al. synthesized multifunctional CQDs for cancer via a hydrothermal method using gallic acid and tyrosine as the carbon sources. The CQDs specifically inhibit cancer cells by producing ROS, but are less toxic to normal cells.229 Due to their excellent photothermal efficiency (33.9%) in the NIR region, they have an excellent synergistic anti-tumor effect on tumor treatment and presentation in mice. In addition, CQDs can make the outer membrane of E. coli rough so that it can fragment, and they have an excellent antibacterial ability, which is conducive to post-operative wound-recovery management.


Drug-delivery applications. 
In order to design more efficient drug-delivery systems, it is necessary to understand the interactions between carbon quantum dots and cell membranes. Boruah et al. used phosphatidylcholine vesicles as a cell membrane model to study the interaction between CQDs carrying four different functional groups including the carboxyl group (–COOH), the amino group (–NH2), the hydroxyl group (–OH) and a BSA protein envelope.230 Verification via PL, vesicle surface charge, FTIR and other characterization methods showed that the CQDs-NH2 had a strong binding ability with vesicles, while the other three CQDs showed no obvious interaction. It may be that the lone pair of electrons on the phosphate oxygen atom can form hydrogen bonds with the two H atoms on the free –NH2, making CQDs-NH2 firmly adsorbed on the vesicle. The possible mechanism of interaction between the CQDs and vesicles is shown in Fig. 12(a). This kind of interaction also exists in our bodies, where neurotransmitters (usually amines) transmit cellular information through synapses in neurons only through vesicular platforms. In addition, most drugs also contain amines, which further demonstrates the importance of amine function. This study will benefit research into carbon-based nanomaterials as drug-delivery systems. Adriamycin is a commonly used clinical drug for the treatment of cancer, but its accumulation in the body will produce many side effects, and some new strategies are needed to reduce its adverse effects to improve the efficiency of treatment. Iron deficiency is a very common nutritional-deficiency disease. Ammonium ferric citrate (FAC) is commonly used for iron supplementation, but its stability and bioavailability need to be improved. Shi et al. synthesized CQDs loaded with DOX and ammonium ferric citrate (FAC), respectively, using peony pollen and urea as the raw materials. The surface of the CQDs obtained was dominated by –NH2, and they formed spherical particles with a diameter of about 5 nm and could emit blue fluorescence with a QY of 12%. The optimal mass ratio of CDs to DOX was 37.2%, which in combination increased the pH targeting of the drug and reduced the side effects. When CDs and FAC are used at the best mass ratio, the drug loading is 54%, the CQDs reduce the toxicity of FAC, and the combined effect of iron supplementation is better.231 Liver fibrosis is caused by the evolution of chronic liver injury due to various etiologic factors, such as viral hepatitis, alcohol/drug irritation, etc. Xu et al. reported an esterase-responsive carbon quantum dot dexamethasone (CD-DEX) for the treatment of liver fibrosis, which inhibits Kupffer cell activation by scavenging ROS and prevents exacerbation of the inflammation by inhibiting the secretion of pro-inflammatory cells.232 The anti-fibrosis effect was evaluated using a CCl4-induced model of liver fibrosis, suggesting that CD-DEX can effectively alleviate liver injury. This multi-nanomedicine provides a new idea for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Wang et al. reported a carbon quantum dot composite ocular drug-delivery system using hyaluronic acid and carboxymethyl chitosan as the carbon sources via a hydrothermal method to obtain a novel CQD for the delivery of diclofenac sodium (DS).233 This system provides prolonged drug release, up to 12 hours of sustained release, and a longer presence in the cornea, improving the bioavailability and reducing the frequency of drug use. Horo and colleagues prepared amine-functionalized CQDs with a size of 3 ± 1.5 nm using a mixture of chitosan (LMWC) and silk fibroin (SF) as the precursors, which showed good target specificity in MCF-7 and HeLa cells when loaded with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).234Fig. 12(b)–(e) show the studies of drug release in vitro.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the probable mechanism of interaction of carbon dots with phosphatidylcholine vesicles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (b) Plot of the percentage drug release vs. time of 5-FU release from FU-BT-CDs; and cell viability assay for the (c) MCF-7, (d) HeLa, and (e) HEK-293 cell lines treated with different concentrations of CDs, 5-FU, FU-CDs and FU-BT-CDs (labelled as a, b, c and d, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 

4.5 Graphene quantum dots
The unique physical and chemical properties of graphene materials have led to many different synthesis methods235–238 since their emergence, and the application range is also expanding, including biomedicine,239,240 sensing,241,242 catalysis243 and so on. Graphene quantum dots (GQDs) are also a member of the carbon-based nanomaterial family. They also have the advantages of high chemical inertia, good biocompatibility and tunable luminescence, and show an outstanding performance in a wide range of biomedical applications. GQDs are usually functionalized and modified to change their intrinsic physicochemical properties in order to meet the corresponding biological application.

Bioimaging applications. 
Recently, Karatay et al. reported that for poly(ethyleneimine)-functionalized N-GQDs (PEI N-GQDs) and nano-silver/N-GQDs (AgNPs/PEI N-GQDs), the AgNPs/PEI N-doped GQDs can obtain a substance-specific fluorescence signal in the cytoplasm of lung adenocarcinoma cell A549 whereas the PEI N-GQDs do not.244 Khose and colleagues synthesized highly fluorescent N-GQDs via microwave heating using melamine sponge and arjuna bark as the nitrogen and carbon sources, respectively. The prepared N-GQDs have an average diameter of 2–3 nm and can emit bright blue fluorescence, which achieved a good imaging application in a breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231) model with blue fluorescence in the cytoplasm and nuclear location.245 Using citric acid as the precursor and L-glutamate as the N source, Wang et al. prepared nitrogen-doped GQDs with bright blue emission using an ultrasound-assisted hydrothermal method. The synthetic N-GQDs have an average particle size of 2.65 nm and a QY of 54%, showing excellent photobleaching resistance and stability, and showing great bio-imaging potential when successfully used in BV2 cell imaging.246 In a recent study by Lin et al., N-GQDs were first prepared using a hydrothermal method, then coated with PEG and branched polyethyleneimine (bPEI) to obtain P@N-GQDs, and finally conjugated with anti-GD2 antibody to obtain the Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs composite vector. The P@N-GQDs achieved good imaging results in the IVIS system and were more suitable for biological imaging than the unmodified N-GQDs. Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs also successfully targeted neuroblastoma in vivo (Fig. 13).247 Reagen et al. successfully pyrolyzed GQDs, which can be used as a bioimaging agent, using CBDA-2 (cis-cyclobutane-1,2-dicarboxylic acid) derived from furfural as a precursor, showing low cytotoxicity in the mouse macrophage line RAW 246.7 and portraying strong fluorescence images in Alexa 488 channels after treatment with MCF-7 cells.248 Yan et al. synthesized GQDs with high biocompatibility using glucose as the carbon source via a hydrothermal method, and these were significantly less cytotoxic than traditional GQDs. Imaging of A549 cells and E. coli showed a clear and complete morphology, and when used further in mice it was shown that the GQDs could cross the blood–brain barrier and enter the brain.249
 Fig. 13  
In vivo IVIS spectra of (a) N-GQDs and P@N-GQDs after subcutaneous tissue injection; (b) signal from scanning along the yellow line in (a) showing a related ratio; (c) in vivo fluorescence emission (Ex: 535 nm/Em: Cy5.5) of induced tumors in nude mice with Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs injection were divided into N-GQDs, P@N-GQDs and Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs (Anti-GQDs), and (d) dissected organs of the treated nude mice via IVIS with Ex: 535 nm and Em: Cy5.5. (e) Dissected organs of mice with Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs injection were measured with Ex: 430, 465, 500, 535 nm (for interpretation of the references to the colors in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article). Reproduced with permission from ref. 247 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 


Biosensing applications. 
Kurniawan et al. synthesized N-GQDs for pH sensing using chitosan as a precursor, which can achieve a wide response range of sustainable pH from 1.8 to 13.6.250 Erkmen and colleagues developed GQDs modified with poly(3,4-ethylene dioxyethiophene) nanoparticles (PEDOT NPs) for the detection of phenolic compounds in biosensors. The determination ranges of catechins, epinephrines and norepinephrines were 0.005–11 μM, 0.2–12 μM and 0.1–2.5 μM, and the LODs were 0.002 μM, 0.065 μM and 0.035 μM, respectively.251 In addition, the sensor can track the anti-inflammatory drug diclofenac that attenuates tyrosinase inhibition by reducing the CAT response. Kalkal and colleagues developed a biosensor for detecting markers of small cell lung cancer via the hydrothermal synthesis of amine-functionalized N-GQDs (3 nm) with a high QY of 76.83% and blue fluorescence emission. After covalently binding the neuron-specific enolase antibody (anti-NSE) as an energy donor, the AuNPs can be used for the rapid response detection of NSE, with a linear range of 0.1 pg mL−1 to 1000 ng mL−1 and a LOD of 0.09 pg mL−1, which can be used for the early diagnosis of small cell lung cancer.252 Sahub et al. developed a biosensor based on GQDs for the detection of organophosphorus pesticides using enzymatic reactions. The principle is that the reaction of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and choline oxidase (CHOx) generates H2O2, which ‘turns off’ the GQD fluorescence, and the presence of organic phosphonates can ‘turn on’ the fluorescence. The sensor achieved the fast and sensitive detection of dichlorvos with a LOD of 0.172 ppm.253Table 3 shows the application of GQDs and other quantum dots in sensing.
Table 3 Application of GQDs and other quantum dots in sensing




Classification
Method
Size (nm)
Analyte
LOD
Range
Ref.




GQDs
Chemical oxidation and amino-hydrothermal
2.3
Fe3+
0.51 nM
0–50 μM

254



GQDs
One-pot hydrothermal
3–4
Glucose
5.5 μM
5.5–66 mM

255



GQDs
Pyrolysis
4.76 ± 0.96
Vanillin
2.5 × 10−8 mol L−1
0–2.1 × 10−5 mol L−1

256



GQDs
Hydrothermal
1–6
Fe3+ and ascorbic acid
1.49 and 1.62 μmol L−1
0–500 μmol−1 and 0–300 μmol L−1

257



CdTe
NA
2
Cd2+
1.1 μg L−1
0.010–2.0 mg L−1

258



CdTe
Hydrothermal
1.94
Ascorbic acid
6.6 nM
0.1–1 μM

259



CdTe
Co-precipitation
4
Tetracycline
0.003 ng mL−1
0.01–10 ng mL−1

260



MoS2
Hydrothermal
2.5 ± 0.32
Dopamine
0.087 μmol L−1
0.25–35 μmol L−1

261



MoS2
NaOH-assisted sonication exfoliation
2.89
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
0.1 U L−1
0–5 U L−1

262



MoS2
Hydrothermal
3.1 ± 0.8
Hematin
0.32 μmol L−1
0.5–15 μmol L−1

263



CsPbBr3
One-pot
15.92

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

51.9 pM
0.2–4.0 nM

264



CsPbBr3
Water emulsion
NA
Tetracycline
28 nM
0.2–5.0 mM

265







Biotherapy applications. 
Magaela et al. combined N-GQDs with porphyrin complex 2 through ester bonds, which could be better taken up by cells. The cell survival rate was above 90%, thus improving the PDT activity.266 Mushtaq and colleagues synthesized curcumin-loaded GQDs (curl-GQDs) that can be used as a photosensitiser in PDT, enhancing the antibacterial photodynamic effect compared with blank GQDs. Low cytotoxicity was demonstrated in NIH/3T3 cells with a threefold increase in ROS production. When Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida albicans, Escherichia coli, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus were exposed to blue light (405 nm) in combination with the curl-GQDs, it was shown that the curl-GQDs enhanced the antibacterial activity and provided an alternative treatment for drug-resistant infections.267 Zhao et al. developed GQDs for the treatment of angiogenic retinopathy, which have potential as an antiangiogenic agent. GQDs have been proved in vitro to inhibit the proliferation, migration, tube formation and germination of HUVEC cells, inducing the cell cycle to stay in the G1 phase, and inhibiting the expression of periosteum protein by down-regulating P-STAT3, thereby affecting retinal angiogenesis (Fig. 14).268 Pramanik et al. reported that GQDs linked to human antimicrobial peptide (LL-37) and human neutrophil polypeptide (HNP1) inhibit viral infection by blocking the binding of the SARS-COV-2 variant (B.1.617.2) of the spike protein receptor binding domain (RBD) to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in human cells. Compared with GQDs that are combined with a single peptide, the inhibition efficiency of the LL-37 and HNP1 dual-polypeptide combination was greatly improved.269
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the role and mechanism of GQD-rescued angiogenic retinopathy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 268 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022. 


Drug-delivery applications. 
Chen et al. prepared an aptamer-modified GQD/chitosan nanodrug delivery system (DDS) for photothermal therapy of liver cancer, which can target hepatocellular carcinoma, significantly inhibit tumor growth in mice, and prolong the survival time of tumor-bearing mice, with good prospects for collaborative tumor treatment.270 Yoosefian and colleagues reported a drug-delivery system using GQDs as a carrier to load the anticancer drug docetaxel (DTX). This system has good stability, and the presence of copolymers delays drug adsorption and increases the adsorption and solubility of DTX.271 Felix et al. used imatinib-modified graphene quantum dots (GQDs@imatinb) for the treatment of leukemia. The properties and morphology of the GQDs did not change after surface loading of the imatinib. Treatment of suspended cells (RPMI 8226) demonstrated that the GQDs@imatinb induced apoptosis to eliminate cancer cells. These may be suitable as an effective drug-delivery platform for the treatment of leukemia.272

5. Summary and outlook
This paper reviews the research and application progress of several novel quantum dots in the biomedical field, with emphasis on the toxicity, synthesis and biological application of quantum dots. The flexibility and versatility of quantum dots make them an indispensable tool for biological research and treatment, which improves the previous treatment methods for some diseases and greatly improves the therapeutic effect. After surface modification and size control, the physicochemical properties and fluorescence emission behavior of the quantum dots can be improved, and the results are more friendly to organisms. Before clinical application, it is necessary to fully understand the distribution of quantum dots in organisms and the toxic consequences after entry, and make a reasonable evaluation through in vivo or in vitro models. Therefore, a unified set of toxicological research standards is needed to make various studies close to clinical use. Due to the variety of quantum dots, various preparation strategies have emerged. It is also of great significance to select the most effective synthesis method suitable for each quantum dot for future applications. At present, more and more attention is being paid to environmental and health problems, and green synthesis routes of quantum dots have been adopted by more and more researchers. The aim is to reduce the generation of harmful substances, avoid wasting of raw materials, improve efficiency and minimize the impact on the environment. Some shortcomings of quantum dots in biological applications in different fields have also been exposed, which limits the further application of corresponding products. We only focus on the application of perovskite quantum dots in biological imaging and biosensing, and find that there are few related studies in biological therapy and drug delivery. Perovskite quantum dots show obvious vulnerability and instability, and are easy to degrade in water or a humid environment. The Pb released is highly biotoxic, which is a major obstacle in their biological application. At present, most MoS2 quantum dots have the characteristics of low quantum yield and concentrated blue fluorescence emission, and the preparation methods used are relatively complex and consume a lot of resources, which poses challenges to the large-scale production and application of quantum dots. ZnO quantum dots are easy to decompose in a low pH environment, and the quantum dots emitting in the red or near infrared regions are difficult to synthesize and have a low QY, which is the main problem in the application of ZnO quantum dots. Heteroatom doping improves the low quantum yield and poor brightness stability of carbon quantum dots, but the exact role and position of the doped atoms are not very clear. In addition, it is also difficult to obtain doped CQDs with a uniform size distribution and high repeatability. At present, the synthesis technology for graphene quantum dots is not sustainable and commercialized, and the factors affecting the PL properties are not well understood.
So far, quantum dots are far from exhausting their biological potential, and there are great expectations for them to solve medical problems. In the future, there will be more beneficial breakthroughs and advances, and even new ways to overcome cancer. According to some of the problems described above, researchers need to further solve and improve these issues. Here, we have the following expectations:
(1) Strengthen the research on QD-induced toxicity, combine experimental research with epidemiological research, and enrich the safety assessment of various quantum dots in different target organs, instead of just using a certain cell line or a single quantum dot, so as to minimize the harm to human health.
(2) It is necessary to further develop economical and simple synthesis methods, and further explore the green chemical synthesis route. Wherever possible, green materials from natural or abundant sources are used as precursors to reduce the burden on the environment.
(3) In order to improve the instability of perovskite quantum dots, the polymer packaging technology needs to be further explored to protect it so as to have long-term stability. Using more environmentally friendly metal ions to replace Pb2+ is necessary, to reduce the harm to health.
(4) Biological imaging requires quantum dot fluorescence emission to be concentrated in the red or near-infrared region and to have good tissue penetration. For different detection targets, the sensor is required to have higher sensitivity and specificity.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51402125), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2017M612175 and 2022M711438), Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2020ME045 and ZR2020ME046), ‘New Universities 20’ Foundation of Jinan (Grant No. 2021GXRC099), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of University of Jinan (No. XBS1447), the Natural Science Foundation of University of Jinan (No. XKY1515), the Science Foundation for Post Doctorate Research from the University of Jinan (No. XBH1607), and the Special Fund of Postdoctoral innovation project in Shandong province (No. 201603061).
References
M. A. Reed, R. T. Bate, K. Bradshaw, W. M. Duncan, W. R. Frensley, J. W. Lee and H. D. Shih, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Process. Phenom., 1986, 4, 358–360 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dong, C. Li, G. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Deng and Q. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2503 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, Y. Huang, Z. Shen and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Zhao, H. Xu, Z. Wang and Z. Dai, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 8987–8993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, E. V. Ushakova, A. L. Rogach and S. Qu, Small, 2021, 17, 2102325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, H. Meng, Y. Sun, L. Qu, Y. Lin, Z. Li and D. Du, Small, 2019, 15, 1901507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Ge, B. Huang, Z.-L. Zhang, X. Liu, M. He, Z. Yu, B. Hu, R. Cui, X.-J. Liang and D.-W. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 5782 RSC .
T. Liu, X. Zhang, D. Liu, B. Chen, X. Ge, S. Gao and J. Song, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, D. Li, J. Liu, F. Du, X. Tan, Y. Zhou, S. Liu and W. Xu, Microchem. J., 2022, 178, 107375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Niu, J. Li, J. Gao, X. Ouyang, L. Cai and Q. Xu, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 3820–3839 CrossRef .
M. Behi, L. Gholami, S. Palomba and F. Dehghani, Nanoscale Adv., 2022, 4, 353–376 RSC .
G. Gedda, G.-R. Chen, Y.-Y. Yao, W. M. Girma, J.-D. Li, C.-L. Yen, Y.-C. Ling and J.-Y. Chang, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 14161 RSC .
Q. Xu, Y. Niu, J. Li, Z. Yang, J. Gao, L. Ding, H. Ni, P. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Tang, Z.-P. Lv, B. Peng, T. S. Hu, H. Zhou and C. Xu, Carb. Neutrality, 2022, 1, 13 CrossRef .
J. Pang, B. Chang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 78–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Kumar, V. Arul, R. Arulmozhi and N. Abirami, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 7464 RSC .
Y. Niu, C. Tian, J. Gao, F. Fan, Y. Zhang, Y. Mi, X. Ouyang, L. Li, J. Li, S. Chen, Y. Liu, H.-L. Lu, X. Zhao, L. Yang, H. Ju, Y. Yang, C.-F. Ding, M. Xu and Q. Xu, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106455 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ye, G. M. Biesold, M. Zhang, W. Wang, T. Bai and Z. Lin, Nano Today, 2021, 40, 101286 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, R. Li, G. Wang, H. Zhu and Z. Li, New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 9408 RSC .
O. Chen, H. Wei, A. Maurice, M. Bawendi and P. Reiss, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 696–702 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chandrasekaran, M. D. Tessier, D. Dupont, P. Geiregat, Z. Hens and E. Brainis, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6104–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bang, Y. Choi, J. Cho, Y.-H. Suh, H. W. Ban, J. S. Son and J. Park, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4236–4243 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, F. Cao, S. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Feng, Y. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Cao, Y. Li, B. Wei, W.-Y. Wong and X. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2022, 2200959 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, G. Yang, X. Yang, X. Xu, J. Huang and S. Cui, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2142–2149 CrossRef .
R.-S. Juang, C.-T. Hsieh, C.-P. Kao, Y. A. Gandomi, C.-C. Fu, S.-H. Liu and S. Gu, Carbon, 2021, 176, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
H. Saljoughi, F. Khakbaz and M. Mahani, Photodiagn. Photodyn. Ther., 2020, 30, 101687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Naderi, H. Zare, N. Taghavinia, A. Irajizad, M. Aghaei and M. Panjehpour, Toxicol. Ind. Health, 2018, 34, 339–352 CrossRef CAS .
I. Corazzari, A. Gilardino, S. Dalmazzo, B. Fubini and D. Lovisolo, Toxicol. In Vitro, 2013, 27, 752–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Li, J. T. Chen, S. S. Bai, X. Wen, S. Y. Song, Q. Yu, J. Li and Y. Q. Wang, Toxicol. In Vitro, 2009, 23, 1007–1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Yong, W. C. Law, R. Hu, L. Ye, L. Liu, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1236–1250 RSC .
K. M. Tsoi, Q. Dai, B. A. Alman and W. C. W. Chan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 662–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Ahire, Q. Wang, P. R. Coxon, G. Malhotra, R. Brydson, R. Chen and Y. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3285–3292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Jaiswal and S. M. Simon, Trends Cell Biol., 2004, 14, 497–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sajid, M. Ilyas, C. Basheer, M. Tariq, M. Daud, N. Baig and F. Shehzad, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22, 4122–4143 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Bradburne, J. B. Delehanty, K. B. Gemmill, B. C. Mei, H. Mattoussi, K. Susumu, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, Bioconjugate Chem., 2013, 24, 1570–1583 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lovrić, H. S. Bazzi, Y. Cuie, G. R. A. Fortin, F. M. Winnik and D. Maysinger, J. Mol. Med., 2005, 83, 377–385 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yan, Y. Zhang, K. Xu, T. Fu, H. Qin and X. Zheng, Toxicology, 2011, 282, 94–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Spirin, S. B. Brichkin and V. F. Razumov, Colloid J., 2013, 75, 427–432 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Madl, L. E. Plummer, C. Carosino and K. E. Pinkerton, Annu. Rev. Physiol., 2014, 76, 447–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Li, S. Muralikrishnan, C.-T. Ng, L.-Y. L. Yung and B.-H. Bay, Exp. Biol. Med., 2010, 235, 1025–1033 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, T. Zhu, C. Chen and Y. Liu, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2014, 15, 17577–17600 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Roberts, J. M. Antonini, D. W. Porter, R. S. Chapman, J. F. Scabilloni, S.-H. Young, D. Schwegler-Berry, V. Castranova and R. R. Mercer, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2013, 10, 1–17 CrossRef .
J. E. Nichols, J. A. Niles, S. P. Vega, L. B. Argueta, A. Eastaway and J. Cortiella, Exp. Biol. Med., 2014, 239, 1135–1169 CrossRef .
B. Rothen-Rutishauser, F. Blank, C. Mühlfeld and P. Gehr, Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol., 2008, 4, 1075–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Scoville, C. C. White, D. Botta, D. An, Z. Afsharinejad, T. K. Bammler, X. Gao, W. A. Altemeier and T. J. Kavanagh, Inhalation Toxicol., 2018, 30, 397–403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, S. Han, H. Liu, X. Chen, L. Huang, X. Li and J. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 8741–8755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jigyasu, S. Siddiqui, M. Lohani, I. A. Khan and M. Arshad, Excli. J., 2016, 15, 54–63 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Choi, Y. J. Kim, J. W. Lee, Y. Lee, Y.-B. Lim and H. W. Chung, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 2160–2168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. McConnachie, D. Botta, C. C. White, C. S. Weldy, H.-W. Wilkerson, J. Yu, R. Dills, X. Yu, W. C. Griffith, E. M. Faustman, F. M. Farin, S. E. Gill, W. C. Parks, X. Hu, X. Gao, D. L. Eaton and T. J. Kavanagh, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e64165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nagy, A. Steinbrück, J. Gao, N. Doggett, J. A. Hollingsworth and R. Iyer, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4748–4762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and M. Tang, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 625, 940–962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, R. Tao, J. Huang, X. He, L. Qu, Y. Jin, S. Zhang and Z. Fu, Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2015, 39, 229–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Migita, A. Moquin, H. Fujishiro, S. Himeno, D. Maysinger, F. M. Winnik and A. Taniguchi, In Vitro Cell.
Dev. Biol.: Anim., 2014, 50, 367–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hao and R. Liu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 220, 117104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mo, L. Hu, G. Zeng, G. Chen, J. Wan, Z. Yu, Z. Huang, K. He, C. Zhang and M. Cheng, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2017, 101, 2713–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Malhi and R. J. Kaufman, J. Hepatol., 2011, 54, 795–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Richter, N. Vidovic, B. Honrath, P. Mahavadi, R. Dodel, A. M. Dolga and C. Culmsee, Cell Death Differ., 2016, 23, 814–827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, J. Long, L. Liu, T. He, L. Jiang, C. Zhao and Z. Li, Life Sci., 2017, 186, 33–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huo, R. Chen, L. Zhao, X. Shi, R. Bai, D. Long, F. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y.-Z. Chang and C. Chen, Biomaterials, 2015, 61, 307–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, H. Shao, W. Liu, W. Gu, X. Shu, Y. Mo, X. Chen, Q. Zhang and M. Jiang, Toxicol. Lett., 2015, 234, 40–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zou, T. Wang, J. Yuan, J. Sun, Y. Yuan, J. Gu, X. Liu, J. Bian and Z. Liu, Toxicol. Lett., 2020, 321, 32–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mirkov, A. P. Aleksandrov, M. Ninkov, D. Tucovic, J. Kulas, M. Zeljkovic, D. Popovic and M. Kataranovski, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2021, 149, 112026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Turley, J. W. Zagorski, R. C. Kennedy, R. A. Freeborn, J. K. Bursley, J. R. Edwards and C. E. Rockwell, Toxicol. Res., 2019, 8, 227–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Nguyen, Y. Zhang, J. Todd, K. Kittle, D. Patry, D. Caldwell, M. Lalande, S. Smith, D. Parks, M. Navarro, A. Massarsky, T. W. Moon, W. G. Willmore and A. F. Tayabali, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2019, 32, 1491–1503 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, H. Kuang, W. Zhang, H. Wei and H. Xu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11564–11577 RSC .
L. Li, J. Tian, X. Wang, G. Xu, W. Jiang, Z. Yang, D. Liu and G. Lin, Front. Pharmacol., 2019, 10, 1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, Y. Zhao, A. E. Nel and S. Lin, Small, 2013, 9, 1608–1618 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Chen, C. Z. Ding and J. Ling, Chemosphere, 2017, 184, 44–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chousidis, C. D. Stalikas and I. D. Leonardos, Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2020, 79, 103426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ž. Jurgelėnė, M. Stankevičius, M. Stankevičiūtė, N. Kazlauskienė, P. Katauskis, F. Ivanauskas, V. Karabanovas and R. Rotomskis, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 785, 147302 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Y. Gong, L. Liu, Y. Zhou, X. Fang, C. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Li, J. Appl. Toxicol., 2017, 37, 1359–1369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, T. Zhang, J. Li, J. Ma, X. Ouyang, X. Zhao, M. Xu, D. Wang and Q. Xu, J. Appl. Toxicol., 2021, 41, 789–798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gu, Z. Dai, X. Yan, J. Ma, Y. Niu, W. Lan, X. Wang and Q. Xu, J. Appl. Toxicol., 2021, 41, 745–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng, J. Yan, W. Qian, C. Song, Z. Zuo and C. He, J. Environ. Sci., 2021, 100, 240–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zheng, M. Guo, X. Song, Y. Miao, M. Pang and D. Ming, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4231–4243 RSC .
F. Rostamzadeh, M. Shadkam-Farrokhi, S. Jafarinejad-Farsangi, H. Najafipour, Z. Ansari-Asl and M. Yeganeh-Hajahmadi, Oxid. Med. Cell. Longevity, 2021, 2021, 8569225 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alexander, M. Agrawal, A. Uddin, S. Siddique, A. M. Shehata, M. A. Shaker, S. A. U. Rahman, M. I. M. Abdul and M. A. Shaker, Int. J. Nanomed., 2019, 14, 5895–5909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, J. M. Yoo, H. Hwang, J. Lee, S. H. Lee, S. P. Yun, M. J. Park, M. Lee, S. Choi, S. H. Kwon, S. Lee, S.-H. Kwon, S. Kim, Y. J. Park, M. Kinoshita, Y.-H. Lee, S. Shin, S. R. Paik, S. J. Lee, S. Lee, B. H. Hong and H. S. Ko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 812–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, Y. Wu, H. Wang, S. Liu, L. Song, S. Li and M. Tan, Food Chem., 2019, 293, 387–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, W. Zou, Y. Pan, K.-T. Yong, L. Li, X. Wang, D. Liu, T. Chen, D. Xue and G. Lin, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2021, 207, 111378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xue, W. Zou, D. Liu, L. Li, T. Chen, Z. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Wang, W. Lu and G. Lin, Neurotoxicology, 2022, 88, 134–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Salter and B. Stevens, Nat. Med., 2017, 23, 1018–1027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, S. Ke, L. Tu, Y. Wang, S. Ye, S. Kou and L. Ren, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 1764–1775 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, X. Liang, K. He, T. Wei, Y. Wang, J. Lu, Y. Yao, T. Zhang, Y. Xue and M. Tang, Toxicol. In Vitro, 2018, 52, 41–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, Y. Li, X. Liang, X. Liu and M. Tang, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2021, 208, 111672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, X. Liang, X. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Kong and M. Tang, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2020, 17, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, X. Liang, T. Wei, N. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Zou, C. Bai, Y. Yao, T. Wu, L. Kong, T. Zhang, Y. Xue and M. Tang, Chemosphere, 2020, 246, 125629 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, K. He, X. Liang, T. Wei, Y. Wang, L. Zou, T. Zhang, Y. Xue and M. Tang, J. Appl. Toxicol., 2020, 40, 388–402 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, X. Liang, K. He, X. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Kong and M. Tang, Int. J. Nanomed., 2020, 15, 3217–3233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Cheng, J. Zhang, M. Chen and T. Wu, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 3314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lin, S.-X. Zhuang, Y.-L. Wang, S. Lin, Z.-W. Hong, Y. Liu, L. Xu, F.-P. Li, B.-H. Xu, M.-H. Chen, S.-W. He, B.-Q. Liao, X.-P. Fu, Z.-Q. Jiang and H.-L. Wang, J. Cell. Physiol., 2019, 234, 13820–13831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, F. Zheng, P. Yang, B. Chen, Z. P. Aguilar, F. Fu and H. Xu, Toxicol. Res., 2020, 9, 371–378 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ye, L. Li, J. Wu, M. Ma, G. Lin, X. Wang and G. Xu, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 4193–4201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Lin, T. Chen, K. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, D. Liu, G. Xu, X. Wang and G. Lin, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2021, 211, 111946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Hoppe, R. Sundar, D. S. P. Tan and A. D. Jeyasekharan, JNCI, J. Natl. Cancer Inst., 2018, 110, 704–713 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Nguyen, J. W. M. Martens, A. V. Hoeck and E. Cuppen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yang, F. Li, Y. Miao, X. Luo, S. Dai, J. Liu, W. Niu and Y. Sun, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 398, 122327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wang, J. Liu, C. Zhao, Z. Xu, K. Murugan and L. Wang, Comp. Biochem. Physiol., Part C: Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2021, 241, 108968 CAS .
X. Li, X. Yang, L. Yuwen, W. Yang, L. Weng, Z. Teng and L. Wang, Biomaterials, 2016, 96, 24–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Gonçalves, T. Rocha, N. C. Mestre, T. G. Fonseca and M. J. Bebianno, Mar. Environ. Res., 2020, 156, 104904 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Guo, W. Liu, J. Liang, Z. He, H. Xu and X. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1641–1644 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, M. Piao, K. Arkin, L. Ren, J. Zhang, J. Hao, Y. Zheng and Q. Shang, Talanta, 2019, 201, 309–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, N. Qi, K. Li, D. Cheng, D. Wang and Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 8108–8118 RSC .
S. Sun, L. Zhao, D. Wu, H. Zhang, H. Lian, X. Zhao, A. Wu and L. Zeng, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 1969–1975 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, P. Ma, X. Deng, Y. Sun, X. Wang and D. Song, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Pradhan, P. P. Dey, A. Khare and A. K. Sharma, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 025112 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kwon and S.-W. Rhee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5256–5258 RSC .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Yin, H. Li and J. Huang, Talanta, 2019, 205, 120121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lim, W. Shen and Z. Gao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 362–381 RSC .
X. Gao, M. Sun, X. Liu, X. Li and J. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2022, 189, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Asok, M. N. Gandhi and A. R. Kulkarni, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4943–4946 RSC .
L. Gu, J. Zhang, G. Yang, Y. Tang, X. Zhang, X. Huang, W. Zhai, E. K. Fodjo and C. Kong, Food Chem., 2022, 376, 131898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, Y. Liang, X. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Yu, H. Xu and Y. Wang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 2856–2860 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Chen and Q. Ma, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4102–4108 RSC .
J. Zhang, H. Maimaitizi, T. Zhang, Y. Tursun, D. Talifu and A. Abulizi, Funct. Mater. Lett., 2020, 13, 2051036 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Monje, K. M. Chacon, I. C. Galindo, C. Castaño, L. M. Ballesteros-Rueda, G. C. Valencia, M. C. Gonzalez and D. F. Mercado, Mater. Today Chem., 2021, 20, 100445 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Wagner, J. M. Knipe and G. Orive, Acta Biomater., 2019, 94, 44–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yi, N. H. Ladi, X. Shai, H. Li, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1276–1289 RSC .
J. Y. Kim, B. J. Kim, M. Kim, W. Jang and D. H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 886, 161347 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, W. Xu, D. Zhou, X. Ma, X. Chen, G. Pan, J. Zhu, Y. Ji, N. Ding and H. Song, J. Lumin., 2019, 216, 116711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Varadi, A. Trinchi, J. Shen, Y. Zhu, G. Wei and C. Li, Small, 2018, 14, 1803156 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, F. Zhang, J. Tai, Y. Li, Y. Yang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Xie, B. Xu, H. Zhong, K. Liu and B. Yang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5820–5826 RSC .
N. Ding, D. Zhou, X. Sun, W. Xu, H. Xu, G. Pan, D. Li, S. Zhang, B. Dong and H. Song, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 345703 CrossRef .
S. Li, D. Lei, W. Ren, X. Guo, S. Wu, Y. Zhu, A. L. Rogach, M. Chhowalla and A. K. Y. Jen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Tan, D. Ravichandran, H. L. Ang, E. W. Y. Ong, C. Q. X. Lim, G. M. Kam, A. P. Kumar and Z. K. Tan, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1900859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ryu, J. Y. Ryu, G. Choe, H. Kwon, H. Park, Y. S. Cho, R. Du and S. Yim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102334 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Chan, D. Giovanni, H. He, T. C. Sum and K. T. Yong, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 9022–9033 CrossRef CAS .
W. Song, Y. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Yao, W. Wang, J. Wu, Q. Shen, W. Luo and Z. Zou, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 795–801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Yin, J. Hou, L. Meng, M. Gao, Y. Sun, C. Zhang, S. Bai, J. Ren and C. Yu, Analyst, 2019, 144, 2034–2041 RSC .
E. H. Umukoro, M. G. Peleyeju, A. O. Idris, J. C. Ngila, N. Mabuba, L. Rhyman, P. Ramasami and O. A. Arotiba, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10255–10266 RSC .
H. R. Kim, J. H. Bong, J. H. Park, Z. Song, M. J. Kang, D. H. Son and J. C. Pyun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 29392–29405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qin, S. Cui, X. Yang, G. Yang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang and D. Qiu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 415101 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, D. Li, G. Pan, D. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Chen and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10505–10513 RSC .
S. Huang, M. Guo, J. Tan, Y. Geng, J. Wu, Y. Tang, C. Su, C. C. Lin and Y. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39056–39063 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Hu, H. J. Pan, R. N. Ma, S. Cheng, L. P. Jia, W. Zhang, L. Shang, Q. W. Xue and H. S. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 2812–2819 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Aparna and R. Sivasubramanian, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 233, 319–328 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Pang, Q. Cheng, L. Han, Y. Li, X. Meng, B. Ibarlucea, H. Zhao, F. Yang, H. Liu, H. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Wang, M. H. Rummeli, Y. Zhang and G. Cuniberti, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Pang, Q. Cheng, F. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Li, T. Gemming, X. Liu, B. Ibarlucea, J. Yang, H. Liu, W. Zhou, G. Cuniberti and M. H. Rümmeli, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 1455–1469 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Xu, L. Jiang, J. Gao, Z. Tang, Y. Xu, X. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2004408 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, C. Hu and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25605–25610 RSC .
J. Y. Wu, X. Y. Zhang, X. D. Ma, Y. P. Qiu and T. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95178–95182 RSC .
W. Gu, Y. Yan, X. Cao, C. Zhang, C. Ding and Y. Xian, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 27–31 RSC .
H. Lin, C. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Xu, Y. Huang and C. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8492–8497 RSC .
S. Xu, G. Zheng and K. Zhou, Anal. Biochem., 2022, 640, 114545 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu, Y. Yan, C. Zhang, C. Ding and Y. Xian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11272–11279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Nirala and R. Prakash, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 263, 109–119 CrossRef .
T. Wang, X. Hu, X. Zhang, H. Cao, Y. Huang and P. Feng, Anal. Methods, 2019, 11, 415–420 RSC .
N. P. Mani and J. Cyriac, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 5481–5488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Desai, S. Jha, H. Basu, S. Saha, R. K. Singhal and S. K. Kailasa, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 111, 110778 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shanmugaraj and S. A. John, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 215, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Cao, F. R. Liu, F. Hou, J. Peng, S. W. Ren and Y. M. Liu, Analyst, 2018, 143, 3702–3707 RSC .
F. Bian, L. Sun, L. Cai, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, S. Wang and M. Zhou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 133, 199–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Ahmed and S. Neethirajan, Glob. Chall., 2018, 2, 1700071 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Luo, B. Li, J. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Xiao and S. Huang, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 190, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Zhao, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Small, 2019, 15, 1901254 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, L. Liu, Q. Lu, S. Yang, L. Yang, Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Song, F. Tan and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5771–5781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Tan, X. Pang, L. Liu, F. Tan and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24331–24338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Wang, Q. You, Q. Sun, Y. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Cheng, S. Wang, F. Tan and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4239–4250 RSC .
X. Ding, F. Peng, J. Zhou, W. Gong, G. Slaven, K. P. Loh, C. T. Lim and D. T. Leong, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dong, S. Tang, Y. Hao, H. Yu, W. Dai, G. Zhao, Y. Cao, H. Lu, X. Zhang and H. Ju, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3107–3114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Jiang, J. Dong, W. Zhang, G. Dang, M. Yang, Y. Li, H. Chen, H. Ji and L. Dong, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 185, 110590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lei, S. Yang, R. Cao, P. Zhou, H. Peng, R. Peng, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Li, M. Wang, Y. He, L. Zhou, J. Du, W. Du, Y. Shi and H. Wu, Polymers, 2020, 12, 144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Liu, C. L. Shen, Q. Lou, W. B. Zhao, J. Y. Wei, K. K. Liu, J. H. Zang, L. Dong and C. X. Shan, J. Lumin., 2020, 221, 117111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. Sun, R. Li, M. Dong, L. Zhang, W. Qi, X. Zhang and H. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Xing, Y. Li, N. Chen, I. Djerdj and Y. Wang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 2881–2888 RSC .
Z. Jia and R. D. K. Misra, Mater. Technol., 2013, 28, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Wang, H. Gong, J. Xu, Z. Yu, Q. Wei and D. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 6818–6824 RSC .
S. Verma, P. Arya, A. Singh, J. Kaswan, A. Shukla, H. R. Kushwaha, S. Gupta and S. P. Singh, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 165, 112347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, I. Shah, S. W. Kim, M. Sajid, J. H. Lim and K. H. Choi, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 283, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Popow-Stellmaszyk, B. Bajorowicz, A. Malankowska, M. Wysocka, T. Klimczuk, A. Zaleska-Medynska and A. Lesner, Bioconjugate Chem., 2018, 29, 1576–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, M. Li, Y. Gao, L. Yin and Y. Guan, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 132210 CrossRef CAS .
D. X. Ye, Y. Y. Ma, W. Zhao, H. M. Cao, J. L. Kong, H. M. Xiong and H. Möhwald, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4294–4300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ghaemi, O. Mashinchian, T. Mousavi, R. Karimi, S. Kharrazi and A. Amani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3123–3134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiang, X. Liu, C. Mao, X. Liu, Z. Cui, X. Yang, K. W. K. Yeung, Y. Zheng and S. Wu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 85, 214–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Yang, Z. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Xu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 2307–2320 RSC .
H. B. Kim, N. Meghani, M. Park, S. H. Lee, S. R. Lee, Y. J. Cho, Y. H. Doh and K. H. Choi, Macromol. Res., 2020, 28, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roshini, S. Jagadeesan, L. Arivazhagan, Y. J. Cho, J. H. Lim, Y. H. Doh, S. J. Kim and K. H. Choi, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2018, 92, 477–488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Cao and L. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 105–115 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, Y. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Du and Y. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22442–22450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mohapatra, R. Pratap, V. Pandey, P. K. Dubey, A. K. Agrawal, A. S. Parmar and A. N. Sahu, J. Fluoresc., 2022, 32, 275–292 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Mahat and S. A. Shamsudin, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 102, 107660 CrossRef CAS .
R. Atchudan, P. Gangadaran, T. N. J. I. Edison, S. Perumal, A. K. Sundramoorthy, R. Vinodh, R. L. Rajendran, B. C. Ahn and Y. R. Lee, Physica E, 2022, 136, 115010 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Wang, Z. Zhou, S. Zhao, S. Zhong, L. Xu, Y. Gao and X. Cui, Microchem. J., 2021, 166, 106250 CrossRef CAS .
D. Elango, J. S. Packialakshmi, V. Manikandan and P. Jayanthi, Mater. Lett., 2022, 312, 131667 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, X. Zhou, B. Qin, Z. Zhou and Y. Zhao, J. Lumin., 2019, 211, 298–304 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Anpalagan, J. V. Karakkat, A. Truskewycz, A. A. Saedi, P. Joseph, V. Apostolopoulos, K. Nurgali, I. Cole, Z. Cai and D. T. H. Lai, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jayanthi, S. Megarajan, S. B. Subramaniyan, R. K. Kamlekar and A. Veerappan, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 278, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Tian, M. Liu, T. Hong-Meng, C. R. Li, X. Zeng, X. Xiao and C. Redshaw, Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 973–980 RSC .
R. Atchudan, T. N. J. I. Edison, M. Shanmugam, S. Perumal, T. Somanathan and Y. R. Lee, Physica E, 2021, 126, 114417 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Pang, P. Liu, W. F. Dong, Q. Mei, Q. Qian, L. Li and R. Yan, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 782238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Architha, M. Ragupathi, C. Shobana, T. Selvankumar, P. Kumar, Y. S. Lee and R. K. Selvan, Environ. Res., 2021, 199, 111263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chellasamy, S. K. Arumugasamy, S. Govindaraju and K. Yun, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 131915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bayat, S. Masoum and E. S. Hosseini, J. Mol. Liq., 2019, 281, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qin, D. Zhang, Y. Ding, X. Zheng, Y. Xiang, J. Hua, Q. Zhang, X. Ji, B. Li and Y. Wei, Analyst, 2020, 145, 177–183 RSC .
Y. Chen, X. Sun, W. Pan, G. Yu and J. Wang, Front. Chem., 2020, 7, 911 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sangubotla and J. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 191, 109364 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, J. Hu, J. Zhao, N. An, K. Liang, Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, Q. Wu and F. Zhang, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103195 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. J. Gracia, S. S. Thavamani, T. P. Amaladhas, S. Devanesan, M. Ahmed and M. M. Kannan, Chemosphere, 2022, 298, 134128 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zheng, K. Qin, L. He, Y. Ding, Q. Luo, C. Zhang, X. Cui, Y. Tan, L. Li and Y. N. Wei, Analyst, 2021, 146, 911–919 RSC .
Y. Su, S. Liu, Y. Guan, Z. Xie, M. Zheng and X. Jing, Biomaterials, 2020, 255, 120110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Cao, L. Wang, C. L. Feng, X. Lin and H. Feng, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 34174–34180 RSC .
E. K. Cilingir, E. S. Seven, Y. Zhou, B. M. Walters, K. J. Mintz, R. R. Pandey, A. H. Wikramanayake, C. C. Chusuei, S. Vanni, R. M. Graham and R. M. Leblanc, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 592, 485–497 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Qu, L. Liu, T. Sun, J. Hou, Y. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Diao, S. Lu, W. Zhao and L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 175102 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shukla, M. Das, D. Kasade, M. Pandey, A. K. Dubey, S. K. Yadav and A. S. Parmar, Chemosphere, 2020, 248, 125998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, C. Liu, X. M. Song, Q. Mao and T. Ma, ACS Appl. Bio. Mater., 2021, 4, 3623–3629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Anthony, R. Murugan, R. Subramanian, G. K. Selvarangan, P. Pandurangan, A. Dhanasekaran and A. Sohrab, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 586, 124266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, W. Li, X. Zhou, M. Xie, Q. Luo, H. Wen, Y. Luo and W. Xue, Microchem. J., 2020, 159, 105456 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Singh, A. Srinivasan, S. Mitra and P. S. G. Pattader, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2022, 271, 120906 CrossRef CAS .
M. Preethi, C. Viswanathan and N. Ponpandian, Mater. Lett., 2021, 303, 130521 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, J. Huang, L. Ding, H. Lin, S. Yu, F. Yuan and B. Liang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2021, 405, 112963 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mohammadi, S. Mohammadi and A. Salimi, Talanta, 2021, 224, 121895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Yan, B. Dou, Q. Feng, X. Miao and P. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 330, 129325 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajalakshmi, T. Deng, S. Muthusamy, M. Xie, J. Xie, K. B. Lee and Y. Xu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2022, 268, 120622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Meng, Z. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Jiao, J. Li, S. Shuang and C. Dong, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ji, J. Yu, J. Cheng, L. Fu, Z. Zhang, B. Li, L. Chen and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 1656–1663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yue, L. Yu, L. Li, P. Liu, Q. Mei, W. F. Dong and R. Yang, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 718856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Y. Wang, X. Y. Liu, F. L. Jiang, Y. Liu and P. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 611, 255–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xiao and Y. Zhang, Microchim. Acta, 2021, 188, 325 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chang, Z. Zhao, J. Feng, Y. Xin, Y. Yang and L. Shi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 349, 130774 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, C. Sun, X. Wang, W. Pan, G. Yu and J. Wang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 233, 118230 CrossRef CAS .
X. Mu, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Huang, P. Ma and D. Song, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2021, 1188, 339163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, K. Qin, F. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Ding, C. Zhang, M. Xu, X. Liu and Y. Wei, Analyst, 2021, 146, 1965–1972 RSC .
Y. Ding, W. Tan, X. Zheng, X. Ji, P. Song, L. Bao, C. Zhang, J. Shang, K. Qin and Y. Wei, Analyst, 2021, 146, 683–690 RSC .
A. Q. Hassan, R. K. Barzani, K. M. Omer, B. R. Al-Hashimi, S. Mohammadi and A. Salimi, Arabian J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103452 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, S. Chen, S. Liu, H. Liu, Z. Xie and M. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 56456–56464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sung, J. Ferlay, R. L. Siegel, M. Laversanne, I. Soerjomataram, A. Jemal and F. Bray, Ca-Cancer J. Clin., 2021, 71, 209–249 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Tian, G. Wang, W. Luo, Z. Huang, Y. Huang, N. Li, M. Guo and X. Fan, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2022, 20, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, M. Xu, S. Wang, K. Abbas, X. Huang, R. Zhang, A. C. Tedesco and H. Bi, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 2296 RSC .
H. Liu, L. Mo, H. Chen, C. Chen, J. Wu, Z. Tang, Z. Guo, C. Hu and Z. Liu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2022, 11, 2101448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Boruah, K. Sankaranarayanan and D. Chowdhury, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 4382–4394 RSC .
N. Shi, K. Sun, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao, L. Geng and Y. Lei, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 101, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Chen, W. Jiang, Y. Zhao, C. Yang, Y. Wu, Q. Li and C. Zhu, Small, 2022, 18, 2102848 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Pan, D. Gu, H. Sun, K. Chen, G. Tan and W. Pan, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2021, 22, 9934 CrossRef CAS .
H. Horo, M. Saha, H. Das, B. Mandal and L. M. Kundu, Carbohydr. Polym., 2022, 277, 118862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, P. S. Wrobel, M. D. Wlodarski, H. Q. Ta, L. Zhao, L. Giebeler, B. Trzebicka, T. Gemming, L. Fu, Z. Liu, J. Eckert, A. Bachmatiuk and M. H. Rümmeli, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1946–1956 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Rümmeli, S. Gorantla, A. Bachmatiuk, J. Phieler, N. Geißler, I. Ibrahim, J. Pang and J. Eckert, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4861–4866 CrossRef .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, M. Libera, D. Placha, G. S. Martynková, B. Trzebicka, T. Gemming, J. Eckert and M. H. Rümmeli, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60884 RSC .
B. Sun, J. Pang, Q. Cheng, S. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Zhang, D. Sun, B. Ibarlucea, Y. Li, D. Chen, H. Fan, Q. Han, M. Chao, H. Liu, J. Wang, G. Cuniberti, L. Han and W. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 6, 2000744 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, J. Pang, Y. Li, B. Sun, B. Ibarlucea, X. Liu, T. Gemming, Q. Cheng, S. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Wang, W. Zhou, G. Cuniberti and M. H. Rümmeli, ACS Sens., 2021, 6, 38441–38881 Search PubMed .
D. Iannazzo, C. Celesti and C. Espro, Biotechnol. J., 2021, 16, 1900422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Pang, Y. Li, B. Ibarlucea, Y. Liu, T. Wang, X. Liu, S. Peng, T. Gemming, Q. Cheng, H. Liu, J. Yang, G. Cuniberti, W. Zhou and M. H. Rümmeli, Nanotechnology, 2022, 33, 185702 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, Y. Gao, Y. Han, J. Pang, C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Zhang and L. Han, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1090–1098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, J. Pang, J. Wang, X. Lu, Q. Hao, E. S. G. Naz, X. Zhou, L. Ma and O. G. Schmidt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15891–15897 CrossRef CAS .
A. Karatay, D. Erdener, C. Gürcan, E. A. Yildiz, A. Yilmazer, B. Boyacıoğlu, H. Unver, M. Yıldız and A. Elmali, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2022, 426, 113741 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Khose, P. Bangde, M. P. Bondarde, P. S. Dhumal, M. A. Bhakare, G. Chakraborty, A. K. Ray, P. Dandekar and S. Some, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2022, 266, 120453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Qi, A. Yang, X. Wang and J. Xu, Nanomaterials, 2021, 11, 2798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lin, K. S. Lin, Y. Chen and N. V. Mdlovu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2022, 131, 104167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reagen, Y. Wu, X. Liu, R. Shahni, J. Bogenschuetz, X. Wu, Q. R. Chu, N. Oncel, J. Zhang, X. Hou, C. Combs, A. Vasquez and J. X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 43952–43962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, X. Hu, P. Guan, T. Hou, P. Chen, D. Wan, X. Zhang, J. Wang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 1198–1215 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kurniawan, B. A. Anjali, O. Setiawan, K. K. Ostrikov, Y. G. Chung and W. H. Chiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 14, 1670–1683 CrossRef .
C. Erkmen, Y. Demir, S. Kurbanoglu and B. Uslu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 343, 130164 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kalkal, R. Pradhan, S. Kadian, G. Manik and G. Packirisamy, ACS Appl. Bio. Mater., 2020, 3, 4922–4932 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sahub, T. Tuntulani, T. Nhujak and B. Tomapatanaget, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 88–97 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, H. Fan, W. Jiang, G. Ni and S. Qu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467-468, 446–455 CrossRef CAS .
M. Masteri-Farahani, F. Ghorbani and N. Mosleh, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 245, 118892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, X. Bai, T. Wang, Q. Shi, J. Zhu and B. Wang, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 9121 RSC .
L. Zhu, D. Li, H. Lu, S. Zhang and H. Gao, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 194, 254–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Zhang, X. Hu, Y. Shi, Z. Li, X. Huang, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, X. Zou and J. Shi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 408, 124872 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ding, K. Wang, M. Fang, W. Zhu, L. Du and C. Li, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2020, 234, 118249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Z. Li, M.-X. Wu and S.-N. Ding, Anal. Methods, 2021, 13, 2297–2304 RSC .
X. Guo, J. Huang, Q. Zeng, Y. Wei, X. Liu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 2799 RSC .
Y. Zhong, F. Xue, P. Wei, R. Li, C. Cao and T. Yi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21298 RSC .
F.-Y. Wu, Y.-S. Cheng, D.-M. Wang, M.-L. Li, W.-S. Lu, X.-Y. Xu, X.-H. Zhou and X.-W. Wei, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 112, 110898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, H. Zeng, C. Duan, Q. Hu, Q. Wu, Y. Yu and X. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 3581 RSC .
X. Wei, S. Zhang, T. Wang, A. Chen, J. Guo, B. Bai, S. Yang, Y. Li, X. Wang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 8432 RSC .
N. B. Magaela, R. Matshitse, B. Babu, M. Managa, E. Prinsloo and T. Nyokong, Polyhedron, 2022, 213, 115624 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mushtaq, T. Yasin, M. Saleem, T. Dai and M. A. Yameen, Photochem. Photobiol., 2022, 98, 202–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhao, X. Gui, Q. Fang, R. Zhang, W. Zhu, H. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Zhao, X. Cui, G. Gao, H. Tang, N. Shen, T. Chen, H. Song and W. Shen, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2022, 20, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pramanik, P. C. Sharma, S. Patibandla, Y. Gao, V. Ruppa-Kasani, J. Goli, A. Kumar, A. Chatterjee, S. S. Sinha, J. T. Bates, M. A. Bierdeman, R. Tandon and P. C. Ray, ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 8150–8157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, W. Hong, S. Duan, Y. Li, J. Wang and J. Zhu, Cancer Biol. Ther., 2022, 23, 281–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoosefian, M. Fouladi and L. I. Atanase, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Felix, L. M. R. Alencar, F. D. de Menezes, V. D. V. P. Midlej, L. Aguiar, S. G. Piperni, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, E. Ricci-Junior, F. Alexis, S. A. Junior, L. Zhu and R. Santos-Oliveira, J. Drug Delivery Sci. Technol., 2021, 61, 102117 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:

Yuanjie Zhang
	Yuanjie Zhang is a master student at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, China. His research focuses on improving the stability of perovskite quantum dots and their applications in photocatalysis and sensing.

Bin Liu
	Bin Liu is a doctor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, China. He is mainly engaged in the synthesis of perovskite nanocrystals, the construction of devices and the application of nanomaterials in biomedical therapy.

Zongming Liu
	Zongming Liu joined the University of Jinan as a principal professor in 1985 and is the Young and Middle-aged Expert with Outstanding Contributions in Shandong Province. He is the author of over 60 journal papers. His group is focusing on nanomaterials, powder engineering, and thermal engineering.

Jinkai Li
	Jinkai Li received his PhD degree from the Northeastern University, Shenyang City, China in 2014. After that, he has worked as a vice-professor at the University of Jinan. He is the author of over 30 journal papers. He is focusing on inorganic luminescent materials and devices, especially for LED devices and biological imaging treatments.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Binding interaction between MPA-QDs and CAT, and (b) binding interaction between MPA-QDs and SOD, where the CAT and SOD molecules are shown as cartoon representations; and (c) proposed mechanism of QD-induced apoptosis and cell death involving oxidative stress, the ERK signaling pathway, caspases and lipid peroxidation in cells. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (d) Cd inhibits the autophagic flux, and the autophagy-blockage-aggravated Cd-induced cell injury in AML12 cells. After treatment with 5 μM Cd and/or 5 μM CQ (an autophagy inhibitor) for 12 h, the autophagic flux was analyzed via western blot analysis. Results are shown as the mean ± SD (n = 5). Compared with the control group, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Compared with the CQ-treated group, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01. (e) Cells were treated with 5 μM Cd and/or 5 μM CQ, and then the effect of autophagy blockage on Cd-induced injury in AML12 cells was analyzed via real-time cell analysis. Error bars represent the standard deviation (n = 4). Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cytotoxicity induced by CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs. (a) Cytotoxicity of CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs at concentrations up to 100 μg mL−1 in PC12 cells after 24, 48 and 72 h of incubation, where values represent the mean ± SD, n = 6; and (b) cytotoxicity of CuInS2/ZnS-PEG QDs at concentrations of more than 100 μg mL−1 in PC12 cells after 24 and 48 h of incubation, values are the mean ± SD, n = 6. (24 h, *P < 0.05 vs. the control, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. the control; 48 h, #P < 0.05 vs. the control, and ####P < 0.0001 vs. the control.) Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (c) In vitro fluorescence imaging results of the different brain regions, (d) radiant efficiency of the different brain regions (n = 3), and (e) amount of Cd in the different brain regions (n = 3). Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 3  Reproductive ability and first litters of pups by male mice after intravenous injection of quantum dots or normal saline. (a) Fertility of male mice, number and body weight of their offspring. (b) Representative mouse parents and their litters of pups at 0–24 h after birth. (c) Changes in pup body weight within 30 days after birth. (d) Organ index of offspring mice on the post-natal day (PND) 10. (e) Organ index of offspring mice on PND 20. (f) Organ index of offspring mice on PND 30. (* Significantly different compared with the control group at the same sampling time, P < 0.05.) Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram of the hydrothermal synthesis of N-CQDs from wolfberries. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of PO QDs and fluorescence screening of Fe3+ and I−, with the inset images showing a photograph of the PO QDs, and bioimaging applications in live bean sprout and HeLa cells. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. (c)–(e) Several images of CQDs synthesized using different raw materials. (c) Yerba mate CQDs. From left to right: photograph of the calcined powder; TEM micrograph (with the particle size distribution inset); and photograph of an aqueous suspension of the CQDs irradiated at 365 nm using a UV lamp. On the micrograph, the scale bar is equivalent to 50 nm. (d) Avocado seed CQDs: (top) TEM micrograph (with the particle size distribution inset), and (bottom) photograph of an aqueous suspension of the CQDs as observed with the naked eye (left) and irradiated at 365 nm using a UV-lamp (right). (e) Orange peel CQDs: TEM micrograph (with the particle size distribution inset). Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of QDs in biomedical applications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of perovskites with the ABX3 formula. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD spectra of the as-received CPB@PMMA (red), PMMA (blue), and CPB PQDs (green), and standard JCPDS data (card# 54-0752) of CsPbBr3 (black line); (b) TGA spectra of PMMA and CPB@PMMA; (c) PL and absorption spectra of CPB@PMMA in water, CPB PQDs in DCM, and CPB PQDs in PET; and (d) SEM images of CPB@PMMA nanospheres and photographs of the corresponding colloid solutions prepared via spraying and dripping, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. (e) Relative PL intensities of wr-PNDs and PQDs stored in water for different periods of time; (f) UV-visible absorption and PL spectra of PQDs in toluene and wr-PNDs in water; (g) time-resolved PL spectra of PQDs and wr-PNDs in toluene; and (h) open-aperture z-scan curves measured for toluene solutions of PQDs and wr-PNDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (i) Directed motion of tagged mammospheres. Snapshots of a cluster of cells exhibiting directed motion due to the magneto-fluorescent particle (glowing spot) embedded in the cell at different time points. The yellow arrows denote the relative locations of the magnets. Scale bar, 50 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  Elemental composition, structure, and applications of TMDCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the microRNA detection process on the MoS2 platform, and (b) schematic diagram of multiplex microRNA detection using MoS2-integrated SCCBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of ZnO NPs@SiO2-based CL bioimaging, (b) and (c) CL images (b) and intensities (c) of HeLa cells cultured with ZnO@SiO2 NPs for 6 h and then added to a mixture of CPPO and different concentrations of H2O2, and (d) cell viability of HeLa cells after 24 h of incubation with different concentrations of ZnO@SiO2 NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 163 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CLSM images of the cellular uptake of ZnO@Polymer-Np for different times (1, 3 and 5 h). ZnO QDs (green), Cy5-labeled pDNA (red), and merged images in a bright field. Scale bar, 10 μm. (b) Quantitative analysis of the fluorescence intensity from ZnO QDs and Cy5-pDNA in PC12 cells for various incubation times. (c) CLSM images of the release of pDNA loaded by ZnO@Polymer-Np in PC12 cells through lysosomal escape. Cy5-labeled pDNA (red), lysosomes (green) stained with Lyso Tracker. Non-overlapping parts of green and red areas (white arrows). (d) Differentiation of PC12 cells incubated with free NGF (100 ng mL−1), ZnO@Polymer or ZnO@Polymer-Np. Extended synapses in the PC12 cells (red arrows). Scale bar, 100 μm. (e) Total number of PC12 cells and (f) number of PC12 cells with synapses (>50 μm). (g) Cell viability of C6 and SH-SY5Y cells treated with ZnO@Polymer-Np at various Zn concentrations (from 0.25 to 3.00 mg mL−1), using PBS as a negative control. (h) Cell proliferation of two PD model cells after treatment with ZnO@Polymer-Np at various Zn concentrations (0.25, 0.50 and 0.75 mg mL−1), where cells pre-treated with MPP+ were used as a positive control. Significance, ns: p > 0.05, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

Hydrothermal carbonization	
Tinospora cordifolia leaves	435	5.47	3.7	B16F10 and SiHa	
180

Carbonization activation and hydrothermal carbonisation	Oil palm biomass	500	5–7	24.6	NA	
181

Hydrothermal	Betel leaves	NA	4.5 ± 0.5	15	L929 and SW1736	
182

Hydrothermal	Corn stalk shells	NA	1.2–3.2	NA	A549	
183

Solvothermal	Polyurethane (PU) sponge	NA	2	NA	HeLa and MC3T3-E1	
201

Microwave-assisted	Citric acid and metformin	450	5–6	8.4	HEK-293, DRG neurons and SJGBM2 cells	
202

Microwave-assisted	Ibuprofen	455	6.99 ± 2.50	5.6	HeLa	
203

Hydrothermal	Shrimp shells	450	8–10	27.14	Nematode cells	
184

Hydrothermal	Sandalwood	458	2–4	12	MG-63	
204

Solvothermal	Lemon juice	704	5.7	31	HeLa	
185

Pyrolysis	Citric acid (CA), thiourea (TU) and hafnium chloride (HfCl4)	
	3.73 ± 0.62	18.4	HeLa	
200

Thermal carbonization	Bread	600	<0	NA	C2C12	
186

Hydrothermal	
o-Phenylenediamine and urea	650	2.60 ± 0.68	20.1	HeLa	
205

Carbonization	Ice biryani	432	2–5	41	A549	
206

One-pot reflux	Carrots	450	3–8	4.56	Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli) and Gram-positive bacteria (S. aureus)	
187


Hydrothermal	
o-Phenylenediamine and L-cysteine	NA	3–8	14	Cl−	2.817 μM	15–200 μM	
216

Microwave-assisted	Glutathione (GSH) and p-phenylenediamine (PPD)	535	3.9 ± 0.4	63	Fe3+ and thiol	1.2 μM and NA	0–150 μM and NA	
217

Hydrothermal	Tri-aminoguanidine (TAG)	396	2.8	11.3	Citrate	4 nM	NA	
213

Solvothermal	Nile blue sulphate and citric acid	615	2.93	54.4	Morin and ClO−	0.84 μM and 0.46 μM	5–125 μM and 2.5–90 μM	
214

Solvothermal	Glutathione and poly(ethylenimine)	NA	10	NA	Lysozyme	4 nM	0.03–10 μM	
215

Hydrothermal	Starch	435	5.6	12.2	NO2− and SO32−	0.425 μM and 0.243 μM	NA	
190

Hydrothermal	Basic fuchsin and sulfosalicylic acid	605	1.2–4.8	1.84	Tetracycline antibiotics and quercetin	32.36 nM and 6.87 nM/22.89 nM	1.24–165 μM and 0.98–34 μM/34–165 μM	
218

Hydrothermal carbonization	Malic acid and neutral red	627	2.28 ± 0.17	24.9	MnO4−	14.5 nM	0–115 μM	
219

Solvothermal pyrolysis	Citric acid and acrylamide	644	6.5–13.5	NA	Hg2+ and ziram	0.19 μM and 0.55 μg mL−1	0–40 μM and 0–5 μg mL−1	
220

Hydrothermal	Chitosan and ethylenediamine	NA	2.3	NA	ALP	0.013 mU mL−1	0.09–0.8 mU mL−1	
221

Microwave-assisted	Mexican mint leaves	436	2.43 ± 0.02	17	Fe3+	0.53 μM	0–15 μM	
191

Hydrothermal	Maple tree leaves	445	2–10	NA	Cs+	24 nM	100 nm to 100 μM	
192

Hydrothermal	Kanamycin sulfate (Kan)	425	3.87	5.26	Cr6+	0.36 μM	0–33 μM	
222

Hydrothermal	
Serratia marcescens KMR-3	413	4	21.6	
p-Nitrophenol	80 nM	30–80 μM	
223

Solvothermal	Glucose and dilute sulfuric acid	590	6 ± 2	NA	Al3+ and Fe3+	2.5 nM and 1.7 nM	0.75–52 μM and 0.38–67.5 μM	
224


 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the probable mechanism of interaction of carbon dots with phosphatidylcholine vesicles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 230 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (b) Plot of the percentage drug release vs. time of 5-FU release from FU-BT-CDs; and cell viability assay for the (c) MCF-7, (d) HeLa, and (e) HEK-293 cell lines treated with different concentrations of CDs, 5-FU, FU-CDs and FU-BT-CDs (labelled as a, b, c and d, respectively). Reproduced with permission from ref. 234 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 13  
In vivo IVIS spectra of (a) N-GQDs and P@N-GQDs after subcutaneous tissue injection; (b) signal from scanning along the yellow line in (a) showing a related ratio; (c) in vivo fluorescence emission (Ex: 535 nm/Em: Cy5.5) of induced tumors in nude mice with Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs injection were divided into N-GQDs, P@N-GQDs and Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs (Anti-GQDs), and (d) dissected organs of the treated nude mice via IVIS with Ex: 535 nm and Em: Cy5.5. (e) Dissected organs of mice with Ab-GD2@P@N-GQDs injection were measured with Ex: 430, 465, 500, 535 nm (for interpretation of the references to the colors in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article). Reproduced with permission from ref. 247 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

GQDs	Chemical oxidation and amino-hydrothermal	2.3	Fe3+	0.51 nM	0–50 μM	
254

GQDs	One-pot hydrothermal	3–4	Glucose	5.5 μM	5.5–66 mM	
255

GQDs	Pyrolysis	4.76 ± 0.96	Vanillin	2.5 × 10−8 mol L−1	0–2.1 × 10−5 mol L−1	
256

GQDs	Hydrothermal	1–6	Fe3+ and ascorbic acid	1.49 and 1.62 μmol L−1	0–500 μmol−1 and 0–300 μmol L−1	
257

CdTe	NA	2	Cd2+	1.1 μg L−1	0.010–2.0 mg L−1	
258

CdTe	Hydrothermal	1.94	Ascorbic acid	6.6 nM	0.1–1 μM	
259

CdTe	Co-precipitation	4	Tetracycline	0.003 ng mL−1	0.01–10 ng mL−1	
260

MoS2	Hydrothermal	2.5 ± 0.32	Dopamine	0.087 μmol L−1	0.25–35 μmol L−1	
261

MoS2	NaOH-assisted sonication exfoliation	2.89	Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)	0.1 U L−1	0–5 U L−1	
262

MoS2	Hydrothermal	3.1 ± 0.8	Hematin	0.32 μmol L−1	0.5–15 μmol L−1	
263

CsPbBr3	One-pot	15.92	
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
	51.9 pM	0.2–4.0 nM	
264

CsPbBr3	Water emulsion	NA	Tetracycline	28 nM	0.2–5.0 mM	
265


 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the role and mechanism of GQD-rescued angiogenic retinopathy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 268 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2022.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
