Recent advances in the fabrication and structure-specific applications of graphene-based inorganic hybrid membranes  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR00084J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR00084J
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5080-5093Recent advances in the fabrication and structure-specific applications of graphene-based inorganic hybrid membranes

        
          
            Xinne 
            Zhao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Panpan 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yuting 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Su
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Gang 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, 100029 Beijing, China. E-mail: suzq@mail.buct.edu.cn
bHybrid Materials Interface Group, Faculty of Production Engineering, University of Bremen, D-28359 Bremen, Germany. E-mail: wei@uni-bremen.de;  Fax: (+)49 421 218 64599
Received 
      6th January 2015
    , Accepted 11th February 2015First published on 12th February 2015AbstractThe preparation and applications of graphene (G)-based materials are attracting increasing interests due to their unique electronic, optical, magnetic, thermal, and mechanical properties. Compared to G-based hybrid and composite materials, G-based inorganic hybrid membrane (GIHM) offers enormous advantages ascribed to their facile synthesis, planar two-dimensional multilayer structure, high specific surface area, and mechanical stability, as well as their unique optical and mechanical properties. In this review, we report the recent advances in the technical fabrication and structure-specific applications of GIHMs with desirable thickness and compositions. In addition, the advantages and disadvantages of the methods utilized for creating GIHMs are discussed in detail. Finally, the potential applications and key challenges of GIHMs for future technical applications are mentioned.Xinne ZhaoXinne Zhao is currently a master's degree candidate under the supervision of Prof. Su at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. Her research interests are focused on functional graphene-based hybrid nanomaterials, organic–inorganic nanofibrous materials by electrospinning, and biosensors.Panpan ZhangPanpan Zhang received his bachelor's degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China (2012). Currently, he is pursuing a master's degree in Materials Science and Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Zhiqiang Su. His research interests focus on novel carbon and metal nanomaterials for applications in electrochemical biosensors, energy storage, and conversion.Zhiqiang SuZhiqiang Su is a Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research is focused on nanohybrids, biomedical materials, polymer materials, biosensors, and bioelectronics. So far, he has published more than 60 papers in international peer-reviewed journals. The papers have been cited more than 450 times, for an h-index of 15.Gang WeiGang Wei is currently a senior researcher and group leader in the Hybrid Materials Interfaces Group at University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include carbon-based nanomaterials, nanofibrous biomaterials, biosensors, and single molecule force spectroscopy. He has published more than 60 papers in international peer-reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 850 times, for an h-index of 19.
1. Introduction
Graphene (G), as the basic unit of graphite-like materials, has a uniform two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice structure with rigorous sp2 hybridization.1–4 Inspired by the unique properties of G, such as its large surface area, superior mechanical strength, extraordinary electronic and catalytic properties, as well as excellent thermal and chemical stabilities, many efforts have been made to explore the potential academic and technological applications of G-based materials since G's discovery in 2004.5–7 When different types of nanostructures, such as metallic nanoparticles (NPs), nanowires (NWs), nanotubes (NTs), polymer NPs, quantum dots, and non-metallic NPs, are integrated with G, the created G-based hybrid materials can offer the potential for use in fascinating applications in optoelectronic devices, electrochemical biosensors, reinforced functional materials, drug carries, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and energy storage.8–12
With the advantages of low price, high quality, and simple synthesis process, G-based materials hold greater potentials than other carbon-based materials.13 In addition, it is now easy to chemically synthesize G and graphene oxide (GO) according to recent technical progress.14–16 GO not only retains some properties of G but can also extend the range of physical and chemical modifications for the fabrication of some novel functional materials. The decoration of G with oxygenic functional groups endows GO with many useful functions due to three main reasons: (i) GO can be dispersed uniformly in most solvents; (ii) the oxygenic functional groups are beneficial to some chemical reactions; (iii) the surface groups of GO can mediate the combination between GO with polymers, ceramics, and metal matrices.17 As a highly oxidized nanosheet of sp2-hybridized carbon, GO can be transformed into reduced graphene oxide (RGO) by chemical and thermal reduction.18 Compared with GO, RGO can partly recover and acquire outstanding conductivity, which is important for the fabrication of functional nanomaterials and nanodevices.19–22
The hybridization of G (G and RGO) with inorganic nanostructures can be described as three typical ways based on the reaction procedures, i.e. (i) GO can be reduced to RGO first, and then the inorganic nanostructures can be prepared and attached onto RGO;23–26 (ii) the inorganic nanostructures can be grown on GO, and then the GO/nanostructure hybrids can be reduced to RGO/nanostructure simultaneously;27–31 (iii) a one-step synthesis and reduction of GO and inorganic ions precursors can be carried out in one system.32–35
Since 2006 when Ruoff's group first reported a G-polystyrene nanocomposite,8 varieties of G-based nanocomposites have been widely synthesized and applied; for example, polymeric membranes containing G-based materials, have been used in several applications in energy and environment related areas (fuel cells, sensors, water purification).36–40 Furthermore, the introduction of inorganic nanostructures onto the surface of G can not only retain the remarkable performances of G, but can also bring some new properties into the created nanohybrids. One of the main functions of G is to provide a support for the binding of inorganic nanostructures. According to the components of the inorganic nanostructures, the fabricated G-based inorganic nanohybrids can be classified in to three main types by hybridizing G with: metallic nanostructures, metallic compound nanostructures, and non-metallic nanostructures.
Recently, there has been increasing interest in the fabrication and applications of G-based inorganic hybrid membranes (GIHMs). First of all, the created GIHMs preserve all the advantages from their individual components, and, furthermore, the hybridization of G with other nanoscale building blocks can bring additional and surprising properties. The continuous and conductive nature of GIHM makes it possible for use in photovoltaic applications and provides a large surface area for attaching other materials.41 At the same time, the controllable thickness of GIHMs makes them suitable for fabricating functional materials with flexible plasticity and unique optical transparent properties. Furthermore, the hybrid structure of GIHMs endows them with high efficiency in electrical conductivity. Finally, created GIHMs are very light, and can be used to replace other materials in portable devices. A search of the open publications using the keywords “graphene, hybrid, membrane” and “graphene, hybrid, film” in the past seven years with SciFinder Scholar was performed, and the result is shown in Fig. 1. It is clear that the fabrication and application of 2- and 3-D GIHMs have been attracting increasing interest in recent years.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of the annual number of scientific publications using the keywords of “graphene, hybrid, membrane” and “graphene, hybrid, film”, as searched by SciFinder Scholar. There were about 417 related publications in 2014 alone (until 16 November). 
In this review, we focus on the recent advances in the technical fabrication and applications of GIHMs with desirable thickness and compositions. We also aim to demonstrate the fabrication of GIHMs by hybridizing G with three different types of nanomaterials, including metallic, metallic compound, and non-metallic nanostructures. The advantages and disadvantages of these utilized methods for the synthesis of GIHMs are presented and discussed in detail. In addition, the potential applications and key challenges of GIHMs for future technical applications are mentioned.
2. GIHMs fabricated with G and metallic nanostructures
Metallic nanostructures can be classified as single- and multi-metallic systems (NPs, NWs, and NTs). With nanoscale size, metallic nanostructures have unique optical, magnetic, electrical, and chemical properties.42 Previously, many methods have been utilized to fabricate GIHMs by hybridizing G with single-metallic23–25,27,28,32–34,43–63 and multi-metallic35,64,65 nanostructures.
2.1 Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
CVD has made a great contribution to the preparation of G-based membranes. Hydrocarbon gases, through CVD consolidating on metal surfaces, enable the formation of uniform, large size, and single-layered G membranes, which can then be transferred onto arbitrary substrates decorated with metallic NPs.43 The sheet resistance of G obtained through the CVD method is much lower than that of G synthesized by a chemical method.44 These characteristics may have huge potential for applications in flexible and large-scale functional devices. In order to fabricate GIHMs with the CVD method, the created G membrane needs to be transferred onto a flexible substrate. Previously, several transfer techniques, such as roll-to-roll transfer, polymer-assisted transfer, thermal release tape (TRT), and hot-pressing remove, have been utilized in combination with CVD for the fabrication of GIHMs.45,46
The TRT-supported G membrane can be easily transferred onto a glass substrate coated with a Ag nanostructure.45 For example, Du and co-workers fabricated a GIHM based on G and AuNPs by a CVD-TRT method, which has potential application as an active substrate for the surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) detection of analytes.47 Furthermore, Liu and co-workers fabricated a G/AgNW hybrid membrane by a two-step method.48 They created a G membrane via CVD, which was further coated with a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) monolayer. After this, the PMMA-coated G membrane was adhered onto the AgNW film to form a G/AgNW hybrid membrane by dissolving PMMA in acetone. With the same strategy, Xu et al. obtained the PMMA-coated G membrane and transferred it onto AgNWs, which were synthesized through a solvothermal method.49 The obtained GIHM can be used as electrodes for flexible and transparent loudspeakers. In another case, Mulpur and co-workers fabricated a G membrane with the CVD method, and then a Ag thin film was deposited onto Pyrex microscope slides by a physical vapor deposition system. Finally, the GIHM was obtained by transferring the G membrane onto the Ag film substrate, and this was further applied for amplifying surface plasmon coupled emissions.50
At present, the CVD method is still the most common technique for fabricating GIHMs for large-scale production; however, the process is considered complex, since a membrane transfer process is required. In addition, the removal of precursors costs a lot of time and the experimental procedure is not environmentally friendly. Moreover, the reaction condition is slightly rigorous.
2.2 Substrate-assisted dry- and wet-transfer
Dry- and wet-transfer techniques have been used to improve the transfer of large-scale G membranes. The dry-transfer method allows the G membrane to transfer onto shallow depressions, while the wet-transfer technique enables the G membrane to transfer onto perforated and flat substrates.66 The typical processes are shown in Fig. 2. For the dry-transfer process, a thick PMMA is coated on a G/Cu foil first (Fig. 2a). After this, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) frame is used as a flexible support for the G/Cu/PMMA membrane. With this support, the G membrane will not be destroyed or wrinkled when it is removed from the etchant. After etching the Cu, the G/PMMA/PDMS membrane is dried and placed onto the target substrate. Finally, the wavy and rough membrane is heated to strengthen it for peeling off the PDMS.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of (a) dry- and (b and c) wet-transfer processes for fabricating GIHMs. 
In the wet-transfer technique (Fig. 2b and c), the G membrane is obtained in water, and a needle is utilized for positioning the membrane on a substrate (Fig. 2c). In this strategy, the assisted substrate can be regarded as a physical support for carrying G, and this substrate should be removed after the final combination of G with metallic NPs. Some typical substrates, such as flexible glass, normal rigid glass, and polymer membranes, can be used as the assisted substrates. For example, Kholmanov et al. used the dry-transfer method for the fabrication of GIHM with RGO and CuNWs for the first time (Fig. 3).23 Here, the thin film of CuNWs and RGO membrane were first fabricated by spray-coating and spin-coating, respectively. Then the PMMA/RGO membrane was obtained by spin-coating PMMA onto the RGO membrane. After a series of treating processes, the PMMA/RGO membrane was transferred onto the surface of CuNW film by the dry-transfer method. The PMMA layer was then removed with acetone, which eventually resulted in the formation of a RGO/CuNW hybrid membrane. The corresponding electrical and optical tests indicated that the electrical conductivity, oxidation resistance, substrate adhesion, and stability of the fabricated GIHM in harsh environments were greatly improved. This interesting work expands the application of GIHMs for use as transparent electrodes in Prussian blue-based electrochromic devices.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the fabrication of a RGO/CuNW hybrid membrane. 
The wet-transfer method has also been used to produce GIHM based on G with AgNWs. For example, Choi et al. transferred a CVD-grown G membrane onto PMMA with the wet-transfer method.52 AgNWs were deposited onto the G membrane by a simple spin-coating. As a matter of fact, substrate-assisted dry- or wet-transfer methods are very effective procedures for fabricating functional GIHMs by combining other membrane-preparing techniques like CVD, spin-coating, and spray-coating.
2.3 Self-assembly
Self-assembly is a very simple and time saving method to prepare large-scale GIHMs by controlling the experimental parameters. For example, Zhou et al. reported an electrostatic self-assembly method for the fabrication of a RGO/AgNP hybrid membrane.28 They first synthesized polycation-modified AgNPs and then conjugated the prepared NPs onto a GO sheet. The reduction of GO and absorption of AgNPs occurred simultaneously, resulting in the formation of RGO/AgNP hybrid membranes. Their results showed that AgNPs with a high density and uniform size distribution dispersed very well on RGO sheets. The fabricated GIHMs with higher transmittance and lower sheet resistance hold great potential for solar cells as a metallic electrode or anti-reflection coating.
Recently, we developed a more convenient and environmentally friendly strategy to synthesize self-assembled RGO/AuNP hybrid membranes, which only needed one step to achieve the preparation and reduction simutaneously.32,33Fig. 4 shows the schematic model for the synthesis of a RGO/AuNP hybrid membrane by the self-assembly technique.32 GO and HAuCl4 were mixed together in aqueous solution and reduced into RGO and AuNPs with glucose under heat treatment. Continuous evaporation makes the created RGO interact with AuNPs, and then self-assemble into a multilayer structure. Finally, a PET film was used to harvest the formed RGO/AuNP hybrid membranes. The fabricated GIHMs with this method are stable, flexible, semi-transparent, and size-adjustable. Furthermore, great potential application as an electrochemical biosensor was demonstrated.32 Compared with previous methods, our strategy for producing GIHMs has several advantages, such as environmental friendliness, cost-effectiveness, high efficiency, and time-saving.
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the one-pot green synthesis of a self-assembled RGO/AuNP hybrid membrane. 
In another group, Bramhaiah et al. fabricated GIHMs with RGO and multi-metallic (Au, Ag, and Pt) NPs at an aqueous–organic interface via self-assembly,64 where the organic phase contained a toluene solution of Ag(PPh3)4NO3 or Au(PPh3)Cl or Pd(PPh3)2Cl2 (PPh3 is triphenylphosphine), and the aqueous phase contained GO with tetrakis hydroxymethyl phosphonium chloride. The ultra-thin films were formed at the interface of the two phases, followed by in situ chemical reduction with sodium borohydride (NaBH4), leading to the fabrication of GIHM with RGO and metallic NPs. With the simple interfacial self-assembly method, Hoseini et al. also fabricated a novel RGO/Pt3Sn hybrid membrane,35 which involved reducing the organometallic precursors and GO with NaBH4 at the toluene-water interface. This route for fabricating GIHM is easy and inexpensive, and offers great potential for the construction of functional membrane-based devices.
Though the self-assembly method for the fabrication of GIHMs is simple and time-saving, it still has some disadvantages, such as the GIHMs fabricated through this way are crisp, weak, and have low efficiency. In addition, self-assembly usually needs surfactants to promote the combination of G with NPs.
2.4 Filtration method
This method can obtain GIHMs without polymeric or surfactant stabilizers, and, furthermore, the fabrication process can be simple, low cost, and convenient. In addition, the thickness and constitution of the fabricated GIHMs by this method are controllable.
Huang et al.55 and Chen et al.56 both obtained G membranes by a filtration method. The same point of their studies is that they used hydrazine to reduce the GO dispersion. The RGO membrane was obtained via filtration and followed by being decorated with AuNPs or NiNPs for the fabrication of GIHMs, which could be respectively used in bioelectrochemistry, biosensors, or electrocatalysts. In addition, Xu et al.57 and Tien et al.58 fabricated GIHMs with the help of vacuum filtration of a G/AgNP dispersion. The G/AgNP dispersion was first synthesized by adding silver nitrate aqueous solution into GO dispersion, and then reduced by hydrazine and NaBH4-ethylene glycol, respectively. The GIHMs they obtained could be separately used in SERS or used as transparent and conductive films.
Previously, Kong et al. used this method to produce layer-by-layer (LBL) GIHMs, in which the G and AuNP layers have an alternating arrangement.25 The fabrication includes a typical two-step process. First, a thin G membrane on a quartz substrate was produced using the vacuum filtration of a RGO solution, and then AuNPs were synthesized by spontaneously reducing Au ions on the created G membranes. In their study, the vacuum filtration method for the LBL-assembly of AuNP-decorated G thin membranes did not require any agents, such as linkers or reducing agents, for the reduction of Au ions, compared to their requirement in the self-assembly method. In this technique, the RGO thin membrane shows more electrical conductivity than the GO sheet, which is useful in applications for sensors and electronic devices. This strategy is simple and direct, and the fabricated GIHMs have potential application in areas such as AuNP-oligonucleotide complexes for intracellular gene regulation and probes for DNA microarrays. One of the clear disadvantages of this method is that the size and shape of the fabricated GIHMs are limited by the vacuum filtration system.
2.5 Electrochemical deposition
Electrochemical deposition is a novel route for synthesizing G/metallic NP hybrid membrane, and is also a simple, efficient, low-cost, and environmentally friendly route. It has enormous potential to be applied in environmental monitoring, food safety, disease detection, and so on. For instance, Zhao et al. used this method to produce a RGO/AgNP membrane.34 They first mixed and sonicated a GO aqueous solution and AgNO3 solution together, and then placed the mixed solution overnight. The mixed solution with Nafion was dropped onto the surface of a glassy carbon electrode (GCE), which was polished in advance. After the solution was completely dry, the GCE was used for cyclic voltammetry (CV) scanning in a phosphate buffer saline solution. Their results indicated that the GIHM created on GCE had a 3D LBL structure. The CV and I-T tests confirmed that the fabricated electrochemical sensor was fast, stable, and reliable, which makes it possible to be applied for chemical or biological determinations. In another work, Hu et al. also reported an electrochemical process for fabricating size-controlled GIHMs with AuNPs on G surface.24 The GO membranes were fabricated first, and Au ions were then obtained through the anode oxidation of bulk Au in HCl aqueous solution, which were then grown into AuNPs on the RGO/PET membrane by electrochemical reduction. The uniqueness of this method is that the requirement for a Au ion precursor can be omitted and the hybrid membranes can be directly used as a uniform and highly active SERS substrate without any surface modification or further treatment. However, the electrochemical method also has its limitations for the large-scale fabrication of hybrid membranes.
2.6 One-step pulsed power wire (PWE) evaporation
PWE evaporation is a simple and economic method for synthesizing G/metallic NP hybrid membranes in an aqueous solution. Myekhlai et al. utilized this method for the first time to create a flexible transparent conductive GIHM, which they further used as a novel optoelectronics material.60 The experimental process is described as a schematic diagram in Fig. 5a.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the experimental process for preparing a G/AgNP hybrid membrane. (b) SEM image of the G/AgNP hybrid membrane. 
The planetary ball milling method was used to modify the surface of pristine G to form ground G. The surface of pristine G was modified by the planetary ball milling method to form ground G, after which the ground G is highly dispersed in water under ultrasonication. AgNPs were prepared previously by the PWE method67 and synthesized in the prepared G aqueous solution, and then the mixture was stirred by a magnetic stirrer to prevent the agglomeration. After this, the nanofluid composite containing G/AgNP was evaporated under mild temperature and was enhanced by thermal treatment. Furthermore, the G/AgNP nanohybrids were decorated on flexible PET film from its aqueous solution by spin-coating. The morphological and structural characteristics of the fabricated GIHM were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and the corresponding results confirmed that the AgNPs were successfully decorated on the surface of G (Fig. 5b). It should be noted that the fabricated GIHM was harvested by a PET film and it was hard to separate PET from GIHM, which will limit the applications of GIHMs fabricated by this method.
2.7 Comparisons of fabrication techniques
According to the introductions above, it was found that there are many strategies that can be utilized to fabricate GIHMs based on G or RGO and inorganic single-metallic nanostructures. The process for preparing GIHMs can be simply classified into two types. The first one involves preparing the G or RGO membrane first, and then adding the as-synthesized inorganic particles onto G or RGO membranes to fabricate GIHMs.23–25,45,48–50,52,55,56 The other one involves preparing the membrane by combining the GO or RGO and inorganic NPs at the same time.28,32–35,57,58,60,64 For the first type, G and RGO membranes can usually be produced through CVD, Langmuir–Blodgett (L–B), vacuum filtration, spin or spray-coating before decorating the inorganic particles.23,25,68 The GO surface structure can be accurately controlled at a molecular level by L–B method, and it is the only technique to obtain GO sheets in a LBL deposition manner. Through the sequential LBL deposition of close-packed GO monolayers, multilayer GO membranes were obtained for producing uniform coverage and transparent conductors with low optical scattering loss after being transferred onto a substrate.69 For instance, Shi et al. obtained hybrid membranes by producing GO membranes through the L–B technique, which were then decorated with AgNWs for further chemical reduction with hydrazine hydrate.27 In addition, other novel ways for fabricating GIHMs with metallic nanostructures are constantly being discovered; for example, using biocompatible ingredients, such as chitosan, peptide nanofiber and proteins like fibrinogen and bovine serum albumin to form a stable dispersion and to accelerate the fabrication of large area membranes.61–63,70 The advantages and disadvantages of each method are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparisons of the fabrication techniques for GIHMs with G and metallic nanostructures




Techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages




CVD43,44,46–50
Common, large-scale production
Time-consuming, high cost, rigorous reaction conditions, thickness uncontrollable


Substrate-assisted dry- or wet-transfer23,52,66
Large-scale production, effective procedures
Complex process, time-consuming


Self-assembly28,32,33,35,64
Simple, time saving, large-scale production
Needs surfactants, crisp, weak and waste of materials


Filtration25,55–58
Simple, low-cost, and convenient, controllable thickness and constitution
Size and shape are limited by instrument used


Electrochemical deposition24,34
Simple, efficient, low-cost, and eco-friendly
Difficult for large-scale production


PWE evaporation60,67
Simple and eco-friendly
Hard to separate from substrate




3. GIHMs fabricated with G and metallic-compound nanostructures
Metallic compounds hybridized with G (G and RGO) include oxides,26,29,30,71–81 hydroxides,82,83 mineral salts,84,85 and so on. Herein, we present how to add the metallic compound nanostructures onto G to fabricate GIHMs.
3.1 Filtration method
This method is simple and efficient, and is most widely used for fabricating GIHMs based on G and metallic compounds, since filtration can assist and direct the assembly of G and metallic compounds.
Zhou et al.71 prepared a G/MnO2 nanosphere hybrid membrane by means of a typical filtration method, which could also be used for the fabrication of RGO and other metal oxide hybrid membrane electrodes. For example, with the help of the filtration method, Shao et al.72 obtained flexible, free-standing, and 3D porous GIHMs based on G and MnO2 nanorods as the positive electrodes, and Kim et al.84 fabricated a RGO/titanate nanosheets hybrid membrane. Thu et al.73 synthesised superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanocrystals anchored on GO sheets by a co-precipitation reaction and obtained hybrid membrane via vacuum filtration. In the study by Li et al., Ni(OH)2 nanoplates were first intercalated into G sheets, and with the help of an extended filtration-assisted method, excellent flexible GIHMs were fabricated and used as a positive electrode for supercapacitors.83 In addition, Zhang et al. demonstrated the vacuum filtration method to fabricate G/montmorillonite hybrid membranes with excellent properties of flexibility, electrical conductivity, and fire resistance.85
Yu et al.74 produced a novel GIHM of G and MnO2NTs by a filtration free-standing technique and further utilized the created GIHM for lithium-ion batteries with enhanced performances. Fig. 6 shows a schematic for the construction of G (Fig. 6a) and MnO2 LBL thin membranes (Fig. 6b). The cross-sectional image of the LBL G/MnO2NT hybrid membrane (Fig. 6c) shows that the MnO2NTs were interspersed between the layers of G. The continuity of the G layer was destroyed by the long MnO2NTs, which made it difficult for them to be distinguished. The G layers were separated and the electrical conductivity of the thin membrane was improved due to the addition of MnO2. The possible reason for this is that the layered structure including the MnO2NTs can reduce the charge transfer resistance between the G layers and can thus accelerate the ion movement.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the fabrication of (a) G membrane and (b) MnO2NT thin membranes to give a LBL structure by the filtration method. (c) SEM image of a thin G/MnO2NT hybrid membrane. 
By vacuum filtration and thermal reduction processes, Wang et al. created a 3D conductive network of flexible free-standing hollow G/Fe3O4 hybrid membranes,29 which could be used as materials for lithium-ion batteries. Due to their complementary working potential windows, transition metal oxides and carbon materials generally serve as negative and positive electrodes in asymmetric supercapacitors. Gao and co-workers synthesized RGO by a hydrothermal synthesis, and then they mixed the created RGO with Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O and polyethylene glycol (PEG) in NaOH for the final fabrication of RGO/Mn3O4NP hybrids.26 By filtrating the mixtures of RGO and Mn3O4NPs with cellulose acetate membrane filters, a RGO/Mn3O4NP hybrid membrane was prepared after washing, air-drying, and peeling off from the filters. Nevertheless, the size and shape of the fabricated GIHMs are limited by the filtration equipment.
3.2 Self-assembly
The self-assembly technique is a simple method, by which large-scale, but still uniform nanostructured membranes, can be obtained without any specialized equipment.76,77 In the study by Zhu and co-workers, a permanent magnet was utilized to help collect the fabricated GIHMs for nanodevices or catalytic applications.78 Electrostatic interaction is the main driving force for the assembly and formation of GIHMs. The 2D RGO/Fe3O4NP membranes were obtained by the following steps. They first prepared G with natural graphite by an oxidation-exfoliation-reduction route. In order to improve the solubility of RGO in water, a surfactant sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDS) was used. After this, they prepared Fe3O4NPs by reducing Fe(acac)3 in triethylene glycol. The as-prepared SDS-modified RGO was positively charged and the synthesized Fe3O4NPs were negatively charged. Finally, they obtained the RGO/Fe3O4NP hybrid membranes using a permanent magnet. The obtained GIHMs had excellent flexibility and mechanical properties. Due to the floating feature of the charged RGO, Fe3O4NPs were assembled onto both sides of a RGO sheet, which provides the same properties at both sides of the fabricated GIHMs in solution. This general method can be easily extended to fabricate other functional GIHMs by using different Co3O4, NiO, and TiO2 NPs. The disadvantage of this method is that the previous preparation for embellishing RGO and metallic compounds nanostructure is complex.
3.3 CVD
CVD has already been mentioned for preparing G-based metal hybrid membranes in section 2.1. This technique can also be utilized to fabricate GIHMs based on G and metal oxide nanostructures. For example, Devadoss et al. obtained G/WO3 membranes with the help of CVD.79 In their study, a G monolayer was firstly synthesized on a Cu foil with a typical CVD process. Then, WO3NPs were deposited onto the G membrane in an ultra-high vacuum chamber by radio frequency sputtering under an atmosphere of Ar and O2. In another work, Kim et al. reported a successful strategy to fabricate large-scale GIHMs of G with CVD and VO2 with a sputtering method followed by a heat-treatment, and which have the potential to be applied in optoelectronic devices.80 The optical response property was also investigated by changing the number of G layers and the temperature.
3.4 Electrophoretic deposition (EPD)
Recently, the EPD method has been widely used to fabricate GO- and G-based films and membranes, which have potential applications in supercapacitors, field emission devices, solar cells, transparent conductors, and so on.86 EPD is an economic technique for the surface modification of metal oxides and the deposition of nanostructured membranes.30 As a way to fabricate GIHM, EPD offers several excellent advantages, such as high deposition rate and production, controllable thickness, and is free of adhesive agents, compared with other processing methods.81
Wang et al. developed a new EPD strategy to prepare pure RGO membranes.86 RGO colloidal particles were suspended in a liquid medium and migrated under an electric field, which promoted the deposition of RGO onto the stainless steel (SS) electrode to form a membrane (Fig. 7a and b). The RGO/SS plate was dried and then placed in FeCl3 solution for separation of the RGO membrane from SS (Fig. 7c–e). A substrate was used to collect the RGO membrane, which was floating on the surface of the FeCl3 solution (Fig. 7f–i). The size and quality of the prepared RGO membrane by the EPD method was controllable, but the agglomeration of RGO was uncontrollable. In Fig. 7, we can clearly see the procedure for fabricating RGO membranes by EPD.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the preparation of a RGO membrane with EPD. (a) Solution of RGO. (b) EPD used to prepare pure RGO membranes. (c) The dry RGO membrane collected on SS. (d) RGO/SS plate floating on the surface of FeCl3 solution. (e) Separation of the RGO membrane from SS. (f) RGO membrane floating on the surface of the solution. (g) Obtaining the RGO membrane. (h) The RGO membrane is transferred to a substrate; (i) The dry RGO free-standing membrane. 
EPD was also utilized to obtain GIHMs. In another work, Wang and co-workers produced G/CoFe2O4NP hybrid membranes by the EPD method, which only required one moderate step and post-thermal annealing.30 The composition of the electrolyte was a stable GO suspension with Fe(NO3)3·9H2O and Co(NO3)2·6H2O, which was deposited onto the Cu foil to form a G/CoFe2O4NP hybrid film by EPD. In this EPD process, the working electrode was Cu foil, and the counter electrode was Pt foil. After the EPD fabrication, the obtained G/CoFe2O4NP hybrid membrane was washed, dried, and thermally annealed, and could be further used for lithium storage.
EPD is an original method with the advantages of fabricating hybrid membranes as lithium-ion batteries electrode without harsh chemicals, binders, or additives.
3.5 Comparisons of the fabrication techniques
In this section, we focused on the techniques for obtaining GIHMs based on G and metallic compound nanostructures, where transition-metal oxides are the most common, since the created GIHMs based on G and transition-metal oxides (e.g. MoO2, Co3O4, NiO, CuO, Fe2O3 or Fe3O4) hybrid membranes have broad applications in lithium-ion batteries.74 The fabrication methods have some similarities with the methods used for obtaining GIHM with G and metallic nanostructures, such as CVD, the filtration method, and self-assembly. Nevertheless, a new technique, EDP, was mentioned in this part of review, and can be used to fabricate both pure RGO film and GIHMs. Special attention is needed to further the chemical bath deposition method, which is cheap and only requires simple devices. This deposition technique was also previously utilized to fabricate G/Ni(OH)2NP thin membranes.82Table 2 shows a comparison of the different methods used for the fabrication of GIHMs with G and metallic compound nanostructures.
Table 2 Comparisons of the fabrication techniques for GIHMs with G and metallic compound nanostructures




Techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages




Filtration method26,29,71–74,83–85
Simple and convenient, controlled thickness and constitution
Size and shape are limited


Self-assembly78
Facile and robust
Complex preparation


CVD79,80
Most common, large-scale production
Time-consuming, high cost, rigorous reaction conditions, thickness uncontrollable


EPD30,81,86
Economic, high deposition rate, controllable thickness, free of adhesive agents
Size and quality are limited by electrode, uncontrollable RGO agglomeration




4. GIHMs fabricated with G and inorganic non-metallic nanostructures
The non-metallic nanostructures are those containing C (e.g., CNTs, fullerenes, carbon black (CB), carbon fiber, and carbon balls),31,87–102 Si,103–105 SiO2,106–108 Si3N4,109 and other non-metallic materials.
4.1 Original bubble deposition method (BDM)
BDM is an easy and flexible technique to deposit GO membranes precisely on discretionary substrates, which allows controlling the thickness of GO membranes.
Azevedo et al. took advantage of this method to obtain hybrid membranes based on GO sheets and CNT for applications in electronics and sensors.87Fig. 8 shows a schematic representation of the fabrication of a GO/CNT hybrid membrane with the typical BDM technique. Firstly, using only GO solution, a bubble is made in a closed chamber (Fig. 8a). Secondly, water drainage starts and the membrane is attached onto a substrate (Fig. 8b). The residual water is then evaporated at a very fast speed after bursting of the bubble. At the interface of the single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) and GO layers, a sandwich structure is formed (Fig. 8c–e). The prepared hybrid structure is composed of monolayer SWCNTs and a dense GO monolayer. The pores between the SWCNTs are filled by GO sheets. With the deposition of the SWCNTs membrane, a sandwich structure is achieved.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the BDM process: (a) Bubble formatting followed by water drainage (blue arrows). (b) The substrate moves down to make the bubble membrane cylindrical (right) and adheres with the substrate. The membrane thickness continues to decrease (yellow arrow) and finally bursts. AFM height images of (c) the deposited SWCNT monolayer (black), (d) GO sheets (yellow) deposited on the SWCNT layer to fill the pores, and (e) the final SWCNT deposition. 
This novel “low-cost” BDM overcomes the disadvantages of traditional G deposition methods and has proved to be an efficient method to assemble different nanostructures, such as SWCNTs, AuNPs, and metal oxide NWs into monolayer membranes.
4.2 Surface precipitation
Nguyen et al. presented a new strategy for the rapid fabrication of G and G/CNT hybrid membranes by a low vacuum annealing of cellulose acetate on a Ni surface.88 Their method of fabrication and hybridization has a lot of advantages, such as time and energy saving, tuneable properties, and is free of the use of toxic chemicals. The precipitation of G on Ni surfaces was achieved with a solid carbon precursor (cellulose acetate), which was joined with a host component CNT network and coated on Ni to produce a G/CNT hybrid membrane. Fig. 9 shows the process to fabricate G and G/CNT hybrid membranes.
 Fig. 9  Schematic fabrication of G and G/CNT hybrid membranes. 
In this method, firstly, the contaminants residing on Ni surfaces were removed ultrasonically in an acetone bath. Then, a roller was used to press the cellulose acetate membrane on to the Ni surface by mechanical force. After this, they placed the sample in a quartz container and put them together into a lamp annealing system. The sample was heated in vacuum. Varying the annealing period and temperatures leads to the formation of different graphitic qualities in GIHMs. As expected, the fabricated GIHMs show excellent optoelectrical and field electron emission properties. The surface precipitation method is a potential route to hybridize G with various nanomaterials.
4.3 LBL self-assembly
LBL self-assembly is a controllable and reproducible method of adsorbing counter-charged species in an aqueous environment,106 and can also be used to produce GIHMs with G and non-metallic nanostructures. The composition and structure of the membranes obtained through this method are controllable with nanoscale precision.
Huang et al. prepared GO/CNT hybrid membranes by simply casting an aqueous dispersion on a Ti substrate through self-assembly as electrodes for supercapacitors.89 Here, firstly, multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with a diameter and length ranging between 10–20 nm and 10–50 μm were synthesized by a CVD method. To fabricate GO/CNT membranes, the synthesized CNTs were handled by an ultrasonicator in distilled water and then the as-prepared GO aqueous dispersion was added. In order to obtain a highly stable GO/CNT hybrid aqueous dispersion, the mixture was put into the ultrasonicator and cast on a Ti sheet and then dried in an oven. Finally, the dried hybrid membranes were annealed for further application as binder-free electrodes for high performance supercapacitors. By adding CNTs, the electrodes exhibit remarkably high specific capacitances. Electrostatic LBL self-assembly is a versatile fabrication technique for producing GIHMs. Yu et al. fabricated large-scale GIHMs by the successive self-assembling of functionalized G nanosheets and MWCNTs for supercapacitors.90 The created GIHMs based on G and MWCNTs are suitable for electrochemical measurements after assembling them onto different substrates. The possible reason for this is that the hybrid membranes with interconnected network carbon structures have well-defined nanopores, which are beneficial to ion diffusion. In addition, Shao et al.92 and Lv et al.94 took advantage of the LBL self-assembly process to fabricate GIHMs at a liquid-air interface, which have the potential to be applied in electrochemical sensors.
Diverse nanostructures, such as CNTs and NPs can be consolidated in a single platform by LBL self-assembly. For example, CNTs modified with carboxylic acid, amine, and polyions have been recently combined with G by the LBL self-assembly technique to fabricate ultrathin electroactive multilayer GIHMs. Hong et al. obtained a GIHM based on RGO and MWCNTs with this technique;97 a schematic showing their fabrication of a RGO/MWCNT LBL membrane is shown in Fig. 10a and b. They synthesized positively charged MWCNTs (MWCNT-NH3+) and prepared negatively charged RGO (RGO-COOH) by chemically reducing GO with hydrazine in the presence of ammonia. Due to the electrostatic interactions between MWCNT-NH3+ and RGO-COO−, a multilayer GIHM based on RGO and MWCNTs was created by repeatedly spin-coating on a planar silicon wafer or quartz slide. The typical SEM images of the prepared 5-layer GIHM are shown in Fig. 10c–e. Fig. 10f shows the optical image of the created (RGO/MWCNT)25 hybrid thin membrane on a PET substrate after mild thermal treatment.
 Fig. 10  (a, b) Schematic of a RGO/MWCNT hybrid LBL membrane; (c) High-resolution SEM image of a (RGO/MWCNT)5 hybrid LBL membrane without further treatment, (d) after treatment by thermal reduction, and (e) after chemical treatment; (f) Image of a (RGO/MWCNT)25 hybrid LBL membrane on a PET substrate after mild thermal treatment. 
The hybrid multilayer of the (RGO/CNT)n membrane fabricated via LBL assembly offers excellent control over the optical and electrical properties. Due to the highly tunable and versatile properties, the thin membranes fabricated via LBL assembly reveal a unique potential for integrating active carbon nanomaterials in applications in advanced energy, sensors, and electronic devices. The disadvantage is that the functionalization of inorganic non-metallic nanostructures and the self-assembly process cost a lot of time, which limits their practical applications.
4.4 Filtration method
Filtration has been found to be a useful method to assemble G- and GO-based hybrid membranes, due to its relatively facile procedure. This technique can also be utilized to fabricate GIHMs with G and non-metallic nanostructures. For example, Khan et al. prepared mixed dispersions to obtain a G/CNT hybrid membrane by vacuum filtration method for application in conductive coatings.98 They first dispersed SWCNTs powder in N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent by high energy ultrasonication, and then dispersed in multilayer G in NMP by low energy ultrasonication. After, they mixed the two parts of the dispersions in a round bottom flask, and then sonicated the mixture in low power sonic bath. The G/CNT hybrid membrane can be produced by filtrating it through a microporous poly(vinylidenefluoride) (PVDF) membrane. After being carefully peeled off, the free-standing membrane was dried under vacuum to remove the residual solution. The created GIHM had better mechanical properties and conductivity than the membranes created with only CNTs or G.
In another case, Wang and co-workers prepared a novel GIHM based on RGO and CB with the vacuum filtration method, and the fabricated GIHM had potential application in flexible and high rate performance supercapacitors.31Fig. 11 shows a schematic of the preparation of the RGO/CB hybrid membrane. The GO prepared by a modified Hummers’ method was mixed with water at room temperature under ultrasonication. CB was dispersed in dimethylformamide (DMF) under ultrasonication. The GO dispersion and CB dispersion in DMF were mixed, and hydrazine was added into the mixture with vigorous stirring. Finally, the RGO/CB hybrid membrane was prepared by vacuum filtration using a cellulose esters filter membrane.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of the fabrication of an RGO/CB hybrid membrane. 
A simple, in situ, and one-step filtration method was also carried out to fabricate a free-standing G/SiNP hybrid membrane for use in lithium-ion batteries, in which the SiNPs are highly encapsulated in a G nanosheet matrix.103 The G/SiNP composite suspension was filtrated with positive pressure by passing through a wetted PVDF filter, which ultimately leads to obtaining a free-standing mat of the G/SiNP composite. The resultant composite mat was washed and dried overnight to peel the membrane off from the PVDF filter. Finally, the as-prepared sample was heat-treated to remove the –H and –OH groups.
4.5 Comparisons of fabrication techniques
There is a general tendency to use carbon material, which acts as an inorganic non-metallic nanostructure, to combines with G to fabricate GIHMs. The composites, particularly G and CNTs, have become new materials with great potential for many applications, due to their large specific surface area, high electrical conductivity, and unique mechanical properties. Carbon-based materials have shown advantageous flexibility and potential for producing flexible and bendable free-standing electrodes.103 The general CVD method is also used to fabricate GIHMs with carbon materials. In some studies, a G membrane was first obtained via CVD for further treatment and combination with carbon nanomaterials,100,108,109 which is similar to the process for fabricating GIHMs with metal and metallic compound nanostructures. However, some new methods have been used in the fabrication of GIHMs with carbon materials, for example, a hybrid G/amorphous carbon membrane was acquired immediately through CVD.101,102 Apart from LBL self-assembly, CVD and filtration covered in sections 2 and 3, new fabrication techniques like BDM and surface precipitation have also been introduced in this section for the first time. In a recent study, GIHMs based on different types of inorganic nanostructure were reported,79,110,111 and extend the applications of GIHMs. The following table (Table 3) shows the advantages and disadvantages of different fabrication techniques for the fabrication of GIHMs with G and non-metallic nanostructures.
Table 3 Comparisons of the fabrication techniques for GIHMs with G and inorganic non-metallic nanostructures




Techniques
Advantages
Disadvantages




BDM87
Easy and flexible, discretionary substrates, controlled thickness
Low production efficiency


Surface precipitation88
Time and energy saving, tunable properties, free from use of toxic chemicals
Circumscribed application


Self-assembly89,90,92,94,95 and LBL assembly97,106
Versatile fabrication technique
Lack of practical application


Filtration31,98,99,103,104
Simple and facile
The size and shape are limited




5. Summary of the potential applications of GIHMs
There are numerous advantages to fabricating G-based nanocomposites into GIHMs for a wide range of applications. The thickness of the GIHMs confer upon them flexible plasticity to contact with different surfaces. Fig. 12 summaries the potential applications of GIHMs in different fields. The unique properties of optical transparency, excellent electrical conductivity, and mechanical properties allow the potential to use GIHMs in optoelectronics material (organic light emitting diodes, touch panels), transparent electrodes in Prussian blue-based electrochromic devices, positive electrodes, and solar cells as metallic electrodes and anti-reflection coatings. The structure of the GIHM endows it with high efficiency in electrical conductivity, which can be useful in energy storage (lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors), electrocatalysts, and electrochemical biosensors. The other excellent properties also bring huge potential for GIHMs to be used in SERS, amplifying surface plasmon coupled emission, the construction of functional membrane-based devices, fire resistance, conductive coatings, and so on. Furthermore, the membrane is so extremely light that it can replace other materials in making portable devices. To summarize, the detailed applications of GIHMs fabricated with G and different nanostructures (metal, metal compound, and non-metal) are presented in Table 4.
 Fig. 12  Potential applications of GIHMs. 
Table 4 Summary of the fabrication strategies and corresponding applications of GIHMs




Nanostructures for GIHMs
Fabrication strategies
Applications




AgNPs28,50,57,58
Self-assembly, CVD, physical vapor deposition, vacuum filtration
Metallic electrode for solar cells, SERS,57 transparent and conductive films,58 surface plasmon coupled emission


AgNWs43,49
CVD, solvothermal method
Antibacterial material, electrochromic devices, electrodes for flexible and transparent loudspeakers


AuNPs25,32,47,55
Filtration, self-assembly, CVD-TRT
Sensors, electronic devices, biosensors, SERS


Metallic NPs34,60
Electrochemical deposition, PWE evaporation
Sensors and optoelectronic devices


CuNWs23
Dry-transfer method
Transparent electrodes for electrochromic devices


Pt3Sn35
Self-assembly
Membrane-based devices


NiNPs56
Filtration
Electrocatalyst


SiNPs103,104
Filtration
Lithium-ion batteries


MnO2 nanorod72
Filtration
Positive electrodes


MnO2NTs74
Filtration
Lithium-ion batteries


Ni(OH)2 nanoplates83
Filtration-assisted method
Positive electrode for supercapacitor


Montmorillonite85
Vacuum filtration
Fire resistance


Fe3O4NPs29,78
Vacuum filtration, self-assembly
Lithium-ion batteries, nanodevices, catalysis


VO2NPs80
CVD and sputtering
Optoelectronic devices


CoFe2O4NPs30
EPD
Lithium storage


CNT87,89,90,92,97,98
BDM, self-assembly, filtration
Sensors, supercapacitors, energy materials, electro-devices


CB31
Vacuum filtration
Supercapacitor




6. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, we presented and discussed the various techniques to fabricate GIHMs in this review. The structure-specific applications of the fabricated GIHMs were also presented. In addition, the advantages and disadvantages of all the methods for creating GIHMs with G and metals, metallic compounds, and non-metallic nanostructures were discussed. From this review, we can obtain the following ideas:
(i) It is simple and convenient to obtain GIHMs through vacuum filtration, while the size and shape of the membrane is limited by the instrument used.
(ii) CVD can achieve large-scale production, but it can barely obtain thin membranes. Moreover, it needs post-processing, which is the same with substrate-assisted wet- or dry-transfer techniques.
(iii) LBL self-assembly is a versatile fabrication technique, but it is usually accompanied with the disadvantage of using surfactants and can lead to the wastage of materials. At the same time, GIHMs fabricated via self-assembly are weak and crisp.
(iv) The spin-coating or spray-coating method is rapid, but the structure of the GIHMs is difficult to control, which influences the final opto-electronic properties.
(v) BDM and EPD are both new techniques for the fabrication of GIHMs, but they still have their limitations.
The properties of GIHMs are not only dependent on the composition, but are also largely influenced by the way they are prepared. In order to fabricate high-quality GIHMs, several key points should be taken into consideration in advance. As one of the most important parts of GIHMs, G with the structure form of individual nanosheets can most effectively enhance its function compared with other structural forms of G. When it comes to inorganic nanostructures, a uniform distribution on the G surface is required. Furthermore, the agglomerate of NPs is also a challenge for researchers to overcome. The key point is how to uniformly distribute the inorganic NPs in GIHMs. Moreover, certain methods need bonders such as a bifunctional linker and an agglomerant to adhere NPs onto the G surface. The choice of linkers directly influences the success or failure of the fabrication of GIHMs. Last, but not least, the size, thickness, and components of the fabricated GIHMs should be accurately controlled for further applications.
For the development of GIHMs in the future, first, there is an increasing tendency and need to fabricate GIHMs in an eco-friendly way, such as by electrophoretic deposition, electrochemical methods, and self-assembly. Second, the main component of GIHMs will be no longer restricted to only one part. Multicomponent GIHMs with different types of NPs are currently being researched. Among the multicomponent hybrid membranes, organic–inorganic hybrid membranes, which can be used as conducting material in fuel cell, are the focus of most interest. Third, it will be more interesting to fabricate functional membranes or films with graphene-like materials112 (MoS2, BN, WS2, MoTe2, and so on) and with the nanostructures introduced in our work. Finally, the most important aspect is to combine theoretical research with practical application. In order to achieve the industrialization of preparing hybrid membranes, some special equipment, such as extruders and large-scale electro-deposition equipment, may be widely utilized. In addition, improving the production process with regard to environmental friendliness, low energy consumption, and high efficiency is a developing trend in the future.
Main abbreviations

GIHMGraphene-based inorganic hybrid membrane
NPsNanoparticles
NWsNanowires
NTsNanotubes
GOGraphene oxide
RGOReduced graphene oxide
CVDChemical vapor deposition
TRTThermal release tape
SERSSurface-enhanced Raman scattering
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PMMAPolymethyl methacrylate
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
LBLLayer-by-layer
GCEGlassy carbon electrode
CVCyclic voltammetry
PWEPulsed power wire
L–BLangmuir–Blodgett
EPDElectrophoretic deposition
CBCarbon black
BDMBubble deposition method
NMP
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
PVDFPoly(vinylidenefluoride)

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (project no. ZZ1307). We also would like to thank the financial support from the Deutsche Akademische Austausch Dienst (DAAD) master's short-term scholarship for academic exchange in the Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research Dresden.
Notes and references
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
C. Chen, Q. H. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Lv, Y. Wen, P. X. Hou, M. Wang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007–3011 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Bai, W. Shang, W. Xie, H. Ma, Y. Fu, D. Fang, H. Sun, L. Fan, M. Han, C. Liu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7461–7467 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6156–6214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2191–2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Sun, N. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Shi, J. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1362–1370 RSC .
K. T. Nguyen and Y. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6245–6266 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
K. Y. Shin and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6645–6648 RSC .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Dimiev and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3060–3068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4265–4268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Varela-Rizo, I. Martín-Gullón and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4565–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gómez-Navarro, J. C. Meyer, R. S. Sundaram, A. Chuvilin, S. Kurasch, M. Burghard, K. Kern and U. Kaiser, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1144–1148 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Mativetsky, E. Treossi, E. Orgiu, M. Melucci, G. P. Veronese, P. Samorì and V. Palermo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14130–14136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kurkina, S. Sundaram, R. S. Sundaram, F. Re, M. Masserini, K. Kern and K. Balasubramanian, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5514–5520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Hou, W. L. Song, P. Wang, M. J. Meziani, C. Y. Kong, A. Anderson, H. Maimaiti, G. E. LeCroy, H. Qian and Y. P. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15026–15032 CAS .
I. N. Kholmanov, S. H. Domingues, H. Chou, X. Wang, C. Tan, J. Y. Kim, H. Li, R. Piner, A. J. G. Zarbin and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1811–1816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, L. Lu, J. Liu and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11994–12000 RSC .
B. S. Kong, J. Geng and H. T. Jung, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2174–2176 RSC .
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 7020–7026 CAS .
L. Shi, J. Yang, T. Yang, Q. Hanxun, J. Li and Q. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 43270–43277 RSC .
Y. Zhou, J. Yang, X. Cheng, N. Zhao, H. Sun and D. Li, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3391–3398 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, L. Gao and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1794–1800 CAS .
B. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, M. Yu, B. Li and X. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 679–687 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Chen, J. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. H. Ouyang and D. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Lu, Q. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6525–6531 RSC .
P. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Lu, S. Zhang, J. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8980–8989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, Z. Liu, W. Fu and H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hoseini, Z. Barzegar, M. Bahrami, M. Roushani and M. Rashidi, J. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 769, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Wang, Z. Ouyang, J. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4254–4263 CAS .
L. Wang, J. Kang, J. D. Nam, J. Suhr, A. K. Prasad and S. G. Advani, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2015, 4, F1–F4 CrossRef CAS .
S. Filice, D. D'Angelo, S. Libertino, I. Nicotera, V. Kosma, V. Privitera and S. Scalese, Carbon, 2015, 82, 489–499 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Heo, H. Im and J. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 425–426, 11–22 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Q. Yang, J. Xu and C. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8057–8062 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, Z. Jin and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6472–6479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, J. Ding and G. Wei, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52598–52610 RSC .
I. N. Kholmanov, C. W. Magnuson, A. E. Aliev, H. Li, B. Zhang, J. W. Suk, L. L. Zhang, E. Peng, S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Piner, G. Shvets and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. O. Choi, D. W. Kim, S. J. Kim, S. B. Yang and H. T. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4575–4581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Chen, D. S. Ghosh, V. Mkhitaryan and V. Pruneri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11756–11761 CAS .
R. S. Edwards and K. S. Coleman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 23–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Du, Y. Zhao, Y. Qu, C. H. Chen, C. M. Chen, C. H. Chuang and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4683–4691 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Chang and L. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2970–2974 RSC .
S. Xu, B. Man, S. Jiang, M. Liu, C. Yang, C. Chen and C. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3532–3539 RSC .
P. Mulpur, R. Podila, K. Lingam, S. K. Vemula, S. S. Ramamurthy, V. Kamisetti and A. M. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17205–17210 CAS .
T. Qiu, B. Luo, M. Liang, J. Ning, B. Wang, X. Li and L. Zhi, Carbon, 2015, 81, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
H. O. Choi, D. W. Kim, S. J. Kim, K. M. Cho and H. T. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5902–5909 RSC .
Q. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Yang and J. K. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 64, 200–247 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Boukhvalov and C. Virojanadara, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1749–1753 RSC .
K. J. Huang, D. J. Niu, X. Liu, Z. W. Wu, Y. Fan, Y. F. Chang and Y. Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2947–2953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Duan, J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3693–3699 CAS .
Z. Xu, H. Gao and H. Guoxin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4731–4738 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Tien, Y. L. Huang, S. Y. Yang, J. Y. Wang and C. C. M. Ma, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1550–1560 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, H. Bi, S. Sun, Y. Tang, W. Zhao, T. Lin, D. Wan, F. Huang, X. Zhou, X. Xie and M. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1408–1413 CAS .
M. Myekhlai, S. Lee, T. Lee, H. Chung and H. Jeong, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xi, X. Chen, D. G. Evans and W. Yang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9885–9892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Sreeprasad, M. S. Maliyekkal, K. Deepti, K. Chaudhari, P. L. Xavier and T. Pradeep, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2643–2654 CAS .
J. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Li, X. Kuang, Y. Fan, G. Wei and Z. Su, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 529–533 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bramhaiah and N. S. John, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7765–7773 RSC .
G. Wei, Y. Zhang, S. Steckbeck, Z. Su and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17190–17195 RSC .
J. W. Suk, A. Kitt, C. W. Magnuson, Y. Hao, S. Ahmed, J. An, A. K. Swan, B. B. Goldberg and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6916–6924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batmunkh, M. R. Tanshen, M. J. Nine, M. Myekhlai, H. Choi, H. Chung and H. Jeong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 8445–8451 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6477–6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zheng, L. Shi, P. C. Ma, Q. Xue, J. Li, Z. Tang and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 4680–4691 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7360–7368 RSC .
H. Zhou, X. Yang, J. Lv, Q. Dang, L. Kang, Z. Lei, Z. Yang, Z. Hao and Z. H. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 300–307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1245–1251 RSC .
T. V. Thu and A. Sandhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 189, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yu, H. W. Park, A. Davies, D. C. Higgins, Z. Chen and X. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1855–1860 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, L. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Ying, Y. Mao, L. Sun and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9850–9855 CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. Cao and J. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 420, 119–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, X. Hu, Y. Sun, W. Luo and Y. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4707–4711 RSC .
G. Zhu, Y. Liu, Z. Xu, T. Jiang, C. Zhang, X. Li and G. Qi, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2432–2437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Devadoss, P. Sudhagar, S. Das, S. Y. Lee, C. Terashima, K. Nakata, A. Fujishima, W. Choi, Y. S. Kang and U. Paik, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4864–4871 CAS .
H. Kim, Y. Kim, T. Y. Kim, A. R. Jang, H. Y. Jeong, S. H. Han, D. H. Yoon, H. S. Shin, D. J. Bae, K. S. Kim and W. S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2632–2636 RSC .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Mai, R. Chen, X. Wang, C. Gu and X. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10898–10905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Zhu, L. Qiu, D. Li and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 7631–7636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Z. Tang, M. Leng and J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7495–7502 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Kim, S. Park, H. Kim, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff and S. J. Hwang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2288–2294 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, W. W. Tjiu, W. Fan, Z. Yang, S. Huang and T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18011–18017 RSC .
M. Wang, L. D. Duong, J. S. Oh, N. T. Mai, S. Kim, S. Hong, T. Hwang, Y. Lee and J. D. Nam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1747–1753 CAS .
J. Azevedo, C. Costa-Coquelard, P. Jegou, T. Yu and J. J. Benattar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14678–14681 CAS .
D. D. Nguyen, R. N. Tiwari, Y. Matsuoka, G. Hashimoto, E. Rokuta, Y. Z. Chen, Y. L. Chueh and M. Yoshimura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9071–9077 CAS .
Z. D. Huang, B. Zhang, S. W. Oh, Q. B. Zheng, X. Y. Lin, N. Yousefi and J. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3591–3599 RSC .
D. Yu and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, S. Pei, L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1958–1991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Shao, W. Lv, Q. Guo, C. Zhang, Q. Xu, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3706–3708 RSC .
A. B. Dichiara, T. J. Sherwood, J. Benton-Smith, J. C. Wilson, S. J. Weinstein and R. E. Rogers, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6322–6327 RSC .
W. Lv, Z. Xia, S. Wu, Y. Tao, F. M. Jin, B. Li, H. Du, Z. P. Zhu, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3359–3364 RSC .
H. Xue, T. Wang, H. Guo, X. Fan, Z. Zhu, X. Pan and J. He, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57724–57732 RSC .
Q. Su, Y. Liang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8279–8281 RSC .
T. K. Hong, D. W. Lee, H. J. Choi, H. S. Shin and B. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3861–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Khan, I. O'Connor, Y. K. Gun'ko and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2825–2830 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Nguyen, Y. T. Lai and N. H. Tai, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2014, 47, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, W. Song, M. W. Jung, M. A. Kang, K. Kim, S. J. Chang, S. S. Lee, J. Lim, J. Hwang, S. Myung and K. S. An, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4247–4252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Zang, Z. Li, X. Li, P. Li, P. Sun, X. Lee, R. Zhang, Z. Huang, K. Wang, D. Wu, F. Kang and H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4862–4869 CAS .
T. Cui, R. Lv, Z. H. Huang, X. Gan, K. Wang, D. Wu, H. Zhu and F. Kang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22295–22300 RSC .
J. Z. Wang, C. Zhong, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1467–1470 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Tao, L. Z. Fan, Y. Mei and X. Qu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1332–1335 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025–2027 RSC .
J. Zhu, L. Xu and J. He, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 16393–16401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Watcharotone, D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, R. Piner, I. Jung, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. E. Wu, S. F. Chen, C. P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Osváth, E. Gergely-Fülöp, N. Nagy, A. Deák, P. Nemes-Incze, X. Jin, C. Hwang and L. P. Biró, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6030–6036 RSC .
S. Lee, V. P. Adiga, R. A. Barton, A. M. van der Zande, G. H. Lee, B. R. Ilic, A. Gondarenko, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and J. Hone, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4275–4279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Kim, S. E. Lee, J. Lee, J. Y. Jung, E. S. Lee, J. H. Choi, J. H. Jung, M. Oh, S. Hyun and D. G. Choi, Physica E, 2014, 61, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, Y. Hwang and J. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 351–361 RSC .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed to the work equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Xinne Zhao	Xinne Zhao is currently a master's degree candidate under the supervision of Prof. Su at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. Her research interests are focused on functional graphene-based hybrid nanomaterials, organic–inorganic nanofibrous materials by electrospinning, and biosensors.
Panpan Zhang	Panpan Zhang received his bachelor's degree in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China (2012). Currently, he is pursuing a master's degree in Materials Science and Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Zhiqiang Su. His research interests focus on novel carbon and metal nanomaterials for applications in electrochemical biosensors, energy storage, and conversion.
Zhiqiang Su	Zhiqiang Su is a Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research is focused on nanohybrids, biomedical materials, polymer materials, biosensors, and bioelectronics. So far, he has published more than 60 papers in international peer-reviewed journals. The papers have been cited more than 450 times, for an h-index of 15.
Gang Wei	Gang Wei is currently a senior researcher and group leader in the Hybrid Materials Interfaces Group at University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include carbon-based nanomaterials, nanofibrous biomaterials, biosensors, and single molecule force spectroscopy. He has published more than 60 papers in international peer-reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 850 times, for an h-index of 19.

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of the annual number of scientific publications using the keywords of “graphene, hybrid, membrane” and “graphene, hybrid, film”, as searched by SciFinder Scholar. There were about 417 related publications in 2014 alone (until 16 November).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of (a) dry- and (b and c) wet-transfer processes for fabricating GIHMs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the fabrication of a RGO/CuNW hybrid membrane.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the one-pot green synthesis of a self-assembled RGO/AuNP hybrid membrane.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the experimental process for preparing a G/AgNP hybrid membrane. (b) SEM image of the G/AgNP hybrid membrane.	 

CVD43,44,46–50	Common, large-scale production	Time-consuming, high cost, rigorous reaction conditions, thickness uncontrollable
Substrate-assisted dry- or wet-transfer23,52,66	Large-scale production, effective procedures	Complex process, time-consuming
Self-assembly28,32,33,35,64	Simple, time saving, large-scale production	Needs surfactants, crisp, weak and waste of materials
Filtration25,55–58	Simple, low-cost, and convenient, controllable thickness and constitution	Size and shape are limited by instrument used
Electrochemical deposition24,34	Simple, efficient, low-cost, and eco-friendly	Difficult for large-scale production
PWE evaporation60,67	Simple and eco-friendly	Hard to separate from substrate

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the fabrication of (a) G membrane and (b) MnO2NT thin membranes to give a LBL structure by the filtration method. (c) SEM image of a thin G/MnO2NT hybrid membrane.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the preparation of a RGO membrane with EPD. (a) Solution of RGO. (b) EPD used to prepare pure RGO membranes. (c) The dry RGO membrane collected on SS. (d) RGO/SS plate floating on the surface of FeCl3 solution. (e) Separation of the RGO membrane from SS. (f) RGO membrane floating on the surface of the solution. (g) Obtaining the RGO membrane. (h) The RGO membrane is transferred to a substrate; (i) The dry RGO free-standing membrane.	 

Filtration method26,29,71–74,83–85	Simple and convenient, controlled thickness and constitution	Size and shape are limited
Self-assembly78	Facile and robust	Complex preparation
CVD79,80	Most common, large-scale production	Time-consuming, high cost, rigorous reaction conditions, thickness uncontrollable
EPD30,81,86	Economic, high deposition rate, controllable thickness, free of adhesive agents	Size and quality are limited by electrode, uncontrollable RGO agglomeration

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the BDM process: (a) Bubble formatting followed by water drainage (blue arrows). (b) The substrate moves down to make the bubble membrane cylindrical (right) and adheres with the substrate. The membrane thickness continues to decrease (yellow arrow) and finally bursts. AFM height images of (c) the deposited SWCNT monolayer (black), (d) GO sheets (yellow) deposited on the SWCNT layer to fill the pores, and (e) the final SWCNT deposition.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic fabrication of G and G/CNT hybrid membranes.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a, b) Schematic of a RGO/MWCNT hybrid LBL membrane; (c) High-resolution SEM image of a (RGO/MWCNT)5 hybrid LBL membrane without further treatment, (d) after treatment by thermal reduction, and (e) after chemical treatment; (f) Image of a (RGO/MWCNT)25 hybrid LBL membrane on a PET substrate after mild thermal treatment.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of the fabrication of an RGO/CB hybrid membrane.	 

BDM87	Easy and flexible, discretionary substrates, controlled thickness	Low production efficiency
Surface precipitation88	Time and energy saving, tunable properties, free from use of toxic chemicals	Circumscribed application
Self-assembly89,90,92,94,95 and LBL assembly97,106	Versatile fabrication technique	Lack of practical application
Filtration31,98,99,103,104	Simple and facile	The size and shape are limited

 	Fig. 12  Potential applications of GIHMs.	 

AgNPs28,50,57,58	Self-assembly, CVD, physical vapor deposition, vacuum filtration	Metallic electrode for solar cells, SERS,57 transparent and conductive films,58 surface plasmon coupled emission
AgNWs43,49	CVD, solvothermal method	Antibacterial material, electrochromic devices, electrodes for flexible and transparent loudspeakers
AuNPs25,32,47,55	Filtration, self-assembly, CVD-TRT	Sensors, electronic devices, biosensors, SERS
Metallic NPs34,60	Electrochemical deposition, PWE evaporation	Sensors and optoelectronic devices
CuNWs23	Dry-transfer method	Transparent electrodes for electrochromic devices
Pt3Sn35	Self-assembly	Membrane-based devices
NiNPs56	Filtration	Electrocatalyst
SiNPs103,104	Filtration	Lithium-ion batteries
MnO2 nanorod72	Filtration	Positive electrodes
MnO2NTs74	Filtration	Lithium-ion batteries
Ni(OH)2 nanoplates83	Filtration-assisted method	Positive electrode for supercapacitor
Montmorillonite85	Vacuum filtration	Fire resistance
Fe3O4NPs29,78	Vacuum filtration, self-assembly	Lithium-ion batteries, nanodevices, catalysis
VO2NPs80	CVD and sputtering	Optoelectronic devices
CoFe2O4NPs30	EPD	Lithium storage
CNT87,89,90,92,97,98	BDM, self-assembly, filtration	Sensors, supercapacitors, energy materials, electro-devices
CB31	Vacuum filtration	Supercapacitor
GIHM	Graphene-based inorganic hybrid membrane
NPs	Nanoparticles
NWs	Nanowires
NTs	Nanotubes
GO	Graphene oxide
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
TRT	Thermal release tape
SERS	Surface-enhanced Raman scattering
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PMMA	Polymethyl methacrylate
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
LBL	Layer-by-layer
GCE	Glassy carbon electrode
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
PWE	Pulsed power wire
L–B	Langmuir–Blodgett
EPD	Electrophoretic deposition
CB	Carbon black
BDM	Bubble deposition method
NMP	
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
PVDF	Poly(vinylidenefluoride)
Footnote
† These authors contributed to the work equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
