Annealing-free, flexible silver nanowire – polymer composite electrodes via a continuous two-step spray-coating method  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR32221H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR32221H
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 977-983Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAnnealing-free, flexible silver nanowire–polymer composite electrodes via a continuous two-step spray-coating method

        
          
            Dong Yun 
            Choi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hyun Wook 
            Kang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hyung Jin 
            Sung
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Sang Soo 
            Kim
          
        
      *
      Department of Mechanical Engineering, KAIST, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Korea. E-mail: hjsung@kaist.ac.kr; sskim@kaist.ac.kr
Received 
      10th August 2012
    , Accepted 26th November 2012First published on 29th November 2012AbstractFor the realization of high-efficiency flexible optoelectronic devices, transparent electrodes should be fabricated through a low-temperature process and have the crucial feature of low surface roughness. In this paper, we demonstrated a two-step spray-coating method for producing large-scale, smooth and flexible silver nanowire (AgNW)–poly3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene:polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) composite electrodes. Without the high-temperature annealing process, the conductivity of the composite film was improved via the lamination of highly conductive PEDOT:PSS modified by dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Under the room temperature process condition, we fabricated the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film showing an 84.3% mean optical transmittance with a 10.76 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance. The figure of merit ΦTC was higher than that obtained from the indium tin oxide (ITO) films. The sheet resistance of the composite film slightly increased less than 5.3% during 200 cycles of tensile and compression folding, displaying good electromechanical flexibility for use in flexible optoelectronic applications.
1 Introduction
The development of highly conductive transparent flexible electrodes is a goal for future optoelectronics technologies, such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), touch panels, and solar cells. Indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes are widely used in a variety of applications; however, these electrodes are not cost-effective due to the high price of indium and show the limited flexibility (brittleness). To mitigate the shortcomings of ITO, several groups have focused on developing new flexible electrodes or flexible electrode fabrication technologies. Recently, several alternatives have been introduced, for example, highly conductive PEDOT:PSS,1–3 metal grids,4 graphene,5,6 carbon nanotubes,7 nanotube–polymer composites,8–10 electrospun copper nanofiber meshes,11 and silver nanowire (AgNW) meshes.12–17 A large number of groups have demonstrated the applications of alternative electrodes in solar cells,5,11,12,18–20 touch panels,17 and OLEDs,6,21 suggesting the advent of new flexible electrodes superior to ITO. Prior to commercialization, the performance, surface roughness, and mass production of alternative electrodes must be improved.
Among the alternative electrodes, AgNW meshes have displayed good optoelectronic characteristics and flexibility, and the material is considered to be the best candidate for replacing ITO; however, there are serious compatibility issues on the fabrication of high-efficient optoelectronic devices. The inherently rough surfaces of the nanowire mesh yield a low shunt resistance, a high dark current and a low efficiency. Additionally, the AgNW mesh is easily detached from the substrate due to weak adhesive forces.12,13 Recently, celebrated research groups have proposed creative strategies for fabricating nanowire–polymer composite films in an effort to resolve the weak properties of the nanowire mesh. Examples of these strategies include an AgNW mesh covered by polyvinyl alcohol,21 an AgNW mesh buried on a PEDOT:PSS film,22 an AgNW–polymethacrylate film composed of stacks of short and long nanowires,23 and an AgNW mesh buffered by PEDOT:PSS or nano-particulate titania (TiOx).24 These groups demonstrated the superiority of these electrodes by fabricating OLEDs and organic solar cells that performed better than ITO-based devices; however, the film fabrication methods are difficult to scale up in a rapid production process. Madaria et al. showed the applicability of a spray deposition method for producing AgNW meshes onto glass, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), or fabric substrates.17
In this work, we introduce a two-step spray-coating process for fabricating flexible AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes. In the proposed process, no additional filtration or transfer steps are required because the PEDOT:PSS conducting polymer is directly sprayed onto the pre-deposited AgNW mesh. This approach is compatible with roll-to-roll coating processes, and the nanowire density and polymer film thickness are easily controlled by adjusting the spray duration. Also, we suggest a new strategy to enhance the conductivity of composite films without annealing of nanowires, which improves the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS via the addition of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). By laminating the modified PEDOT:PSS onto the AgNW mesh, no high-temperature annealing steps are needed to achieve high-performance flexible electrodes. We fabricated composite films showing a 10.76 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance and an 84.3% mean optical transmission over the visible light, much better than the performance of an ITO film. The surfaces of the AgNW mesh were smoothened during the PEDOT:PSS lamination process, addressing a significant morphological issue and improving the compatibility with high-efficiency optoelectronic devices. The composite electrodes were very stable under compression and tensile bending stresses, displaying good electromechanical flexibility for use in the applications to flexible optoelectronics.
2 Experimental
AgNWs dispersed in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) were purchased from Seashell Technologies. The mean length and diameter of the supplied AgNWs were 30 μm and 115 nm, respectively. The AgNWs were well dispersed by the polar groups without the surfactant coating of polyvinylpyrrolidone. To minimize the agglomeration of nanowires and deposit them uniformly onto the substrates, the dispersion was diluted to a concentration of 0.1 mg mL−1 in IPA. The PEDOT:PSS (Clevios PH 1000) aqueous dispersion was provided by Heraeus Clevios GmbH. A 5 wt% DMSO solution was added to the PEDOT:PSS dispersion, and this PEDOT:PSS mixture was filtered using 0.45 μm polyvinylidene difluoride syringe filters. The PEDOT:PSS dispersion was diluted in ethanol by a 11.1% volume ratio to reduce the viscosity and surface tension. An O2 plasma treatment was applied to the cleaned substrates for 5 min to produce a hydrophilic surface. A hydrophobic surface tends to induce the agglomeration of nanowires, as observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). It was important that the nanowire dispersion completely wet the substrate to ensure a uniform distribution of AgNWs in the electrode.
During the spray-coating process, we used the effervescent-type atomizer designed by our group. The spray conditions, i.e., the gas/liquid mass ratio (GLR), nozzle diameter, and nozzle-to-substrate distance, were key parameters for the spray-coating process. Among these parameters, the GLR significantly affected the mean droplet size, which determined the number of AgNWs contained in a droplet.25 In other words, the mean droplet size was a crucial factor for achieving less agglomerated and more uniformly deposited AgNWs. In this study, all spray conditions were maintained at a 0.5 mL min−1 liquid flow rate, a 3.0 L min−1 nitrogen (N2) gas flow rate, and a 15 cm distance between the nozzle and the substrate. An optimal temperature of the substrate was obtained to avoid the flooding, which causes that the coating quality was deteriorated by the coffee-stain effect on the substrate. The room temperature spraying condition of PEDOT:PSS induced the flooding. Therefore, the PEDOT:PSS dispersion was sprayed onto the pre-deposited AgNW mesh heated at 60 °C in an effort to promote the evaporation of the solvent contained in polymer droplets. Since IPA was highly volatile, however, no heating step was required during the spray-deposition of AgNW dispersion.
In the device fabrication, the composite film was used as a cathode. The ZnO precursor was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate dihydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, Aldrich, 99.9%, 1 g) and ethanolamine (NH2CH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99.5%, 0.29 mL) in 2-methoxyethanol (CH3OCH2CH2OH, Aldrich, 99.8%, 10 mL) under vigorous stirring for 12 h for the hydrolysis reaction in air. A ZnO layer was deposited by spin-coating onto the composite film at 2000 rpm for 60 s, and then dried at 140 °C for 10 min. The photovoltaic layer was cast from 4.0 wt% P3HT:PCBM (Rieke Metal, Nano-c) in a 1:0.7 ratio in 1,2-dichlorobenzene, and stirred for 4 h at 75 °C. The photovoltaic layer spun at 1000 rpm for 60 s was allowed to dry at room temperature for 20 min, and then annealed at 130 °C for 20 min. The buffer layer of PEDOT:PSS (EL-P 5010) was spun at 1000 rpm for 60 s diluted in IPA (2:1 w/w), and dried at 140 °C for 10 min. Ag ink (RA FS FD 076, Toyo) was used to fabricate the top anode by a simple brush method.
The nanostructures and surface morphology images of the electrodes were obtained using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (S-4800, HITACHI). The surface roughness and topography were analyzed using a scanning probe microscope (XE-100, Park Systems) operated in the tapping mode. Specular transmission spectra were obtained using a UV/VIS/NIR spectrophotometer (V-570, Jasco), and the reference spectra were evaluated from the cleaned bare glass and PET substrates, respectively. The sheet resistance was measured using a 4-point probe system (CMT SR2000, AIT), and the values obtained from several positions on a sample were averaged. The current–voltage curve was obtained using a solar simulator (IVT Solar) under 100 mW cm−2 of AM 1.5 global solar illumination, and the light source was calibrated using a standard Si photodiode.
3 Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows a schematic diagram of the two-step spray-coating method. AgNW dispersion was sprayed onto the cleaned bare glass or PET substrate at room temperature. Subsequently, the PEDOT:PSS dispersion was coated directly onto the pre-deposited AgNW mesh maintained at 60 °C. By separately depositing the AgNWs and PEDOT:PSS, we eliminated the difficulties associated with preparing high mass fraction composites with well-dispersed nanowires, as described previously in the fabrication of nanotube–polymer composite films.8,9 No careful transfer techniques were necessary.13,21,22 The AgNW mesh was a bit hazy due to substantial light scattering from the nanowires (Fig. 1b), and the composite film appeared to be light blue (Fig. 1d). The photographs show that the AgNWs and composite film were sufficiently transparent that the letters below the electrodes could be seen clearly. The SEM images indicate that the AgNWs formed a uniform mesh without significant nanowire density differences across the substrate (Fig. 1c), and the pre-deposited AgNW mesh was buried under the PEDOT:PSS without disturbing the electrical network of nanowires (Fig. 1e). Additional chemical treatments to the AgNW or PEDOT:PSS were not needed in order to obtain well-constructed electrical channels among the nanowires using the spray-deposition method.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the procedures for fabricating AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes. (b) Photograph of the AgNW mesh deposited on a PET substrate (13 × 13 cm). (c) SEM image of the uniformly deposited AgNW mesh without a large difference in the density of nanowires. Inset shows the cross-section view of the AgNW mesh. (d) Photograph of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film deposited on a PET substrate. The mean transmittance was 81.7% (at 550 nm) and the sheet resistance was 11.3 Ω sq−1. Their standard deviations were 2.84% and 1.85 Ω sq−1, respectively. (e) SEM image of the AgNW mesh embedded in the PEDOT:PSS film. Connections between nanowires were maintained upon deposition of PEDOT:PSS. Inset shows the angled cross-section view of the composite film. 
The performance of the composite film as a function of the annealing temperature of the AgNW mesh is shown in Fig. 2a. In all cases, the AgNW meshes on glass were annealed for 20 min and the 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS films were laminated without annealing steps. The sheet resistance of the composite film comprised of the unannealed AgNW mesh was 7.8 Ω sq−1. The sheet resistance decreased by 27.8% with increasing the annealing temperature to 140 °C due to the formation of the fusion at the contact of nanowires which led to the reduction of contact resistance between the nanowires as shown in the inset of Fig. 2a. The sheet resistance increased when the annealing temperature was higher than 160 °C, since almost all electrical connections between the nanowires were broken due to the melting of nanowires. The high-temperature annealing process of AgNWs has limitations in terms of the compatibility with plastic-based devices and the process simplification for high productivity. Therefore, a new approach is required to improve the conductivity of the AgNW mesh without the high-temperature heat treatment. To scrutinize the effects of lamination of PEDOT:PSS and its conductivity on the electrical performance of the AgNW mesh, the unannealed AgNW mesh (10.85 Ω sq−1) was used as a reference sample for comparison. As shown in Fig. 2b, the sheet resistance of the unannealed AgNW mesh was decreased by 28% (changed to 7.8 Ω sq−1) upon the lamination of PEDOT:PSS. The conductivity of the AgNW mesh was greatly improved through the lamination of PEDOT:PSS modified by DMSO. The sheet resistance of the composite film was reduced by 13.7% compared with the DMSO-free condition. The decrease of resistance was induced by the highly enhanced conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film by the addition of DMSO.18,19 Further increase in the conductivity can be achieved by annealing the AgNW mesh or composite film. Since the glass transition temperature of the plastic substrate was lower than 120 °C, the annealing process of the composite film was conducted below 120 °C for 20 min. As the annealing temperature increased, the sheet resistance slightly decreased in the composite film composed of the annealed or unannealed AgNW mesh. However, it is not a significant reduction in the sheet resistance. From this point of view, the annealing-free spray-coating method via the lamination of PEDOT:PSS modified by DMSO is a suitable and competitive approach compatible with a continuous fabrication process in the plastic-based optoelectronics.
 Fig. 2  (a) Sheet resistance of the composite films as a function of the AgNW annealing temperature. Insets show SEM images of the morphological changes in the nanowires. (b) Sheet resistance of the composite films depending on the different fabrication steps: lamination of PEDOT:PSS, addition of DMSO, annealing of the AgNW mesh, and different annealing temperature. A bare AgNW mesh (left triangle) was used as a reference sample for normalization. Three types of composite films were evaluated: (i) annealing-free AgNW–PEDOT:PSS without DMSO (down triangle), (ii) annealing-free AgNW–PEDOT:PSS with DMSO (circle), and (iii) annealed AgNW–PEDOT:PSS with DMSO (up triangle). 

Fig. 3 shows two functionalities of PEDOT:PSS: conductivity enhancement and surface smoothing. The lamination of PEDOT:PSS consolidates the nanowire contacts, similar to the effect of annealing. We verified this effect by performing SEM analysis of the morphological changes on the nanowire surfaces. As shown in the SEM images of Fig. 3a, the nanowires were laid down on one another. In other words, the electrical contact was very weak because the nanowires lightly contacted each other. The SEM images shown in Fig. 3b reveal deformations in the shapes of the upper nanowires along the topology of the lower nanowires due to strong adhesive forces induced by the lateral shrinkage and the substantial reduction in the thickness of the PEDOT:PSS layer during film formation.1 Thus, the electrical contact between nanowires was strengthened and also the contact area was enlarged upon lamination of PEDOT:PSS onto nanowires. The rough surface of the AgNW mesh was smoothened since the protruding nanowires were flattened and the openings between nanowires were filled with PEDOT:PSS.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the roles of PEDOT:PSS in reducing the surface roughness and improving the electrical contact. Angled cross-sectional view of SEM images (below the schematics). (a) Bare AgNW mesh. (b) AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film. 
The surface topography and roughness of the composite film were characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM) operated in the tapping mode. Fig. 4a shows an AFM topographical image of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film onto which a 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS was laminated. The root mean square (RMS) roughness was 51.8 nm. This somewhat high RMS value was attributed to the abnormally thick and extensive imperfections among the nanowires. The triply stacked nanowires used in the height line scan are denoted by the black box in Fig. 4a. As shown in the height profile of Fig. 4b, the height of the stacked nanowires (∼100 nm) in the composite films decreased to one-third to that of the bare nanowire mesh (∼300 nm). The surface roughness was not low enough for compatibility with high-efficiency devices, but the surface roughness of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film was considerably reduced relative to the surface roughness of the bare AgNW mesh. We expect that the surface of the composite films can become rather smooth through the mechanical pressing technique.14
 Fig. 4  (a) AFM topography image of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film. (b) Height line profile of the triply stacked nanowires is indicated by the black box in (a). 
The sheet resistance and optical transmittance were examined by testing a series of films prepared with various AgNW densities. A series of 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS films mixed with DMSO were coated onto the nanowires. The composite films were prepared at room temperature during the whole process, except for the PEDOT:PSS coating stage, in which PEDOT:PSS was sprayed at 60 °C for only 30 seconds. The sheet resistance and transmittance at 550 nm of various composite films are represented in Fig. 5a. The performances of the electrodes on glass or PET substrates were nearly identical. The composite films were fabricated at room temperature; therefore, the electrode performance was unaffected by the nature of the substrate. In general, the transmittance and sheet resistance of a thin metallic film may be expressed as,26 (1)where σop(λ) is the optical conductivity and σDC is the DC conductivity of the film. The value of σDC/σop(λ) has been used as a figure of merit for polymer–nanotube composites and AgNW meshes.9,13 This relationship was fit to the data shown in Fig. 5a using three different values of σDC/σop(λ) = 100, 150, and 270. All experimental values fell within the range of σDC/σop(λ) = 100–270. The value of σDC/σop(λ) was much higher than the minimum requirement value for industry.9 The value of σDC/σop(λ) at 85% transmittance (σDC/σop = 150) is two times higher than that of the spray-coated AgNW mesh with annealing (σDC/σop = 75).17 The performance of the metal nanowire electrodes is significantly influenced by the aspect ratio of the nanowires; in the case of the nanowire with a diameter larger than 20 nm, the longer and thicker nanowires greatly decrease the percolation threshold in electrical conductance and the optical transmittance increases with retaining the sheet resistance.27 Albeit the higher value of σDC/σop was affected by the high aspect ratio of the nanowires used in this study, we achieved the improvement in performance of the composite films without any annealing steps through the lamination of the highly conductive PEDOT:PSS modified by DMSO.
 Fig. 5  (a) Transmittance values of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite films as a function of the sheet resistance. Films were deposited on glass (circle) or PET (triangle). In all cases, 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS with DMSO were laminated onto the AgNW meshes with different nanowire densities. The solid line indicates the fit to eqn (1), for σDC/σop = 270 (red), 150 (blue), or 100 (dark yellow). (b) Transmittance spectra over the wavelength range 350–800 nm: 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS film on PET (blue), ITO film on PET (black), and AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film on PET (red). The inset table shows the sheet resistance and average transmittance of the ITO and composite film. 
As shown in Fig. 5b, the optoelectrical property of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film was compared to that of the ITO film. Samples were prepared on PET substrates without annealing steps during the entire process. The transmittance of the 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS film was 95.67% at 550 nm. The AgNW–PEDOT:PSS film showed 10.76 Ω sq−1 sheet resistance and 85% transmission at 550 nm. The transmission spectra were nearly constant over the visible light. The sheet resistance of the ITO film was 14.94 Ω sq−1 and the transmittance was 96.5% at 550 nm. Although the transmittance of the ITO film was much higher than that of the composite film, the transmittance of the ITO film was significantly reduced near the UV region and displayed dramatic fluctuations over the region of visible light. For this reason, the average transmittance values of the composite and ITO films over the wavelengths 350–800 nm were not significantly different (see the inset table of Fig. 5b). The performances of the composite film and ITO film were compared using the value of ΦTC defined by eqn (2). ΦTC is commonly used as a figure of merit for transparent electrode materials, as defined by Haacke,28 (2)where T is the optical transmission and Rs is the electrical sheet resistance. The figures of merit for the two films were ΦTC,AgNW–PEDOT = 0.0168 Ω−1 and ΦTC,ITO = 0.0127 Ω−1, demonstrating that the composite film provided a superior performance over the ITO film. The analysis was performed using the average transmittance over the wavelengths 350–800 nm.
The long-term and electromechanical stabilities of the composite film were scrutinized. The analysis of the long-term stability was made in air during more than 40 h. The temperature and the relative humidity of the atmosphere were 25.5 ± 0.95 °C and 49.5 ± 4.5%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6a, the resistance of the PEDOT:PSS film with DMSO was slightly decreased by the ionic conduction over the first 1–2 h and then the resistance was steadily increased up to 1.5 times from the initial resistance. The increase in the resistance of the PEDOT:PSS film was induced by the swelling of the PSS layer by the water uptake.29 Similar variation in resistance was observed in the composite film coarsely coated AgNWs (the resistance was increased by 120% after 40 h), indicating a significant degrading effect of PEDOT:PSS on the conductivity of the composite film. Unlike the cases of the PEDOT:PSS film and composite film with low density of AgNWs, the resistance of the composite film with high density of AgNWs was gradually increased from the beginning of the measurement. The increase in the resistance at the initial stage was primarily affected by the conductivity deterioration of AgNWs, which resulted from the acid corrosion by PEDOT:PSS. As the concentration of AgNWs increased, the long-term stability of the composite film was more enhanced (the resistance was increased by 9.3–24.7% after 40 h), indicating a less degrading effect of PEDOT:PSS on the conductivity of the composite film. However, the degree of degradation was slightly higher than that of the bare AgNW mesh; the resistance of the AgNW mesh was varied around 1–2% during the measurement. In conclusion, the time stability of the composite film was weakened by two factors: (1) the conductivity degradation of PEDOT:PSS by the water absorption and (2) the acid corrosion of AgNWs by PEDOT:PSS. The degrading effect of the acidity of PEDOT:PSS on the conductivity becomes more dominant when the concentration of AgNWs increased.
 Fig. 6  (a) Exposure time to air and the consequential changes in resistance of PEDOT:PSS (up triangle) and AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite films (circle). (b) Sheet resistance over the bending cycle of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film on PET (solid line) or ITO film on PET (short dashed line). 
The improvement in the electromechanical stability was achieved through the lamination of PEDOT:PSS onto the AgNW mesh. Fig. 6b compares the sheet resistance of an ITO film on a PET and an AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite prepared on a PET as a function of the bending cycle. The films were bent to the bending radius of 3.5 mm. The compression and tensile bending stresses were delivered once every cycle and then the sheet resistance measurements were taken after the substrate was re-flattened. The resistance of the ITO film dramatically increased to 326.1 Ω sq−1 at one bending cycle and steadily increased up to 7792.8 Ω sq−1 during 10 bending cycles. Finally, the ITO film failed at nearly 50 bending cycles. When the ITO film was bent, a lot of visible fine cracks were created at the surface and the cracks were more easily produced under the compression. In stark contrast, the sheet resistance of the composite film slightly increased less than 5.3% from its initial value after 200 cycles of tensile and compression folding. The conductivity of the composite film was restored when the stress was released, and no visible defects such as cracking or tearing of the surface were observed. Failure was not observed over 200 bending cycles.
To prove the practicability of the composite film as a transparent electrode in devices, we applied the composite film to bulk-heterojunction photovoltaic cells with an inverted configuration. The device was fabricated by depositing the following thin layers onto the composite film: 80 nm of (electron transporting) ZnO, 400 nm of P3HT:PCBM, 1 μm of (hole transporting) PEDOT:PSS, and 2 μm of Ag. In Fig. 7, the current–voltage characteristics of the device under 100 mW cm−2 of AM 1.5 illumination are shown. The device had a high short circuit current of 12.34 mA cm−2, a low open circuit voltage of 0.08 V, and a low fill factor of 25.02%, resulting in a poor power conversion efficiency of 0.25%. Although we fabricated a thick device owing to the large-diameter of AgNWs, the open circuit voltage and fill factor were very low due to the high dark current which was induced by shunting through the high peaks of AgNWs embedded in PEDOT:PSS.24 However, these surface topographical matters can be resolved by using thinner AgNWs or by mechanically pressing the composite film. We anticipate the application of the composite film for the production of flexible devices through a low-temperature roll-to-roll process.
 Fig. 7  Current density versus voltage for an inverted organic photovoltaic cell structured by 80 nm ZnO/400 nm P3HT:PCBM/1 μm PEDOT:PSS/2 μm Ag on the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film. 
4 Conclusions
We fabricated high-performance AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes via the scalable two-step spray-coating technique without a high-temperature annealing process. Laminating the PEDOT:PSS mixed with the polar organic solvent (DMSO) improves the conductivity of the composite films. In application to the plastic substrates, this strategy on conductivity enhancement of a composite film is more suitable and compatible compared with the nanowire annealing method. The lamination of PEDOT:PSS significantly strengthens the electrical contact between nanowires and smoothens the rough surface of the AgNW mesh. Under the room temperature process condition, we fabricated flexible composite electrodes showing better optical and electrical properties than that of the ITO films. The electromechanical flexibility of the composite films was very stable under the compression and tensile bending stresses. We expect that this work will be helpful for the development of high-quality flexible electrodes for the synthesis of large-scale, high-efficiency and flexible optoelectronic devices.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Creative Research Initiatives (no. 2012-0000246) program of the National Research Foundation of Korea.
References
U. Lang, E. Müller, N. Naujoks and J. Dual, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1215–1220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, Q. Xu, C.-W. Chu, Y. Yang, G. Li and J. Shinar, Polymer, 2004, 45, 8443–8450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4141–4147 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Ahn, D. J. Lorang and J. A. Lewis, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2700 RSC .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaempgen, G. S. Duesberg and S. Roth, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 252, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Blighe, Y. R. Hernandez, W. J. Blau and J. N. Coleman, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4443–4447 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, P. E. Lyons, S. Sorel, E. M. Doherty, P. J. King, W. J. Blau, P. N. Nirmalraj, J. J. Boland, V. Scardaci, J. Joimel and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 714–720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Yu, T. Pui, P. Chen, L. Zheng and K. Liao, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2469–2471 RSC .
H. Wu, L. Hu, M. W. Rowell, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, J. R. McDonough, J. Zhu, Y. Yang, M. D. McGehee and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4242–4248 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Madaria, A. Kumar, F. N. Ishikawa and C. Zhou, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 564–573 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gaynor, J.-Y. Lee and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 30–34 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Madaria, A. Kumar and C. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 245201 CrossRef .
S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061–4067 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, F. Zhang, K. Tvingstedt, S. Barrau, F. Li, W. Tian and O. Inganäs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 233308 CrossRef .
Y.-F. Lim, S. Lee, D. J. Herman, M. T. Lloyd, J. E. Anthony and G. G. Malliaras, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 193301 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Zeng, Q.-K. Zhang, R.-M. Yu and C.-Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4484–4488 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, L. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Hu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4453–4457 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Leem, A. Edwards, M. Faist, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. C. de Mello, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4371–4375 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Sovani, P. E. Sojka and A. H. Lefebvre, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2001, 27, 483–521 CrossRef .

          M. Dressel and G. Grüner, Electrodynamics of Solids, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. M. Bergin, Y.-H. Chen, A. R. Rathmell, P. Charbonneau, Z.-Y. Li and B. J. Wiley, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1996–2004 RSC .
G. Haacke, J. Appl. Phys., 1976, 47, 4086–4089 CrossRef CAS .

          A. M. Nardes, Ph.D. thesis, University of Eindhoven,  2007 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the procedures for fabricating AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite electrodes. (b) Photograph of the AgNW mesh deposited on a PET substrate (13 × 13 cm). (c) SEM image of the uniformly deposited AgNW mesh without a large difference in the density of nanowires. Inset shows the cross-section view of the AgNW mesh. (d) Photograph of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film deposited on a PET substrate. The mean transmittance was 81.7% (at 550 nm) and the sheet resistance was 11.3 Ω sq−1. Their standard deviations were 2.84% and 1.85 Ω sq−1, respectively. (e) SEM image of the AgNW mesh embedded in the PEDOT:PSS film. Connections between nanowires were maintained upon deposition of PEDOT:PSS. Inset shows the angled cross-section view of the composite film.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Sheet resistance of the composite films as a function of the AgNW annealing temperature. Insets show SEM images of the morphological changes in the nanowires. (b) Sheet resistance of the composite films depending on the different fabrication steps: lamination of PEDOT:PSS, addition of DMSO, annealing of the AgNW mesh, and different annealing temperature. A bare AgNW mesh (left triangle) was used as a reference sample for normalization. Three types of composite films were evaluated: (i) annealing-free AgNW–PEDOT:PSS without DMSO (down triangle), (ii) annealing-free AgNW–PEDOT:PSS with DMSO (circle), and (iii) annealed AgNW–PEDOT:PSS with DMSO (up triangle).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram showing the roles of PEDOT:PSS in reducing the surface roughness and improving the electrical contact. Angled cross-sectional view of SEM images (below the schematics). (a) Bare AgNW mesh. (b) AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) AFM topography image of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film. (b) Height line profile of the triply stacked nanowires is indicated by the black box in (a).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Transmittance values of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite films as a function of the sheet resistance. Films were deposited on glass (circle) or PET (triangle). In all cases, 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS with DMSO were laminated onto the AgNW meshes with different nanowire densities. The solid line indicates the fit to eqn (1), for σDC/σop = 270 (red), 150 (blue), or 100 (dark yellow). (b) Transmittance spectra over the wavelength range 350–800 nm: 100 nm thick PEDOT:PSS film on PET (blue), ITO film on PET (black), and AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film on PET (red). The inset table shows the sheet resistance and average transmittance of the ITO and composite film.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Exposure time to air and the consequential changes in resistance of PEDOT:PSS (up triangle) and AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite films (circle). (b) Sheet resistance over the bending cycle of the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film on PET (solid line) or ITO film on PET (short dashed line).	 

 	Fig. 7  Current density versus voltage for an inverted organic photovoltaic cell structured by 80 nm ZnO/400 nm P3HT:PCBM/1 μm PEDOT:PSS/2 μm Ag on the AgNW–PEDOT:PSS composite film.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
