Macromolecular architectures for organic photovoltaics  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP23422J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP23422J
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4043-4057Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMacromolecular architectures for organic photovoltaics

        
          
            Bhooshan C. 
            Popere
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrea M. Della 
            Pelle
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ambata 
            Poe
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            S. 
            Thayumanavan
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003. E-mail: thai@chem.umass.edu
Received 
      30th October 2011
    , Accepted 11th January 2012First published on 11th January 2012AbstractResearch in the field of organic photovoltaics has gained considerable momentum in the last two decades owing to the need for developing low-cost and efficient energy harvesting systems. Elegant molecular architectures have been designed, synthesized and employed as active materials for photovoltaic devices thereby leading to a better molecular structure–device property relationship understanding. In this perspective, we outline new macromolecular scaffolds that have been designed within the purview of each of the three fundamental processes involving light harvesting, charge separation and charge transport.
Bhooshan C. Popere
Bhooshan Popere obtained his BTech degree in Polymer Engineering and Technology from the Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai, India in 2007. He subsequently joined the research laboratory of Professor S. Thayumanavan (Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst) in 2007. He is currently a fifth year PhD candidate focusing on design, synthesis and characterization of panchromatic conjugated polymers for organic electronics.
Andrea M. Della Pelle
Andrea Della Pelle received her BS degree from Fairfield University in 2008. She then joined the Chemistry department at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst where she is pursuing a PhD under the advisement of Professor S. Thayumanavan. She is currently a fourth year graduate student and her research work is focused on the design and synthesis of macromolecular architectures for organic photovoltaics.
Ambata Poe
Ambata Poe received his BS degree in Chemistry from Lincoln University in 2009. He then joined the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Department of Chemistry in pursuit of his PhD. He is currently a third year graduate student working under the supervision of Professor S. Thayumanavan with a focus on molecular systems with organic photovoltaic applications.
S. Thayumanavan
S. “Thai” Thayumanavan is a Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. He received his BSc and MSc degrees from The American College in Madurai, India. He received his PhD from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1996 under the direction of Professor Peter Beak. Following a postdoctoral stint with Professor Seth R. Marder at Caltech, he started his independent career at Tulane University in 1999 and moved to UMass Amherst in 2003. His research work involves the design and syntheses of new macromolecules to obtain novel supramolecular assemblies that are of interest in drug delivery, sensing, and photovoltaics.
Introduction
The exhaustible nature of conventional energy resources and their detrimental impact on our environment boost the need for low-cost, efficient, clean, renewable energy alternatives.1,2 Photovoltaic (PV) devices composed of organic active layers have received increased attention in recent years and offer the opportunity to capitalize on solar irradiance as an energy source. Employing synthetic organic materials gives us a great deal of control over the properties and performance of the device.3 Whether we aim for greater light absorption to increase the amount of solar energy harnessed, increased charge transfer and mobility to maximize device efficiency and power output, or improved processing abilities allowing for the creation of flexible and durable devices with a wide array of applications, organic materials can be tuned to suit our needs. We are currently at a point in scientific research where we need to form an intellectual junction between the synthetic molecules we create and their properties for the purpose of creating organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices.
The typical structure of an OPV device is shown in Fig. 1. Indium-tin-oxide (ITO), a commonly employed transparent electrode, deposited on a glass substrate is covered with a poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS) layer, which serves as a hole injection layer. The active layer of the device is then deposited, followed by the metal electrode. Characteristics of these devices are measured using a J–V plot, which measures current density as a function of voltage across the photovoltaic cell, illustrated in Fig. 2.4
 Fig. 1  Architecture of a bulk heterojunction device; the inset illustrates the process of charge transfer at the donor–acceptor interface, where an exciton is generated in the donor (inset, left) material and, if it is within an appropriate distance from the interface, electron transfer takes place. 
 Fig. 2  
J–V curve illustrating the current–voltage characteristics of an illuminated bulk heterojunction photovoltaic device; the key points of the graph are the Voc (open circuit voltage), Jsc (short circuit current), Vmpp (voltage at maximum power), and Jmpp (current at maximum power). The fill factor is a quantitative determination of the squareness of the J–V curve. The power conversion efficiency (η) of a photovoltaic cell is given by the ratio of maximum power output to the power input (Pin). 
The process of conversion of solar energy to electricity in an OPV device is given by (i) photoexcitation, the absorption of a photon to generate an exciton, or a coulombically bound electron–hole pair; (ii) diffusion, relocation of the exciton to a donor–acceptor interface where the free charges can be generated; and (iii) charge transport, charges are free to move to their respective electrodes.5–7
The amount of solar light absorbed by an organic material is given by its molar extinction coefficient, the energy offset between the material's highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and its lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), the oscillator strength of the light absorption at different wavelengths, and the thickness of the material.4,8 Systems containing molecules with extended conjugation are generally better suited for OPV devices. These moieties characteristically exhibit a broad absorption, increasing the fraction of solar irradiance that can be harnessed. Compared to silicon, organic materials have high absorption coefficients, allowing thinner films to be used in devices while still absorbing a significant fraction of incident photons. For example, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), one of the better studied p-type materials for OPV devices, with a film thickness of 240 nm has been shown to absorb greater than 95% of incident light over its absorption wavelength range (450–600 nm).9 For maximum overlap with the photon flux of the AM 1.5 solar spectrum, it is desirable for a material to have absorption spanning the entire visible spectrum and extending into the near infrared region (band gap ≤1.1 eV). One way to overcome this limitation is by combining various moieties with complementary energy levels to tune absorption, a process that is reviewed elsewhere.10
While early OPV devices contained active layers consisting of either a hole transporting p-type donor (D) or electron transporting n-type acceptor (A) material or a D–A bilayer, bulk heterojunction (BHJ) devices are currently very popular in OPV research. Blending of a p-type material with an n-type material creates a larger interfacial area between the two, along with bicontinuous channels for free charges to be transported to their respective electrodes after separation.11Mixing of this nature drastically increases power conversion efficiency (PCE) and enhances charge separation in OPV devices.12,13
Upon reaching a D–A interface, the exciton is able to dissociate into a geminate pair, where an electron resides in the LUMO of the acceptor while the hole remains in the HOMO of the donor. This process requires a favorable offset between the donor LUMO and acceptor LUMO.14,15 Smaller energy level offsets will favor recombination of charges while larger offsets, which can facilitate charge transfer, waste energy in separating the charges; both conditions lower the overall efficiency of the PV device. Once separated, the free positive and negative charges travel through the p-type and n-type material to their respective electrodes, relying on inter- and intramolecular hopping.16
Of the n-type materials currently available, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM), a fullerene-based molecule, is very popular for use in BHJ devices since it possesses many attractive properties for donor–acceptor blends.6PC61BM possess a deep lying LUMO, which allows for photoinduced electron transfer from a wide range of p-type materials. These negative charges are greatly stabilized electronically by a triply degenerate LUMO, which allows for reversible reduction by up to six electrons, and kinetically by photoinduced electron transfer taking place several orders of magnitude faster than back electron transfer.6,17 These advantages, along with a high electron mobility and solution processibility, made PC61BM, and other fullerene derivatives, the principle n-type material to date.
Even though these properties are favorable for electron transport, the large size and crystallinity of these fullerene moieties make them less compatible with the current polymer p-type materials, which rely heavily on π–π interactions for intermolecular electronic communication.3,18 Disruption of these interactions can sacrifice hole mobility and efficiency of the PV device.13,19 On the other hand, if we were able to design n-type polymeric materials, we could have considerable tunability to engineer both the molecular level features and possibly control the bulk properties, essential for organic photovoltaics.20–22
In this review, we focus on describing electron transporting conjugated polymer, block copolymer, dendrimer, and dendron–rod–coil molecular architectures as relevant to organic photovoltaics. This review will not explore the achievements made using various conjugated donor polymers: fullerene blends, as these have been extensively studied and described elsewhere.23,24

Conjugated polymers

Improvement in OPV performance over the last decade has been exponential. The quantum leap in this performance was brought about by the introduction of the bulk-heterojunction concept. Conjugated polymers, ranging from poly(phenylene vinylenes) (PPV) to very sophisticated donor–acceptor type polymers, have enabled a systematic evolution of our understanding of molecular structure–device property relationships.25 Of all these polymers, P3HT has been the poster child of conjugated polymers, being the only polymer to be commercially manufactured with excellent control over molecular structure and polydispersity.26,27 Nonetheless, conjugated polymers with elegant molecular structures are continuously being designed, synthesized, and characterized.
In retrospect, it is intriguing to note that monumental improvements in polymer structure have come about for p-type conjugated polymers, while significantly less progress has been made in the corresponding n-type materials—fullerenes and their derivatives have been the material of choice, so far.28 In order for a conjugated polymer to act as an electron acceptor in OPVs, it should: (i) be readily soluble and form defect-free thin films; (ii) possess reasonably high electron mobility; (iii) have commensurately positioned HOMO/LUMO energy levels relative to the electron donor. In addition to these, polymer-based acceptors provide a unique and an important feature—intense and broad absorption spectrum. Thus, design and synthesis of novel conjugated polymer-based electron acceptors is indeed warranted. In this section we choose to focus on molecular architectures that have been either employed as, or are potentially promising, n-type conjugated polymers.
Poly(phenylenevinylenes) (PPVs) have gained considerable success over the last two decades as hole-transporting polymers and are widely used in OLEDs.29 Incorporation of cyano groups in the polymer backbone results in an increase in the ionization potential as well as the electron affinity of the polymer with concomitant improvement in electron-injection and transport properties. Thus, with only the alkyl chains being different, Halls et al.30 (P1a) and Heeger et al.31 (P1b) independently demonstrated the photovoltaic behavior of bulk-heterojunction blends incorporating MEH-PPV and cyano-PPV (CN-PPV). Since the device characteristics were measured under different illumination intensities, the photovoltaic metrics cannot be directly compared. However, the evidence of photoinduced electron transfer between MEH-PPV and CN-PPV, evidenced by photoluminescence quenching in thin films, established a paradigm for using conjugated polymer-based electron acceptors for OPVs. Several polymers based on the CN-PPV backbone have since been designed for, and employed in, all-polymer BHJ solar cells with efficiencies reaching as high as 1.7% at 100 mW cm−2 illumination.32–34
A different polymer design employing 9,9-dialkyl fluorene units in the polymer backbone was reported by Loos et al.35 An alternating copolymer based on fluorene with dicyanovinylbenzene and thiophene (P2) was used as an electron acceptor in a BHJ configuration blended with poly[2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MDMO-PPV) as the donor. Devices based on these two polymers showed an impressive PCE of 1.5% with a large active cell area of 0.36 cm2.

        BHJ devices based on conjugated polymer donors and acceptors suffer from complete phase separation of the components of the blend. Bilayer devices provide an alternative to circumvent this issue. Towards this end, CN-PPV was employed as an electron acceptor with poly[(4-octylphenyl)thiophene] (POPT) in a bilayer OPV. Friend et al. reported a laminate device based on MEH-CN-PPV (P1b in Fig. 3) and POPT with a power conversion efficiency of 1.9% at 77 mW cm−2 illumination.36 By improving the regioregularity of POPTvia Grignard metathesis (GRIM) polymerization, Frechét et al. obtained a high molecular weight POPT (75 kDa) with a narrow molecular weight distribution. High molecular weight, combined with a large degree of regioregularity (>99%) rendered POPT fairly insoluble in solvents such as tetrahydrofuran and ethyl acetate. Consequently, P1b could be directly spun-coated onto a POPT layer enabling the fabrication of a true bilayer device, which showed a PCE of 2% under AM1.5 illumination.37
 Fig. 3  Structures of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and conjugated polymers based on the CN-PPV backbone. 

Perylene bisimide (PBI) small-molecules have been shown to possess excellent air stability and high electron mobility. However, an overwhelmingly strong tendency of these moieties to aggregate rendered them indisposed for solution processing. The introduction of soluble PBIs by Müllen et al. enabled facile synthesis of readily soluble PBI derivatives.38 Comparable electron affinity to fullerenes makes systems based on PBI attractive candidates for electron acceptors in OPVs. Marder et al. reported an alternating conjugated polymer (P3a) based on PBI and dithienothiophene (DTT).39 This polymer exhibited a broad absorption spectrum between 300 nm–700 nm, an excellent saturation regime electron mobility of 1.3 × 10−2 cm2 V−1s−2, and a deep LUMO energy level of −3.9 eV. A blend of this polymer with a bis(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene acting as an electron donor showed an average power conversion efficiency of 1%. By varying the polymer composition (P3b), as well as the blend composition, the authors later reported all-polymer solar cells with an improved PCE of 1.48% (Fig. 4).40
 Fig. 4  Structures of conjugated polymers based on PBI units reported by Marder and co-workers. 
One of the most attractive features of conjugated polymers is the ability to fine-tune the frontier molecular orbital energy levels by synthetic modifications to the polymer structure. Hashimoto et al. copolymerized PBI units with appropriate comonomers leading to n-type conjugated polymers with varying HOMO and LUMO energy levels.41 Photovoltaic devices based on a blend of P4 with tris(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene showed modest PCE values of 1.15%. Replacing a carbazole unit with a weaker donor, like fluorene, naturally caused a blue shift in the absorption spectrum of the ensuing copolymer. On account of more stable HOMO energy levels of PBI-fluorene copolymers, the Voc of the resulting devices increased by 0.1 V. However, the Jsc dropped significantly leading to an overall PCE of only 0.58%.
On the other hand, incorporating a stronger donor like dithienopyrrole (DTP) resulted in the lowering of the optical bandgap with the low energy absorption edge reaching ∼900 nm. This bathochromic shift in the absorption spectrum could also be attributed to a more planar polymer backbone in P5 as compared to P4. However, due to the increased HOMO energy level of the resulting polymer, the Voc of the OPV device decreased from 0.74 V for P4 to 0.66 V for P5a. Devices incorporating a blend of P5a with tris(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene showed a modest PCE of 0.97%. It should be noted, however, that since the two copolymers have a different combination of solubilizing alkyl side-chains, a direct comparison of photovoltaic characteristics of these polymers should be made with caution, since alkyl chains are known to have significant influence on interchain interactions and, hence, the overall device performance (Fig. 5).42
 Fig. 5  Structures of conjugated polymers based on PBI units reported by Hashimoto and co-workers. 
Incorporating thiophene linkers between repeat units of the copolymers was shown to have deleterious effects on the solubility of the ensuing polymers. Consequently, these polymers showed very poor PCEs as compared to the copolymers lacking thiophene groups. For instance, polymer P5b showed a slightly reduced optical bandgap as compared to P5a. However, devices fabricated from a blend of P5a and a compositionally different tris(thienylenevinylene)-substituted polythiophene as the photoactive material showed overall PCE values of ∼0.13%.43
Recently, Reynolds and co-workers designed and synthesized n-type conjugated polymers based on isoindigo. These polymers possess broad absorption spectra between 300 nm–750 nm and comparable electron affinity to PC61BM (∼3.9 eV). Electron-only devices based on vertical architecture Al/Poly(iI)/LiF/Al in pristine films in the space charge limited current regime were reported to be 3.7 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1. Preliminary bulk heterojunction devices fabricated by blending poly(isoindigo) P6 with P3HT afforded modest PCE of 0.47% (Fig. 6).44
 Fig. 6  Structures of conjugated polymers based on isoindigo units (P6) reported by Reynolds and co-workers, and BODIPY units reported by Thayumanavan and co-workers (P7). 
Another set of conjugated polymers based on 4,4-difluoro-4-borata-3a-azonia-4a-aza-s-indacene, more commonly known as BODIPY dyes, have been designed and synthesized by Thayumanavan and co-workers. BODIPY dyes have been recognized for their large extinction coefficients, high fluorescence quantum yields, and remarkable photostability. Typically, small-molecule BODIPY derivatives show steady-state absorption maxima ranging from 500 nm–700 nm. Conjugated polymers based on these molecules have intense and broad absorption spectra extending up to 800 nm. For instance, an ethynyl-bridged alternating copolymer comprising BODIPY and PBI units possessed an optical bandgap of 1.57 eV and a high electron affinity. Thin-film transistors operating in a bottom-contact, bottom-gate configuration revealed electron mobility values of 1.3 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for P7. Additionally the LUMO energy level as determined by thin-film cyclic voltammetry (CV) was found to be 4.09 eV below the vacuum energy level.45 This value is very close to the LUMO energy level of PCBM. Thus, these polymers can be potential candidates as electron acceptors with panchromatic absorption in all-polymer solar cells.

Block copolymers


Block copolymers (BCPs) are macromolecules comprising of two or more homopolymer segments (blocks) that are covalently linked together. The most common and extensively studied class of block copolymers is that of a simple A–B type diblock copolymer. The interaction between the two blocks defined by the temperature-dependent Flory–Huggins incompatibility parameter χ, and the degree of polymerization (N) together drive a phase separation that is sensitive to the volume fraction of the component blocks.46–48 The diblock copolymer morphology varies from simple body-centered cubic spheres, hexagonally packed cylinders, and lamellae to some more complex geometry including the interpenetrating double-gyroid structure. Consequently, these nanostructures can be arrived at by a judicious combination of rational molecular design and synthesis, and post-processing techniques. In a typical BCP, the dimension of these nanostructured domains ranges from 10 nm to 100 nm and bear a sensitive dependence on the overall molecular weight of the macromolecule. Naturally, the structural limitation on the exciton diffusion length of about 5–20 nm can be addressed with block copolymers designed for photovoltaic applications.49,50 In addition to flexible-coil block copolymers, rod–coil block copolymers also demonstrate rich nanoscale morphology. Depending on the volume fraction of the rod or the coil segment, analytical free energy calculations of these rod–coil systems can predict transitions between nematic, smectic A and C, bilayer and puck phases. Self-consistent field theory (SCFT) applied to block copolymers predicts complex phase diagrams including isotropic, nematic, lamellar, arrowhead, and bilayer microphases.51
Conjugated rod–coil block copolymers
A peculiar feature of rod–coil block copolymers is the high degree of immiscibility between the component rod and coil segments. This allows for domain formation, even for relatively low molecular weight fragments in contrast to most flexible coil BCPs. However, controlling the overall molecular weight of the polymer is a formidable synthetic challenge that needs to be addressed. While, generally, the component blocks first polymerized are coupled through a condensation step of appropriately functionalized chain termini, more elegant methods of utilizing rod macroinitiators to grow the flexible coil have also been reported.52
As mentioned earlier, the motivation for utilizing rod–coil block copolymers for photovoltaic applications is their ability to assemble into novel and varied architectures, thereby enabling efficient exciton dissociation. In order for the photoexcited hole–electron pair to be completely separated, it needs to meet an interface (within the exciton diffusion length) between the polymer on which it resides and another material with an appropriately placed LUMO and HOMO. This distance coincides very well with the typical size of block copolymer domains. Given that the domain size is easily tunable by appropriately varying the block length, it is theoretically possible to combine two polymer blocks that act as a mutual electron donor–acceptor pair. To this end, BCPs containing conjugated blocks such as soluble derivatives of poly(phenylenevinylene) (PPV) or polythiophene (PT), attached to flexible coils containing pendant electron acceptors, such as PCBM or soluble perylenebisimides (PBI), have been designed and synthesized.
Of these, BCPs based on an alkoxy-substituted PPV (MEH-PPV) rod coupled to a fullerene-substituted polystyrene (PS) coil have garnered considerable attention. In a seminal work, Hadziioannou and co-workers first designed and synthesized a short, alkoxy-substituted PPV (about seven repeat units), with modified chain ends, that was used as a macroinitiator leading to copolymers containing styrene and 4-chloromethyl styrene with controlled molecular weight.53,54C60 units were then grafted onto the polymer chain via an atom transfer radical addition (ATRA) reaction to the chloromethyl center to obtain BCP1 (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Structures of rod-coil block copolymers incorporating PPV blocks as the conjugated rod segments and flexible polystyrene blocks with pendant C60 groups as coil segments. 
In order to circumvent the problem of interchain crosslinking via the chloromethyl group during C60 functionalization, Ivanov and co-workers converted these to azido groups prior to addition of C60 resulting in BCP2 (Fig. 7).55 While these systems had limited absorbance relative to the solar spectrum, they exhibited excellent phase separation in solid-state films. Detailed evaluation of the effect of C60 grafting density on the electronic properties of the material revealed an increase in the electron mobility with grafting density (up to 60% grafting), although the mobility values were significantly lower than pristine PCBM. This still remains a formidable challenge in rod–coil BCPs with C60 grafts. Furthermore, the solid-state morphology of BCP1 and BCP2 clearly indicated that fullerene, although covalently bound to the flexible chains, managed to crystallize and quite extensively determined the behavior of the system. Consequently these systems did not show microdomain formation after C60 functionalization.
As a solution to the C60 crystallization problem, it was suggested that a more crystalline polythiophene (PT) block be employed instead of PPV. Subsequently, a rod–coil BCP precursor containing a conjugated poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) block and a flexible methacrylate block was designed and synthesized by Jo and co-workers.56 In this BCP, a bromine-terminated P3HT block with well-defined molecular weight was used as an atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) initiator to grow the methacrylate block. Transesterification of the methacrylate block with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid yielded the final block copolymer, BCP3 (Fig. 8). Similarly, Wudl et al. reported a block copolymer based on P3HT and side-chain fullerenes.57 In this case, a P3HT macroinitiator for reversible addition fragmentation transfer (RAFT) polymerization was synthesized and used for polymerizing a precursor coil block. Grafting of C60 onto this coil block resulted in the final block copolymer BCP4. In solid state, these polymers exhibited long-range nanofibrillar structures characteristic of rod–coil BCPs. Incorporation of only 5 wt% of BCP4 in P3HT:PCBM blend resulted in a 35% improvement in the overall device efficiency compared to the devices without the compatibilizer.
 Fig. 8  Structures of rod–coil block copolymers incorporating P3HT blocks as the conjugated rod segments and flexible poly(acrylate)/poly(methacrylate) blocks with pendant C60 groups as coil segments. 
In a block copolymer system based on ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP), Fréchet et al. designed and synthesized fully functionalized donor–acceptor flexible coil block-copolymers, where both P3HT and PCBM were incorporated in the polymer as pendant groups (BCP5 in Fig. 9).58 While the photovoltaic properties of this block copolymer as the photoactive layer was not reported, these materials were employed as compatibilizers in P3HT:PCBM solar cells resulting in improved long-term morphological stability. Other acceptor units like perylene bisimide (PBI) linked to an acrylate backbone, have also been incorporated in rod–coil BCPs with P3HT being the conjugated rod block (BCP6).59 These systems were designed with chain lengths appropriate for domain formation suitable for exciton dissociation. Annealing afforded photovoltaic devices with 0.5% PCE, attributed to better ordering and microphase separation. Analogous to BCP5, these copolymers were also demonstrated to function as compatibilizers in P3HT:PBI blended systems that afforded a 50% improvement in the device efficiency. This was attributed to the ability of the compatibilizer to prevent excessive crystallization of the PBI moieties in the blend.
 Fig. 9  Structures of coil–coil/rod–coil block copolymers incorporating P3HT units as pendant groups (BCP5) or as the conjugated rod segments (BCP6) used as compatibilizers for bulk heterojunction devices. 
Utilizing the chain-end chemistry in P3HT polymers, Cramail et al. designed and synthesized novel multi-block copolymers incorporating fullerenes into the polymer backbone (BCP7 in Fig. 10).60 The C60 units were linked to 1,4-dialkoxy phenylene units via a methylene bridge, thus imparting the polymeric C60 segment a coil-like flexibility. Although no photovoltaic device performance was evaluated, atomic force microscopy (AFM) showed ordered domains repeating around 20 nm.
 Fig. 10  Structure of the block copolymer incorporating C60 in the polymer backbone. 
Flexible coil block copolymers
As discussed above, the bulk heterojunction approach involving a physical blend of π-conjugated polymers and PCBM has led to a remarkable improvement in the OPV performance compared with the initial bilayer devices reported. Alternating donor–acceptor conjugated polymers with broad absorption and reduced optical bandgap have been the most promising candidates for OPVs, with PCE reaching 8%.61 However, there is still a vast scope for improvement in the OPV performance before commercial manufacturing can be realized. In retrospect, all of these devices are based on a physical blend of two materials—either polymer/fullerene or polymer/polymer blends. Since the active layer in OPVs is solution processed, there is a high likelihood for the components to macrophase separate during film formation and annealing, causing deleterious effects on the OPV performance. Nevertheless, with a careful control of several factors, including the molecular weight, active layer composition, solubility/miscibility of the components, solvents, etc., the phase separation process could be tuned to arrive at the best PCE. However, these post-processing techniques do not yield predictable outcomes and are far from being universal. For instance, the set of conditions that work best for a particular combination of polymer/PCBM blend may not be suitable for any other polymer/PCBM combination. Block copolymers, on the other hand, self-assemble into well ordered nanostructured domains. These domains can be tuned in size and shape by simply varying the molecular weight and the volume fraction of individual blocks. Thus, BCPs employing electronic functionality hold great promise for OPV applications.
A novel class of flexible coil BCPs employing triphenylamines as the electron–donor block and highly soluble perylene bisimides (PBI) as the electron–acceptor block was designed and synthesized by Thelakkat et al. (Fig. 11).62,63 The choice of these monomers was based on the appropriate alignment of frontier molecular orbital energy levels for efficient photoinduced electron transfer from the donor to the acceptor block. Additionally, the triphenylamines were assembled via simple Buchwald–Hartwig coupling of 4-bromostyrene with various aromatic amines to afford a library of triphenylamines with varying HOMO energy levels and hole mobilities. Synthesis of the PBI block, however, needed a careful balance between solubilizing alkyl chains and electronic communication between neighboring PBI molecules. With polymerizable monomers available, all polymers were synthesized via controlled radical polymerization affording polymers with narrow polydispersity indices and well-controlled molecular weights—a feature usually not observed with π-conjugated polymers. These polymers have been shown to form nanometre-sized cylindrical or lamellar domains in thin films thereby affording an elegant control over the size and shape of the donor–acceptor morphology.64,65 A comparison of cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of these block copolymers with those of the blends of the corresponding block copolymers reveals large domains (>200 nm) for blends. On the other hand, efficient microphase separation observed in the BCP films resulted in a large degree of photoluminescence quenching and a six-fold improvement in the external quantum efficiency (EQE) and a ten-fold improvement in the PCE.
 Fig. 11  Structure of flexible block copolymers based on triphenyl amines and PBI units. 
Despite all the elegant molecular designs proposed based on block-copolymer architectures, photovoltaic devices based on these systems have performed rather poorly compared to their conjugated polymer analogs. One of the reasons could be the fact that conjugated polymers, on account of their increased effective conjugation length and large extinction coefficients, show a better spectral overlap with the incident solar spectrum. Another important factor could be the nature of the interface between the component blocks as well as between the block copolymer and the electrode material. Although block copolymers provide a ‘bottom-up’ approach to arriving at nanostructured domains, it is not clear what the ‘ideal’ morphology for a photovoltaic device is. However, analyses of the active layer morphology in conjugated polymer:PCBM solar cells correlate promising device performance to interpenetrating non-equilibrium structures. Within this purview, Thayumanavan and co-workers designed and synthesized flexible block copolymers based on pendant 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT) (Fig. 12).66 These polymers were synthesized via ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) thereby enabling excellent control over molecular weight and polydispersity. It was shown that ProDOT units with uncapped 3- and 5-positions could be chemically and electrochemically crosslinked via oxidative coupling resulting in a two-dimensionally conjugated network with red-shifted absorption spectrum. These polymers, with appropriately chosen acceptor blocks, can be crosslinked, thereby potentially trapping the non-equilibrium structures, as they evolve from a disordered state in thin films.
 Fig. 12  Structure of side-chain crosslinkable flexible block copolymers based on pendant dialkoxy thiophene units. 

        Dendrimers
      

        Dendrimers offer an interesting architecture for organic photovoltaics owing to their structural properties, which allow them to mimic natural photosynthetic systems. Dendrimers are synthetic macromolecules which contain several branching units connected to a single core. Unlike their polymer counterparts, dendrimers can be structurally perfect, precisely controlled, and monodisperse.67–70Dendrimers offer one major benefit over other macromolecules for photovoltaics. The highly branched nature of dendrimers has been shown to offer advantages in light harvesting over their linear polymer analogs.71,72Light harvesting dendrimers have been well studied and extensively reviewed elsewhere.73–77 Here we will discuss two main classes of dendrimers used for light harvesting: (i) flexible dendrimers, in which the dendrimer acts solely as a scaffold for functionalization with chromophores at either the core, branching units, or periphery of the macromolecule, and (ii) conjugated dendrimers, where the backbone itself is the chromophore.
Natural photosynthetic organisms consist of a large array of chromophores, which surround a reaction center.78–84 Not only are the chromophores responsible for absorbing photons from a broad spectral range, they are also responsible for transferring the energy from the photons to the reaction center. It is not surprising, therefore, that the scientific community has attempted to mimic this process, designing dendrimers which are capable of harnessing light and transferring the energy to the core of the dendrimer.
The first main class of dendrimers, flexible dendrimers, can be constructed to act as a scaffold upon which chromophores can be placed. Most commonly, benzyl ether linkages are utilized for the construction of such dendrimers, which can be functionalized with light harvesting moieties at the periphery or core. The insulating ether linkages prevent conjugation of the dendrimer and impart a degree of flexibility into the macromolecule.
Thayumanavan and co-workers have reported flexible benzyl ether dendrimers, D1 in Fig. 13, which mimic the key initial steps in the photosynthetic event in that they are capable of undergoing both energy and electron transfer upon photoexcitation.85 These dendrimers contain a benzothiadiazole-based conjugated oligomer core, which acts as an energy and electron acceptor, and diarylaminopyrene units at the periphery, which act as energy and electron donors. Due to the insulating linkers, there is a lack of electronic communication between the donors and acceptors, allowing for independent tuning of the energy levels of the chromophores. The oxidation potential of the benzothiadiazole core is higher than that of the diarylaminopyrene units, suggesting that the units at the periphery can reduce the excited state of the core. Fluorescent quenching and transient absorption spectroscopy experiments suggest the presence of a charged intermediate species, supporting the presence of a charge transfer process. The charge transfer efficiency of the dendrimers was found to be as high as 70% and the efficiency of a photon to charge-separated state process was 50%. Unlike previously reported examples,86 these dendrimers do not show a decrease in charge separation with increasing generations, most likely owing to the flexibility of the dendrimer scaffold. The rate of electron transfer depends on the distance between the donor and acceptor functionalities; in the case of the benzyl ether dendrimers, the flexible backbone allows for backfolding, which brings the donor functionalities in close proximity to the acceptor core in high generations.87 Additionally, the donor and acceptor moieties have sufficient spectral overlap, appropriate for fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), implying that there will be energy transfer between them. Efficient energy transfer, even in high generations, occurs as a result of the excitation of the peripheral chromophores yielding a fast rise in fluorescence of the acceptor functionality.
 Fig. 13  
Benzyl ether
          dendrimer, introduced by Thayumanavan and co-workers, capable of undergoing both energy and electron transfer. 
Much work has also been done on fully conjugated light harvesting dendrimers. Some of the more successful designs consist of conjugated dendrimers in which an energy gradient in the backbone, as well as an acceptor at the core, has been synthetically included in the design.88–91 Including an energy gradient results in an efficient funneling of energy from the backbone of the dendrimer to the acceptor located at the core.
One of the interesting methods for providing this energy gradient is to design a dendrimer with unsymmetrical branching, introduced by Peng and co-workers who synthesized phenyl acetylene dendrimers with branching at the ortho- and para-positions, as seen in D2 and D3 in Fig. 14.92,93 Most light harvesting dendrimers consist of symmetrical branching, where energy transfer from the periphery to the core proceeds through the branching units. In the case of unsymmetrical branching, however, there exist branches with various conjugation lengths, which not only leads to an energy gradient directed toward the core of the molecule, but also broad absorption spectra. Additionally, as the size of the dendrimers increases, the absorbance spectrum red-shifts and the amount of light that is absorbed doubles with each increasing generation. The authors also installed perylene as an acceptor functionality at the core of the dendrimer in order to determine the energy transfer efficiency. They found that when the molecule is excited at the absorption wavelength of the phenyl acetylene backbone, a majority of fluorescence originates from the perylene core. The energy transfer efficiencies are greater than 98% for generations one through three.
 Fig. 14  Unsymmetrically branched dendrimers containing a unidirectional efficient energy transfer (EET). 

        Dendrimers themselves mimic natural light harvesting systems in that chromophores at the periphery surround the core of the dendrimers. It is therefore not surprising that attention has been paid to dendrimers for photovoltaic applications. Although polymers are most commonly used for the active layers of organic solar cells, the efficiency of polymer photovoltaics is greatly dependant on controlling the active layer, which is strongly dependent on the molecular weight of the polymer.94,95 Unlike their polymer equivalents, the molecular weight of dendrimers are completely controlled and monodisperse, resulting in a well-defined morphology. Additionally, the structure of dendrimers allows for a large concentration of chromophores for light absorption as well as efficient energy transfer to the core. p-Type dendrimer semiconductors can be blended with PCBM creating bulk heterojunction photovoltaics.
Early attempts at dendrimer-based photovoltaics, published in 2004 by Crossley, Imahori, Kamat, Fukuzumi, and co-workers, were focused on using porphyrin-based dendrimers, which closely resemble natural photosynthetic arrays, blended with fullerene.96 It was found that the dendrimers form clusters with the fullerene molecules, resulting in a π-complex, and thus absorbance in the 700–800 nm region. These solar cells showed an overall power conversion efficiency of 0.32%.
Rance, Kopidakis, and co-workers later reported a dendrimer consisting of an electron-withdrawing core and electron-rich thiophene-based dendrons for bulk heterojunction solar cells97 (D4 in Fig. 15). The conjugation of electron-rich and electron-poor constituents have been shown to lower the bandgap of a material causing a red-shift in absorbance and allowing for improved photon harvesting.98–100 These dendrimers were found to arrange into well-ordered morphologies owing to their planar nature. As compared to the control dendrimer, in which there were no electron-withdrawing groups installed in the core, the dendrimer with the electron-withdrawing core shows higher photoconductivity and longer photocarrier lifetimes. These improvements to the photophysical behavior of the dendrimers, as well as the ordered morphology, resulted in a device efficiency of 1.12%.
 Fig. 15  
          Dendrimer exhibiting reduced bandgap due to the inclusion of an electron-rich dendron with an electron-withdrawing core. 
Holmes and co-workers have also synthesized thiophene-based dendrimers with a hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) core101 as seen in D5 in Fig. 16. HBC is a planar aromatic hydrocarbon, which has been shown to self-assemble into columns resulting in very well organized films. Additionally, the bandgap and absorption intensity can easily be tuned by varying the generation of the dendrimer resulting in a change in the number of thiophene units. Solar cells were constructed from different generations by blending with either PC61BM or PC71BM. The highest efficiency was found in the second-generation dendrimer blended with PC71BM and was found to be 2.5% efficient.
 Fig. 16  
Thiophene based dendrimers with a HBC core capable of self-assembling into columns generating well organized films. 
Although dendrimers are capable of effectively harnessing photons and transferring the energy to the core, the energy is not easily transferred away from the core to another molecule. Functionalizing a dendrimer with chromophores at the periphery positions, especially in higher generations, results in a high density of light harvesting functionalities and increases the likelihood of capturing light. Unfortunately, a higher density of light harvesting functionalities also causes the dendrimer to take on a spherical shape to reduce steric strain. This means that the cores of two neighboring molecules are sheltered from each other, hindering charge transport between them. This prevents effective charge separation and charge transport through the bulk of the material, which is necessary for efficient photovoltaics.
Dendron–rod–coils
Future directions in the field of organic photovoltaics may focus on the development of macromolecular architectures capable of efficient light harvesting while also providing appropriate morphologies to effectively separate and shuttle charges without the need for blending with PCBM. With these design criteria in mind, Thayumanavan and co-workers have reported a dendron–rod–coil molecular design, DRC1 shown in Fig. 17, which melds the advantages of a dendritic architecture, for light harvesting and charge transfer, with those of linear polymer, for intermolecular transport of the charges.102 In the charge-separated state of a light harvesting dendrimer, one charge is localized in the periphery while the other is trapped in the core. This can be detrimental to a photovoltaic device where charge migration in addition to charge separation is necessary. However, when a dendron is coupled with a polymer acceptor, yielding the molecule asymmetric, there is an opportunity for the charge located at the core to escape to the polymer. This particular design consists of a benzyl ether dendron with hole transporting moieties located at the periphery, a low bandgap sensitizer, or core, and an electron-transporting coil polymer. Due to the covalent inclusion of the electron-transporting polymer, an exciton has a greater probability to reach a donor–acceptor interface within its lifetime, making the use of PCBM to fabricate a photovoltaic device potentially unnecessary.
 Fig. 17  Dendron–rod–coil architecture for an all-organic photovoltaic device. 
It was demonstrated in previous work by the Thayumanavan group that a benzyl ether dendrimer with diarylaminopyrene functionalities at the periphery is capable of reducing the excited state of the benzothiadiazole-based core85 (D1 in Fig. 13). Additionally it was found that the excited state of the core is capable of transferring an electron to a coil polymer consisting of naphthalenediimide (NDI) functionalities. Using fluorescence quenching experiments it was found that upon selective excitation of the core, there was an efficient electron transfer resulting in complete quenching of the fluorescence of the core. Stern–Volmer quenching experiments revealed an additional advantage of using a dendrimer. It was found that the NDI moiety is significantly more effective at quenching the excited state of the core than the diarylaminopyrene molecules. However, the difference in quenching between the dendron–rod and the rod–coil functionalities were relatively minor suggesting that the dendrimer provides some architectural advantage over the coil polymer in this charge transfer event.
Dendron–rod–coil architectures have also been shown to form one-dimensional assemblies, the likes of which can potentially facilitate charge transfer. Phenyl ester-based dendrons with hydroxyl groups on the peripheral phenyl rings, covalently bound to oligoisoprene groups through biphenyl ester rods of varying lengths, have formed highly stable nanoribbons and self-sustaining organogels.103,104 The strong network of hydrogen bonds and π–π stacking are credited for maintaining the ordered supramolecular structure. Particular structural criteria have a great effect on the balance of these intermolecular forces, primarily in the dendron and rod segments of the molecules.
Stupp et al. synthesized a series of dendron–rod–coil molecules, DRC2 and DR (Fig. 18), and observed the effects of altering the dendron generation, number of peripheral hydroxyl groups, and rod and coil composition on assembly formation.103,104 The small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) studies on the dendron–rod portion of the molecule containing four hydroxyl groups were used to determine the hydrogen bonding network of the ribbon backbone in the dendron–rod–coil, which was found to be comprised of a repeating tetrameric hydrogen bonded network. The stability of this assembly is enhanced by the π–π interactions of the aromatic units of stacking dendrons, given by a d spacing of 4.93 Å, and stacking rods. The thickness of the tetrameric conformation is also consistent with the ribbon thickness of 2 nm, as determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM).
 Fig. 18  Dendron–rod–coil molecules shown to form assemblies such as nanoribbons and self-sustaining nanogels. 
Modification of the rod segment from repeating biphenyl ester groups to quaterthiophene, DRC3 in Fig. 18, illustrated the potential for dendron–rod–coil assemblies as conductive materials.105 The one-dimensional nanostructure persisted with the change in rod composition, as confirmed by various spectroscopic methods. Thin films of material self-assembled from a toluene solution gave conductivity three orders of magnitude greater than films cast from THF solutions, in which no assemblies were formed, confirming the enhanced electronic communication within the assembly.
Conclusions
Organic photovoltaics are complex devices, which require the precise orchestration of several processes i.e., light harvesting, charge separation, and charge mobility. In order for organic photovoltaics to reach their full potential, all of these processes must be optimized within a single device. Optimum performance of any material for organic photovoltaic devices rests on a fine balance between clever molecular design for light absorption and charge separation, and arriving at interpenetrating morphologies for charge transport. For instance, an ideal material for the active layer of a device would marry the light harvesting and charge transporting capabilities of a conjugated polymer with the well-controlled morphologies and solubility of a block copolymer.
In order to achieve these ideal properties, several challenges still need to be addressed. The field of organic photovoltaics is still in its infancy. We have come a long way in our understanding of designing p-type materials for efficient light harvesting. However, most of the devices involving these p-type materials are also based on blends with a fullerene derivative. This warrants the need for an extensive investigation into n-type materials in order to develop a larger library of materials and arrive at the “ideal” material combination for organic photovoltaics.
To add to the complexity of this problem, morphological control must also be addressed. For a given combination of donor and acceptor materials, it is nearly impossible to accurately predict the “ideal” active layer morphology of the blend. Extensive post-processing techniques, however, can help arrive at the optimum morphology for a given combination. Classical block copolymers have rich phase behavior, which is well-understood, wherein mutually incompatible blocks thermodynamically separate into predictable well-ordered structures. However, that knowledge cannot be readily applied to donor–acceptor block copolymers due to the inherent attraction between the electron “rich” donor and the electron “poor” acceptor blocks. An interesting approach to address this problem would be to use unconventional molecules such as dendron–rod–coil that have the potential to drive phase separation based on shape rather than the chemical incompatibility. At this stage, however, tedious synthetic routes to arrive at such structures limit their availability for detailed structure–property relationships. An in-depth correlation between molecular architecture and thin film morphology will greatly facilitate the rational design of these molecules for photovoltaics.
Acknowledgements
We thank the U.S. Department of Energy for support through the EFRC at UMass Amherst (DE-SC0001087), the U.S. Army Research Office (54635CH) for support through the Green Energy Center, and the NSF for support through the MRSEC at UMass Amherst.
References
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
R. M. Swanson, Science, 2009, 324, 891–892 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan, Z. Tan, B. Domercq, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, Y. Li, D. Zhu, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7246–7247 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Benanti and D. Venkataraman, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Brédas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Potscavage, A. Sharma and B. Kippelen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1758–1767 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. J. Thomas, A. L. Thompson, A. V. Sivakumar, C. J. Bardeen and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 373–383 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 268–320 CrossRef CAS .
D. Venkataraman, S. Yurt, B. H. Venkatraman and N. Gavvalapalli, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Brédas, D. Beljonne, V. Coropceanu and J. Cornil, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4971–5004 CrossRef .
J.-M. Nunzi, C. R. Phys., 2002, 3, 523–542 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef .
X.-C. Li, H. Sirringhaus, F. Garnier, A. B. Holmes, S. C. Moratti, N. Feeder, W. Clegg, S. J. Teat and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 2206–2207 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Brunetti, X. Gong, M. Tong, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 532–536 CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan and D. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 409–419 RSC .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Scharber, D. Mühlbacher, M. Koppe, P. Denk, C. Waldauf, A. J. Heeger and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 789–794 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Loewe, P. C. Ewbank, J. Liu, L. Zhai and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 4324–4333 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Iovu, E. E. Sheina, R. R. Gil and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8649–8656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He and Y. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1970–1983 RSC .
A. C. Grimsdale, K. L. Chan, R. E. Martin, P. G. Jokisz and A. B. Holmes, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 897–1091 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marsegila, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510–4515 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Breeze, Z. Schlesinger, S. A. Carter, H. Tillmann and H.-H. Hörhold, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kietzke, H.-H. Hörhold and D. Neher, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6532–6537 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kietzke, D. A. M. Egbe, H.-H. Hörhold and D. Neher, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4018–4022 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Koetse, J. Sweelssen, K. T. Hoekerd, H. F. M. Schoo, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, X. Yang and J. Loos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 083504 CrossRef .
M. Granström, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 395, 257–260 CrossRef .
T. W. Holcombe, C. H. Woo, D. F. J. Kavulak, B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14160–14161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Quante, Y. Geerts and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhan, Z. Tan, B. Domercq, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, Y. Li, D. Zhu, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7246–7247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, E. Zhou, X. Zhan, X. Wang, Y. Li, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073309 CrossRef .
E. Zhou, J. Cong, Q. Wei, K. Tajima, C. Yang and K. Hashimoto, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 2851–2855 CrossRef .
L. Yang, H. Zhou and W. You, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16793–16800 CAS .
E. Zhou, K. Tajima, C. Yang and K. Hashimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2362–2368 RSC .
R. Stalder, J. Mei, J. Subbiah, C. Grand, L. A. Estrada, F. So and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 6303–6310 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Popere, A. M. Della Pelle and S. Thayumanavan, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4767–4776 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates, Science, 1991, 251, 898–905 CAS .
H.-A. Klok and S. Lecommandoux, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1217–1229 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 525–557 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1266–1273 CAS .
P. D. Topham, A. J. Parnell and R. C. Hiorns, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1131–1156 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9205–9216 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Liu, C.-H. Lin, C.-C. Kuo, S.-T. Lin and W.-C. Chen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 603–637 CrossRef CAS .
B. de Boer, U. Stalmach, P. F. van Hutten, C. Melzer, V. V. Krasnikov and G. Hadziioannou, Polymer, 2001, 42, 9097–9109 CrossRef CAS .
U. Stalmach, B. de Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464–5472 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barrau, T. Heiser, F. Richard, C. Brochon, C. Ngov, K. van de Wetering, G. Hadziioannou, D. V. Anokhin and D. Ivanov, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2701–2710 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Lee, A. Cirpan, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1483–1489 RSC .
C. Yang, J. K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5416–5423 RSC .
K. Sivula, Z. T. Ball, N. Watanabe and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 206–210 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, A. Cirpan, T. P. Russell and T. Emrick, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1079–1082 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Hiorns, E. Cloutet, E. Ibarboure, A. Khoukh, H. Bejbouji, L. Vignau and H. Cramail, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6033–6044 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, S. M. Lindner and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1493–1500 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lindner, S. Hüttner, A. Chiche, M. Thelakkat and G. Krausch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3364–3368 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hüttner, M. Sommer, A. Chiche, G. Krausch, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4206–4211 RSC .
S. King, M. Sommer, S. Hüttner, M. Thelakkat and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5436–5441 RSC .
A. Nantalaksakul, K. Krishnamoorthy and S. Thayumanavan, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. J. Fréchet, Science, 1994, 263, 1710–1715 Search PubMed .
D. A. Tomalia, H. Baker, J. Dewald, M. Hall, G. Kallos, S. Martin, J. Roech, J. Ryder and P. Smith, Polym. J., 1985, 17, 117–132 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Newkome, Z. Yao, G. R. Baker and V. K. Gupta, J. Org. Chem., 1985, 50, 2003–2004 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hawker and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7638–7647 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nantalaksakul, R. R. Dasari, T.-S. Ahn, R. Al-Kaysi, C. J. Bardeen and S. Thayumanavan, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 2981–2984 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Ahn, A. Nantalaksakul, R. R. Dasari, R. O. Al-Kaysi, A. M. Müller, S. Thayumanavan and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24331–24339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Adronov and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1701–1710 RSC .
A. Nantalaksakul, D. R. Reddy, C. J. Bardeen and S. Thayumanavan, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 133–150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Y.-Y. Li, J. Chen, G. Yang and Y. Li, Chem. Asian J., 2010, 5, 992–1005 CAS .
V. Balzani, P. Ceroni, M. Maestri and V. Vicinelli, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2003, 7, 657–665 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. D'Ambruoso and D. V. McGrath, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2008, 214, 87–147 CAS .
J. Deisenhofer, O. Epp, K. Miki, R. Huber and H. Michel, Nature, 1985, 318, 618–624 CrossRef .
J. Deisenhofer and H. Michel, Science, 1989, 245, 1463–1473 CAS .
J. Barber and B. Andersson, Nature, 1994, 370, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
G. McDermott, S. M. Prince, A. A. Freer, A. M. Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, M. Z. Papiz, R. J. Cogdell and N. W. Isaacs, Nature, 1995, 374, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pullerits and V. Sundström, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 381–389 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 1997, 1, 506–513 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, A. Damjanović, T. Ritz and K. Schulten, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1998, 95, 5935–5941 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. J. Thomas, A. L. Thompson, A. V. Sivakumar, C. J. Bardeen and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 373–383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, N. G. Pschirer, D. Liu, A. Stefan, F. C. De Schryver and K. Müllen, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 528–537 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, R. R. Dasari, A. Nantalaksakul and S. Thayumanavan, Chem. Commun., 2007, 739–741 RSC .
Z. Xu and J. S. Moore, Acta Polym., 1994, 45, 83–87 CrossRef CAS .
C. Devadoss, P. Bharathi and J. S. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 9635–9644 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shortreed, S. F. Swallen, Z.-Y. Shi, W. Tan, Z. Xu, C. Devadoss, J. S. Moore and R. Kopelman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 6318–6322 CrossRef .
S. F. Swallen, Z.-Y. Shi, W. Tan, Z. Xu, J. S. Moore and R. Kopelman, J. Lumin., 1998, 76–77, 193–196 CrossRef .
Z. Peng, J. S. Melinger and V. Kleiman, Photosynth. Res., 2006, 87, 115–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Melinger, Y. Pan, V. D. Kleiman, Z. Peng, B. L. Davis, D. McMorrow and M. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12002–12012 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353–1362 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1776–1780 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, Y. Kashiwagi, M. A. Absalom, J. Sly, K. Hosomizu, M. J. Crossley, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 975–979 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Rance, B. L. Rupert, W. J. Mitchell, M. E. Köse, D. S. Ginley, S. E. Shaheen, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22269–22276 CAS .
E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954–985 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and Y. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1709–1718 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Havinga, W. ten Hoeve and H. Wynberg, Polym. Bull., 1992, 29, 119–126 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. H. Wong, C.-Q. Ma, W. Pisula, C. Yan, X. Feng, D. J. Jones, K. Müllen, R. A. J. Janssen, P. Bäuerle and A. B. Holmes, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 457–466 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nantalaksakul, A. Mueller, A. Klaikherd, C. J. Bardeen and S. Thayumanavan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2727–2738 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Zubarev, E. D. Sone and S. I. Stupp, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7313–7327 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1674–1684 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Messmore, J. F. Hulvat, E. D. Sone and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14452–14458 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

Bhooshan C. Popere
	Bhooshan Popere obtained his BTech degree in Polymer Engineering and Technology from the Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai, India in 2007. He subsequently joined the research laboratory of Professor S. Thayumanavan (Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst) in 2007. He is currently a fifth year PhD candidate focusing on design, synthesis and characterization of panchromatic conjugated polymers for organic electronics.

Andrea M. Della Pelle
	Andrea Della Pelle received her BS degree from Fairfield University in 2008. She then joined the Chemistry department at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst where she is pursuing a PhD under the advisement of Professor S. Thayumanavan. She is currently a fourth year graduate student and her research work is focused on the design and synthesis of macromolecular architectures for organic photovoltaics.

Ambata Poe
	Ambata Poe received his BS degree in Chemistry from Lincoln University in 2009. He then joined the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Department of Chemistry in pursuit of his PhD. He is currently a third year graduate student working under the supervision of Professor S. Thayumanavan with a focus on molecular systems with organic photovoltaic applications.

S. Thayumanavan
	S. “Thai” Thayumanavan is a Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. He received his BSc and MSc degrees from The American College in Madurai, India. He received his PhD from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1996 under the direction of Professor Peter Beak. Following a postdoctoral stint with Professor Seth R. Marder at Caltech, he started his independent career at Tulane University in 1999 and moved to UMass Amherst in 2003. His research work involves the design and syntheses of new macromolecules to obtain novel supramolecular assemblies that are of interest in drug delivery, sensing, and photovoltaics.

 	Fig. 1  Architecture of a bulk heterojunction device; the inset illustrates the process of charge transfer at the donor–acceptor interface, where an exciton is generated in the donor (inset, left) material and, if it is within an appropriate distance from the interface, electron transfer takes place.	 

 	Fig. 2  
J–V curve illustrating the current–voltage characteristics of an illuminated bulk heterojunction photovoltaic device; the key points of the graph are the Voc (open circuit voltage), Jsc (short circuit current), Vmpp (voltage at maximum power), and Jmpp (current at maximum power). The fill factor is a quantitative determination of the squareness of the J–V curve. The power conversion efficiency (η) of a photovoltaic cell is given by the ratio of maximum power output to the power input (Pin).	 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and conjugated polymers based on the CN-PPV backbone.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structures of conjugated polymers based on PBI units reported by Marder and co-workers.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structures of conjugated polymers based on PBI units reported by Hashimoto and co-workers.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structures of conjugated polymers based on isoindigo units (P6) reported by Reynolds and co-workers, and BODIPY units reported by Thayumanavan and co-workers (P7).	 

 	Fig. 7  Structures of rod-coil block copolymers incorporating PPV blocks as the conjugated rod segments and flexible polystyrene blocks with pendant C60 groups as coil segments.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structures of rod–coil block copolymers incorporating P3HT blocks as the conjugated rod segments and flexible poly(acrylate)/poly(methacrylate) blocks with pendant C60 groups as coil segments.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures of coil–coil/rod–coil block copolymers incorporating P3HT units as pendant groups (BCP5) or as the conjugated rod segments (BCP6) used as compatibilizers for bulk heterojunction devices.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of the block copolymer incorporating C60 in the polymer backbone.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure of flexible block copolymers based on triphenyl amines and PBI units.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of side-chain crosslinkable flexible block copolymers based on pendant dialkoxy thiophene units.	 

 	Fig. 13  
Benzyl ether
          dendrimer, introduced by Thayumanavan and co-workers, capable of undergoing both energy and electron transfer.	 

 	Fig. 14  Unsymmetrically branched dendrimers containing a unidirectional efficient energy transfer (EET).	 

 	Fig. 15  
          Dendrimer exhibiting reduced bandgap due to the inclusion of an electron-rich dendron with an electron-withdrawing core.	 

 	Fig. 16  
Thiophene based dendrimers with a HBC core capable of self-assembling into columns generating well organized films.	 

 	Fig. 17  Dendron–rod–coil architecture for an all-organic photovoltaic device.	 

 	Fig. 18  Dendron–rod–coil molecules shown to form assemblies such as nanoribbons and self-sustaining nanogels.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
