Ultrafast exciton dynamics in Type II ZnTe–ZnSe colloidal quantum dots   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP41978E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP41978E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13638-13645Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUltrafast exciton dynamics in Type II ZnTe–ZnSe colloidal quantum dots†

        
          
            M. 
            Cadirci
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. K. 
            Stubbs
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. M. 
            Fairclough
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            E. J. 
            Tyrrell
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. A. R. 
            Watt
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            J. M. 
            Smith
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            D. J. 
            Binks
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Physics and Astronomy & Photon Science Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. E-mail: david.binks@manchester.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)1612751001;   Tel: +44 (0)1612754234
bDepartment of Materials, University of Oxford, Parks Road, OX1 3PH, Oxford, UK
Received 
      13th June 2012
    , Accepted 21st August 2012First published on 21st August 2012AbstractUltrafast transient absorption spectroscopy is used to investigate the exciton dynamics of Type II ZnTe–ZnSe core–shell colloidal quantum dots. Surface-trapping is shown to occur within a few picosecond for hot electrons and with a few 10s of picoseconds for electrons cooled to the band-edge, and is the dominant process in the decay of the band-edge bleach for well-stirred samples pumped at moderate powers. The surface-trapped electrons produce a broad photo-induced absorption that spectrally overlaps with the band-edge, distorting and partially cancelling out the bleach feature. At high pump powers and for unstirred samples, these surface-trapped electrons can survive sufficiently long within the pumped volume to accumulate under repeated excitation of the sample, resulting in the formation of an additional exciton decay channel.
1. Introduction
Colloidal quantum dots (CQD) are nanometre-scale semiconductor crystals whose size is similar to or smaller than the Bohr radius of an exciton in the corresponding bulk material. The resulting confinement of charge carriers makes the electronic properties of CQD size-dependent and thus allows them to be tuned by control of crystal growth.1 CQDs can be grown in core–shell heterostructures and these can be classified according to the region of the structure in which each carrier localises. In a Type I CQD, both the electron and hole are confined to the core whilst in an inverted Type I both reside primarily in the shell. In contrast, the electron and hole localise to different parts of a Type II CQD and in a quasi-Type II dot one of the carriers is confined to a particular region whilst the other is delocalised over the whole CQD. Type II and quasi-Type II CQD structures are of particular interest because they enable the electron and hole wavefunction overlap to be controlled by changing the core diameter and shell thickness. Reducing the wavefunction overlap allows exciton recombination rates to be decreased and exciton–exciton (X–X) interaction energies to be increased.2–5 These are both key to a number of important applications of CQDs allowing, for example, the threshold for optical gain in CQDs to be reduced and extending the lifetime of that gain.6 Type II CQDs also have been shown7 to exhibit efficient multiple exciton generation (MEG), a process by which much of the energy of an absorbed photon in excess of the bandgap can be used to increase photocurrent instead of being wasted as heat, and thereby potentially improve the efficiency of a solar cell.8–10
To date ultrafast exciton dynamics have been studied in Type II CQDs utilising CdE (E = Se, S or Te) for either the core or shell material, or both. These core–shell structures have included CdS–ZnSe,6 ZnTe–CdSe,11 CdTe–CdSe,12–16 ZnSe–CdS,17 CdTe–CdS,18 CdSe–ZnTe,19 CdTe–ZnTe20 and CdSe–ZnS.21 However, the use of cadmium is heavily regulated because of its toxicity by, for instance, the Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive of the European Union;22 other jurisdictions have similar legislation. In contrast, the analogous zinc compounds are not similarly restricted. Furthermore, the effective band gap of zinc-based CQDs tends to be larger than for those based on Cd allowing emission at wavelengths as short as ∼450 nm to be demonstrated,23 and thus enabling optical gain at blue wavelengths from Type II CQD. In contrast, the emission from other Type II CQDs has been limited to the green, red or infrared spectral regions (i.e. >500 nm).11–21,24 The synthesis of a Type II CQD based entirely on ZnE (E = Se, S and Te) has only recently been reported.23,25 In the first of those works, the authors fabricated and characterised both ZnTe–ZnSe core–shell and ZnTe–ZnSe–ZnS core–shell–shell heterostructures, and also investigated the performance of hybrid CQD/polymer photovoltaic cells incorporating them. In the second work, ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs were fabricated by an alternative method and it was shown that that the lattice mismatch between the core and the shell materials results in the development of a large strain that has a significant effect on exciton energies.
In this paper, we report an investigation of ultrafast exciton dynamics in ZnTe–ZnSe core–shell CQDs for the first time. The method used to synthesize the ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs is outlined first, and is followed by a description of their characterisation by steady-state absorption and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). A detailed study of exciton cooling, trapping and relaxation using ultrafast transient absorption is then described.
2. Synthesis and characterisation
The synthesis method used to produce ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs is described in detail elsewhere23 and so is only outlined briefly here. The ZnTe cores were prepared using zinc and tellurium precursor solutions comprising zinc acetate dehydrate in benzyl ether and oleic acid, and tellurium trioctylphosphine (TOP) and superhydride in octyl ether, respectively. All reactions were carried out in an inert atmosphere. The Te-precursor was injected rapidly into the Zn-precursor at 245 °C; the resulting solution was returned to and then maintained at this reaction temperature until the target CQD size was achieved, at which point the reaction was quenched by rapid cooling in a water bath. The resulting CQDs were cleaned with excess anhydrous methanol, extracted by centrifuge and re-dispersed in hexane. The ZnSe shell was added using the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) technique. Here, the ZnTe cores in hexane were initially mixed with degassed benzyl ether:oleic acid:TOP (15:1:1). Zinc oleate and selenium-TOP were then alternately injected at 235–240 °C, and the evolution of the absorption spectrum was monitored in situ with a dip probe; the reaction time for Se and Zn layer growth was typically 25–30 minutes. The resulting core–shell CQDs were cleaned with an excess of 3:1 methanol:butanol, extracted by centrifuge and re-dispersed in hexane. All chemicals were used as received from the manufacturer (Sigma Aldrich) unless stated otherwise. For this work, two core sizes were prepared and two different shell thicknesses were added to each.
For TEM, the samples were cleaned a further four times with methanol before being drop-cast onto a 400 mesh ultra-thin carbon grid with copper support. TEM images were taken using a Jeol 2010 TEM at 200 kV. Fig. 1 shows some example TEM images for a core–shell CQD; the inset shows the size histogram for this sample. Similar images for the two ZnTe core-only samples and the 3 other core–shell samples are included in the ESI.† The average diameters of the two ZnTe core sizes were measured to 2.4 nm and 4.1 nm, with a standard deviation of about 10% in both cases. The average diameters and the size standard deviation for all the samples are given in Table 1. The shell thickness, also shown in Table 1, was calculated by comparing these diameters to those of the original cores, and expressed as a number of monolayers (ML) by assuming the thickness of a single ML is given by half the lattice constant of ZnSe, i.e. 0.284 nm26 – see ESI† for more detail. The samples were also characterised by powder X-ray diffraction and were found to exhibit a zinc blende structure, with the value of the lattice constant for the core–shell samples intermediate between that of bulk ZnTe and ZnSe – see ESI.† The 2–6 band effective mass model of ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs presented previously23 allows the carrier localization in these samples to be predicted based on the core radius and shell thickness – see ESI.† This model predicts that the sample with 4.1 nm core and 1 ML shell is quasi-Type II i.e. the hole is confined to the core and the electron is delocalised over the whole CQD. In contrast, the two thickest shelled CQDs for each core size are Type II (i.e. the hole and electron are localised in the core and shell, respectively), whilst the 2.4 nm core–2 ML samples is on the border between the two regimes.
 Fig. 1  Transmission electron micrographs of the CQDs with 4.1 nm diameter cores and 1 ML thick shells. The right upper panel shows a histogram of CQD diameters measured from the image. 
Table 1 Properties of the ZnTe–ZnSe core–shell CQD samples studied




Core size (nm)
Average diameter (nm)
Shell thickness (ML)a
Size standard deviation, δ (%)
Localization type
Decay constant, τ (ps)





a ML = monolayer.





2.4
3.6
2
10
Quasi-II/II
17.9 ± 0.6


2.4
4.7
4
10
II
60 ± 2


4.1
4.7
1
11
Quasi-II
19.2 ± 0.5


4.1
5.2
2
8
II
58 ± 4




The four ZnTe–ZnSe core–shell and two corresponding ZnTe core-only sample solutions were initially characterised optically by absorption and PL spectroscopy using a Varian Cary 5000 UV-visible-NIR spectrometer and a Varian Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer, respectively. Fig. 2 shows the absorption and the PL spectra obtained for the samples. The ZnTe core-only samples showed no PL, an observation that has been previously attributed to the presence of Te surface traps.23 The core–shell samples, however, exhibited efficient PL with up to 12% quantum yield. The half-width-at-half-maximum (HWHM) of the PL was in the range 15–20 nm (i.e. 75–100 meV) in each case. The 2.4 nm and 4.1 nm ZnTe core-only CQDs both have well-defined absorption peaks, at about 425 nm and 450 nm respectively. The addition of the ZnSe shell causes a red-shift in the absorption for both core sizes, which increases as the shell becomes thicker. Although red-shifted, the shape of the absorption spectrum for the 4.1 nm core–1 ML shell CQDs is similar to that of the corresponding ZnTe core. In contrast, the shape of the spectra for other CQDs does not contain the same distinct features; a weakening of absorption features is expected for a Type II structure and is similar to that observed by ourselves and others previously for ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs.23,25 Thus these observations are consistent with the identification of the 4.1 nm core–1 ML shell CQDs as quasi-Type II and the other three samples as Type II.
 Fig. 2  Absorption and PL spectra for ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs with (a) 2.4 nm and (b) 4.1 nm cores. Absorption curves have been offset vertically for clarity. 
The presence of a second feature at a higher energy can be discerned in the absorption spectra (Fig. 2) for the 4.1 nm core-only and 4.1 nm core–1 ML shell CQDs. This feature becomes more clearly evident for all the samples when the second derivatives of the absorption spectra are examined – see Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Second derivatives of the absorbance spectra for ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs with (a) 2.4 nm cores, and (b) 4.1 nm cores. The two minima seen in each of the spectra correspond to the lowest energy and next to lowest energy allowed transitions i.e. 1S and 2S + 1P, respectively. 
A 2–6 band effective mass model presented previously23,27 enables the transitions associated with these absorption features to be identified. In this model, electron (hole) states are labelled nqj (nQj) where q = s, p, d…(Q = S, P, D…) represents the lowest value of the envelope angular momentum l in the overall wave function, n is the ordinal number of a level with a given symmetry, and j is the total angular momentum of a state with associated degeneracy 2j + 1. The lowest energy feature in the absorption spectrum corresponds to the transition to the 1s1/2 level in the conduction band (CB) from the 1S3/2 level in the valence band (VB); we identify this as the 1S transition. (Note that the single particle 1P3/2 level is at a similar energy to 1S3/2 but the 1P3/2 to 1s1/2 transition is dipole forbidden and so does not contribute significantly to the steady-state absorption spectrum). The next lowest energy feature can be attributed to three transitions: from 2S3/2 in the VB to 1s1/2 in the CB, and from 1P3/2 in the VB to either 1p1/2 or 1p3/2 in the CB, which are quasi-degenerate. We describe the first of these as the 2S transition and the latter two as the 1P transition. The 1P5/2 and 1D5/2 levels are at a similar energy to 2S3/2 but the transitions from these levels to 1s1/2 are also forbidden and so are not expected to significantly contribute to the steady-state absorption spectrum. Fig. 4 illustrates the relevant energy levels and transitions.
 Fig. 4  Energy levels and absorption transitions close to the band edge. (CB = conduction band and VB = valence band). 
3. Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy
The carrier dynamics of the CQDs on a picosecond timescale were measured using a home-built ultrafast transient absorption spectrometer that measures the pump-induced fractional transmission change through a sample as a function of delay time between pump and probe pulses. A mode-locked Ti:Sapphire oscillator (Spectra-Physics, Tsunami) was employed to produce ∼100 fs pulses at 800 nm with a repetition rate of 80 MHz. The output from the Ti:Sapphire oscillator was directed into a Ti:Sapphire regenerative amplifier (Spectra-Physics, Spitfire) to obtain 1 mJ, ∼100 fs pulses at 800 nm with a repetition rate of 1 kHz. About 95% of the amplifier output was sent to an optical parametric amplifier (Light Conversion, TOPAS-C) to produce, via subsequent second and third harmonic generation stages, a pump beam tuneable in the ultraviolet and visible region of the spectrum. The remaining 5% of the output from the regenerative amplifier was directed on to a 2 mm thick sapphire plate to generate white light continuum pulses which were used as the probe beam. The 3 mm diameter pump beam was set to a wavelength of 350 nm (2.4 nm core CQDs) or 400 nm (4 nm core CQDs) and modulated with mechanical chopper locked into the half repetition rate of the laser pulses. A 200 mm mechanized delay stage (Newport ILS) was used to control the time delay between pump and probe beam. The probe beam was divided into a reference and sample beam, both of which were sent onto a pair of silicon photodiodes through a SpectraPro 2500i spectrometer tuned to the wavelength corresponding to the band edge exciton of the sample under study (determined by the minima of the second derivative absorbance spectra shown in Fig. 3, and corresponding to the spectral feature named ‘B1’ in the terminology of ref. 27).
A lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830) synchronized to the mechanical chopper was used to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. Samples of each CQD in hexane or anhydrous hexane were prepared and sealed under a nitrogen atmosphere to have an absorbance (natural logarithm) in the range of A ∼ 0.2–0.4 at the band edge, corresponding to a concentration of ∼3 × 10−5 mol l−1. Unless otherwise noted, each sample was vigorously stirred at 1000 rpm throughout the experiment with a magnetic stirrer (Thermo Scientific, Variomag Mini).
4. Results and discussion

Fig. 5 shows some example pump-induced fractional transmittance transients for CQDs with a 2.4 nm core and 2 ML shell; similar transients for the other CQDs are given in the ESI.† The transients for both samples with 4.1 nm cores and the sample with a 2.4 nm core and 4 ML shell are all well described by a single exponential decay with an offset; the fits shown in the ESI† are global and the resulting time constants, τ, are given in Table 1. The transients for the 2.4 nm core, 2 ML shell sample shown in Fig. 5 on the other hand are better described by a bi-exponential decay (with an offset) and, in this case, a global fit yields time constant of 17.9 ± 0.6 ps and 153 ± 5 ps. Rapid decays on a timescale of 10s or 100s of picoseconds are associated either with species with more than two charges that can undergo Auger recombination,28 such as multi-excitons, or with the surface trapping of charges.5,29 We will now consider a number of these possible processes to determine which of them can best explain the observed transients.
 Fig. 5  Pump-induced fractional transmittance transients for the 2.4 nm ZnTe core–2 ML ZnSe shell CQDs for pump powers ranging between 0.5 and 2 mW. The fits shown are to a biexponential decay function. 
4.1 Biexciton recombination
Biexcitons (or higher order multi-excitons) decay to single excitons which have a recombination lifetime which is long compared to the duration of this experiment, typically ∼10 ns,1 and thus appear as a constant offset in these transients. (See Fig. 6a). Hence, if the observed decays are due only to biexciton decay then the ratio, R, between the initial amplitude of the transient and that remaining at t = 500 ps is determined by the relative populations of single and biexcitons. This can be estimated either from the magnitude of the decay transient or from the absorbed pump fluence. The probability of a CQD absorbing m photons during a pump pulse, Pm, and consequently containing m excitons immediately afterwards is determined by Poisson statistics,1i.e. Pm = 〈m〉m exp(−〈m〉)/m! The average number of absorbed photons, 〈m〉, can be found, for small ΔT/T, from1 (1)The values of ΔT/T shown in Fig. 5 are all about ∼10−3 or less which corresponds to values of 〈m〉 of ∼10−2. This is consistent with the values of 〈m〉 = σpJ calculated for each sample from the maximum pump fluences, J (in units of photons per cm2per pulse) and estimated absorption cross-sections at the pump wavelength, σp. These calculations indicate that the number of biexcitons formed was negligible compared to the number of single excitons and thus R should be approximately unity. Since R is much greater than this for all the data shown in Fig. 5 we conclude that the observed transients are not due to the decay of multi-excitons.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the processes that affect transmittance transients for ZnTe–ZnSe QDs: (a) biexciton recombination, (b) recombination when a previous excitation has resulted in a long-lived surface-trapped charge, a.k.a. ‘trion’ recombination,29,30 (c) cooled electron trapping and (d) hot electron trapping. (SS = surface state; CBM = conduction band minimum; VBM = valence band maximum). 
4.2 Trion recombination
Several recent studies30,31 have shown that trion recombination in PbSe CQD can result in large R values even at low pump rates. Since this has been demonstrated to be an important effect for one type of CQD, we now consider whether it could explain the transients observed here for ZnTe–ZnSe CQD. Trion recombination becomes significant when one or other of a pair of photogenerated charges becomes trapped on the surface of the CQD for a time longer than the period between pump pulses. This allows the number of CQD with surface trapped charges to accumulate over time with repeated pumping. Such long-lived trapping can result in the formation of a trion between the geminate partner of the trapped charge, which remains in the CQD volume, and the charge pair created on the absorption of a photon during a subsequent pump pulse. Trions undergo efficient Auger recombination on the picosecond timescale and thus could be responsible for the observed decay transients. The process of trion formation and recombination is illustrated in Fig. 6b.
Trions are detected by our experiment but, in contrast to multi-excitons which decay to the single excitons responsible for the offset observed in transmittance transients, decay back to a state that does not contribute to the transmittance signal.30,31 Thus, the associated component of the transient will decay exponentially to zero rather than to an offset and thus increase the value of R. However, several recent studies30–32 have shown that the formation of trions can be prevented if the sample is stirred or flowed. In such a stirred or flowed sample CQDs are continuously swept out of the excitation volume in between successive pump pulses and thus only CQDs without surface-trapped charges absorb photons and only neutral excitons or multi-excitons form. Fig. 7a compares the transient obtained when a sample was stirred to when it was unstirred, with all other experimental parameters the same. The transient for the stirred sample undergoes a rapid decay from the peak which is well-described by a single exponential. In contrast, when the sample is no longer stirred the decay now includes an additional component, which is about 10 times slower. This suggests that the longer time constant observed for the 2.4 nm core–2 ML shell sample is associated with long-lived, surface-trapped charges, and their formation in the other CQDs was suppressed by stirring. The longer decay component can also be induced even in stirred samples if the pump fluence is increased sufficiently. Fig. 7b compares transmittance transients for the same sample, stirred at 1000 rpm, when pumped at average powers of 1.2 mW and 2.5 mW. At the lower pumping power, the decay from the peak is mono-exponential with a time constant of τ = 22 ± 1 ps, whilst at the higher power the decay is now bi-exponential with a second time constant of ∼10τ. This result also supports the association of the longer time constant with this process. The significant population of CQDs with long-lived surface-trapped charges necessary for this decay channel to be observable will accumulate within the excitation volume if their rate of production, which will depend on the pump power, exceeds the rate at they are lost either by being removed by stirring or flowing or by recombination.
 Fig. 7  Fractional transmittance transients for the 4 nm core 1 ML CQDs for (a) stirred and unstirred samples, and (b) at high and moderate pump powers. The black lines are single and double exponential fits to the stirred and unstirred transients in (a), and to moderate and high power transients in (b), respectively. 
4.3 Surface trapping of cooled electrons
We now turn our attention to the cause of the ∼20–60 ps transient observed in each of the CQD samples and which is responsible for the large R values. Recent work on CdSe CQD has shown that surface-trapping can affect transmittance transients on the time-scale of our experiments even when it does not lead to the accumulation of charged CQDs.29 It is thus reasonable to consider whether the same process explains the transients observed for ZnTe–ZnSe CQD. Electrons may be trapped either from a high lying energy state immediately after photo-excitation, i.e. when ‘hot’, or after they have cooled to the band-edge, as shown in Fig. 6d and c, respectively. The latter process partially reverses the band-edge bleach by removing state-filling electrons, and the recent work on CdSe CQD has shown it can occur on a time-scale of about 30 ps,5 which is similar to the decay constants observed here and thus further reason to consider this process. This cool electron trapping can take place in singly-excited CQD and could therefore explain the large R values we observe at low excitation levels even in well-stirred samples. The trapping of electrons, whether cool or hot, can also indirectly affect the absorption transients at the band-edge if it produces or modifies a photo-induced absorption (PA) that overlaps spectrally with the bleach.
4.4 Fractional transmittance spectra

Fig. 8 shows the fractional transmittance spectra for the 2.4 nm core–4 ML shell sample obtained at a time corresponding to the peak of the transient; similar spectra are given for the other CQDs in the ESI.† As expected, all four spectra show a bleach feature in the absorption edge region; for most of them this feature is symmetrical and of similar width to the PL peak shown in Fig. 2 (the spectrum for the 4.1 nm core–2 ML shell sample is too weak to similarly characterise with confidence). However, these bleach features peak at wavelengths somewhat different to the positions of the minima of the second derivative absorbance spectra shown in Fig. 3; in particular, the bleach shown in Fig. 8 peaks at a wavelength about 30 nm shorter. A significant PA feature at long wavelengths is also evident which seems to overlap with the edge of the bleach; partial cancellation between the PA and bleach in this spectral region will distort the observed bleach feature and may explain the apparent shift of its peak to shorter wavelengths. The weak spectrum and transients of the 4 nm core–2 ML shell sample may be explained by a nearly complete cancellation between the bleach and PA in that case. This PA feature is broad compared to the band-edge bleach and similar to the PA observed for CdSe CQDs in a recent study,29 which was attributed to excited state absorption (ESA) into a continuum enabled by the presence of surface states. This similarity further suggests that sub-nanosecond processes at work in CdSe and ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs are the same. The authors rationalised this explanation by suggesting that surface states perturb the symmetry of the system and thereby modify the optical selection rules, allowing significant absorption by transitions that would otherwise be forbidden. This proposal is supported by pseudo-potential calculations which show that the presence of surface states, charged or neutral, can result in the mixing of allowed and forbidden states.33 In the particular case of ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs, such mixing enabled by the surface-trapping of a pump-generated electron might increase the absorption due to the forbidden 1P3/2 to 1s1/2 transition, directly counteracting the band-edge bleach due to the similar-wavelength 1S3/2 to 1s1/2 transition, as well as producing broad ESA into a continuum.
 Fig. 8  Fractional transmittance spectra ∼3 ps after the pump pulse for the 2.4 nm ZnTe core CQD with 4 ML ZnSe shell and 1 mW of pump power. 
The biexciton interaction energy, ΔXX, in Type II CQDs can be a significant fraction of the bleach width, with values as high as ΔXX = 0.1 eV having been reported for CdS–ZnSe CQDs.6 These large values of ΔXX are a result of the charge separation between the core and the shell6 and can be expected to be present on a similar scale in ZnTe–ZnSe CQD. We will therefore compare the expected effects of a large biexciton interaction energy against observation. A large ΔXX value will distort the bleach peak as well25 and so this effect could also be influencing the shape of the spectra shown in Fig. 8. However, the effect of ΔXX on the transmittance spectrum is fixed after the electron has cooled to the band edge, a process that corresponds to the rise-time of the transmittance transient. This occurs in a time less than 5 ps in the samples studied, as seen in Fig. 9a which shows the initial stages of a transient for each sample. In comparison, the transmittance spectra continue to evolve in both magnitude and shape over a significantly longer time-scale, as shown in Fig. 9b for the 2.4 nm core–2 ML shell CQDs. This indicates that the distortion of the bleach feature is dominated by its spectral overlap with the PA, the magnitude (nearly twice that of the beach feature after 7 ps in the case shown) and shape of which depends on whether the surface state that enables it has trapped a charge or not.
 Fig. 9  (a) Initial transients for all four samples, and (b) fractional transmittance spectra for the 2.4 nm core–2 ML shell CQD at time Δt after the peak of the transient and a pump power of 1 mW. 
4.5 Surface trapping of hot electrons

Fig. 9a also shows that, while the initial rise is monotonic for the 2.4 nm core–2 ML shell and 4 nm core–2 ML shell CQDs, there is a brief initial period of PA for the other CQDs, which is particularly pronounced for the 4.1 nm core–1 ML shell sample with an amplitude of −15 × 10−4 or about three times the subsequent bleach maximum. The initial monotonic rise to a bleach maximum observed for two of the samples can be explained just by the cooling of the hot electrons to the band edge where they fill some of the available states. However, state-filling cannot explain the initial PA seen in the other two samples, which indicates instead that there is significant trapping of hot electrons as well as cold. This is consistent with recent studies on both hot exciton relaxation in ensembles of Type I CdSe CQDs.5
4.6 Comparison to other CQDs
As described in Section 1, ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs uniquely combine three important properties. Firstly, unlike for core-only CQD such as PbSe and CdSe and Type I CQD heterostructures such as CdSe–CdS, their Type II heterostructure enables the wavefunction overlap between the electron and hole to be controlled. This allows properties such as the exciton lifetime and X–X interaction energy to be increased, both of which are crucial to the enhancement of optical gain in CQDs.6 Secondly, they are the only Type II CQD yet demonstrated to emit at wavelengths less than 500 nm, thus enabling gain in the blue part of the spectrum.11–21 Lastly, they are also unique amongst Type II CQDs in being free of toxic elements such as Cd and Pb, the use of which is heavily restricted by legislation.22
This study has shown, as for CdSe and PbSe CQDs, that the surface-trapping of photogenerated charges can play an important role in the sub-nanosecond exciton dynamics of ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs. In particular, surface-trapped charges can persist for periods longer than time between pump pulses as is the case for PbSe CQDs.30,31 Furthermore, in a similar way to CdSe CQD,5 surface-trapping can occur both for hot electrons immediately after excitation and for electrons cooled to the band edge.
5. Summary
Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy has been used to investigate exciton dynamics in Type II ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs. The results indicate that there is significant surface trapping of both hot and cold electrons. These surface-trapped electrons are responsible for a broad photo-induced absorption feature that is largely at wavelengths longer than the band-edge. However, the edge of this photo-induced absorption spectrally overlaps with the band-edge bleach to some extent resulting in a partial cancellation and distortion of the bleach peak. The surface-trapping of electrons that have cooled to the band-edge occurs rapidly, with a lifetime of a few 10s of ps, partially reversing the bleach on this time-scale. This process dominates the decay of the band-edge bleach in most of the samples if they are vigorously stirred and excited at moderate pump powers, producing single exponential decay transients. However, if the sample is not stirred or pumped at higher powers then the transient becomes bi-exponential, with the time constant of the new component of the decay being about 10 times as long as the first. The emergence of this new decay channel is attributed to the accumulation of CQDs with surface-trapped electrons, and hence un-recombined holes, that survive longer than the time between pump pulses. If a photon is absorbed by such a CQD during a subsequent pump pulse then a trion is formed from the newly photogenerated exciton and the hole; this trion can decay rapidly by Auger recombination. Finally, the development of a photo-induced absorption within the first few ps after excitation in some of the CQDs shows that the surface-trapping of electrons can occur even before they have cooled to the band-edge.
Acknowledgements
SMF, EJT, AARW, and JMS acknowledge financial support from EPSRC. JMS acknowledges additional support from Hewlett Packard Ltd. MC acknowledges financial support from the Ministry of National Education of the Republic of Turkey.
Notes and references

Semiconductor and Metal Nanocrystals, ed. V. I. Klimov, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2004, p. 65 Search PubMed .
A. Piryatinski, S. A. Ivanov, S. Tretiak and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2006, 7, 108 CrossRef .
Z. Deutsch, A. Avidan, I. Pinkas and D. Oron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 13, 3210 RSC .
P. Kambhampati, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kambhampati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22089 CAS .
V. Klimov, S. Ivanov, J. Nanda, M. Achermann, I. Bezel and J. McGuire, Nature, 2007, 447, 441 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gachet, A. Avidan, I. Pinkas and D. Oron, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 164 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2735 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Binks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12693 RSC .
J. Nanda, S. A. Ivanov, M. Achermann, I. Bezel, A. Piryatinski and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15382 CAS .
D. Oron, M. Kazes and U. Banin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035330 CrossRef .
S. Rawalekar, S. Kaniyankandy, S. Verma and H. N. Ghosh, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 1729 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chuang, T. L. Doane, S. S. Lo, G. D. Scholes and C. Burda, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6016 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chuang, S. S. Lo, G. D. Scholes and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2530 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, H. Zhong and G. D. Scholes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 046601 CrossRef .
A. Avidan, Z. Deutsch and D. Oron, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 165332 CrossRef .
S. Rawalekar, S. Kaniyankandy, S. Verma and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1460 CAS .
S. Kaniyankandy, S. Rawalekar, S. Verma and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1428 CAS .
S. Rawalekar, S. Kaniyankandy, S. Verma and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12335 CAS .
A. Makhal, H. Yan, P. Lemmens and S. K. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 627 CAS .

          http://www.rohs.eu/english/index.html
        .

          S. M. Fairclough, E. J. Tyrell, D. M. Graham, P. Lunt, S. J. O. Hardman, A. Pietzsch, F. Hennies, J. Moghal, W. R. Flavell, A. A. R. Watt and J. M. Smith, – submitted.
S. A. Ivanov, A. Piryatinski, J. Nanda, S. Tretiak, K. R. Zavadil, W. O. Wallace, D. Werder and V. I Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bang, J. Park, J. H. Lee, N. Won, J. Nam, J. Lim, B. Y. Chang, H. J. Lee, B. Chon, J. Shin, J. B. Park, J. H. Choi, K. Cho, S. M. Park, T. Joo and S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 233 CrossRef .

          T. C. Chiang and F. J. Himpsel, 2.1.23 ZnSe, ed. A. Goldmann and E.-E. Koch, SpringerMaterials - The Landolt-Börnstein Database, (http://www.springermaterials.com) DOI:10.1007/10377019_27 .
E. J. Tyrrell and J. M. Smith, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 195328 CrossRef .
V. I. Klimov, Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tyagi and P. Kambhampati, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 094706 CrossRef .
J. A. McGuire, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1810 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Midgett, H. W. Hillhouse, B. K. Hughes, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17486 CAS .
J. A. McGuire, M. Sykora, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2049 CrossRef CAS .
M. Califano, A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2360 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp41978eThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Transmission electron micrographs of the CQDs with 4.1 nm diameter cores and 1 ML thick shells. The right upper panel shows a histogram of CQD diameters measured from the image.	 


2.4	3.6	2	10	Quasi-II/II	17.9 ± 0.6
2.4	4.7	4	10	II	60 ± 2
4.1	4.7	1	11	Quasi-II	19.2 ± 0.5
4.1	5.2	2	8	II	58 ± 4

 	Fig. 2  Absorption and PL spectra for ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs with (a) 2.4 nm and (b) 4.1 nm cores. Absorption curves have been offset vertically for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 3  Second derivatives of the absorbance spectra for ZnTe–ZnSe CQDs with (a) 2.4 nm cores, and (b) 4.1 nm cores. The two minima seen in each of the spectra correspond to the lowest energy and next to lowest energy allowed transitions i.e. 1S and 2S + 1P, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy levels and absorption transitions close to the band edge. (CB = conduction band and VB = valence band).	 

 	Fig. 5  Pump-induced fractional transmittance transients for the 2.4 nm ZnTe core–2 ML ZnSe shell CQDs for pump powers ranging between 0.5 and 2 mW. The fits shown are to a biexponential decay function.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the processes that affect transmittance transients for ZnTe–ZnSe QDs: (a) biexciton recombination, (b) recombination when a previous excitation has resulted in a long-lived surface-trapped charge, a.k.a. ‘trion’ recombination,29,30 (c) cooled electron trapping and (d) hot electron trapping. (SS = surface state; CBM = conduction band minimum; VBM = valence band maximum).	 

 	Fig. 7  Fractional transmittance transients for the 4 nm core 1 ML CQDs for (a) stirred and unstirred samples, and (b) at high and moderate pump powers. The black lines are single and double exponential fits to the stirred and unstirred transients in (a), and to moderate and high power transients in (b), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Fractional transmittance spectra ∼3 ps after the pump pulse for the 2.4 nm ZnTe core CQD with 4 ML ZnSe shell and 1 mW of pump power.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Initial transients for all four samples, and (b) fractional transmittance spectra for the 2.4 nm core–2 ML shell CQD at time Δt after the peak of the transient and a pump power of 1 mW.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp41978e

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
