Antibacterial features of material surface: strong enough to serve as antibiotics?  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TB02139K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TB02139K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2023, 11, 280-302Antibacterial features of material surface: strong enough to serve as antibiotics?

        
          
            Jie 
            Wang†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Ping 
            Li†
c, 
      
        
          
            Ning 
            Wang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Wang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Dongming 
            Xing
          
        
      *a
aThe Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: wangning@qdio.ac.cn; xdm@qdu.edu.cn
bCAS Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Corrosion and Bio-Fouling, Institute of Oceanology, China Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: wangjing1@qdio.ac.cn
cSchool of Rehabilitation Sciences and Engineering, University of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China
Received 
      7th October 2022
    , Accepted 2nd December 2022First published on 6th December 2022AbstractBacteria are small but need big efforts to control. The use of antibiotics not only produces superbugs that are increasingly difficult to inactivate, but also raises environmental concerns with the growing consumption. It is now believed that the antibacterial task can count on some physiochemical features of material surfaces, which can be anti-adhesive or bactericidal without releasing toxicants. It is necessary to evaluate to what extent can we rely on the surface design since the actual application scenarios will need the antibacterial performance to be sharp, robust, environmentally friendly, and long-lasting. Herein, we review the recent laboratory advances that have been classified based on the specific surface features, including hydrophobicity, charge potential, micromorphology, stiffness and viscosity, and photoactivity, and the antibacterial mechanisms of each feature are included to provide a basic rationale for future design. The significance of anti-biofilms is also introduced, given the big role of biofilms in bacteria-caused damage. A perspective on the potential wide application of antibacterial surface features as a substitute or supplement to antibiotics is then discussed. Surface design is no doubt a solution worthy to explore, and future success will be a result of further progress in multiple directions, including mechanism study and material preparation.
1 Introduction
Bacteria and other microorganisms belong to the oldest life form on earth and have been well-adapted to their living environments. As a whole, they are essential to the ecosystem and human body, but are undesirable on many occasions, including disease control and material protection from corrosion. We can sterilize surgical apparatuses with burning fire, preserve food via desiccation and salting, and more modernly, inactivate bacteria via ultra-violate (UV) irradiation or using antibiotics. UV light kills bacteria only when the irradiation is ongoing, while the wide use of biocides is causing environmental concerns and treatment-tolerance, including the cross-resistance to clinically used drugs.1 Nowadays, the scenarios that are being harassed by bacteria are so diverse that we still need new methods to make the antibacterial effect more biocompatible, environmentally friendly, cost-effective, and long-lasting.2
Some physiochemical properties of material surfaces exhibit intrinsic antibacterial capability. Bacterial adhesion can be effectively inhibited via surface design, and some surface features are naturally bactericidal.3 For instance, the surface hydrophobicity of lotus leaf helps to inhibit bacteria attachment;4,5 the wings of cicada and dragonfly are microscopically spiky, which accounts for their antibacterial effects by inducing cell impedance, penetration, and oxidative stress.6–8 Such examples, together with the relevant mechanism study and the progress in material science, are promoting the design of biomimetic or rationally optimized surfaces to create “green” and long-term resistance to microbiological infection or corrosion (Scheme 1).9 Basically the designs can be classified into three strategies: inhibiting bacteria adhesion, killing bacteria on the surface, or a combination thereof. Common methods to inhibit bacteria adhesion include making material surfaces superhydrophobic or superhydrophilic, tailoring surface morphology to reduce the available contact points/areas, tuning surface zeta potential, and modulating material stiffness.10,11 Common methods to kill bacteria on contact include building nano-spikes on the material surface, making the surface highly positively charged, generating hyperthermia or oxidative species under certain stimulations, etc.3 These strategies are producing exciting antibacterial outcomes, but have they become efficient enough to replace traditional methods? We wonder, to be more practical, how to make them closer to this goal.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of antibacterial surface design by learning the structures in nature, revealing the antibacterial mechanisms, and exploiting the progress in material science. 
Rational design of surface properties can indeed bring advantages over traditional antibacterial pathways, but for practical applications, there should be more to compromise, in which the antibacterial efficiency and durability are two important aspects. Antibacterial efficiency of surface features is relatively multifactorial compared with UV irradiation and the use of antibiotics. For example, Gram-positive bacteria have thicker cell walls compared with Gram-negative ones,12 which may make them less susceptible to spike-induced cell lysis. Whether a surface modification is long-lasting and cost-effective also influences the potential for wide application. The valuable results of previous reports help us to understand the pros and cons of each kind of design and provide rationales for further optimization. In this review, we describe the recent advances in antibacterial surface designs by categorizing them into anti-adhesive or bacteria-killing strategies. The fundamentals of each kind of design are also introduced with the help of relevant experimental findings in the literature. Particularly, biofilm formation and its effect on antibacterial efficiency are discussed, given the significant influence of biofilm on bacteria-associated infection and corrosion.13,14 A discussion about the application potential of the emerged designs is included in the end.
2 Bacterial colonization and biofilm formation
There may be a misconception that bacteria prefer to exist individually in a planktonic state; instead, they tend to spontaneously aggregate on surfaces to facilitate inter-cell communications such as quorum sensing and promote colonization and biofilm formation.15 Bacterial biofilms are surface-attached communities consisting of bacteria and extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), which are mainly composed of polysaccharides, proteins, and nucleic acids.16 The included bacteria can be multispecies. Biofilms actually account largely for bacteria-caused chronic damage. For example, dental plaque is an archetypical biofilm that constantly produces organic acids and leads to dental caries if left untreated;17 the overproduction of polysaccharide alginate by P. aeruginosa in the lung leads to the formation of a mucoid biofilm, which further induces chronic inflammation and causes severe damage to the lung tissues of cystic fibrosis patients;18 microbiologically-influenced material corrosion in humid environments is mainly caused by acidification, oxidation and charge transfer from the biofilm.19 Biofilm formation can be divided into four steps: (i) reversible bacteria attachment, (ii) irreversible attachment, (iii) bacterial colonization and production of EPS and (iv) biofilm maturation into large cellular aggregates (Fig. 1a).20,21 Matured biofilms can release bacteria to colonize new areas. The bacteria encased in biofilms are relatively difficult to inactivate compared with free bacteria due to protection by the extracellular matrix, the slow growth rate that makes antibiotics ineffective,22 and the presence of persister cells that are metabolically inactive but can resume growth after being back into a nonlethal environment (Fig. 1b).23 All these contributed to the drug resistance of bacteria in biofilms. Meanwhile, biofilm can block the surface features that will otherwise be bactericidal by flattening the spiky morphology, neutralizing the positive surface charge, blocking the surface photoactivity, or ‘detoxifying’ the metal ions released from the surface (Fig. 1c). Note that some metal ions (e.g., Ag+ and Zn2+) are bactericidal via the disruption of the cell wall and cytoplasmic membrane, denaturation of ribosomes, etc.24,25 Tuning surface properties to interrupt either of the biofilm formation steps will be helpful for inhibiting biofilm formation. Anti-adhesion strategies can prevent or delay bacterial attachment, while bacteria-killing methods inhibit the colonization process.
 Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the 4-step biofilm formation process. (b) Biofilm formation induces drug resistance via multiple routes. (c) Biofilm also block or attenuate the bactericidal capability of surface features, which include spiky morphology, positive surface charge, photocatalytic or photothermal property, and the release of bactericidal metal ions. 
Mimicking the ways nature has paved for surface self-renewal is receiving more attention, such as fabricating self-sacrificing surfaces that can peel the contaminated layer off and constructing wrinkling surfaces whose curvature is changeable for biofilm delamination. The latter is inspired by the good antifouling capability of wrinkled surfaces in nature, such as arteries, dolphin skin, and mussel byssus.26 Specifically, the winkling and un-wrinkling of arteries are switchable with pulse pressure. Pocivavsek et al. demonstrated that dynamic surface topography, switchable from smooth to wrinkled, is effective at delaminating films adhered to the surface, and the threshold surface curvature for detaching the fouling layer is reciprocally related to the intrinsic length scale of the fouling layer, which accounts for its bending stiffness and adhesion energy.27 Also, via a topography switching strategy, Gu et al. were able to remove mature bacteria biofilm on a shape memory polymeric matrix. The matrix was tailored as recessive hexagonal patterns and temporally kept strained at a lower temperature. After biofilm formation on the strained structure, shape recovery was realized after heating the matrix above its glass transition temperature, and rapid reduction of the biofilms of P. aeruginosa, S. aureus and E. coli was observed.28 Moreover, the P. aeruginosa biofilm cells were found sensitized after detaching from the shape memory matrix, as confirmed by a 3 logs more reduction of biofilm cell counts in the presence of 50 μg mL−1 tobramycin compared with that on a static control surface. The detached bacteria also had higher cellular activity, including the increased intracellular level of adenosine triphosphate and rrnB gene expression.29 These are some typical examples for breaking down the matured biofilms.
3 Anti-adhesive strategies
Anti-adhesion is experimentally worthy of studying since adhesion promotes the release of virulence factors and enables biofilm formation, and surfaces with only bacteria-killing capability will be blocked by dead bacteria and then by the biofilm. The Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (DLVO) theory, which describes bacteria as inert particles and assumes materials as ideal flat surfaces, has been used to simulate the adhesion behavior,30 but it often fails to match with experimental results. Material surface hydrophobicity, chemistry, zeta potential, and texture are typical parameters influencing the adhesion tendency of bacteria.10,31 On the other hand, the anti-adhesive performance of a surface can be bacterial species-dependent given the wide structural variety among species. Capsule, fimbriae, EPS, cell membrane/wall, and even flagella all influence the adhesion behavior.32 All these make bacterial adhesion difficult to predict and make massive experimental explorations necessary. The following are typical anti-adhesive strategies that have been extensively explored. Test procedures from different studies may not be standardized but the obtained implications are still important for future rational design. Notably, we consider that surfaces that can make bacteria, if adhered, stay isolated from each other rather than assemble into clusters, are also anti-adhesive. This is because colonization needs cell–cell communications between bacteria, and long intercellular distances will effectively attenuate the chance of growth, viability, and proliferation, as well as the potential of microcolony formation.33 It has also been reported that quorum-sensing, a significant process of cell–cell communication, controls the expression of virulence factors by pathogenic bacteria.15,34 Meanwhile, a surface with cavities that can allow only one bacterium to reside will form traps for bacteria and inhibit cell division due to spatial confinement.6
3.1 Surface zeta potential
Surfaces modified with cationic polymers or surfactants are used to induce bacterial cell death,35,36 while negatively charged surfaces can repel bacteria via the electrostatic repulsion effect.37 Bacteria usually exhibit negative surface charges because of the abundance of carboxyl, phosphate, and saccharide groups on the cell surface. It is now known that Gram-negative bacteria are more susceptible to being repelled compared with Gram-positive bacteria due to the difference in glycocalyx structure.37
Surface zeta potential for a bacterium is relatively constant, whereas, for an artificial material, it is readily tunable, as many studies did to achieve repulsion against bacteria. By grafting 4-amino-benzenesulfonic acid monosodium salt to the membrane surface, Yao et al. prepared an anion exchange membrane with a negative surface charge at pH 6.2.38 The obtained membrane showed a good anti-adhesion effect against E. coli and S. aureus, thereby holding potential for uses in water purification. Olena et al. reported that the surface charge of anti-bacterial coatings altered bacterial adhesion, motility, and biofilm formation.39 Polymer brush surfaces with different characteristics were prepared via grafting-from polymerization, including negatively charged, zwitterionic, and positively charged surfaces. By studying P. aeruginosa, they found that mushroom-like colonies were formed on negatively charged and zwitterionic surfaces; on positively charged surfaces and the ethylene-glycol-based protein-repellent surfaces, flat biofilms were formed. In another study, the silica surface was alternately coated by poly(allylamine hydrochloride)/poly(4-styrenesulfonate) sodium multilayers, and reduced adhesion of P. aeruginosa was observed when the surface was negatively charged.40 The influence of surface roughness and hydrophobicity was excluded. Smith et al. further confirmed this trend and excluded the effect of biological response-mediated adhesion by studying both live and dead bacteria.41
Negatively charged free nanoparticles are also helpful. Zhu et al. reported the feasibility of negatively charged carbon nanodots for efficient anti-biofilm formation and anti-corrosion.42 The carbon nanodots, which carried abundant oxygen functional groups (–COOH, –OH, and CO), when added into the culture media of Iron bacteria sp., E. coli and S. aureus, effectively inhibited bacterial colonization in neither the solid or liquid culture media when the concentration reached 0.5 mg mL−1. Mechanism study revealed that the carbon nanodots could damage cell walls.
Coating surfaces with neutral noncharged hydrophilic polymers such as PEG and polyacrylamide or zwitterionic polymers such as poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone) are also useful for reducing bacterial attachment.43–45 PEG coating may be the mostly applied method as a result of its high biocompatibility and availability. Actually, a lot of nanoformulations were PEGylated to reduce protein adsorption after being injected in vivo into veins to achieve longer circulation or retain their initial surface chemistry.46 It was suggested that longer chain length led to a better performance of reducing both initial attachment and adhesion after a prolonged period of time.44 This favorable effect of long chain length was less prominent for larger yeast cells when compared with smaller bacteria. The once-adhered bacteria could be easily removed via the passage of an air bubble.44 Buxadera-Palomero et al. coated titanium with high density PEG via pulsed electrodeposition to reduce infections from titanium dental implants.47S. aureus and E. coli attachment decreased up to 90% compared with the uncoated titanium surface, while the fibronectin adsorption decreased to a lesser extent, thereby favoring fibroblast adhesion on the surface. Peng et al. grafted long chain PEG on a fixed dental appliance made from stainless steel. S. mutans adhesion and biofilm formation were effectively inhibited for a duration that can match the daily tooth brushing time interval.48 This effect was proposed to be a result of the PEG-induced formation of a stable thin water layer through hydrogen bonding with water molecules.
3.2 Potential settling points
Many studies found that the scale of surface microtexture is highly related to the attachment tendency of fouling microorganisms, that if the scale is smaller than the size of microorganisms, attachment would be reduced due to fewer attachment points, and vice versa.49 This has produced the concept of ‘potential settling points’ or ‘attachment points’, which describes the effect of surface texture scale by focusing on the available contact area. This theory is universal and governs a larger variety of microorganisms, including diatom,50 alga, bryozoan,51 and bacteria. Support for this theory is the phenomenon that bacteria tend to adhere to corners compared with flat surfaces due to the increased attachment points corners can provide.52 Therefore, if the scale of microtextures is too large, the surface will basically be flat for bacteria and cannot provide enough attachment points.
The ‘potential settling points’ theory is supported by a larger number of studies. Lutey et al. constructed laser-textured surfaces with different scales of surface roughness, including 8.6 μm for spikes, 90 nm for periodic surface structure, and 60 nm for nanopillars.53 The latter two surfaces greatly inhibited the retention of E. coli and S. aureus after 2 h of immersion in bacteria culture media due to a limited number of available attachment points. Yang et al. studied bacterial adhesion and growth on patterned surfaces that had differently sized (0.5–10 μm) honeycomb-like pores.54 The 1 μm pattern showed the least adhesion and colonization of E. coli and S. aureus compared with other patterns and the flat surface. 1 μm is close to the size of S. aureus and smaller than the length of E. coli, and for both bacteria trapping inside a 1 μm pore would cause considerable cell deformation; therefore, adhesion was proposed to be favored by maximizing cell–surface contact area and minimizing cell deformation. Moreover, the adhered S. aureus on 10 μm-sized patterns was predominantly ‘leaned’ on the side-walls of the patterns, showcasing the bacterial preference for seeking more attachment points. In the study by Wu et al., a stainless steel surface with an average roughness of less than 172.5 nm and root-mean-square roughness of less than 217.9 nm exhibited at least a 10-fold lower number of adhered P. aeruginosa, and 15-fold lower for S. aureus after 4 h of incubation, compared with electropolished surfaces on which the texture scale was much larger than the size of bacteria.55 Moreover, the bacteria preferred to adhere separately as single cells on the nanoscale rough surface. Vadillo-Rodríguez et al. achieved reduced adhesion of S. epidermidis and S. aureus on surface patterns with nanometer scale roughness.52 Bacteria tended to adhere to square corners and convex walls of recessing surface features compared with flat or concave walls of protruding features, indicating that adhesion was driven by the maximization of cell–surface contact points. Meanwhile, adhesion and biofilm formation on patterned surfaces was lower than on the unpatterned control surface, and due to that the height/depth of the protruding/recessing features was nanosized and considerably smaller than the size of the bacteria.
Species-dependence was also found in the pursuit of settling points. Ge et al. fabricated micropillar arrays with different feature sizes (0.6–20 μm) on a single silicon chip to ensure the same bacterial culture environment, and the arrangement of the arrays was random to eliminate possible center/edge effects (Fig. 2a and b).56,57 Significant reduction of bacterial retention, growth, and proliferation was achieved when the pillar size was reduced to submicrometer level, presumably due to the limited attachment area and/or trapping bacterium between pillars (Fig. 2c), and theoretical analysis indicated the difference might also come from the change in surface hydrophobicity. Bacterial viability was not affected by the pillar array within 24 h, and after being coated with TiO2, which was a photocatalytic material that could inactivate bacteria under light irradiation, the obtained surfaces held the potential for antiadhesive-bactericidal synergy.57 Interestingly, S. aureus tends to adhere to the flat surface while E. coli preferred the micropillar arrays with a feature size of 1.4–2 μm, probably because of their difference in size, shape and that S. aureus had no flagella while E. coli had.
 Fig. 2  Potential settling points influence adhesion. (a) A single Si scaffold consisting of ten areas with differently patterned areas. (b) Every two areas are isolated by a fence with 4 μm width and the same height as the pillars. (c) Typical fluorescence images of S. aureus adhesion on different areas. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Scheme of rod-like bacteria adhesion to flat or patterned surfaces and attachment of the appendage-possessing bacteria. (e) SEM image of a hexagonally patterned surface. Scale bar: 2 μm (5 μm for the inset). (f and g) SEM images of wild-type E. coli grown for 24 h on (f) patterned or (g) flat surface. Scale bar: 10 μm (2 μm for the insets). (h) Biovolume of different bacteria (wild type, ΔmotB or ΔfliC) adhered to a flat or patterned surface, and typical SEM images of these bacteria on a patterned surface. Scale bar: 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2013, National Academy of Science of the USA. 
A number of studies have suggested that flagella influence bacterial adhesion. Gu et al. found the importance of flagella motility in the orientation of E. coli adhered to line patterns by using mutant strains.58 When the fliC gene that encodes flagellin-a major component of flagella, the MotB gene that encodes protein MotB-a necessary protein to control flagella rotation, or the fimA gene that encodes the subunits of fimbriae, was mutated, the ability of E. coli to preferentially adhere perpendicularly to the orientation of line patterns was weakened.58 Feng et al. found that bacterial adhesion on a nanopore-patterned alumina surface was reduced when the pore diameter decreased from 100 to 15 or 25 nm.59,60 Flagella-deficient E. coli mutant (ΔflgA) showed slow and less adhesion on both 100 and 15 nm sized surfaces.60 Friedlander et al. showed that the adhesion of E. coli on hexagonally patterned poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) surfaces was assisted by flagella.61 Adhesion to patterned surfaces was lower compared with a flat surface during the first 2 h, but this trend was reversed after longer exposures because bacterial flagella could explore microscale crevices to facilitate adhesion (Fig. 2d–g). ΔflgC mutant significantly reduced adhesion regardless of the feature spacing (Fig. 2h), possibly resulting from the reduced bacterial motility.
Moreover, surface textures that cannot provide enough attachment points can present stress to the already adhered bacteria and cause deformation of bacterial morphology. For example, Sinha et al. showed that attachment of P. aeruginosa was lower on a laser-induced graphene surface compared with the same but crushed surface, consistent with the attachment points theory because the uncrushed surface had nanofibers thinner than the scale of the bacteria, and therefore contact area was rather limited.62 Meanwhile, bacteria adhered on the uncrushed surface were quasi-spherical rather than rod-like, indicating stress, which deformed bacteria. In another study, E. coli attached to line patterns of PDMS was reduced when the line width was 5 μm, compared with those with 10 μm or 20 μm width.58 The E. coli adhered on the 5 μm width surface were longer in morphology and had higher transcriptional activities, indicating a surface topology-caused stress.
3.3 Hydrophobic surfaces
Although contradictory results exist, it is widely accepted that surfaces with high hydrophobicity are anti-adhesive against bacteria.49,63 Several concepts, including wetting modes (which include the Young's, Wenzel, and Cassie–Baxter wetting models, Fig. 3a) and surface free energy are often used to describe the surface hydrophobicity.32 Young's model describes a droplet on an ideally flat surface, while the Wenzel and Cassie–Baxter models are more accurate when the droplet becomes larger than the scale of roughness. Water droplet in the Wenzel model penetrates the rough structure, while in the Cassie–Baxter model there will be gas pockets trapped at the droplet-substrate interface. The hydrophobicity-assisted Cassie–Baxter model will reduce the contact area between bacterial dispersion and surface (Fig. 3b). Molecularly, while bacteria may require EPS to bind surface and form biofilms, high surface hydrophobicity will generally inhibit the initial binding of bacteria since the major part (∼90%) of EPS is water and the remaining constituents include polysaccharides, proteins, nucleic acids, and various ions.16,64 This leads to the reduced initial affinity between bacteria and surfaces of increased hydrophobicity (Fig. 3c) (note that some bacterial species, such as the Sphingomonas wittichii65 have high surface hydrophobicity). Engineering surfaces to be hydrophobic, solely or synergistically with other antibacterial strategies, is under extensive exploration. For example, a silica-deposited polyethylene terephthalate film with a water contact angle (WCA) greater than 120° showed reduced adhesion of E. coli and S. aureus by more than 60%, compared with the plain film that had a WCA of about 50°.66
 Fig. 3  Hydrophobicity generally favors anti-adhesion. (a) Illustration of typical wetting modes of a water drop on substrate surfaces, including the Young's mode, the Wenzel mode, and the Cassie–Baxter mode. (b) The hydrophobicity-assisted Cassie–Baxter mode (right) helps to reduce the contact area between bacterial dispersion and surface compared with the Wenzel mode (left). (c) Besides the reduced contact area, the bacterial surface substances typically have lower affinity on more hydrophobic surfaces. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces refer to those that have a WCA of over 150°. Lotus leaf is superhydrophobic due to its hierarchical micro/nanostructure and the presence of a layer of epicuticular waxes.67 Inspired by this, great efforts have been devoted to increasing surface hydrophobicity by engineering surface topology and chemistry, with the purpose of improving anti-adhesion performance.68,69 For example, a TiO2 nanotube film that became superhydrophobic (WCA of 156°) after modifying with perfluorooctyl-triethoxysilane showed superior repellence against S. aureus than the moderately hydrophobic titanium film with WCA of 133°.68 An important rationale for superhydrophobicity design is that surfaces with only moderate hydrophobicity (e.g., with WCA of <100°) have been reported to have great bacterial adhesion, even greater than those with very low hydrophobicity. Stallard et al. prepared surfaces with varying degrees of hydrophobicity, ranging from superhydrophilic (WCA < 5°) to superhydrophobic, using different siloxane coatings.70 Adsorption of serum proteins on surfaces of moderate hydrophobicity (WCA around 100°) was much higher than on superhydrophilic or superhydrophobic surfaces. Adsorption of S. aureus followed the same trend. It should be noted that tuning hydrophobicity is always accompanied by the changing of surface chemistry, making it hard to exclusively study the effect of hydrophobicity.
The effect of hydrophobicity is often overwhelming when it is interplaying with other features such as surface zeta potential, morphology, etc. Oh et al. studied the influence of surface hydrophobicity and zeta potential on the kinetics of bacterial adhesion.71 They found that gold surfaces modified with shorter alkyl groups provided better anti-adhesion performance than those with longer alkyl groups. More importantly, while the greatest adhesion was observed on hydrophilic surfaces with positive zeta potential, both S. aureus and E. coli O157:H7 adhered more easily on hydrophobic surfaces than on hydrophilic surfaces with negative zeta potential, suggesting that surface charge here played a stronger role than hydrophobicity. Similarly, Yuan et al. fabricated polystyrene substrates with varied surface wettability, and those hydrophilized by air plasma treatment with a WCA of ∼0° showed the most efficient anti-adhesion property against E. coli, even more efficient than the surface hydrophobized by depositing perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane with a WCA of >160°.72 The reason was ascribed to the relatively high hydrophobicity of the lipopolysaccharide outside E. coli, as well as the negative surface charge of the superhydrophilic surface. Rajab et al. produced hierarchical textures on stainless steel and found that the adhesion of E. coli was the lowest on the surface with the largest peak and valley width rather than the one with the greatest hydrophobicity, and the moderately hydrophobic surface had lower adhesion than the highly hydrophobic one, suggesting that surface topography may play a greater role.73
Besides improving hydrophobicity,74 joint modulations of surface morphology and hydrophobicity can enhance the robustness of hydrophobicity (resistance to mechanical abrasion)74–76 and tune the wettability of attached droplets.77 Kim et al. reported a superhydrophobic surface with high mechanical robustness due to the presence of a hierarchical structure.74 Small hydrophobic silica nanoparticles were sprayed onto microscale pillars, which were made from poly(methyl methacrylate). A specimen was pressed with a 2.5 N force, forced to move on sandpaper, and showed good durability in terms of retaining its superhydrophobicity. Notably, the size of the sprayed silica nanoparticles had a great influence on surface hydrophobicity, suggesting the importance of morphology optimization. Compared with the Wenzel wetting state, where the liquid droplet is in full contact with a rough surface, the Cassie–Baxter state allows the droplet to flow away more easily, thereby reducing the probability for bacteria to adhere and facilitating the self-cleaning of contaminants. Zhang et al. fabricated a flexible and mechanically robust superhydrophobic silicone surface that enabled a stable Cassie–Baxter state under mechanical stress cycles by building dual scale roughness on the surface.77 Hydrophobic silica microparticles on the surface were studded with nanoparticles, which was important for the stability of the Cassie–Baxter state.
3.4 Slippery surfaces
Different from hydrophobic surfaces that inhibit adhesion by reducing the contact area with trapped “air pockets”, slippery surfaces realize the same through the exceptional mobility of bacteria on the immobilized, molecularly smooth interface.78 Slippery liquid-infused surface (SLIS), possibly inspired by the Nepenthes pitcher plant, refers to the solid surfaces coated with a thin layer of liquid (lubricant), in which the solid surfaces need to be porous or spiky to provide capillary forces and reduce lubricant loss from the shear flow.79 On SLIS, objects, including bacteria, will easily flow or move at a low tilted angle, resembling the process of insects sliding into the “stomach” of Nepenthes. The infused liquids are usually not miscible with the surrounding liquid, thereby requiring high hydrophobicity for reducing bacterial adhesion. Infused lubricant is attached to and protected by the matrix holders, which are usually porous and molecularly more compatible with the lubricant rather than the bacteria-containing media. By this, the lubricant can play its role over a long duration without significant mass loss, even in mildly flowing environments.79,82 A duration of several days is useful for applications such as anti-biofouling of medical devices. Yang et al. constructed injectable slippery microparticles by coating fluorinated spiky particles with lubricant (Fig. 4a).80 The presence of spikes enabled long-term (at least 14 days) residence of the lubricant. Adhesion of E. coli and S. aureus on the slippery particles (WCA ∼156°) was greatly reduced than that on the spiky particles (WCA ∼125°) and fluorinated spiky particles (WCA ∼151°) (Fig. 4b). Epstein et al. constructed a SLIS by infusing perfluorinated fluids onto nanostructured Teflon membranes and found that 96–99% of common bacterial biofilm attachment was prevented under both static and physiologically relevant flow conditions.83 It was confirmed that the reduced biofilm attachment was not caused by the cytotoxicity of the perfluorinated fluids but by the nonadhesive character of SLIS. Moreover, SLIS was stable in submerged, extreme pH, saline, and UV environments and did not degrade in at least one weak.
 Fig. 4  Slippery surfaces reduce adhesion. (a) Scheme of the lubricant-coated spiky microparticles with anti-adhesive capability, compared to conventional microparticles contaminated by proteins, cells, and bacteria. (b) Statistics of the adhesion of E. coli and S. aureus on spiky microparticles (SMP), fluorinated spiky microparticles (SMP-F) or slippery microparticles (LCSMP#1 and LCSMP#2). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Directional slippery surface for easier droplet removal. Side view illustration and photograph of a water drop on the surface are shown in top left and top right, respectively. The surface was inspired by pitcher plant (bottom left) and rice leaf (bottom right). Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Numerous attempts have produced some design criteria, and the optimization of solid surface porosity/roughness and choosing suitable lubricants are two research foci. Kim et al. studied the effect of length scale and hierarchy of substrate morphology on its retaining capability for lubricant.84 Uniform nanostructured surfaces provided better shear-tolerant retaining of lubricant than flat, microstructured and hierarchical (nanoscale roughness on microscale texture) surfaces under different shear conditions. Cai et al. studied the effect of surface microstructure on the lubricant-locking ability and long-term antibacterial performance of SLIS.85 They prepared microcavity with either a vertical or inclined wall, in which the latter resembled a pitcher to hold the lubricant. A deeper and inclined cavity enabled less lubricant loss in a flowing environment and less bacterial adhesion. For the uploading of lubricants, various oils and ionic liquids were employed and their viscosity and affinity to the substrate matrix were key parameters to optimize.
Besides inhibiting initial adhesion, reducing the residing time of bacteria is also helpful, and researchers have been trying to allow the bacteria-containing droplets to flow away as quickly as possible. Dai et al. showed that this could be achieved by using hydrophilic group-containing lubricants and making the surface “directional” (Fig. 4c).81 By carving the nanotextured surface with microgrooves whose direction was parallel to the sliding direction of the surface, water droplets would move down more easily along the given direction compared with flowing on a non-directional surface; moreover, water droplets moved down more easily when using hydroxy-terminated polydimethylsiloxane as the lubricant, compared with using the more hydrophobic perfluorinated lubricant. This trend was obvious regardless of how the droplets wetted the surface (via Wenzel or Cassie–Baxter state). In marine environments where water droplets will frequently be splashed on artificial surfaces, such surfaces are useful for not only anti-biofouling purpose but also the inhibition of water-caused degradation.
While preventing bacterial attachment, some SLISs have been further engineered to inactivate bacteria, either in the surrounding environment or on the surface. This can be realized by embedding antibacterial molecules into the lubricant or using some plant extract oils as the lubricant.89 Manna et al. prepared a SLIS that could release small molecule germicide in a sustained manner.90 Triclosan was loaded into porous poly(ethyleneimine)/poly(2-vinyl-4,4-dimethylazlactone) multilayers, followed by the infusion of silicone oil. Adhesion, biofilm formation, and proliferation of various microorganisms, including bacterial, fungal, and mammalian cells, were inhibited. Michael et al. loaded small molecule agents into the porous substrate before the infusion of slippery oil.91 Quorum sensing inhibitors, which can inhibit the production of excreted virulence factors and the formation of biofilm, were loaded into porous polymer multilayers, followed by infusion of silicone oil. The surface colonization of P. aeruginosa and the virulent behavior of surrounding planktonic cells were both inhibited. Li et al. fabricated a SLIS using a metal-organic framework (MOF)-based spiky matrix and a quaternary ammonium salt-based ionic liquid as lubricant.92 This lubricant was an inherent antibacterial molecule that could damage bacterial cell integrity, thereby making the SLIS dual functional (anti-adhesion and contact-killing). The SLIS inhibited biofilm formation because lipopolysaccharide, an important mediator for the adhesion of Gram-negative bacteria, was greatly repelled by SLIS.
Lubricants can be stably trapped but a gradual mass loss is inevitable over time, especially in flowing environments. SLISs that can effectively maintain or restore antibacterial capability after being damaged are highly desirable.93 Polymeric materials are the most commonly used substrates for constructing healable SLISs.94,95 Wei et al. designed a self-healable SLIS by drop-casting the solution of low molecular-weight fluorinated gelators. Self-assembly of gelators produced a layer of nanofibers, which served as porous substrates to hold the lubricant.96 This surface was healed after being mechanically scratched due to the fast and reversible formation of the nanofiber network. Jiang et al. obtained self-healable SLIS by using polymers that produced a large amount of dynamic hydrogen bonds.97 Two separate substrates spontaneously merged into an intact material within 20 min without squeezing action, with the help of reversible hydrogen bonding and the chain locomotion ability. The SLIS exhibited resistance against bacterial settlement and microbiologically influenced corrosion for at least 7 days. Another method to solve the problem of lubricant loss is by using solid instead of liquid lubricants, as proposed by Meng et al.98 A solid slippery surface was prepared by infusing paraffin wax at relatively high temperatures to maintain its liquid phase. Once the paraffin wax cooled down, the SLIS became a solid surface that could maintain its lubrication property after immersing in aqueous solutions or wiped by filter paper, thereby exhibiting higher stability than the liquid counterparts. Moreover, the surface could self-heal after being scratched via a heating–cooling process.
3.5 Material stiffness and viscosity
Stiffness is another important factor influencing bacterial adhesion.3,109 Young's modulus, defined by the ratio of tensile stress to tensile strain, is the most commonly used variable when describing rigidity or stiffness, and a softer and more elastic material has a lower Young's modulus. As a highly controllable property, material stiffness is widely tuned, and it is often reported that stiffer surfaces are easier to be adhered (Table 1).86,110,111 For example, Kolewe et al. demonstrated that fewer Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria adhered to softer hydrogels (Fig. 5a).86 Poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate hydrogels with low Young's moduli had 52% and 82% fewer E. coli adhesion compared with those with intermediate and high moduli. For S. aureus, the corresponding reduction was 62% and 79%. Agar hydrogels achieved similar results, thereby excluding the influence of surface chemistry. Lorite et al. also reported increased adhesion and biofilm formation of X. fastidiosa on stiffer silicon surfaces, although the role of surface chemistry was not excluded.111
Table 1 Representative studies on the effect of stiffness




Materials
Moduli
Strains
Notes
Ref.




Greater adhesion on softer surfaces


PDMS
0.1–2.6 MPa

E. coli BW25113
The high viscosity of soft PDMS plays an important role

99



Polyacrylamide hydrogel
17–654 Pa

S. aureus AH2547
A layer of viscous adjacent water was on these ultrasoft gels

100



PDMS
0.06–4.52 MPa

E. coli BW25113, P. aeruginosa DSM1117
Abiotic beads mimicked all strains well about adhesion

101



PDMS
64.2–2326.8 KPa

E. coli BW25113, S. epidermidis ATCC155, P. aeruginosa DSM1117
The PDMS surface contained free polymer chains which was confirmed crucial

102



PDMS
0.1–2.6 MPa

P. aeruginosa PAO1 and E. coli RP437, and their isogenic mutants
Stiffer PDMS made P. aeruginosa smaller and drug-resistant; E. coli were more motile on stiffer PDMS

88, 103 and 104



Greater adhesion on stiffer surfaces


Poly-N-isopropyl-methacrylamide
21–346 KPa

S. aureus ATCC12600
Varying hydrogel size may cause morphological difference

105



PDMS
3.4–278.1 MPa

E. coli HCB1 and HCB1414 ΔcheY ΔcheZ; Pseudomonas sp. nov776
More E. coli tumble and more Pseudomonas sp. flick on softer PDMS

106



PEG dimethacrylate and agar hydrogels
44–6489 KPa

E. coli MG1655, S. aureus SH1000
Adhesion was believed independent of hydrogel chemistry

86



Poly(L-lysine) and hyaluronan derivative
0.03–0.15 MPa

L. lactis NZ3900, E. coli TOP10 and MG1655

L. lactic grew similarly regardless of stiffness, while E. coli grew more rapidly on softer surfaces

107



Poly(allylamine) hydrochloride and poly(acrylic acid)
∼1–100 MPa

S. epidermidis ATCC14990, E. coli w3100 and ΔmreB
Adhesion was found independent of surface roughness, interaction energy, and charge density

108



Adhesion independent of stiffness


PDMS with surface free polymer chain ends blocked
163.8–3630.8 KPa

E. coli BW25113, S. epidermidis ATCC155, P. aeruginosa DSM1117
Blocking the polymer chain ends eliminated the adhesive difference observed in pristine PDMS

102



PDMS
0.01–1 Mpa

E. coli ATCC25922
Hydrophobicity instead of stiffness of PDMS influenced adhesion

87



PDMS
0.06–4.52 MPa

S. aureus DSM 20231

S. aureus adhered differently from E. coli and P. aeruginosa

101





 Fig. 5  Different conclusions about the influence of stiffness. (a) Few S. aureus and E. coli adhered to softer PEG dimethacrylate hydrogels. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) E. coli adhesion on PDMS substrate was found independent of the stiffness ranging from 1 MPa to 0.01 MPa, but was dependent on surface hydrophobicity that greater adhesion occurred on more hydrophobic surfaces. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) E. coli adhered on stiffer PDMS substrates were more motile, i.e., more bacteria were rotating or moving, than on soft substrates as a result of the flagellar motility. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Some studies concluded differently (Table 1). Wang et al. explored S. aureus adhesion on ultrasoft polyacrylamide hydrogels in a flowing environment and found that adhesion on the hydrogel surface decreased by 3 logs when increasing the modulus from 17 Pa to 654 Pa.100 Interfacial coverage of biofilm also decreased as the gel modulus increased. This was different from the previous acknowledgement about the effect of stiffness, possibly due to the ultralow modulus regime that was not reached by previous studies. The injectable hydrogel was surrounded by a layer of adjacent viscous water and had reduced interfacial free energy, which lowered the energy barrier for bacterial adhesion but on the other hand could increase the reversibility of the bacteria–surface interaction. Siddiqui et al. studied E. coli retention under shear force and demonstrated that bacteria were more strongly attached to soft PDMS.112
Song et al. found that the adhesion of E. coli and P. aeruginosa was inversely correlated with the stiffness of the PDMS surface.103 More interestingly, the bacteria on stiffer surfaces were smaller in size and more resistant to antibiotics. The oprF gene, which has multiple roles, including encoding the major outer membrane surface porin protein OprF, was involved in P. aeruginosa response to surface stiffness.104 Mutation of oprF gene eliminated the difference. Moreover, bacteria adhered on soft surfaces had a higher level of intracellular cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate, which was consistent with the role of this molecule as an inhibitor of bacterial motility and promotor for biofilm formation. For E coli, those adhered on stiffer PDMS surfaces were more motile, i.e., more bacteria were rotating or moving rather than staying still (Fig. 5c).88 By employing isogenic mutants, it was found that motB gene, which encodes flagella motor, was involved in this response. Obviously, this response mechanism does not cover the bacteria that have no flagella. There are also studies concluding a ‘neutral’ effect of stiffness, such as the one by Arias et al. showing that E. coli adhesion was independent of PDMS stiffness but dependent on hydrophobicity, and greater adhesion occurred on more hydrophobic surfaces (Fig. 5b).87
The effect of rigidity on bacterial adhesion is relatively sharp for a given bacterium-material system. Contradiction of the exact effect in different studies may come from the differences in a material matrix, bacterial strain, and experimental settings. For instance, the influence of stiffness for ultrasoft materials with Young's modulus lower than 1 kPa may be intrinsically different from that for relatively rigid materials. Bacteria with or without flagella or fimbriae also respond differently to surface stiffness. An example is that E. coli were found to adhere and grow more rapidly on softer surfaces while L. lactis grow slowly on both soft and stiff surfaces.107 Also, we notice that many studies used PDMS to explore the effect of stiffness and led to an inverse relationship between adhesion amount and surface modulus,88,101,103,104,112 while it is unclear whether the unique chemistry of this matrix makes a difference. Influences of other properties, such as hydrophobicity and surface topology, should also be excluded when examining the effect of stiffness. Meanwhile, it was reported by Bawazir et al. that the effect of material stiffness could be altered by conditioning film or when multiple species were involved.113 Adhesion of Streptococcus oralis, Streptococcus mutans, and Candida albicans increased on stiffer PDMS (0.06–3.01 MPa), while this trend became indistinct when the surface was coated with salivary pellicle or when the three species were cultured together. From the viewpoint of practical application, stiffness tunability may be relatively limited for some materials, such as orthopedic implants, dermal fillers, and catheters, which may narrow the scope of this antibacterial strategy.
Viscosity represents the resistance of a fluid to change in shape or movement of neighboring portions relative to another; therefore, it can be regarded as the fluid-version of stiffness. The influence of viscosity was relatively less studied, possibly due to the difficulty in tuning viscosity while maintaining other physiochemical properties. Nevertheless, it can be expected that the high viscosity of hydrophilic surfaces favors bacterial adhesion by increasing the contact area as well as the adhesion force between a viscous surface and an attached subject trying to leave the surface.114 Valentin et al. explored the importance of substrate viscosity using PDMS that exhibited both low stiffness and high viscosity.99 The viscous soft PDMS enabled large contact area, reduced detachment, and high adhesion, which reduced desorption under shear stress at the air/liquid interface. Note that the study did not decouple stiffness and viscosity, i.e., it would be better to compare two comparably soft surfaces with varied viscosity.
4 Bacteria-killing strategies
4.1 Spiky surfaces
Some insect wings are natural antibacterial surfaces because of their unique nanotopography. Cicada or dragonfly wings, while being hydrophobic to limit bacterial contamination, are also lethal to the attached bacteria due to the presence of nanopillars. The most recognized mechanism is by inducing cell rupture and lysis. Ivanova et al. previously showed that Psaltoda claripennis (a species of cicada) wings were hydrophobic with an average WCA of about 158°, but not particularly effective at repelling Pseudomonas aeruginosa.115 However, the P. aeruginosa that had been attached to wings could be killed immediately, typically within 5 min. Cells were penetrated by the nanopillars and cellular components spread out. Altering surface chemistry by coating the wings with a thin layer of gold did not block cell death,115 and a similar artificial surface made of silicon was also effective in inducing cell rupture,116 suggesting the unique morphology of nanopillars accounted for the bactericidal effect. Note that the rough silicon surface could disrupt not only vegetative bacterial cells but also spores.116 Different species of cicadas have wings with different surface topographies, which have been compared by Kelleher et al. regarding their bactericidal performance.117 They studied three different species (Megapomponia intermedia, Ayuthia spectabile and Cryptotympana aguila) and quantified the roughness of three kinds of wings. It was found that the wings of Megapomponia intermedia and Cryptotympana aguila, which had a higher degree of roughness (generally higher pillar height, smaller pillar diameter and smaller pillar-to-pillar spacing), were more effective at killing Pseudomonas fluorescens. These results provide strong rationales for optimizing the geometrical parameters of bactericidal rough surfaces.
Dragonflies have similar but different wings. The nanopillars are more irregular in height and more inclined to bend under pressure than those on cicada wings. D. Bandara et al. found that the wings of Orthetrum villosovittatum (a species of dragonfly) had two populations of nanopillars with different heights, and the taller nanopillars, which contacted firstly with bacteria (E. coli), were not rigid enough to penetrate the cells.118 Instead, the nanopillars provided strong attachment to bacterial EPS, and the shear force generated via cell movement on wing surface was lethal to bacteria (Fig. 6d). The ultimate bactericidal pathway was still cell rupture, but was quite different from the penetration-rupture model. Nevertheless, we consider this pathway pretty reasonable because dragonflies need to constantly wave their wings to fly, providing the driving force of cell movement on wings to generate the lethal shear force. It can also be envisioned that such a bactericidal pattern will be achievable in aqueous environments and when bacteria drift about with water flow, there will be a strong shear force once the bacteria adhere to a spiky surface. There are other reports supporting the importance of adhesion strength to bacteria rupture. For example, Nowlin et al. showed that the rupture of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (a eukaryotic microorganism) was on the premise of adhesion.119 Of the studied three species, the wings of Tibicen tibicen cicada and Progomphus obscure dragonfly, which had high aspect ratio nanostructures than Magicicada septendecim cicada, afforded higher affinity to yeast and led to a greater degree of rupture. These results are not consistent with the common understanding that dragonfly wings are repellant against bacteria via high hydrophobicity,115 possibly because of the spikiness-enhanced attachment.120,121 Therefore, the wings may have evolved to keep a balance between hydrophobicity-mediated repelling and nanopillar-enhanced attachment, that once bacteria adhere, they will adhere tightly to be ruptured.
 Fig. 6  Different bactericidal routes of nanopillars. (a) SEM images of the indicated bacteria on TiO2 nanopillars, where the white arrows show the regions of envelope deformation. (b) TEM image of a K. pneumonia on the nanopillars, where the bacteria appear to be penetrated by multiple nanopillars. (c) 3D reconstruction tomogram of the bacteria in (b), showing that multiple nanopillars indeed penetrated the envelope. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (d) Another bactericidal mechanism (lower panel) beyond the cell penetration route (upper panel). The taller nanopillars on dragonfly wings tend to bend instead of penetrate the cell membrane, and the EPS layer outside bacteria generates strong adhesive force, leading to the separation of the two cell membranes and forming blebs when bacteria are trying to move away. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Recent work by Jenkins et al. provided a different understanding of the main bactericidal mechanism of nanopillars.6 Using a layer of TiO2 nanopillars as mimics of cicada wings, they found that deformation and penetration of bacteria envelope, which is more prominent in Gram-negative E. coli and K. pneumoniae than in Gram-positive S. aureus, indeed occurred (Fig. 6a–c), but this did not lead to significant bacterial lysis. Instead, via proteomic analysis, nanopillar-induced oxidative stress, featured by increased H2O2 levels in bacteria, was identified and proposed as an important contributor to reduced cell viability. Another interesting indication was that bacteria could be spatially stuck between the nanopillars, impeding cell division on the horizontal plane. The factors that led to a different conclusion about the origin of the bactericidal effect (oxidative stress rather than cell rupture), we believe, may include that previous studies have focused on the bacteria-wing observations under microscopy but, to some extent, ignored explorations on a molecular level. Meanwhile, the fabricated TiO2 nanopillars were more random in height, diameter, and spacing compared with those on cicada wings, while all these parameters matter.
Various simulation models have been established to deepen the understanding of bactericidal mechanisms. Pogodin et al. modeled the bacterial membrane as a thin elastic layer without considering the structure and composition details and found that the membrane stretched when in contact with cicada wings, with the stretching degree heavily depending on cell rigidity.122 Experimentally, the authors confirmed that after irradiation by microwave to decrease internal turgor pressure, bacteria became more sensitive to the bactericidal effect of the wing surface. Li et al. focused on the total free energy of bacterial cells adhered to the cicada wing-like surface and observed an increase of adhesion energy due to the roughness-caused increase of the contact area.123 The physical origin of bacterial adhesion on the nanopatterned surface was determined by the balance between adhesion energy and deformation energy of the cell membrane. Increasing the diameter and narrowing the spacing of nanopillars led to the enhancement of bacterial adhesion while decreasing nanopillar diameter to a critical value would inhibit adhesion.124 Using an elastic mechanical model, Xue et al. found that surface roughness determined the stretching degree of cell walls, and more interestingly, the gravity of bacterial cells, as well as nonspecific forces such as van der Waals forces, were essential for achieving sufficient adhesion.125 These results provide complementary explanations of the effect of roughness, although the established models mainly focus on physical interactions without covering molecular interactions.
Despite different understandings of the underlying mechanism, all the above studies confirmed the bactericidal effect. Even the skin of gecko (Lucasium sp.), which consists of numerous spinules (hundred nanometers in height and 10–20 nm in radius) has been demonstrated to be bactericidal against P. gingivalis.126 These results have inspired numerous efforts to design artificial spiky surfaces.127 Some of the surfaces achieved antibacterial performance by inducing cell rupture, some by eliciting filamentous growth (affecting bacterial division),128 while some further employed other properties including positive surface charge,129 hydrophobicity,130 photodynamic effect,131etc. For example, Chen et al. fabricated bactericidal surfaces by carving borosilicate glass with pulsed laser irradiation, followed by layer-by-layer polyelectrolyte modification.129 The carved glass exhibited linear trenches with a depth of 1–2 μm, spacing varied from 1 μm to 4 μm, and nanoscale bumps at both sides of the trenches. This design produced local stress on the bacteria membrane, and the modification of cationic polymers increased the attraction between bacteria and glass surface. Of note, combining photothermal or photodynamic effects with spiky surfaces represents another potential strategy, where the local hyperthermia or reactive oxygen species (ROS) will be lethal to attached bacteria. An example is an antibacterial system constructed by decorating silicon nanowires with protoporphyrin IX (a photosensitizer), which could capture E. coli through the unique surface topography and split cell wall by ROS under 630 nm light irradiation.131 Obviously, using photocatalytic semiconductor materials (e.g., TiO2, FeSe2, ZnO) to construct nanopillars and utilizing sunlight as an energy source will make this system more practical.
Spiky surfaces can also pierce mammalian cells,132 highlighting the potential to damage microorganisms of much larger sizes. Piercing the membrane of mammalian cells generally needs pillars of longer length, larger spacing, and reasonably higher stiffness. A platform designed for delivering biomolecules into living mammalian cells consisted of vertical silicon nanowires of one to several micrometers in height.133 Spiky TiO2 microparticles carrying spikes of hundreds of nanometers were reported to physically penetrate cell membranes to realize intracellular delivery.132 The cells remained alive after membrane penetration, but these surfaces still hold potential for anti-microorganisms in nutrition-deficient natural environments. There are also studies showing that long nanowires (e.g., 2–11 μm long and 3–7 μm spaced)134 would remain enclosed in membrane compartments rather than spontaneously penetrate the cell membrane and therefore, could not reach the cell interior.134,135 Modulating the surface chemistry of nanowires could improve the probability of piercing the membrane.134 It is reasonable to estimate that bacteria may not deform at a similar extent as mammalian cells due to the thicker wall/membrane structure, thereby being more susceptible to penetration.
Generally, all these studies have demonstrated the great potential of spiky surfaces in damaging not only bacteria but also spores and eukaryotic microbes. Some common views can be reached from the obtained results, such as that (i) sharpness and spacing of nanopillars are critical parameters to optimize; (ii) Gram-negative bacteria with thinner peptidoglycan layer are usually more susceptible to nanopillar-induced rupture; (iii) bacterial adhesion, tuned by both the morphology and surface chemistry of nanopillars, has a significant influence on bactericidal performance; (iv) bactericidal effect is usually not accompanied by a killing capability to mammalian cells, thereby enabling a bactericidal but human cell-compatible property for medical applications.
4.2 Positive surface charge
Cationic polymers or small molecules are a class of environmentally friendly antibacterial agents. Their antibacterial mechanism is mostly accepted as binding the negatively charged bacterial membrane/wall through electrostatic attraction to induce cellular disruption.35,136 Cationic polymers with hydrophobic moieties were proposed to induce hydrophobic insertion into lipid tails upon electrostatic attachment to the membrane, resulting in membrane breakage (Fig. 7a).136 This mechanism is supported by studies that have suggested a balance of cationicity and hydrophobicity for improved antibacterial performance.137 For free cationic molecules that can enter cells, there are other mechanisms, including inhibiting DNA replication after entering cytoplasm and attaching to the oppositely charged DNA,138 targeting lipid II-an important precursor for peptidoglycan synthesis-to inhibit the synthesis of bacterial wall (Fig. 7a),139,140 and stimulating the antibacterial immune response of the infected host,141etc. Actually, antimicrobial peptides, which are an important part of the innate immune system in different organisms, are mostly cationic and amphiphilic and function by binding the membrane and changing the electrochemical potential of the membrane.142,143 For the membrane-disruption mechanism that relies on strong electrostatic attraction, bactericidal efficiency will be higher when cationic group density is increased. Moreover, there is a density threshold, only above which will the polymer be antibacterial. A number of works have been devoted to the structural optimization of polymers, aiming at eliminating pH-dependence of cationicity, increasing cation density, improving structural stability, tuning hydrophilicity, etc.35,144 A large variety of positively charged nanoparticles have also been used after being optimized in multiple aspects (Fig. 7b). Obviously, modifying artificial surfaces to be highly cationic is a promising bactericidal strategy that can play relatively long-term effect compared with germicides since the cationic groups generally will not undergo mass loss when anchored on a surface. Meanwhile, surfaces that can sustainably release cationic nanoparticles are under extensive exploration since localized release is a powerful treatment method145 and free nanoparticles can exert additional merits such as the ability to be internalized by bacteria, although some studies showed that cationic nanoparticles are more efficient for bacteria killing when surface-immobilized compared with those dispersed in solution.146
 Fig. 7  Positive surface charge for bacterial inactivation. (a) Illustration of the typical antibacterial mechanisms of cationic materials including cationic polymers and small molecules, as well as positively charged nanoparticles. Typical mechanisms, including disrupting cell membrane, inhibiting DNA replication, and inhibiting the synthesis and transportation of lipid to hinder cell wall synthesis. (b) Important properties of molecular and particulate cationic materials that need careful optimization. 
Natural cationic polymers such as chitosan, cellulose, and cyclodextrin are widely used due to their high biocompatibility and availability.147 Chitosan is probably the most used one. Martinez et al. coated a catheter with chitosan and inserted it into living Sprague-Dawley rats,148 and the formation of C. albicans biofilm was significantly reduced. In vitro study further showed inhibited cell viability and biofilm activity of C. albicans and C. parapsilosis. Zhai et al. electrodeposited chitosan and zinc onto carbon steel to fabricate chitosan-zinc composite film,36 and achieved obvious inhibition of the growth and metabolism of sulfate-reducing bacteria when exposed to the bacterial medium. The amine- or guanidine-rich natural polymers are highly cationic only at relatively lower pH, and conjugation with the amine groups will further decrease the potency to be protonated. Employing polymers with pH-independent cationicity, such as quaternary ammonium- and phosphonium-based ones, will be more applicable in this regard.149,150 For example, Asri et al. fabricated an antibacterial coating by immobilizing hyperbranched quaternary ammonium compounds on silicon substrate by tethering polyethyleneimine and then alkylating the amine groups.151 The surface achieved a contact-killing efficiency of >99.99% at a challenge of 1600 CFU per cm2S. epidermidis. The coating was proposed to be ‘shape-adaptive’ to make the bacteria well-enveloped by the hyperbranched cationic layer, leading to the removal of membrane lipids. Anthierens et al. functionalized poly(butylene adipate) with a quaternary phosphonium group to serve as potential antibacterial packaging material.152 The obtained polymer significantly reduced the cell counts of E. coli both in polymer-containing bacterial dispersions and on the surface of polymer-molded plates.
The membrane-damage mechanism indicates that cationic molecules bearing a hydrophobic linear moiety are helpful for bacteria killing, and this has been supported by a number of studies. Fadida et al. demonstrated earlier that polyethylene surface, when modified with dimethyloctadecyl 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl ammonium, which had a C18 alkane chain, exhibited strong antibacterial effect against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive species, while the surfaces modified with trimethyl 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl ammonium that had no long alkane chain did not show bactericidal activity.153 Grace et al. studied the contribution of hydrophobicity, chain length, and cationicity to the antibacterial activity of low molecular weight cationic polymers by synthesizing a library of polymers containing a different number of cationic groups and different lengths of hydrocarbon chain tail (C2 and C12).137 The polymers having the lowest number of cationic groups and a C12 tail had lower minimum inhibitory concentrations against both the selected Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. An action pathway of electrostatic attraction followed by hydrophobic interaction-induced membrane insertion was identified as the most probable mechanism.
A critical parameter describing these surfaces is the cation density, while it should be noted that highly cationic materials may cause hemolysis when applied in vivo.154 Also, the ultimate goal is to improve bacteria-accessible cation density because the cations need to be very close to the cell to be bactericidal. According to this, increasing the grafting density of cations on a surface can be more helpful than lengthening the polymer length. Muruta et al. studied the effect of chain length and chain density of poly(quaternary ammonium)-modified surface on bacteria kill efficiency.155 The bacteria-accessible surface charge density, quantized as charges per cm2, was increased by increasing either chain length or short-chain density, leading to an improvement of E. coli killing efficiency. It was believed that a surface with at least 5 × 1015 charges per cm2 would be able to kill a monolayer of E. coli. The killing mechanism of penetrating cell membrane was believed unlikely given the limited chain length of the synthesized polymers. The structure of the polymer itself, besides cationicity and hydrophobicity, also matters. Hoque et al. prepared a series of organo-soluble cationic polymers for spin/brush coating, and found that linear polymers were more lethal for bacteria and fungi than the branched polymers.156 Song et al. reported that alternating copolymers in which cationic side chains were interspersed by hydrophobic side chains at a spacing of 8–10 Å backbone were more effective antibacterial polymers than the random polymers of similar backbone or homopolymers with a narrower spacing of cationic side chains.157 The exact reason why regularly spaced cations were more effective was not well elucidated, but the alternating copolymers were shown to effectively cause potassium efflux and damage bacterial membrane. Generally, all these studies showcased the importance of optimizing the molecular structure and grafting pattern of cationic polymers other than improving cationicity.
Bacteria killing of positively charged surfaces is facilitated by electrostatic attraction but this may raise an issue, which is the blockage of the cations by dead bacteria, cell debris, or other contaminants. Timely degradation or removal of the adsorbed components is needed. The balance is tricky to keep in scenarios where the durative bactericidal effect is needed in an open environment. A few potential resolutions have been proposed. Chen et al. developed hierarchical polymer brushes comprising a quaternary ammonium-based cationic upper layer and zwitterionic antifouling sublayer on a silicon surface.158 While the upper layer effectively inactivated E. coli and S. aureus, the sublayer further inhibited the adhesion of dead bacteria. Chen et al. reported an antimicrobial coating with bactericidal and antifouling dual-function.159 The coating was a combination of quaternary ammonium-based cation, zwitterionic molecule, and dopamine and achieved 1.00, 1.09, and 0.94 log reduction of S. aureus, E. coli and P. aeruginosa compared with the pristine uncoated surface. Adsorption of protein and platelet was also reduced, but the anti-adsorption mechanism, which possibly lay in the unique molecular structure, was not elucidated.
4.3 Photoactive surfaces
For applications where light irradiation is readily accessible, surfaces with photocatalytic or photothermal properties are also long-lasting since bacteria inactivation does not need the release of surface components. Photocatalytic or photodynamic materials generate highly oxidative ROS under light irradiation, during which oxygen or water is commonly needed; fortunately, these precursors are readily available in air or aqueous conditions.160 The mechanism for ROS generation has been well studied, including the one-electron reduction of O2 to produce ˙O2−, and the oxidation of H2O to generate ˙OH.160,161 ROS is highly bactericidal due to the high oxidizing potential. They can induce bacterial death by directly damaging the cell wall/membrane and oxidizing intracellular components such as coenzyme A and nucleic acids.162 Such action mechanisms are rather robust when ROS concentration reaches the killing regime and it is uneasy for bacteria to develop treatment resistance. In this respect, ROS-mediated bacterial inactivation may be more reliable compared with antibiotics, which commonly target one specific biosynthesis process. Meanwhile, ROS lifetime is short163 but their generation is instant once light irradiation becomes available, enabling immediate antibacterial effect. Obviously, the production of enough ROS is the critical step since the light irradiation intensity in natural environments is relatively limited, and artificial laser irradiation is not very cost-effective. Generally, both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria are liable to be damaged by ROS, while some species may be more sensitive due to the different membrane structures.164 For example, Chen et al. fabricated a wool/acrylic fiber, which was incorporated with rose bengal (a photosensitizer), and found that the material under irradiation was more effective when inactivating Gram-positive S. aureus and B. subtilis compared with Gram-negative P. aeruginosa and E. coli. Note that cationic yellow (a traditional dye) could also be incorporated to expand the color tunability of the fiber without greatly attenuating the antibacterial performance (Fig. 8a and d).165 It should be noted that organic photocatalysts are relatively susceptible to self-photooxidative reactions upon activation,166 which is unfavorable for long-term antibacterial activity.
 Fig. 8  Photocatalytic inactivation against bacteria. (a) Schematic of the application of rose bengal (RB)- and cationic yellow (CY3)-embedded wool/acrylic (W/A) fibers for antimicrobial photodynamic inactivation. (b) Photographs of pristine W/A fiber, RB-W/A fiber, and RB/CY3-W/A fiber. (c and d) SEM images of the corresponding fibers from (b) at (c) 50× and (d) 1000× magnification. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of rose bengal-deposited photonic crystals for enhanced ROS generation and bacterial activation. This figure has been published in CCS Chemistry 2022; Photonic Crystal-Enhanced Photodynamic Antibacterial Therapy is available online at https://doi.org/10.31635/ccschem.022.202201795. 
Efforts have been devoted to improving photocatalytic efficiency under a given wavelength and expanding the photoactive spectrum to improve the energy utilizing rate of a broad-spectrum irradiation167 since solar irradiation, which covers a broad spectral range, is the main energy source in outdoor environments. The earlier developed photocatalysts can be activated only by ultraviolet or visible light, while the infrared region accounts for more than 40% of the total solar irradiation energy. Fortunately, our ability to tailor the photoactive spectrum of metallic photocatalysts by controlling particle morphology, adding dopants or preparing alloys is growing.168 Construction of heterostructures by growing one nanocrystal onto another is a useful strategy to improve photocatalytic performance,169 such as the works reported by Chen's group aiming at improving antibacterial activity.170,171 ROS generation from heterostructures was enhanced by promoting the separation and diffusion of electron–hole pairs after photo-activation and improving electron transporting efficiency.171 Bandgap of heterostructures could also be narrowed to enhance photocatalysis at the visible spectral region.172 Alternatively, enhanced photocatalysis was realized by matching the light reflection range of matrix with the absorption peak of the photocatalyst using photonic crystals.173 Photonic crystals are a hierarchical material in which nanoparticles are periodically arranged that resemble the way atoms are arranged in a crystal; they show multiple scattering effects and slow photon phenomenon (photons at the edge of photonic bandgap have slower group velocity), which is helpful for ROS production.174 Gao et al. tuned the reflection band (dependent on the size of component silica nanoparticles) of silica nanoparticle-based photonic crystals to match the absorption band of rose bengal, which, together with the slow photon phenomenon and multiple scattering effects led to high bacteria killing efficiency against both S. aureus and E. coli (Fig. 8e).173
Many inorganic photocatalysts are under extensive exploration for antibacterial purposes and are used in fields including food packaging, textile, and anti-corrosion, either as free particles or embedded in coatings. TiO2 is a wide bandgap material but is rather stable and can form patterned nanotubes via hydrothermal oxidation of titanium, which is helpful for increasing catalytic active sites.175,176 The relatively high biocompatibility promotes its application in the food industry, such as the research by Shahbaz et al., who used TiO2 and ultraviolet irradiation to inactivate the bacteria in apple juice.177 Other metallic materials with wider photoactive spectral band have been developed. Metal chalcogenide nanoparticles such as MoS2, WSe2, and CuInS2 exhibited photoactivity within a spectral range reaching 800 nm,161 and FeSe2 nanoparticles have photocatalytic potential at the second near-infrared region.179 These photocatalysts may have higher application potential given the higher light-utilization efficiency, ease of large scale production, and the antibacterial effect of the released ions (e.g., Cu2+, Zn2+, Fe2+, and Fe3+) upon decomposition.
Photothermal materials inactivate bacteria by converting the irradiation energy into heat. Photothermal therapy (PTT) has actually been widely applied for anti-tumor purpose by employing materials that were photoresponsive in near-infrared region and heating tumor tissues above 45 °C.180 Local hyperthermia disrupts cell membrane permeability, denatures protein, evaporates cellular liquid, and bacteria will be dead before developing heat-resistant surviving mechanisms.181 For the antibacterial purpose, the application potential is higher since the criterion for choosing photothermal materials will be lower without requesting extremely high biocompatibility. Note that human cells could also be damaged at temperatures that are lethal to bacteria, making this strategy not very appropriate for use in the human body. Photothermal mechanisms of different materials have been classified into three categories, i.e., (i) localized surface plasmon resonance effect, (ii) electron–hole generation and relaxation, and (iii) conjugation or hyperconjugation effect.182 Typical materials in the corresponding categories are (i) noble metal nanoparticles, (ii) transition metal-containing semiconductors, and (iii) graphene and conjugated polymers, respectively. Higher temperature leads to better antibacterial performance, and therefore choosing suitable materials with high photothermal transition efficiency is important. Narrowing the bandgap of photothermal materials can broaden the spectral range for light absorption, thereby increasing the light-utilization efficiency of broad-spectrum irradiation.178,183 Li et al. modulated the bandgap of Prussian blue nanocrystals via zinc-doping, which narrowed the experimental bandgap from 2.01 eV to 1.86 eV by increasing zinc concentration (Fig. 9a and b).178 The absorption peak red-shifted to about 740 nm, which made it suitable to apply an 808 nm laser irradiation for effective photothermal irradiation of E. coli, S. aureus, and methicillin-resistant S. aureus. Irradiation was believed to produce heat and simultaneously accelerate the release of zinc and iron ions, which were also antibacterial (Fig. 9c). Immobilizing photothermal agents on material surfaces via suitable methods has been widely explored to obtain antibacterial properties. Wang et al. coated substrates facilely via the coordinated assembly of tannic acid and Fe3+, forming a photothermal layer rapidly.184 Irradiation with 808 nm light led to the photothermal killing of over 99% of the attached bacteria for both E. coli and methicillin-resistant S. aureus. The surface showed high photostability under repeated irradiations. Interestingly, when further conjugated with poly(N-isopropylacrylamide), the surface showed bacteria-releasing capacity at lowered temperature, presumably due to the surface wettability transition from bacteria-attractive to a bacteria-repellent state.
 Fig. 9  Bacterial inactivation via enhanced photothermal conversion efficiency. (a) Theoretical and experimental bandgaps of Prussian blue nanocrystals with different levels of zinc doping. (b) Scheme of red-shifting the absorption peak of Prussian blue nanocrystals via zinc doping. (c) Scheme of bacterial inactivation using zinc-doped nanocrystals via heat generation and accelerated release of zinc and iron ions. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Given the different working mechanisms, synergistic systems combining ROS generation and photothermal effect have been developed. ROS can oxidize bacterial membranes and increase the thermal sensitivity of damaged cells, while hyperthermia can increase membrane permeability and facilitate the damage of intracellular structures by ROS. Feng et al. employed MoS2 to realize synergistic bacteria-killing.185 Chitosan-coated MoS2 nanosheets were electrophoretically deposited onto Ti plates, and when irradiated with 660 nm and 808 nm dual lights, the surface showed antibacterial efficiency of 99.84% and 99.65% against E. coli and S. aureus, respectively, both higher than that under single light irradiation. 606 nm irradiation was believed to produce ROS while 808 nm induced local hyperthermia. Luo et al. prepared a core–shell dual MOF consisting of Prussian blue MOF as the core and porphyrin-doped UIO-66 MOF as the shell and enhanced ROS generation and photothermal effect were achieved for bacterial inactivation due to the presence of MOF heterointerface.169 Tan et al. reported an anti-biofilm coating on bone implants by coating titanium with red phosphorus.186 The surface was further adsorbed with IR780 as a NIR photosensitizer and coated with polydopamine as a photothermal enhancer. 808 nm light irradiation generated heat and 1O2, and the latter enhanced the temperature sensitivity of S. aureus biofilm, leading to an antibacterial efficiency of 96.2% in vivo after 10 min of irradiation.
5 Anti-adhesive and bactericidal combined strategies
Combination strategies for anti-adhesion (or inactivation) can be achieved by combining one anti-adhesive (or bactericidal) route with another, such as fabricating spiky photocatalytic surfaces for more efficient bacteria-killing. Combining anti-adhesion with bactericidal capability is a further extension. Such a combination might be paradoxical because bactericidal surfaces often attract bacteria to adhere, but many studies have achieved an intriguing balance beyond the paradox. Hao et al. used dagger-like MOF to coat various materials, including silicon wafer, polyurethane film, and silicon catheter, and then infused a hydrophobic lubricant (Fig. 10a and b).187 The obtained SLIS effectively inhibited bacterial adhesion and once lubricant loss occurred to expose a “surface defect”, the dagger-like substrate exhibited mechanically bactericidal capability. The spiky SLIS holds the potential for medical applications given the good cyto- and hemo-compatibility of the SLIS. Jiang's group was able to create a switchable surface charge to inactivate and then release bacteria.188,189 A polymer capable of switching repeatedly between the cationic N,N-dimethyl-2-morpholinone state and zwitterionic carboxy betaine state was used for coating. In a neutral or basic environment, the zwitterionic state dominated, which facilitated anti-adhesion and release of dead bacteria; the zwitterionic state could be converted to a cationic state to kill bacteria. Another example is a lotus-leaf-inspired hierarchical structured surface by Jiang et al.130 ZnO nanoneedles were grown onto silicon micro-pillars, followed by fluorination to increase hydrophobicity. Contact between the surface and aqueous bacterial media was significantly reduced after fluorination, and the bacteria were inactivated via a cell-rupture route once they landed on the surface (Fig. 10c–g). All these examples suggest the necessity of timely cleaning for bactericidal surfaces, although the structural complexity of the surfaces may be increased.
 Fig. 10  Anti-adhesive and bactericidal combined strategies. Schematic illustration of (a) fabrication process of a SLIS based on dagger-like MOF, and (b) the SLIS-coated catheter for bacteria repelling and then killing after the ‘daggers’ were exposed. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of a lotus leaf-inspired surface with hydrophobicity-induced anti-adhesive and spikiness-induced bactericidal dual functions. (d and e) SEM images of the ZnO nanoneedles grown on silicon micro-pillars. (f and g) Scheme of bacterial media interacting with (f) hydrophilic or (g) fluorinated hydrophobic spiky surface. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
6 Concluding remarks and perspectives
Now we can tune surface property in so many aspects to influence the adhesion and viability of bacteria. While the surface features all have a sharp influence, for a specific application, there should be some preferred strategies. For example, for bone implants or breast implants, the tuning range of material stiffness will be quite limited; for surfaces that need to be implanted deep in vivo, bacteria killing via photo-responsiveness is hardly feasible; in terms of decreasing potential settling points, it is hard to keep a large surface flat on the micro level. Moreover, the critical step of microbiologically-caused infection or contamination is the formation of biofilms, and thus the anti-adhesion or bactericidal performance needs to be quite long-lasting while keeping high efficiency. This might be the most difficult part because 100% repellence is basically unachievable using current anti-adhesive strategies, while bacteria-killing surfaces are easily contaminated by dead cells, losing their bactericidal capacity and forming a bacteria-attractive layer for the buildup of biofilms. It has been known that EPS, the bacterial metabolite consisting of polysaccharide, protein, nucleic acid, and lipids, accounts for 50–90% of the dry weight of biofilm.190 EPS is vital for the formation and maintaining the biofilm by adhering to the substrate surface, promoting bacteria aggregation, forming a biofilm scaffold, and providing protection for bacteria.190,191 Dead cells and cell debris may serve as EPS on bacteria-killing surfaces to promote biofilm formation. The bactericidal effect, enabled either by positive surface charge, spiky morphology or photo-responsiveness, will be blocked by the cell debris layer with growing thickness. Combining anti-adhesive property with bactericidal capacity will be necessary in this regard.
From another viewpoint, understanding the antibacterial mechanism is highly needed. Many studies are testing anti-adhesive performance by counting the number of adhered bacteria and testing bacteria-killing properties by focusing on the ratio of live/dead cells. We envision that biochemical studies on the molecular level may need more attention. For example, besides exploring the physical penetration of bacterial membranes by nanospikes, proteomic analysis revealed the occurrence of oxidative stress in the bacteria landing on spiky surfaces; the role of E. coli flagella in seeking maximum settling points was revealed by gene mutation studies, suggesting the flagella-relevant species-dependent adhesion on the patterned surface.60,61 These results provide a strong rationale for future surface design.
Meanwhile, published reports provide indications that are valuable for better surface design, and it will be more helpful if the results from different studies and different research groups could be comparable. Experimental operation methods differ from study to study, which might be one of the reasons leading to contradictory conclusions. For example, when evaluating adhesion behavior, the incubation condition of the substrate with bacteria, orientation (upwards or downwards) of the substrate in bacterial suspension, presence of shear force in bacterial suspension, and even the washing times after incubation will all influence the adhesion results. This further suggests the number of factors that should be considered when using an antibacterial surface.
So, have the antibacterial surface features become strong enough to serve as biocides? Currently, in most application scenarios, the answer may be negative. In our opinion, the main obstacles include (i) species-dependence of antibacterial efficiency. Bacteria in real environments are diverse in species, including Gram-positive and -negative ones, flagella-positive and -negative ones, etc., while it is hard to enable an antibacterial surface feature to be effective against all the species. (ii) Difficulty in offering long-term efficacy, which mainly originates from abrasion, loss of active constituents over time, or surface coverage by dead cells and other contaminants. (iii) Cost-related concerns, such as the difficulty in producing microscopically unique surfaces on a large scale. Photoactive surfaces provide relatively strong bacteria-killing capacity, while under the conditions where some artificial laser light is needed, power consumption that can otherwise be used in electrocatalysis or UV light irradiation will be significant. Nevertheless, it is felicitous to foresee that antibacterial surface features will play bigger roles in the future and certain that they will be our main antibacterial measures on many occasions. On the other hand, antibacterial surfaces may not need to replace biocides or other conventional sterilizing methods but offer a supplementary capacity to delay or minimize the bacteria-caused damage since the current surface design can indeed decrease bacterial adhesion, reduce viability, and inhibit biofilm formation effectively.
Author contributions
Jie Wang and Ping Li: conceptualization and writing – original draft; Ning Wang: writing – reviewing and editing; Jing Wang: conceptualization and project administration; Dongming Xing: projection administration and supervision.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 42006046), the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDA23050104), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 42106051 and U2106206).
Notes and references
T. H. Divala, K. L. Fielding, C. Kandulu, M. Nliwasa, D. J. Sloan, A. Gupta-Wright and E. L. Corbett, Lancet Infect. Dis., 2020, 20, 1089–1098 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xin, H. Shah, A. Nawaz, W. Xie, M. Z. Akram, A. Batool, L. Tian, S. U. Jan, R. Boddula, B. Guo, Q. Liu and J. R. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1804838 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, E. S. Thian, M. Wang, Z. Wang and L. Ren, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, A. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Yang, Q. Zhang, S. Luo, M. Ye, Y. Zhou, Y. An, W. Huang, T. Xuan, Y. Pan, X. Xuan, H. He and J. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126202 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Kayes, A. J. Galante, N. A. Stella, S. Haghanifar, R. M. Q. Shanks and P. W. Leu, React. Funct. Polym., 2018, 128, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jenkins, J. Mantell, C. Neal, A. Gholinia, P. Verkade, A. H. Nobbs and B. Su, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jaggessar, H. Shahali, A. Mathew and P. Yarlagadda, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2017, 15, 64 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Linklater, S. Juodkazis, S. Rubanov and E. P. Ivanova, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29387–29393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Soni and G. Brightwell, Foods, 2022, 11, 844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hasan, R. J. Crawford and E. P. Ivanova, Trends Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 295–304 CrossRef CAS .
A. Uneputty, A. Dávila-Lezama, D. Garibo, A. Oknianska, N. Bogdanchikova, J. F. Hernández-Sánchez and A. Susarrey-Arce, Colloid Interface Sci. Commun., 2022, 46, 100560 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Silhavy, D. Kahne and S. Walker, Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol., 2010, 2, a000414 Search PubMed .
L. K. Vestby, T. Gronseth, R. Simm and L. L. Nesse, Antibiotics, 2020, 9, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tuck, E. Watkin, A. Somers and L. L. Machuca, NPJ Mater. Degrad., 2022, 6, 25 CrossRef .
G. O. A. da Silva, S. Pennafirme, D. da Costa Pereira, C. C. C. Waite, R. T. Lopes, I. C. B. Lima and M. A. C. Crapez, Biofilm, 2020, 2, 100034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Y. A. Costa, J. M. Raaijmakers and E. E. Kuramae, Front. Microbiol., 2018, 9, 1636 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Jakubovics, S. D. Goodman, L. Mashburn-Warren, G. P. Stafford and F. Cieplik, Periodontol, 2021, 86, 32–56 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Jones and D. J. Wozniak, mBio, 2017, 8, e00864–00817 CAS .
A. Ogawa, K. Takakura, N. Hirai, H. Kanematsu, D. Kuroda, T. Kougo, K. Sano and S. Terada, Materials, 2020, 13, 923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Armbruster and M. R. Parsek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 4317–4319 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Muhammad, A. L. Idris, X. Fan, Y. Guo, Y. Yu, X. Jin, J. Qiu, X. Guan and T. Huang, Front. Microbiol., 2020, 11, 928 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Hall and T. F. Mah, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 2017, 41, 276–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Wood, S. J. Knabel and B. W. Kwan, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2013, 79, 7116–7121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kedziora, R. Wieczorek, M. Speruda, I. Matolinova, T. M. Goszczynski, I. Litwin, V. Matolin and G. Bugla-Ploskonska, Front. Microbiol., 2021, 12, 659614 CrossRef PubMed .
S. N. Riduan and Y. Zhang, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 2588–2595 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tian, D. Fan, X. Feng and H. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 3399–3428 RSC .
L. Pocivavsek, J. Pugar, R. O’Dea, S.-H. Ye, W. Wagner, E. Tzeng, S. Velankar and E. Cerda, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 948–953 Search PubMed .
H. Gu, S. W. Lee, S. L. Buffington, J. H. Henderson and D. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21140–21144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, H. Gu, J. B. Kilberg and D. Ren, Acta Biomater., 2018, 81, 93–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hermansson, Colloids Surf., B, 1999, 14, 105–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, S. Yu, A. Amirfazli, A. Rahim Siddiqui and W. Li, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2021, 24, 2101053 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, L. Wang and E. Levänen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12003–12020 RSC .
D. Perez-Pascual, V. Monnet and R. Gardan, Front. Microbiol., 2016, 7, 706 CrossRef .
S. T. Rutherford and B. L. Bassler, Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med., 2012, 2, a012427 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guo, J. Qin, Y. Ren, B. Wang, H. Cui, Y. Ding, H. Mao and F. Yan, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 4611–4616 RSC .
X. Zhai, K. Li, F. Guan, C. Sun, J. Duan and B. Hou, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 344, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Campoccia, L. Montanaro and C. R. Arciola, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 8533–8554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, J. Mu, J. Liao, J. Dong, B. Luo, H. Ruan, Z. Shen and J. Shen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 288, 120628 CrossRef CAS .
O. Rzhepishevska, S. Hakobyan, R. Ruhal, J. Gautrot, D. Barbero and M. Ramstedt, Biomater. Sci., 2013, 1, 589–602 RSC .
D. Kovacevic, R. Pratnekar, K. Godic Torkar, J. Salopek, G. Drazic, A. Abram and K. Bohinc, Polymers, 2016, 8, 345 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Smith, A. Dhinojwala and F. B. Moore, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 7035–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, H. Li, H. Wang, B. Yao, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900007 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ozcelik, K. K. K. Ho, V. Glattauer, M. Willcox, N. Kumar and H. Thissen, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 78–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Roosjen, H. C. van der Mei, H. J. Busscher and W. Norde, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10949–10955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kingshott, W. Jiang, D. Bagge-Ravn, N. Gadegaard and L. Gram, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 6912–6921 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mishra, B. Nayak and R. K. Dey, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 11, 337–348 CrossRef .
J. Buxadera-Palomero, K. Albo, F. J. Gil, C. Mas-Moruno and D. Rodriguez, Coatings, 2020, 10, 456 CrossRef .
L. Peng, L. Chang, X. Liu, J. Lin, H. Liu, B. Han and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17688–17692 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, J. Shi, L. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Liang, L. Yang and L.-N. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2022, 99, 82–100 CrossRef .
A. J. Scardino, E. Harvey and R. De Nys, Biofouling, 2006, 22, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Scardino, J. Guenther and R. de Nys, Biofouling, 2008, 24, 45–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vadillo-Rodriguez, A. I. Guerra-Garcia-Mora, D. Perera-Costa, M. L. Gonzalez-Martin and M. C. Fernandez-Calderon, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 169, 340–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. A. Lutey, L. Gemini, L. Romoli, G. Lazzini, F. Fuso, M. Faucon and R. Kling, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 10112 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yang, Y. Ding, X. Ge and Y. Leng, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 135, 549–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, S. Altenried, A. Zogg, F. Zuber, K. Maniura-Weber and Q. Ren, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 6456–6464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, Y. Leng, X. Lu, F. Ren, K. Wang, Y. Ding and M. Yang, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2015, 103, 384–396 CrossRef .
X. Ge, C. Ren, Y. Ding, G. Chen, X. Lu, K. Wang, F. Ren, M. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Li, X. An, B. Qian and Y. Leng, Bioact. Mater., 2019, 4, 346–357 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gu, A. Chen, X. Song, M. E. Brasch, J. H. Henderson and D. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Feng, Y. Cheng, S. Y. Wang, D. A. Borca-Tasciuc, R. W. Worobo and C. I. Moraru, npj Biofilms Microbiomes, 2015, 1, 15022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Feng, Y. Cheng, S. Y. Wang, L. C. Hsu, Y. Feliz, D. A. Borca-Tasciuc, R. W. Worobo and C. I. Moraru, Biofouling, 2014, 30, 1253–1268 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Friedlander, H. Vlamakis, P. Kim, M. Khan, R. Kolter and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 5624–5629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Singh, S. Ramanan, Y. Kaufman and C. J. Arnusch, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1713–1720 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu and H. Shi, Curr. Opin. Food Sci., 2021, 42, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Flemming and J. Wingender, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2010, 8, 623–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gutman, S. L. Walker, V. Freger and M. Herzberg, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 398–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Levana, S. Hong, S. H. Kim, J. H. Jeong, S. S. Hur, J. W. Lee, K. S. Kwon and Y. Hwang, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2022, 23, 513 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Latthe, C. Terashima, K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, Molecules, 2014, 19, 4256–4283 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tang, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Zhang, H. Wang, C. Lin and L. Zhang, J. Nanomater., 2011, 2011, 178921 Search PubMed .
K. Bartlet, S. Movafaghi, L. P. Dasi, A. K. Kota and K. C. Popat, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 166, 179–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Stallard, K. A. McDonnell, O. D. Onayemi, J. P. O'Gara and D. P. Dowling, Biointerphases, 2012, 7, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Oh, Y. Yegin, F. Yang, M. Zhang, J. Li, S. Huang, S. V. Verkhoturov, E. A. Schweikert, K. Perez-Lewis, E. A. Scholar, T. M. Taylor, A. Castillo, L. Cisneros-Zevallos, Y. Min and M. Akbulut, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 17247 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan, M. P. Hays, P. R. Hardwidge and J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 14254–14261 RSC .
F. H. Rajab, C. M. Liauw, P. S. Benson, L. Li and K. A. Whitehead, Food Bioprod. Process., 2018, 109, 29–40 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Kim, W. Yao and Y.-R. Cho, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 634, 127973 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Q. Sun, M. J. Hokkanen, C. Zhang, F. Y. Lin, Q. Liu, S. P. Zhu, T. Zhou, Q. Chang, B. He, Q. Zhou, L. Chen, Z. Wang, R. H. A. Ras and X. Deng, Nature, 2020, 582, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiu, Y. Liu, D. W. Hess and C. P. Wong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 155705 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Zhu, G. He, P. Zhang, Z. Zhang and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14180–14186 RSC .
C. Howell, A. Grinthal, S. Sunny, M. Aizenberg and J. Aizenberg, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802724 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Deng, T. Shen, H. Chen, J. Lu, H.-C. Yang and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7536–7547 RSC .
C. Yang, G. He, A. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Zhou, T. Hang, D. Liu, S. Xiao, H. J. Chen, F. Liu, L. Li, J. Wang and X. Xie, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 250–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, N. Sun, S. O. Nielsen, B. B. Stogin, J. Wang, S. Yang and T.-S. Wong, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaaq0919 CrossRef .
M. Villegas, Y. Zhang, N. Abu Jarad, L. Soleymani and T. F. Didar, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8517–8536 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Epstein, T. S. Wong, R. A. Belisle, E. M. Boggs and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13182–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kim, M. J. Kreder, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1793–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Cai, Q. Zeng and T. Wu, Effect of Surface Microstructure on the Long-term Anti-bacterial Performance for Slippery Liquid Infused Porous Surfaces, 2020 IEEE SENSORS,  2020, pp. 1–4 DOI:10.1109/SENSORS47125.2020.9278715.
K. W. Kolewe, S. R. Peyton and J. D. Schiffman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19562–19569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Arias, J. Devorkin, A. Civantos and J. P. Allain, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 16–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song, M. E. Brasch, H. Wang, J. H. Henderson, K. Sauer and D. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22176–22184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, C. Feng, X. Wang, H. Gu, J. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zhang and L. Yang, Ind. Crops Prod., 2021, 166, 113489 CrossRef CAS .
U. Manna, N. Raman, M. A. Welsh, Y. M. Zayas-Gonzalez, H. E. Blackwell, S. P. Palecek and D. M. Lynn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3599–3611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kratochvil, M. A. Welsh, U. Manna, B. J. Ortiz, H. E. Blackwell and D. M. Lynn, ACS Infect. Dis., 2016, 2, 509–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, M. Yan and W. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 607, 1424–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, P. Han, M. Liu, H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Jiang, P. Liu, Y. Wei, Y. Song and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10462–10466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, D. Daniel, A. Grinthal, K. Lin and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 790–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Scheres, H. Xia and H. Zuilhof, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908098 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, C. Schlaich, S. Prevost, A. Schulz, C. Bottcher, M. Gradzielski, Z. Qi, R. Haag and C. A. Schalley, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7358–7364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, W. Wang, J. Li, L. Zhu, D. Zhang, P. Wang and G. Wang, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2022, 109, 320–329 CrossRef CAS .
X. Meng, Z. Wang, L. Wang, L. Heng and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16355–16360 RSC .
J. D. P. Valentin, X. H. Qin, C. Fessele, H. Straub, H. C. van der Mei, M. T. Buhmann, K. Maniura-Weber and Q. Ren, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 552, 247–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Guan, I. Isayeva, K. Vorvolakos, S. Das, Z. Li and K. S. Phillips, Biomaterials, 2016, 95, 74–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Straub, C. M. Bigger, J. Valentin, D. Abt, X. H. Qin, L. Eberl, K. Maniura-Weber and Q. Ren, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, e1801323 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Pan, S. Altenried, M. Liu, D. Hegemann, E. Bülbül, J. Moeller, W. W. Schmahl, K. Maniura-Weber and Q. Ren, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 93–103 RSC .
F. Song and D. Ren, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10354–10362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song, H. Wang, K. Sauer and D. Ren, Front. Microbiol., 2018, 9, 110 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Keskin, O. Mergel, H. C. van der Mei, H. J. Busscher and P. van Rijn, Biomacromolecules, 2019, 20, 243–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Peng, X. Zhou, Z. Wang, Q. Xie, C. Ma, G. Zhang and X. Gong, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 12257–12263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Saha, C. Monge, V. Dulong, C. Picart and K. Glinel, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 520–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Lichter, M. T. Thompson, M. Delgadillo, T. Nishikawa, M. F. Rubner and K. J. Van Vliet, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1571–1578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zheng, M. Bawazir, A. Dhall, H. E. Kim, L. He, J. Heo and G. Hwang, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2021, 9, 643722 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lu, E. A. Q. Mondarte, K. Suthiwanich, T. Hayashi, T. Masuda, N. Isu and M. Takai, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2020, 3, 1079–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Lorite, R. Janissen, J. H. Clerici, C. M. Rodrigues, J. P. Tomaz, B. Mizaikoff, C. Kranz, A. A. de Souza and M. A. Cotta, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e75247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Siddiqui, A. Chandrasekaran, N. Lin, N. Tufenkji and C. Moraes, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 8840–8849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bawazir, A. Dhall, J. Lee, B. Kim and G. Hwang, Colloids Surf., B, 2022, 221, 112952 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, H. Zeng, Y. Tian and J. Israelachvili, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 19624–19629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, V. A. Baulin, S. Pogodin, J. Y. Wang, M. J. Tobin, C. Lobbe and R. J. Crawford, Small, 2012, 8, 2489–2494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Ivanova, J. Hasan, H. K. Webb, G. Gervinskas, S. Juodkazis, V. K. Truong, A. H. Wu, R. N. Lamb, V. A. Baulin, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, D. E. Mainwaring and R. J. Crawford, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2838 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Kelleher, O. Habimana, J. Lawler, B. O. Reilly, S. Daniels, E. Casey and A. Cowley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14966–14974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bandara, S. Singh, I. O. Afara, A. Wolff, T. Tesfamichael, K. Ostrikov and A. Oloyede, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6746–6760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nowlin, A. Boseman, A. Covell and D. LaJeunesse, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2015, 12, 20140999 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Q. Li, J. Xue, W. Chen, R. Zhang and D. Xing, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 127849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Zhou, D. Xu, J. Li and D. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47197–47207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pogodin, J. Hasan, V. A. Baulin, H. K. Webb, V. K. Truong, T. H. Phong Nguyen, V. Boshkovikj, C. J. Fluke, G. S. Watson, J. A. Watson, R. J. Crawford and E. P. Ivanova, Biophys. J., 2013, 104, 835–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1311–1316 RSC .
X. Li and T. Chen, Phys. Rev. E, 2016, 93, 052419 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xue, J. Liu, L. Guo, L. Zhang and Q. Li, J. Theor. Biol., 2015, 385, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Watson, D. W. Green, L. Schwarzkopf, X. Li, B. W. Cribb, S. Myhra and J. A. Watson, Acta Biomater., 2015, 21, 109–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tripathy, P. Sen, B. Su and W. H. Briscoe, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 248, 85–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Dickson, E. I. Liang, L. A. Rodriguez, N. Vollereaux and A. F. Yee, Biointerphases, 2015, 10, 021010 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, A. Enrico, T. Pettersson, M. Ek, A. Herland, F. Niklaus, G. Stemme and L. Wagberg, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 575, 286–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, L. Hao, L. Song, L. Tian, Y. Fan, J. Zhao, C. Liu, W. Ming and L. Ren, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125609 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, X. H. Liu, X. H. Zhang, L. Tan and C. J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6831–6841 RSC .
H. J. Chen, T. Hang, C. Yang, D. Liu, C. Su, S. Xiao, C. Liu, D. A. Lin, T. Zhang, Q. Jin, J. Tao, M. X. Wu, J. Wang and X. Xie, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 960–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Shalek, J. T. Robinson, E. S. Karp, J. S. Lee, D. R. Ahn, M. H. Yoon, A. Sutton, M. Jorgolli, R. S. Gertner, T. S. Gujral, G. MacBeath, E. G. Yang and H. Park, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 1870–1875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Berthing, S. Bonde, K. R. Rostgaard, M. H. Madsen, C. B. Sørensen, J. Nygård and K. L. Martinez, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 415102 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Mumm, K. M. Beckwith, S. Bonde, K. L. Martinez and P. Sikorski, Small, 2013, 9, 263–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiu, Z. Si, Y. Luo, P. Feng, X. Wu, W. Hou, Y. Zhu, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Xu and D. Huang, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2020, 8, 910 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Grace, J. X. Huang, S. E. Cheah, N. P. Truong, M. A. Cooper, J. Li, T. P. Davis, J. F. Quinn, T. Velkov and M. R. Whittaker, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15469–15477 RSC .
K. Chindera, M. Mahato, A. K. Sharma, H. Horsley, K. Kloc-Muniak, N. F. Kamaruzzaman, S. Kumar, A. McFarlane, J. Stach, T. Bentin and L. Good, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chugunov, D. Pyrkova, D. Nolde, A. Polyansky, V. Pentkovsky and R. Efremov, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1678 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Ding, J. Shen and K. Zhu, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2019, 36, 573–592 RSC .
S. J. Lam, N. M. O'Brien-Simpson, N. Pantarat, A. Sulistio, E. H. Wong, Y. Y. Chen, J. C. Lenzo, J. A. Holden, A. Blencowe, E. C. Reynolds and G. G. Qiao, Nat. Microbiol., 2016, 1, 16162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mookherjee, M. A. Anderson, H. P. Haagsman and D. J. Davidson, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2020, 19, 311–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Carratala, N. Serna, A. Villaverde, E. Vazquez and N. Ferrer-Miralles, Biotechnol. Adv., 2020, 44, 107603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Cai, Z. Huang, X. Tang and X. Zhang, Polym. J., 2017, 50, 33–44 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Pi, D. Xing and C. Wang, J. Controlled Release, 2021, 340, 149–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fang, Y. Jiang, K. Nusslein, V. M. Rotello and M. M. Santore, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 125, 255–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rofeal, F. Abdelmalek and A. Steinbuchel, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2022, 23, 4101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Martinez, M. R. Mihu, M. Tar, R. J. Cordero, G. Han, A. J. Friedman, J. M. Friedman and J. D. Nosanchuk, J. Infect. Dis., 2010, 201, 1436–1440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, H. Xiao and Y. Zhang, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2015, 16, 3626–3655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. ÇAkmakÇI, F. ŞEn and M. V. Kahraman, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10605–10615 CrossRef .
L. A. T. W. Asri, M. Crismaru, S. Roest, Y. Chen, O. Ivashenko, P. Rudolf, J. C. Tiller, H. C. van der Mei, T. J. A. Loontjens and H. J. Busscher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 346–355 CrossRef CAS .
T. Anthierens, L. Billiet, F. Devlieghere and F. Du Prez, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2012, 15, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fadida, Y. Kroupitski, U. M. Peiper, T. Bendikov, S. Sela Saldinger and E. Poverenov, Colloids Surf., B, 2014, 122, 294–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yasuhara and K. Kuroda, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2015, 26, 479–484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Murata, R. R. Koepsel, K. Matyjaszewski and A. J. Russell, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 4870–4879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hoque, P. Akkapeddi, V. Yadav, G. B. Manjunath, D. S. S. M. Uppu, M. M. Konai, V. Yarlagadda, K. Sanyal and J. Haldar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1804–1815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Song, S. G. Walker, K. A. Parker and N. S. Sampson, ACS Chem. Biol., 2011, 6, 590–599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, J. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Long, D. Yu, X. Wu and H. Yang, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 5213–5221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Z. Li, X. Li, C. Kuang, X. Liu, Z. Song, H. Liu and Y. Shan, Composites, Part B, 2022, 232, 109623 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Zhu, R. Huang, Y. Ding, C. Ruan and X. C. Shen, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 630969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, B. Li, X. Liu, Z. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Cui and S. Wu, ACS Appl. Bio. Mater., 2021, 4, 3909–3936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Regmi, B. Joshi, S. K. Ray, G. Gyawali and R. P. Pandey, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 33 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Attri, Y. H. Kim, D. H. Park, J. H. Park, Y. J. Hong, H. S. Uhm, K. N. Kim, A. Fridman and E. H. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9332 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ren, H. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, C. Li, K. W. K. Yeung, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Cui and S. Wu, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100245 CrossRef .
W. Chen, J. Chen, L. Li, X. Wang, Q. Wei, R. A. Ghiladi and Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29557–29568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ferreira, P. F. C. Menezes, C. Kurachi, C. Sibata, R. R. Allison and V. S. Bagnato, Laser Phys. Lett., 2008, 5, 156–161 CrossRef .
V. K. Yemmireddy and Y. C. Hung, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2017, 16, 617–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chaves, J. G. Azadani, H. Alsalman, D. R. da Costa, R. Frisenda, A. J. Chaves, S. H. Song, Y. D. Kim, D. He, J. Zhou, A. Castellanos-Gomez, F. M. Peeters, Z. Liu, C. L. Hinkle, S.-H. Oh, P. D. Ye, S. J. Koester, Y. H. Lee, P. Avouris, X. Wang and T. Low, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2020, 4, 29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, J. Li, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Feng, X. Yang, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, C. Yang, X. Wang and S. Wu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1591–1601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, W. Wang, W. Wang, M. Zhang, C. Wang, C. Ma, W. Li and S. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 601, 531–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, W. Wang, H. Feng, L. Cao, H. Wang, D. Wang and S. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 604, 810–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Liu, M. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Cao, C. Zhang, T. Liu, D. Kong, W. Li and S. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 608, 735–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Chen, M. Li, L. Zhang and J. Zhu, CCS Chem., 2022, 1–9,  DOI:10.31635/ccschem.022.202201795 .
Y. Zhang, Q. Li, P. Guo, E. Zhang, K. Wu, Y. Liu, H. Lv, X. Hou and J.-J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7326–7332 RSC .
B. Ni and X. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500085 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, N. Liu and P. Schmuki, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3210–3235 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Shahbaz, S. Yoo, B. Seo, K. Ghafoor, J. U. Kim, D.-U. Lee and J. Park, Food Bioprocess Technol., 2015, 9, 182–190 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Yang, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Zhu, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, X. Wang and S. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4490 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Deng, C. Hao, S. Sen, C. Xu, P. Král and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16630–16639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bian, Y. Wang, Z. Pan, N. Chen, X. Li, W.-L. Wong, X. Liu, Y. He, K. Zhang and Y.-J. Lu, ACS
Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 11353–11385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, Q. Yu and H. Chen, Biomater. Sci., 2021, 9, 10–22 RSC .
D. Xu, Z. Li, L. Li and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000712 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, J.-W. Cao, X. Jiang, J. Chen, T. Wang and K.-J. Chen, Cryst. Growth Des., 2021, 21, 729–734 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Wei, Y. Qu, Y. Zhou, Y. Zheng, C. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. Yu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21283–21291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Feng, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung and S. Wu, Small, 2018, 14, 1704347 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tan, J. Li, X. Liu, Z. Cui, X. Yang, S. Zhu, Z. Li, X. Yuan, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, H. Pan, X. Wang and S. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801808 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hao, R. Jiang, J. Gao, J.-N. Xu, L. Tian, X. Zhang, S. Zhou, J. Zhao and L. Ren, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 27, 101430 CrossRef .
G. Cheng, H. Xue, Z. Zhang, S. Chen and S. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8831–8834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, L. Mi, J. Mendiola, J. R. Ella-Menye, L. Zhang, H. Xue and S. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2602–2605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, Int. J. Environ. Pollut., 2008, 32, 78–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koo, M. L. Falsetta and M. I. Klein, J. Dent. Res., 2013, 92, 1065–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of antibacterial surface design by learning the structures in nature, revealing the antibacterial mechanisms, and exploiting the progress in material science.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the 4-step biofilm formation process. (b) Biofilm formation induces drug resistance via multiple routes. (c) Biofilm also block or attenuate the bactericidal capability of surface features, which include spiky morphology, positive surface charge, photocatalytic or photothermal property, and the release of bactericidal metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Potential settling points influence adhesion. (a) A single Si scaffold consisting of ten areas with differently patterned areas. (b) Every two areas are isolated by a fence with 4 μm width and the same height as the pillars. (c) Typical fluorescence images of S. aureus adhesion on different areas. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Scheme of rod-like bacteria adhesion to flat or patterned surfaces and attachment of the appendage-possessing bacteria. (e) SEM image of a hexagonally patterned surface. Scale bar: 2 μm (5 μm for the inset). (f and g) SEM images of wild-type E. coli grown for 24 h on (f) patterned or (g) flat surface. Scale bar: 10 μm (2 μm for the insets). (h) Biovolume of different bacteria (wild type, ΔmotB or ΔfliC) adhered to a flat or patterned surface, and typical SEM images of these bacteria on a patterned surface. Scale bar: 2 μm. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2013, National Academy of Science of the USA.	 

 	Fig. 3  Hydrophobicity generally favors anti-adhesion. (a) Illustration of typical wetting modes of a water drop on substrate surfaces, including the Young's mode, the Wenzel mode, and the Cassie–Baxter mode. (b) The hydrophobicity-assisted Cassie–Baxter mode (right) helps to reduce the contact area between bacterial dispersion and surface compared with the Wenzel mode (left). (c) Besides the reduced contact area, the bacterial surface substances typically have lower affinity on more hydrophobic surfaces.	 

 	Fig. 4  Slippery surfaces reduce adhesion. (a) Scheme of the lubricant-coated spiky microparticles with anti-adhesive capability, compared to conventional microparticles contaminated by proteins, cells, and bacteria. (b) Statistics of the adhesion of E. coli and S. aureus on spiky microparticles (SMP), fluorinated spiky microparticles (SMP-F) or slippery microparticles (LCSMP#1 and LCSMP#2). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Directional slippery surface for easier droplet removal. Side view illustration and photograph of a water drop on the surface are shown in top left and top right, respectively. The surface was inspired by pitcher plant (bottom left) and rice leaf (bottom right). Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

Greater adhesion on softer surfaces
PDMS	0.1–2.6 MPa	
E. coli BW25113	The high viscosity of soft PDMS plays an important role	
99

Polyacrylamide hydrogel	17–654 Pa	
S. aureus AH2547	A layer of viscous adjacent water was on these ultrasoft gels	
100

PDMS	0.06–4.52 MPa	
E. coli BW25113, P. aeruginosa DSM1117	Abiotic beads mimicked all strains well about adhesion	
101

PDMS	64.2–2326.8 KPa	
E. coli BW25113, S. epidermidis ATCC155, P. aeruginosa DSM1117	The PDMS surface contained free polymer chains which was confirmed crucial	
102

PDMS	0.1–2.6 MPa	
P. aeruginosa PAO1 and E. coli RP437, and their isogenic mutants	Stiffer PDMS made P. aeruginosa smaller and drug-resistant; E. coli were more motile on stiffer PDMS	
88, 103 and 104

Greater adhesion on stiffer surfaces
Poly-N-isopropyl-methacrylamide	21–346 KPa	
S. aureus ATCC12600	Varying hydrogel size may cause morphological difference	
105

PDMS	3.4–278.1 MPa	
E. coli HCB1 and HCB1414 ΔcheY ΔcheZ; Pseudomonas sp. nov776	More E. coli tumble and more Pseudomonas sp. flick on softer PDMS	
106

PEG dimethacrylate and agar hydrogels	44–6489 KPa	
E. coli MG1655, S. aureus SH1000	Adhesion was believed independent of hydrogel chemistry	
86

Poly(L-lysine) and hyaluronan derivative	0.03–0.15 MPa	
L. lactis NZ3900, E. coli TOP10 and MG1655	
L. lactic grew similarly regardless of stiffness, while E. coli grew more rapidly on softer surfaces	
107

Poly(allylamine) hydrochloride and poly(acrylic acid)	∼1–100 MPa	
S. epidermidis ATCC14990, E. coli w3100 and ΔmreB	Adhesion was found independent of surface roughness, interaction energy, and charge density	
108

Adhesion independent of stiffness
PDMS with surface free polymer chain ends blocked	163.8–3630.8 KPa	
E. coli BW25113, S. epidermidis ATCC155, P. aeruginosa DSM1117	Blocking the polymer chain ends eliminated the adhesive difference observed in pristine PDMS	
102

PDMS	0.01–1 Mpa	
E. coli ATCC25922	Hydrophobicity instead of stiffness of PDMS influenced adhesion	
87

PDMS	0.06–4.52 MPa	
S. aureus DSM 20231	
S. aureus adhered differently from E. coli and P. aeruginosa	
101


 	Fig. 5  Different conclusions about the influence of stiffness. (a) Few S. aureus and E. coli adhered to softer PEG dimethacrylate hydrogels. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) E. coli adhesion on PDMS substrate was found independent of the stiffness ranging from 1 MPa to 0.01 MPa, but was dependent on surface hydrophobicity that greater adhesion occurred on more hydrophobic surfaces. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) E. coli adhered on stiffer PDMS substrates were more motile, i.e., more bacteria were rotating or moving, than on soft substrates as a result of the flagellar motility. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Different bactericidal routes of nanopillars. (a) SEM images of the indicated bacteria on TiO2 nanopillars, where the white arrows show the regions of envelope deformation. (b) TEM image of a K. pneumonia on the nanopillars, where the bacteria appear to be penetrated by multiple nanopillars. (c) 3D reconstruction tomogram of the bacteria in (b), showing that multiple nanopillars indeed penetrated the envelope. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (d) Another bactericidal mechanism (lower panel) beyond the cell penetration route (upper panel). The taller nanopillars on dragonfly wings tend to bend instead of penetrate the cell membrane, and the EPS layer outside bacteria generates strong adhesive force, leading to the separation of the two cell membranes and forming blebs when bacteria are trying to move away. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright, 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Positive surface charge for bacterial inactivation. (a) Illustration of the typical antibacterial mechanisms of cationic materials including cationic polymers and small molecules, as well as positively charged nanoparticles. Typical mechanisms, including disrupting cell membrane, inhibiting DNA replication, and inhibiting the synthesis and transportation of lipid to hinder cell wall synthesis. (b) Important properties of molecular and particulate cationic materials that need careful optimization.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic inactivation against bacteria. (a) Schematic of the application of rose bengal (RB)- and cationic yellow (CY3)-embedded wool/acrylic (W/A) fibers for antimicrobial photodynamic inactivation. (b) Photographs of pristine W/A fiber, RB-W/A fiber, and RB/CY3-W/A fiber. (c and d) SEM images of the corresponding fibers from (b) at (c) 50× and (d) 1000× magnification. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of rose bengal-deposited photonic crystals for enhanced ROS generation and bacterial activation. This figure has been published in CCS Chemistry 2022; Photonic Crystal-Enhanced Photodynamic Antibacterial Therapy is available online at https://doi.org/10.31635/ccschem.022.202201795.	 

 	Fig. 9  Bacterial inactivation via enhanced photothermal conversion efficiency. (a) Theoretical and experimental bandgaps of Prussian blue nanocrystals with different levels of zinc doping. (b) Scheme of red-shifting the absorption peak of Prussian blue nanocrystals via zinc doping. (c) Scheme of bacterial inactivation using zinc-doped nanocrystals via heat generation and accelerated release of zinc and iron ions. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Anti-adhesive and bactericidal combined strategies. Schematic illustration of (a) fabrication process of a SLIS based on dagger-like MOF, and (b) the SLIS-coated catheter for bacteria repelling and then killing after the ‘daggers’ were exposed. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of a lotus leaf-inspired surface with hydrophobicity-induced anti-adhesive and spikiness-induced bactericidal dual functions. (d and e) SEM images of the ZnO nanoneedles grown on silicon micro-pillars. (f and g) Scheme of bacterial media interacting with (f) hydrophilic or (g) fluorinated hydrophobic spiky surface. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
