Catalytic reduction of CO 2 into fuels and fine chemicals  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0GC01092H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0GC01092H
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4002-4033Catalytic reduction of CO2 into fuels and fine chemicals

        
          
            Arindam 
            Modak
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Piyali 
            Bhanja
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Saikat 
            Dutta
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Biswajit 
            Chowdhury
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Asim 
            Bhaumik
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemical Sciences, Ariel University, Ariel-40700, Israel
bSchool of Materials Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata-700032, India. E-mail: msab@iacs.res.in
cBiological & Molecular Science Laboratory, Amity Institute of Click Chemistry Research & Studies, Amity University, Noida 201303, India
dDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad, Dhanbad 826004, India
Received 
      27th March 2020
    , Accepted 18th May 2020First published on 17th June 2020AbstractWith the progressive increase in atmospheric CO2 over the years and owing to its potential environmental threat, researchers have focused their attention on the fruitful utilization of CO2 into value-added chemicals and feedstocks. Although CO2 conversion reactions are intensively studied through several electrochemical, photochemical and photo-electrochemical pathways, chemical reduction of CO2 is more challenging to achieve due to the involvement of breaking of high energy CO bonds without any applied potential together with the accomplishment of green chemistry perspectives. Considerable progress in the chemical reduction of CO2 in the presence of reducing agents over homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts has been achieved over the years. However, this technology has several pitfalls to overcome before it can be utilized in large scale industrial processes. We show here the recent progress in CO2 reduction to essential fuels [CO, CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, HCO2H, CH4, dimethylether (DME), dimethylcarbonate (DMC) and lower hydrocarbons] as well as valuable chemicals via nucleophilic addition reactions. We also emphasize the direct conversion of CO2 from ultra-diluted sources like ambient air as a possible roadmap to solve carbon emission problems from the real world. The entire discussion is divided into two parts where in the first part we summarize several homogeneous catalytic processes involving the nucleophilic addition of CO2, resulting in C–C and C–H bond formation leading to the synthesis of 2-oxazolidinones, aminals, terminal carboxylated products and indolelactone derivatives that are potentially sound for the pharmaceutical industry. Other reduction products, such as methane, methanol, and methoxides, are also listed using Frustrated Lewis Pairs (FLP) as catalysts. The second part extensively highlights heterogeneous catalysts to reduce CO2 with H2. However, significant efforts are still needed to develop active, selective and stable catalysts on a pilot plant scale by judicial consideration of the thermodynamics and kinetics of the reactions. CO2 reduction can proceed over a range of immobilized metallic nanoparticles on inorganic supports (CeO2, Al2O3, TiO2etc.) and nanostructured porous frameworks (zeolites, porous polymers, mesoporous silica). Thus, thorough investigation on the reaction mechanism of the overall process involving different active sites is necessary. Primarily, this review brings together the major advancements made in the CO2 reduction processes together with a focus on the utility and challenges in achieving the activation of the CO2 molecule.
1. Introduction
The concentration of atmospheric CO2 is directly related to climate change and ocean acidification1 due to the physico-chemical properties associated with the carbon dioxide molecule. With increasing urbanization and deforestation, the CO2 level in the atmosphere has increased abruptly over the years. Considerable research efforts have been directed to mitigate CO2via its sequestration from flue gas mixtures by using porous adsorbents.2 Physical adsorption of CO2 on the surfaces of metal organic frameworks (MOFs)3/zeolitic imidazole frameworks (ZIFs),4 porous organic polymers (POPs),5 porous carbons,6 surface functionalized mesoporous silicas,7 covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs),8 covalent organic frameworks (COFs),9etc. has been intensively studied over the years to reduce the concentration of this greenhouse gas. CO2 emission from different stationary, mobile and natural sources is shown in Table 1. As seen from this table coal-fired power plants are considered as the major source of CO2 emission to the environment, and they also emit various other gases including nitrogen, water vapor, CO, nitrogen oxides and sulfur oxides.10 CO2 sequestration and its storage in underground reserves can only partially alleviate the burning issue of the increasing CO2 level because underground leaking cannot be ruled out. This disadvantage has motivated researchers to explore the utilization of CO2 as the C1 source for the conversion of reactive organic molecules into fuels and valuable fine chemicals.11 Since there is a large diversity of organic transformations that can be carried out using CO2 as the reagent, the net amount of CO2 that could be mitigated in this process should be greater than that in the presently operational CO2 sequestration processes.12 Often these CO2 utilization processes are associated with streams of other gases and water vapor, which could deactivate the catalytic sites. Thus, this causes a considerable decrease in CO2 utilization efficiency in the long run. In Fig. 1 we have shown the CO2 reduction products on representative metallic nanoparticles supported over a porous matrix and addition of nucleophiles (carbon/heteroatom/hydride) to CO2. CO2 conversion products are high value chemicals, fuels and petrochemicals or precursors used to produce more complex chemicals and fuels.11 Utilization of CO2 as an abundant, green and significantly cheap chemical feedstock is a topic of immense research interest due to the environmental impact and economy of the process. In nature several CO2 emission and fixation reactions proceed simultaneously, which can keep a balance in the carbon cycle. But the activation of CO2 is difficult since carbon is in its highest oxidation state and is thermodynamically stable. Hence it requires high energy substrates along with extreme reaction conditions to surpass the thermodynamic barrier. As an example it is seen for fixation of CO2 with reactive epoxides or reaction with Grignard reagents that the use of a suitable catalyst or very high pressure is often very much essential.13 Unlike CO2 fixation to a reactive molecule, which enhances the carbon chain length,14 the chemical reduction of CO2 lowers the formal oxidation state of carbon present in CO2 together with the formation of new C–H and C–C bonds. During photosynthesis sunlight provides necessary energy to overcome the thermodynamic stability of CO2. Hence, CO2 reduction processes are mimicking the photosynthesis route, where the energy is explored in the form of chemical energy. Both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts are intensively studied for CO2 reduction purposes,15 the latter being more advantageous of having recyclability and sustainability and can be used in fixed bed reactors for long-term operation under different reaction conditions. It is worth mentioning that today CO2 conversion into fine chemicals only accounts for 4% of total CO2 emissions, whereas CO2 conversion to fuel could reduce ca. 30%, and especially it can diminish almost 100% CO2 emission from power plants.16 This fact is signifying the importance of the reduction of CO2 into fuels and chemicals as this is beneficial from the stand points of the environment and the economy of the processes.
 Fig. 1  Chemical reduction of CO2 to fuels and valuable organics. 
Table 1 Major CO2 emission sources




Nature of sources
Examples




Immovable
Power plants operated by fossil fuel, turbines, the chemical industry


Mobile
Cars, heavy vehicles, trucks, ships, aircrafts


Natural
Humans, animals, deforestation, land corrosion, earthquake, volcanic eruptions




CO2 reduction processes can follow the thermochemical, photochemical and electrochemical pathways, which is dependent on the choice of the catalyst as well as the technology of the process. For thermochemical reduction of CO2, the catalyst should have enough stability and durability. Electrochemical CO2 reduction occurs more likely on a small scale involving localized CO2 conversion, where the corresponding electrocatalyst is used to exhibit minimum competitive H2 evolution. Electrochemical CO2 reduction17 is a widely studied area and is beyond the scope of this review. Nevertheless, the substantial market value of CO2 reduction products together with the possibility for a range of products make these catalytic conversions highly challenging in order to achieve a possible roadmap for high energy fuels and feedstocks from the abundant source of CO2. The development of a successful CO2 conversion system thus involves the integration of different CO2 capture subsystems by taking advantage of different catalytic pathways. However, CO2 conversion generally utilizes CO2 from concentrated sources or using pure CO2. But global carbon emissions are from distributed sources like automobile vehicles. Hence, CO2 conversion from ambient air or simulated flue gas mixtures (containing 30–40 mol% CO2) could considerably slow down the increasing trend in the concentration of CO2 over the years.18–20 Until now, making fuel through the reduction of CO2 from ambient air is still an emerging area of research and this is considered as the most viable technology at its early stage.19
Nucleophilic addition of CO2 to cyclic and acylic chemicals as well as other reduction products with supported metal/metal oxide nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 1. Following discussion considers the formation of both oxygenated (methanol, ethanol, CO, HCHO, HCOOH, DMC, DME) and non oxygenated (CH4, liquid hydrocarbons) fuels and illustrates mechanistically how they are formed from CO2. The outstanding potential of polyamines supported over silica as the catalyst for the direct reduction of CO2 to methanol by using diluted CO2 from ambient air shows the avenue to counter the CO2-emission problem of our atmosphere.
2. CO2 reduction by carbon and other heteroatom nucleophiles
Organometallic chemistry provides a useful understanding of the chemical transformation of CO2 into organic molecules under ambient conditions. The thermodynamic and kinetic inertness of CO2 is limiting its chemical activation. Therefore energy-rich substrates are necessary to facilitate these reactions. CO2 can efficiently react with activated nucleophiles to create new C–H, C–C bonds under mild conditions. This nucleophilic addition to CO2 generates new molecules and heterocycles under ambient conditions in the presence of catalytically active metal centers. CO2 has multiple reactive sites to form different chelating complexes with metal centers, as shown in Fig. 2. Electron transfer can occur from metal to CO2 molecules and vice versa together with the formation of a π-complex with electron deficient metal centers. In the following section we will summarize these reactions.
 Fig. 2  Coordination sites of the CO2 molecule with transition metals. 
2.1. Heteroatomic nucleophiles and hydride transfer reactions
Nitrogen sites of several transition-metal containing heterocycles bearing bipyridine, porphyrin etc. moieties act as an efficient photosensitizer for CO2 reduction through the proton-assisted multiple electron transfer (MET) process. The formal reduction potential of the ligands in the macrocyclic complex tailors the CO2 reduction pathway by donating electrons to CO2 through a low-energy pathway.21a But the low stability of the molecular system and the very high stability of CO2 are substantially restricting the reaction products to CO with low turnover frequency and poor selectivity. Thus, there remains a formidable challenge to produce renewable fuel from CO2 with an expensive photosensitizer and sacrificial electron donors. Nucleophilic addition of nitrogen nucleophiles with CO2 is attractive and energetically profitable. CO2 reacts with allylamines to produce 2-oxazolidinones, which is pharmaceutically demanding.21b The formation of 2-oxazolidinones has been reported with metals,21c ionic liquids,21d and MOFs21eetc. Yu and coworkers showed CO2 annulation with indole and Togni's reagent.21f Highly functionalized oxazolidin-2-ones were formed by a Pd catalyzed multicomponent reaction between aryl halides, propargyl amine and CO2 at 1 atm through a vinyl-Pd-activated complex as the intermediate.21g 2-Oxazolidinones containing an exocyclic alkene were formed by a Cu-catalyzed four component reaction between the terminal alkyene, aldehyde, amines and CO2.21h Apart from addition reactions, often substitution reactions proceed smoothly in the synthesis of oxazolidinediones.21i Furthermore, carboxylative cyclization was proposed by Zhang and others21j where nucleophilic addition occurs on CO2. In Fig. 3 we show several representative nucleophilic addition products with CO2 which produced A,21kB,21fC,21l and D.21i
 Fig. 3  Several nucleophilic CO2 addition products. 
Reduction of CO2via hydride transfer (H−) is one of the most convenient routes for its reduction to fuels.22 The iridium aqua complex [Cp*IrIII(L)(OH2)]2+{Cp* = η5-C5Me5, L = bpy or 4,4′-OMe-bpy} can reduce CO2 to HCOOH with active hydride species of the Ir(III)-complex, which is involved in the rate determining step of this CO2 reduction process.22 Interestingly, the active iridium hydride catalyst [Cp*IrIII(L)(H)]+ was isolated during CO2 hydrogenation with [Cp*IrIII(L)(OH2)]2+ under acidic conditions, and the formation of a strong Ir–H bond was confirmed via spectroscopic investigations (NMR, ESI-mass and FTIR). Transition-metal (TM) hydrides are commonly investigated for chemical reduction of CO2 because of their thermodynamic potential for H− transfer reaction.23 TM hydrides are typically based on noble metals like Ru, Pt etc., which form complexes with 2,2′-bipyridine and 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine type nitrogen containing heterocyclic ligands.24 Recently non-precious metal complexes showed high efficiency in CO2 reduction to formate in the presence of a sacrificial agent.25 Although precious metal-based TM catalysts are commonly employed, their high cost is not suitable for large scale production of utilizable fuels from CO2. Formate/formic acid is a promising next generation energy carrier due to its minimum production cost and easy handling and it can release H2 on demand. Thus, selective reduction of CO2 to formate/formic acid over these catalytic systems represents an economical route in order to produce a high yield of utilizable fuel.
Apart from noble TM hydrides, hydride-transfer from cheap and abundant organic hydrides offers a cost-effective route for the reduction of CO2 to renewable fuels. However, CO2 reduction by organic hydrides like dihydropyridine proceeds through successive intermediary reactions where HCOOH and HCHO are produced as intermediates. The process is challenging due to the complexity in the preparation of organic hydrides and the complicated steps involving multiple (H−) transfer, proton transfer and dehydration, making the overall process non-selective and kinetically sluggish in nature.26 Musgrave and others showed the preparation of a metal-free and recyclable CO2 reduction catalyst, derived from benzimidazole.26 Benzimidazole containing H− donor sites facilitates CO2 reduction to formate26 as shown in Fig. 4. It is noteworthy to mention that benzimidazoles are imidazole derivatives and have been previously identified as a promising hydride donor owing to their conformational characteristics and anomeric effect.27
 Fig. 4  Chemical reduction of CO2 to formate by benzimidazole-based organic hydrides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26b. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, dihydrobenzimidazoles as organo-hydrides can chemically reduce CO2 to formate in DMSO without requiring a Lewis acid/base for activation of the substrate,26,28 because a polar solvent helps in stabilizing and solubilizing charged intermediates and CO2 effectively. The use of a polar aprotic solvent without any acidic proton can significantly prevent the possibility of a hydrogen evolution side reaction. Both experimental (NMR, ESI-MS) and density functional theory (DFT) studies suggest the transformation of the 1,3-dimethyl-1H-benzimidazol-3-ium cation to the corresponding organohydride that is able to transfer hydride to CO2 and regenerate electrochemically. Among the hydrides, 1d (both R1 and R2 have methyl groups, Fig. 4) shows the strongest ability to reduce CO2 to formate with negative change in free energy . But this system shows a lower yield of formate (51%), because of a low selectivity in DMSO, whereas 1c shows a higher yield (59%) of formate in spite of having positive free energy , demonstrating that an optimum activity of nucleophiles could be achieved via more stable CO2-adducts. Although organoboron and organosilane have prior advantages for chemically reducing CO2 in the presence of H2, their inability to regenerate into an active hydride merely limits their application potential to only a stoichiometric quantity. Additionally, handling and storing dihydrogen is often problematic, which is disadvantageous for using H2 as the reactant in the presence of a Lewis acid/base as a catalyst.29 In such circumstances fruitful development of toxic metal-free organic hydrides via an electrochemical, photoelectrochemical or photochemical pathway offers the utilization of renewable and green sources of energy.
2.2. Carbon nulceophiles
Hydroboration and hydrosilylation reactions are often found to be very successful strategies for chemical reduction of CO2 owing to the high reactivity of boranes and silanes. Since these reagents are expensive to use compared to dihydrogen, they are employed for proof-of-concept purposes.30 Ying and coworkers have reported the hydrosilylation of CO2 catalyzed by NHCs under ambient conditions, which produced methoxysilane as the major product and formoxysilane and silylacetal as the minor products having the overall TON of 1840.31 Another approach in accomplishing CO2 reduction is via C–N bond formation when reduction of CO2 with hydrosilanes was carried out in the presence of amines. Cantat and co-workers,32 as well as Dyson and coworkers33 have showed the formation of symmetrical and unsymmetrical aminals from CO2via hydrosilylation of CO2 with amines.
Ylidic olefins are also investigated as carbon nucleophiles for CO2 activation by Lu et al., where the ability to bind ylidic olefins with CO2 could generate zwitterionic CO2 adducts (Fig. 5).34 Later PHMS was used as a hydride source for N-formylation of amines with CO2.35 In 2009, the CO2 binding property was demonstrated by Bertrand and co-workers after they isolated free abnormal NHC, shown in Fig. 3d.36a Later in 2016 this abnormal NHC and CO2 were utilized for hydroboration of CO2.36b A catalytic system comprising 9-BBN as the hydride source achieves a very high TON of 6000 for this CO2 reduction reaction. In Fig. 5e–g we show some representative carbon nucleophiles that reversibly bind CO2 at low temperatures.37a,b Carboxylation of CO2 is proposed by Biju and coworkers through a multicomponent reaction, forming ammonium benzoate as the intermediate.37c During transition metal catalyzed carboxylation, the key step is CO2 insertion to form a M(metal)–C bond in the intermediate. Here the major challenge is the release of the product during transmetalation.37d Cu-Catalyzed carboxylation of CO2 to a fused ring is also reported.37e Boracarboxylation of vinyl arene with CO2 and B2pin2 (bis(pinacolato)diboron) in the presence of a copper catalyst, [(ICy)-CuCl] (ICy = 1,3-bis-(cyclohexyl)imidazol-2-ylidene) forms a carboxylated product at room temperature. Mechanistically, the reaction proceeds through the CO2 insertion into the Cu–C bond with good regioselectivity in the final product.37f Apart from Cu, nickel catalyzed carboxylation of alkenes with CO2 is also a promising area of research to produce sodium acrylate.37g Martin and others showed that the regioselectivity of the product can be controlled by changing ligands (phenanthroline to terpyridine). In both cases nickel catalyzed carboxylation generates a π-allyl complex as the intermediate. The possible mechanism for the Ni-catalyzed carboxylation of olefins using CO2 as the reagent is shown in Fig. 6.37h
 Fig. 5  Carbon nucleophilic catalysts used for replacing the C–O bond of CO2 by the C–H and C–N bonds via hydrosilylation and hydroboration reactions. 
 Fig. 6  Mechanistic pathway for the alkene carboxylation over transition metal complexes with CO2. 
Selective carboxylation at the termination carbon from a mixture of isomeric alkyl halides is also another interesting topic for nickel catalysed carboxylation reactions. The NiI2/Hex2Ph2phen catalyst shows a chain walking ability to generate terminal carboxylated products.37i CO2 can also be trapped organocatalytically through C–C and C–O bonds. Skrydstrup and others37j showed nucleophilic activation of CO2 by alkynyl indoles with DBU (1,8-diazabicyclo [5.4.0] undec-7-ene)/TBD (triazabicyclodecene (1,5,7-triazabicyclo[4.4.0]dec-5-ene) as the organic base under mild conditions, as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  2-Alkynyl indole as a nucleophile is used for trapping CO2 with TBD as a base, reproduced with permission from ref. 37j. Copyright, 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Nucleophile addition to CO2 is quite promising, yet both experimental and theoretical studies are necessary to understand the mechanism of the process. During carboxylation involving such nucleophilic attack over reactive metal-catalysts, the challenging hurdle is the release of the product from the strong coordination site of the metal present at the catalyst surface, which could facilitate the successive reaction. Moreover, the development of a low cost catalyst having a sustainable route is mandatory for CO2 reduction through the nucleophilic addition approach. Considering the huge promise shown in CO2 capture by COFs, POPs and MOFs (including ZIFs), it is highly desirable to develop these porous materials with in-built carbon nucleophiles, which could be capable for H− transfer and nucleophilic addition reactions with CO2 that would be a permanent solution in making a recyclable catalyst.
2.3. CO2 conversion with Frustrated Lewis Pairs (FLPs)
Non metal based catalysts have gained increasing attention as an alternative catalyst for the CO2 reduction reactions. Keeping this in mind, here we have discussed some of the recent developments in this field. The frustrated Lewis pair technology and nucleophilic activation of CO2 have emerged as metal-free strategies for the catalytic reduction of CO2 and this can significantly contribute in the green approach towards the synthesis of fuels and feedstocks.38 Stephan and others reported high CO2 uptake over a Frustrated Lewis acid pair with a large number of inter–intra molecular FLPs and these are utilized for the reduction of CO2.39 They reported FLPs containing cheap and readily available aluminium halides (–Cl, –Br) with PMes3 (Mes = 2,4,6-C6H2Me3) for CO2 conversion to methanol in the presence of excess ammoniaborane as a hydrogen source at room temperature.40 Theoretical analysis showed that hydride transfer (HT) to CO2 is favourable over a Lewis acid (LA) alone. However, in the presence of a Lewis base (LB), HT hinders by almost ∼8 kcal mol−1. In the FLP system, the presence of LB could stabilize the FLP-CO2 adducts and hence could enhance the rate of the reaction. On the other hand, the LA in FLP actually polarizes CO2 by increasing the electrophilicity towards hydride at much lower energy barriers.40
Furthermore, by changing the reductant to Et3SiH, CH4 is obtained as the major product via the deoxygenative reduction pathway while using a boron containing FLP (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine (TMP) and tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane [B(C6F5)3]).41a In another work, Stephan and coworkers reported catalytic reduction of CO2 by using phosphine/CH2I2 and ZnBr2, which produces CO and phosphine oxide.41b Often transition metal (Ru, etc.) based homogeneous catalysts either hydrogenate,42 or hydrosilylate/hydroborate43 CO2 to formic acid, methanol, methane, CO and methoxide derivatives. Piers and coworkers used Et3SiH as a reductant to generate CH4 and (Et3Si)2O.41a FLPs which displayed good sequestration of CO244 showed high efficiency for the reduction of CO2 to methanol in the presence of ammoniaborane as the reducing agent. Fontaine and coworkers described the reduction of CO2 using ambiphilic FLP Ph2PC6H4B(O2C6H4), generating methoxyboranes with a high TOF (900 h−1) at 70 °C.45 Thus, although hydroboration and hydrosilylation are interesting academically, hydrogenation of CO2 could be industrially feasible. Furthermore, the development of an efficient FLP system requires circumventing the entropy challenge problem to bring a Lewis acid/base and CO2 in close vicinity, which could promote hydride delivery from the Lewis acidic B-site. The transformation of CO2 to methanol is a six electron transfer (6e−) process, where formaldehyde and formic acid are intermediates. This distinct reduction step requires the Lewis acidity of the electrophilic boron center to facilitate hydride delivery. In order to address this issue, Fontaine and coworkers developed different B/N containing frustrated Lewis pairs i.e., 1-Br2-2-NMe2-C6H4 (R = 2,4,6-Me3C6H2 1,2,4,5-Me3C6H2 2), which incorporate tri-aryl boron centers that are significantly less Lewis acidic than the ubiquitous B(C6F5)3 for the hydrogenation of CO2.29 Similarly, nucleophilic CO2 activation to methoxyboranes is also observed with a B/N containing frustrated Lewis pair.46 Through this way, the proximity of the Lewis acid and base reduces the entropy barrier and the reduced Lewis acidity at the boron center is expected to promote a hydride shift. This system with B/N FLPs hydrogenates CO2 at ambient temperature. Zhao and coworkers have reported CO2 activation under homogeneous reaction conditions with 2-cyanopyridine, which resulted five membered heterocyclic compounds with the carbonyl carbon of CO2.47 However, due to the lack of reusability and difficulty in the product separation process, these homogeneous catalysts are less exciting for carrying out large scale CO2 reduction.
3. CO2 hydrogenation
3.1. Methane synthesis
The catalytic hydrogenation of CO2 to methane (methanation) is one of the demanding CO2 utilization reactions having high commercial and environmental benefits. Methanation of CO2 is an eight electron reduction process with high kinetic limitations as well as poor selectivity for products. However, this reaction is thermodynamically favourable (ΔG298 K = −130.8 kJ mol−1, ΔH298 K = −252.9 kJ mol−1) over supported Ru, Rh and Ni-based catalysts.48a The thermodynamic aspects and feasibility of CO2 hydrogenation to CH4 with/without forming CO as the intermediate have been reviewed by independent research groups48a,b together with the respective mechanistic pathways for this reduction reaction. Precious metals (Pd, Ru, Rh etc.) supported on inorganic oxides (SiO2, Al2O3, ZrO2, CeO2) are found to be very effective catalysts for methanation of CO2,48b,c,d which can be operated under relatively mild conditions. But their high cost is disadvantageous for their practical applications and this has motivated researchers to pay attention to non-noble metal catalysts (e.g., Co, Cu, Ni, etc.). Although Ni-based catalysts showed promise, they generally require a high activation temperature (350 °C), which is an energy consuming process. Thus, alloying nickel with Zr and Al can be a useful strategy to reduce the reaction temperature. At low temperatures nickel catalysts generally get deactivated through the formation of nickel carbonyls. It has been observed that the formation of nickel carbonyls can be minimized by controlling the number of defect sites at the nickel surface. The defects can accelerate hydrogen dissociation and hence it could promote low temperature methanation of CO2. Liu et al.49 showed the immbolization of Ni nanoparticles (NPs) on TiO2 for CO2 methanation reactions. Ni on TiO2 was synthesized by the deposition–precipitation method followed by a calcination–reduction process (denoted as Ni/TiO2-DP). Through the extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and hydrogen-temperature programmed desorption (H2-TPD) study the authors have demonstrated that the supported Ni NPs on TiO2 contains high unsaturation and provides more active sites for significant dissociation of the hydrogen at the surface. The authors studied the catalytic activities of Ni/TiO2 for CO2 methanation. Apart from TiO2, other metal oxides include Al2O3, SiO2 and CeO2 to promote Ni based catalysts for CO2 methanation.50 In Fig. 8 CO2 conversion and CH4 selectivity are plotted against temperature over different supported Ni catalysts. Interestingly this result showed that CO2 conversion could be achieved at relatively low temperature with an improved Ni loading from 5–15 wt% and 99% selectivity to CH4 can be observed. CeO2 is useful to promote the metal–support interaction by partial reduction of the support and to form well dispersed Ni metal.51 It is pertinent to mention that being basic, CeO2 helps in the activation of CO2 for improving the methanation activity.52 Additionally CO2 adsorption is favorable due to a large number of oxygen defects at the surface of CeO2. The integration of Ni-Al layered double hydroxides (LDHs) with CeO2 shows superior catalytic activity and stability at low temperature CO2 methanation reaction.53 CeO2 loading was optimized to study the reaction activity especially at low temperature where the highest catalytic activity with a CO2 conversion of 91% is shown at 250 °C. The authors conducted a CO2 thermal desorption experiment to investigate the relative amount and strength of basic sites. The CO2-TPD profiles of the NiAl–MO/CeO2−x catalysts are shown in Fig. 9. The desorption peak at low temperature is attributed to the CO2 desorption from the weak basic surface, the presence of unreduced Ni sites and the surface hydroxyl groups on the metal oxides.54 With increasing surface CeO2 concentrations, the CO2 adsorption capacity and the basic strength of the support were increased at a low temperature (50–130 °C), suggesting that the CO2 adsorption is related to the basicity of the porous ceria surface (Fig. 10). Being weakly acidic, CO2 is generally attached to the surface basic sites and thus the moderate basicity of CeO2 can provide additional CO2 adsorption sites. Addition of CeO2 provided both weak and moderate basic sites that significantly affected the basic property of the adsorbent, where the weak and medium basic sites are subjected to involve in the activation of CO2 to reactive intermediates.55 Pt nanocrystals dispersed over mesoporous CeO2 nanorods could selectively reduce CO2 in the presence of solar irradiation with a solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency of 10.3%.56 Kawaguchi and co-workers showed the hydrosilylation of CO2 using the zirconium benzyl phenoxide complex to produce methane at room temperature.43 Mitton et al. proposed another way of CO2 reduction to methane by using Pt, Pd formatoborate complexes.57a Another cationic complex [(POCOP) IrIII] was investigated by S. Park et al. as the catalyst for the CO2 conversion to methane using hydrosilanes.57b Moreover, [Et2Al]+ as a strong Lewis acid catalyzes the hydrogenation of CO2 to methane with hydrosilanes under mild conditions, as reported by Khandelwal et al.57c On the other hand a mixed organometallic Al/B Lewis acid catalyst could activate the CO bonds of CO2 molecules in the presence of the triethylsilane reducing agent.57d This catalytic reduction of CO2 proceeds via tandem multiple hydrosilylation steps and at 80 °C temperature it showed almost quantitative conversion of CO2 with an overall yield of 94% of CH4.
 Fig. 8  CO2 conversion with temperature (°C) profile for Ni-TiO2-DP having Ni loading of (5–20)% and 15% Ni/TiO2-IMP (A). CH4 selectivity with temperature (°C) profile for Ni(15%)/TiO2-DP and Ni(15%)/TiO2-IMP (B), reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 9  CO2-TPD profiles for the NiAl–MO/CeO2−x catalysts, reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 10  Proposed reaction mechanism for CO2 methanation on NiAl–MO/CeO2−x catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2. Methanol synthesis
In CO2, carbon is present in its highest oxidation state and thus it is chemically and thermodynamically stable. However, due to the dipolar nature and Lewis acidity of the CO2 molecule, several homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts can interact effectively with CO2 to convert it into methanol and syngas. Thus, it is attractive to counter the environmental concern associated with the production of the traditional syngas feedstock. CO2 hydrogenation with H2via a reverse-water gas shift process produces methanol at a capacity of ∼75 Mt per year. Methanol is very important in the chemical industry as it is intensively utilized as a solvent, feedstock, building block and future energy carrier. However, efficient catalysts are still lacking which could utilize CO2 directly along with H2 from renewable sources to make methanol. It is highly challenging to overcome the theoretically low methanol yield of ∼0.06% at 300 °C and 0.1 MPa between the reaction of CO2 and H2 because methanol synthesis is sluggish both kinetically at low temperature and thermodynamically at high temperatures.58 For industrial methanol synthesis, ternary mixed metal oxides (Cu–ZnO–Al2O3) showed low yield and poor activity from mixed syngas (CO/CO2/H2) owing to the interfering effect of water.59 The ternary system shows low selectivity to methanol due to the reverse water gas shift (RWGS) reaction. It is worthy to mention that among other heterogeneous catalysts, Cu–ZnO–Ga2O3/SiO2 and LaCr0.5Cu0.5O3 show high selectivity towards methanol but these mixed oxides are not stable to use for prolonged reaction cycles.60 Similarly Cu/CeOx/TiO2 also failed to justify the required stability.61 In2O3 was found to have good catalytic activities in the CO2 transformation to methanol.62 Density functional theory (DFT) shows that methanol formation over In2O3 is favored due to the development and eradication of oxygen vacancies.63 In another attempt, O. Martin et al. prepared a highly stable In2O3/ZrO2 composite catalyst and it showed 1000 recycling ability for methanol synthesis.64 In2O3 nanoparticles overcome the reverse water-gas shift reaction and showed 100% selectivity to methanol at all temperatures whereas Cu–ZnO–Al2O3 only produces 47% yield of methanol due to the simultaneous occurrence of the RWGS reaction. It has been proposed that CO2 reduction to methanol follows through the formation of HCOO, COOH or CO as intermediates. The energy barrier of forming HCOO (0.60 eV) is lower than the COOH (1.17 eV) pathway, but the rate-determining step in the hydrogenation of HCOO is too high (1.23 eV), so possibly it is difficult to hydrogenate HCOO to methanol.65a But in the presence of water, the energy barrier of the intermediate COOH is decreased to 0.17 eV, making the reaction kinetically favorable.65b Sanford and coworkers65c showed CO2-to-methanol conversion in the presence of dimethylamine using homogeneous ruthenium as the catalyst (Fig. 11). Here dimethylamine reacts with CO2 forming dimethylammonium dimethylcarbamate through dimethylformamide as the intermediate for converting ∼95% CO2 into a mixture of CH3OH and dimethylformamide. In Fig. 12, the mechanism for CO2-to-methanol is shown. Here CO2 and NHMe2 react to form dimethylammonium dimethylcarbamate, which is used as a representative CO2 capture intermediate that is hydrogenated to dimethylformamide (step i) followed by further hydrogenation to methanol (step ii). It has been observed that hydrogenation of CO2 and CO showed a change in Gibbs free energy (ΔG298 K), which are 3.4 and −25.3 kJ mol−1, respectively. For CO2 hydrogenation to methanol, ΔG increases with increasing temperature, suggesting that the formation of methanol is exothermic and is favourable at low temperature.65d
 Fig. 11  CO2 conversion to methanol via the homogeneous catalytic pathway (A) and tandem catalysis using a sequential adsorption and conversion of CO2 (B). Reproduced with permission from ref. 65c. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  Possible mechanism for dimethylammonium dimethylcarbamate conversion to methanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65c. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.3. Synthesis of liquid hydrocarbon and gasoline
CO2 can be hydrogenated to hydrocarbons by either a direct or indirect route. Direct CO2 hydrogenation (FT synthesis) is described by the reduction of CO2 to CO via reverse water-gas shift reaction (RTGS) followed by hydrogenation of CO to hydrocarbons.12 The indirect route involves different supported catalysts to form methanol as the intermediate from syngas (CO and H2), which gets converted into hydrocarbons subsequently.66,67 Usually direct conversion produces CO and lighter paraffins, and this is more economical in nature. Gasoline like hydrocarbons are produced from refining of petroleum products from syngas via the FTS process and by methanol to gasoline conversion reactions.68 Therefore it is highly challenging to find an effective catalyst working under ambient conditions showing a high CO2 conversion productivity to gasoline and liquid fuels.
Conversion of CO2via hydrogenation to highly selective C5+ isoalkanes and low aromatics is a long term research goal.69 Higher wt% of aliphatic hydrocarbons in gasoline together with a minimum concentration of olefins and aromatics is desirable for its fuel property, which could reduce the probability of the emission of pollutants. C5+ isoalkane is the main contributor of the octane number in gasoline. Hence sustainable research is required for selective hydrogenation of CO2 to gasoline with a high content of C5+ isoalkane and selective CO2 hydrogenation to liquid fuel70 is a long standing goal. Other methods involving the Fischer–Tropsch route via CO, methanol and dimethyl ether as intermediates are also quite interesting.71 Gao et al. have reported a zeolite based bifunctional catalyst consisting of In2O3 and HZSM-5, which exhibits a high gasoline selectivity (78.6%) and a low methane selectivity (1%).70 Because of its high octane value, an isoalkane derived from syngas has received much attention. The selectivity can be improved by using a bifunctional catalyst bearing a thick porous shell, which induces the synergistic effect. In their report, Wei et al. demonstrated 74% isoparaffin selectivity among 82% total selectivity of C4+ hydrocarbons from CO2 hydrogenation on a multifunctional Na–Fe3O4/HMCM-22 catalyst. The high porosity and strong Brønsted acidity of HMCM-22 favor isomerization, while necessarily suppressing aromatization and CO formation side reactions. This research is depicting a tandem catalytic process regarding CO2 activation to olefins on the Na–Fe3O4 site, accompanied by diffusion to the HMCM-22 zeolite for successive isomerization and oligomerization. Low CO2 conversion is attributed to the coke formation and subsequent hindrance in the diffusion of reactants to the active sites because of partial blocking in the HMCM-22 channel. Thus significant regeneration energy is required to separate coke from the Na–Fe3O4/HMCM-22 catalyst.72 Although the HZSM-5 zeolite is commonly employed for the methanol to gasoline process, catalytic data of different HZSM-5 supported catalysts suggested huge potential in CO2 hydrogenation to high quality C5+ hydrocarbon products along with a low yield of aromatics. A ternary core–shell catalyst comprising Fe–Zn–Zr cores modified with a HZSM-5 shell is developed by Tan and others, which showed 91.9% C5+ isoalkane selectivity from CO2 hydrogenation reactions. The total hydrocarbon selectivity from CO2 is 55.8% with a low yield of aromatics (∼5.2%) executed at 21.5% conversion of CO2 (Fig. 13).73a High C5+ isoalkane selectivity can be attributed to the unique core–shell morphology of the catalyst, therefore minimizing the unwanted aromatization, owing to the advantageous feature of a thicker shell. They observed that the selectivity to high-quality gasoline depends on the combination effect of acidity, thickness and the core–shell structure rather than the granular mixing of Fe–Zn–Zr and HZSM-5, which again indicates the necessity of a core–shell framework. Interestingly, Fe–Zn–Zr@HZSM-5 is substantially stable with retention of the isoalkane selectivity to 90% for 100 h on stream. However, very low CO2 conversion is still a major issue, which could be attributed to low thermodynamic force when the catalytic sites of Fe–Zn–Zr and HZSM-5 are far from each other.73b Meanwhile the Zr-domain helps in CO activation and the Zn-domain catalyzes the heterolytic dissociation of H2, while HZSM-5 affects CO conversion and lowers the olefin selectivity. Owing to high activation energy for CO conversion (Eact = 71 ± 5 kJ mol−1) over these bifunctional catalysts, it requires a high temperature (>673 K). For practical utilization of CO2 conversion to gasoline fuels with these bifunctional catalysts, a thorough structural modification is necessary to counter these drawbacks. Several research groups have successively employed a supported HZSM-5 catalyst for this CO2 utilization reaction,74,75 which showed a low selectivity (25–34%) for isoalkanes together with a high selectivity for aromatic hydrocarbons. This result suggested that bifunctional catalysts based on the HZSM-5 zeolite bearing metal and acid sites are necessary for a high hydrocarbon yield. It is pertinent to mention here that CO2 hydrogenation to high quality gasoline could be achieved by a judicial choice of bifunctional catalysts based on acidic zeolites. Since CO2 hydrogenation to gasoline is a sort of tandem reaction, the assembly style (mortar mixing, granular mixing) of the active sites in a bifunctional catalyst would be quite effective in modulating the catalysis. In this regard, the mortar-mixing of active sites is better than granular-mixing for CO2 or CO hydrogenation to lower olefins.76 The catalyst produced by granular mixing showed a better performance in CO2 hydrogenation to gasoline than the catalyst through mortar-mixing.77 In a recent review Galadima and Muraza have highlighted the catalytic sites involved in different mechanistic pathways for the synthesis of fuel range olefins.78
 Fig. 13  Reaction pathway for CO2 hydrogenation to gasoline over the Fe–Zn–Zr@HZSM-5 core–shell catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73a. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
CO2 hydrogenation via RWGS and FTS shows high olefinic nature of the products over iron catalysts and this is supported from the theoretical calculations based on density functional theory.69 DFT proposes that Fe3O4 (111) activates CO2 after addition of an alkali metal.79 The conventional iron-based catalyst, which follows the Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) distribution, generally shows a wide range of hydrocarbon products67 comprising olefins and paraffins with a low octane number which is not useful as gasoline. However the zeolite possesses high activity in the aromatization, isomerization and oligomerization reaction of hydrocarbons. Tsubaki et al.80a have employed a bifunctional catalyst, where Co(III) was supported over the mesoporous zeolite Y. This bifunctional Co/Ymeso catalyst showed high selectivity for liquid fuels in the FT reaction, which did not follow the conventional AST model.80b On the other hand a combination of a zeolite and iron-based FT catalyst is able to exhibit a high ocatane value in gasoline products. It is therefore an obvious choice to design a composite catalyst, which could exhibit high selectivity in C5–C11 hydrocarbons. In their research Wei et al. have showed the preparation of highly stable and efficient multifunctional Na–Fe3O4/HZSM-5 for conversion of CO2 to gasoline-range (C5–C11) hydrocarbons having a selectivity up to 78% among all hydrocarbons and only 4% methane at 22% conversion of CO2.81 Three types of active sites present in this catalyst such as Fe3O4, Fe5C2 and the acid sites of HZSM-5 cooperatively catalyze a tandem-type synergetic conversion of CO2 to gasoline, as shown in Fig. 14 schematically.
 Fig. 14  Reaction scheme for CO2 hydrogenation to gasoline-range hydrocarbons over an iron–zeolite based catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
3.4. Formation of CO, HCHO, HCO2H and dimethyl ether (DME)

CO2 to CO. 
At atmospheric pressure, complete reduction of CO2 mainly yields CH4via CO2 methanation, and/or CO through a reverse water-gas shift (RWGS) reaction. RWGS produces CO with ΔH298 K being 41.2 kJ mol−1 and may be used as a feedstock for the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis.82 Under physiological conditions several bioenzymes show CO2 conversion to CO.83a Wang et al. proposed through generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional calculations that before hydrogenation, CO2 dissociates to CO and O in the rate-determining step, which is in accordance with the redox mechanism as supported experimentally.83b Another mechanism was proposed by Eley–Rideal (ER), where CO2 was initially hydrogenated to COOH* as the intermediate, which is different from the redox mechanism.83c CO2 hydrogenation on supported oxides proceeds through the COOH* intermediate and the surface hydroxyl groups lower the energy barrier for the RWGS reaction, which improves the selectivity of CO at the cost of methanol. Based on the DFT calculation on the γ-Al2O3 support, the CO formation is both kinetically and thermodynamically feasible.83d For catalytic CO2 reduction with supported catalysts, the support activates CO2 while the metal activates H2.83e Therefore these two functionalities determine the pathway which will be dominant, and the desorption of CO determines the RWGS pathway. This reason justifies if the material is prone to methanation or RWGS. Generally supported catalysts containing Cu, Pd and Pt are active for RWGS and Ni, Rh, and Ru are applicable for methanation. The activity of the metal particle in the support is generally affected by the support, oxidation state, particle size and structure of the supported metal.84 It has been reported that supported Ru catalysts are active and stable for their ability to dissociate hydrogen and bind with CO.85 For reducible supports like CeO2 and TiO2, the metal–support interface is directly involved in the reaction, and is found to be better than alumina.86 Apart from the support, the size of metal nanoparticles also affects the product formation from CO2.87 For instance, smaller Ru clusters showed high selectivity for the RWGS pathway, whereas larger Ru particles showed methane selectivity.84 In their work, Cargnello and coworkers88 have investigated the pre-treatment effect in tuning the structure of the supported Ru-catalyst for selective CO2 reduction. A simple low temperature oxidative treatment (210 °C) induces structural changes in Ru catalysts which affects their dispersibility and eventually CO2 reduction selectivity.84 X-ray absorption analysis showed that atomically dispersed stable RuOx/CeO2 species is responsible for switch in the catalytic selectivity towards RWGS. Hence, low temperature pre-treatment could provide enough stability to Ru NPs over CeO2 compared to the alumina and TiO2 supports. Here the authors prepared controlled size Ru NPs by variation of the solvent and the concentration of Ru precursor, where the NPs are formed in the 1–5 nm size range. Size distributions of the as-synthesized Ru NPs with three different sizes (1.4 ± 0.3 nm, 2.6 ± 0.3 nm, and 4.4 ± 0.5 nm, respectively) are shown in Fig. 15, and then they are immobilized on Al2O3, TiO2, and CeO2 for executing catalytic activity. Ru NPs thus formed in this way were devoid of any signs of sintering or agglomeration. The catalysts were tested for CO2 hydrogenation reactions at atmospheric pressure with H2 maintaining H2/CO2 in a 4/1 ratio where CO and CH4 are only detectable products. They demonstrated that after reductive pretreatment in H2, Ru NPs on CeO2 remain metallic and showed selective CO2 methanation, whereas only oxidative pretreatment in O2 at low temperature (210 °C), the catalytic potential was switched from methanation to 90% selectivity in CO via RWGS. For CO2 reduction to CO under homogeneous conditions, Sadighi and others showed the high activity of the copper(I) boryl complex (turnover number, 1000 per Cu).89a The mechanism for (NHC)Cu(boryl) (NHC means N-heterocyclic carbene) catalyzed reduction was investigated by DFT calculation, which suggests the initial formation of Cu–B followed by boryl migration (from C to O) released CO in the rate-determining step.89b Stephan and others showed CO2 reduction to CO through in situ generated (bis)ylide from carbodiphosphorane and zinc(II), with a turnover number of 24.8 at 100 °C.41b
 Fig. 15  TEM images of the starting Ru NPs (a, 1.4 nm; b, 2.6 nm; c, 4.4 nm) and the corresponding particle size distributions (d–f). (g–o) Catalysts described for this work: Ru/Al2O3 (g–i); Ru/TiO2 (j–l); and Ru/CeO2 (m–o) with increasing Ru particle size from top to bottom; reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


CO2 to HCHO. 
Over the years, gas phase synthesis of formaldehyde from syngas has been thermodynamically limited and has shown extremely low yields (<0.2%).90a Selective reduction of CO2 to HCHO is useful from the industrial perspective since HCHO is a reactive C1 building block with industrial production of >20 million tons per year.90b Formaldehyde was mainly produced by a conventional process from a high temperature (700–1100 °C) reforming of natural gas to produce methanol, followed by partial oxidation/dehydrogenation of methanol to form HCHO.90b Many reports consider direct conversion of CO2 to methanol/HCHO rather CO2 to free formaldehyde/formalin although it is trapped in situ as an acetal and imine.90c Owing to the high reactivity of formaldehyde in water, it is stabilized as a methane diol, and thus aqueous phase synthesis is favorable and is an energy saving process compared to the gas phase.90d Thus CO conversion (∼19%) to methanediol is thermodynamically favorable in water and is 100% selective in contrast to only ∼10−4% conversion in the gas phase reaction. For the synthesis of formaldehyde from syngas (CO/H2 = 1:1) using supported bimetallic catalysts i.e., NiRu/Al2O3, the equilibrium constant for formaldehyde at 298 K is 8.8 × 10−7 mol−1 for the gas phase reaction, in contrast to 17.3 mol−1 under aqueous conditions. This observation is supported by considering the thermodynamics of the reaction that indicates a positive Gibbs free energy (ΔG298 K = 34.565 kJ mol−1) in the gas phase but negative (ΔG298 K = −7.071 kJ mol−1) under aqueous conditions, signifying that gas phase synthesis is both experimentally and energetically not profitable.90c
Zirconium metallocene shows stoichiometric reduction of CO2 to formaldehyde and methanol under homogeneous conditions, as reported by Gambarotta and co-workers.91 Through a low-temperature approach, syngas (CO:H2 = 1:1) was converted to formaldehyde in aqueous solution and is stabilized as a hemiacetal. Therefore, under aqueous conditions, this reaction is thermodynamically allowed and further reduction to methanol is completely inhibited.92 Bontemps et al. showed that during chemical reduction of CO2 using [RuH2(η-H2)2(PCy3)2] (Cy = cyclohexyl) and pinacol borane, formaldehyde is trapped as bis(boryl)methylene acetal.93 Polyhydride Ru complexes are advantageous to explore CO2 reduction under homogenous conditions, as explored experimentally94 and theoritically.95 Sabo-Etienne and co-workers showed the formation of free formaldehyde catalyzed by the Ru(polyhydride) complex along with borane under mild conditions (Fig. 16), which was trapped in situ with a primary amine for successive characterization and isolation as formalin solution.96 Consequently, CO2 conversion to free HCHO is quite difficult in homogeneous systems, which merely depends on the trapping agent to selectively trap the in situ generated aldehyde without interfering others.
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation for the conversion of CO2 to formalin. 
Selective CO2 reduction to HCHO and CO was presented under Dielectric Barrier Discharge (DBD) with Ar and organic compounds as reducing agents by Dey et al.97 (Fig. 17). The added hydrocarbon (CnH2n+x; n = 6–12; x = 0 or 2) is useful for a necessary H-atom provider, and resulted in HCHO production and subsequent generation of CO. It is worth mentioning that chemical reduction of CO2 under a dielectric barrier although produces CH4, but since CH4 is a greenhouse gas, the partial reduction of CO2 to HCHO, methanol, and CO is highly desirable for various chemical processes.98 Under DBD conditions with Ar as the carrier gas, CO2 is decomposed to several products as shown in eqn (1)–(3) (ignoring possible decomposition to C- and O-atoms).99 The CO2 concentration was always maintained high enough to effect ∼80% energy utilization and the concentration of CO in the product gas stream was qualitatively measured against the energy utilized for CO2 decomposition. In the presence of hydrocarbons, the remaining energy generates H-atoms that are subsequently reacted to generate HCHO as per the equations mentioned below (eqn (4)–(8)). (1) (2) (3) (4) H˙ + H˙ → H2(5) CO + H˙ → OCH˙(6) OCH˙ + H˙ → HCHO(7) >C˙− + >C˙− → Dimerization(8)
 Fig. 17  CO2 reduction with Dielectric Barrier Discharge and gas phase separation of CO and HCHO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2006, Springer Nature. 


CO2 to DME. 
Similar to CO and HCHO, another fuel that can be derived from indirect conversion of CO2 is DME, which possesses a high H/C ratio, and an intense energy density without having NOx and SOx emission properties. Chemical and physical properties of DME closely resemble those of liquid petroleum gas (LPG) which could be advantageous as a promising fuel alternative to LPG.100 DME is an important intermediate of chemicals (gasoline, light olefins, methyl acrylate) and is the best alternative to chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) compounds, indicating the future prospects of DME. However, DME cannot be directly synthesized from CO2; rather CO2 hydrogenation initially forms either methanol (eqn (9)) or CO (eqn (10)). CO again hydrogenated to methanol (eqn (11)) and methanol dehydration is forming DME (eqn (12)). CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O(9) CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O(10) 2CO + 4H2 → 2CH3OH(11) 2CH3OH → CH3OCH3 + H2O ΔH273 = −23.4 kJ mol−1(12)
The overall reaction for one mole of DME is shown in eqn (13). 2CO2 + 6H2 → CH3OCH3 + 3H2O ΔH273 = −123.0 kJ mol−1(13)

Eqn (13) is suggesting that to produce one mole of DME, it is necessary to consume 6 moles of H2. But, if H2 is produced from natural gas or light hydrocarbon, the overall process will not be economically advantageous; rather, H2 produced from renewable sources (wind, light, solar) could be a valuable strategy.101 It is noteworthy that direct conversion of CO2 to DME is not thermodynamically favorable, rather indirect synthesis via methanol is more advantageous, as shown above. Conventionally, CO2 hydrogenation followed by methanol dehydration on solid acid102 catalyst (HZSM-5 zeolite, heteopolyacids, alumina) surfaces is a multi-step process which is not limited to diffuse product distribution and catalytic deactivation, demonstrating that the process is not a profitable pathway to synthesize DME from a industrial point-of-view. It would be more reliable to use a one-step protocol, where within a single reactor and by employing a bifunctional catalyst, both reactions may take place in parallel that could alleviate the thermodynamic perspective of methanol synthesis, and enhance both CO2 conversion and DME selectivity. Such a direct protocol could be lucrative and may reduce much capital cost for the DME production.103 Syngas to DME synthesis via methanol formation followed by the dehydration reaction was developed recently which is economical and more beneficial, as shown in eqn (11) and (12).104 It is seen that a bifunctional catalyst like CuO–ZnO–Al2O3 along with the combination of an acid catalyst showed high activity and selectivity for dehydration of methanol to DME.105 Among transition metals, Ag and Cu show higher activity for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol.106 Since methanol dehydration is an exothermic reaction, it signifies that a low reaction temperature is thermodynamically advantageous for DME production. Generally, methanol dehydration on the acid surface is crucial, requiring a temperature within ∼100–300 °C and a pressure ∼20 bar. Nevertheless, it is imperative to choose an acid catalyst in such a way that may not adsorb water and will also hinder any side reactions. Although γ-Al2O3 is cheap as well as a highly stable catalyst, it can be easily deactivated by adsorption of water; hence it cannot efficiently catalyze the one-pot transformation of CO2-to-DME.107 On the other hand, heteropolyacids (HPAs) containing strong Brønsted acid sites show promising potential towards methanol dehydration to DME. In this regard, the work done by Alharbi et al.108 and Ladera et al.109 is noteworthy. Alharbi et al.108 showed that several modified HPAs are better showing a higher TOF (53 h−1) than ZSM-5 (1 h−1) towards DME. Ladera et al.109 investigated that the methanol accessibility in HPA can be improved using a conjugation with TiO2.
Zeolites are crystalline microporous materials with well-defined pores of sub-nanometer scale pore dimensions and having both Brønsted and Lewis acid sites. Thus, different metal loaded/incorporated zeolites have good potential to act as a catalyst for the one-pot conversion of CO2-to-DME.110 But both the pore size and acidity of zeolites strongly influence the hydrocarbon and coke formation during the methanol dehydration step, which apparently blocks the zeolite pores.111 To tackle such issues, several groups including Catizzone et al.112 and Kim et al.113 have modified the pore surfaces of zeolites for minimizing the coke formation and this has been monitored by careful investigation of its pore size distribution (micro/mesoporosity). It has been shown that a hierarchical micro-/mesoporous ZSM-5 showed a lower coke formation rate than purely microporous ZSM-5. Lowering acidity in the zeolite surface may prevent unwanted side reactions.114,115 Zeolites with abundant acid sites and high stability in water have been designed to inhibit the formation of unwanted hydrocarbons from methanol dehydration and therefore showed a high yield in DME from CO2. Several metal/metal oxide supported zeolites including Cu/Zn/Al-HZSM-5,116 Cu/Zn/Zr/V-ZSM-5,117 Cu/Zn/Al/La-ZSM-5,118 Cu/Zn/Zr/Pd-ZSM-5,119 and Cu/Zn/Al-ZSM-5,120a showed a moderate to high DME yield of 19, 19.1, 31.2, 13.8 and 23% respectively. For Cu–Zn–Al/γ-Al2O3, the synthesis of DME in an isothermal fixed bed reactor shows an effective fitting of all parameters in a kinetic model and suggests the role of water as an inhibitor for the reaction.120b Although DME synthesis is determined kinetically, a comprehensive thermodynamic aspect is missing entirely.120c These integrated catalytic systems comprising binary and ternary catalysts facilitate the CO2 hydrogenation and methanol dehydration steps in a one-pot process. Metal sites promote hydrogenation, whereas the acidity of the zeolite is responsible for the dehydration step. Thus, supported zeolites have a wider scope for direct conversion of CO2 to DME and are yet to be studied thermodynamically and through fixed bed operations.


CO2 to HCO2H. 
CO2 reduction to formic acid/formate has attracted significant interest because of the scientific value of the product as a chemical as well as an on-demand H2 energy source. Formic acid and formates are often produced predominately in the electrochemical or phtoelectrochemical reduction of CO2.121,122 In the energy industry, HCO2H is useful as a hydrogen storage material and it can be safely transported and stored. Thus, selective synthesis of formic acid/formate via CO2 hydrogenation is in demand in the context of synthesizing green and renewable fuel. But, the conversion is highly restricted due to kinetic and thermodynamic perspectives, suggesting the requirement of an efficient homo/heterogeneous catalytic system. Conversion of gaseous CO2 to liquid formic acid is entropically forbidden , and several parameters (T, P and additives) are essential to control the equilibrium.123 Due to the high reduction ability, Pd(0) complexes showed selective hydrogenation of CO2 to HCO2H.124 Szymczak et al. have shown that sterically crowded Ru(II) complexes of bispyridylisoindoline and terpyridine ligands could exhibit exceptionally high TONs for the hydrogenation of CO2 to HCO2H125 by using the auxiliary base 1,8-diazobicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene (DBU). Very recently Jessop et al. have employed phosphaamidine and phosphaguanidine based Rh(I)/Ru(II) complexes as a homogeneous catalytic system for the hydrogenation of CO2 in DMSO under 40 bar CO2 pressure and at 60 °C temperature.126 A high turnover number of 1500 could be achieved for the selective synthesis of HCO2H using an optimum concentration of DBU. The conversion of CO2 to formic acid displayed a very high turnover number (3500000) over homogeneous Ru/Ir- princer complexes.127,128 Direct hydrogenation of CO2 with H2 requires bases and additives that produce formates. Ogo et al. showed that formic acid was produced in acidic medium from direct hydrogenation of CO2 in acidic buffer.129 It is highly complicated to separate the mixture of formic acid with a base that is disadvantageous for up-scaling. Moret et al.130 showed that homogeneous ruthenium(II)phosphine catalyzes CO2 conversion to HCO2H in acidic medium without requiring additives and bases. The [RuCl2(PTA)4] complex (PTA = 1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphaadamantane) produces 15% by volume HCOOH in DMSO during hydrogenation of CO2, which is shown mechanistically in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Possible catalytic cycle for hydrogenation of CO2 to HCO2H in DMSO with a homogeneous Ru-complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130, Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
Despite the exceptionally high TONs displayed by homogeneous catalysts, industry is highly reluctant to use them because under homogeneous conditions, formate may decompose back to CO2/H2. On the other hand unsupported metals in the bulk state generally agglomerate and suffer from a low turnover number (TON 0.022), signifying the utility of supported metal catalysts.131 Compared to bulk Au, supported Au/TiO2 showed a higher TON (855).132 Again, Au nanoparticles on the Al2O3 support showed a two-fold higher efficiency than Au/TiO2 owing to the synergetic effect between NPs and the support.133 Considering the importance of the support, Su et al.134 demonstrated that the synthesis of a suitable porous support is essential for improving the TON. In this regard, they showed a higher TOF (527 h−1) of formate by Pd NPs on activated carbon than that on Pd/C (TOF: 2.5 h−1). Y. Cao and others135 showed the effect of reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) nanosheets on the activity of Pd NPs. Using 1 wt% Pd on r-GO, the authors showed a dramatic increase in TON (7088) at 100 °C, 4 MPa H2 for 32 h. The majority of the supported catalyst uses CO2 as HCO3−/CO32−, however few showed the direct synthesis of formic acid from gaseous CO2 in the absence of a base. Nguyen et al.136 deposited PdNi alloy on the carbon nanotubes/graphene containing support. The bimetallic catalyst showed efficient transformation of CO2 to formic acid (yield 1.92 mmol) at 40 °C/5 MPa.
Precious metal based heterogeneous catalysts showed low to moderate activities for the hydrogenation of CO2 to formate, but they are economical due to their high recyclability. On the other hand, molecular catalysts exhibit an outstanding TON (3500000)137 in this reaction and thus their immobilization on heterogeneous supports is quite advantageous. Amine, thiol, and nitrile functionalized mesoporous MCM-41 or polystyrene beads are used for loading Ru complexes and the resulting material has been employed as a catalyst for the CO2 transformation to formate (Fig. 19).138 Among the supports, the MCM-41-based catalyst shows a better activity and TON than the polystyrene functionalized support, which is because of high mesoporosity (852 m2 g−1) and the presence of uniform pores (3.5 nm) of MCM-41. Again, among the functionalized ligands, the amine functionality improves the electron donating properties to the active site compared to thiol and nitrile, resulting in better catalytic activity with amine-based Ru catalysts. Importantly, a secondary amine containing complex shows more catalytic activity than the corresponding primary and tertiary amines owing to more electron donating properties of secondary amines. However thiol-complexes exhibit more stability and recyclability than amines, because thiols can impart back bonding with the corresponding metal complexes.
 Fig. 19  Representative porous silica and COF-based catalysts which show CO2 conversion to formate. 
Apart from silica, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) having periodically organized pores of aromatic building units can be utilized as a catalyst support for CO2 to formate conversion. COFs having high thermal stability, low skeletal density, a tunable porous structure and covalent bonding between the building blocks are essential to induce significant metal–support interactions. Some representative COF catalysts are shown in Fig. 19 which depicts excellent catalytic activity for CO2 transformation to formate. Among the reported COFs, Pd NPs on mesoporous g-C3N4 (Fig. 19) showed a TON of 81 at 150 °C with pH2/pCO2 = 1. Increasing pH2/pCO2 = 2, the TON for formate becomes 106.139 Ru(III) supported on Tröger's base functionalized COF (Fig. 19) showed a better TON of 2254 in the presence of PPh3 as an additive at 40 °C and 12 MPa pressure. But in the absence of phosphine ligands, the TOF value deceased to 25, indicating that Ru(III)-COF (Fig. 19) cannot be a self-sustained catalyst.140 Yoon's group141 developed a bipyridine functionalized COF to immobilize a homogeneous [IrCp*(bpy)Cl]Cl complex (Fig. 19), which shows a TON of 5000 at 120 °C, 8 MPa. Other Ir complexes grafted on C3N4 show the initial TON of 6400 at 120 °C, 8 MPa pressure.142a The thermodynamic aspect for CO2 reduction to formic acid is shown by Limtrakul and others.142b Through a DFT study, the authors demonstrated CO2 reduction to HCOOH following a two-step pathway in which the breaking of H2 falls within the rate-determining step. The energy required for the two-step catalytic pathway is 24.3 and 18.3 kcal mol−1 for each step that is much lower than 67.2 kcal mol−1 for the concerted reaction and 73 kcal mol−1 for the uncatalyzed gas phase reaction. It is significant that these COF catalysts are recyclable and hardly the TON decreases after recycling, considering that these COF-based porous supports are quite useful for direct conversion of CO2 to formate. Although CO2 reduction to formate is a fast growing area of research, a few challenges need to be overcome. Solid catalysts should be sufficiently stable to prevent any decomposition in a wide pH range and to ensure rapid formation of formic acid. It is important to replace all COF-supported expensive metal complexes with cheap and available transition metals.

3.5. CO2 to ethanol
CO2 hydrogenation to highly valuable chemicals includes CO, hydrocarbons, oxygenates and alcohols. Direct synthesis of ethanol utilizing CO2 as the feedstock is very challenging as it is thermodynamically disadvantageous due to poor selectivity.143 Ethanol is a renewable fuel and is a very important bulk chemical in the industry having multipurpose uses including as a solvent and disinfectant. With regard to the ethanol synthesis from syngas, there are few reports on the theoretical aspects, suggesting that CHx and C2 oxygenates are the possible steps to ethanol.143 Since CO2 hydrogenation generally produced a mixture of methanol and other mixed alcohols, selective transformation of CO2 to ethanol is economically very exciting. Efficient catalytic systems for direct synthesis of ethanol from CO2 should promote the partial reduction of CO2 to CO, C–C bond formation and hydroxylation simultaneously.143 The presence of secondary metal/metal oxides e.g., Li on Rh/SiO2 showed a low CO2 conversion (7%) and ethanol selectivity (15.5%) via CO intermediates and the ethanol selectivity depends on Li loading.144 The mechanistic pathway for CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol is shown in Scheme 1. The addition of Fe3+ to Rh/SiO2 also changed the electronic state of Rh, resulting 26.7% conversion of CO2 with 16% selectivity for ethanol at 260 °C.145 Similarly, Fe3+ also changed the electronic states of Rh/SiO2, executing 26.7% conversion of CO2 with 16% selectivity of ethanol at 260 °C.145 83% ethanol selectivity from CO2 at 250–450 °C is observed by the Rh10Se/TiO2 catalyst where the promotional effect of anionic selenium is indeed essential to form acetate as the intermediate instead of CO.146 CoMoS showed CO2 hydrogenation to C1–C3 alcohols containing 35.6% C2+ alcohol in the mixture.147 The Ru–Co homogeneous catalyst showed CO2 hydrogenation at 200 °C with an ethanol selectivity of 26.4% in the alcohol products. Although supported Rh catalysts are useful for CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol, a high CO2 pressure (8 MPa) together with low CO2 conversion and poor selectivity to ethanol is disadvantageous. Gong and others showed that Rh on TiO2 nanorods could be advantageous in promoting the ethanol selectivity through a synergetic combination between surface hydroxyls and highly dispersed Rh nanoparticles.148 Previous studies described the promotional effect of surface hydroxyl sites to control the local environment around the hydrophilic reactants.149 It is demonstrated that surface hydroxyl groups on RhFeLi/TiO2 promote the ethanol selectivity through the protonation of methanol, followed by the hydrogenation of CHO*. During the reaction, CHO* is formed in the rate-determining step and can dissociate into CHx* rather than CO, as elaborated in Fig. 20.
 Scheme 1  Plausible mechanism for CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol through the CO intermediate. 
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram showing ethanol synthesis from CO2 through Rh on TiO2 NRs (–OH rich) and TiO2 Com (without –OH). Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright, 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Since Pt can strongly activate CO2, it is interesting to use Pt and its alloy for CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol. Other than Pt, Pd is quite promising since it promotes C–C coupling which is an important step for the production of C2+ molecules. Thus several Pd alloys are promising to high ethanol selectivity, but are limited to conventional disordered structures. It has been proposed that ordered catalysts having a significant interaction with active sites could promote charge transfer and control electronic effects. Such a catalytic system may outperform other disordered catalysts. Bai et al. showed the synthesis of highly ordered, monodisperse Pd–Cu alloy nanoparticles through the wet chemistry approach, which converts CO2 to ethanol via formate as the intermediate.150 The authors’ prepared highly dispersed Pd–Cu nanoparticles (6–7 nm) deposited on various supports (SiO2, CeO2, Al2O3, P25 etc.) to study the effect of heterogeneity for CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol. Among various studies, Pd2Cu deposited on P25 showed the highest turnover frequency and selectivity to ethanol owing to the charge-transfer effect between Pd and Cu on the P25 support which improves the surface reducibility. A through mechanistic investigation by diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) showed low CO coverage on Pd of Pd2Cu/P25 that can be responsible for the three-folded bridged CO for prompt conversion to ethanol via HCO.
Apart from precious metals, non-noble metals are highly desirable in designing CO2 hydrogenation catalysts in order to get the practical benefit for ethanol synthesis from cheap sources. Iron catalysts are used in conventional FT reactions mixed with Cu, for promoting CO2 reduction to ethanol along with CO.151 Furthermore, the activity of these non-noble metal catalysts can be again improved by adding Pd/Ga or potassium carbonate to suppress the unwanted side reactions, probably the formation of methane. For instance, by adding K2CO3 to Cu/Fe/ZnO, the ethanol selectivity was improved from ∼6% to ∼20% at 300 °C (7 MPa).152 Co-Based catalysts are quite useful for this reaction because of their application in the C–C bond formation reactions as observed in the case of the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis. For supported metal catalysts, introducing a promoter may enhance the ethanol selectivity, as repoted by Wang et al.153a Regarding this, the effect of Mn on the MnCu catalyst is studied, that sufficiently improves CHx sources following a decrease in methanol selectivity. Theoretically, the energy barrier and reaction energy (+87.4 and −64.9 kJ mol−1) are much lower for MnCu than for Cu (41.0 and 2.6 kJ mol−1) alone, implying that the formation of C2 oxygenates as the ethanol precursor is both kinetically and thermodynamically favourable with a bimetallic catalyst. The additional metal creates new adsorption sites and directs a new pathway for promoting the ethanol selectivity.153a Han et al. have showed CO2 hydrogenation to C1–C5 alcohols over the Ru–Rh bimetallic catalyst containing LiI as the promoter with a targeted C2+ alcohol selectivity of 96.4% at 160 °C reaction temperature.153b Xiao and co-workers showed CO2 hydrogenation over the CoAlOx catalyst having an ethanol selectivity of 92.1% at 140 °C through formate as the intermediate.153c Although CoAlOx showed high ethanol selectivity from CO2, other non-precious mixed-metal oxide catalysts like Fe–Co and Mn–Co exhibited higher selectivity to methanol rather than ethanol. Interestingly, CoAlOx is highly active, giving ethanol as the major product, but pure alumina and Co3O4 are inactive as shown in Fig. 21. FT-IR spectroscopic data suggested the transformation of formate to acetate with the addition of *CHx as the intermediate to produce ethanol from CO2. Although the majority of the catalysts suffer from low CO2 conversion activity, at high temperature relatively low C2+ alcohol selectivity is observed. Hence, a mild protocol is always desirable. Apart from supported catalysts, bimetallic Ru–Co under homogeneous conditions showed CO2 conversion to low ethanol selectivity (26.5%) at 200 °C because other products (CO, methanol) are also formed.154 CoMoS shows the highest C2+ alcohol selectivity (35.6%) among the mixtures of other alcohols at 340 °C.147 At lower temperature (160 °C), the C2+ alcohol selectivity is higher (96.4%) with bimetallic Ru3(CO)12/Rh2(CO)4Cl2 catalysts in the presence of LiI as the promoter in 1,3-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone (DMI) medium.153b
 Fig. 21  CO2 hydrogenation of various catalysts containing 0.02 g catalyst, 2 mL water as the solvent, 4 MPa initial pressure (H2/CO2 = 3:1), 15 h reaction time with (a) 140 °C and (b) 200 °C, where the yield of the products and their selectivity are calculated on the basis of moles of carbon, reproduced with permission from ref. 153c. Copyright, 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
3.6. CO2 to dimethylcarbonate
CO2 conversion to dimethylcarbonate (DMC) is one of the most promising and sustainable ways for DMC synthesis compared to other existing synthetic routes.155 DMC is very useful as an organic solvent and building block in several pharmaceuticals, can act as a methylating agent and is considered as a high octane fuel.155 Although several reports documented the transformation of CO2 and methanol to DMC (eqn (14)), owing to the reversibility of the reaction and the interfering effect of water, DMC can revert back to CO2. Also dehydration of methanol produces dimethylether as the side product (eqn (15)) that cannot be ruled out. Notably, the synthesis of DMC from CO2 and methanol is thermodynamically not permitted, as seen from the change in positive free energy (ΔG453 K = 35 kJ mol−1), also a low yield of DMC (<2%) is noticeable.156a The main disadvantage is the water formed in the reaction medium at low levels (100–1000 ppm) that retards the reaction. Hence, azeotropic distillation, adding molecular sieves or scavengers like dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC), could be important to control the equilibrium limitations of DMC.156b,c This circumstance suggested the large-scale synthesis of DMC to regenerate the spent scavengers, which is a highly energy intensive process. Lercher and others156d showed that zeolites have good potential to separate water (1 mol%) from aqueous methanolic solution. Using 3A zeolite at 298 K, the highest DMC selectivity can be achieved, because such zeolite pores are suitable for the adsorption of water with a lower adsorption energy (26–29 kJ mol−1) than methanol (92 kJ mol−1). Several catalysts that are reported for the conversion of CO2 and methanol to DMC includes ZrO2,157 Al2O3–CeO2,158 CeO2–ZrO2,159 and Ga2O3/Ce0.6 Zr0.4O2160 having a poor yield of DMC (0.42–0.76%). Although a high DMC yield (>95%) can be achieved while employing a dehydrating agent, the process is expensive and is difficult to recycle.161 DMC synthesis from heterogeneous catalysts in the absence of a dehydrating agent requires special attention. Heterogeneous catalysts consisting Cu–Ni162 showed several advantages, where Cu and Ni are active sites grafted in silica and the activities are primarily dependent on the metal size, dispersion, and metal–support interaction. It is known that 2CH3OH + CO2 ⇌ CH3OCOCH3O + H2O(14) 2CH3OH ⇌ CH3OCH3 + H2O(15)a uniform particle size without any agglomeration on the support would be highly desirable for efficient activity. The incorporation of V2O5 on SiO2 showed a promotional effect of reactant activation.162 By employing the sulfuration method, Meng et al. showed the formation of more Cu–Ni alloy phase that is responsible for better catalytic activity than pristine Cu–Ni.163 Additionally, the sulfuration method provides uniform dispersion of smaller particles without any agglomeration, as compared to the solution synthesis route. The catalyst prepared by the sulfuration process showed 4.2% methanol conversion with a DMC selectivity of 93.1% at 140 °C, 1.2 MPa pressure in a continuous tubular fixed bed reactor. Verma and coworkers164 showed the chemical fixation of CO2 into DMC with a titanium-based zeolitic thiophene-benzimidazolate framework (Ti-ZTBF). A high surface area (811.4 m2 g−1) together with CO2-philic heteroatoms at the pore surface of Ti-ZTBF could make it a promising recyclable catalyst for CO2 conversion to DMC at 100 °C with 40 psi CO2 pressure.
Ceria nanoparticles are often employed for the direct synthesis of DMC from CO2 due to their high activity and excellent support material.165 A large number of ceria catalysts with different morphologies exhibit a high DMC yield owing to the synergetic effect among the surface exposed plane and defect sites.165 Honda and others showed an improved yield of DMC (70–94%) with 2-cyanopyridine as compared to benzonitrile as the dehydrating agent along with ceria.166 Srinivas et al.167 described how CeO2 based catalysts with nanocubes (Ce-C), nanorods (Ce-R), nanospindles (Ce-S) and other irregular type morphologies (Ce-N) are imperative to yield DMC from CO2.167 The mechanistic pathway for this CO2 conversion process is illustrated in Fig. 22. Ce-S having a spindle feature is more active than rods, cubes and irregular morphologies because of defects and optimum acidity/basicity. Methanol conversion is nearly quantitative with Ce-S, exhibiting 100% selectivity in DMC. Under homogeneous catalytic conditions, the organotin compound showed useful results for CO2 conversion to DMC168a using either orthoesters168b or acetals.168c Polyether ligands such as decyl-18-crown-6 accelerate CO2 conversion to DMC by improving the solubility of the TiIV catalyst.168d
 Fig. 22  Possible mechanism for CeO2 catalyzed synthesis of DMC from CO2 and methanol, reproduced with permission from ref. 167b, copyright, 2016, Indian Academy of Sciences. 
On the other hand, Zhang et al. showed that the addition of the ionic liquid [EMIM]Br to Ce0.5 Zr0.5O2 doubled the yield of DMC from CO2.161a Zhao, Wu and coworkers161b showed DMC synthesis using bifunctional ionic liquid catalysts ([CnCmIm][HCO3]) from CO2 and methanol, exhibiting high recyclability. Experimental and theoretical studies revealed that [CnCmIm][HCO3] forms the CO2-adduct, with 72% yield of DMC at 25 °C, 1 MPa CO2 pressure. Owing to the difficulty in synthesis and the expensive nature of ionic liquids, it is quite necessary to use an alternative cheap catalyst. Wen et al.168e showed that K2CO3 and KHCO3 can catalyze CO2 conversion to DMC with propylene glycol under supercritical CO2 and methanol. A moderate yield of DMC (30%) and less possibility in obtaining by-products are the major advantages in their study. Thus, one-pot production of DMC from CO2 in the bulk scale could be achieved by using this cheap catalytic process.
4. CO2 conversion from ambient air
CO2 capture and conversion from ambient air bearing CO2 under highly diluted conditions with a partial pressure of 400 ppm is quite noteworthy to mention here. In order to have high efficiency of the catalysts for this reaction, it should have very high selectivity for CO2 capture (high CO2/N2 selectivity). Thus, this CO2 utilization process is highly challenging from the environmental perspective. Direct air capture (DAC) has wide scope for implementation of this technology in an enclosed environment like submarine, aircraft etc. However the scope and utility of diverse materials have remained unexplored to date. Direct extraction of CO2 from ambient air or direct air capture (DAC) is becoming quite popular as it can be applied in real world carbon capture purposes.169 DAC is meritorious since it separates CO2 from distributed sources. Through DAC, anywhere in the globe, adsorbed CO2 will be subjected to produce fuels, pharmaceuticals or other important chemicals.170 Carbon capture through DAC deals with CO2 under ultra-diluted conditions, which is 350 times lower than normal coal-based flue gas. Herein, we discuss some DAC prospects for conversion of CO2 to methanol. Furthermore, other low selectivity products such as CH4 and HCOOH are also interesting as these are high energy fuel products obtained by reducing CO2 with H2. Here abundant H2 is produced from the electrolysis of water using renewable energy sources like solar, wind, etc. Among all the hydrogenation products, methanol is the most valuable because of its promising application in direct methanol fuel cells and it is also a hydrogen storage medium (12.5 wt% H2). Olah and coworkers have demonstrated a one-pot CO2 capture and conversion over pentaethylenehexamine (PEHA) and a Ru-PNP complex as a homogeneous catalyst171 (Table 2). The CO2 reduction product methanol can be simply distilled out from the reaction medium for further enhancing the CO2 to methanol conversion and this is commercially explored in the George Olah Renewable Methanol plant in Reykjavik, Iceland.172 In their study they used a shorter polyamine chain such as PEHA as a CO2 capturing agent as well as an activating agent of the catalyst. PEHA is deliberately used because of its significant CO2 adsorption capacity in both diluted and concentrated CO2 sources.173 The reaction conditions for methanol at relatively low temperatures (125–165 °C) using air as a CO2 source are shown in Table 2. CO2 transformation to methanol proceeds with a bifunctional princer complex through two intermediate steps involving ammonium carbamate, ammonium formate, and N-formyl intermediates (steps 2–4, Fig. 23). It is said that the –NH moiety of the PNP princer ligand is significant for selective transformation of methanol from N-formyl intermediates (step 4, Fig. 13) and also imparts high stability during catalysis. This research shows chemical transformation of 79% CO2 from air to CH3OH with a reusable catalyst, solvents and amines after separating CH3OH from the product (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 23  CO2 capture from air and direct conversion to methanol using polyamine as the catalyst and the proposed mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 24  Reaction sequence for direct conversion of CO2 from air to methanol using 3.4 mmol PEHA, 20 μmol catalyst1 (Ru-catalyst, shown in Table 2), 50 bar H2, 40 h at 155 °C was mixed with aqueous triglyme. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Table 2 Hydrogenation of CO2 from air to methanol using homogeneous princer metal complexes.a Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society









Entry
Amine
Cat.

T (°C)
Additive
CH3OHb (mmol)
TON (CH3OH)





a Reaction conditions: PEHA = 3.4 mmol, TMG = 8.5 mmol, DBU = 8.5 mmol, K3PO4 = 1 mmol, CO2/H2 (1:3) = 75 bar, catalyst = 20 μmol, and THF = 10 mL. Entries 1–7 and 9–10, 95 °C for 18 h and 155 °C for 18 h. Entry 8, 95 °C for 18 h. Entries 11–13, 155 °C for 40 h.
b Determined by 1H NMR. TON = turnover number.





1
PEHA
1
95–155
K3PO4
9
450


2
PEHA
2
95–155
K3PO4
9.1
455


3
PEHA
3
95–155
K3PO4
—
—


4
PEHA
4
95–155
K3PO4
—
—


5
PEHA
5
95–155
K3PO4
—
—


6
TMG
1
95–155
K3PO4
—
—


7
DBU
1
95–155
K3PO4
1.6
80


8
PEHA
1
95
K3PO4
—
—


9
PEHA
1
95–155
—
7.6
380


10
—
1
95–155
—
Traces
—


11
PEHA
1
155
K3PO4
13.8
690


12
PEHA
1
155
—
10.4
520


13
PEHA
1
155
—
21.2
1060




When polyamines are used as catalysts they adsorb CO2 which may require a high regeneration temperature and consequently significant decomposition possibility. This drawback can be mitigated by 7a-substituted pyrrolizidine carboxamides, as proposed by Gademann and co-workers.174 They hypothesized experimentally that aminopyrrolizidines have several advantages over conventional amines due to their arrangement in solution. Generally, caged-amines have a higher t90% value (time until 90% of maximal CO2 saturation) than linear alkyl amines like methanolamine.175 This reflects faster CO2 adsorption kinetics (Fig. 25) together with significantly higher reduction of CO2 to the corresponding formamide in a high turnover number (TON = 778). Additionally, the reaction also delivered methanol as the product of the 6-electron reduction and aziridines to oxazolidinones as an important commodity chemical (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 25  Time dependent CO2-absorption profile of pyrrolizidine 6 and linear diamine 2 under diluted CO2 conditions (90% N2; 10% CO2) in PEG200 (a). Direct air capture of pyrrolizidine 6 (red) and PEG200 (black) compared to the blank measurement (grey) in a flow of compressed air (9 mL min−1) (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 26  CO2 conversion with pyrrolizidine to methanol in THF at 155 °C, 134 h using 2.39 μmol Ru-MACHO-BH as catalyst (A); CO2 reaction with aziridine at 1 atm CO2, 160 °C, 15 h (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In Table 3 we have summarized a comprehensive overview for selective synthesis of a few important CO2 reduction products over a wide range of catalysts.176–209 Although CO and CH4 are rather common and generally shows high selectivity, but the selective synthesis of methanol, DME and other lower olefins is quite challenging. At low conversion level of CO2 this reaction is associated with other hydrogenated products as seen from Table 3. Thus, direct hydrogenation of CO2 to liquid fuel by avoiding CO route is highly desirable. Co6MnOx shows high selectivity in liquid fuel, C5+ (53.2 C-mol%) at relatively low temperature (200 °C).185 A multifunctional Na–Fe-HZSM-5 catalyst showed direct conversion of CO2 to gasoline (C5–11) with a selectivity of 78% along with 4% selectivity for CH4 at 22% conversion level.183 The zirconium-based catalyst In–Zr/SAPO shows a high olefin (C2+) selectivity of 36% at the cost of only <70% CO selectivity, because of the promotional effect of Zr that creates more oxygen vacancies, stabilizes intermediates and prevents the sintering of the active sites. Addition of K on the Fe–Co bimetallic catalyst deposited on Al2O3 promotes a lower olefin selectivity (69%) by enhancing the CO2 adsorption and simultaneously suppressing the H2 adsorption. In K–Mn–Fe/Al2O3, KAlH4 is the part of the active component that promotes H2 activation and increases the lower olefin selectivity to 62.4%.
Table 3 CO2 hydrogenation to CO, CH4, CH3OH, DME and hydrocarbons over supported catalysts




Catalyst

T (°C)

P (MPa)
CO2 conv. (%)
Selectivity (%)
Ref.


CO
CH4
CH3OH
DME
Olefins/hydrocarbons




Fe–Mo–Al2O3
600
1
45
100
—
—
—
—

176



La–Fe–Ni
350
—
16.3
96.6
—
—
—
—

177



Ni–La/Na-BETA
350


65
—
100
—
—
—

178



Au–CuO/SBA-15
250
3
24.2
—
—
13.5
—
—

179



Cu–Zn–Mn-KIT-6
180
4
8.2
—
—
99
—
—

180



Co/SiO2
360


44.3
—
86.5
—
—
—

181



Cu–Zn–Al/HZSM-5
270
3
30.6




10.4
49.2



182



Na–Fe/HZSM-5
320
3
22
—
4
—
—
78 (C5–C11)

183



V–Cu–Zn–Zr/HZSM-5
270
3
32.5
28
—
13.2
58.8
—

117



Cu–Zn–Zr/zeolite
240
3
23.6
24.5
—
25.5
49.3
—

184



Co6MnOx
200
8
15.3
0.4 (C-mol%)
—
—
—
92.9 (C1–C4) (C-mol%)

185



53.2 (C5+)


ZnO–ZrO2
320
5
10
—
—
91
—
—

186



CuNi2 in CeO2 NT
260
3
17.8
—
—
78.8
—
—

187



Pd/In2O3
300
5
20
—
—
70
—
—

188



Cu–ZnO
250
3
29
—
—
84
—
—

189



Rh–SrTiO3
300
—
8
95
—
—
—
—

190



Cu–Zn/SiO2
220
3
14
—
—
57
—
—

191



Cu–Zn–Al–La/HZSM-5
250
3
43.8
24.6
—
4.3
71.2
—

118



In–Zr/SAPO
380
3
26
64
—
—
—
C2+/lower olefins (36)

192



Ni–SiO2/GO
470
—
54
—
88
—
—
—

193



Ni–CeO2
700
0.1
40
100
—
—
—
—

194



Cu–Ni/γ-Al2O3
600
0.1
29
80
—
—
—
—

195



PtCO/CeO2
300
0.1
3.3
71
—
—
—
—

196



PtCo/γ-Al2O3
300
0.1
5
90
—
—
—
—

196



Mo2C
300
0.1
9
94
—
—
—
—

196



Pd–Ni, Pd–Mg, Pd–Li on SiO2
450
0.1
(43–60)
—
88–95
—
—
—

197



Ni/CexZr1−xO2
350
0.1
70
—
99
—
—
—

198



K–Mn–Fe/Al2O3
290
1.4
41.4
11.5
—
—
—
C2–C5 (62.4)

199



C1 (26)


Co–Pt/Al2O3
220
2
6.8
—
93.1
—
—
C2–C4 (6.8)

200



Fe–Co–K/Al2O3
300
1.1
31
18
13
—
—
C2+ (69)

201



Pd–CaO/MCM-41
250
3
12
—
—
65
—
—

202





Among other catalysts, Cu–Zn–Al/HZSM-5 showed over 30% CO2 conversion with 15% DME yield.182 In V–Cu–Zn–Zr/HZSM-5, the DME yield is dependent on the vanadium amount and the highest 58.8% DME selectivity can be obtained with this catalyst although methanol is also another side product.117 For the Cu–Zn–Zr–zeolite system, the combination of Cu/Zn/Zr as a methanol synthesis catalyst along with the HZSM-5 zeolite as the dehydration catalyst provides one-step CO2 hydrogenation to DME.184 A La-Containing catalyst, Cu–Zn–Al–La/HZSM-5, with the optimum loading of 2 wt% La increases CO2 conversion and selectivity to DME, where La promotes activity by increasing the dispersion of Cu at the catalyst surface. The synergetic interaction between ZnO–ZrO2 solid solution showed 91% methanol selectivity in the CO2 reduction.186 Compared to Au/SBA-15, addition of CuO provides a strong interaction between Au and CuO for promoting CO2 hydrogenation to methanol.179 CuNi2/CeO2 NT showed a methanol selectivity of 78.8% with a space–time yield of 18.1 mmol (gcat h)−1 at 17.8% CO2 conversion. A strong interaction between Cu–Ni and CeO2 NT partially reduces Ce4+ to Ce3+, thus forming oxygen vacancies at the surface for adsorption and activation of more CO2.187 At the optimum loading of Cu–Zn (28.3 wt%) on the porous silica support 57% methanol selectivity was obtained.
Hydrogenation of CO2 to formic acid is generally carried out in alkaline bicarbonate solutions. But the high stability of bicarbonate is a major setback for this reaction. In Table 4 we have highlighted some of the representative heterogeneous catalysts in the CO2 hydrogenation reaction.134–136,203–209 The Au/SiO2-Schiff base catalyst showed good catalytic activity for CO2 hydrogenation to formate through a non-bicarbonate pathway.203 Here CO2 activates to the carbamate intermediate at the Au-schiff base interface that selectively transformed into formate. Addition of triethylamine (NEt3) as an additive is useful in a polar solvent as it adsorbs more CO2. Highly strained Pd NPs on reduced graphene oxide show good catalytic activity for hydrogenation of bicarbonate to formate.135 Pd NPs supported on the carbon support show 92% yield of formate (TOF 105 h−1) by hydrogenation of ammonium carbamates in a water–ethanol mixture at 20 °C.205 Ru NPs show the synthesis of formic acid under supercritical CO2 in the Et3N–methanol–water system with a TON of 6351 h−1.207 A sustainable and green synthesis of formic acid from CO2 and H2 using a basic ionic liquid, [DAMI][TfO]/PPh3 and Si(CH2)3NH(CSCH3){RuCl3 (PPh3)} as the catalyst is shown,208 where the TOF under this condition reaches 1840 h−1. Functionalized MCM-41 bound RuCl3 is utilized as the catalyst for CO2 conv. to formic acid under supercritical CO2.209 Interestingly the hydrogenation activity depends on the functionality (–SH, –NH2–, –CN) present in the MCM-41. Cu/CuCr2O4 with metallic Cu as the active site shows the conv. of gaseous CO2 and H2 to formic acid in a fixed-bed reactor with 87.8% selectivity of formic acid at 14.6% conv. of CO2.209
Table 4 CO2 hydrogenation to formic acid/formates with representative heterogeneous catalysts




Catalyst

T (°C)

P
H2 (atm)

P
CO2 (atm)

P
H2 (MPa)/PCO2 (MPa)
Additives
Time (h)
TOF (h−1)
Ref.




Ru/γ-Al2O3
80




5/8.5
NEt3
1
91

136



Au/SiO2-Schiff base
90




5/3


12
1206

203



Pd/r-GO (2 wt%)
100
40




KHCO3 (as CO2 source)
10
212

135



Pd/r-GO (3.2 μmol Pd)
100
40






32
221.5


Ir-CTF complex
90




1/1
KHCO3
2
358

204



Pd/AC
20




2.75/0
NaHCO3
1
527

134



Pd/Al2O3
20




2.75/0
NH4HCO3
1
278


Pd/AC
20




5.52/0
NH4HCO3
2
836


Ir-COF
120




4/4
Et3N
0.5
1500

142



Pd/AC
20
27.14
0


NH2CO2NH4
8
105

205



Cu/CuCr2O4
140
30 (total P)




5
4.19

206



RuNPs
80
49
128


NEt3
3
6351

207



Si(CH2)3NH(CSCH3){RuCl3(PPh3)}
80
89
89


[DAMI][TfO]/PPh3
2
1840

208



Ru/MCM-41
80
53
92


NEt3/PPh3
1
1075

209





5. Outlooks and future challenges
Utilizing waste CO2 as a single carbon source to produce fuels and complex chemicals is a significant footstep to keep the balance of the carbon cycle of nature. The comprehensive understanding of several CO2 reduction processes over supported and un-supported catalysts has potential benefits for future research in this direction. For achieving sustainability in the CO2 reduction, the critical issues are addressed below:
(1) CO2 hydrogenation is often unfavorable due to extreme thermodynamic and kinetic limitations. To overcome such problems several approaches including catalyst design, stability of the active sites, choice of porous support, optimization of the reaction conditions, wettability of the surface, chemical and hydrothermal stability as well as understanding of the reaction mechanism are necessary. Often poor selectivity of CO2 reduction products is a drawback of the process and it requires thorough investigation on thermodynamics, kinetics together with the reaction intermediates. In this context it is challenging to understand how the active site of the catalysts undergoes transformations during the course of the reaction via stabilization of the key intermediates. Also the cost-effectiveness of the process and the poisoning effect of the catalysts should have to be focused on. Furthermore, the purity of the CO2 source often plays a crucial role in the feasibility of the process. Flue gas contains CO2, N2, SOx, NOx and moisture having a low concentration of CO2 (∼15 v/v%) in the mixture.210 Thus, selective adsorption of CO2 from the other gases in the flue gas stream by using a basic monoethanolamine (MEA) column followed by the release of CO2 rich gases through temperature/pressure manipulation is essential to avoid any interruption in the reaction by other gases. For example, traces of water may deactivate the catalyst or SOx may act as a catalyst poison, and N2/NOx could interfere with the reaction to reduce the efficiency of the catalyst. To date, most of the heterogeneous catalysts can activate CO2 at elevated pressure (up to 6 MPa or more) with a few exceptions of some homogenous catalysts (as discussed before). Thus, it is highly desirable to design catalysts for CO2 conversion at ambient CO2 pressure to meet the cost-efficiency of the process.
(2) RWGS is thermodynamically favorable at high temperature; thus, at 400 °C the equilibrium constant is very low. Although, the process requires a higher temperature (>700 °C), but it is economically not profitable. To increase the equilibrium constant, a hydrogen-rich feed or CO2-rich mixture might be profitable. Since methanation is thermodynamically favorable at lower temperature (<600 °C), CO2-to-methanol and CO2-FT are exothermic. So under low temperature and high pressure conditions, the reaction can be allowed, but still it is kinetically disadvantageous under these conditions. CO2 reduction to CO, CH3OH, CH4 and hydrocarbons can occur via hydrogen transfer to CO2 forming formate and later a hydrogenation and dissociation to generate CH4 and CH3OH. For RWGS, CO2 hydrogenation initially forms carboxylates that dissociate to CO and OH and further hydrogenate to hydrocarbons, CH4, and CH3OH. Therefore, future efforts should be directed towards designing a suitable catalyst for selective hydrogenation products. Here, CO might be an important intermediate because it favors methanol formation if the support facilitates a stronger interaction and stabilization of CO. Therefore catalyst screening to identify intermediates and to understand the adsorption configuration of CO2 and key intermediates by DFT calculation and other in situ studies (environmental TEM, synchrotron-based XRD and X-ray absorption techniques) are mandatory. Another aspect is the designing of water-tolerant catalysts because a large amount of water is produced during CO2 hydrogenation, leading to the formation of hydroxyl species at the catalyst surface. This caused the poisoning of the catalyst and the reduction of methanol yield.211 Nevertheless, for flow reactions, a high permeability of the membrane is necessary to eliminate water from the reaction mixture. In this context, it is significant to design hydrophobic catalysts to protect bimetallic nanoparticles from being deactivated by water.212,213 Although Cu–ZnO is a promising catalyst for methanol synthesis, novel technologies with rational designing of reactors could improve CO2 to methanol conversion at lower temperature and pressure. In RWGS, the CO selectivity is relatively high, but it suffers from poor CO2 conversion even at 700 °C. Again, commercially methanol (6 Mt per year) is produced mainly from syngas containing a low CO2 concentration. The process thus would be potentially useful for industrial purposes if methanol is obtained from CO2 rich syngas with inexpensive Fe and Cu containing catalysts.214
(3) CO conversion to lower olefins is a major obstacle on bifunctional catalysts because CO2 is eliminated by the water-gas shift reaction. Thus it is necessary to control the composition of Lewis and Brønsted acid sites of the catalyst to increase the CO conversion and inhibit the CO2 production. Although Fe-based heterogeneous catalysts showed CO2-to-light olefins, more efficient catalysts for the formation of the C–C bond are highly desirable that can couple with RWGS, F–T and/or methanol-to-olefin (MTO) reactions to optimize the yield of hydrocarbon fuels.
(4) For the synthesis of DMC from CO2, a low yield of the product is still problematic for large-scale applications, where water that is formed during the reaction inhibits the overall process. Thus a high surface area catalyst having hierarchical porosity is desirable to increase the DMC yield. A high yield in DMC synthesis needs in-depth structural engineering to optimize the acid–base properties of the catalyst together with its surface composition and nanostructure.
(5) DME is synthesized by a two-step tandem reaction, which is primarily dependent on the methanol dehydration step. Poisoning by water and the formation of coke during the reaction deactivate methanol dehydration reactions for long-term operation. It is inevitable to design stable catalysts (having significant water uptake ability) which could resist water formation and coke deposition problems.
(6) For CO2-to-formic acid conversion, several homogeneous complexes of Rh215 and Ru216 showed high activity in supercritical CO2 and ionic liquids. Recently these complexes are stabilized on functional porous polymer surfaces for direct conversion of CO2 into formic acid.208,217 Off-course a high surface area nanocatalyst having good dispersibility of metal nanoparticles can provide higher recyclability and better durability of the catalysts in the CO2-to-formate conversion. The heterogeneous catalysts should be sufficiently active to produce formate within a very short time to enhance the yield of formic acid. But most of the solid catalysts showed poor selectivity as well as low yield because of the rapid kinetics of the C–H bond formation reactions.218 To date, a high yield of formic acid requires either the toxic phosphine ligand or use precious noble metal catalysts. Almost all the homogeneous catalysts contain expensive noble metal complexes. Thus CO2 conversion to formic acid is not economically suitable at this moment. Again, the stability of formic acid under the reaction conditions with these precious catalysts is questionable since the reverse reaction (HCOOH ⇌ CO2 + H2) cannot be ruled out. To ensure the economical benefit of HCOOH the bulk scale production is necessary to meet the demand of the industry. Hence, it requires rational design of new catalysts bearing Earth abundant active sites that could prevent the further decomposition of formic acid once it is formed.
(7) Generally formaldehyde is produced from methanol at high temperature, but, if it is produced from syngas, the process would require lower temperature, which may provide new opportunities for energy saving synthesis of formaldehyde in a sustainable manner. Another aspect in this process is the stabilization of formaldehyde in water, as an alcohol can be used to stabilize formaldehyde via formation of methanediol.219 This may change the thermodynamic aspects of the reaction and accelerate more CO2 conversion. While it is found that formaldehyde is mainly trapped as a reduction product of CO2, it requires additional energy and techniques to liberate solvent-stabilized formaldehyde to obtain free formaldehyde. This circumstance largely prevents the mass-production of formaldehyde via CO2 reduction. Hence a low cost and sustainable route is still inevitable for bulk production of free formaldehyde.
(8) CO2 hydrogenation requires a bulk source of H2, which is mainly provided by steam reforming, partial oxidation of oil or via coal gasification. This method produces large H2 along with other greenhouse gases like CO2, which is not desirable. Hence generation of H2 from sustainable sources like water splitting, biomass conversion etc. is inevitable, which can produce CO2-free H2 with no byproducts except for O2. If H2 is supplied to the reaction system in situ from water, then it would be energy saving. At lower cost of renewable H2, CO2 reduction will thus become economically viable because lighter alkanes will then be replaced by cheap H2. Generally dry reforming of alkanes produces H2 at higher temperature, which leads to significant deactivation of catalysts.220 Thus with all certainty abundant water or biomass could be the obvious choice for syngas production in the future to narrow down the energy cost.
(9) Several carbon and other heteroatomic nucleophiles have shown stoichiometric CO2 reduction to form corresponding adduct with CO2. CO2 addition by hydride transfer reaction is a complicated process with a challenge to retain the activity of hydride under reaction conditions. To circumvent the selectivity issue, stable hydrides are necessary. Stoichiometric carboxylation of organic molecules using a transition metal forms reactive M–C intermediates, which then reacted with CO2. For reusing the catalyst for consecutive cycles, it is highly important to release carboxylates from the catalyst. Using organometallic reagents in a stoichiometic quantity or by adding a strong base, the above problems could be resolved. But it is more desirable to develop a sustainable strategy for prompt release of the product from transition metal intermediates. Although CO2 reduction is investigated both experimentally and theoretically, understanding the role of water at the molecular level for the homogeneous system is still in dispute. The interaction among the active components, support, and promoters and how CO2 is activated and interacted with H2 are still elusive. Another challenging task will be the hydrogenation of carbonate and bicarbonate owing to their safety and convenience in handling and storing. On the other hand, there is a strong competition between electrochemical and chemical CO2 reduction because H2 used for chemical reduction of CO2 is less cost-effective and difficult in handling and involves complex purification steps. Electrochemical CO2 reduction is advantageous since H2 is directly obtained from water electrolysis.221 However, during electrochemical CO2 reduction, the highly competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) decreases the CO2 reduction efficiency, which provides the opportunity to couple thermo-catalytic reactions in pressure or flow reactors for more viable and sustainable CO2 reduction to fuels.
(10) Finally CO2 conversion from ultra-diluted sources and ambient air will actually solve the real world carbon emission problems.222 Goldberg and coworkers collected ∼75 Mt CO2 per year from the renewable sources of the Kerguelen plateau and used it as a chemical feedstock to convert it to hydrocarbon fuels.223 The cartoon shown in Fig. 27 is illustrating the model of the CO2 reduction process. The Fischer–Tropsch reaction thus enables the production of ∼770 million gallons of diesel from ∼8 Mt CO2 that is collected from 47 TWh of wind energy. The concentration of CO2 under ultra-diluted conditions is ∼400 ppm, which is ∼350 times more diluted than flue gas from coal-fired pilot plants. Under extremely low CO2 partial pressure, physisorbent materials like MOF, activated carbon and zeolites are inefficient to catalyze,224 while chemisorbent materials225 are suitable for accumulating enough substrate (CO2) for conversion. On the other hand physisorbent materials are useful as they can interact with CO2 through weak forces and thus release on demand. In this context, the amine decorated porous polymer network PPN-6226 showed outstanding ability as a catalyst (CO2ads is 1.04 mmol g−1; selectivity 3.6 × 1010) under diluted CO2 conditions (∼412 ppm); the fact is demonstrating that high surface area structured porous polymers could be promising for CO2 conversion in real-world applications.
 Fig. 27  Schematic pathway for CO2 captured from ambient air used in fuel production at a remote place. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright, 2013, American Chemical Society. 
(11) Although metal oxide based nanomaterials are mostly explored for CO2 reduction reactions, their low surface area is a major drawback to achieve a higher product yield under mild conditions. In this context, porous organic polymers (POPs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have huge scope to be used as catalysts or supports in the reduction of CO2. The main disadvantage is their poor hydrothermal stability that can be improved by enhanced cross-linking among the building units.227 The green synthesis of POPs/COFs using readily available monomers, the use of less hazardous or green solvents and a high degree of cross-linking involved can offer a robust catalyst228 for this reaction. With the help of theoretical and experimental tools, low cost multifunctional POPs/COFs could facilitate the CO2 reduction to fuels and fine chemicals industrially viable in the near future.
6. Conclusion and remarks
In this contribution we reviewed several promising approaches for CO2 reduction to fuels and other important nucleophilic addition products. It is yet very challenging to identify new recyclable catalysts with a high surface area, easy assessability and a large number of active sites that can provide these valuable products in good yield with high turnover numbers. It is also imperative to generate a CO2-free H2 source from renewable sources for large scale utilization of CO2. CO2-to-CO conversion is an endothermic reaction (ΔH = 41.2 kJ mol−1), thus 100% CO selectivity can be accomplished at a high temperature (>600 °C) and 1 MPa pressure.215 On the other hand, the exothermic reaction of CO2 hydrogenation to other products, CH3OH, DME, lighter olefins etc. requires a lower temperature (<100 °C), which prevents CO2 activation under this condition. Therefore it is challenging to design CO2-philic catalyst surfaces that may work at low temperatures. Transition metal supported porous nanocatalysts offer very promising results in terms of high yield of liquid fuels together with the durability for long term operation. The nature of mixed metal oxides, the acidity of zeolites/supports together with hierarchical porosity and high surface area may play a crucial role in increasing the catalysts’ efficiency and the overall yield of the liquid fuels under optimum temperature and pressure conditions. But the drawbacks associated with the use of supported metal catalysts e.g., sintering at a high reaction temperature, the effect of water produced during the reaction and thermodynamic limitations should be carefully evaluated during the catalyst designing process. Hence, multifunctional catalysts that combine the wide chemical reactions (methanation, methanol synthesis, RWGS, olefin synthesis from methanol) are suitable to overcome the large thermodynamic limitations in CO2 hydrogenation. Cheap and scalable porous polymers could be utilized as catalysts in future research on CO2 reduction reactions and could make the processes green and sustainable. Successful and pilot plant scale-up for direct reduction of CO2 using the feedstock of the flue gas mixture into fuels and fine chemicals will not only reduce the production cost of the process, but also contribute significantly to mitigating global warming and ocean acidification together with solving the future energy demand.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
AB wishes to thank DST-SERB for a core-research grant (Project No. CRG/2018/000230). BC and AB would like to acknowledge DST, New Delhi for funding under Indo-Russian project grant (project no. DST/INT/RUS/RSF/P-25). AM acknowledges Prof. Alex Schechter, Ariel University for his support and fruitful discussion. SD acknowledges research funding support by the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India, for grant number BT/RLF/Re-entry/41/2017 under the DBT Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship (2019–2024).
Notes and references
R. A. Feely, C. L. Sabine, K. Lee, W. Berelson, J. Kleypas, V. J. Fabry and F. J. Millero, Science, 2004, 305, 362–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Kothandaraman, A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. A. Olah and G. K. S. Prakash, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5831–5838 RSC ; 
  (b) A. W. Kleij, M. North and A. Urakawa, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1036–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            A. Modak and S. Jana, in Carbon Dioxide Chemistry, Capture and Oil Recovery, ed. I. Karamé, J. Shaya and H. Srour, IntechOpen, London, UK,  2018, ch. 9, pp. 165–183 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) A. Modak and S. Jana, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 276, 107–132 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Wang, Z. G. Xie, K. deKrafft and W. L. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H.-Q. Xu, J. Hu, D. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 86–107 RSC .

  (a) D. J. Tranchemontagne, J. K. Mendoza-Cortés, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1257–1283 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Liu, P. K. Thallapally, B. P. McGrail, D. R. Brown and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2308–2322 RSC ; 
  (c) M. L. Ding and H. L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3194–3201 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Prasetya, B. C. Donose and B. P. Ladewig, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16390–16402 RSC .

  (a) A. Modak, M. Nandi, J. Mondal and A. Bhaumik, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 248–250 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Zhong, Y. Q. Su, X. W. Chen, X. J. Li and R. H. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4855–4863 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P. Bhanja, A. Modak and A. Bhaumik, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 244–257 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. P. Hao, W. C. Li, D. Qian and A. H. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 853–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Dutta, A. Bhaumik and K. C. W. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3574–3592 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Modak and A. Bhaumik, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 232, 157–162 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. Ren, H. Li, J. Chen, L. Wei, A. Modak, H. Yang and Q. Yang, Carbon, 2017, 114, 473–481 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. G. Qi, Y. B. Wang, L. Estevez, X. N. Duan, N. Anako, A. H. A. Park, W. Li, C. W. Jones and E. P. Giannelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 444–452 RSC ; 
  (b) B. Ohs, M. Kroedel and M. Wessling, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 204, 13–20 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Rao, M. Wang, Z. M. Shang, Y. W. Hou, G. Z. Fan and J. F. Li, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 670–677 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, D. N. Jiang, D. L. Huang, G. M. Zeng, P. Xu, C. Lai, M. Chen, M. Cheng, C. Zhang and Z. W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22848–22870 RSC .

  (a) R. Gomes, P. Bhanja and A. Bhaumik, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10050–10053 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. F. Zeng, R. Q. Zou and Y. L. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2855–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) P. X. Guan, J. K. Qiu, Y. L. Zhao, H. Y. Wang, Z. Y. Li, Y. L. Shi and J. J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12459–12462 RSC .
M. B. Folgueras, M. Alonso and R. M. Diaz, Energy, 2013, 55, 426–435 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Mikkelsen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 RSC ; 
  (b) C. Maeda, Y. Miyazaki and T. Ema, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1482–1497 RSC ; 
  (c) G. Fiorani, W. S. Guo and A. W. Kleij, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1375–1389 RSC ; 
  (d) P. Bhanja, A. Modak and A. Bhaumik, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 7278–7287 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) A. Rafiee, K. R. Khalilpour, D. Milani and M. Panahi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5771–5794 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
A. Banerjee, G. R. Dick, T. Yoshino and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2016, 531, 215–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. X. Guo, B. Yu, J. N. Xie and L. N. He, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 474–479 RSC ; 
  (b) A. Molla, K. Ghosh, B. Banerjee, M. A. Iqubal, S. K. Kundu, S. M. Islam and A. Bhaumik, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 477, 220–229 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Y. Liu, X. Q. Chai, X. Cai, M. Y. Chen, R. C. Jin, W. P. Ding and Y. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9775–9779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. A. Pramudita and K. Motokura, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4834–4843 RSC ; 
  (b) F. Goodarzi, L. Q. Kang, F. R. Wang, F. Joensen, S. Kegnaes and J. Mielby, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 1566–1570 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kaiser, R. B. Unde, C. Kern and A. Jess, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2013, 85, 489–499 CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
G. F. Nemet, M. W. Callaghan, F. Creuzig, G. S. Fuss, J. Hartmann, J. Hilaire, W. F. Lamb, J. C. Minx, S. Rogers and P. Smith, Environ. Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 063003 CrossRef .
W. Lee, Y. S. Kim and S. P. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 331, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. J. Morris, G. J. Meyer and E. Fujita, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1983–1994 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) V. A. Peshkov, O. P. Pereshivko, A. A. Nechaev, A. A. Peshkov and E. V. Van der Eycken, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3861–3898 RSC ; 
  (c) S. Yoshida, K. Fukui, S. Kikuchi and T. Yamada, Chem. Lett., 2009, 38, 786–787 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Hu, J. Ma, Q. Zhu, Z. Zhang, C. Wu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5399–5403 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) G. Zhang, H. Yang and H. Fei, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2519–2525 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. Ye, L. Zhu, S. Yan, M. Miao, X. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Lan and D. Yu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8324–8330 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) P. García-Domínguez, L. Fehr, G. Rusconi and C. Nevado, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3914–3918 RSC ; 
  (h) W. J. Yoo and C. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 1503–1506 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) S. Sharma, A. K. Singh, D. Singh and D. Kim, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1404–1407 RSC ; 
  (j) W. Zhang, N. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Ding and X. Lu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8072–8076 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) J. Ye, L. Song, W. Zhou, T. Ju, Z. Yin, S. Yan, Z. Zhang, J. Li and D. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10022–10026 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (l) S. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Cao, C. Chen and C. Xi, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4515–4519 RSC .
S. Ogo, R. Kabe, H. Hayashi, R. Harada and S. Fukuzumi, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4657–4663 RSC .
K. W. Huang, J. H. Han, C. B. Musgrave and E. Fujita, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 508–513 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsubara, E. Fujita, M. D. Doherty, J. T. Muckerman and C. Creutz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15743–15757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taheri, E. J. Thompson, J. C. Fettinger and L. A. Berben, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7140–7151 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. H. Lim, A. M. Holder, J. T. Hynes and C. B. Musgrave, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16081–16095 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. H. Lim, S. Ilic, A. Alherz, B. T. Worrell, S. S. Bacon, J. T. Hynes, K. D. Glusac and C. B. Musgrave, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 272–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ilic, A. Alherz, C. B. Musgrave and K. D. Glusac, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2809–2836 RSC .
E. Hasegawa, N. Yoshioka, T. Tanaka, T. Nakaminato, K. Oomori, T. Ikoma, H. Iwamoto and K. Wakamatsu, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 7651–7665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Courtemanche, A. P. Pulis, É. Rochette, M. A. Légaré, D. W. Stephan and F. G. Fontaine, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9797–9800 RSC .
F. G. Fontaine, M. A. Courtemanche, M. A. Légaré and É. Rochette, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 334, 124–135 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Riduan, Y. Zhang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3322–3325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Frogneux, E. Blondiaux, P. Thuery and T. Cantat, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3983–3987 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, F. D. Bobbink, G. Laurenczy and P. J. Dyson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Wang, Y. M. Wang, W. Z. Zhang and X. B. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11996–12003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. B. Saptal and B. M. Bhanage, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1980–1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) E. Aldeco-Perez, A. J. Rosenthal, B. Donnadieu, P. Parameswaran, G. Frenking and G. Bertrand, Science, 2009, 326, 556–559 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. C. Sau, R. Bhattacharjee, P. K. Vardhanapu, G. Vijaykumar, A. Datta and S. K. Mandal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) V. T. Annibale, D. A. Dalessandro and D. Song, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16175–16183 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Yang, L. Yan, Q. Xie, Q. Liang and D. Song, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 2240–2245 RSC ; 
  (c) S. S. Bhojgude, T. Roy, R. G. Gonnade and A. T. Biju, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5424–5427 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) D. Yu, S. P. Teong and Y. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 293, 279–291 CrossRef ; 
  (e) J. N. Xie, B. Yu, C. X. Guo and L. N. He, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4061–4067 RSC ; 
  (f) T. W. Butcher, E. J. McClain, T. G. Hamilton, T. M. Perrone, K. M. Kroner, G. C. Donohoe, N. G. Akhmedov, J. L. Petersen and B. V. Popp, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 6428–6431 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) M. L. Lejkowski, R. Lindner, T. Kageyama, G. É. Bódizs, P. N. Plessow, I. B. Müller, A. Schäfer, F. Rominger, P. Hofmann, C. Futter, S. A. Schunk and M. Limbach, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14017–14025 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) M. van Gemmeren, M. Börjesson, A. Tortajada, S.-Z. Sun, K. Okura and R. Martin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6558–6562 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) M. Börjesson, T. Moragas, D. Gallego and R. Martin, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6739–6749 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (j) Z. Xin, C. Lescot, S. D. Friis, K. Daasbjerg and T. Skrydstrup, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6862–6866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Fontaine and D. W. Stephan, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2017, 3, 28–32 CrossRef .
C. M. Mömming, E. Otten, G. Kehr, R. Fröhlich, S. Grimme, D. W. Stephan and G. Erker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6643 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) G. Ménard and D. W. Stephan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1796–1797 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) C. H. Lim, A. M. Holder, J. T. Hynes and C. B. Musgrave, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10062–10066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Berkefeld, W. E. Piers and M. Parvez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10660 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Dobrovetsky and D. W. Stephan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2516–2519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wesselbaum, T. V. Stein, J. Klankermayer and W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7499–7502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsuo and H. Kawaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12362–12363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Stephan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 306–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Courtemanche, M. A. Légaré, L. Maron and F. G. Fontaine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9326–9329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Légaré, M. A. Courtemanche and F. G. Fontaine, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11362–11365 RSC .
X. Su, W. Lin, H. Cheng, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Yu, Z. Wud and F. Zhao, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1775–1781 RSC .

  (a) W. Wei and G. Jinlong, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2011, 5, 2–10 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. A. A. Aziz, A. A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono and A. Ahmad, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2647–2663 RSC ; 
  (c) P. Frontera, A. Macario, M. Ferraro and P. Antonucci, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 59 CrossRef ; 
  (d) P. Panagiotopoulou, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 542, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Li, F. Wang, S. He, H. Chen, Y. Zhao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2627–2633 RSC .
T. Abe, M. Tanizawa, K. Watanabe and A. Taguchi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 315–321 RSC .
K. Tang, W. Liu, J. Li, J. Guo, J. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Niu and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26839–26849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, J. Ren, M. Miao, Z. Li, J. Lin and K. Xie, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 18–30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, H. He, A. Traitangwong, M. Gong, V. Meeyoo, P. Li, C. Li, Z. Peng and S. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5636–5650 RSC .
W. Li, X. Nie, X. Jiang, A. Zhang, F. Ding, M. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Guo and C. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 397–408 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, J. Peng, T. Sun, S. Wang and S. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2014, 45, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Mao, Q. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Z. Li, H. Huang, Z. K. Jiang, Q. Q. Hu and X. J. Zhao, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 2857–2869 RSC .

  (a) S. J. Mitton and L. Turculet, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15258–15262 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Park, D. Bézier and M. Brookhart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11404–11407 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Khandelwal and R. J. Wehmschulte, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7323–7326 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. W. Chen, L. Falivene, L. Caporaso, L. Cavallo and E. Y. X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5321–5333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Liu, G. Q. Lu, Z. F. Yan and J. Beltramini, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 6518–6530 CrossRef CAS .
F. Studt, M. Behrens, E. L. Kunkes, N. Thomas, S. Zander, A. Tarasov, J. Schumann, E. Frei, J. B. Varley, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Norskov and R. Schlcgl, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1105–1111 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
J. Graciani, K. Mudiyanselage, F. Xu, A. E. Baber, J. Evans, S. D. Senanayake, D. J. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. F. Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, Science, 2014, 345, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, Z. Fan, J. Ye, J. Yan, Q. Ge, Y. Li, W. He, W. Yang and C. J. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 12, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, C. Liu, D. Mei and Q. Ge, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1296–1306 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin, A. J. Martin, C. Mondelli, S. Mitchell, T. F. Segawa, R. Hauert, C. Drouilly, D. C. Ferré and J. P. Ramirez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6261–6265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Yang, J. Evans, J. A. Rodriguez, M. G. White and P. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9909–9917 RSC ; 
  (b) D. Cheng, F. R. Negreiros, E. Aprà and A. Fortunelli, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 944–965 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. M. Rezayee, C. A. Huff and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(3), 1028–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) G. A. Olah, G. K. S. Prakash and A. Goeppert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12881–12898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. B. Noureldin, N. O. Elbashir, K. J. Gabriel and M. M. El-Halwagi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 625–636 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cheng, W. Zhou, J. C. Kang, S. He, S. L. Shi, Q. H. Zhang, Y. Pan, W. Wen and Y. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 334–347 CAS .
C. Marcilly, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 47–62 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 884–890 RSC .
P. Gao, S. Li, X. Bu, S. Dang, Z. Liu, H. Wang, L. Zhong, M. Qiu, C. Yang, J. Cai, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Rodemerck, M. Holena, E. Wagner, Q. Smejkal, A. Barkschat and M. Baerns, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1948–1955 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, R. Yao, Q. Ge, Z. Wen, X. Ji, C. Fang, J. Zhang, H. Xu and J. Sun, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 9958–9967 CrossRef .

  (a) X. Wang, G. Yang, J. Zhang, F. Song, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, N. Tsubaki and Y. Tan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5401–5412 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Liu, W. Zhou, Y. Yang, K. Cheng, J. Kang, L. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Min, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4708–4718 RSC .
Y. Tan, M. Fujiwara, H. Ando, Q. Xu and Y. Souma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1999, 38, 3225–3229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Xu, C. M. Shi, B. Liu, T. Wang, J. Zheng, W. P. Li, D. P. Liu and X. H. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 593–610 RSC .
X. Liu, W. Zhou, Y. Yang, K. Cheng, J. Kang, L. Zhang, G. Zhang, X. Min, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4708–4718 RSC .
J. Wei, Q. Ge, R. Yao, Z. Wen, C. Fang, L. Guo, H. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15174 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Galadima and O. Muraza, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 115, 109333 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, F. Yu, Y. An, Y. H. Zhao, Y. H. Sun, Z. G. Li, T. J. Lin, Y. J. Lin, X. Z. Qi, Y. Y. Dai, L. Gu, J. S. Hu, S. F. Jin, Q. Shen and H. Wang, Nature, 2016, 538, 84–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. He, Z. Liu, Y. Yoneyama, N. Nishiyama and N. Tsubaki, Chem. Eur. J., 2006, 12, 8296–8304 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Abello and D. Montane, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1538–1556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, Q. Ge, R. Yao, Z. Wen, C. Fang, L. Guo, H. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15174 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) X. D. Xu and J. A. Moulijn, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 305–325 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. D. Porosoff, B. Yan and J. G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 62–73 RSC .

  (a) S. W. Ragsdale, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol., 2004, 39, 165–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. C. Wang and J. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3053–3057 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. Vesselli, L. D. Rogatis, X. Ding, A. Baraldi, L. Savio, L. Vattuone, M. Rocca, P. Fornasiero, M. Peressi, A. Baldereschi, R. Rosei and G. Comelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11417–11422 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Y. X. Pan, C. J. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Catal., 2010, 272, 227–234 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Kattel, P. Liu and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9739–9754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kwak, L. Kovarik and J. Szanyi, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2449–2455 CrossRef CAS .
C. Leitenburg, A. Trovarelli and J. Kaŝpar, J. Catal., 1997, 166, 98–107 CrossRef .
S. Tada, O. J. Ochieng, R. Kikuchi, T. Haneda and H. Kameyama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10090–10100 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Jang, H. M. Kim, J. O. Shim, S. Y. Yoo, K. W. Jeon, H. S. Na, Y. L. Lee, D. W. Jeong, J. W. Bae, I. W. Nah and H. S. Roh, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1621–1633 RSC .
A. Aitbekova, L. Wu, C. J. Wrasman, A. Boubnov, A. S. Hoffman, E. D. Goodman, S. R. Bare and M. Cargnello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13736–13745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. S. Laitar, P. Müller and J. P. Sadighi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17196–17197 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Zhao, Z. Lin and T. B. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(49), 15637–15643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. H. Newton and B. F. Dodge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1933, 55, 4747–4759 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. C. Wang, N. Dietl, R. Kretschmer, J. B. Ma, T. Weiske, M. Schlangen and H. Schwarz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3703 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) L. E. Heim, H. Konnerth and M. H. G. Precht, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2347–2355 RSC ; 
  (d) L. E. Heim, H. Konnerth and M. H. G. Precht, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2347–2355 RSC .
S. Gambarotta, S. Strologo, C. Floriani, A. Chiesivilla and C. Guastini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 6278–6282 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Bahmanpour, A. Hoadley and A. Tanksale, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3500–3507 RSC .
S. Bontemps and S. Sabo-Etienne, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10253–10255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Montiel-Palma, M. Lumbierres, B. Donnadieu, S. Sabo-Etienne and B. Chaudret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 5624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dong, M. Ji, X. Yang, J. Yao and H. Chen, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 5,  DOI:10.3390/catal7010005 .
S. Bontemps, L. Vendier and S. Sabo-Etienne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4419–4425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Dey and T. N. Das, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2006, 26, 495–505 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inui and T. Takeguchi, Catal. Today, 1991, 10, 95–106 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gellert and U. Kogelschatz, Appl. Phys. B, 1991, 52, 14–21 CrossRef .
T. Ogawa, N. Inoue, T. Shikada and Y. Ohno, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2003, 12, 219–227 Search PubMed .
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711–1731 RSC .
C. Arcoumanis, C. Bae, R. Crookes and E. Kinoshita, Fuel, 2008, 87, 1014–1030 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, Y. Huang, F. Qiu and S. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 167, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
R. Khoshbin and M. Haghighi, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 4996–5003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arakawa, J. L. Dubois and K. Sayama, Energy Convers. Manage., 1992, 33, 521–528 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sugawa, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 665–668 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Xu, J. H. Lunsford, D. W. Goodman and A. Bhattacharyya, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 149, 289–301 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Liu, C. Yao, J. Zhang, D. Fan and D. Chen, Fuel, 2011, 90, 1738–1742 CrossRef CAS .
W. Alharbi, E. F. Kozhevnikova and I. V. Kozhevnikov, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7186–7193 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ladera, J. L. G. Fierro, M. Ojeda and S. Rojas, J. Catal., 2014, 312, 195–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 298–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Campelo, F. Lafont, J. M. Marinas and M. Ojeda, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 192, 85–96 CrossRef CAS .
E. Catizzone, A. Aloise, M. Migliori and G. Giordano, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 243, 102–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Kim, S. C. Baek, Y. Lee, K. Jun, M. J. Kim and I. S. Yoo, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 309, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hassanpour, M. Taghizadeh and F. Yaripour, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 4063–4069 CrossRef CAS .
E. Catizzone, A. Aloise, M. Migliori and G. Giordano, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 406–415 CrossRef .
S. P. Naik, T. Ryu, V. Bui, J. D. Miller, N. B. Drinnan and W. Zmierczak, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 362–368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Cao, S. Zhang, K. Wang, F. Ding and J. V. Wu, Catal. Commun., 2014, 55, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, H. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Guo and M. Jia, J. Rare Earths, 2013, 31, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, W. Lu, M. Wang and X. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Ereña, R. Garoña, J. M. Arandes, A. T. Aguayo and J. Bilbao, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2005, 3, A29 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) A. T. Aguayo, J. Erena, D. Mier, J. M. Arandes, M. Olazar and J. Bilbao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 5522–5530 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. D. Peng, B. A. Toseland and P. J. A. Tijm, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1999, 54, 2787–2792 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Low, B. Cheng and J. G. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 658–686 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Ertem, S. J. Konezny, C. M. Araujo and V. S. Batista, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 745–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Jessop, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 259–272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sakamoto, I. Shimizu and A. Yamamoto, Organometallics, 1994, 13, 407–409 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Geri, J. L. Ciatti and N. K. Szymczak, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7790–7793 RSC .
R. Kandel, G. Schatte and P. G. Jessop, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12512–12521 RSC .
J. F. Hull, Y. Himeda, W. H. Wang, B. Hashiguchi, R. Periana, D. J. Szalda, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 383–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Filonenko, R. van Putten, E. N. Schulpen, E. J. M. Hensen and E. A. Pidko, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1526–1530 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ogo, H. Hayashi and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2714–2715 Search PubMed .
S. Moret, P. J. Dyson and G. Laurenczy, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4017,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms5017 .
H. Takahashi, L. H. Liu, Y. Yashiro, K. Ioku, G. Bignall, N. Yamasaki and T. Kori, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 1585–1589 CrossRef CAS .
D. Preti, C. Resta, S. Squarcialupi and G. Fachinetti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12551–12554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Filonenko, W. L. Vrijburg, E. J. M. Hensen and E. A. Pidko, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, L. Yang, M. Lu and H. Lin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 813–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Bi, J. D. Lin, Y. M. Liu, D. L. Du, J. Q. Wang, H. Y. He and Y. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13583–13587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. M. Nguyen, H. Park, M. Banu, J. Y. Kim, D. H. Youn, G. Magesh, W. Y. Kim and J. S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105560–105566 RSC .
R. Tanaka, M. Yamashita and K. Nozaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14168–14169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Zhang, J. Fei, Y. Yu and X. Zheng, Catal. Commun., 2004, 5, 643–646 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. M. Yu, J. H. Fei, Y. P. Zhang and X. M. Zheng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2006, 17, 1097–1100 CAS .
J. H. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Y. Kim, S. W. Nam, J. H. Han, T. H. Lim, S. Gautam, K. H. Chae and C. W. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9490–9495 RSC .
Z. Yang, H. Zhang, B. Yu, Y. Zhao, G. Ji and Z. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1271–1274 RSC .
K. Park, G. H. Gunasekar, N. Prakash, K. D. Jung and S. Yoon, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3410–3413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Gunniya Hariyanandam, D. Hyun, P. Natarajan, K. D. Jung and S. Yoon, Catal. Today, 2016, 265, 52–55,  DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2015.10.037 ; 
  (b) T. Maihom, S. Wannakao, B. Boekfa and J. Limtrakul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17650–17658 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Inui and T. Yamamoto, Catal. Today, 1998, 45, 209–214 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Y. Li, D. E. Jiang, X. C. Zeng and Z. F. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1123–1129 RSC ; 
  (c) A. Swapnesh, V. C. Srivastava and I. D. Mall, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2014, 37, 1765–1777 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kusama, K. Okabe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kusama, K. Okabe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Energy, 1997, 22, 343–348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Izumi, Platinum Met. Rev., 1997, 41, 166 CAS .
L. S. Davy, D. Nieskens, Y. Ferrari, R. Liu and J. Kolonko, Catal. Commun., 2011, 14, 111–113 CrossRef .
C. Yang, R. Mu, G. Wang, J. Song, H. Tian, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3161–3167 RSC .
G. Huang, Q. Yang, Q. Xu, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7379–7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, Q. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Dai, X. Wang and X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6827–6830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inui, T. Yamamoto, M. Inoue, H. Hara, T. Takeguchi and J. B. Kim, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 186, 395–406 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takagawa, A. Okamoto, H. Fujimura, Y. Izawa and H. Arakawa, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 114, 525–528 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Zhang, G. Wang, B. Wang and L. Ling, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5243–5254 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Qian, M. Cui, Z. He, C. Wu, Q. Zhu, Z. Zhang, J. Ma, G. Yang, J. Zhang and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5685–5689 RSC ; 
  (c) L. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Liu, H. Wang, W. Zhang, Q. Yang, J. Ma, X. Dong, S. J. Yoo, J. G. Kim, X. Meng and F. S. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6104–6108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Tominaga, Y. Sasaki, M. Saito, K. Hagihara and T. Watanabe, J. Mol. Catal., 1994, 89, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. A. Pacheco and C. L. Marshall, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 2–29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Tundo and M. Selva, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 706–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. J. Feng, X. B. Lu and R. He, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 272, 347–352 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) I. Yamanaka, A. Funakawa and K. Otsuka, J. Catal., 2004, 221, 110–118 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) F. Arico and P. Tundo, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2016, 12, 2256–2266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Tomishige, T. Sakaihori, Y. Ikeda and K. Fujimoto, Catal. Lett., 1999, 58, 225 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, E. Fracchiolla, P. Giannoccaro, C. Pastore, I. Papai and G. Schubert, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 6177 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Honda, S. Kuno, S. Sonehara, K. Fujimoto, K. Suzuki, Y. Nakagawaa and K. Tomishige, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 365–370 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) B. Peng, H. Dou, H. Shi, E. E. Ember and J. A. Lercher, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 1914–1919 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ikeda, T. Sakaihori, K. Tomishige and K. Fujimoto, Catal. Lett., 2000, 66, 59–62 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto, C. Pastore, C. Cuocci, B. Aresta, S. Cometa and E. De Giglio, Catal. Today, 2008, 137, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tomishige and K. Kunimori, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 237, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, S. Park, I. K. Song and J. C. Jung, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 531–537 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. F. Zhang, Z. W. Liu, J. Lu and Z. T. Liu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 1981–1988 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Zhao, X. Hu, D. Wu, R. Li, G. Yang and Y. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2046–2052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wu, Y. Z. Meng, M. Xiao and Y. X. Lu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 249, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, K. A. Alferov, M. Xiao, D. Han, S. Wang and Y. Meng, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 142 CrossRef .
S. Verma, R. B. Nasir Baig, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 655,  DOI:10.1038/s41598017007361 .
S. Wang, L. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Zhao, G. Zhang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5582–5588 RSC .
M. Honda, M. Tamura, Y. Nakagawa, S. Sonehara, K. Suzuki, K. Fujimoto and K. Tomishige, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. Unnikrishnan, P. Varhadia and D. Srinivas, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 23993–23996 RSC ; 
  (b) P. Unnikrishnan and S. Darbha, J. Chem. Sci., 2016, 128, 957–965 CrossRef ; 
  (c) G. G. Giram, V. V. Bokade and S. Darbha, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 17546–17552 RSC .

  (a) N. Yamazaki, S. Nakahama and F. Higashi, Rep. Asahi Glass Found. Ind. Technol., 1978, 33, 31 CAS ; 
  (b) M. Cheong, S. C. Kim and J. B. Park, New J. Chem., 1997, 21, 1143 CAS ; 
  (c) T. Sakakura, J. C. Choi, Y. Saito and T. Sako, Polyhedron, 2000, 19, 573–576 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) K. Kohno, J. C. Choi, Y. Ohshima, H. Yasuda and T. Sakakura, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 186–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Y. Wen, R. Zhang, Y. Cang, J. Zhang, L. Liu, X. Guo and B. Fan, Pol. J. Chem. Technol., 2015, 17, 62–65 CAS .
M. Steinberg and V. D. Dang, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 97–112 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Sanz-Pérez, C. R. Murdock, S. A. Didas and C. W. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11840–11876 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kothandaraman, A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. A. Olah and G. K. Surya Prakash, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 778–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, J. P. Jones, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995–8048 RSC .
A. Goeppert, S. Meth, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1949 RSC .
I. Kerschgens and K. Gademann, Synthesis, 2015, 47, 3153–3160 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Hanusch, I. P. Kerschgens, F. Huber, M. Neuburger and K. Gademann, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 949–952 RSC .
A. G. Kharaji, A. Shariati and M. A. Takassi, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 21, 1007–1014 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, B. Yan, Z. Jiang, S. Yao, Z. Liu, Q. Wu, R. Ran, S. D. Senanayake, D. Weng and J. G. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7354–7357 RSC .
A. Quindimil, U. De-La-Torre, B. Pereda-Ayo, J. A. González-Marcos and J. R. González-Velasco, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 393–403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Na, H. Wang and W. Gao, J. Porous Mater., 2017, 24, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Koh, M. Khavarian, S. P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 9334–9342 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, H. Liu, Y. Xing, S. Xu, H. Xie and K. Xiong, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. Li, S. Zhang, K. Wang and J. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16391–16396 RSC .
J. Wei, Q. Ge, R. Yao, Z. Wen, C. Fang, L. Guo, H. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Frusteri, G. Bonura, C. Cannilla, G. Drago Ferrante, A. Aloise, E. Catizzone, M. Migliori and G. Giordano, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 522–531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, M. Cui, Q. Qian, J. Zhang, H. Liu and B. Han, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 12654–12659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, C. Tang, Z. Feng, H. An, H. Liu, T. Liu and C. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701290 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Tan, Z. Shi and D. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 10148–10158 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rui, Z. Wang, K. Sun, J. Ye, Q. Ge and C. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 488–497 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, P. Lu, D. Xu and K. Tao, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 35, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, Q. Wu, J. Cen, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, D. Su, X. Chen, J. B. Parise, E. Stach and A. Orlov, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 1003–1011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, H. Yang, P. Gao, X. Li, J. Zhang, H. Liu, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 642–651 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dang, P. Gao, Z. Liu, X. Chen, C. Yang, H. Wang, L. Zhong, S. Li and Y. Sun, J. Catal., 2018, 364, 382–393 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, K. Ma, J. Ji, S. Tang, C. Liu, W. Jiang, H. Yue and B. Liang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 194, 10–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Lu and K. Kawamoto, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 53, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and D. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1999, 24, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Porosoff, X. Yang, J. A. Boscoboinik and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6705–6709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Park and E. W. McFarland, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. U. Aldana, F. Ocampo, K. Kobl, B. Louis, F. Thibault-Starzyk, M. Daturi, P. Bazin, S. Thomas and A. C. Roger, Catal. Today, 2013, 215, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams and H. D. Willauer, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 373, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Dorner, D. R. Hardy, F. W. Williams, B. H. Davis and H. D. Willauer, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4190–4195 CrossRef CAS .
R. Satthawong, N. Koizumi, C. S. Song and P. Prasassarakich, Catal. Today, 2015, 251, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Song, X. R. Liu, L. F. Xiao, W. Wu, J. W. Zhang and X. M. Song, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 1272–1280 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, X. Yang, L. Li, S. Miao, Y. Li, Y. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1407,  DOI:10.1038/s41467017016733 .
A. V. Bavykina, E. Rozhko, M. G. Goesten, T. Wezendonk, B. Seoane, F. Kapteijn, M. Makkee and J. Gascon, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 2217–2221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, M. Lu and H. Lin, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2769–2773 RSC .
C. L. Chiang, K. S. Lin, H. W. Chuang and C. M. Wu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 23647–23663 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umegaki, Y. Enomoto and Y. Kojima, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 409–412 RSC .
Z. Zhang, S. Hu, J. Song, W. Li, G. Yang and B. Han, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Yu, J. H. Fei, Y. P. Zhang and X. M. Zheng, Chin. J. Chem., 2006, 24, 840–844 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aaron and C. Tsouris, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2005, 40, 321–348 CrossRef CAS .
O. Martin and J. Perez-Ramirez, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 3343–3352 RSC .
Z. A. Qiao, P. Zhang, S. H. Chai, M. Chi, G. M. Veith, N. C. Gallego, M. Kidder and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11260–11263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Wang, J. Hilgert, F. H. Richter, F. Wang, H. J. Bongard, B. Spliethoff, C. Weidenthaler and F. Schüth, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 293–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lam, G. Noh, K. W. Chan, K. Larmier, D. Lebedev, K. Searles, P. Wolf, O. V. Safonova and C. Copére, Chem. Sci., 2020 10.1039/d0sc00465k .
N. N. Ezhova, N. V. Kolesnichenko, A. V. Bulygin, E. V. Slivinskii and S. Han, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2002, 51, 2165–2169 CrossRef CAS .
P. Munshi, A. D. Main, J. C. Linehan, C. C. Tai and P. G. Jessop, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7963–7971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weilhard, M. I. Qadir, V. Sans and J. Dupont, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1628–1634 CrossRef .
P. G. Jessop, Y. Hsiao, T. Ikariya and R. Noyori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 8851–8852 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Heim, N. E. Schloerer, J. H. Choi and M. H. G. Precht, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3621,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms4621 .
M. S. Fan, A. Z. Abdullah and S. Bhatia, ChemCatChem, 2009, 1, 192–208 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .

          A. Buis, The Atmosphere: Getting a Handle on Carbon Dioxide, Global Climate Change: NASA,  2019 Search PubMed .
D. S. Goldberg, K. S. Lackner, P. Han, A. L. Slagle and T. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 7521–7529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bollini, S. A. Didas and C. W. Jones, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15100–15120 RSC .
C. W. Jones, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 31–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, J. P. Sculley, D. Yuan, R. Krishna and H. C. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4057–4061 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, K. Huang, F. J. Liu, P. F. Zhang and L. L. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 15008–15016 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 7668–7700 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Chemical reduction of CO2 to fuels and valuable organics.	 

Immovable	Power plants operated by fossil fuel, turbines, the chemical industry
Mobile	Cars, heavy vehicles, trucks, ships, aircrafts
Natural	Humans, animals, deforestation, land corrosion, earthquake, volcanic eruptions

 	Fig. 2  Coordination sites of the CO2 molecule with transition metals.	 

 	Fig. 3  Several nucleophilic CO2 addition products.	 

 	Fig. 4  Chemical reduction of CO2 to formate by benzimidazole-based organic hydrides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26b. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Carbon nucleophilic catalysts used for replacing the C–O bond of CO2 by the C–H and C–N bonds via hydrosilylation and hydroboration reactions.	 

 	Fig. 6  Mechanistic pathway for the alkene carboxylation over transition metal complexes with CO2.	 

 	Fig. 7  2-Alkynyl indole as a nucleophile is used for trapping CO2 with TBD as a base, reproduced with permission from ref. 37j. Copyright, 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 8  CO2 conversion with temperature (°C) profile for Ni-TiO2-DP having Ni loading of (5–20)% and 15% Ni/TiO2-IMP (A). CH4 selectivity with temperature (°C) profile for Ni(15%)/TiO2-DP and Ni(15%)/TiO2-IMP (B), reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  CO2-TPD profiles for the NiAl–MO/CeO2−x catalysts, reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Proposed reaction mechanism for CO2 methanation on NiAl–MO/CeO2−x catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  CO2 conversion to methanol via the homogeneous catalytic pathway (A) and tandem catalysis using a sequential adsorption and conversion of CO2 (B). Reproduced with permission from ref. 65c. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Possible mechanism for dimethylammonium dimethylcarbamate conversion to methanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65c. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Reaction pathway for CO2 hydrogenation to gasoline over the Fe–Zn–Zr@HZSM-5 core–shell catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73a. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Reaction scheme for CO2 hydrogenation to gasoline-range hydrocarbons over an iron–zeolite based catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM images of the starting Ru NPs (a, 1.4 nm; b, 2.6 nm; c, 4.4 nm) and the corresponding particle size distributions (d–f). (g–o) Catalysts described for this work: Ru/Al2O3 (g–i); Ru/TiO2 (j–l); and Ru/CeO2 (m–o) with increasing Ru particle size from top to bottom; reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation for the conversion of CO2 to formalin.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
H˙ + H˙ → H2	(5)
CO + H˙ → OCH˙	(6)
OCH˙ + H˙ → HCHO	(7)
>C˙− + >C˙− → Dimerization	(8)

 	Fig. 17  CO2 reduction with Dielectric Barrier Discharge and gas phase separation of CO and HCHO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2006, Springer Nature.	 
CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O	(9)
CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O	(10)
2CO + 4H2 → 2CH3OH	(11)
2CH3OH → CH3OCH3 + H2O ΔH273 = −23.4 kJ mol−1	(12)
2CO2 + 6H2 → CH3OCH3 + 3H2O ΔH273 = −123.0 kJ mol−1	(13)

 	Fig. 18  Possible catalytic cycle for hydrogenation of CO2 to HCO2H in DMSO with a homogeneous Ru-complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130, Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  Representative porous silica and COF-based catalysts which show CO2 conversion to formate.	 

 	Scheme 1  Plausible mechanism for CO2 hydrogenation to ethanol through the CO intermediate.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram showing ethanol synthesis from CO2 through Rh on TiO2 NRs (–OH rich) and TiO2 Com (without –OH). Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright, 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  CO2 hydrogenation of various catalysts containing 0.02 g catalyst, 2 mL water as the solvent, 4 MPa initial pressure (H2/CO2 = 3:1), 15 h reaction time with (a) 140 °C and (b) 200 °C, where the yield of the products and their selectivity are calculated on the basis of moles of carbon, reproduced with permission from ref. 153c. Copyright, 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 
2CH3OH + CO2 ⇌ CH3OCOCH3O + H2O	(14)
2CH3OH ⇌ CH3OCH3 + H2O	(15)

 	Fig. 22  Possible mechanism for CeO2 catalyzed synthesis of DMC from CO2 and methanol, reproduced with permission from ref. 167b, copyright, 2016, Indian Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 23  CO2 capture from air and direct conversion to methanol using polyamine as the catalyst and the proposed mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Reaction sequence for direct conversion of CO2 from air to methanol using 3.4 mmol PEHA, 20 μmol catalyst1 (Ru-catalyst, shown in Table 2), 50 bar H2, 40 h at 155 °C was mixed with aqueous triglyme. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 



1	PEHA	1	95–155	K3PO4	9	450
2	PEHA	2	95–155	K3PO4	9.1	455
3	PEHA	3	95–155	K3PO4	—	—
4	PEHA	4	95–155	K3PO4	—	—
5	PEHA	5	95–155	K3PO4	—	—
6	TMG	1	95–155	K3PO4	—	—
7	DBU	1	95–155	K3PO4	1.6	80
8	PEHA	1	95	K3PO4	—	—
9	PEHA	1	95–155	—	7.6	380
10	—	1	95–155	—	Traces	—
11	PEHA	1	155	K3PO4	13.8	690
12	PEHA	1	155	—	10.4	520
13	PEHA	1	155	—	21.2	1060

 	Fig. 25  Time dependent CO2-absorption profile of pyrrolizidine 6 and linear diamine 2 under diluted CO2 conditions (90% N2; 10% CO2) in PEG200 (a). Direct air capture of pyrrolizidine 6 (red) and PEG200 (black) compared to the blank measurement (grey) in a flow of compressed air (9 mL min−1) (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  CO2 conversion with pyrrolizidine to methanol in THF at 155 °C, 134 h using 2.39 μmol Ru-MACHO-BH as catalyst (A); CO2 reaction with aziridine at 1 atm CO2, 160 °C, 15 h (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Fe–Mo–Al2O3	600	1	45	100	—	—	—	—	
176

La–Fe–Ni	350	—	16.3	96.6	—	—	—	—	
177

Ni–La/Na-BETA	350	
	65	—	100	—	—	—	
178

Au–CuO/SBA-15	250	3	24.2	—	—	13.5	—	—	
179

Cu–Zn–Mn-KIT-6	180	4	8.2	—	—	99	—	—	
180

Co/SiO2	360	
	44.3	—	86.5	—	—	—	
181

Cu–Zn–Al/HZSM-5	270	3	30.6	
	
	10.4	49.2	
	
182

Na–Fe/HZSM-5	320	3	22	—	4	—	—	78 (C5–C11)	
183

V–Cu–Zn–Zr/HZSM-5	270	3	32.5	28	—	13.2	58.8	—	
117

Cu–Zn–Zr/zeolite	240	3	23.6	24.5	—	25.5	49.3	—	
184

Co6MnOx	200	8	15.3	0.4 (C-mol%)	—	—	—	92.9 (C1–C4) (C-mol%)	
185

53.2 (C5+)
ZnO–ZrO2	320	5	10	—	—	91	—	—	
186

CuNi2 in CeO2 NT	260	3	17.8	—	—	78.8	—	—	
187

Pd/In2O3	300	5	20	—	—	70	—	—	
188

Cu–ZnO	250	3	29	—	—	84	—	—	
189

Rh–SrTiO3	300	—	8	95	—	—	—	—	
190

Cu–Zn/SiO2	220	3	14	—	—	57	—	—	
191

Cu–Zn–Al–La/HZSM-5	250	3	43.8	24.6	—	4.3	71.2	—	
118

In–Zr/SAPO	380	3	26	64	—	—	—	C2+/lower olefins (36)	
192

Ni–SiO2/GO	470	—	54	—	88	—	—	—	
193

Ni–CeO2	700	0.1	40	100	—	—	—	—	
194

Cu–Ni/γ-Al2O3	600	0.1	29	80	—	—	—	—	
195

PtCO/CeO2	300	0.1	3.3	71	—	—	—	—	
196

PtCo/γ-Al2O3	300	0.1	5	90	—	—	—	—	
196

Mo2C	300	0.1	9	94	—	—	—	—	
196

Pd–Ni, Pd–Mg, Pd–Li on SiO2	450	0.1	(43–60)	—	88–95	—	—	—	
197

Ni/CexZr1−xO2	350	0.1	70	—	99	—	—	—	
198

K–Mn–Fe/Al2O3	290	1.4	41.4	11.5	—	—	—	C2–C5 (62.4)	
199

C1 (26)
Co–Pt/Al2O3	220	2	6.8	—	93.1	—	—	C2–C4 (6.8)	
200

Fe–Co–K/Al2O3	300	1.1	31	18	13	—	—	C2+ (69)	
201

Pd–CaO/MCM-41	250	3	12	—	—	65	—	—	
202


Ru/γ-Al2O3	80	
	
	5/8.5	NEt3	1	91	
136

Au/SiO2-Schiff base	90	
	
	5/3	
	12	1206	
203

Pd/r-GO (2 wt%)	100	40	
	
	KHCO3 (as CO2 source)	10	212	
135

Pd/r-GO (3.2 μmol Pd)	100	40	
	
	
	32	221.5
Ir-CTF complex	90	
	
	1/1	KHCO3	2	358	
204

Pd/AC	20	
	
	2.75/0	NaHCO3	1	527	
134

Pd/Al2O3	20	
	
	2.75/0	NH4HCO3	1	278
Pd/AC	20	
	
	5.52/0	NH4HCO3	2	836
Ir-COF	120	
	
	4/4	Et3N	0.5	1500	
142

Pd/AC	20	27.14	0	
	NH2CO2NH4	8	105	
205

Cu/CuCr2O4	140	30 (total P)	
	
	5	4.19	
206

RuNPs	80	49	128	
	NEt3	3	6351	
207

Si(CH2)3NH(CSCH3){RuCl3(PPh3)}	80	89	89	
	[DAMI][TfO]/PPh3	2	1840	
208

Ru/MCM-41	80	53	92	
	NEt3/PPh3	1	1075	
209


 	Fig. 27  Schematic pathway for CO2 captured from ambient air used in fuel production at a remote place. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright, 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
