 Ab initio calculation of the attempt frequency of oxygen diffusion in pure and samarium doped ceria  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP04802A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP04802A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 9957-9973
Ab initio calculation of the attempt frequency of oxygen diffusion in pure and samarium doped ceria

        
          
            Julius 
            Koettgen
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tobias 
            Zacherle
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Steffen 
            Grieshammer
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Manfred 
            Martin
          
        
      *abcd
aInstitute of Physical Chemistry, RWTH Aachen University, Landoltweg 2, 52056 Aachen, Germany. E-mail: julius.koettgen@rwth-aachen.de; martin@rwth-aachen.de;  Fax: +49-241-80-92128;   Tel: +49-241-80-94712
bHelmholtz-Institut Münster (IEK-12), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Corrensstr. 46, 48149 Münster, Germany
cJARA-Energy, Forschungszentrum Jülich and RWTH Aachen University, Germany
dJARA-HPC, Forschungszentrum Jülich and RWTH Aachen University, Germany
Received 
      10th July 2016
    , Accepted 20th March 2017First published on 24th March 2017AbstractThe rate of oxygen ion jumps in a solid oxide depends not only on the activation energy but also on the pre-exponential factor of diffusion. In order to allow a fully ab initio prediction of the oxygen ion conductivity in pure and samarium doped ceria, we calculated the attempt frequency for an oxygen ion jump from first principles combining DFT+U, the NEB method, phonon calculations and the transition state theory. Different definitions of the jump attempt frequency are presented. The equivalence of the Eyring and the Vineyard method is shown without restriction to the Gamma point. Convergence checks of the phonon mesh reveal that the common reduction to the Gamma point is not sufficient to calculate the attempt frequency. Calculations of Sm doped ceria revealed an increase of the prefactor. The attempt frequency for the constant pressure case in quasi-harmonic approximation is larger than the attempt frequency at constant volume in harmonic approximation. The calculated electronic energies, enthalpies and entropies of migration are in agreement with the experimental diffusion coefficients and activation energies.
1 Introduction
The increasing use of renewable energy sources like wind and solar power highlights the importance of energy conversion and storage. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) provide high energy conversion efficiency and excellent fuel flexibility and are therefore a promising candidate for future energy applications. For good performance, an electrolyte with high oxygen ion conductivity is required. Potential materials are fluorite-structured oxides, such as doped zirconia (ZrO2) and doped ceria (CeO2), with the latter favorably allowing a reduction of the operating temperature from 900 °C to 600 °C. Pure cerium oxide itself is not a good ionic conductor.1 In contrast doping with lower-valent oxides like rare-earth oxides creates oxygen vacancies which results in a significant increase in oxygen ion conductivity. In particular, doping with samarium oxide (Sm2O3) leads to high conductivities as revealed by impedance spectroscopy experiments.2
The ionic conductivity σi of the oxygen ions (i = O2−) or vacancies  is proportional to their squared charge zi2e2, concentration ni and mechanical mobility bi (eqn (1)). The mobility is related to the diffusion coefficient Di by the classical Einstein relation for non-interacting defects with the Boltzmann constant kB and the absolute temperature T.† Both diffusion coefficients (DO2− and ) depend on the weighted mean jump rate of all oxygen ions (O2−) or vacancies  to one nearest neighbor site. In this work, jumps to other lattice sites are neglected according to Nakayama and Martin.4 In eqn (1),l is the jump distance and γ is the geometrical factor, which includes the number of jump sites np and the dimension of diffusion d and is  in a primitive cubic lattice, e.g. the oxygen sublattice in ceria.5,6 The jump rate can be described by the Arrhenius equation (eqn (2)) with the activation enthalpy at constant pressure ΔHa(p,T). The activation enthalpy describes the experimentally determined dependence of the diffusion coefficient on temperature and can be calculated from the slope of the plot lniversus 1/T. (1) (2)Therefore, the pre-exponential factor for diffusion D0,i = γl2·exp,i(p,T) depends on the frequency exp,i(p,T). The latter can be interpreted as the mean experimental attempt frequency of all oxygen vacancies or oxygen ions to jump to one nearest neighbor site at constant pressure. It should be noted that several definitions of the term ‘attempt frequency’ exist, which will be discussed in Section 2. Naturally, deviations in the activation enthalpy, which appears in the exponential term, possess a stronger influence on the jump rate than deviations in the attempt frequency.
The conductivity of an oxygen ion conductor (eqn (1)) can be defined for both oxygen ions and vacancies whereat both conductivities are equal in value. Likewise, the absolute value of the oxygen ion charge is equal to the Kröger–Vink charge of the oxygen vacancies. Therefore, the diffusion coefficients of ions DO2− and vacancies  differ according to (3)with the concentration of oxygen ions nO2− and oxygen vacancies  (cf. ‘jump balance’). The same applies to the mean jump rate i and the mean attempt frequency exp,i(p,T). In a pure ceria crystal with isolated defects, all oxygen vacancies have the same attempt frequency , where  is the attempt frequency for the jump of one individual oxygen ion to a vacant lattice site. This is the elementary frequency for a jump process where both the jumping oxygen vacancy and the jumping oxygen ion have the same jump attempt frequency and which is calculated in this work. In the transition state theory, attempt frequencies of individual defects are calculated. Since oxygen ions can only jump when a neighboring vacancy exists, the mean attempt frequency of all oxygen ions exp,O2− depends on the fraction of oxygen vacancies. We assume that the attempt frequency of an oxygen vacancy  is not influenced by other vacancies. Therefore, the attempt frequency and the diffusion coefficient of the oxygen ions increase with increasing oxygen vacancy fraction according to eqn (3).
In doped ceria, a variety of ionic configurations occurs, which leads to a variety of jump environments and possibly different local attempt frequencies. As a macroscopic property, the mean experimental attempt frequency exp,i(p,T) is influenced by all local attempt frequencies that affect the diffusion.
The ionic conductivity in ceria can be simulated by means of molecular dynamics (MD) using pair potentials7–12 or by kinetic Monte Carlo simulations (KMC) using empirical13 or ab initio calculations4,14–17 for the activation barrier (migration energy) for each occurring jump. In all these KMC studies, ‘a typical value’ (mostly 1013 s−1) for the attempt frequency for all ionic configurations was applied. For praseodymium doped ceria, Dholabhai et al. calculated the attempt frequency by means of density functional theory with a Hubbard U parameter (DFT+U) resulting in 5 × 1012 s−1 for one of many possible ionic configurations.18 However, a Vineyard approximation was applied considering only the Gamma point. As mentioned before, it was assumed that the attempt frequency is constant for different configurations. Attempt frequencies for different ionic configurations are rarely calculated. Tarancón et al. used classical molecular dynamics (MD) to indirectly calculate attempt frequencies for Ce0.92Gd0.08O1.96 resulting in (5.4 ± 0.3) × 1012 s−1 for jumps through an edge formed either by two host cations (Ce–Ce edge, see Fig. 1) or one dopant and one host cation (Ce–Gd edge).10
 Fig. 1  Possible migration edge configurations in samarium doped ceria. Ce–Ce edge (left), Ce–Sm edge (middle) and Sm–Sm edge (right). Cerium ions (green), samarium ions (blue), oxygen ions (red spheres) and oxygen vacancies (red boxes). 
In order to allow a fully ab initio prediction of the oxygen ion conductivity, in this work we calculated the attempt frequencies for oxygen ion jumps in pure and doped ceria for different configurations from first principles combining DFT, the nudged elastic band (NEB) method and phonon calculations.
The migration of oxygen vacancies in fluorite structured ceria is considered between adjacent tetrahedral oxygen sites4 in the (100) direction with the experimental jump distance l = 2.7055 Å given by half of the unit cell length.19 Along this migration pathway two cations form a ‘migration edge’. In pure CeO2, only cerium ions are at the migration edge, while doping with samarium oxide leads to configurations with one or two Sm ions at the migration edge (see Fig. 1). Jumps through a Ce–Ce, Ce–Sm or Sm–Sm edge were explicitly calculated in this work. For KMC simulations, the migration energies and the attempt frequencies must be known for all occurring configurations containing multiple Sm dopants and oxygen vacancies at various positions. The migration energies of all possible configurations can be calculated by combining three explicit migration edge energies with association energies between the migrating oxygen vacancy and the other adjacent defects according to a pair interaction model proposed earlier.20 The attempt frequencies of the three edge configurations are assumed to be representative for all possible migration configurations.
It is known that under oxygen-poor conditions ceria can be reduced leading to the formation of polarons21,22 and a number of theoretical studies has been dedicated to this subject.17,23–27 However, we restrict our simulations to conditions were the number of polarons is much smaller than the dopant level and can thus be neglected.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we introduce the transition state theory according to Eyring and Vineyard and show the equivalence of their results without restriction to the Gamma point. In Section 3, computational details according to the general computational setup and the phonon calculations are described. In Section 4, we present our results for the attempt frequency in pure ceria depending on the phonon mesh and the influence of doping with samarium as well. The calculated attempt frequencies at constant volume are transformed to constant pressure. Finally, we compare the calculations with experiments. In Section 5, we give a short summary.
2 Theory
2.1 Historical developments concerning the rate constant
Reaction rate theory was majorly influenced by Arrhenius,28 Trautz and Lewis,29,30 Eyring31 and Vineyard.32 The Arrhenius equation28 (eqn (2)), originally formulated in 1889 for the temperature dependent rate constant of a chemical reaction, assumes that a minimum amount of activation energy at constant volume (or enthalpy at constant pressure) is necessary to transform reactants into products. Thus, the reaction rate is proportional to the product of a pre-exponential factor and the probability an activated state occurs. While Arrhenius assumed a constant prefactor, about 25 years later, Max Trautz and William Lewis29,30 proposed a minor temperature dependence of the pre-exponential factor. According to their collision theory, a reaction occurs if the kinetic energy along the line-of-centers at contact exceeds a specific value.33 However, other degrees of freedom can also contribute to the formation of the activated state,34 and discrepancies between theoretical and experimental results were observed.
2.2 Transition state theory according to Eyring
In the year 1935, Eyring31 published an essential contribution to the transition state theory or absolute-rate theory. He proposed between the initial state (IS) and transition state (TS) a quasi-equilibrium IS ⇌ TS. The corresponding equilibrium constant is K = cTS/cIS, where cTS and cIS are the concentrations of the reactants in both respective states. Once the transition state configuration is reached, every complex decomposes to the product (P) with the decomposition frequency νd, . Then, the reaction rate for the formation of the product P can be written as (4)Here, k is the reaction rate constant. A transmission factor κ ≤ 1 could be included in eqn (4) to account for ‘return jumps’, though it cannot be evaluated in the frame of the transition state theory.‡ Hence, the classical transition state theory is an upper bound to the true reaction rate.41
The equilibrium constant K in eqn (4) can be expressed by the partition functions of the initial state ZIS and the transition state ZTS.42 Both of them can be written as a product of an electronic partition function Zel and a vibrational partition function Zvib assuming no coupling between vibrational and electronic excitation (eqn (5)). At temperatures far below the Fermi temperature, the electronic partition function is primarily determined by the electronic ground state. Therefore, the ratio of the electronic partition functions results in , where ΔE0el is the electronic energy difference between the activated complex and the reactants at temperatures far below the Fermi temperature. This quantity is typically obtained in ab initio calculations at absolute zero. (5)Until now, all transition state related properties like the concentration cTS, the equilibrium constant K, and the vibrational partition function ZTS,vib contained the decomposition vibration. However, the vibrational mode, which corresponds to the decomposition vibration, has to be excluded from these properties for the calculation of the free energy. Therefore, the partition function for the critical vibration can be separated from the vibrational partition function according to .§ Here, ZTS,vib′ is the vibrational partition function for all normal coordinates except for the decomposition vibration, similar to a modified equilibrium constant K′ = cTS′/cIS = (hνd)/(kBT)K. Therefore, the transition state partition function ZTS,vib′ has one degree of freedom less than the initial state partition function ZIS,vib. The final expression for the reaction rate constant is (6)Eqn (6) can be applied to the diffusion process as follows: the migration of an oxygen ion  from a lattice site 2 to a lattice site 1 can be described by the following quasi-chemical reaction: (7)In the initial state (IS), the oxygen ion occupies lattice site 2, while the oxygen vacancy occupies a neighboring lattice site 1. In the transition state (TS), the oxygen ion is located on the saddle point between both empty lattice sites 1 and 2. Finally, in the product state P, the oxygen ion occupies lattice site 1 and the vacancy occupies lattice site 2. The corresponding electronic energy profile is shown in Fig. 2. Comparing eqn (7) and (4) indicates that the jump rate Γ for this elementary site exchange process corresponds to the reaction rate constant k discussed before.
 Fig. 2  Sketch of the electronic energy profile for an oxygen jump in pure ceria according to eqn (7). 
The partition functions ZTS,vib′ and ZIS,vib in eqn (6) can be described by means of the quantum harmonic oscillator excluding the decomposition frequency (see the next subsection). For a system at constant volume, both partition functions correlate with the free energy F according to F(V,T) = −kBTlnZ(V,T). Introducing the vibrational free energy difference between the initial and transition states, ΔFvib = Fvib,TS − Fvib,IS, finally the Eyring formula for the jump rate at constant volume (eqn (8)) is obtained. (8)Similar to the Arrhenius equation (eqn (2)), the Eyring formula (eqn (8)) is a product of an attempt frequency, here ν0(V,T), and an exponential term containing the electronic energy difference, ΔE0el(V), whereat the latter is temperature independent. The definition of the attempt frequency according to Eyring in eqn (8) is commonly used in the literature since ν0(V,T) is independent of temperature at high temperatures (see Section 4) and can be easily used in combination with the electronic energy difference ΔE0el which is the standard result for ab initio calculations.
In addition, the total free energy difference between the transition state and initial state can be used, again, with the assumption of no excited electronic states at temperatures far below the Fermi temperature (9)where ΔEvib is the vibrational energy difference and ΔSvib the entropy difference between the initial and transition states. Thus, eqn (8) can be written as (10)Until now, we assumed that the volume of the solid is constant during the migration, while experiments are usually performed at a constant pressure of p = 1 bar. This leads to a change in volume during the jump of the oxygen ion from the initial to the transition state, which is limited as atomic displacements in a solid proceed with the speed of sound.45–47 Nevertheless, the attempt frequency can be calculated at constant pressure. Similar to eqn (4) and (6) the reaction rate is (11)Therefore, the activated states with the concentration cTS decompose into the product with the unknown decomposition frequency νd, while for the modified concentration cTS′ the prefactor kBT/h is e.g. 1.9 × 1013 s−1 at 900 K. Using the change in standard Gibbs free energy between the transition and initial states ΔG = −kBTlnK′ according to the Van't Hoff isotherm results in the jump rate:44,48 (12)with the Gibbs free energy difference ΔG = ΔH − TΔSvib while assuming no change in the electronic entropy. Here, all thermodynamic quantities are in standard state i.e. their pure form at 1 bar. Of course, this derivation can also be used for the constant volume case. The enthalpy of migration at constant pressure is ΔH = ΔE0el + ΔEvib + pΔV. In this work, the electronic energy difference ΔE0el, the attempt frequency ν0(p,T), the vibrational energy difference ΔEvib and the migration volume ΔV are calculated for a system at zero pressure (see Section 4) which is a good approximation for p = 1 bar. The resulting pressure–volume work of migration pΔV with p = 1 bar is rather small (about 10−6 eV) and will be neglected here:41 (13)While theoretical calculations use the enthalpy of migration ΔH to calculate the jump rate according to eqn (12), experimental measurements rely on the activation enthalpy ΔHa (eqn (2)). Using the definition of the activation enthalpy ΔHa = kBT2(∂lnΓ(p,T)/∂T) according to eqn (2) in eqn (12), the relation between both energies can be formulated by ΔHa = ΔH + kBT leading to (14)In theoretical calculations, the attempt frequency ν0(p,T) according to the Eyring theory is combined with the electronic energy difference at zero temperature ΔE0el(p,T) to calculate the reaction rate (eqn (13)). In experiments, the measured quantities are the experimental attempt frequency  and the activation enthalpy ΔHa(p,T) (eqn (14)). Therefore, both equations cannot be directly compared, in general. However, for ceria and Sm doped ceria the vibrational energy ΔEvib is calculated in this work to be approximately −kBT at high temperatures. This corresponds exactly to the value of the missing vibrational degree of freedom of the transition state that consists of kinetic and potential energies. As a result, the calculated attempt frequencies ν0(p,T) and experimental attempt frequencies  can be directly compared. In conductivity and diffusion experiments, only a macroscopic attempt frequency  and activation enthalpy can be extracted. Hence, the calculated and experimental attempt frequencies can only be directly compared according to eqn (2) if all jump environments are equivalent.
The attempt frequency is commonly assumed to be ‘a typical value’ in the range of 1012–1013 s−1.5,49,50 This is based on the assumption that the vibrational partition functions of the initial and activated states in Eyring's formula (eqn (6)) are similar41 resulting in the frequency kBT/h that is 6.2 × 1012 s−1 at room temperature and 1.9 × 1013 s−1 at 900 K.
2.3 Transition state theory according to Vineyard
Vineyard32 adapted Eyring's concept to the movement of defects in solids in 1957. Even though only one atom jumps in the elementary process, the movement of defects is essentially a many-body process since the migrating defect interacts with neighboring atoms. The absolute rate theory is in its general form already a many-body process; however, most authors had oversimplified solid state processes to one-body models or assumed that all surrounding atoms are fixed. Vineyard avoided these reductions. A hyper-surface is defined, which passes through the transition state and is orthogonal to contours of equal potential energy separating the initial and the final jump position. The jump rate is given by the ratio of representative points on one side of the hyper-surface to the number of points crossing the hyper-surface from just this site. Any representative point of the system that reaches the hyper-surface with finite velocity will unavoidably cross to the product site. This corresponds to the transition state in the Eyring theory, which always decomposes into the product. Using the theory of small vibrations, a high-temperature approximation and a reduction to the Gamma point, the attempt frequency can be calculated by using the Vineyard formula (15)where νi and νj are the normal frequencies for vibration in the initial and transition states at the Gamma point, respectively. Thereby, the product for the initial state features one additional normal frequency compared to the transition state product. Limitations of the Vineyard theory were illustrated by Bennett51,52 and Da Fano et al.53 A similar solution to the Vineyard method was formulated by Rice in 1985.54–56 Further historical developments include various modifications to account for quantum effects during hydrogen diffusion.57–60
2.4 Equivalence of the Eyring and the Vineyard theory
Many authors refer to the equivalence of the Eyring and the Vineyard method in the harmonic approximation at high temperatures in case only phonons at the Gamma point are considered in both methods.5,61,62 Indeed many groups calculate phonon modes for the Gamma point only63–65 unless thermodynamic properties derived from the phonon dispersion on the whole reciprocal lattice grid are of special interest.63,64,66–69 According to this, the vibrational free energy is sometimes calculated for several phonon wave vectors q (q-point mesh),5,70–73 extending the Eyring method to the full Brillouin zone. In fact, the Vineyard method can also be applied to a phonon mesh with several wave vectors, but this possibility is only mentioned by Fedorov and Sadreev.74 To our knowledge, there is no example in the literature in which the equivalence of the Eyring and the Vineyard method is shown without restriction to the Gamma point. For this reason, we will describe this derivation below.
The canonical partition function for M discrete wave vectors with the index q is defined as (16)where the N phonon bands, equivalent to the degrees of freedom, have the index i and the microstates have the index n.¶ For the vibrational partition function, the harmonic approximation and therefore the energy eigenvalues Eq,i,n = hνq,i(1/2 + n) of the quantum harmonic oscillator with its frequency νq,i can be used (also see work by Maradudin75 and Wimmer et al.62). The vibrational energy Fvib can be calculated from the partition function Fvib = −kBTlnZvib resulting in (17)Here,  is independent of temperature and can be regarded as zero point energy correction to the energy barrier ΔE0el. The attempt frequency can be calculated corresponding to the Eyring theory (eqn (8)): (18)The indices i (phonon band) and q (wave vector) for the initial state correspond to the indices j and m for the transition state. The transition state has one degree of freedom less than the initial state. For the last part in eqn (18), which is given for comparison with the literature, it is assumed that the difference in zero point energy can be neglected, which might be valid at high temperatures.76
As a further approach that is often performed in the literature, the Taylor expansion of the hyperbolic sine can be simplified at high temperatures (see eqn (19)) to sinhx ≈ x. Eqn (19) is often referred to as the classical limit77 of the vibrational free energy of the ‘quantum mechanical’ vibrational free energy in eqn (17). (19)Inserting eqn (19) in the Eyring formula (eqn (8)) leads to (20)The resulting attempt frequency (eqn (20)) allows the general use of the classical Vineyard method at high temperatures and for any phonon mesh. If only the Gamma point is considered (M = 1), the classical Vineyard formula (eqn (15)) is obtained.
3 Computational details
All calculations were performed by means of density functional theory within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) according to Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof78 (PBE) and the projector augmented-wave method79 (PAW) using the Vienna Ab initio simulation package (VASP).80,81 Plane waves with an energy cutoff of 500 eV and a 2 × 2 × 2 Monkhorst–Pack k-point mesh for the simulation cell constructed from 16 unit cells were applied according to an earlier publication.17 The convergence parameters for electronic and ionic relaxation were set to 10−8 eV and 10−4 eV Å−1, respectively, to guarantee sufficient accuracy of the calculated forces. The 5s25p66s25d14f1 electrons of the cerium atoms, the 5s25p66s25d1 electrons of the samarium atoms and the 2s22p4 electrons of the oxygen atoms were treated as valence electrons. A Hubbard U parameter was introduced to account for the localization of strongly correlated electrons by the rotational invariant approach.82 A value of 5 eV for the 4f-orbitals of cerium was chosen according to earlier studies.17,20,26,83,84 For all defective cells, the total number of electrons in the cell was adapted to reproduce the actual charge state of the different defects, e.g. (Ce64O127)2+ for a simulation cell containing one oxygen vacancy.
The nudged elastic band85,86 (NEB) method was applied to investigate the transition states and the minimum energy pathways. One ionic configuration for the saddle point configuration (‘image’) was interpolated from the initial and final states of the migration process. Tests with more than one intermediate image between the initial and final configurations of migration showed no differences in the migration energies. The same is true for tests using the climbing image nudged elastic band87 (CI-NEB) method. The internal atomic positions in the cell were relaxed without changing the lattice parameter.
The phonon frequencies at constant volume were calculated using the finite difference method introduced by Parlinski et al.88 employing the commercial software MedeA. All investigated structures were relaxed according to the parameters given above. Starting from these structures, cells with atomic displacements of ±0.005 Å were created automatically. For all created cells the electronic ground state was calculated and the Hellmann–Feynman forces acting on the ions were used to build the force constant matrix. After Fourier transformation, the diagonalization of the dynamical matrix yielded the phonon frequencies at different q-points. No longitudinal/transverse optical splitting (LO/TO) was applied according to Grieshammer et al.17
4 Results and discussion
Phonon dispersions for the initial and the transition state of migration (see eqn (7)) showed minor contributions of imaginary frequencies at some q-points in the vicinity of the Gamma point that had to be taken into account (see Fig. 3, imaginary frequencies are shown as negative frequencies). The number of imaginary acoustic branches varies between the initial and transition states. For this reason, the occurring imaginary parts were disregarded symmetrically in the initial and transition states as the resulting error is assumed to be small. In general, imaginary frequencies suggest an unstable structure leading to deformations along the associated phonon wave vectors. However, for some q-point samplings the occurring imaginary frequencies may be caused by non-cubic supercells, or, as shown by Grabowski et al.,69,89 not fully converged parameters. The latter can probably be neglected since the results by Grabowski et al. suggest that our k-point mesh and supercell size are converged.69,90 Furthermore, the supercell volume was doubled compared to previous phonon calculations.17
 Fig. 3  Phonon dispersions of the initial state  (left, space group Pm2) and the transition state  (right, space group Pmmm) in ceria according to eqn (7). 

Fig. 4 shows the vibrational free energy difference ΔFvib and its components, the vibrational energy difference ΔEvib and entropy difference between the initial and transition states ΔSvib, according to eqn (9) in ceria in harmonic approximation for a 6 × 6 × 6 phonon mesh. As previously mentioned, the vibrational energy difference is similar to −kBT as it differs less than 5% at temperatures above 900 K.
 Fig. 4  Vibrational free energy difference ΔFvib, vibrational energy difference ΔEvib and entropy difference ΔSvib between the initial and transition states in ceria in harmonic approximation for a 6 × 6 × 6 phonon mesh. For comparison −kBT is shown which is similar to ΔEvib. 
4.1 Pure ceria: influence of the phonon mesh
The attempt frequency was calculated using the Eyring method31 (eqn (8)) with eqn (17) and our generalized Vineyard32 method (eqn (20)) with different q-point mesh sizes. The attempt frequency rises to a plateau with increasing temperature (Fig. 5). Above 600 K, both the Eyring and the generalized Vineyard method lead to similar attempt frequencies as predicted by theory. At 0 K, the free vibrational energy difference between the initial and transition states is 0.007 eV. Some authors move this zero point energy contribution of the attempt frequency (ZPE) to the migration energy leading to another definition of the attempt frequency, which is larger especially at low temperatures.5,76,91,92 For the calculation of the phonon dispersion, an equidistantly spaced q-point mesh of dimensions between 1 × 1 × 1 and 6 × 6 × 6 was applied to sample the phonon dispersion, since the number of all possible discrete wave vectors is too large (eqn (16)). It can be clearly seen that the common reduction to the Gamma point (1 × 1 × 1) is not sufficient to calculate the attempt frequency. The convergence of the phonon mesh is reached only above 64 q-points corresponding to a 4 × 4 × 4 grid. The resulting attempt frequency in pure ceria 1.5 × 1012 s−1 is in the range of the usually assumed values (1012–1013 s−1).
 Fig. 5  Oxygen vacancy attempt frequency ν0 in ceria in harmonic approximation for different phonon mesh sizes. Lines are calculated using the Eyring method, squares are the results of the generalized Vineyard formula. The dashed line shows the result according to the Eyring method without zero point energy (ZPE). 
4.2 Sm doped ceria
The influence of doping with Sm on the attempt frequency was investigated. Therefore, one or two samarium dopants were introduced at the migration edge (see Fig. 1) between two edge-sharing tetrahedra. A convergence of the resulting attempt frequencies as a function of the used phonon mesh was observed, similar to pure ceria, while the approximation of the attempt frequency based on Gamma point calculations was even worse. All further results correspond to the 6 × 6 × 6 phonon mesh. Surprisingly, one samarium dopant does not influence the attempt frequency, whereas two samarium dopants increase the attempt frequency by a factor of three (Table 1). The increase in attempt frequency for the Sm–Sm edge compared to pure ceria is expected due to the higher activation barrier and steeper electronic energy curvature. For the Ce–Sm edge, the migrating oxygen ion deviates from the direct, straight path found for the Ce–Ce and the Sm–Sm edge between the initial and final positions. The migrating oxygen ion follows a curved path by avoiding the steeper electronic energy curvature and a high attempt frequency. Surprisingly, this leads to similar attempt frequencies for one Sm dopant and pure ceria. The resulting attempt frequencies for the Ce–Ce and Ce–Sm edges are in agreement with the literature in which a constant attempt frequency for different configurations is either assumed18 or calculated for both the Ce–Ce and Ce–Gd edges.10 Here, Tarancón et al. did not consider the Gd–Gd edge due to “the negligible impact on the final diffusion properties”.
Table 1 Electronic migration energies for different migration configurations, distances of the edge cations in the initial and the transition state and oxygen vacancy attempt frequencies ν0(V,T) (Vineyard) at constant volume (V = const.)




Migration edge

d
IS (Å)

d
TS (Å)

d
TS − dIS (Å)
ΔE0el(V,T) (eV)

ν
0(V,T) (s−1)




Ce–Ce
4.148
4.267
0.119
0.587
1.47 × 1012


Ce–Sm
4.142
4.268
0.126
0.759
1.49 × 1012


Sm–Sm
4.141
4.280
0.139
1.166
4.30 × 1012




A key property for the interaction between the edge cations and the migrating oxygen ion are the distances of the edge cations in the transition state dTS and the initial state dIS (see Table 1). The migration energies ΔE0el of the different edge configurations depend linearly on the difference between the distances of the edge cations between the transition and initial states, dTS − dIS. Simply described, the cations at the edge must be pushed apart during an oxygen ion jump. This leads to a linear relationship between the widening of the edge cations and the migration energy. Likewise, the attempt frequency is majorly influenced by the edge cation distance in the transition state dTS. For the Ce–Ce and Ce–Sm edges, ν0 and dTS are similar, respectively. Both values increase significantly for the Sm–Sm edge.
For further investigation and in consideration of the very time-consuming phonon calculations, the attempt frequency could be described in a simple approximation by displacing the migrating oxygen ion in the initial state. Using the classical harmonic oscillator with the displacement x and the electronic energy  the attempt frequency can be calculated according to  with the mass m of the migrating oxygen ion. In this simplified case, it is assumed that all neighboring atoms are frozen similar to the Einstein model (one body problem), a classical model can be used and only the initial state has an influence on the attempt frequency. This simple static displacement model leads to similar attempt frequencies for all three edge configurations (Fig. 1) with a slight increase for more Sm dopants from 8.42 × 1012 to 9.74 × 1012 s−1 (see Fig. 6). Analogous bulk calculations without any oxygen vacancy lead to a frequency of 11 × 1012 s−1. The attempt frequencies according to the static displacement model are higher than the values from the phonon calculations indicating a hard potential around the initial state. As described, the phonon calculations revealed an exceptionally high attempt frequency for the Sm–Sm edge. This deviation from the static displacement result indicates a strong influence of the neighboring atoms for the Sm–Sm edge as established above.
 Fig. 6  Oxygen vacancy attempt frequency ν0 in harmonic (squares) and quasi-harmonic (circles) approximations in samarium doped ceria with different numbers of dopants at the migration edge, using the generalized Vineyard method at a temperature of 900 K. For comparison the results of the simple displacement approximation (triangles) are also shown. 
4.3 Attempt frequency at constant pressure in quasi-harmonic approximation
All phonon calculations were performed isochoric, i.e. at a constant volume that was derived for bulk ceria at absolute zero. This follows the harmonic approximation in which all calculations are performed at a fixed equilibrium volume. To investigate the isobaric behavior, i.e. the constant pressure case (p = 0), the quasi-harmonic approximation can be applied in which the minimum of the free energy for different volumes is determined at given temperatures. Therefore, all properties like the migration energy should be calculated at constant pressure (eqn (13)). The influence of the change between the constant volume and constant pressure cases on the electronic migration energy at zero temperature ΔE0el is small (±0.015 eV), and the exponential factor varies below ±20% at 900 K (compare Tables 1 and 2). As phonon calculations are computationally demanding, it is commonly assumed that the change in vibrational entropy with changing volume, , is similar in the defect-free bulk, the defective cell in the initial state and in the transition state.93,94 Starting from the equilibrium volume V0, the entropy of migration at p = 0 is given according to Grieshammer et al.17 (21)with the change in volume between the transition state and initial state at constant pressure ΔV = VTS(p = 0, T) − VIS(p = 0, T) which is assumed to be independent of temperature. Alternatively, the change in pressure between the transition state and initial state at constant volume Δp can be used (see eqn (22)). The volumetric thermal expansion coefficient αV and the bulk modulus BT for bulk ceria were already determined by Grieshammer et al.17 The free vibrational energy of migration ΔFvib is defined by the vibrational energy ΔEvib and entropy ΔSvib (see eqn (9)). The free vibrational energy of migration at zero pressure can then be written as ΔFvib(p,T) = ΔFvib(V0,T) − T·αVBT·ΔV = ΔFvib(V0,T) + T·αVV·Δp.(22)Therefore the generalized Vineyard result (eqn (20)) can be modified:95 (23)The same modification applies to the Eyring formula (eqn (8)): (24)
Table 2 Electronic migration energies for different migration configurations, changes in volume between transition state and initial state ΔV and oxygen vacancy attempt frequencies ν0(p,T) (Vineyard) at constant pressure (p = 0) and 900 K




Migration edge
ΔE0el(p,T) (eV)
ΔV (Å3)

ν
0(p,T) (s−1)




Ce–Ce
0.602
3.06
7.67 × 1012


Ce–Sm
0.769
3.01
7.52 × 1012


Sm–Sm
1.162
2.64
1.79 × 1013




In Fig. 6 and 7, the attempt frequencies in samarium doped ceria for the relaxed cell volume (p = 0) are shown. We can now compare the constant volume with the constant pressure case: the hydrostatic pressure for the constant volume case (V0) results in a volume compression for the Ce–Ce and Ce–Sm edges and an expansion for the Sm–Sm edge for the constant pressure case for both the initial state [VIS(p,T)] and transition state [VTS(p,T)]. In the constant pressure case, the change in volume between the transition state and initial state ΔV is similar for the Ce–Ce and Ce–Sm edge and slightly smaller for the Sm–Sm edge (see Table 2). The influence of αVBTΔV in eqn (21) on the attempt frequency is significant. Minor errors in αVBT are propagated exponentially in the attempt frequency, as shown in Fig. 6 and 7. Thus, the error in the attempt frequency is larger than 10% above 1500 K. The attempt frequency at constant pressure increases compared to the constant volume case by a factor of about five for the Ce–Ce and Ce–Sm edges and four for the Sm–Sm edge at 900 K. The resulting attempt frequencies are roughly in the range of the usually assumed values (1012–1013 s−1) and similar to the experimental Debye frequencies in ceria which are between 8 × 1012 and 10 × 1012 s−1 according to ultrasonic pulse, specific heat and thermal expansion coefficient measurements.96–99
 Fig. 7  Oxygen vacancy attempt frequency ν0 in pure ceria in harmonic and quasi-harmonic approximations calculated using the Eyring (lines) and the generalized Vineyard (squares) method at a temperature of 900 K at constant volume (V = const.) and constant pressure (p = 0). 
4.4 Experimental values for pure ceria
Although the Vineyard method directly uses the normal mode frequencies in the initial and transition states, their resulting ratio defines a frequency that differs from any existing frequency in the real lattice.34 However, the attempt frequency of oxygen ion jumps can be extracted as an average macroscopic property based on the temperature dependence of the oxygen ion conductivity or the oxygen diffusion coefficient. Common experiments to examine the experimental attempt frequency are therefore direct current measurements (DC), impedance spectroscopy (AC), secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and gas phase analysis (GPA). The experimental attempt frequencies and oxygen vacancy diffusion coefficients are shown in Table 3 and Fig. 8. Error bars are calculated based on the scattering of the diffusion coefficient.
Table 3 Experimental oxygen vacancy attempt frequency  of pure ceria for polycrystalline samples (Poly) and single crystals (SC) calculated based on impedance spectroscopy (AC), direct current (DC), secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and gas phase analysis (GPA) measurements. The number of charge carriers is based on the purity (hp = high, lp = low) of the starting material or the non-stoichiometry for a CeO1.992 and b CeO1.96. The error of the attempt frequency is given according to the linear regression




Source
Crystallinity
Method
Domain

T (°C)

 (s−1)




This work
Poly
AC
Bulk
227–733
(9 ± 2) × 1014


Wang et al.100
Polyhp
AC
Bulk
237–352
(9 ± 4) × 1013


Wang et al.100
Polylp
AC
Bulk
237–596
(8 ± 1) × 1013


Floyd101
SC
GPA
Bulk
836–1151
(2 ± 3) × 1015


Brugner et al.102
SC, Poly
DC
Bulk, total
1200–1500
(6.7 ± 0.8) × 1019


Wang et al.100
Polyhp
AC, DC
Total
621–847
5.2 × 1021


Wang et al.100
Polylp
AC, DC
Total
507–891
4.9 × 1017


Kamiya et al.103
Poly
SIMS
Total
1095–1297
(1.6 ± 0.9) × 1020


Kamiya et al.103
Poly
SIMS
Total
797–895
(3 ± 5) × 1014


Kamiya et al.104
Poly
GPA
Total
1094–1296
(3 ± 2) × 1022


Tuller et al.21
SCa
AC, DC
Bulk
200–1150
2.3 × 1013


Naik et al.105
Polyb
DC
Total
1030–1330
(1.1 ± 0.2) × 1013




 Fig. 8  Experimental (a) oxygen vacancy diffusion coefficients and (b) resulting attempt frequencies of pure ceria using bulk100 and total21,101–105 domain. Though experimental attempt frequencies vary over several orders of magnitude, all experiments are probably based on the same elemental frequency for a jump process. 
SIMS and GPA experiments were used by Floyd101 and Kamiya et al.103,104 to investigate the oxygen tracer diffusion coefficient . The oxygen tracer diffusion coefficient is related to the oxygen self-diffusion coefficient DO2− by a correlation factor fO2− according to . In contrast to the jumps of an oxygen vacancy, the jumps of a tracer ion are correlated, leading to a smaller mean square displacement for the tracer and a correlation factor below unity. For vacancy diffusion in a simple cubic lattice the correlation factor is 0.65 at very low defect concentrations. Beyond that, the tracer correlation factor is a function of the defect concentration: increasing vacancy concentrations decrease the probability of ‘return jumps’ for a tracer atom, the tracer correlation decreases and fO2− increases. In addition, with increasing defect concentration the ion-vacancy interaction increases and the distribution of conducting ions influences the tracer correlation factor.3 Therefore, the correlation factor used here (fO2− = 0.65) is an approximation.
The oxygen self-diffusion coefficient DO2− is related to the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient  according to eqn (3) using the charge carrier concentration. For pure ceria under oxidizing conditions, the determination of the concentration is quite difficult as oxygen vacancies exist due to (extrinsic) impurities, reduction and intrinsic disorder. However, many studies point out a high impurity concentration compared to the intrinsic- (anti-Frenkel) or reduction-dominated oxygen vacancy concentration at p(O2) = 0.2 bar at temperatures below 800 °C.17,26,106,107 At higher temperatures, the oxygen vacancy concentration increases especially due to reduction, though it could only be roughly estimated for experimental samples with unknown impurities. Therefore, in this work, the charge carrier concentration at all temperatures was derived from the purity of the starting materials according to the literature assuming trivalent impurities100,101,103,104 or, for one sample, from mass spectrographic analysis.102,108 The error in the charge carrier concentration is estimated to be well below one order of magnitude. The approximated oxygen vacancy concentration varies over two orders of magnitude for stoichiometric ceria (1017–1019 cm−3) and is a reason for the scattering of the extracted oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient [see Fig. 8(a)].
In the literature, direct current measurements and impedance spectroscopy experiments were used to measure the oxygen ion conductivity.21,100,102,105 In this work, additional impedance spectroscopy experiments were performed (see Appendix). Using the charge carrier concentration, the conductivity can be converted into the ‘conductivity’ diffusion coefficient or charge diffusion coefficient of the oxygen ions Dσ,O2−, which is defined according to the classical Nernst–Einstein equation (eqn (1)). It should be noted that Dσ,O2− has the dimensions of a diffusion coefficient but is not defined by Fick's first law. The conductivity and tracer diffusion coefficients can be compared using the Haven Ratio .3,109 Only for non-interacting defects the Haven Ratio is equal to the tracer correlation factor. Otherwise, a thermodynamic factor has to be considered, which was neglected in this work. Based on this assumption, the conductivity diffusion coefficient Dσ,O2− can be converted into the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient  according to eqn (3) using again the charge carrier concentration.
Experimental attempt frequencies  and activation enthalpies ΔHa can be extracted as average macroscopic properties from the Arrhenius behavior of the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient  according to eqn (2) for a known jump distance and geometrical factor (eqn (1)). Surprisingly, the experimental attempt frequency for pure ceria varies vastly between 1013–1022 s−1 (Table 3). In the following section, we will explain that all experiments are probably based on the same elemental frequency for a jump process.
4.5 Reasons for the scattering of the experimental attempt frequency
The vast scattering of the experimental attempt frequency is caused by the measurement technique, sample properties and temperature range.
Minor influences of the measurement technique include measuring inaccuracies, different experimental methods for either tracer diffusion or conductivity and the conversion of  and Dσ,O2− into the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient. Measuring inaccuracies are assumed to be small, especially since the experimental attempt frequency is extrapolated from measurements at several temperatures. Oxygen tracer diffusion coefficients and conductivities from different experiments differ due to diverse oxygen vacancy concentrations: the oxygen tracer diffusion coefficients of SIMS and GPA measurements for pure ceria vary about one order of magnitude.101,103,104 The ionic conductivities measured in the present work and literature vary up to two orders of magnitude.100,102,105 However, similar results for one sample are expected using different experimental methods. For example, Tuller et al.21 observed the same ionic conductivity for single crystals using impedance spectroscopy and direct current measurements. To compare the different experiments the charge carrier concentration has to be approximated, which is a reason for the scattering of the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient. Furthermore,  and Dσ,O2− are compared, thereby approximating values for the tracer correlation factor and the thermodynamic factor. For Gd doped ceria single crystals, where the charge carrier concentration is well defined, Ruiz-Trejo et al.110 reported a tracer diffusion coefficient based on SIMS measurements one order of magnitude smaller than the conductivity diffusion coefficient. Here, the Haven Ratio is one order of magnitude smaller due to the thermodynamic factor. In the related fluorite structure, 9.5 mol% single crystal yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ), Manning et al.111 reported a Haven Ratio of 0.33 at low and 0.48 at high temperatures. Both examples give a smaller product of tracer correlation factor and thermodynamic factor than that assumed in this work, though this is expected at high defect concentrations. In this case, the Haven Ratio changes by a factor smaller than two due to the thermodynamic factor. At small defect concentrations as in pure ceria, the tracer correlation factor of 0.65 may be a good choice. Therefore, the conversion of  and Dσ,O2− into the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient has probably only a minor impact on the scattering of the experimental attempt frequency.
To validate the different macroscopic experimental techniques, the diffusion coefficients can be compared to microscopic nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements. Avila-Paredes et al.112,113 measured the oxygen transport in Ce0.95Sc0.05O1.975 using the bulk conductivity relaxation frequency from impedance spectroscopy measurements as well as the temperature dependence of 45Sc magic-angle-spinning NMR line shapes. The resulting prefactors from the extrapolation of the oxygen vacancy hopping frequencies are similar for both impedance with (4.6 ± 0.1) × 1013 s−1 and NMR measurements with (4.3 ± 1.1) × 1013 s−1. Fuda et al.114 examined lightly Y doped ceria (0.02–0.6 mol% Y2O3) using NMR. They found the correlation times of the vacancy motion to be essentially independent of the dopant fraction. The resulting prefactor from the extrapolation of the oxygen vacancy hopping frequency is (2.8 ± 0.3) × 1012 s−1. The nanocrystalline samples that were examined by Fuda et al.114 feature a large grain boundary effect, while NMR measurements can give bulk properties for polycrystalline samples due to the low grain boundary volume as in the case of Avila-Paredes et al.112,113 Both NMR results fit well with the calculated attempt frequencies for pure ceria.
Major influences on the macroscopic experimental attempt frequency are sample properties which include the mentioned diverse oxygen vacancy concentrations, the macroscopic structure composed of bulk and grain boundaries and different impurities. In this work, all calculations were performed in the bulk domain. In order to allow a better comparison of the calculated attempt frequency with experimental values, single crystals should be used or bulk properties from polycrystalline samples should be extracted. Otherwise, the total conductivity or diffusion could result from the contribution of the bulk (grain, lattice) and the grain boundary domain. Impedance spectroscopy is an important tool to separate both contributions and has been extensively used on pure21,100 and samarium doped ceria.115–120 However, only a few authors specify the bulk ionic conductivity separately. The relation between bulk and grain boundary conductivities for rare-earth doped ceria is well known: Zhan et al.118 and Bellino et al.115 separated the bulk, grain boundary and total conductivities of Sm and Y doped ceria showing a bulk conductivity that is larger than both the grain boundary and total conductivity. The resulting experimental attempt frequency for the bulk is however only a fraction (0.8–0.005) compared to the experimental attempt frequency of the total domain caused by higher activation enthalpies for the total domain. For pure ceria, Wang et al.100 measured bulk conductivities orders of magnitude larger than the total conductivity with an activation enthalpy lower than that for the total domain. In fact, Fig. 8 and Table 3 show, for most stoichiometric ceria measurements, higher ΔHa and higher  for the total domain compared to the bulk. While the experimental attempt frequencies for the bulk domain fit well with the calculated attempt frequencies for pure ceria, the attempt frequencies for the total domain are significantly higher. However, Brugner et al.102 reported the same conductivity for polycrystalline samples and single crystals resulting in the same experimental attempt frequency, though compared to other bulk measurements  is very large here. Furthermore, it has been shown that the contribution from the grain boundaries to the total resistivity diminishes at high temperatures.121 Therefore, also attempt frequencies for the total domain are shown included in Fig. 8.
Beyond the macroscopic structure, even small amounts of impurities that associate with oxygen vacancies, e.g. small rare-earth cations, can increase the activation enthalpy. While the impact on the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient at intermediate temperatures might be small, different impurities may lead to different activation enthalpies, which would significantly influence the experimental attempt frequency. Therefore, we performed kinetic Monte Carlo simulations similarly to an earlier work20 between 500 and 800 °C without considering changes in the jump attempt frequency or the existence of polarons. For all jumps the calculated jump attempt frequency (1.47 × 1012 s−1) was applied and in pure ceria a migration energy of 0.47 eV was used. Subsequently, the conductivity was fitted according to eqn (2). In contrast to CeO1.99995, where ΔHa and  are similar to the input values, for Ce0.999Sc0.001O1.9995 the apparent activation enthalpy (1 eV) and attempt frequency (1.54 × 1014 s−1) increase significantly, while the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient decreases up to two orders of magnitude. This effect can only be observed for dopants with strong association between the dopant and oxygen vacancies. For lightly Sm or La doped ceria, no significant influence on the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient, activation enthalpy and attempt frequency can be observed. Therefore, different impurities can significantly influence the experimental attempt frequency. Experimentally, this can be seen e.g. in the conductivity measurements by Wang et al.100
Finally, the macroscopic experimental attempt frequency is influenced by the measured temperature range due to the above-discussed influences. While the conductivity and the oxygen tracer diffusion coefficient are continuous with temperature, the activation enthalpy may change in different temperature regimes. This leads to kinks in the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient and jumps in the experimental attempt frequency if a constant charge carrier concentration is assumed. Two types of kinks are well known in the literature: for a change from a low-temperature region dominated by impurities to a high-temperature region dominated by reduction, the activation enthalpy increases abruptly at higher temperatures. As the number of oxygen vacancies created by reduction (or intrinsic disorder) increases with temperature, their concentration may exceed the number of defects created by impurities. Defects created by reduction and intrinsic defects have to be formed leading to an increase in activation enthalpy.1,103 Actually, Kamiya et al.103 reported at low temperatures an experimental attempt frequency orders of magnitude lower than that at high temperatures indicating a change from an impurity- to a reduction-dominated regime. It shall be mentioned that Kamiya et al. measured penetration depths at low temperatures similar to the grain size of pure ceria, which might lead to bulk dominated properties, while at high temperatures the penetration depths are orders of magnitude higher.122 Therefore, the change in attempt frequency of six orders of magnitude results from both the change in bulk and grain boundary dominated regimes as well as the defect chemistry transition. Ideally, for investigating reduction-dominated regions, the change in the charge carrier concentration should be included in the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient, which might lead to similar experimental attempt frequencies in both temperature regimes.
The second type of kink is a decrease in activation enthalpy at higher temperatures caused by a change in the diffusion behavior at different temperatures, especially for non-stoichiometric or doped ceria.115,121,123–125 Zhan et al.118 described a critical curvature temperature Tb for Sm doped ceria. Below this temperature, oxygen vacancies are trapped by samarium ions . Therefore, ΔHa is the sum of the ‘migration enthalpy’ of the oxygen ions and the association enthalpy of  while at higher temperatures ΔHa is equivalent to the ‘migration enthalpy’ of the oxygen ions. This causes a kink in the ionic conductivity in the Arrhenius plot leading to lower activation enthalpies and prefactors at high temperatures. This kink can be reproduced using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations although further influences on the activation enthalpy are given.20,126 For another perspective on this effect, Zhan et al. assumed that the concentration of the oxygen vacancies depends on the association enthalpy of the forming  defect complexes at low temperatures, while at T > Tb the concentration of oxygen vacancies is set by the dopant fraction, as all oxygen vacancies are free. Taking into consideration that the association reduces the oxygen vacancy concentration, this could lead to the same attempt frequencies at low and high temperatures. Therefore, the experimental attempt frequency can only be extracted above the critical curvature temperature if the degree of association is unknown. We examined this effect using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations similar to an earlier work20 without considering changes in the jump attempt frequency. Although Zhan et al. investigated highly doped ceria, the kinetic Monte Carlo simulations show this effect for Sc doped ceria for dopant fractions as low as Ce0.99998Sc0.00002O1.99999 around Tb = 800 °C. For the above-mentioned Ce0.999Sc0.001O1.9995, the apparent activation enthalpy (0.67 eV) and attempt frequency (4.65 × 1012 s−1) decrease again at conductivities fitted between 1100 and 1300 °C. Therefore, a change in the diffusion behavior can change the experimental attempt frequency by two orders of magnitude. However, impedance measurements of the bulk domain in pure ceria are commonly limited to low temperatures due to a restricted frequency range.
Obviously, measurements of non-stoichiometric ceria might lead to different results as the presence of polarons changes the diffusion behavior. In fact, the smallest activation enthalpies in this work are the ones measured by Tuller et al.21 and Naik et al.105 [see Fig. 8(b)].
In summary, differences in the measurement technique, sample properties or investigated temperature range change the oxygen self-diffusion coefficient by about two orders of magnitude at intermediate temperatures [see Fig. 8(a)]. The vast scattering of the experimental attempt frequency in the range of nine orders of magnitude is caused by a change in activation enthalpy. Especially, different contributions of bulk and grain boundary domains to the total conductivity or diffusion, different impurities, a change from an impurity- to a reduction-dominated regime and a change in the diffusion behavior can lead to significant changes in the activation enthalpy. A closer examination shows a clear dependence of the experimental attempt frequency on the activation enthalpy [Fig. 8(b)]. As diffusion coefficients are extrapolated to infinite temperature to obtain experimental attempt frequencies, larger activation enthalpies lead obviously to larger attempt frequencies. If now the oxygen tracer diffusion coefficient is identical for all measurements at a specific temperature, the relation between the experimental attempt frequency and activation enthalpy is given by (25)All oxygen vacancy diffusion coefficients were fitted according to the Arrhenius equation (eqn (2)). Using the resulting activation enthalpies and experimental attempt frequencies, an average oxygen vacancy diffusion coefficient at 1600 K was fitted (eqn (25)). Here, the best agreement for all measurements can be observed at 1600 K. Fig. 8(a) already shows that all  can be described as a function of  and ΔHa using an average oxygen vacancy diffusion coefficient at 1600 K. This is even true for non-stoichiometric ceria. An exception is the measurement of Wang et al. of the total domain for the high purity sample, probably due to the large grain boundary contributions at low temperature measurements.100 The good correlation of eqn (25) in Fig. 8(b) is not surprising since it follows the classical rule  with the constants Tc and b. A linear relationship between activation enthalpy and activation entropy has been found in physical, chemical and biological processes.127,128 The enthalpy–entropy relation is in the literature referred to as the compensation rule or Meyer–Neldel rule.129 The additional term ‘isokinetic relation’ refers to the common intersection point in an Arrhenius plot as shown in Fig. 8(a). Many investigations present an empirical relationship in experiments. However, e.g. Kemeny and Mahanti showed that activation enthalpy and entropy are proportional to the number of vibrational degrees of freedom for electronic charge transport using a quadratic generalization of Holstein's one-dimensional linear polaron theory.130 As the compensation rule applies to a series of closely related chemical reactions, we conclude that all presented measurements are linked and assume that a change in the activation enthalpy determines the experimental activation entropy. Therefore, it may be still possible that all experiments are based on the same elemental frequency for a jump process, which is similar to the calculated attempt frequency. Changes in the activation enthalpy are caused by grain boundary contributions for the total domain, measurements of reduction-dominated regions or the association of oxygen vacancies and impurities, as recapitulated in the following section.
Samples of low purity exhibit a smaller experimental bulk attempt frequency than that predicted by the fit (eqn (25)). This indicates that the charge carrier concentration may be overestimated for these samples.
The total domain indeed has similar oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficients compared to bulk measurements; however, most experiments show a higher activation enthalpy leading to higher experimental attempt frequencies obviously due to the grain boundary contribution.100
High concentrations of impurities that associate with the oxygen vacancies lead to a significant increase in activation enthalpy and experimental attempt frequency especially at low temperatures where dopants and oxygen vacancies possibly associate. This can be seen by comparing measurements from this work with the bulk domain of Wang et al.100
With increasing temperature the charge carrier concentration increases, one example is given by Kamiya et al.103 whose low-temperature regime might show bulk dominated properties indicated by the low experimental attempt frequency. Brugner et al.102 showed similar high  and ΔHa at high temperatures for both single crystals and polycrystalline samples indicating that at high temperatures a reduction-dominated region exists. In this work, a constant charge carrier concentration was used, leading for a reduction-dominated region to an overestimated increase in the oxygen vacancy self-diffusion coefficient. Consequently, the resulting experimental attempt frequency is too high.
The example of pure ceria emphasizes the difficulties in measuring the experimental attempt frequency. While calculations are often performed in defect-poor (or periodic) materials, creating these materials experimentally is challenging. Here, the experimental bulk attempt frequencies for stoichiometric ceria are the best values for comparison and indeed agree with the calculated attempt frequency.
4.6 Experimental values for doped ceria
For the bulk of Sm and Y doped ceria,115,118,131,132 a similar fit of the macroscopic, experimental attempt frequencies using eqn (1) and (2) would lead to an increase in the experimental attempt frequency with increasing dopant fraction. Here, overestimated attempt frequencies for small dopant fractions131,132 were neglected due to an unknown number of charge carriers because of additional impurities.
However, despite the considerations above, comparing the attempt frequency for doped ceria is more difficult, since we cannot use the classical Einstein equation (eqn (1)) as there are many defects, which will interact. Moreover, in doped ceria, a variety of possible defect configurations exists leading to a distribution of different jump environments with a distribution of migration energies and possibly different local attempt frequencies. In contrast, in experiments, the linear interpolation of the conductivity with temperature in the Arrhenius plot gives only a single value for the attempt frequency and for the activation enthalpy. Comparing a single fit value with the actually present distribution is not trivial. Beyond that, the apparent value of the attempt frequency obtained by fitting is directly influenced by the distribution of migration energies.
This dependency can be shown in a simple model: we consider a highly ordered, fluorite structured crystal, in which half of the migration energies are 0.5 eV and the other half is larger by a value b. Both jump environments appear alternating. Now, we let a single oxygen vacancy jump through the crystal. Each jump has the same attempt frequency. To simulate the ionic conductivity we can use kinetic Monte Carlo simulations according to previous calculations.20,126 In Fig. 9(a), the oxygen ion conductivity for the simple model was calculated between 500 and 700 K for different b-values. All linear regressions of the simulated conductivities, naively based on eqn (1) and (2), show a good fit.
 Fig. 9  The (a) ionic conductivity for the simple model and regression according to eqn (1) and (2). The fit parameters are the (b) apparent oxygen vacancy attempt frequency and (c) the apparent activation enthalpy. 
The fit parameters are the apparent attempt frequency and the apparent activation enthalpy shown in Fig. 9(b and c). The resulting activation enthalpy is about 0.5 eV + b. Therefore, the activation enthalpy is strongly influenced by the higher migration energy. Although we always use the same attempt frequency in the kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, the apparent attempt frequency increases at higher migration energies. For high b-values, only the higher migration energy determines the ionic conductivity and the lower migration barrier is passed in a considerably small amount of time. Therefore, the covered distance is doubled, which appears here in the doubled attempt frequency. The effect is already mentioned in the literature. Wang et al.100 explained the increase in pre-exponential factor for high dopant fractions with the migration distance after each rate-controlling jump, which increases beyond the lattice jump distance of the oxygen vacancy. This simple example shows that the experimental attempt frequency is strongly influenced by the distribution of migration energies.
Therefore, we have to perform kinetic Monte Carlo simulations, which include different attempt frequencies for different ionic configurations, to compare the calculated attempt frequencies with the experimental attempt frequencies for doped ceria. For Sm doped ceria and the calculated configuration-dependent attempt frequencies, we will report on kinetic Monte Carlo simulations in a subsequent paper.
5 Conclusion
We calculated the attempt frequency for an oxygen ion jump in pure and Sm doped ceria. The convergence of the phonon mesh was shown pointing out that the common reduction to the Gamma point is not sufficient to calculate the attempt frequency. The resulting attempt frequency for the constant volume case in harmonic approximation (1.47 × 1012 s−1) and the constant pressure case in quasi-harmonic approximation (7.67 × 1012 s−1) for pure ceria at 900 K is in agreement with common literature estimates and experiments. The experimental attempt frequencies scatter within several orders of magnitude while they are probably based on the same elemental frequency for a jump process. The calculated attempt frequency is unaffected by doping with a single Sm ion at the migration edge, while a Sm–Sm edge exhibits a significantly larger attempt frequency. The calculated attempt frequencies of doped ceria should only be compared with the experimental attempt frequencies by performing kinetic Monte Carlo simulations.
Appendix: experimental details
Samples were prepared by dissolving cerium(III) nitrate hexahydrate (99.9%, Chempur) and citric acid (VWR International, 2.5 equivalent) in water. During mixing for several hours at 50 °C the sol–gel transformation occurred. The temperature was increased to 350 °C where the produced foam was dried for three hours and subsequently calcined for four hours at 1000 °C. The calcined powder was dry milled in a planetary mill, uniaxially pressed to disks (10 mm in diameter and 2 mm thick) and sintered in air at 1400 °C for 24 hours. The composition was successfully verified using X-ray diffraction (Theta-Theta diffractometer, STOE, Darmstadt, Germany). Density measurements according to the Archimedes method gave high densities around 98% of the theoretical value. For impedance measurements, samples were coated with platinum paste and connected with platinum wire. Impedance spectroscopy measurements were performed in air using a two-point geometry (Solatron 1260) with frequencies between 107 and 7 × 10−2 Hz. The bulk semicircle was identified according to the literature.100 The depressed bulk semicircle in the complex impedance plot was analyzed using an equivalent circuit composed of an RQ-element with the constant phase element Q. The ionic conductivity was calculated according to  with the sample thickness d and the area A.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Jülich Aachen Research Alliance High Performance Computing (JARA-HPC) for granting computing time within the projects jara0035 and jara0071. The authors gratefully acknowledge the computing time granted on the supercomputers JUROPA and JURECA at the Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC). Financial support of the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology within the project HORIZONT is acknowledged.
References
M. Panhans and R. Blumenthal, Solid State Ionics, 1993, 60, 279–298 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eguchi, T. Setoguchi, T. Inoue and H. Arai, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 52, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
G. Murch, Solid State Ionics, 1982, 7, 177–198 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakayama and M. Martin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3241–3249 RSC .
L. T. Kong and L. J. Lewis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 073412 CrossRef .

          W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to ceramics, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1976 Search PubMed .
H. Hayashi, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 131, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inaba, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 122, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gotte, D. Spangberg, K. Hermansson and M. Baudin, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tarancón, A. Morata, F. Peiró and G. Dezanneau, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 26–37 CrossRef .
M. Burbano, S. Nadin, D. Marrocchelli, M. Salanne and G. W. Watson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8320–8331 RSC .
L. Sun, D. Marrocchelli and B. Yildiz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Murray, G. Murch and C. Catlow, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 196–202 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krishnamurthy, Y.-G. Yoon, D. J. Srolovitz and R. Car, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 1821–1830 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pornprasertsuk, P. Ramanarayanan, C. B. Musgrave and F. B. Prinz, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 103513 CrossRef .
R. Pornprasertsuk, J. Cheng, H. Huang and F. B. Printz, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 195–205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grieshammer, T. Zacherle and M. Martin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15935–15942 RSC .
P. P. Dholabhai, S. Anwar, J. B. Adams, P. Crozier and R. Sharma, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 811–817 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 129, 63–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grieshammer, B. O. H. Grope, J. Koettgen and M. Martin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9974 RSC .
H. Tuller and A. Nowick, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1977, 38, 859–867 CrossRef CAS .
R. Farra, M. García-Melchor, M. Eichelbaum, M. Hashagen, W. Frandsen, J. Allan, F. Girgsdies, L. Szentmiklósi, N. López and D. Teschner, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2256–2268 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, J. L. F. Da Silva and J. Sauer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 026101 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nakayama, H. Ohshima, M. Nogami and M. Martin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6079 RSC .
P. R. L. Keating, D. O. Scanlon, B. J. Morgan, N. M. Galea and G. W. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2443–2452 CAS .
T. Zacherle, A. Schriever, R. A. De Souza and M. Martin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 134104 CrossRef .
J. J. Plata, A. M. Márquez and J. F. Sanz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25497–25503 CAS .
S. Arrhenius, Z. Phys. Chem., 1889, 4, 226–248 Search PubMed .
M. Trautz, Chemistry, 1916, 96, 1–28 CAS .
W. C. Lewis, J. Chem. Soc., 1918, 113, 471 RSC .
H. Eyring, J. Chem. Phys., 1935, 3, 107 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Vineyard, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1957, 3, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Present, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1955, 41, 415–417 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Pontikis, in Diffusion in materials, ed. A. L. Laskar, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht,  1990, vol. 179, p. 37 Search PubMed .
H. A. Kramers, Physica, 1940, 7, 284–304 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toller, G. Jacucci, G. DeLorenzi and C. P. Flynn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1985, 32, 2082–2095 CrossRef CAS .
G. De Lorenzi, G. Jacucci and C. P. Flynn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 9461–9468 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marchese, G. Jacucci and C. P. Flynn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 9469–9481 CrossRef .
M. Marchese and C. P. Flynn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 12200–12207 CrossRef .
J. H. Harding, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1990, 53, 1403–1466 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hänggi and M. Borkovec, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1990, 62, 251–341 CrossRef .

          S. Glasstone, K. J. Laidler and H. Eyring, The theory of rate processes: the kinetics of chemical reactions, viscosity, diffusion and electrochemical phenomena, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.,  1941 Search PubMed .
H. Eyring, Chem. Rev., 1935, 17, 65–77 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Eyring, S. H. Lin and S. M. Lin, Basic Chemical Kinetics, Wiley, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .

          H. Mehrer, Diffusion in solids: fundamentals, methods, materials, diffusion-controlled processes, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .

          C. P. Flynn, Point defects and diffusion, Clarendon Press,  1972 Search PubMed .

          E. Whalley, Advances in Physical Organic Chemistry, Victor Gold, Elsevier, Burlington, 2nd edn,  1964, pp. 93–162 Search PubMed .

          J. Philibert, Atom movements, Éd. de Physique, Les Ulis,  1991 Search PubMed .
H. Yildirim, A. Kara, S. Durukanoglu and T. S. Rahman, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 484–492 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. B. Jacobs, B. Gotsmann, M. A. Lantz and R. W. Carpick, Tribol. Lett., 2010, 39, 257–271 CrossRef .
C. H. Bennett and B. J. Alder, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1971, 32, 2111–2122 CrossRef CAS .

          C. H. Bennett, in Diffusion in solids, ed. A. S. Nowick, Acad. Press, New York,  1975, p. 73 Search PubMed .
A. Da Fano and G. Jacucci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1977, 39, 950–953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rice, Phys. Rev., 1958, 112, 804–811 CrossRef CAS .
H. Glyde, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1967, 39, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Feit, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1972, 5, 2145–2153 CrossRef .
A. D. Le Claire, Philos. Mag., 1966, 14, 1271–1284 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ebisuzaki, W. J. Kass and M. O'Keeffe, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 1373 CrossRef CAS .
W. Franklin, Phys. Rev., 1969, 180, 682–694 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Truhlar, B. C. Garrett and S. J. Klippenstein, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 12771–12800 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, F. Zheng and P. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 153507 CrossRef .
E. Wimmer, W. Wolf, J. Sticht, P. Saxe, C. B. Geller, R. Najafabadi and G. A. Young, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 134305 CrossRef .
K.-P. Bohnen, R. Heid and B. Renker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 5771–5774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-P. Bohnen, R. Heid and M. Krauss, Europhys. Lett., 2003, 64, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
G. Deinzer, G. Birner and D. Strauch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 144304 CrossRef .
I. I. Mazin, D. J. Singh, M. D. Johannes and M. H. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 057003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shukla, M. Calandra, M. d'Astuto, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, C. Bellin, M. Krisch, J. Karpinski, S. M. Kazakov, J. Jun, D. Daghero and K. Parlinski, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 095506 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, J. S. Tse, T. Cui, D. D. Klug, L. Zhang, Y. Xie, Y. Niu and G. Zou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 014306 CrossRef .
B. Grabowski, T. Hickel and J. Neugebauer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 024309 CrossRef .
L. T. Kong and L. J. Lewis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165422 CrossRef .
M. Mantina, L. Q. Chen and Z. K. Liu, Defect Diffus. Forum, 2009, 294, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
O. N. Bedoya-Martínez and G. Roma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 134115 CrossRef .
M. Mantina, Y. Wang, R. Arroyave, S. L. Shang, L. Q. Chen and Z. K. Liu, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 305402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Fedorov and A. F. Sadreev, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2598–2601 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Maradudin, Theory of lattice dynamics in the harmonic approximation, Academic Press, New York, NY, 2nd edn,  1971, vol. 3 Search PubMed .
P. G. Sundell, M. E. Björketun and G. Wahnström, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 094301 CrossRef .
K. Toyoura, Y. Koyama, A. Kuwabara, F. Oba and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 214303 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1396 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758–1775 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J. Humphreys and A. P. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hooper, A. Ismail, J. B. Giorgi and T. K. Woo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12969 RSC .
P. P. Dholabhai, J. B. Adams, P. Crozier and R. Sharma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7904 RSC .

          H. Jonsson, G. Mills and K. M. Jacobsen, in Classical and quantum dynamics in condensed phase simulations, ed. B. J. Berne, World Scientific, Singapore,  1998, pp. 385–404 Search PubMed .
M. Lumeij, J. Koettgen, M. Gilleßen, T. Itoh and R. Dronskowski, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 222–223, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parlinski, Z. Q. Li and Y. Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 4063–4066 CrossRef CAS .
A. Franke and E. Pehlke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235441 CrossRef .
J. Hafner, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 2044–2078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Jiang and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 214103 CrossRef .
D. F. Johnson and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4436–4444 CAS .
P. Ágoston and K. Albe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3226 RSC .
Y. Mishin, M. R. Sørensen and A. F. Voter, Philos. Mag. A, 2001, 81, 2591–2612 CAS .
A. Suzuki and Y. Mishin, Interface Sci., 2003, 11, 131–148 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riess, M. Ricken and J. Nölting, J. Solid State Chem., 1985, 57, 314–322 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisashige, Y. Yamamura and T. Tsuji, J. Alloys Compd., 2006, 408–412, 1153–1156 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hayashi, M. Kanoh, C. J. Quan, H. Inaba, S. Wang, M. Dokiya and H. Tagawa, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 132, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inaba and H. Tagawa, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1998, 106, 272–278 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Wang and A. S. Nowick, J. Solid State Chem., 1980, 35, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Floyd, Indian J. Technol., 1973, 11, 589–594 CAS .
F. S. Brugner and R. N. Blumenthal, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1971, 54, 57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamiya, E. Shimada, Y. Ikuma, M. Komatsu and H. Haneda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamiya, E. Shimada and Y. Ikuma, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1998, 106, 1023–1026 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Naik and T. Y. Tien, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1978, 39, 311–315 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Martin, T. Zacherle, A. Schriever, R. A. d. Souza and S. Grieshammer, ECS Trans., 2013, 57, 2405–2410 CrossRef .
R. N. Blumenthal, P. W. Lee and R. J. Panlener, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 123 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Murch, Philos. Mag. A, 1982, 45, 685–692 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruiz-Trejo, J. D. Sirman, Y. M. Baikov and J. A. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 1998, 113–115, 565–569 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Manning, J. D. Sirman, R. A. De Souza and J. A. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 100, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Avila-Paredes, P. Jain, S. Sen and S. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 893–897 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jain, H. J. Avila-Paredes, C. Gapuz, S. Sen and S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6553–6560 CAS .
K. Fuda, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1984, 45, 1253–1257 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Bellino, D. G. Lamas and N. E. Walsöe de Reca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
U. Anselmi-Tamburini, F. Maglia, G. Chiodelli, A. Tacca, G. Spinolo, P. Riello, S. Bucella and Z. A. Munir, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2363–2368 CrossRef CAS .
K. Singh, S. A. Acharya and S. S. Bhoga, Ionics, 2007, 13, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhan, T.-L. Wen, H. Tu and Z.-Y. Lu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A427 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 100, 23–27 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, Y. Zhang, Z. W. Cheng, X. Cheng and J. Meng, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2002, 13, 757–762 CrossRef CAS .
J. van Herle, T. Horita, T. Kawada, N. Sakai, H. Yokokawa and M. Dokiya, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 16, 961–973 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Harvey, R. A. De Souza and M. Martin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5803–5813 CAS .
P. Manning, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 93, 125–132 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, M. Feng and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1998, 81, 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
R. O. Fuentes and R. T. Baker, J. Power Sources, 2009, 186, 268–277 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. H. Grope, T. Zacherle, M. Nakayama and M. Martin, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 476–483 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kemeny and B. Rosenberg, Nature, 1973, 243, 400–401 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Wang, M. Zhang, L. Liu, S. Ogata and L. H. Dai, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 174118 CrossRef .
W. Meyer and H. Neldel, Z. Tech. Phys., 1937, 18, 588–593 CAS .
G. Kemeny and S. D. Mahanti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1975, 72, 999–1002 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, D. Park, J. Griffith and A. Nowick, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 2, 95–105 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tian and S.-W. Chan, MRS Proc., 1998, 548, 629–634 CrossRef .

Footnotes† At high defect concentrations, an ‘exact Nernst–Einstein’ relation using the chemical potential can be applied.3‡ A ‘return jump’ rate is taken into account by the Kramers approach,35 and the short-memory augmented-rate theory (SM-ART) framework of Toller et al.34,36–40§ The decomposition vibration can be described as a classical harmonic oscillator where the weighted number of states consists of the kinetic and potential energies weighted by the Boltzmann factor, integrated over phase space and ‘arbitrarily’ divided by the Planck constant. This is similar to a quantum harmonic oscillator without zero point energy and in the high temperature limit (kBT ≫ hνd). Instead of describing the decomposition motion as a vibration, a translational degree of freedom can be used. Then, the reaction rate can be defined as a product of the concentration of the transition state cTS, the translational partition function for the particle in a one-dimensional box  with the box length δ and the effective mass associated with the translation along the reaction coordinate m. This modified transition state concentration is multiplied by the mean velocity given by a one-dimensional Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution  and the inverse box length 1/δ.34,42–44¶ The partition function is calculated as the geometric mean for all discrete wave vectors, just as the arithmetic mean of all wave vectors would be used for the phonon density of states to satisfy its normalization condition.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Possible migration edge configurations in samarium doped ceria. Ce–Ce edge (left), Ce–Sm edge (middle) and Sm–Sm edge (right). Cerium ions (green), samarium ions (blue), oxygen ions (red spheres) and oxygen vacancies (red boxes).	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  Sketch of the electronic energy profile for an oxygen jump in pure ceria according to eqn (7).	 
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 3  Phonon dispersions of the initial state  (left, space group Pm2) and the transition state  (right, space group Pmmm) in ceria according to eqn (7).	 

 	Fig. 4  Vibrational free energy difference ΔFvib, vibrational energy difference ΔEvib and entropy difference ΔSvib between the initial and transition states in ceria in harmonic approximation for a 6 × 6 × 6 phonon mesh. For comparison −kBT is shown which is similar to ΔEvib.	 

 	Fig. 5  Oxygen vacancy attempt frequency ν0 in ceria in harmonic approximation for different phonon mesh sizes. Lines are calculated using the Eyring method, squares are the results of the generalized Vineyard formula. The dashed line shows the result according to the Eyring method without zero point energy (ZPE).	 

Ce–Ce	4.148	4.267	0.119	0.587	1.47 × 1012
Ce–Sm	4.142	4.268	0.126	0.759	1.49 × 1012
Sm–Sm	4.141	4.280	0.139	1.166	4.30 × 1012

 	Fig. 6  Oxygen vacancy attempt frequency ν0 in harmonic (squares) and quasi-harmonic (circles) approximations in samarium doped ceria with different numbers of dopants at the migration edge, using the generalized Vineyard method at a temperature of 900 K. For comparison the results of the simple displacement approximation (triangles) are also shown.	 
	(21)
ΔFvib(p,T) = ΔFvib(V0,T) − T·αVBT·ΔV = ΔFvib(V0,T) + T·αVV·Δp.	(22)
	(23)
	(24)

Ce–Ce	0.602	3.06	7.67 × 1012
Ce–Sm	0.769	3.01	7.52 × 1012
Sm–Sm	1.162	2.64	1.79 × 1013

 	Fig. 7  Oxygen vacancy attempt frequency ν0 in pure ceria in harmonic and quasi-harmonic approximations calculated using the Eyring (lines) and the generalized Vineyard (squares) method at a temperature of 900 K at constant volume (V = const.) and constant pressure (p = 0).	 

This work	Poly	AC	Bulk	227–733	(9 ± 2) × 1014
Wang et al.100	Polyhp	AC	Bulk	237–352	(9 ± 4) × 1013
Wang et al.100	Polylp	AC	Bulk	237–596	(8 ± 1) × 1013
Floyd101	SC	GPA	Bulk	836–1151	(2 ± 3) × 1015
Brugner et al.102	SC, Poly	DC	Bulk, total	1200–1500	(6.7 ± 0.8) × 1019
Wang et al.100	Polyhp	AC, DC	Total	621–847	5.2 × 1021
Wang et al.100	Polylp	AC, DC	Total	507–891	4.9 × 1017
Kamiya et al.103	Poly	SIMS	Total	1095–1297	(1.6 ± 0.9) × 1020
Kamiya et al.103	Poly	SIMS	Total	797–895	(3 ± 5) × 1014
Kamiya et al.104	Poly	GPA	Total	1094–1296	(3 ± 2) × 1022
Tuller et al.21	SCa	AC, DC	Bulk	200–1150	2.3 × 1013
Naik et al.105	Polyb	DC	Total	1030–1330	(1.1 ± 0.2) × 1013

 	Fig. 8  Experimental (a) oxygen vacancy diffusion coefficients and (b) resulting attempt frequencies of pure ceria using bulk100 and total21,101–105 domain. Though experimental attempt frequencies vary over several orders of magnitude, all experiments are probably based on the same elemental frequency for a jump process.	 
	(25)

 	Fig. 9  The (a) ionic conductivity for the simple model and regression according to eqn (1) and (2). The fit parameters are the (b) apparent oxygen vacancy attempt frequency and (c) the apparent activation enthalpy.	 
Footnotes
† At high defect concentrations, an ‘exact Nernst–Einstein’ relation using the chemical potential can be applied.3
‡ A ‘return jump’ rate is taken into account by the Kramers approach,35 and the short-memory augmented-rate theory (SM-ART) framework of Toller et al.34,36–40
§ The decomposition vibration can be described as a classical harmonic oscillator where the weighted number of states consists of the kinetic and potential energies weighted by the Boltzmann factor, integrated over phase space and ‘arbitrarily’ divided by the Planck constant. This is similar to a quantum harmonic oscillator without zero point energy and in the high temperature limit (kBT ≫ hνd). Instead of describing the decomposition motion as a vibration, a translational degree of freedom can be used. Then, the reaction rate can be defined as a product of the concentration of the transition state cTS, the translational partition function for the particle in a one-dimensional box  with the box length δ and the effective mass associated with the translation along the reaction coordinate m. This modified transition state concentration is multiplied by the mean velocity given by a one-dimensional Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution  and the inverse box length 1/δ.34,42–44
¶ The partition function is calculated as the geometric mean for all discrete wave vectors, just as the arithmetic mean of all wave vectors would be used for the phonon density of states to satisfy its normalization condition.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
