Conducting polymer composites for unconventional solid-state supercapacitors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA13432H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA13432H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4677-4699Conducting polymer composites for unconventional solid-state supercapacitors

        
          
            Chen 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoteng 
            Jia†
b, 
      
        
          
            Kewei 
            Shu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Changchun 
            Yu
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Gordon G. 
            Wallace
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Caiyun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *d
aSchool of Materials and Energy, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China
bDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Irvine, USA
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, Canada
dARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, AIIM Facility, University of Wollongong, Innovation Campus, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail: caiyun@uow.edu.au; gwallace@uow.edu.au
Received 
      9th December 2019
    , Accepted 3rd February 2020First published on 7th February 2020AbstractThe rapid development of wearable devices has stimulated the pursuit of unconventional and multifunctional flexible supercapacitors such as stretchable, compressible, electrochromic, self-healable or transparent supercapacitors. Redox-active conducting polymers (CPs) that combine metal like electrically conductive properties with polymer like mechanical properties are ideal materials for use. However, they suffer from poor performance due to volume variations during charge and discharge processes. The integration of CPs with other materials to form composites provides an effective approach to achieve excellent performance. This review discusses the recent progress on the design and fabrication of CP composites with tailored microstructures for these novel supercapacitors. It will cover a wide range of materials with different intrinsic properties (e.g. carbon materials, metal oxides/hydroxides, and two dimensional materials) to be incorporated with CPs. It aims to provide insights into the synergistic effect of components on the supercapacitive performance of composites. We also present the strategies towards their practical applications in integrated systems and future perspectives.Chen ZhaoDr Chen Zhao is currently an associate professor at the School of Materials and Energy, Guangdong University of Technology, China. He received his B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, and PhD degree from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, the University of Wollongong, Australia. His current research interests focus on materials and device engineering of flexible and stretchable energy devices and sensors for wearable electronics.Xiaoteng JiaDr Xiaoteng Jia is currently an Associate Professor at State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. He received both double BSc Degrees (2010) in Chemistry & Biotechnology and MSc Degree (2013) from Polymer Chemistry and Physics at Jilin University, and PhD Degree from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, the University of Wollongong in 2017. His research interests include synthesis of biodegradable conducting polymers and functional biomaterials for advanced biosensors and bio-batteries.Kewei ShuDr Kewei Shu is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Toronto (Canada). He obtained his B.S. degree from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2007, M.S. degree from Renmin University of China in 2011, and PhD from the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 2016. Dr Shu's research mainly focused on novel energy storage systems including supercapacitors, metal–air batteries and multivalent ion batteries.Changchun YuDr Changchun Yu is currently an associate professor at School of Ophthalmology & Optometry, Wenzhou Medical University, China. She received her PhD degree from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, the University of Wollongong in 2019. Her research interests include electrochemistry, conducting polymer membranes/hydrogels, salinity gradient power generation and tissue engineering.Gordon G. WallaceProfessor Gordon Wallace is the Executive Research Director at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Director of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (Materials Node), and Director of the Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, Australia. He previously held an ARC Federation Fellowship and currently holds an ARC Laureate Fellowship. His research interests include organic conductors, nanomaterials and electrochemical probe methods of analysis, and their use in the development of Intelligent Polymer Systems. Current focus involves the use of these tools and materials in developing bio-communications from the molecular to skeletal domains to improve human performance via medical Bionics.Caiyun WangDr Caiyun Wang is an Associate Professor at the Intelligent Polymer Research Institute/ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science at the University of Wollongong, Australia. She received her PhD degree in 2004 in materials engineering from the University of Wollongong. Her research interests include conducting polymers and 2D materials for energy-storage applications; nanostructured catalysts for electrochemical reduction of CO2, and asymmetric membranes for salinity gradient power generation.
1. Introduction
The rapid growth of portable electronics has given rise to increasing demands for energy storage devices (e.g. batteries and capacitors) with high energy and power densities.1–3 As illustrated in Fig. 1, batteries can achieve high energy density but suffer from slow power delivery or uptake, limiting their applications where fast and high power is needed. In contrast, conventional capacitors offer a much higher power density than batteries but with much lower energy density. Supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors, have the potential to bridge the gap between batteries and conventional capacitors.4,5 A typical supercapacitor shows several orders of magnitude higher energy density than conventional capacitors while providing higher power than batteries. Significant efforts have been made recently to increase the energy density to be close to or beyond that of batteries without sacrificing the high power density.6–8
 Fig. 1  Ragone plot (power versus energy) for various types of energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission.3 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Conventional supercapacitors consist of two electrodes separated by a separator in a liquid electrolyte including aqueous electrolyte, organic electrolyte and ionic liquid.9–12 They need to be hermetically sealed in strong cases to avoid leakage for safety and performance concerns.13 Solid-state electrolytes, especially polymer gel electrolytes, are introduced to avoid leakage problems yet with reasonable performance.14,15 The emergence of unconventional multi-functional electronic devices such as smart garments, foldable and transparent displays, and E-skins requires energy storage devices that are structurally compatible with their configurations in addition to the required performance.16 Supercapacitors in the form of button or cylindrical cells are too rigid and bulky to be seamlessly integrated with such electronic devices. Lightweight thin unconventional supercapacitors that are flexible, stretchable, and compressible, or even with new functions (i.e. transparency, electrochromism, and self-healing) have attracted tremendous attention.17–26 Being the key components, electrodes should possess the merits of high conductivity and high charge storage capability for providing high performance, as well as excellent mechanical properties for fitting different configurations and/or enduring the deformation.
Supercapacitors are generally classified into two types in terms of their energy storage mechanisms: electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudo-capacitors.27 EDLCs store energy by the adsorption of anions and cations on the electrode surface. Performance strongly depends on the specific surface area and pore size distribution of electrode materials.28 Carbon materials with high surface area such as activated carbon, carbon nanotubes and graphene are widely used for EDLCs.29–33 Pseudo-capacitors derive the capacitance from redox reactions of active species such as conducting polymers (CPs) and transition metal oxides/hydroxides.34,35 Typically, pseudo-capacitors can achieve higher specific capacitances than EDLCs, as the faradaic process occurs not only on the surface but also in the bulk.36
Compared with transition metal oxide/hydroxides, CPs are considered as the most promising materials due to their high specific capacitance, high conductivity, environmentally friendly nature, ease of synthesis, high flexibility and structural diversity.34 The most fascinating CPs for supercapacitors mainly include polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI), polythiophene (PTh) and its derivatives, such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) (Fig. 2). CPs store energy from the doping and dedoping processes associated with the reversible redox reactions, offering high specific capacitances, such as 620 F g−1 for PPy, 750 F g−1 for PANI and 485 F g−1 for PTh.34 However, CP based electrodes usually suffer from poor cycling stability due to the volume changes being occurred in the doping–dedoping processes. The formation of composites with other active materials such as carbon materials, metal oxides/hydroxides and novel two dimensional (2D) materials can endow CPs with improved cycling stability and energy storage capability.37 To date, progress towards advanced supercapacitors benefits from the continuous development of nanostructured CP based composites in different forms (powders, fibers, films, foams and hydrogels),38–42 which provides considerable opportunities to achieve various types of unconventional supercapacitors with novel architectures and functions.
 Fig. 2  Schematic structures of PPy, PANI, PTh and PEDOT. 
The use of CP composites in supercapacitors has attracted significant attention and has been summarized in excellent review articles.36,43 However, no dedicated review about the application of CP composites for unconventional supercapacitors is available yet. In this review, we will focus on discussing the design and fabrication of CP composite electrodes with tailored microstructures for unconventional supercapacitors. The incorporated materials include a wide range of materials with different intrinsic properties such as carbon materials, metal oxides/hydroxides and 2D materials. The assembly of CP composites for unconventional solid-state supercapacitors, the integration with wearable systems, and future perspectives are sequentially presented.
2. Conducting polymer composites for supercapacitors
The intrinsic properties of CPs are highly impacted by the formed structures and compositions that can be controlled during the synthesis processes. CPs are typically formed via chemical or electrochemical polymerization. These two types of methods will be briefly discussed first to give an idea about this type of material, followed by the fabrication strategies for CP composites.
2.1 Synthesis of conducting polymers
CPs can be chemically synthesized in solutions containing monomers and oxidants. Oxidants (i.e. ferric chloride and ammonium persulfate) can oxidize monomers forming a radical cation that reacts with another monomer or radical cation to form a dimer. In the chain growth step, re-oxidation and coupling are repeated to form CPs.44 This method offers the feasibility to synthesize CPs in bulk quantities.45 Apart from liquid phase chemical polymerization, vapor phase polymerization (VPP) is also proposed. During the VPP process, monomer vapor reaches the oxidant covered substrate and is polymerized to form a polymer layer. The main advantage of VPP is its capability to deposit thin CP films onto a diverse range of substrates.46
Compared to chemical polymerization, electrochemical polymerization offers a number of advantages: ability to incorporate various dopants, easy control of microstructures, sequential deposition to produce layered structures, and easy formation of copolymers. This process is performed in a solution containing monomers, dopants and/or other additives. Monomers get oxidised at the surface of a conductive substrate upon applying an anodic potential.47 The polymer chain commonly carries positive charges and is counter-balanced by anions. The solvent, electrolyte salt, and substrate should be stable during this oxidation process. Electrochemical polymerization can be achieved by using different techniques such as galvanostatic (constant current),48 galvanodynamic (pulsed current),49 potentiostatic (constant potential)50 or potentiodynamic (cyclic voltammetry or pulsed potential) methods.51 Electrochemical polymerization at a constant current affords easy control of polymer thickness by simply tuning the elapsed deposition time. A pulsed current method can be used to obtain CPs with a shorter chain length or a higher degree of conjugation. Constant potential or potentiodynamic methods are ideal for deposition of CPs with overoxidation potentials which are close to the oxidation potential of the monomer.
CPs with targeted nanostructures can be chemically or electrochemically synthesized via hard-template, soft-template or template-free strategies. Among various nanostructures, one-dimensional (1D) nanowires, nanofibers, and nanotubes exhibit large specific area with optimal ion diffusion paths that are desirable for charge storage.52–54 The hard-template method proposed by Martin et al. has been widely used in producing CP nanowire/tube arrays due to its simplicity and controllability.55 CPs are polymerized into the channels of a porous membrane either chemically or electrochemically (Fig. 3a and b).56–58 The main disadvantage of the hard-template method is that the removal of template destroys the structure. The soft-template method is another powerful technique to prepare 1D CPs. The size and morphology of CPs mainly depend on the pre-assembled soft templates, which are generally made from surfactant micelles, liquid-crystalline phases and structure-directing molecules through the self-assembly mechanism induced by hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, π–π stacking or electrostatic interactions.59 The surfactant based approach is the widely used one (Fig. 3c).60–64 For example, PPy nanofibers were synthesized using the cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as the soft-template under neutral aqueous conditions (Fig. 3d).64 The drawback of the soft-template method is the poor control of the diameter, morphology and orientation. 1D CPs can also be prepared by template-free methods, such as dilute polymerization65 and electrochemical polymerization.66–68 The formation of such 1D CPs is attributed to the well-controlled nucleation and growth processes (Fig. 3e). For instance, a PANI nanowire array was formed by electrochemical polymerization (Fig. 3f).67 The template-free approach is attractive for producing CP composites owing to its simplicity and convenience.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the procedures used for the growth of 1D CPs via hard-template (a), soft template (c), and template free (e) methods. Reproduced with permission.52,64 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH, and copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. The corresponding SEM images of the synthesized 1D CPs: (b) PPy nanowire array by the hard-template method. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2005, Elsevier; (d) PPy nanofiber by the soft-template method. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; and (f) PANI nanowire array by the template-free method. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Synthesis of conducting polymer composites
As pure CPs suffer from poor cycling stability, they are fabricated into composites with different materials to enhance the performance in terms of cycling stability, energy storage capacity and even mechanical properties. To date, various types of binary or even ternary CP composites have been developed. The incorporated materials mainly include carbon materials, pseudo-capacitive materials, and 2D materials.
Methods for synthesizing CP composites can be mainly classified into three categories based on the mechanism and procedure: ex situ synthesis, in situ synthesis and one-pot synthesis.59 For ex situ synthesis, they are produced separately, and then the composite is obtained by blending two or more individual components.69 For in situ synthesis, at least one component of the composite is synthesized in the presence of another one. One key advantage of this method is that the interface in-between components can be controlled at the molecular level to achieve a synergistic effect.70 The last method, one-pot synthesis, is based on the reaction that monomers and other components can interact with each other forming composites in one single step.71
As unconventional supercapacitors are generally built on one dimensional (1D, fiber), two dimensional (2D, film or paper), and three dimensional (3D, foam or sponge) integrated electrodes. Hence, the synthesis of traditional powder like CP composites, which has been well presented in recent excellent reviews, is excluded here.36,43

2.2.1 Conducting polymer–carbon nanomaterial composites. 
Carbon nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene can be used as building blocks to construct diverse macroscopic structures with different dimensions from 1D fibers, 2D films to 3D foams. The assembling of macroscopic structures from CNTs or graphene has been well reviewed recently.72,73 CPs can be integrated with these structures to enhance their performance by harnessing the synergistic effects from carbons and CPs.
Generally CNT or graphene fibers are not suitable for direct use as high performance fiber electrodes, due to the low accessible surface area related to their compact structures. They are usually employed as supports for growing CPs to fabricate composite electrodes to harness the capacitance from CPs and the synergistic effects from components. For instance, CNT fiber with a thin layer of in situ chemically polymerized PANI nanowire arrays presented a 16-fold improvement in areal capacitance.74 Apart from depositing CPs onto these fibers, CP–carbon composite fibers can be also prepared by wet-spinning75,76 and scrolling.77 Qu et al. reported the continuous production of reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/PPy fibers by the wet-spinning process.76 The mixture of pyrrole (Py) monomers and graphene oxide (GO) was spun into an aqueous FeCl3 solution by using a single-capillary needle, where Py was in situ polymerized to PPy forming GO/PPy fibers. After drying, GO/PPy fibers were chemically reduced to rGO/PPy fibers with hydroiodic acid. The diameters of such fibers could be controlled in the range of 15 to 80 μm by tuning the diameter of spinneret needle and concentration of GO. The resultant rGO/PPy fibers showed high conductivity and mechanical flexibility and worked as flexible and lightweight electrodes for fiber shaped supercapacitors (Fig. 4a and b). This composite fiber showed an areal capacitance of 115 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2. In parallel with the wet approach, a dry scrolling strategy was proposed to produce CNT/PEDOT composite fibers.77 CNT sheets with a layer of vapor phase polymerized PEDOT were scrolled to form composite fibers with the diameter ranging from 20 to 35 μm. The CNT/PEDOT composite fibers showed high mechanical strength and flexibility with a high volumetric capacitance of 167 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. To harness the capacitance from the inner surface as well, hollow composite fibers are developed. Peng et al. developed hollow rGO/PEDOT:PSS composite fibers with high flexibility and conductivity by sealing a mixture of GO, PEDOT:PSS and vitamin C in a glass pipe at 90 °C.78 Two ends of the glass pipe were open to further dry and reduce the wet fiber to form hollow composite fibers. The hollow structure might derive from the gas released from the reduction of GO. These composite fibers showed robust mechanical properties and could be woven into textiles (Fig. 4c), and they exhibited a rough and wrinkled surface with increased specific area beneficial for supercapacitors (Fig. 4d). They delivered a high specific areal capacitance of 304.5 mF cm−2 at 0.08 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 4  Various macroscopic CP composites. Digital image (a) and cross-sectional SEM image (b) of rGO/PPy fibers. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Photo of hollow rGO/PEDOT:PSS fibers being woven with cotton fibers, and (d) SEM images of a knotted rGO/PEDOT:PSS fiber. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. Digital photo (e) and SEM image (f) of CNT/PANI composite paper. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. Digital photo (g) and cross-sectional SEM image (h) of a flexible rGO/PPy nanoparticle film. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Digital photo (i) and SEM image (j) of CNT/PPy sponge. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2014, Springer. Digital photo (k) and SEM image (l) of CNT/PANI coated polymer sponge. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Free-standing CNT films were often fabricated by vacuum filtration and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods.79,80 Vacuum filtration of CNT dispersion through a membrane can get porous films with interconnected and entangled CNTs. If the films are thick enough (i.e. micro scale), they can be easily peeled off.79 Apart from free-standing CNT films/buckypaper, CNTs on various flexible substrates such as plastic films, papers and textiles are also good electrodes for supercapacitors.31,81,82 The porous structures in free-standing or substrate-supported CNT films enable the loading of CPs to form uniform hybrid film electrodes.14,83–86 For example, CNT buckypaper was used as the template for chemical polymerization of PANI.79 The paper like CNT/PANI could be rolled up easily (Fig. 4e), and PANI was uniformly coated on the surface of individual CNTs (Fig. 4f). It delivered a specific capacitance of 424 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, higher than that of pristine CNTs or PANI. The capacitance decay rate was 10.6% after 1000 cycles, lower than 30% for pure PANI. The increased specific capacitance and enhanced cycling stability could be attributed to the synergistic effect between CNT buckypaper and PANI, where the interconnected CNT network acted as a framework to stabilize PANI. Ge et al. prepared a flexible electrode by chemically depositing PANI nanoribbons onto cellulose paper-supported CNTs that were obtained by dipping cellulose paper into CNT dispersion followed by a drying process.86 PANI nanoribbons were formed in situ between networks of cellulose fibers and CNTs. This composite paper delivered an areal capacitance of 330 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2, higher than 106 mF cm−2 from PANI nanoribbon coated paper.
A mechanically strong graphene film commonly has a compact structure with re-stacked graphene nanosheets due to the strong π–π interactions and van der Waals attraction in-between.87 CPs acting as “spacers” not only prevent the restacking but also provide pseudo-capacitance to enhance the supercapacitive performance.88–90 For example, Ge et al. reported a rGO/PPy nanoparticle film that was fabricated by vacuum filtration in combination with electrochemical reduction.88 A mixture of PPy nanoparticles and GO was vacuum filtered through a membrane to obtain a GO/PPy film. Then the GO/PPy film was electrochemically reduced to get a rGO/PPy film (Fig. 4g and h). This free-standing rGO/PPy film showed excellent mechanical properties and electrochemical properties: a high areal capacitance of 216 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2, and a high capacitance retention rate of 87% after 5000 cycles. In addition, CPs can grow on the graphene sheet surface of free-standing or substrate-supported graphene films to produce composite films delivering high capacitance as well.51,91,92
3D porous CNT and graphene architectures possess advantages of high specific surface area and fast ion and electron transport kinetics, enabling their applications in high performance supercapacitors. Similar to 1D fibers and 2D films, CPs can also be formed on 3D CNT or graphene architectures via chemical or electrochemical polymerization.19,22,41,93,94 Li et al. reported a CNT/PPy core–shell sponge via electrochemically polymerizing PPy onto a CVD grown CNT sponge (Fig. 4i).41 PPy was well formed around each individual CNT (Fig. 4j), and this core–shell configuration ensured efficient charge transport. The resultant CNT/PPy sponge maintained the initial network structure with high porosity. It could be compressed at large strain (50%) without structural collapse. This CNT/PPy sponge showed a specific capacitance of 255.4 F g−1 at 200 mV s−1, and a capacitance retention of 80% after 1000 cycles. 3D Graphene foam made by etching away the Ni foam that had functioned as the template and catalyst during the CVD growth exhibited stable electrical and mechanical properties under stretching. Such foam was used as the skeleton to support the growth of PPy via chemical polymerization, and the formed composite foam could maintain stable conductivity over a strain range of 0–40%, suitable for the use in a stretchable supercapacitor.94 Moreover, CNT or graphene coated polymer sponges can inherit the compression tolerance of sponges and are used for CP deposition. PANI coated sponge/CNTs (Fig. 4k and l) showed a high compression strain of 60% and a high specific capacitance of 216 F g−1.22


2.2.2 Conducting polymer–pseudo-capacitive material composites. 
Pseudo-capacitive materials of metal oxides or metal hydroxides provide higher capacitance than carbon materials, but suffer from low rate capability due to the low electrical conductivity. The incorporation of CPs with properties of high conductivity and polymeric flexibility can not only facilitate electron transport to the pseudo-capacitive materials with low conductivity, but also protect the metal oxides or hydroxides in the composites to keep the integrity. It endows the formed composites with high specific capacitance, high rate capability and excellent cycling stability.95–99 Zhang et al. prepared a transparent composite film by aerosol-jet spraying a mixed solution of PEDOT:PSS and RuO2 onto a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate.100 This composite film exhibited a high volumetric capacitance of 190 F cm−3 while retaining high transparency, which held great potential for transparent supercapacitors. Zhao et al. reported a hybrid layered film based on the electrostatic self-assembly of CoNi-layered double hydroxides (CoNi-LDH) and PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 5a).101 The intimate interfacial bonding between these two components was beneficial for charge storage. The PEDOT:PSS layer acted as a conductive network to facilitate the charge collection and transport, while the long-range periodic stacking facilitated the ion diffusion to the inner CoNi-LDH. This composite electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 920 F g−1 at 3 A g−1, and 83.7% of the capacitance was retained at an even higher current density of 30 A g−1.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations for the assembly of conducting polymer-pseudo-capacitive material composites: (a) CoNi-LDH monolayer and PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Flexible PPy/MnO2/CC composite. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Carbon cloth (CC) is a common current collector of low cost for unconventional supercapacitors owing to its high conductivity, mechanical flexibility and chemical stability. Hence the integration of CP composites with flexible CC offers a facile method to construct flexible electrodes.102–105 Fan et al. reported a highly flexible electrode based on MnO2 and PPy composites on CC using an in situ electrodeposition technique: successive electrodeposition of MnO2 and PPy (Fig. 5b).102 This composite electrode showed a specific capacitance of 342 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and a capacitance retention of 55.8% at 100 mV s−1, all higher than those of the pristine MnO2 electrode. The enhanced specific capacitance and rate capability were ascribed to the increased conductivity from PPy and the synergistic effect between MnO2 and PPy.


2.2.3 Conducting polymer-2D material composites. 
2D nanomaterials have attracted great interest for energy storage due to their unique physicochemical and electrochemical properties.106 Graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides (MXenes) are widely investigated for application in supercapacitors. Composites based on CPs and 2D materials can inherit the properties of each individual component with a synergistic effect due to the facile charge transfer in-between these two constituents. CPs act as the conducting platform for charge delivery between 2D nanosheets and prevent the restacking of these 2D nanosheets. Graphene/CP composites have been discussed in Section 2.2.1, and we mainly discuss TMD and MXene based composites here.
TMDs are a group of layered compounds with a formula of MX2, where M is the transition metal from groups 4, 5 or 6 (such as Mo or W) and X is a chalcogen atom (S, Se or Te). Such layered structures can be easily exfoliated to single layer MX2 nanosheets.107 As a representative member of the TMD family, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has gained increasing interest for application in supercapacitors due to its earth abundance, unique structure and high capacitance. The large surface of MoS2 sheets provides sufficient active sites for charge storage, and pseudo-capacitance can be obtained due to the wide range of oxidation states of Mo.108,109 Free-standing and substrate-supported MoS2/CP composite electrodes have been developed for flexible supercapacitors.109,110 For example, a free-standing MoS2/PEDOT:PSS film was prepared by filtering the dispersion of MoS2 nanosheets and PEDOT:PSS through a PVDF hydrophobic membrane.109 The resultant composite film showed a compact layered structure and was robust with high fracture strength. It delivered a high volumetric capacitance of 141.4 F cm−3 at 0.2 A g−1 and showed good cycling stability with a capacitance retention rate of 98.6% after 5000 cycles. Zhang et al. reported a CC supported MoS2/PANI composite electrode for flexible supercapacitors. MoS2 was formed on CC by a hydrothermal method and then coated with PANI by electrochemical polymerization.110 For this material, PANI increased the contact area between the electrode and electrolyte and provided pseudo-capacitance as well. CC endowed the electrode with high conductivity and flexibility. This supercapacitor electrode showed excellent performance: a high specific capacitance of 972 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, excellent rate capability of 730 F g−1 at 30 A g−1, and good cycling stability with a capacitance retention rate of 87% after 5000 cycles.
MXenes were discovered to be an emerging class of 2D materials by Gogotsi and co-workers in 2011.111 The general composition of MXenes can be expressed as Mn+1XnTx, where M is a transition metal, X stands for carbon or nitrogen, Tx represents surface functional groups such as O, –OH and –F, and n = 1, 2, or 3.112 Ti3C2Tx, the most widely studied MXene, has been regarded as a promising material for supercapacitors.113,114 Similar to other 2D materials, free-standing MXene films suffer from the restacking of nanosheets with limited accessible surface area resulting in decreased capacitance and rate capability. CPs can be formed on MXene sheets to fabricate electrodes with high accessible surface area and improved electrochemical performance.115–118 Mohammadi et al. reported a Ti3C2Tx/PANI free-standing film by oxidant-free in situ polymerization of PANI on the surface of MXene sheets (Fig. 6a).117 The polymerization was induced by the charge transfer between monomer and MXene. After vacuum filtration, a composite film with a layered structure was formed (Fig. 6b). It exhibited excellent flexibility and outstanding gravimetric and volumetric capacitances (503 F g−1 and 1682 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1). Zhu et al. fabricated a free-standing MXene/PPy composite film through intercalating PPy into layered Ti3C2 MXene.118 Ti3C2 MXene was electrophoretically deposited onto fluorine-doped tin oxides followed by the electrochemical polymerization of PPy (Fig. 6c). The intercalated PPy was strongly bonded with Ti3C2 MXene sheets through hydrogen bonds between the N–H groups of pyrrole rings and the oxygen or fluorine-containing terminal groups on Ti3C2 MXene sheets. The formed MXene/PPy film could be easily peeled off from the FTO and freely folded and rolled up (Fig. 6d). It possessed a porous cross section (Fig. 6e). This composite film delivered a capacitance of 203 mF cm−2 that was over 30% greater than that of a neat PPy film (150 mF cm−2) and retained nearly 100% of the capacitance even after 20000 cycles.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the process for the synthesis of the Ti3C2Tx MXene/PANI composite. (b) A cross-sectional SEM image of the fabricated Ti3C2Tx MXene/PANI composite film. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic presentation of the formation of the MXene/PPy composite film. (d) Images of the flexible MXene/PPy composite film. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the MXene/PPy composite film. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 


2.2.4 Conducting polymer ternary composites. 
Binary CP-based composites have demonstrated greatly improved electrochemical performance in supercapacitors compared to CPs. To further increase the supercapacitive performance, ternary composites have been developed. They are mainly in the form of CNT/graphene/CPs or nanocarbon/metal oxide/CPs. These ternary composites commonly possess various macroscopic structures owing to the structural variation of nanocarbon assemblies.
Cheng et al. reported a ternary fiber electrode, MnO2 nanosheets integrated with a PEDOT:PSS coated CNT fiber (Fig. 7a).119 The PEDOT:PSS coating layer was formed by repeatedly dipping CNT fibers into the PEDOT:PSS solution followed by an annealing treatment at 120 °C. The electrochemical growth of MnO2 nanosheets onto such fibers produced the ternary CNT/PEDOT:PSS/MnO2 fiber electrode. PEDOT:PSS as the middle layer not only provided pseudo-capacitance, but also served as a binder to connect the outer layer MnO2 and inner layer CNT fibers. Such a ternary fiber exhibited an improved electrochemical performance than its binary counterpart: a high specific capacitance of 478.6 F cm−3 (411.6 F g−1) was achieved at 0.05 A cm−3, higher than that of CNT/MnO2 (386.9 F cm−3), and a high capacitance retention rate of 91% over 10000 cycles.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the formation of ternary CP composites: (a) 1D CNT/PEDOT:PSS/MnO2 fiber, reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Flexible graphene/CNT/PANI film, reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) 3D rGO/PANI/Co3O4, reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Thin film ternary composite electrodes have also been developed. Fan et al. demonstrated a flexible graphene/CNT/PANI ternary film by chemical polymerization of PANI onto a flexible GO/CNT composite film followed by the reduction of GO (Fig. 7b).120 The resultant film showed excellent performance due to the 3D conductive graphene/CNT network, which can combine the advantages of pseudo-capacitance and electrochemical double-layer capacitance at the electrode–electrolyte interface. A high capacitance of 498 F g−1 was obtained at 0.5 A g−1, and 95.8% of the initial capacitance was retained after 3000 cycles. In another work, Li et al. reported a highly flexible CNT/Fe3O4/PANI composite film with high specific capacitance. A CNT film was used as both the substrate and current collector providing the flexibility. Fe3O4 was deposited on the CNT film and then electrochemically coated with PANI. PANI provided not only pseudo-capacitance, but also served as a conducting shell to improve the conductivity and structural stability of Fe3O4. Such a ternary composite film exhibited a high capacitance of 201 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1 and a 3.6% capacitance loss after 10000 cycles.121
3D porous ternary composites take advantage of multidimensional electron transport and high surface area for achieving high energy storage performance. A graphene/PANI/Co3O4 ternary hybrid aerogel was prepared by a hydrothermal treatment of in situ polymerized GO/PANI and GO/cobalt salt hybrid sols (Fig. 7c).122 The formed ternary composite exhibited a better electrochemical performance than its 2D counterpart: a high specific capacitance of 1247 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 755 F g−1 at 20 A g−1; no obvious capacitance fade was observed over 3500 cycles.
In summary, CP composites have shown greatly improved capacity and stability compared to pure CPs. For clear vision, the electrochemical performances and synergistic mechanisms of some representative CP composites are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Electrochemical performances and synergistic mechanisms of some representative CP composites




Materials
Specific capacitance
Cycling stability
Synergistic effects
Ref.





a The capacitive performance is the combination of electric double layer capacitance from carbons and pseudocapacitance from the faradaic reactions of CPs.
b Carbon provides a conductive network for rapid charge transfer.
c Carbon acts as a framework to stabilize CPs.
d Capacitance derives from faradaic reactions of pseudo-capacitive materials and CPs.
e CPs act as a binder and improve the electrical conductivity.
f Pseudo-capacitive materials provide a rigid support and interlink the polymer chain of CPs for enhanced stability.
g CPs prevent 2D materials from restacking, facilitate the charge delivery and provide pseudo-capacitance.
h 2D materials provide large surface area and pseudo-capacitance.
i The interfacial contact between 2D materials and CPs is beneficial for stabilizing the composites.





Carbon–CP
rGO/PPy fiber
115 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2
—



,


,




74



CNT/PEDOT fiber
167 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1
99% after 10000 cycles

77



rGO/PEDOT:PSS fiber
304.5 mF cm−2 at 0.08 mA cm−2
96% after 10000 cycles

78



CNT paper/PANI
424 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1
89.4% after 1000 cycles

79



CNT film/PANI
236 F g−1 at 10 A g−1
85% after 1000 cycles

83



Cotton fabric/CNT/PPy
201.99 F g−1 at 1.8 A g−1
50% after 500 cycles

84



Paper/CNT/PANI
330 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2
79% after 1000 cycles

86



rGO/PPy film
216 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2
87% after 5000 cycles

88



rGO/PANI film
210 F g−1 at 0.3 A g−1
79% after 800 cycles

89



rGO/PPy film
345 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1
91.6% after 1000 cycles

90



rGO/PANI film
233 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1
100% after 1500 cycles

91



rGO/PANI paper
763 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1
82% after 1000 cycles

92



CNT/PPy sponge
335 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1
80% after 1000 cycles

41



CNT/PEDOT sponge
147 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
95% after 3000 cycles

93



Pseudo-capacitive materials–CP
MnO2/PEDOT:PSS
503 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1
99.5% after 4000 cycles



,


,




97



MnO2/PPy
600 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1
90% after 5000 cycles

98



MnO2/PPy
342 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1
96% after 1000 cycles

102



MoO3/PANI
1050 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
71% after 5000 cycles

103



MnO2/PANI
1560 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1
88.1% after 1000 cycles

105



2D materials–CP
MoS2/PEDOT:PSS
141.4 F cm−3 at 0.2 A g−1
98.6% after 5000 cycles



,


,




109



MoS2/PANI
972 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
87% after 5000 cycles

110



Ti3C2Tx/PPy
416 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1
92% after 25000 cycles

115



Ti3C2Tx/PANi
503 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1
98.3% after 10000 cycles

117



Ti3C2Tx/PPy
203 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2
100% after 20000 cycles

118



Ternary composites
CNT fiber/PEDOT:PSS/MnO2
478.6 F cm−3 at 0.05 A cm−3
91% after 10000 cycles



,


,


,


,




119



rGO/CNT/PANI film
498 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
95.8% after 3000 cycles



,


,




120



CNT/Fe3O4/PANI film
201 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1
96.4% after 10000 cycles



,


,




121



rGO/PANI/Co3O4 aerogel
1247 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
100% after 3500 cycles



,


,




122






3. Conducting polymer composite-based unconventional solid-state supercapacitors
Flexible and lightweight solid-state supercapacitors with sandwiched, interdigitated and fiber-type architectures are in high demand for integration with wearable electronics. The continuous development of advanced materials has also endowed solid-state supercapacitors with smart functions such as electrochromism, self-healing and transparency, apart from their excellent energy storage capability in different configurations. These smart functions will promote the applications of solid-state supercapacitors in intelligent wearable electronics.
3.1 Flexible solid-state supercapacitors with different configurations
To date, remarkable achievements have been made in developing sandwich type flexible solid-state supercapacitors (fSSCs) due to their simple structure and relatively easy fabrication process using film electrodes. The recent emergence of on-chip and textile electronics has inspired the development of micro-supercapacitors with in-plane interdigitated electrodes and fiber-shaped supercapacitors.

3.1.1 Flexible solid-state supercapacitors with a sandwiched structure. 
fSSCs are generally fabricated from flexible electrodes, solid-state electrolyte and flexible packaging. Flexible electrodes should possess advantages of high capacitance, low self-discharge, long cycling stability and high mechanical flexibility. The solid-state electrolyte needs to be highly ionically conductive, thermally and mechanically stable; it can also serve as the separator eliminating the need for an additional one.123 It adopts the conventional sandwich structure design with a stacked configuration of current collector–film electrode–solid electrolyte–film electrode–current collector (Fig. 8a).124 The current collector can be removed when electrodes are robust and of high conductivity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of flexible solid-state supercapacitors with a sandwiched structure. Reproduced with permission.124 Open access, Nature Publishing Group. (b) CNT/PANI based paper-like flexible supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Cellulose paper/rGO/PANI based flexible supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) MXene/PPy film based flexible supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Film like CP composites are widely used to fabricate fSSCs, and the CNT/CP composite is an attractive one. As mentioned above, free-standing CNT films can be assembled through vacuum filtration-induced self-assembly from stable CNT dispersion42,79,125,126 or direct CVD growth.80,83 The porous structure of the film makes it an ideal framework for loading CPs.14,83 For example, Meng et al. reported a highly flexible solid-state paper-like supercapacitor using a CNT/PANI composite film that was obtained by chemically depositing PANI onto a thin CNT film via a filtration process using CNT dispersion.14 Two gel electrolyte (polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/H2SO4) impregnated CNT/PANI composite films were pressed face-to-face under pressure to form an integrated solid-state device. The device showed a specific capacitance of 31.4 F g−1, and no capacitance fade was observed under twisting or even folding conditions (Fig. 8b).
CNTs can attach firmly on the surface of various substrates (i.e. plastic films, papers and textiles) due to the van der Waals interaction or hydrogen bonds.81,82,84 Such strong interaction ensures the high flexibility of the whole composite film. Huang et al. fabricated a fSSC with flexible PPy coated cotton fabric/CNT electrodes. These electrodes were prepared by a facile “dipping and drying” method to coat CNTs onto the fabric and a subsequent electrochemical polymerization of PPy onto CNTs. A fSSC fabricated using PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte showed a high specific capacitance (50.09 mF cm−2 at 25 mV s−1) and excellent flexibility. It could be twisted or rolled up without breaking the structural integrity.84
Free-standing graphene films have also shown great promise as electrodes for flexible supercapacitors because they are ultrathin, flexible and lightweight. However, graphene sheets tend to aggregate and restack during the film making process.127 The incorporation of redox-active spacers is one of two main strategies to prevent the restacking of graphene sheets apart from the creation of porous graphene networks.88–90,128,129 Hu and co-workers prepared a graphene/PANI composite film by in situ chemical polymerization and a subsequent chemical reduction. GO nanosheets coated with chemically polymerized PANI in aqueous solution were filtered to get a GO/PANI composite film, and then it was reduced to rGO/PANI with hydroiodic acid. The assembled solid-state supercapacitor with PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte showed an areal capacitance of 0.425 F cm−2, and the energy storage properties were nearly unchanged when it was bent, reflecting its excellent flexibility.129
Similar to CNTs, graphene can also be integrated with different substrates such as paper and textiles with large surface area for the deposition of CPs.130–132 For instance, Liu et al. demonstrated a fSSC assembled with cellulose paper/graphene/PANI nanocomposite electrodes.132 Its preparation started with coating a thin and uniform GO layer onto cellulose fibers in the paper, and then porous rGO networks were assembled in the pores of the paper via a hydrothermal process in a mixture of GO dispersion, hydrazine monohydrate and ammonia solution. After freeze-drying, nanostructured paper/rGO was obtained, and the subsequent chemical polymerization of PANi produced paper/rGO/PANI composite paper. The fSSC was assembled by sandwiching two such composite papers with PVA/H2SO4 polymer electrolyte. This composite electrode delivered a specific capacitance of ∼224 F g−1, and the solid-state device showed stable performance at the folding or bending states (Fig. 8c).
2D materials such as TMDs and MXenes have attracted great interest for application in flexible supercapacitors owing to their unique physicochemical and electrochemical properties.109,118,133–140 CPs can be incorporated with them to form flexible composite electrodes to inherit properties of each individual component with synergistic effects. Ge et al. prepared free-standing MoS2/PEDOT:PSS through a simple filtration technique.109 The fSSC with PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte could maintain 87.8% of capacitance when being bent to 90°, and 80% of capacitance could be retained after being bent 1000 times. Zhu et al. reported a highly flexible electrode by hybridizing PPy chains with MXenes.118 The solid-state supercapacitor with MXene/PPy films as electrodes and PVA/H2SO4 as electrolyte exhibited an areal capacitance of 35.6 mF cm−2, and the performance under different bending states was maintained (Fig. 8d).


3.1.2 Micro-supercapacitors. 
The rapid development in miniaturized personal wearable devices has significantly trigged the pursuit for ultrathin, flexible and lightweight energy storage devices that can be directly integrated with other electronic components.141 Flexible supercapacitors with a sandwiched structure often suffer from ion transport limitations within thick electrodes. Moreover, the integration with miniaturized wearable devices is still a challenge. To address these issues, micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) with in-plane interdigitated microelectrodes have been proposed (Fig. 9a).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of flexible solid-state supercapacitors with interdigitated electrodes. (b) Schematic illustration of the operating principle of the MSC with graphene electrodes. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible MSC fabricated with graphene/PPy foam through a bottom-up approach. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) rGO/PEDOT:PSS film based flexible MSC assembled through a top-down approach. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
The in-plane interdigitated electrode geometry offers several advantages over the sandwiched configuration. First, the distance between electrode fingers can be precisely controlled through advanced patterning technologies. The shortened ionic diffusion path between electrodes enable the realization of a high power density.142 Those electrode fingers are physically and electrically isolated from adjacent ones, eliminating the use of a separator and the risk of short circuit. Furthermore, the primary ionic transport is in the lateral direction that is easy for the diffusion of electrolyte ions, resulting in an improved rate performance (Fig. 9b).143 This is particularly important for thick electrodes and electrodes made from 2D materials with layered structures.144 At last, the in-plane architecture facilitates the integration with on-chip electronics on one planar substrate, which is critical for the miniaturization of the whole wearable system.145 All of these merits enable MSCs to be the most promising candidate for energy storage components of miniaturized wearable electronics.
The fabrication of interdigitated micro-electrode arrays can be classified into two approaches depending on the deposition methods of active materials: bottom-up and top-down. For the bottom-up approach, current collectors and active materials are deposited successively onto a flexible substrate with a designed pattern. It is generally achieved by patterning current collectors followed by the deposition of active materials through various methods such as spray coating, electrodeposition, electrophoretic deposition and mechanical pressing.146–155 Gao and co-workers fabricated a graphene/PPy composite based flexible solid-state MSC on paper by a facile templating and imprinting method (Fig. 9c).155 Graphene/PPy composite foam was obtained by electrochemical polymerization of PPy onto graphene foam. The cut graphene/PPy pieces were then pressed into the aluminum interdigitated mask on one piece of paper, and interdigitated graphene/PPy electrodes were formed after removing the mask. PVA–H2SO4 gel electrolyte was spread onto the electrodes to form an MSC. This paper-based MSC exhibited an areal capacitance of 22 mF cm−2 at 0.4 mA cm−2. There was no obvious change in capacitance when the MSC was bent to 180°. The bottom-up approach is also suitable for fabricating flexible MSCs with asymmetric electrode arrays that contain both electrochemical double-layer capacitive electrodes and pseudo-capacitive ones. The former one provides a high power supply while the latter one can act as the energy source. Asymmetric devices often possess a wider operating voltage window than symmetric systems (usually less than 1.0 V with PVA based gel electrolyte), leading to a higher energy density.156
In the top-down approach, an etching process is performed on a thin film of active materials to remove unwanted materials forming interdigitated electrodes that are directly assembled into solid-state MSCs after coating polymer gel electrolyte. Various etching techniques have been employed including dry etching (i.e., plasma,157,158 laser,159–161 or mechanical scribing162,163) and wet etching (microfluidic164). For example, Liu et al. fabricated a flexible solid-state MSC with graphene/PEDOT:PSS films using a laser etching method (Fig. 9d).161 Graphene/PDEOT:PSS dispersion was bar coated onto a Au coated PET sheet. A CO2 laser was employed to generate an interdigitated pattern by creating channels and leaving the active electrodes. The assembled flexible MSC with a PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte coating achieved a high areal capacitance of ∼84.7 mF cm−2 and excellent flexibility with negligible change under repeated bending. This top-down technology can be applied to create well-separated microelectrodes from a wide range of electrode materials. Thus, it paves the way for rational engineering of electrodes for a wide range of wearable electronic devices.
The geometric parameters including interspace, width, length and numbers of microelectrodes need to be improved to realize flexible interdigitated MSCs with high performance for practical applications. Microelectrode arrays with designed 3D structures such as micro-rod arrays can provide a high surface area for high energy density without sacrificing power density. Geometries other than simple interdigitated design should also be considered for flexible MSCs. For example, fractal165 and concentric circular166 designs have been proposed recently to offer enhanced electrochemical performance.


3.1.3 Fiber-shaped supercapacitors. 
Different from sandwiched supercapacitors or in-plane interdigitated MSCs, fiber-shaped supercapacitors show incomparable advantages for direct use as wearable units or the integration with textile structures for smart garments.167 The developed fiber electrodes mainly include plastic wires,168 metal wires,169 carbon fibers, CNT or graphene fibers,170,171 conducting polymer fibers,172,173 and composite fibers.74,174–176 Plastic wire was the first used one, but the insulating nature of plastic limited the performance.168 Metal fibers improved the conductivity,169 but increased the volume and weight of the devices with negligible contribution to the capacitance. To achieve fiber supercapacitors with excellent flexibility and good electrochemical performance, nanocarbon based fibers (CNT and graphene fiber) are widely used. As for films, pure CNT or graphene fibers suffer from limited electrolyte penetration due to the compact structures as well. CPs with pseudo-capacitive properties were incorporated with those fibers to boost the electrochemical performance.76–78,174
Different device architectures have been developed for fiber shaped supercapacitors, mainly including parallel, twisted and coaxial structures (Fig. 10a).167,177 For the parallel structure, two fiber electrodes are arranged in parallel to the separator or polymer gel electrolyte, similar to planar supercapacitors.169,178–180 Huang et al. produced a fiber supercapacitor with CP composite coated metal yarns in parallel structures.169 The metal yarn was produced by twist-bundle-drawing stainless steel thin fibers together. After hydrothermal formation of rGO on the metal yarn, MnO2 and PPy were electrodeposited consecutively. Two parallel fiber electrodes were coated with PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte to form fiber supercapacitors. The specific capacitance of one fiber electrode was 31 mF cm−1 or 411 mF cm−2. The assembled fiber supercapacitor showed high flexibility and could be knitted into a wrist band with woolen yarns using a common knitting machine owing to the high strength of fiber supercapacitors (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of three typical device configurations of fiber shaped supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.167,177 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH and copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A parallel fiber supercapacitor with rGO/MnO2/PPy composite coated stainless steel yarn electrodes. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) A twisted fiber supercapacitor with CNT/PANI composite fibers. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) A coaxial fiber supercapacitor with MnO2/PPy coated carbon fibers as the inner electrode and dip-coated CNTs as the outer electrode. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
A twisted structure can be achieved by twisting two fiber electrodes that are separated with a separator or gel electrolyte.174,175 Compared with the parallel structure, twisted structures have increased interfaces for enhanced electrochemical performance.181 Cai et al. reported a twisted fiber supercapacitor with PANI coated CNT fibers that were obtained by electrochemically depositing PANI onto CNT fibers.174 Two electrolyte (PVA/H3PO4) coated fiber electrodes were twisted to obtain a fiber supercapacitor. The incorporation of PANI significantly increased the capacitance of the device to as high as 274 F g−1 (263 mF cm−1). This fiber supercapacitor showed robust mechanical properties as well. The capacitance was decreased by less than 3% after 50 cycles of bending. Due to the excellent flexibility and stability, the fiber supercapacitor could be woven into textile (Fig. 10c).
For the coaxial structure, the core electrode, separator or polymer gel electrolyte and outer electrode are assembled layer by layer.182–186 The contact area is increased and internal resistance is decreased in the coaxial structure compared to the twisted structure, leading to an improved performance.182,186 Shen et al. reported a coaxial fiber supercapacitor with MnO2/PPy coated carbon fibers as the inner electrode, PVA/H3PO4 as the electrolyte, and dip-coated CNTs as the outer electrode.185 The fiber supercapacitor showed a capacitance of 25.8 μF cm−1 with high bending flexibility and tensile strength (Fig. 10d).
It can be seen that carbon–CP composites are widely used for flexible supercapacitors due to the diverse macroscopic structures of carbon materials. However, the specific capacitance of carbon materials is not very high, leading to limited improvement in the capacitance of composites. Pseudo-capacitive material–CP and TMD–CP composites can take advantage of the high capacitance, and they are generally in the form of films for use in flexible supercapacitors. Other macroscopic structures (fibers and foams) are still under exploration for advanced flexible supercapacitors. MXene–CP composites are promising for flexible supercapacitors due to the unique 2D structures and high capacitance of MXenes. The electrochemical performance of CP based flexible supercapacitors has been significantly improved from the binary to ternary compositions in terms of capacity and stability. Nevertheless, the composition of ternary composites should be well controlled to maximize the performance as the electrochemical performance is easily affected by the composition sequence.119

3.2 Multifunctional solid-state supercapacitors
With the development of high performance functional materials, it is of great interest to integrate versatile materials into devices to realize various functions. These multifunctional supercapacitors may withstand severer mechanical deformations (stretching and compressing) than bending, or are smart and responsive to external stimuli such as voltage (electrochromism) and physical damage (self-healing), or show special physical properties (transparency). The multifunction can endow wearable electronics with high levels of personalization.

3.2.1 Stretchable supercapacitors. 
Stretchable electronics that are capable of maintaining their performance under large deformation are in high demand for the ever-growing wearable electronics. Stretchable devices such as polymer light-emitting diodes187,188 and transistors189,190 have demonstrated good stretchability while maintaining their functions. Stretchable power sources are essential for constructing integrated stretchable electronics. To date, great efforts have been devoted to developing CP composite based stretchable supercapacitors with different configurations (e.g. 1D fiber, 2D planar and 3D), in order to ensure a stable performance output at multidimensional stretching states.
For 1D fiber supercapacitors, Peng's group developed a stretchable coaxial fiber supercapacitor using a PANI coated CNT film.191 A CNT sheet was wrapped around a pre-stretched elastic polymer fiber followed by a release. PANI was electrochemically polymerized onto the CNT sheet. This fiber electrode served as the inner electrode and was then covered with a thin layer of PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte. The electrodeposited CNT/PANI composite film was used as the outer electrode followed by the second layer of gel electrolyte (Fig. 11a). The resultant fiber supercapacitor could reach a stretchability of 400% with an areal specific capacitance of 3.08 mF cm−2 and could be woven across each other into elastic textiles (Fig. 11b). Wallace's group developed a helix design to endow a non-stretchable fiber supercapacitor with stretchability.192 Hybrid CNT/graphene/PANI fibers prepared by a combination of wet-spinning and electrochemical polymerization were twisted to construct a fiber supercapacitor. The as-prepared supercapacitor was coiled on a stainless steel rod and then coated with a layer of rubber to fix the structure. Then the rod was removed and filled with rubber. It showed an ultra-stretchability of 800% (Fig. 11c) while achieving a specific capacitance of 137.5 F g−1 (10.3 mF cm−1, 273.7 mF cm−2 and 91.2 F cm−3).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a coaxial stretchable fiber-shaped supercapacitor. (b) Stretchable textile consists of coaxial fiber supercapacitors under stretching by 100%. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a superelastic fiber-based supercapacitor and under different strains up to 800%. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the planar supercapacitor with 1000% stretchability and the related SEM image of the wavy CNT/PPy electrode. (e) Capacitance enhancement under strain. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a stretchable textile supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) An all-solid-state supercapacitor based on graphene/PPy foam. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (h) A 3D stretchable solid-state supercapacitor based on pyramid-shaped CNT/PANI films. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For 2D planar supercapacitors, buckled electrodes formed on prestretched substrates15,193–195 or electrolytes196,197 have been widely adopted to realize stretchable supercapacitors. In addition, materials with specific structures (embedded in elastomers,198,199 2D reentrant auxetic200 and 3D porous94) or on intrinsic stretchable substrates (textiles201) can also be used directly in planar stretchable supercapacitors.
A buckled electrode is generally obtained by a mechanical buckling process, in which a thin electrode film is laminated on a prestretched substrate or electrolyte, and a buckled structure is formed spontaneously after releasing the pre-strain due to mechanical competition in-between.193,195,196 The strain applied to the electrodes can be accommodated by changing the wave amplitude and wavelength of the buckled structure, thus avoiding damaging the active material layer. Zhang et al. reported a highly stretchable supercapacitor based on buckled CNT/PANI composite films by a mechanical buckling process coupled with a gel electrolyte. It displayed a high stretchability of 120% and delivered a specific capacitance of 106 F g−1.194 A polyacrylamide hydrogel cross linked by vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticles showed an ultrahigh stretchability of 1500%. The prestrained hydrogel was attached with CNT/PPy paper electrodes to form a buckled structure after the release (Fig. 11d). The assembled stretchable supercapacitor could be stretched to 1000% with improved capacitance due to the increased contact between electrodes and electrolyte (Fig. 11e).197
Stretchable supercapacitors based on intrinsic stretchable substrates have also been developed. Stretchable textile with a knitted structure can be used as the substrate to build supercapacitors with intrinsic stretchability. CNT coated cotton textiles were decorated with MnO2 nanoparticles and PPy and used as stretchable electrodes. The formed solid-state supercapacitor with poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) based electrolyte could be stretched by 21% with a 98.5% capacitance retention (Fig. 11f).201 By designing electrodes' structure, intrinsically stretchable supercapacitors can also be obtained. A PPy coated 3D graphene foam based supercapacitor could sustain a strain of 50%. Such a high stretchability was attributed to the shape deformation of the 3D graphene network (Fig. 11g).94
3D stretchable supercapacitors can be realized by using the origami, kirigami or patterning techniques.20,202–204 Peng's group designed a pyramid-shaped CNT film by patterning deposition of the catalyst for the CVD growth of CNTs. The pyramid-shaped CNT film could be deformed in three dimensions and also sustain complex deformations with the co-stretching in two directions. This deformation could be controlled by the pattern structure as well. The electrodeposition of PANI on such a CNT film resulted in PANI/CNT electrodes, and the assembled solid-state supercapacitor with PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte could endure both in-plane and out-of-plane deformations (Fig. 11h).20
Currently, CP composite based stretchable supercapacitors mainly rely on the composites with carbon materials for the improved stability and shape tailorability. Stretchable supercapacitors with configurations from 1D to 3D could be easily built with such composites. However, the capacitance originating from those composites is limited due to the limited contribution from carbon materials. Composite materials with high capacitance and mechanical flexibility are still under exploration.


3.2.2 Compressible supercapacitors. 
Compressible supercapacitors can be regarded as a reverse case of stretchable supercapacitors that possess compression-tolerant ability. CNTs, graphene and their composite foams are widely employed in compressible supercapacitors.205–207 The energy density of those foams can be effectively enhanced by the addition of CPs with pseudo-capacitance.41 He et al. reported a compressible solid-state supercapacitor based on PEDOT coated CNT sponge.93 The CNT sponge was synthesized by CVD, and then PEDOT was deposited by electrochemical polymerization that greatly enhanced the specific capacitance. The supercapacitor based on composite sponge electrodes with PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte reached a specific capacitance of 51 F g−1 and could retain 97% of the capacitance under 50% compression.
Daily used sponges consist of cellulose or polyester fibers. The interconnected fibers endow sponges with high compression tolerance. CNTs or graphene can attach onto the sponge skeleton by van der Waals interaction. CNT or graphene coated sponges can inherit the compression tolerance of sponges. Furthermore, the porous structure makes them ideal substrates for CP deposition for improved electrochemical properties.22,208 The sponge/CNT/PANI with high compressibility was prepared by a “dipping and drying” method to coat CNTs onto the sponge skeleton and a subsequent chemical polymerization of PANI onto CNTs. With PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte, a compressible all-solid-state supercapacitor was prepared. The performance of this supercapacitor was nearly unchanged when compressed under 60% strain (Fig. 12).22
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a solid-state compressible supercapacitor based on the sponge/CNT/PANI composite. (b–d) Optical images of a supercapacitor showing the compressing-recovering process. (e) CV curves of a compressible supercapacitor at different strains. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Similar to CP composite based stretchable supercapacitors, CP composite based compressible supercapacitors are also mainly built on carbon–CP composites. 3D carbon supports can be obtained by CVD synthesis or coating with commercial polymer sponges. The energy storage capability is still limited due to the relatively low capacitance of such carbon materials.


3.2.3 Electrochromic supercapacitors. 
The development of robust solid-state supercapacitors has attracted attention towards wearable electronics. The introduction of multifunctionality (i.e. sensing, color change, and self-healing etc.) brings them closer to smart electronics.209 Electrochromism is the reversible color change of materials during redox reactions. Integration of electrochromism in a supercapacitor makes it smart and enables the indication of the stored energy level.210,211 Thus electrochromic supercapacitors can combine energy storage and color transitions in one system. CPs have the ability to change colors associated with the oxidation/reduction processes.212–214 PANI is widely used in electrochromic supercapacitors due to its high energy storage capability and obvious color changes at different doping states. PANI shows four structures at different oxidation states in different colors: fully reduced leucoemeraldine with a yellow color, partially oxidized emeraldine salt with a green color, emeraldine base with a blue color and fully oxidized pernigraniline with a black color.215
As an example, Peng's group reported an electrochromic and stretchable supercapacitor with PANI coated aligned CNT sheet electrodes and PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte.216 A thin layer of aligned CNT sheets was paved onto a pre-stretched polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to obtain a stretchable and conducting film. PANI was deposited on such a film via electrochemical polymerization. The stretched composite electrode was then released and coated with a gel electrolyte to fabricate the electrochromic and stretchable supercapacitor. The composite electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 308.4 F g−1, and the capacitance was well maintained after stretching up to 100% for 200 cycles. The positive electrode showed fast and reversible color change between blue, green and yellow at the corresponding voltages of 1, 0.5 and 0 V (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Chromatic transition of a CNT/PANI composite based solid-state supercapacitor during a charge–discharge process. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration and (c) chromatic transition of an all transparent stretchable electrochromic supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from CPs, some metal oxides also show stable electrochromic performance. For example, tungsten oxide (WO3) showed reversible color changes between transparent and deep blue in accordance with the intercalation or de-intercalation of cations.217 The introduction of CPs could effectively improve the coloration efficiency of those metal oxides.218–220 Yun et al. reported an all-transparent stretchable electrochromic supercapacitor using Au/Ag core–shell nanowire-embedded PDMS as the current collector, a WO3 nanotube/PEDOT:PSS composite as the active material, and a polyacrylamide-based hydrogel as the electrolyte (Fig. 13b).221 A high specific capacitance of 471.0 F g−1 was obtained for the composite electrode with a capacitance retention of 92.9% over 5000 cycles. A wearable patch made from the solid-state supercapacitor showed reversible coloration between blue and transparent (Fig. 13c).
The high conductivity of carbon–CP composites enables the facile fabrication of electrochromic supercapacitors without current collectors. Regarding to metal oxides–CP composites with higher specific capacitance, their conductivity needs to be improved to eliminate the usage of transparent current collectors.


3.2.4 Self-healable supercapacitors. 
Solid-state supercapacitors have shown great promise as a power source for wearable/portable electronics. However, the devices in long-time service may undergo physical damage or even be broken during the continuous mechanical deformations such as bending, twisting and stretching. All these failures would result in performance degradation and even breakdown. Thus, it is desirable to develop supercapacitors with self-healing properties that are able to heal damage and restore the structural integrity and electrochemical performance by introducing healable materials in the system.222
Peng et al. reported a self-healable fiber supercapacitor with a healable conducting wire that was fabricated by wrapping an aligned-CNT sheet around healable polymer fibers (Fig. 14a).223 The self-healing process was achieved by the reconnection of aligned-CNTs. An aligned-CNT strand was formed along the cross-section of broken ends during the cutting process and served as a “bridge” to connect two broken ends of the CNTs upon contact (Fig. 14b). Two healable wires were twisted with PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte to form the fiber supercapacitor. The specific capacitance can be enhanced from 11.1 F g−1 to 140.0 F g−1 with a PANI coating on the CNT film (Fig. 14c). The capacitance was recovered to 92% after healing (Fig. 14d). Huang et al. proposed a magnetic-assisted self-healable supercapacitor by employing magnetic electrodes and a self-healable polyurethane (PU) shell.224 The magnetic electrode was produced by depositing Fe3O4 and PPy on stainless steel yarns. Two electrodes were twisted with PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte and coated with a PU shell to obtain the self-healable fiber supercapacitor. Once the electrode was broken, strong magnetic force generated from Fe3O4 nanoparticles could guide the reconnection of broken electrodes to restore electrical conductivity (Fig. 14e). Healable PU helped to recover the configuration integrity of the supercapacitor. This fiber supercapacitor offered an areal capacitance of 61.4 mF cm−2, and could restore up to 71.8% of initial capacitance after four breaking/healing cycles (Fig. 14f).
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-healing of the CNT sheet coated polymer fiber. (b) SEM image of a CNT sheet fiber after self-healing. (c) CV curves of fiber shaped supercapacitors based on CNT sheet fibers before and after the incorporation of PANI. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the fiber shaped supercapacitor containing PANI before breaking and after healing. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of the fiber-shaped supercapacitor's self-healing process assisted by the magnetic force. (f) CVs of the supercapacitor after healing for different cycles. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The self-healing of those CP composite based supercapacitors mostly originates from the substrates or the packaging shells, which make no contribution to the overall capacitance yet increase the volume. CP composites with intrinsic self-healing capability are in high demand for self-healable supercapacitors, which may be achieved by incorporating dynamic hydrogen bonds into the composites.225


3.2.5 Transparent supercapacitors. 
Transparent electronics such as displays have attracted extensive attention in recent years.226 Transparent energy storage devices are needed to develop fully integrated transparent electronics. To obtain transparent supercapacitors, each component should be transparent. Since gel electrolytes are transparent, electrodes with transparency hold the key to fabricating transparent supercapacitors. To date, ultrathin CNTs, graphene and their composite films have been developed for transparent supercapacitors.85,227–229 However, there is a compromise between transparency and capacitance. Thin film electrodes show high transparency but with low areal capacitance, in contrast to thick electrodes with low transparency but high capacitance. It is essential to balance and optimize the capacitance and transparency to achieve the best transparent supercapacitors.
CNT sheets drawn from a spinnable CNT array that was synthesized by CVD showed a thickness of 25 nm and high transparency. With a layer of electrochemically deposited PANI at a weight percentage of 70%, the transmittance value for the composite film was over 70% over a wavelength range of 300–900 nm. The composite film showed a specific capacitance of 233 F g−1. A solid-state transparent supercapacitor was fabricated with these electrodes and PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte. The capacitance was decreased by less than 8% after being bent for 50 cycles.85 For producing transparent CNT films at low cost, facile vacuum filtration was applied.229 The produced CNT film (15 nm thickness) with a PANI coating of 59 wt% exhibited a 70% transmittance at 500 nm. The fabricated transparent supercapacitor delivered a specific capacitance of 55.0 F g−1.
CP/metal oxide composites have also been investigated as transparent electrodes for supercapacitors.100,230 Liu et al. prepared a transparent hybrid electrode by in situ growth of Ni3V2O8/PANI onto a PET/indium tin oxide (ITO) substrate (Fig. 15).230 This composite film showed an ultrahigh specific capacitance of 2565.7 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1. The assembled solid-state supercapacitor showed a transmittance of 59.1% at 500 nm and provided an areal capacitance of 58.5 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the transparent Ni3V2O8/PANI composite electrode and the fabrication of the device. (b) Photograph of the transparent electrodes (Ni3V2O8, PANI, and Ni3V2O8/PANI composite, from left to right). (c) Transmittance spectra of the PET/ITO substrate, Ni3V2O8 electrode, Ni3V2O8/PANI composite electrode, and device, and the inset shows the photo of the transparent device. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In transparent supercapacitors, the weight of active materials in the electrodes is very low because of the thickness requirement for transparency. Therefore, even with the CP composites of high capacitance, the areal energy density of such a supercapacitor device is still very low.
CP composites have been widely used as active materials for supercapacitor electrodes due to their enhanced specific capacitance and improved cycling stability. The development of unconventional supercapacitors is benefited from those composites. The device configurations, composite electrodes and the electrochemical performances of those supercapacitors are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Configurations, CP composite electrodes and the electrochemical performances of unconventional solid-state supercapacitors




Devices
Configurations
Electrode composites
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance (device)
Ref.





a Calculated based on the results given in reference when specific results were not given.
b SCs: supercapacitors.





Flexible SCsb
Sandwiched
CNT/PANI film
PVA/H2SO4
31.4 F g−1 (whole device)

14



CNT/PANI
PVA/H2SO4
184.6 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2

42



Cotton/CNT/PPy
PVA/H3PO4
50.09 mF cm−2 at 25 mV s−1

84



rGO/PANI
PVA/H2SO4


425 mF cm−2 at 0.5 A g−1

129



Paper/graphene/PANI
PVA/H2SO4
123 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2

130



Textile/rGO/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
230 mF cm−2 at 1 mV s−1

131



Paper/rGO/PANI
PVA/H2SO4


56 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1

132



MoS2/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H3PO4


39 F cm−3 at 50 mV s−1

109



MXene/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
35.6 mF cm−2 at 0.3 mA cm−2

118



Interdigitated
Graphene/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
22 mF cm−2 at 0.4 mA cm−2

155



rGO/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H3PO4
84.7 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1

161



Fiber-shaped
rGO/PPy
PVA/H2SO4
107.2 mF cm−2 at 0.24 mA cm−2

76



rGO/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H3PO4
304.5 mF cm−2 at 0.08 mA cm−2

78



CNT/PANI
PVA/H3PO4
263 mF cm−1 at 2 A g−1

174



Stretchable SCs
Fiber-shaped
CNT/PANI
PVA/H3PO4
3.08 mF cm−2 at 1 A g−1

191



CNT/graphene/PANI
PVA/H3PO4
273.7 mF cm−2 at 1 A g−1

192



Sandwiched
CNT/PANI
PVA/H3PO4
61.4 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2

20



Graphene foam/PPy
PVA/H3PO4
258 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1

94



CNT/PANI
PVA/H3PO4
106 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

194



Compressible SCs
Sandwiched
Sponge/CNT/PANI
PVA/H2SO4


54 F g−1 at 0.4 A g−1

22



CNT sponge/PEDOT
PVA/H2SO4
51 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1

93



Electrochromic SCs
Sandwiched
CNT/PANI
PVA/H3PO4


77.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

216



WO3/PEDOT:PSS
Polyacrylamide/LiCl


117.75 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

221



Self-healable SCs
Fiber-shaped
CNT/PANI
PVA/H2SO4
1.34 mF cm−1 at 0.33 A g−1

223



Fe3O4/PPy
PVA/H3PO4
61.4 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1

224



Transparent SCs
Sandwiched
CNT/PANI
PVA/H3PO4


58.25 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

85



RuO2/PEDOT:PSS
PVA/H2SO4
0.84 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1

100



Ni3V2O8/PANI
PVA/KOH
58.5 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1

230






4. Integration
To realize the practical application in wearable electronics, it is required to integrate unconventional supercapacitors with other functional units into an integrated system. The integration of supercapacitors with sustainable energy harvesting or conversion units may provide a self-powered energy system, thus realizing the continuous function for health monitoring, motion detection or information acquisition.231
As a good demonstration, Ha's group designed an integrated sensor system comprising a stretchable array of MSCs, a commercial Si solar cell and a strain sensor.232 In the system, MSCs can be wirelessly charged with the solar cell to continuously operate the strain sensor. CNTs deposited with PPy were employed as active materials to fabricate MSCs with a redox additive (1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide) doped PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte. The fabricated solid-state MSCs exhibited an areal capacitance of 5.17 mF cm−2. Two solar cells were serially connected to charge the MSC array. The discharge curves of MSCs charged with solar cells were similar to those using an external power source, indicating the reliable charging using solar cells. A resistor type strain sensor was integrated with MSCs and a solar cell array to detect biosignals such as arterial pulse and wrist motion (Fig. 16). This work successfully demonstrated the application of integrated energy harvesting/storage/sensor systems as skin-attachable electronics.
 Fig. 16  (a) Optical image of the stretchable MSC array with integrated solar cells and a strain sensor. The inset shows the circuit diagram. (b) Photograph of the integrated system attached to the skin of the wrist to detect pulse signals. (c) Resistance change of the strain sensor driven by the MSCs in response to the pulse signal of the radial artery. (d) Photograph of the integrated system attached to the skin of the wrist to detect wrist motion. (e) Resistance change of the strain sensor driven by the MSC in response to the bending of the wrist. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
5. Conclusions and prospects
We have presented a comprehensive review of CP composites as advanced electrodes for unconventional solid-state supercapacitors. Conducting polymers normally suffer from poor cycling stability due to the degradation induced by volume changes during charge/discharge cycles. The introduction of other materials into CPs forming binary or even ternary composites can overcome the drawbacks of pristine CPs and offer improved supercapacitive performance. The commonly used integration materials mainly include carbon, metal oxides/hydroxides, 2D TMDs and MXenes that can induce synergistic effects with CPs for enhanced conductivity, improved charge transfer and redox behavior.
For future development of CP composites for advanced supercapacitors, the deep and fundamental understandings of the structure–property relationships are needed. The versatility in synthetic strategies enables the tuning of nanostructured CPs with high conductivity and high surface area, which endows them with high energy and power densities. Also the precise control of doping levels is needed to improve the electrical conductivity and energy storage capability. The doping/dedoping phenomena of dopants are the important features of CPs as supercapacitor materials. A promising approach is to incorporate immobilised dopants such as large sheets of 2D materials that allow the insertion of small size of ions for alleviating volume changes. Furthermore, a deeper understanding of the electrochemical processes and the structural changes of CP composites within a supercapacitor system using in situ microscopic/spectroscopic techniques will promote the development of new CP composites. Finally, computational modelling and machine-learning techniques are expected to greatly impact the optimization of the composition of CP composites and prediction of novel functions of CP composites with big data of different synthesis parameters to guide/promote the development of CP composites.
Macroscopic assemblies of electrode materials greatly impact the configurations of supercapacitors. CP composites can be fabricated into different structures from 1D to 3D, which facilitates the realization of unconventional supercapacitors in different configurations (sandwiched, interdigitated and fiber shaped) and/or with novel functions (stretchable, compressible, electrochromic, self-healable and transparent). These supercapacitors may have excellent mechanical stability or deliver fast response to external stimuli, making them ideal components for wearable electronics. For the use in advanced manufacturing, such as large-scale printing of supercapacitors, PANI and PEDOT:PSS are more attractive because of the good solution processability. For multifunctional supercapacitors, such as electrochromic supercapacitors, PANI and PTh derivatives are good candidates due to their remarkable colour changing ability between different redox states.
The ultimate goal for assembling unconventional supercapacitors is to realize skin or textile conformal systems. More efforts should be paid to the device-level integration with other wearable components such as energy harvesting/conversion devices and functional electronic devices. It should also be pointed out that a unified standard is needed to evaluate unconventional supercapacitors for reliable and reproducible results.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Funding from the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence Scheme (CE 140100012) is acknowledged. Chen Zhao gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Start-Up research grant of Guangdong University of Technology (220413181), and the Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams (2016ZT06C412).
References
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 RSC .
J. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710–23725 RSC .
P. J. Hall, M. Mirzaeian, S. I. Fletcher, F. B. Sillars, A. J. R. Rennie, G. O. Shitta-Bey, G. Wilson, A. Cruden and R. Carter, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1238–1251 RSC .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, P. Zhao, X. Zhou, H. Wu and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16373–16378 RSC .
W.-w. Liu, X.-b. Yan, J.-w. Lang, C. Peng and Q.-j. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17245–17253 RSC .
D. R. MacFarlane, N. Tachikawa, M. Forsyth, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, G. D. Elliott, J. H. Davis, M. Watanabe, P. Simon and C. A. Angell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 232–250 RSC .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160–2181 RSC .
C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, H. Dong, B. Zhu, J. Li, H. H. Hng, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vlad, N. Singh, C. Galande and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402115 CrossRef .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-F. Chen, Z.-H. Huang, H.-W. Liang, W.-T. Yao, Z.-Y. Yu and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3331–3338 RSC .
Y. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. H. Tsang, S. P. Lau, H. Huang and Y. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9142–9149 RSC .
S. He, L. Qiu, L. Wang, J. Cao, S. Xie, Q. Gao, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Wang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14968–14973 RSC .
M. Hu, J. Wang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Ma and Y. Huang, Chem.
Commun., 2018, 54, 6200–6203 RSC .
Z. Niu, W. Zhou, X. Chen, J. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6002–6008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Jung, M. B. Karimi, M. G. Hahm, P. M. Ajayan and Y. J. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 773 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cheng, Y.-Z. Zhang, J.-D. Zhang, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10493–10499 RSC .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2066–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
L. Liu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4340–4363 RSC .
B. Li, F. Dai, Q. Xiao, L. Yang, J. Shen, C. Zhang and M. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 102–106 RSC .
H.-Q. Wang, Z.-S. Li, Y.-G. Huang, Q.-Y. Li and X.-Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3883–3889 RSC .
M. Kaempgen, C. K. Chan, J. Ma, Y. Cui and G. Gruner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. An, W. S. Kim, Y. S. Park, J.-M. Moon, D. J. Bae, S. C. Lim, Y. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 387–392 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Yu, D. Neff, A. Zhamu and B. Z. Jang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Snook, P. Kao and A. S. Best, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, L. Li, X.-l. Wang, C.-d. Gu and J.-p. Tu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41910–41921 RSC .
Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shown, A. Ganguly, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Energy Sci. Eng., 2015, 3, 2–26 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kumar, H.-J. Choi, Y. R. Shin, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1715–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, G. Wu, P. Tan, H. Cheng, R. Hong, F. Wang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8940–8946 RSC .
M. Kim, C. Lee and J. Jang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2489–2499 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, E. Shi, Y. Yang, Y. Shang, Q. Peng, S. Wu, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, Q. Yuan, A. Cao and D. Wu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 209–218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zeng, H. Chen, F. Cai, Y. Kang, M. Chen and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23864–23870 RSC .
J. Yang, Y. Liu, S. Liu, L. Li, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 251–268 RSC .
Y. Tan and K. Ghandi, Synth. Met., 2013, 175, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cheng, Y.-N. Meng and Z.-X. Wei, Isr. J. Chem., 2018, 58, 1299–1314 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, J. Joon Kim and T. L. Andrew, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5787–5796 RSC .
S. Sadki, P. Schottland, N. Brodie and G. Sabouraud, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 283–293 RSC .
C. Wang, W. Zheng, Z. Yue, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3580–3584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, A. C. Rastogi and S. B. Desu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 268–272 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta and N. Miura, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1466–1469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Davies, P. Audette, B. Farrow, F. Hassan, Z. Chen, J.-Y. Choi and A. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17612–17620 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Meng and Z. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 14–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, W. Zhang, C. Wang, T.-C. Wen and Y. Wei, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 671–712 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397–2409 RSC .
C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961–1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Martin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duchet, R. Legras and S. Demoustier-Champagne, Synth. Met., 1998, 98, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, D. H. Park, J. Joo, S. G. Yu and S. H. Lee, Synth. Met., 2005, 150, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Nguyen and H. Yoon, Polymers, 2016, 8, 118 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Wu, H. Kolla and S. K. Manohar, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 7873–7875 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Ansari, M. M. Khan, S. A. Ansari, I. Amal, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 242, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Z. Zhu, T. Dai and Y. Lu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1736–1740 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Oh, M. Shin, J. B. Lee, J.-H. Ahn, H. K. Baik and U. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6954–6961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shu, Y. Chao, S. Chou, C. Wang, T. Zheng, S. Gambhir and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22031–22041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-R. Chiou, C. Lu, J. Guan, L. J. Lee and A. J. Epstein, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, K. Wang and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1117–1121 RSC .
K. Wang, J. Huang and Z. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8062–8067 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zang, C. M. Li, S.-J. Bao, X. Cui, Q. Bao and C. Q. Sun, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7053–7057 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, K.-J. Ahn, Y. Lee, S. Noh and H. Yoon, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500117 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J.-H. Ouyang and D. Jia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19831–19842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, W. Ma and Z. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1504–1520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295–7325 RSC .
K. Wang, Q. Meng, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei and M. Miao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1494–1498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jalili, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25174–25182 RSC .
X. Ding, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, Z. Dong, N. Chen, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12355–12360 RSC .
J. A. Lee, M. K. Shin, S. H. Kim, H. U. Cho, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, M. D. Lima, X. Lepró, M. E. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1970 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Qu, J. Cheng, X. Li, D. Yuan, P. Chen, X. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, C. Liu and S. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 186–189 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, L. Song, R. Yang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Sun, Y. Ren, D. Liu, L. Liu, J. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou and S. Xie, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2307–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, J. W. Choi, Y. Yang, S. Jeong, F. La Mantia, L.-F. Cui and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 21490–21494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, M. Pasta, F. La Mantia, L. Cui, S. Jeong, H. D. Deshazer, J. W. Choi, S. M. Han and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 708–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, P. Luan, Q. Shao, H. Dong, J. Li, J. Chen, D. Zhao, L. Cai, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8726–8733 RSC .
S. Huang, P. Chen, W. Lin, S. Lyu, G. Chen, X. Yin and W. Chen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 13359–13364 RSC .
H. Lin, L. Li, J. Ren, Z. Cai, L. Qiu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1353 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ge, L. Yang, L. Fan, C. Zhang, X. Xiao, Y. Gogotsi and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 568–578 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ge, C. Wang, K. Shu, C. Zhao, X. Jia, S. Gambhir and G. G. Wallace, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 102643–102651 RSC .
Q. Wu, Y. Xu, Z. Yao, A. Liu and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, C. Zhao, K. Shu, C. Wang, Z. Guo, G. G. Wallace and H. Liu, Carbon, 2014, 79, 554–562 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z.-G. Chen, J. Tan, Z.-S. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 RSC .
X. He, W. Yang, X. Mao, L. Xu, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang and J. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, R.-P. Ren and Y.-K. Lv, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2942–2943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2078–2085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Su, C. Yang, C. Xu, H. Wu, Z. Zhang, T. Liu, C. Zhang, Q. Yang, B. Li and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12432–12440 RSC .
R. K. Sharma, A. C. Rastogi and S. B. Desu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7690–7695 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, D. Wu, C. Cheng, J. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Su and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12105–12109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, T. M. Higgins, S.-H. Park, S. E. O'Brien, D. Long, J. N. Coleman and V. Nicolosi, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 495–505 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, S. Xu, K. Tschulik, R. G. Compton, M. Wei, D. O'Hare, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2745–2753 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, X. Wang, G. Li, A. Yu and Z. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ling, H. Zou, W. Yang, W. Chen, K. Lei and S. Chen, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 20, 92–100 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, C. Chen, Z. Huang, L. Jin, J. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Zhang and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66311–66317 RSC .
Y. He, S. Du, H. Li, Q. Cheng, V. Pavlinek and P. Saha, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2016, 20, 1459–1467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Y. Ge, Y. Chao, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 57–72 CrossRef .
N. A. Kumar, M. A. Dar, R. Gul and J.-B. Baek, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 286–298 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Huang, J.-Z. Zhang, G.-W. Shi and Y.-M. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 397–403 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ge, R. Jalili, C. Wang, T. Zheng, Y. Chao and G. G. Wallace, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Qin, Y. Lin, D. Zhang, H. Liao, Z. Li, J. Tian and Q. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 264, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M.-Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, M. Boota, X. Xie, M. Zhao, B. Anasori, C. E. Ren, L. Miao, J. Jiang and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5260–5265 RSC .
A. VahidMohammadi, J. Moncada, H. Chen, E. Kayali, J. Orangi, C. A. Carrero and M. Beidaghi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22123–22133 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600969 CrossRef .
X. Cheng, J. Zhang, J. Ren, N. Liu, P. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Deng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9685–9691 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, N. Zhao, H. Wang, J. Xu and F. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12340–12347 RSC .
J. Li, W. Lu, Y. Yan and T.-W. Chou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11271–11277 RSC .
H. Lin, Q. Huang, J. Wang, J. Jiang, F. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Wang, D. Lu and S. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 444–451 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 175, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Weng, J. M. Razal, Q. Xu, C. Zhao, Y. Hou, S. Seyedin, R. Jalili, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, L. J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3639–3665 RSC .
Y. Meng, K. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6985–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hu, J. Zhao, G. Zhu and J. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Liu, S. Chen, W. Pan and J. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 32, 166–173 CrossRef .
M. Barakzehi, M. Montazer, F. Sharif, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 305, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Niu, L. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4855–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, W. Fu, Q. Zeng, J. Lin, C. Yan, Z. Lai, B. Tang, K. Suenaga, H. Zhang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701909 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Lei, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 408–423 CrossRef .
M. S. Javed, S. Dai, M. Wang, D. Guo, L. Chen, X. Wang, C. Hu and Y. Xi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701264 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
C. Zhang, B. Anasori, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, A. Shmeliov, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702678 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. P. Kremer, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705506 CrossRef .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 12, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. Mohana Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
J. Xu and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 131–139 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, G. Lee, D. Kim and J. S. Ha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4608–4615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, W. Zou, B. Quan, A. Yu, H. Wu, P. Jiang and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, L. Zhang, L. Liu, B. Zhu, H. Dong and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4035–4042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Wu, Z. Lin, L. Li, B. Song, K.-s. Moon, S.-L. Bai and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, G. Shin, Y. J. Kang, W. Kim and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7975–7982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, X. Yan, J. Chen, Y. Feng and Q. Xue, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6053–6062 RSC .
X. Pu, M. Liu, L. Li, S. Han, X. Li, C. Jiang, C. Du, J. Luo, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601254 CrossRef .
W.-W. Liu, Y.-Q. Feng, X.-B. Yan, J.-T. Chen and Q.-J. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4111–4122 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, Z.-S. Wu, J. Qin, S. Zheng, S. Wang, F. Zhou, C. Sun and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703034 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Gao, J. Gao, C. Shao, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19750–19756 RSC .
S. C. Lee, U. M. Patil, S. J. Kim, S. Ahn, S.-W. Kang and S. C. Jun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43844–43854 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, S. Li, S. Yang, Z. Liu, S. Liu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4054–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, D. Ye, Y. Yu, L. Liu and Y. Wu, Carbon, 2017, 111, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Huang, C.-J. Chung, C.-T. Hsieh, P.-L. Kuo and H. Teng, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yadav, A. Basu, A. Suryawanshi, O. Game and S. Ogale, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600057 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, B. Weng, Q. Xu, Y. Hou, C. Zhao, S. Beirne, K. Shu, R. Jalili, G. G. Wallace, J. M. Razal and J. Chen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600166 CrossRef .
T. Huang, K. Jiang, L. Li, S. Chen, R. Li, G. Shen and D. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1652–1657 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salles, E. Quain, N. Kurra, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Small, 2018, 14, 1802864 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xue, Z. Xie, L. Zhang, X. Ma, X. Wu, Y. Guo, W. Song, Z. Li and T. Cao, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2703–2708 RSC .
M. K. Hota, Q. Jiang, Y. Mashraei, K. N. Salama and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700185 CrossRef .
L. Li, C. Fu, Z. Lou, S. Chen, W. Han, K. Jiang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647–662 RSC .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Hu, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, C. Liu, Z. Pei, C. Hao, Z. Wang and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4766–4775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. Zhang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13453–13457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yao, H. Wang, Q. Zhou, M. Wu, M. Zhang, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700974 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, P. A. Lynch, Z. Wang, W. Yang, X. Wang and J. M. Razal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6401–6410 RSC .
Z. Cai, L. Li, J. Ren, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 258–261 RSC .
Q. Meng, K. Wang, W. Guo, J. Fang, Z. Wei and X. She, Small, 2014, 10, 3187–3193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, Z. Wang, S. Moradi, F. Yang, P. A. Lynch, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang and J. M. Razal, Small, 2019, 15, 1804732 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, D. Tan, X. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Small, 2013, 9, 1998–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Saravanakumar, S. S. Jayaseelan, M.-K. Seo, H.-Y. Kim and B.-S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18819–18834 RSC .
B. Liu, B. Liu, X. Wang, D. Chen, Z. Fan and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ai, Z. Lou, L. Li, S. Chen, H. S. Park, Z. M. Wang and G. Shen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600142 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Qiu, J. Ren, G. Guan, H. Lin, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6436–6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, B. Zheng, T. Huang and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9399–9404 RSC .
L. Lim, Y. Liu, W. Liu, R. Tjandra, L. Rasenthiram, Z. Chen and A. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39576–39583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, Y. Xie, M. Sanghadasa, Y. Tang, L. Lu and L. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39391–39398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Lou, D. Chen, W. Han and G. Shen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800115 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Chen, X. Niu, J. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 664–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, X. Niu, Z. Liu and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3989–3994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos, C. Zhu, J. Y. Oh, X. Yan, I. Pochorovski, J. W. F. To, N. Liu, U. Kraft, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7925–7937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Xu, W. Wang, G.-J. N. Wang, R. Rastak, F. Molina-Lopez, J. W. Chung, S. Niu, V. R. Feig, J. Lopez, T. Lei, S.-K. Kwon, Y. Kim, A. M. Foudeh, A. Ehrlich, A. Gasperini, Y. Yun, B. Murmann, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Nature, 2018, 555, 83–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Deng, X. Li, Z. Yang, S. He, X. Chen, G. Guan, J. Ren and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, J. Foroughi, C. Wang, H. Long and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702047 CrossRef .
C. Yu, C. Masarapu, J. Rong, B. Wei and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4793–4797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, P. Luan, W. Zhou, Q. Zhang, L. Cai, X. Zhang, W. Zhou, Q. Fan, F. Yang, D. Zhao, Y. Wang and S. Xie, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1680–1690 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Wang, Z. Yue, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9008–9014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, M. Chen, G. Wang, H. Bao and P. Saha, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, F. Shi, X. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, H. Hou, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9141–9145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, M.-S. Balogun, K. Mai, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4724–4729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, J. Ding, C. Liu and E.-H. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2048–2055 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Kim, K. Lee, S. Kang, S. Lee, J. B. Pyo, I. S. Choi, K. Char, J. H. Park, S.-S. Lee, J. Lee and J. G. Son, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13272–13280 RSC .
T. G. Yun, B. i. Hwang, D. Kim, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9228–9234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, Y. Luo, Y. Tang, J. Wei, Z. Zhu, X. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Qi, S. Pan, X. J. Loh and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704531 CrossRef PubMed .
S. He, J. Cao, S. Xie, J. Deng, Q. Gao, L. Qiu, J. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Hu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10124–10129 RSC .
I. Nam, G.-P. Kim, S. Park, J. W. Han and J. Yi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1095–1102 RSC .
P. Li, C. Kong, Y. Shang, E. Shi, Y. Yu, W. Qian, F. Wei, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, A. Cao and D. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8472–8479 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhen, Z. Zhang, J. Lao, J. Wei, K. Wang, F. Kang and H. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 157, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, S. Zou, K. Liu, C. Lv, Z. Wu, Y. Yin, T. Liang and Z. Xie, J. Power Sources, 2018, 384, 214–222 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, K. Wang, Z. Huang, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2938–2949 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, J. Ren, X. Fang and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501867 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, W. Meng, Q. Gong, G. Li and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21321–21327 RSC .
Y. Zhong, Z. Chai, Z. Liang, P. Sun, W. Xie, C. Zhao and W. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34085–34092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. B. Gacal, B. Kiskan, Y. Yagci and L. Toppare, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2202–2210 CrossRef .
S. Xiong, J. Wei, P. Jia, L. Yang, J. Ma and X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 782–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kai, W. Suda, Y. Ogawa, K. Nagamine and M. Nishizawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19513–19518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Mortimer, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 2971–2981 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Lin, P. Chen, G. Guan, J. Deng and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4444–4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J.-p. Tu, X.-h. Xia, X.-l. Wang and C.-d. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5492–5498 RSC .
H. Ling, J. Lu, S. Phua, H. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Huang, D. Mandler, P. S. Lee and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2708–2717 RSC .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
H. Ling, L. Liu, P. S. Lee, D. Mandler and X. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D.-H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I.-D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, S. Zhu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700890 CrossRef .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9526–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, Z. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu, W. Cheng, X. Wang, L. Pan, B. Xu and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705551 CrossRef .
C. Zou, A. Komar, S. Fasold, J. Bohn, A. A. Muravsky, A. A. Murauski, T. Pertsch, D. N. Neshev and I. Staude, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1533–1540 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, P. Wan, H. Xu and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17865–17871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Gao, Z. Shao, X. Peng, X. Wu and F. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, G. Cheng and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3084–3088 RSC .
X. Liu, J. Wang and G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20688–20695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Lou, D. Chen, K. Jiang, W. Han and G. Shen, Small, 2018, 14, 1702829 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yun, C. Song, H. Lee, H. Park, Y. R. Jeong, J. W. Kim, S. W. Jin, S. Y. Oh, L. Sun, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 644–654 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Present address: State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, P. R. China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Chen Zhao	Dr Chen Zhao is currently an associate professor at the School of Materials and Energy, Guangdong University of Technology, China. He received his B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, and PhD degree from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, the University of Wollongong, Australia. His current research interests focus on materials and device engineering of flexible and stretchable energy devices and sensors for wearable electronics.
Xiaoteng Jia	Dr Xiaoteng Jia is currently an Associate Professor at State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, China. He received both double BSc Degrees (2010) in Chemistry & Biotechnology and MSc Degree (2013) from Polymer Chemistry and Physics at Jilin University, and PhD Degree from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, the University of Wollongong in 2017. His research interests include synthesis of biodegradable conducting polymers and functional biomaterials for advanced biosensors and bio-batteries.
Kewei Shu	Dr Kewei Shu is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Toronto (Canada). He obtained his B.S. degree from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2007, M.S. degree from Renmin University of China in 2011, and PhD from the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 2016. Dr Shu's research mainly focused on novel energy storage systems including supercapacitors, metal–air batteries and multivalent ion batteries.
Changchun Yu	Dr Changchun Yu is currently an associate professor at School of Ophthalmology & Optometry, Wenzhou Medical University, China. She received her PhD degree from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, the University of Wollongong in 2019. Her research interests include electrochemistry, conducting polymer membranes/hydrogels, salinity gradient power generation and tissue engineering.
Gordon G. Wallace	Professor Gordon Wallace is the Executive Research Director at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Director of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (Materials Node), and Director of the Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, Australia. He previously held an ARC Federation Fellowship and currently holds an ARC Laureate Fellowship. His research interests include organic conductors, nanomaterials and electrochemical probe methods of analysis, and their use in the development of Intelligent Polymer Systems. Current focus involves the use of these tools and materials in developing bio-communications from the molecular to skeletal domains to improve human performance via medical Bionics.
Caiyun Wang	Dr Caiyun Wang is an Associate Professor at the Intelligent Polymer Research Institute/ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science at the University of Wollongong, Australia. She received her PhD degree in 2004 in materials engineering from the University of Wollongong. Her research interests include conducting polymers and 2D materials for energy-storage applications; nanostructured catalysts for electrochemical reduction of CO2, and asymmetric membranes for salinity gradient power generation.

 	Fig. 1  Ragone plot (power versus energy) for various types of energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission.3 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic structures of PPy, PANI, PTh and PEDOT.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the procedures used for the growth of 1D CPs via hard-template (a), soft template (c), and template free (e) methods. Reproduced with permission.52,64 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH, and copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. The corresponding SEM images of the synthesized 1D CPs: (b) PPy nanowire array by the hard-template method. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2005, Elsevier; (d) PPy nanofiber by the soft-template method. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; and (f) PANI nanowire array by the template-free method. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Various macroscopic CP composites. Digital image (a) and cross-sectional SEM image (b) of rGO/PPy fibers. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Photo of hollow rGO/PEDOT:PSS fibers being woven with cotton fibers, and (d) SEM images of a knotted rGO/PEDOT:PSS fiber. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. Digital photo (e) and SEM image (f) of CNT/PANI composite paper. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. Digital photo (g) and cross-sectional SEM image (h) of a flexible rGO/PPy nanoparticle film. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. Digital photo (i) and SEM image (j) of CNT/PPy sponge. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2014, Springer. Digital photo (k) and SEM image (l) of CNT/PANI coated polymer sponge. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations for the assembly of conducting polymer-pseudo-capacitive material composites: (a) CoNi-LDH monolayer and PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Flexible PPy/MnO2/CC composite. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the process for the synthesis of the Ti3C2Tx MXene/PANI composite. (b) A cross-sectional SEM image of the fabricated Ti3C2Tx MXene/PANI composite film. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic presentation of the formation of the MXene/PPy composite film. (d) Images of the flexible MXene/PPy composite film. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the MXene/PPy composite film. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of the formation of ternary CP composites: (a) 1D CNT/PEDOT:PSS/MnO2 fiber, reproduced with permission.119 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Flexible graphene/CNT/PANI film, reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) 3D rGO/PANI/Co3O4, reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 


Carbon–CP	rGO/PPy fiber	115 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2	—	


,


,


	
74

CNT/PEDOT fiber	167 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1	99% after 10000 cycles	
77

rGO/PEDOT:PSS fiber	304.5 mF cm−2 at 0.08 mA cm−2	96% after 10000 cycles	
78

CNT paper/PANI	424 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1	89.4% after 1000 cycles	
79

CNT film/PANI	236 F g−1 at 10 A g−1	85% after 1000 cycles	
83

Cotton fabric/CNT/PPy	201.99 F g−1 at 1.8 A g−1	50% after 500 cycles	
84

Paper/CNT/PANI	330 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2	79% after 1000 cycles	
86

rGO/PPy film	216 mF cm−2 at 0.2 mA cm−2	87% after 5000 cycles	
88

rGO/PANI film	210 F g−1 at 0.3 A g−1	79% after 800 cycles	
89

rGO/PPy film	345 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1	91.6% after 1000 cycles	
90

rGO/PANI film	233 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	100% after 1500 cycles	
91

rGO/PANI paper	763 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1	82% after 1000 cycles	
92

CNT/PPy sponge	335 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	80% after 1000 cycles	
41

CNT/PEDOT sponge	147 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	95% after 3000 cycles	
93

Pseudo-capacitive materials–CP	MnO2/PEDOT:PSS	503 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1	99.5% after 4000 cycles	


,


,


	
97

MnO2/PPy	600 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1	90% after 5000 cycles	
98

MnO2/PPy	342 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	96% after 1000 cycles	
102

MoO3/PANI	1050 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	71% after 5000 cycles	
103

MnO2/PANI	1560 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1	88.1% after 1000 cycles	
105

2D materials–CP	MoS2/PEDOT:PSS	141.4 F cm−3 at 0.2 A g−1	98.6% after 5000 cycles	


,


,


	
109

MoS2/PANI	972 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	87% after 5000 cycles	
110

Ti3C2Tx/PPy	416 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1	92% after 25000 cycles	
115

Ti3C2Tx/PANi	503 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	98.3% after 10000 cycles	
117

Ti3C2Tx/PPy	203 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2	100% after 20000 cycles	
118

Ternary composites	CNT fiber/PEDOT:PSS/MnO2	478.6 F cm−3 at 0.05 A cm−3	91% after 10000 cycles	


,


,


,


,


	
119

rGO/CNT/PANI film	498 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	95.8% after 3000 cycles	


,


,


	
120

CNT/Fe3O4/PANI film	201 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1	96.4% after 10000 cycles	


,


,


	
121

rGO/PANI/Co3O4 aerogel	1247 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	100% after 3500 cycles	


,


,


	
122


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of flexible solid-state supercapacitors with a sandwiched structure. Reproduced with permission.124 Open access, Nature Publishing Group. (b) CNT/PANI based paper-like flexible supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.14 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) Cellulose paper/rGO/PANI based flexible supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) MXene/PPy film based flexible supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of flexible solid-state supercapacitors with interdigitated electrodes. (b) Schematic illustration of the operating principle of the MSC with graphene electrodes. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible MSC fabricated with graphene/PPy foam through a bottom-up approach. Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) rGO/PEDOT:PSS film based flexible MSC assembled through a top-down approach. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of three typical device configurations of fiber shaped supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.167,177 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH and copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A parallel fiber supercapacitor with rGO/MnO2/PPy composite coated stainless steel yarn electrodes. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) A twisted fiber supercapacitor with CNT/PANI composite fibers. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) A coaxial fiber supercapacitor with MnO2/PPy coated carbon fibers as the inner electrode and dip-coated CNTs as the outer electrode. Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a coaxial stretchable fiber-shaped supercapacitor. (b) Stretchable textile consists of coaxial fiber supercapacitors under stretching by 100%. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a superelastic fiber-based supercapacitor and under different strains up to 800%. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic of the planar supercapacitor with 1000% stretchability and the related SEM image of the wavy CNT/PPy electrode. (e) Capacitance enhancement under strain. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a stretchable textile supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) An all-solid-state supercapacitor based on graphene/PPy foam. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (h) A 3D stretchable solid-state supercapacitor based on pyramid-shaped CNT/PANI films. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a solid-state compressible supercapacitor based on the sponge/CNT/PANI composite. (b–d) Optical images of a supercapacitor showing the compressing-recovering process. (e) CV curves of a compressible supercapacitor at different strains. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Chromatic transition of a CNT/PANI composite based solid-state supercapacitor during a charge–discharge process. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration and (c) chromatic transition of an all transparent stretchable electrochromic supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-healing of the CNT sheet coated polymer fiber. (b) SEM image of a CNT sheet fiber after self-healing. (c) CV curves of fiber shaped supercapacitors based on CNT sheet fibers before and after the incorporation of PANI. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the fiber shaped supercapacitor containing PANI before breaking and after healing. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic of the fiber-shaped supercapacitor's self-healing process assisted by the magnetic force. (f) CVs of the supercapacitor after healing for different cycles. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the transparent Ni3V2O8/PANI composite electrode and the fabrication of the device. (b) Photograph of the transparent electrodes (Ni3V2O8, PANI, and Ni3V2O8/PANI composite, from left to right). (c) Transmittance spectra of the PET/ITO substrate, Ni3V2O8 electrode, Ni3V2O8/PANI composite electrode, and device, and the inset shows the photo of the transparent device. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 


Flexible SCsb	Sandwiched	CNT/PANI film	PVA/H2SO4	31.4 F g−1 (whole device)	
14

CNT/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	184.6 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2	
42

Cotton/CNT/PPy	PVA/H3PO4	50.09 mF cm−2 at 25 mV s−1	
84

rGO/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	

425 mF cm−2 at 0.5 A g−1	
129

Paper/graphene/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	123 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2	
130

Textile/rGO/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	230 mF cm−2 at 1 mV s−1	
131

Paper/rGO/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	

56 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	
132

MoS2/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H3PO4	

39 F cm−3 at 50 mV s−1	
109

MXene/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	35.6 mF cm−2 at 0.3 mA cm−2	
118

Interdigitated	Graphene/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	22 mF cm−2 at 0.4 mA cm−2	
155

rGO/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H3PO4	84.7 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1	
161

Fiber-shaped	rGO/PPy	PVA/H2SO4	107.2 mF cm−2 at 0.24 mA cm−2	
76

rGO/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H3PO4	304.5 mF cm−2 at 0.08 mA cm−2	
78

CNT/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	263 mF cm−1 at 2 A g−1	
174

Stretchable SCs	Fiber-shaped	CNT/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	3.08 mF cm−2 at 1 A g−1	
191

CNT/graphene/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	273.7 mF cm−2 at 1 A g−1	
192

Sandwiched	CNT/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	61.4 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2	
20

Graphene foam/PPy	PVA/H3PO4	258 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1	
94

CNT/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	106 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	
194

Compressible SCs	Sandwiched	Sponge/CNT/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	

54 F g−1 at 0.4 A g−1	
22

CNT sponge/PEDOT	PVA/H2SO4	51 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	
93

Electrochromic SCs	Sandwiched	CNT/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	

77.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	
216

WO3/PEDOT:PSS	Polyacrylamide/LiCl	

117.75 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	
221

Self-healable SCs	Fiber-shaped	CNT/PANI	PVA/H2SO4	1.34 mF cm−1 at 0.33 A g−1	
223

Fe3O4/PPy	PVA/H3PO4	61.4 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1	
224

Transparent SCs	Sandwiched	CNT/PANI	PVA/H3PO4	

58.25 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	
85

RuO2/PEDOT:PSS	PVA/H2SO4	0.84 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1	
100

Ni3V2O8/PANI	PVA/KOH	58.5 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1	
230


 	Fig. 16  (a) Optical image of the stretchable MSC array with integrated solar cells and a strain sensor. The inset shows the circuit diagram. (b) Photograph of the integrated system attached to the skin of the wrist to detect pulse signals. (c) Resistance change of the strain sensor driven by the MSCs in response to the pulse signal of the radial artery. (d) Photograph of the integrated system attached to the skin of the wrist to detect wrist motion. (e) Resistance change of the strain sensor driven by the MSC in response to the bending of the wrist. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† Present address: State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, P. R. China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
