Metal–organic frameworks and their derivatives with graphene composites: preparation and applications in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA12776C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA12776C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2934-2961Metal–organic frameworks and their derivatives with graphene composites: preparation and applications in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis

        
          
            Zixi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianying 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jiajun 
            Mao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhong 
            Chen
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Yuekun 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *ab
aNational Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk, College of Textile and Clothing Engineering, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China
bCollege of Chemical Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, P. R. China. E-mail: jyhuang@fzu.edu.cn; yklai@fzu.edu.cn
cKey Laboratory of Bio-inspired Smart Interfacial Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore
Received 
      21st November 2019
    , Accepted 3rd January 2020First published on 3rd January 2020AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a special class of porous materials and have been widely explored for applications in supercapacitors, catalysts, and adsorbents, because of their large specific surface areas and tunable structure and composition. However, traditional MOFs suffer from poor conductivity and low stability, which limit their efficiency in catalysis and other applications that require good electrical conduction. To overcome this limitation, a composite made of electrically conducting graphene and MOFs is conceptually a viable solution. This review summarizes the latest preparation methods for MOF/graphene materials with a focus on applications in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. We aim to assist existing researchers to obtain a fast and holistic overview of MOF and their derivatives with graphene composites in catalysis, and also the new comers to quickly catch up with the latest development in this field.Zixi WangZixi Wang has been a postgraduate student supervised by Prof. Lai at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University since 2017. Currently, she is a visiting student at the National University of Singapore. Her current scientific interests include the rational design and construction of multifunctional MOFs and MOF derivatives with graphene composites for electrocatalytic and photocatalysis applications.Jianying HuangJianying Huang received her Ph.D. degree in 2007 from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University. During 2007–2011, she was an assistant professor at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter. After that, she acted as a visiting scholar at Muenster University. From 2013, she was an associate Professor at the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University and then moved to the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University in 2018. She is selected as the 2019 Highly Cited Researchers (Clarivate Analytics). Her research interests focus on bio-inspired intelligent textile surfaces with special wettability, ATRP and click-chemistry reactions.Yuekun LaiDr Yuekun Lai is a Fujian province “Minjiang Scholar” chair professor at the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. He is selected as the 2018 and 2019 Highly Cited Researchers (Clarivate Analytics) and the recipient of the 2016 Journal of Materials Chemistry A (JMCA, RSC) Emerging Investigators and 2019 Advanced Materials Interfaces (AMI, Wiley) Hall of Fame award. His current research topics are bioinspired intelligent materials with special wettability, multifunctional fabrics, and functional nanostructures for energy and environmental applications.
1. Introduction
In the field of catalysis, precious metals and compounds (e.g. Pt, IrO2, RuO2, and Au) are still the predominant materials for various energy conversion devices due to their excellent activity and stability.1,2 Although they have outstanding catalytic properties in many electrochemical reactions, these noble metal catalysts suffer from extremely high cost and low abundance. They may also lose their activity due to poisoning by methanol or carbon monoxide, which has severely hampered their large-scale commercialization.3 Accordingly, it is an unstoppable trend to develop alternative catalysts possessing low cost, high activity, and long-term stability using earth-abundant materials. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), composed of metal ions/clusters and organic linkers, are a group of emerging functional inorganic–organic hybrid porous materials with a high specific surface area of 1000 to 10000 m2 g−1,4 adjustable pore size, and excellent chemical composition and structural properties. They have received extensive attention as adsorbents,5,6 supercapacitors,7 storage agents,8,9 sensors,10 catalysts,11etc. Noticeably, one of the outstanding features of MOFs is their controllability, because their structure and composition can be purposefully fine-tuned to achieve desired performances.
It is known that MOFs alone perform poorly in terms of electrical conductivity. This limitation makes them unable to demonstrate their best performance in the electrochemical field.12 Although conductive MOFs have recently been reported, they are not yet widely used due to many restricted conditions.13 On the other hand, graphene-based materials have been widely studies and they enjoy a series of advantages, such as low toxicity and excellent electrical, thermal, electrochemical and mechanical properties. Therefore, MOFs/graphene-based composites have an ability to combine the advantages of MOFs and graphene and perfectly alleviate the shortcomings of each component, resulting in better stability, improved conductivity, and high selectivity. More importantly, carboxylate and pyridine graphene-based materials play an indispensable role in the assembly process of heterostructures, which can enhance coordination bonding and guide the growth of MOFs.14
Aside from poor conductivity, MOFs also face the challenges of structural instability, derived from the fragile coordination bond between the metal node and the organic ligand, and high humidity sensitivity, which further limits the practical application of MOFs.15 Efforts have been made to transform MOFs into metal-carbon porous materials with a greater structural stability and better conductivity. Heteroatom doping was also possible to further enhance the properties through high-temperature calcination.16 However, high-temperature calcination will reduce the specific surface area and the number of effective active sites of MOFs.17 To resolve this issue, graphene oxide (GO) was introduced as the mechanical support for nanoparticles to prevent their agglomeration.14 Subsequently, the GO can be reduced to reduced graphene oxide (rGO).
In the past few years, there have been many reviews based on MOFs and their derivatives;12,18,19 however, few of them paid particular attention to the structure, preparation, morphology, and catalytic properties of MOFs/graphene. This review briefly summarizes the latest developments in MOFs/graphene-based materials, with a focus on the latest preparation methods and applications in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.
2. Preparation of MOFs/graphene
This section is focused on different preparation methods for MOFs/graphene. Several strategies for improving the performance have been described. The synthesis of MOFs/graphene materials mainly involves two steps: the selection of MOF precursors and compositing with graphene. According to the way of combining MOFs with graphene, there are two different preparation routes: physical mixing and in situ growth.
2.1 Physical mixing of MOFs and 2D materials
The physical mixing is to combine the prepared MOFs with graphene with the assistance of a chemical reagent (HCl and polydopamine), hydrothermal treatment, or sonicating. For example, Wang et al. prepared ZIF-8 wrapped with graphene by mixing as-prepared ZIF-8, GO powder and HCl in deionized water, followed by centrifugation and drying, as shown in Fig. 1a.20 To improve the interaction between the GO matrix and MOFs, polydopamine (PDA) can be added in the synthesis process. Because PDA adhered on the outside of MOF nanoparticles possesses a positive charge, while GO is negatively charged, their adhesion is enhanced through electrostatic interactions.21
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the physical mixing methods. (a) Synthetic procedures of graphene wrapped ZIF-8 and the TEM images. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. (b) The synthesis of ZIF-8@rGO hydro-/aerogels. Adapted with permission from ref. 27. (c) Illustration of the preparation of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOFs/rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 28. 
Compared with direct mixing with chemical reagents, hydrothermal treatment is a more effective way to combine MOFs and GO. Qin et al. synthesized a porous Ti-MOFs/N-doped graphene (NG) nanocomposite by mixing as-synthesized Ti-MOFs and GO suspension liquids together and subsequently conducting solvent thermal reactions for 8 h at 130 °C.22 Many heterostructures were synthesized in this way, for example, MIL-101(Cr)@rGO,23 SiW12@UiO-67/M/G-CdS,24 CdS@NU-1000/rGO,25 and MIL-LIC-1(Eu)/GO.26
GO is partially reduced to rGO under the action of heat or reducing agents; meanwhile, the aggregation of graphene oxide also occurred, which would greatly reduce exposure to active sites. Assembling 2D graphene into a 3D graphene aerogel (GA) can solve this problem. Mao et al. synthesized ZIF-8@rGO hydro-/aerogels (Fig. 1b) by first mixing MOFs with a solution of GO and hydrazine as the reduction agent, and then the mixture was transferred to an electrical oven at 95 °C.27
To further improve the uniformity of MOFs on GO, a sonicating strategy is adopted. Karthik et al. synthesized NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOFs/rGO by just sonicating a mixture of GO and Ti-MOFs, as shown in Fig. 1c. The formed π–π interaction between MOFs and GO was the key to high catalytic efficiency.28 Similarly, Na/Zn-based bimetallic MOFs/RGO was also prepared by an ultra-sonication strategy.29
2.2 
          In situ growth of MOFs on 2D materials
The GO surface is rich in oxygen-containing functional groups (such as –OH and –COOH), which can provide suitable conditions for in situ uniform MOF growth. Metal clusters, as MOF precursors, first bind to the groups on the GO surface, and subsequently nucleation and growth of MOFs would occur when ligands are added. This type of in situ growth clearly can improve the adhesion between the MOF and graphene.
Jahan et al. firstly achieved in situ growth of MOFs on GO by heating a Cu-MOF precursor and GO mixture in a Teflon-capped autoclave at 120 °C for 36 h. The GO-incorporated Cu-MOF composite showed high electrocatalytic activity and stability.30 Interestingly, Gu et al. prepared a wrinkled 3D microsphere MOFs@rGO composite by spraying an in situ formed ZIF-8@rGO suspension into 165 °C methyl silicone oil. Due to the rapid evaporation of water, ZIF-8@rGO nanosheets quickly wrinkled and assembled into porous microspheres, as shown in Fig. 2c.31
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration presenting the synthesis by in situ growth. (a) The synthetic procedure of sandwich-like GS@ZIF-67. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. (b) Synthesis of a 3D rGO/ZIF-67 aerogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of wrinkled 3D microsphere MOFs@rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 31. 
Hydrothermal is the most commonly used method to prepare GO-incorporated MOF composites.31–35 As a special functional surface is needed for high catalytic activity, GO functionalization is necessary. For example, Jahan et al. prepared a graphene-metalloporphyrin MOF by combining iron porphyrin with pyridine-functionalized graphene.36 GO can be treated via simple acid treatment to get more carboxylic groups (–COOH) that can serve as a functional group for the further growth of MOF crystals, as shown in Fig. 2a.37,38 Many experiments have demonstrated that heteroatom dopants (N, P and S) can significantly improve the catalytic performance. For example, glucose, which served as the nitrogen source, was introduced into the system for the preparation of N-graphene.39 Besides hydrothermal methods, microwave-induced synthesis has also been widely accepted for in situ growth of MOFs. “Super-hot spots” (SHSs) were found on the surface of graphene synthesized by the microwave method. It was proved that SHSs can get MOF crystals dispersed uniformly on graphene and enhance the combination of MOFs and graphene.40,41
Graphene aerogel (GA) can also be a matrix to grow MOFs. GA possesses interconnected multi-level porous (mesoporous, microporous and microporous) structures with a high specific surface area, improved mechanical properties, and high electrical conductivity, which facilitates rapid transport of mass and electrons as well as more convenient catalyst-recovery.42,43 Yang et al. prepared a porous 3D rGO/ZIF-67 aerogel by assembling GA and then growing MOFs in situ on GA, as shown in Fig. 2b.44–48 Along this line, researchers are also developing one-step formation of MOFs/GA.49
2.3 MOF-derived/graphene
MOFs can serve as promising precursors for carbon materials, including porous carbon and metal-containing compounds, after heat treatment in a specific atmosphere. However, MOF particles tend to agglomerate into larger particles during the heat treatment.50 The introduction of a diffusion barrier during the preparation of the materials has been commonly adopted in the field of nanotechnology, especially when it involves high temperature calcination. In general, the preparation of MOF-derived/graphene materials involves three main steps: the preparation of MOFs, the combination of MOFs and graphene, and post-treatment. Different MOF derivatives, including metal-free porous carbon, single metal-based compounds (metal oxide/sulfide/phosphide) and bimetallic based compounds, have been prepared. The manufacture of MOF precursor/graphene has been described in the previous section, so this step will not be discussed in detail in this section. Instead, this section will be focused on the post-treatment of MOF precursor/graphene to obtain the target composition, morphology and structure.
After annealing treatment, the organic units in MOFs can be converted into a carbon material and the metal-containing unit can be simultaneously converted into the corresponding transition metal NPs embedded in the carbon matrix (or evaporated when the temperature is too high). At the same time, rGO is further reduced and doped with heteroatoms from the organic ligands. In order to maintain the porous structure of the MOFs, inert Ar gas has been used during calcination. N2 is one of the most commonly used inert gases, but it has a lower activation energy and higher thermal conductivity than Ar, which may be detrimental to the structure and nitrogen retention. In addition to the inert gas, NH3 is used as a reaction gas in the preparation of electrocatalysts, since it can promote the doping of nitrogen.

2.3.1 Porous carbon. 
Porous carbon exhibits many distinct advantages such as low cost, outstanding stability, high electrical conductivity, and good processability over metal oxides, sulfides, and carbides. In principle, MOF crystals, as a porous framework, are the perfect candidates for porous carbon, when the metal units in MOFs evaporate at high temperatures or some transition metals are removed by subsequent acid treatment.
ZIF-8, one of the Zn-based MOFs, is a promising precursor for the preparation of metal-free N-doped porous carbon by carbonization under an inert atmosphere (Ar or N2) and simultaneous evaporation of Zn at sufficiently high temperatures. Researchers have studied the activity of heteroatom-doped carbon materials for electrocatalysis. N. Liu et al. synthesized sandwich structured N-doped porous carbon@graphene (N-PC@G) by in situ growth of ZIF-8 on GO and subsequent pyrolyzing at 900 °C under a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 3a). In the high-temperature carbonization process, the metal Zn was evaporated, the MOF was converted into porous carbon, and the GO was reduced to rGO. The porous carbon exhibited a high degree of graphitization, high surface area (1094.3 m2 g−1) and multi-level porous (micro- and meso-) structure.51 After this, many kinds of N-doped nanoporous carbon/graphene nanosheets52–54 and hierarchically porous carbon/3D graphene55,56 were derived from Zn-MOFs@GO after carbonization and acid etching to remove the zinc in the precursor.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of sandwich-like N-doped porous carbon@graphene. Adapted with permission from ref. 51. (b) The preparation of hollow CoOx/N-graphene. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. (c) The fabrication of Ni2P@C/G. Adapted with permission from ref. 64. (d) The synthesis of NGO/Ni7S6. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. 


2.3.2 Single metal-MOFs/graphene. 
The porous carbon catalysts exhibit high activity in alkaline electrolytes, while it is not satisfactory in acidic media. Many studies have demonstrated that retaining the metallic element in the MOF precursor is an effective way to keep the catalytic activity in both acid and alkaline media owing to an increase in the number of active sites. Zhao et al. designed cobalt nanoparticles uniformly embedded in nitrogen-doped graphene via pyrolysis of ZIF-67@GO at 800 °C in an inert atmosphere. During this process, metal clusters containing Co atoms were transformed into CoNPs.57
Structural engineering is an indispensable strategy to prepare high-performance catalysts by integrating different components to make full use of their advantages. To date, various nanostructures based on MOF-derived/graphene have been synthesized and extensively studied, such as core–shell, sandwich, and layered structures. Liu et al. synthesized double-shelled hybrid nanocages by growing ZIF-67 on prepared ZIF-8 first, followed by calcination in N2 and subsequent acid washing.58 In a separate effort, Zhang et al. prepared multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) encapsulated Co on vertically oriented graphene by annealing CCVG@ZIF-67 with melamine in a flow of Ar and H2.59
Transition metal compounds (oxides, nitrides, sulfides, and phosphides) are promising materials for catalytic applications. These materials can be prepared by utilizing MOFs as a precursor or template. Due to the special structure of MOFs, the prepared transition metal compounds are embedded in carbon materials, which can lead to superior performance. To prepare the desired transition metal compounds, chemical modification in a controlled environment is needed to enable chemical reactions. For example, porous transition metal oxides@graphene nanostructures can be derived from MOFs/GO by calcining in an oxygen atmosphere to remove carbon. Xiao et al. obtained hollow CoOx/NG-A (Fig. 3b) derived from Co-MOFs loaded on a graphene hydrogel by a two-step calcination process in Ar followed by air. During the annealing process, sample II was prepared through the calcination of GO/Mo-MOFs in Ar. After the subsequent calcination in air, the CoOx/NG-A composite was obtained.47 In the same way, a rGO/MoO3 composite,60 Fe2O3/3D graphene networks,61 and Nb2O5@carbon/rGO62 were prepared.
The above two-step processing is also applicable to other composites, such as transition metal sulfides (TMSs) and phosphides (TMPs). After pyrolysis and subsequent phosphatization, Jiao et al.63 prepared layered CoP/rGO for overall water splitting. In their work, CoO/rGO was first prepared by calcination at 700 °C under a N2 atmosphere and then at 400 °C in air. Then CoO/rGO and NaH2PO4 were placed in a tube furnace and pyrolysed at 300 °C for 2 h under an argon gas flow. Finally, CoP/rGO was obtained after acid-washing to remove impurities and residues. Wang et al. demonstrated Ni2P nanocrystals supported on a graphene (Ni2P@C/G) structure by firstly carbonizing in argon to obtain carbon-confined Ni nanocrystals supported on graphene (Ni@C/G). After that, phosphatization was carried out using NaH2PO4 to form NiP@C/G under an argon gas flow, as shown in Fig. 3c.64 Core/shell structured CoP@C polyhedrons/3D rGO was prepared in the same way.65 The impregnation method is often used to chemically modify MOF derivatives. Zhang et al. synthesized a Ni2P/G composite by placing Ni-MOFs-74/G and sodium hypophosphite in a furnace at 275 °C in an argon atmosphere.66 Similar to TMPs, TMSs can be achieved by a facile two-step calcining route. Xie et al. prepared FeS2@RGO derived from Prussian blue (PB)/GO by carbonization at 650 °C for 6 h under an N2 flow and subsequently vulcanization in a sulfur steam at 600 °C for 2 h under an N2 flow.67 To simplify the process, a hydrothermal process can be used for the preparation of TMSs. TMS/rGO could be prepared by just putting MOFs and a sulfur source (thioacetamide68 or thiourea69) together into a Teflon-lined autoclave with an appropriate treatment temperature (Fig. 3d).


2.3.3 Bimetallic-MOFs/graphene. 
In recent years, bimetallic MOFs, consisting of two different metal ions with the same ligand, have attracted more and more attention owing to the diverse types of active sites and improved catalytic efficiency.70 Typically, bimetallic MOFs can be prepared by mixing two different metal ions with the same ligand.71–73 For example, Niu et al. prepared Fe–Co-ZIF/GO by using FeSO4, Co3(NO3)2 and 2-methylimidazole as precursors of Fe–Co-ZIF (Fig. 4a).74 Besides, bimetallic MOFs can also be synthesized by introducing another metal ion onto the prepared MOF via post-treatment processes.75,76 For example, Hao et al. prepared ZIF-67-Ni/GO by introducing Ni2+ into ZIF-67/GO as the precursor, as shown in Fig. 4b.77
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of bimetallic Fe–Co/N-rGO from Fe–Co-ZIF/GO. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of bimetallic NixCoyO4/Co-NC from ZIF-67-Ni/GO. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. (c) Schematic illustration of FeCo alloy/nitrogen-doped graphene layers from the calcination of Fe3[Co(CN)6]2. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. (d) Synthetic procedures of NiCo2O4@graphene nanorods from the carbonization of ZIF-67@Ni-BTC. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. 


2.3.4 Graphene derived from MOF calcination. 
Incorporation of graphene improves the physical and chemical properties of MOFs and promotes uniform growth of MOFs. Aside from introducing graphene in the preparation process, some studies found that the ligands of MOFs can transform into graphene during thermal annealing. Yang et al. synthesized FeCo alloy nanoparticles embedded in nitrogen-doped graphene after annealing of Fe3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticles in N2 as shown in Fig. 4c. The excellent stability in the HER of the material is due to the protective effect of the graphene layer.78 In the same way, Ni NPs encapsulated in few-layer nitrogen-doped graphene (NiNPs@NC),79 Ni@graphene,80 NiFe alloy nanoparticles encapsulated within a-few-layer-thick N-doped graphene,81 NiCo2O4@graphene nanorods (Fig. 4d),82 and FeCoNi-ternary alloys/graphene layers83 were prepared successfully by directly annealing the corresponding MOFs in an inert atmosphere. Due to the unique physical and chemical performance, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have always been a hotspot in the field of catalysis. However, the complex preparation process of CNTs limits their wide application. It is therefore interesting to see that graphene nanotubes can be obtained by calcination of MOFs.84,85 Li et al. found that Fe3C species in MOFs act as the catalysts for the growth of graphene/graphene tubes when temperature increases to 1000 °C.86

3. 
        In situ analysis
Revealing the mechanism of the catalytic process is the basis for finding a more efficient and stable catalytic base for energy conversion. Using in situ technologies is the most effective strategy that can track the structural changes and the morphological changes of nanostructured catalysts during the catalysis process. In situ analysis methods most commonly used in the field of catalysis are in situ TEM, in situ SEM, in situ XRD and in situ XPS.
Recently, Ersen et al. adopted an in situ EC-TEM protocol, including sample deposition, observation mode, and in situ and ex situ electrochemical conditions, to detect changes in the morphology and structure of Co3O4 nanoparticles during the OER.87 This in situ transmission electron microscope can observe the evolution of the chemical, morphological, and structural changes of a nanoelectrode when it is initially exposed to different aqueous electrolytes or open conditions. The results show that Co3O4 nanoparticles undergo surface amorphization and generate a nano-cobalt-like oxidation phase during the OER process, and this process is irreversible.
It is vital to get direct real-space information on the kinetics of catalytic reactions, which often require simplified model systems and operation under high vacuum conditions. Therefore, there is a strong need to develop methods that enable observation of active catalysts under relevant operating conditions. Recently, Willinger et al. performed in situ scanning electron microscopy to study the surface reaction kinetics and the relationship between the structure and activity. The high sensitivity of in situ SEM to the work function and surface composition makes it possible to detect single molecular layers of molecular species adsorbed on metal surfaces. The authors used it to visualize the catalytic hydrogenation of NO2 on Pt catalysts.88
An in situ XRD test can be performed in the same position of the same material, and the obtained information (such as unit cell parameters and the peak intensity) is relatively comparable. Claus Daniel et al. performed an in situ XRD study of different cycles under the normal charge and discharge conditions of high-voltage lithium-rich anode materials, and the possible causes of lithium-rich voltage attenuation were pointed out.89 In addition to in situ XRD during charge and discharge, there is an in situ method called high-temperature in situ XRD, which can not only observe the structural changes in the material during the material synthesis process, but also can detect the corresponding structural changes with temperature changes under a certain potential during the process of charge and discharge.

In situ XPS can avoid photon reduction of the sample during the test and obtain the true electronic structure of the catalyst surface during the reaction. Wolfbeisser et al. studied the surface composition of a bimetallic CuNi–ZrO2 catalyst under real reaction conditions.90
In addition, in situ infrared spectroscopy technology,91in situ Raman spectroscopy,92 and emerging X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)93 have been widely used to study heterogeneous catalysis and surface chemistry. The in situ analysis can directly provide the characteristics of catalytic reactions under reaction conditions and has been widely used in catalytic research. Although sometimes the information provided by a kind of in situ test is qualitative or reflects only a certain aspect, a reasonable combination of these in situ test methods can understand the entire picture of the catalytic reaction. The purpose of applying the in situ analysis is to observe surface phenomena of the catalytic reaction, find out the internal intrinsic relationships between the catalytic activity and structure, and provide a scientific basis for the development of new catalysts.
4. Electrocatalysis
MOFs, with a unique porous structure and adjustable components, are creating new opportunities to design highly efficient electrocatalysts.94 Transition metal (such as Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, etc.) based MOFs are popular precursors to prepare porous carbon, metal-based compounds, and hybrids. However, direct carbonization of MOFs will result in poor electron conductivity and aggregation of nanoparticles. Graphene oxide (GO) is an effective carbon carrier for enhancing the electron conductivity as well as ensuring uniform distribution of MOFs. MOFs/graphene materials are promising candidates to replace precious metals in the field of electrocatalysis. Here, we mainly introduce the electrochemical properties of MOF-derived porous materials/graphene for the ORR, HER, OER and bifunctional catalysis (overall water splitting, ORR and OER).
4.1 ORR
Oxygen is reduced to water or hydroxide during the ORR. The ORR is a multi-electron reaction, and the reaction mechanism is complicated, involving multi-step elementary reactions and reactions of different intermediate products. There are two kinds of pathways in the ORR, one is a direct 4-electron reaction to water, and the other is a continuous reaction pathway where 2 electrons take part in the reaction first generating the intermediate product H2O2 or HO−, and then a 2-electron reaction may continue to occur to produce H2O, or when intermediate products are unstable, a reversible reaction may occur to decompose O2 and participate in the reduction reaction again. Meanwhile, compared with the 2e− pathway which can easily stop in the first step, the 4e− pathway is preferred owing to its faster reduction rate.95 However, the 4e− pathway is not easy to achieve, because the reduction potential required for the 4-electron pathway is higher than that for the 2-electron pathway, and the dissociation energy of the O–O bond in O2 is greater than that of the intermediate products (H2O2 or HO−). There are different intermediate products under acidic and alkaline conditions (the following formula). Since metal-air batteries and fuel cells need to operate under alkaline conditions in practical applications, ORR performance tests are usually performed under alkaline conditions.96
Acidic solution:O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e− → 2H2O (l)O2 (g) + 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2O2 (l)H2O2 (l) + 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → 2H2O (l)
Alkaline solution:O2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 4e− → 4OH− (aq)O2 (g) + H2O (l) + 2e− → HO− (aq) + OH− (aq)HO− (aq) + H2O (l) + 2e− → 3OH− (aq)
Unlike that of the HER and OER, ORR performance is measured by using parameters including diffusion-limited current density (jlim), half-wave potential (E1/2), dynamic current density (jkin), and the electron transfer number (n). Besides, a rotating disk electrode (RDE) is required in ORR testing. This is because of the low solubility of oxygen in aqueous solution, which will cause great difficulty in mass transfer. The number of electrons transferred during the ORR is calculated by using the Koutecky–Levich equation: 1/j = 1/jlim + 1/jkin(1)where the diffusion-limited current density, jlim, is the maximum current density observed at a given rotation speed (typically 1600 rpm), and jkin can be obtained from the data measured at different electrode rotating speeds by using the following equations.96 Jkin = Bω1/2(2) B = 0.2nFCoD2/3v−1/6(3)where ω is the rotation speed in rpm, Co is the saturated O2 concentration (1.26 × 10−6 mol cm−3 at 25 °C in 0.1 M KOH), D is the diffusion coefficient of oxygen (1.9 × 10−5 cm2 s−1), and v is the kinematic viscosity of the solution (0.010 cm2 s−1 at 20 °C).
The 20% Pt/C catalyst is the state-of-the-art material for ORR electrocatalysts, but it suffers from low resource availability of Pt, high cost and sensitivity to methanol.97 Cheaper, more efficient and methanol-stable electro-catalysts have to be developed. At present, MOF-based materials are being intensively investigated because of their potential to replace platinum in the ORR. The high surface area of MOF-based materials ensures that O2 species are more likely to enter the pores with a greater chance of contact with the active site which is critical for improving ORR kinetics. In general, highly effective ORR catalysts require the following features: high active site density, faster transfer rates of electrons and reagents, and good durability.98 The combination of MOFs with highly conductive materials such as graphene is an effective strategy for improving ORR activity.
The earliest paper utilizing MOFs for the ORR can be traced back to 2012. Maryam Jahan et al. fabricated pyridine-functionalized graphene/Fe-porphyrin MOFs with the desired 4e− route for the ORR in alkaline electrolytes.36 So far, relatively high ORR performance has been obtained in many MOF-based catalysts, but only in an alkaline electrolyte.12 In order to meet the practical application requirements of specific energy technologies, more research is needed on MOF-base catalysts for the ORR in acidic media. Towards this effort, Fe-MOFs@CNTs-G85 and Ti-MOFs/NG22 were prepared with excellent ORR performances in alkaline and acidic media. The synergistic effect of MOFs and graphene provides a more stable system for maintaining catalytic activity in acidic media.

4.1.1 Porous carbon/graphene. 
In recent years, carbon materials have drawn a great amount of attention for catalysis due to their excellent electrochemical performance, abundance, and low cost. Many studies have shown that metal-free carbon catalysts exhibits ORR activity close to that of Pt/C.99–101 MOFs are ideal precursors for porous carbon materials when the metals are removed by evaporation during the pyrolysis process.102 Compared to conventional carbon materials, porous carbon materials possess a larger specific surface area and more active sites.103 MOFs containing Zn, Al, and Mg have been widely used in the synthesis of metal-free catalysts for the ORR. These metallic components do no possess activity for the ORR; however, they can be removed from the framework by high-temperature calcination or acid leaching, which will lead to a highly porous catalyst with a high specific surface area.104
Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), whose ligands contain a high nitrogen content, are the most commonly studied frameworks for the preparation of nitrogen-doped porous carbon. Zhong et al. developed an ORR electrocatalyst for alkaline media using nitrogen-doped porous carbon sheets (GNPCSs) derived from graphene and ZIF-8. It possesses a large number of micropores and meso/macropores due to the retention of micropores in ZIF-8 and removal of Zn. The best resultant GNPCSs-800 shows better ORR activity than conventional Pt/C. Particularly, the new catalyst shows an outstanding tolerance to methanol and superior durability, which can be ascribed to the close contact between N-doped porous carbon and N-doped graphene.105
In order to get a higher density of active sites for the ORR, nano-porous carbon/graphene with a sandwich structure was synthesized by Wei et al. from Zn-ZIF/GO after carbonization at 800 °C and acid etching to remove the inactive component. The composite exhibited a high specific surface area of 1170 m2 g−1 and a high onset potential of 0.92 V vs. RHE and a large limiting current density of 5.2 mA cm−2 at 0.60 V.52 Their work demonstrated that effective control of the growth of ZIF nanocrystals on GO sheets can minimize the damage to the porous structures of ZIFs caused by calcination. In the same way, Liu et al. also prepared sandwich-like structured N-doped porous carbon@graphene derived from ZIF-8@GO.51


4.1.2 Transition metal NP-doped carbon materials. 
Although metal-free carbon catalysts have desired ORR activity and advantageous stability under alkaline conditions, their ORR activity isn't satisfactory in acidic electrolytes. Metallic catalysts become necessary. According to previous studies, individual metal NPs can only show minimal electrocatalytic activity in energy conversion. However, N-coordinated transition metal NP-doped carbon materials (M–N–C) with tailored structures, such as core–shell structures, could show excellent ORR activity in both acidic and alkaline media.106 Following this finding, MOFs are perfect precursors to obtain carbon materials containing transition metals. These transition metal NPs are embedded in carbon materials after high-temperature calcination, which not only increases electron conductivity, but also changes the local work function to realize ideal binding energy for O2 adsorption and OO dissociation.107 Among the numerous M–N–C catalysts, Co–N–C and Fe–N–C are the most widely studied because of their excellent activity and stability.
Cobalt imidazolate frameworks are some of the earliest studied MOFs for the ORR. They exhibited promising ORR activity owing to high-density Co–N4 centers after calcination.109,110 To date, a series of nanoporous Co–Nx/C materials derived from the heterostructure ZIF-67/GO have been explored as electrocatalysts for the ORR.47,49,59,66,111,112 Wei et al. prepared nanoporous Co–Nx/graphene materials derived from ZIF-67/GO via carbonization at 700 °C and an acid leaching process. The compound exhibited higher ORR catalytic activity, better methanol tolerance and superior stability than Pt/C under both alkaline and acidic conditions. Compared with ZIF-700-AL and ZIF-67/rGO-700, ZIF-67/rGO-700-AL had an advantageous limiting current density and onset potential, because rGO was beneficial for high catalytic performance and acid leaching can remove CoO and part of Co nanoparticles in contact with the solution from the carbon skeleton matrix.111 As a result, the porosity of the carbon framework is increased with more active sites, and the transportation efficiency of mass and electrons was enhanced too.
With more in-depth research into ORR catalysts, it was recognized that structures with layered pores and interconnectivity would increase the density and exposure of highly active sites.113 The construction of three-dimensional graphene aerogels is therefore attractive to optimize the mass transfer and positional exposure of the catalyst. Xia et al. prepared CoOx hollow NP/N-doped graphene aerogels (NG-A) from Co-MOFs/NG-A with calcination in Ar and air respectively. The catalyst possessed excellent ORR activity with a more positive onset potential of 1.019 V and a half-wave potential of 54 mV, which was identical to that of Pt/C. A nitrogen adsorption–desorption test showed that CoOx/NG-A exhibited a high BET surface area (1359 m2 g−1) and large pore volume (7.2 cm3 g−1). These holes with larger pore volumes greatly promoted the transport of substances in the triple-phase reaction.47
M–N–C presents an enhanced catalytic performance after further doping with heteroatoms P or S. This is because doping induces a redistribution of the charge of the carbon atoms, which can effectively reduce the potential required for the ORR and weakens the O–O bonding.114 There are two main approaches of doping heteroatoms into MOF-derived carbon materials. One is to select MOFs with organic linkers that contain heteroatoms, and the other is to introduce heteroatoms into MOFs or GO before or during carbonization. It is important to note that both the type and degree of doping can significantly affect the corresponding catalytic performance. Huang et al. prepared nitrogen, sulfur-codoped cobalt oxides/graphene utilizing ZIF-67 and sulfur-functionalized graphene oxide by a simple two-step method. CoO@Co3O4/NSG-650 showed a half-wave potential of +0.79 at −3.0 mA cm−2, which was very close to the value of Pt/C, and a low Tafel slope of 366.7 mV dec−1, similar to that of IrO2 (396.4 mV dec−1).66 The authors also found that catalysts without the addition of GO or sulfur functional groups showed reduced ORR activity.
Although cobalt-based ZIFs are the first and most widely used MOFs for the M–N–C ORR catalyst, Fe-based MOFs generally show a higher intrinsic ORR activity due to their highly active Fe–Nx moiety, particularly in acidic electrolytes.115 Fe-containing electrocatalysts are mainly derived from MIL-101(Fe) and MIL-88(Fe) in large quantities for the ORR.46,85,108 Liang et al. fabricated edge-abundant porous Fe3O4 nanoparticles embedded in a nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel (Fe3O4@NGA) from MIL-88B-NH2. The preparation process is shown in Fig. 5a. The TEM image in Fig. 5g shows that the Fe3O4 nanoparticles had abundant exposed edge active sites, which would promote oxygen adsorption and activation. The CV curve of Fe3O4@NGA (Fig. 5b) was obtained in N2-saturated and O2-saturated KOH. The O2-saturated CV curve possessed an apparent cathodic peak compared with the N2-saturated line, confirming its ORR catalytic activity. In Fig. 5c, the LSV curve showed that Fe3O4@NGA possessed an onset potential of 0.96 V and a half-wave potential of 0.81 V which were highly comparable to those of 20% Pt/C. Fig. 5d shows that edge-poor Fe3O4/NGA without using MOFs as the metal precursor has a lower limiting current density than Fe3O4/NGA derived from MIL-88B-NH2. This is because of the rich defects of Fe3O4. Fe3O4/GA without N doping was inferior to Fe3O4@NGA with respect to the limiting current density and initial potential, since heteroatoms such as N could help to form an ORR active Fe–Nx moiety and change the neutral state of the carbon atom to produce sites with positive charges that favored O2 adsorption and reduction. Moreover, the ORR durability of Fe3O4@NGA was assessed at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm for 30000 seconds. Fe3O4@NGA still retained a relative current density of more than 65%, while commercial 20% Pt/C suffered from a much larger current loss as shown in Fig. 5e. In addition, Fe3O4@NGA also had better tolerance to methanol than 20% Pt/C (Fig. 5f), because NGA could anchor MOF nanoparticles to avoid aggregation.108
 Fig. 5  ORR performance tests on Fe3O4@NGA. (a) Preparation process of the Fe3O4 @NGA catalyst, (b) CV curves of Fe3O4@NGA tested in N2 or O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH, (c) LSV curves of Pt/C, Fe3O4@NGA, MIL-900, and NGA-900, (d) LSV curves of Fe3O4@NGA, Fe3O4@GA, and edge poor Fe3O4@NGA, (e) chronoamperometric curve of Pt/C and Fe3O4@NGA, (f) chronoamperometric curve with addition of methanol at 600 s, and (g) HRTEM image of lattice fringes on Fe3O4@NGA. Adapted with permission from ref. 108. 


4.1.3 Bimetal organic framework derivatives/graphene. 
Although single-metal MOFs have made great progress, the properties of single active sites and poor conductivity limit the performance of MOF-derived nanoparticles. Moreover, metal centers in MOFs containing only a single transition metal tend to aggregate during high-temperature calcination, which may reduce the catalytic performance. In view of this, some inventive strategies have been put forward, for example, introducing a second metal into MOFs. The partial replacement of metal cations in MOFs enables adjustment of the pyrolysis products.114 Bimetallic MOF crystals may contain both active metals (e.g. Co and Fe) and inactive metals (e.g. Mg, Zn, and Al). The latter contributes to a higher specific surface area and homogeneous distribution of active metals in MOFs. Wei et al. synthesized nanoporous Co–Nx/carbon nanosheets with cobaltnitrate and zinc nitrate as the metal sources. The added Zn replaces some of the original positions of Co in the framework, which increases the distance between neighbouring Co atoms and effectively prevents the formation of Co–Co bonds during high temperature calcination.52 Aside from the addition of an inactive metal, two active metals in MOFs such as CoFe/NG,71,74,76,116 NiCo/NG,77 and MnFe/NG72 have been used for the ORR. Niu et al. synthesized sandwich-like Fe/Co–N/rGO from FeCo-MOFs/GO after a high-temperature carbonization (Fig. 4a). Fe–Co/N-rGO-AL at a molar ratio of Fe/Co = 0.40 showed a high onset potential of 0.98 V and a half-wave potential of 0.84 V. Importantly, the methanol tolerance of this catalyst was better than that of 20 wt% Pt/C in 0.1 M KOH. The result showed the ORR performance of FeCo-MOFs was far better than that of single-metal Fe-MOFs and Co-MOFs.74
Developing catalysts with unique structures like core/shell with rich exposed metal active sites and defects is a promising route to enhance ORR performance. Fang et al. synthesized a core-shell-structured nitrogen-doped CoCx/FeCo@C/rGO hybrid derived from Fe-doped Co3[Co (CN)6]2. It was found that the outer carbon shell of CoCx/FeCo was tightly bonded to rGO, which could stabilize CoCx/FeCo and allow the catalyst to have a larger surface area. Such a structure was also beneficial for the inhibition of possible corrosion of the catalysts and thus enjoyed a long-term stability. N-doped CoCx/FeCo@C/rGO possessed an onset potential of 1.0183 V, a half-wave potential of 0.9653 V, and a Tafel slope of 99.09 mV dec−1 that was close to that of Pt/C (73.05 mV dec−1). The good ORR performance was attributed to the strong binding affinity of Fe making the O–O bond easily broken and the strong electron transfer ability of nanoparticles and the increased electrochemically active region.76
Graphene plays an exceptional role in improving the electrocatalytic performance of MOFs. It is worth noting that calcination of certain types of MOFs can produce graphene. For example, Li et al. synthesized nitrogen-doped graphene/graphene-tube nanocomposites at 1000 °C with designed cage-containing MOFs and dicyandiamide as the nitrogen–carbon precursor.86 However, graphene obtained by direct calcination of MOFs tends to possess poor conductivity and many defects, which is not conducive to an efficient ORR.

4.2 HER
With the depletion of fossil fuels and the intensifying concern over global warming and air pollution, hydrogen as a clean and zero-carbon energy source is an ideal energy source in the future.117 The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) takes place at cathodes, as a half-reaction of water electrolysis. Platinum is the best HER catalyst, in terms of the overall catalytic activity and stability. In the HER, the chemisorption and desorption processes of H atoms are very critical factors. An excellent HER catalyst should have a strong bond energy to allow H* to adsorb on the surface for completing the transfer of electrons and protons, and a weaker bond energy for release of the produced H2 from the surface at the same time, which can be evaluated from the change in Gibbs free energy (ΔH*G). The optimal ΔH*G should be zero with the HER reaching the maximum rate. The HER can be carried out under acidic, neutral or alkaline conditions with different mechanisms. In an acidic solution, one proton from the electrolyte meets an electron from the electrode to form a hydrogen atom (Volmer pathway). Then, two adjacent hydrogen atoms combine to form a hydrogen molecule (Tafel pathway), or one hydrogen atom and another proton from the electrolyte as well as electrons from the electrode surface generate H2 (Heyrovsky pathway). Under alkaline or neutral conditions, the catalytic reaction begins with the dissociation of water due to the absence of protons in the electrolyte, and H2 is then produced by following the Tafel or Heyrovsky pathway as in acidic solution. It is the additional hydrolysis step required under alkaline conditions that makes the performance in the alkaline electrolyte worse than in the acidic solution for the same catalyst.96
Acidic solution:2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2 (g)
Alkaline or neutral solution:2H2O (l) + 2e− → H2 (g) + 2OH− (aq)
The electrocatalytic HER is typically carried out in a three-electrode configuration (working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode). From the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) polarization curve, we can obtain the overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The overpotential and the Tafel slope are two most important parameters to determine the activity of the catalyst. The overpotential reflects the thermodynamic barrier of HER catalysis and the Tafel slope is an important parameter for analyzing the rate determination steps. The stability of catalysts can be reflected by cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronoamperometry or chronopotentiometry.17
In order to effectively develop the hydrogen economy, a large amount of exploration has been conducted to find an effective and inexpensive HER catalyst.118 Today, one of the most attractive routes to obtain hydrogen is through electrolysis of water. MOF-derived transition metals, or their oxides, nitrides and phosphides, have been widely considered to replace Pt-based materials in electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution.
Among numerous MOF materials, cobalt-based MOFs composed of a cobalt salt and 2-methylimidazole are the most popular precursors for the HER.49,84,112,119,120 Su et al. fabricated RuCo alloys/nitrogen-doped graphene layers (RuCo@NC) from Ru-doped Prussian blue analogs. The catalyst displayed an outstanding HER performance in alkaline media, even better than that of commercial Pt/C.121 The ruthenium precious metal has good performance, but its cost is high and it is unstable. The synthesized structure, in which the metal is encapsulated in a few carbon layers, is very promising, because the outer carbon layer can effectively protect the internal metal from corrosion. Zhu et al. synthesized a cobalt-embedded in nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel (Co–N-GA) catalyst from MOFs@GA with a one-step in situ hydrothermal treatment, as shown in Fig. 6a.49 Co–N-GA displayed a high surface area of 466.6 m2 g−1 and hierarchical porosity, including micropores, mesopores and macropores, owing to GA having interconnected pores, as shown in Fig. 6f–g. Co–N-GA exhibited extraordinarily strong HER activity in acidic, neutral and alkaline media, particularly in acidic medium, as shown in Fig. 6b–d. The potential of 46 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 was merely 5 mV higher than that of commercial Pt/C. Fig. 6e gives the Tafel slopes (33 mV dec−1) of Co–N-GA in acidic medium, which was close to that of Pt/C (26 mV dec−1). The durability test shows Co–N-GA had superior stability for the HER with nearly unchanged current density after 5000 s of continuous operation at a constant potential of −0.11 V in acidic medium. The hierarchically porous structure and the synergistic effect between the nitrogen-doped carbon shell and inner metallic Co were credited for the excellent electrocatalytic performance. Following a similar strategy, Wen et al. also synthesized Co nanoparticles/nitrogen-doped carbon–graphene by the pyrolysis of graphene oxide/ZIF-67 in a nitrogen atmosphere. They found that the HER activity gradually reached a peak value when the precursor was calcined at 700 °C.112
 Fig. 6  HER performance tests on Co–N-GA. (a) Illustration of the preparation procedure of Co–N-GA, (b) polarization curves of Co–N-GA, Co/N/GA, MOFs, GA and Pt/C and (e) corresponding Tafel plots of Co–N-GA, Co/N/GA and Pt/C in a 0.5 M H2SO4 medium, (c) polarization curves in a 0.1 M KOH medium, (d) polarization curves in a 1.0 M PBS medium, (f) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms, and (g) pore size distribution curve of Co–N-GA. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. 
Co compounds such as cobalt oxides, sulfides and phosphides have greater stability in catalytic processes than cobalt nanoparticles. At the same time, CoP showed excellent HER performance, because P atoms are able to capture electrons from cobalt and serve as a proton carrier.122 Tabassum et al. fabricated CoP@B/N-doped graphene nanotubes from ZIF-67 by calcination and phosphidation. The CoP@BCN nanotubes exhibited a low overpotential (87, 215 and 122 mV) at −10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope value (46, 52 and 59 mV dec−1) in acidic, basic, and PBS solutions, respectively. The B and N dopants could enhance the electron spin density between the heteroatoms and adjacent carbon atoms, creating more HER active sites, and 1D graphene nanomaterials exhibited smaller charge transfer resistance and faster electrode kinetics, which would facilitate faster transport of electrons and mass.84
Metal sulfides have also received increasing attention owing to their excellent HER activity and strong corrosion resistance. Sun et al. synthesized Co9S8/CoS1.097/rGO by a phase control method and in situ sulfuration of a Co-MOF precursor. The obtained composite delivered a small overpotential of 188 mV at 10 mA cm−2, owing to the synergistic effect of Co9S8, CoS1.097 and the N, S doped C matrix.120
Apart from the above-discussed cobalt-based metals, there are an explosive number of nickel-based and molybdenum-based catalysts derived from MOFs reported for the electrocatalytic HER, such as MoP/rGO123 and atomic-level Ni nanoparticles/graphene layers.121
4.3 OER
The OER, occurring at the anode, is the reverse reaction of the ORR in many energy conversion devices, such as water electrolysis cells and metal–air cells.124 The mechanism of the OER under acidic and basic conditions has always been debated; each group has its own opinions. But there are still some theories accepted by everyone that the OER proceeds through the adsorption and desorption of oxygen-containing intermediate products and the binding energy between the electrocatalyst and the intermediate is the key to the OER. The effect of pH on catalyst OER activity is complex, because H2O and OH− can both serve as active species.18 Generally, the OER has a minimal activity under neutral conditions. Furthermore, most metals are converted into corresponding oxides or hydroxides during the OER process, but these substances, except for IrO2 and RuO2, are extremely unstable under acidic conditions. Therefore, the OER is generally carried out under alkaline conditions (0.1 or 1.0 M KOH solution).96
Acidic solution:2H2O (l) → O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e−
Alkaline solution:4OH− (aq) → O2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 4e−
Similar to the HER, the overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and the Tafel slope are the main criteria to determine the OER activity.125
Suffering from inherently sluggish kinetics and higher overpotentials of the OER, and because the activity of the OER at different active sites can vary greatly, OER catalysts require higher catalytic activity to overcome the slower dynamics (involving multi-step electron transfer) and stricter requirements on active species, such as metal-containing sites.126 Currently, noble metal-based compounds (RuO2 and IrO2) are the most effective OER catalysts, but they have disadvantages such as high cost and low stability. Recent studies have found that transition metals and their compounds possess the potential to become substitutes of these precious metals for the OER.127 MOFs are suitable precursors for transition metal compounds due to their adjustable structure and composition.
Islam et al. synthesized AgNPs@rGO/MIL-88B(Fe) by depositing Ag nanoparticles on GO MIL-88B(Fe)@GO for the OER at neutral pH. It showed a low overpotential of 395 mV at 1 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slopes of 60 mV dec−1. Graphene might promote the transfer of electrons on MIL-88B (Fe) to the Ag nanoparticles with negative charge and effectively protect MIL-88B (Fe) from decomposition during the OER.128 Although pristine MOFs have some OER activity, their OER performance is still far from satisfactory due to their low electron conductivity. Ni-based64,129 and Fe-based128 MOFs are the most commonly used precursors for the electrocatalytic OER. Wang et al. synthesized carbon-confined Ni2P nanocrystals supported on graphene (Ni2P@C/G) from Ni-MOFs/rGO. The preparation process is shown in Fig. 3c. Ni2P@C/G exhibited a low overpotential of 285 mV at 10 mA cm−2, much lower than that of IrO2 (320 mV) in 1.0 M KOH. The overpotential, Tafel plots and Nyquist plots of Ni2P@C/G were all lower than those of Ni2P@C, which was attributed to the presence of graphene. Ex situ XPS and TEM analyses showed that Ni2P was partially oxidized to NiOOH, which could facilitate the electrocatalytic performance during the OER process.64
Since nickel and iron are both beneficial for the OER, there are many examples of iron-nickel alloys used for the electrocatalytic OER. For example, Fang et al. synthesized Fe–Ni–P/RGO derived from PCN-600-Ni@GO via pyrolysis and subsequent phosphidation processes. Fe–Ni–P/rGO-400 exhibited an overpotential of 240 mV at 10 mA cm−2, much better than that of the state-of-the-art IrO2 (400 mV), as shown in Fig. 7a. Meanwhile, the Tafel slope of 63 mV dec−1 was much lower than that of IrO2 (Fig. 7b). It also can be found that bimetallic Fe–Ni–P-400 showed an advantage in every respect over single metal FeP-400. The Fe–Ni–P/rGO-400 catalyst had a much smaller charge-transfer resistance (Rct) after the introduction of GO, as shown in Fig. 7c. Positive effects between bimetals, porous structures and the addition of graphene should be responsible for the superior OER activity and stability of Fe–Ni–P/rGO (Fig. 7d).75 Similarly, Zhang synthesized core–shell FeNi alloy@N-doped carbon nanocages under a H2/Ar atmosphere for the OER.73
 Fig. 7  OER performance tests. (a) LSV curves, (b) Tafel slopes, and (c) Nyquist plots for Fe–Ni–P/rGO-400, Fe–Ni–P-400, and FeP-400 in 1.0 M KOH solution, and (d) durability test for the electrochemical OER activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 75. 
It's worth mentioning that Li et al. recently synthesized oriented metal organic framework films (SURMOFs) grown layer by layer directly on an electrode substrate. The material obtained after calcination had superior OER activity – the obtained mass activity at a defined overpotential of 300 mV was an order of magnitude higher than that of IrO2 and at least 3.5 times higher than that of the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts, such as NiFe or NiCo based electrocatalysts. The advantage of this material was the ultra-thin structure of the SURMOF derivative, which led to effective exposure of a large number of active sites.130
4.4 Bifunctional catalysts
Generally, energy conversion devices contain not only one chemical reaction, rechargeable metal–air batteries involve both the ORR and the OER, and water electrolysis consists of the OER and HER. Bifunctional electrocatalysts are practically attractive. Precious metals can be replaced for bifunctional uses, as they tend to display poor-bifunctional performance.131 Moreover, using water electrolysis as an example, when different catalysts are used as the cathode and anode, an ion-exchange membrane has to be added to the electrolytic cell due to the difference of electrolytes used in the OER and HER. Based on these problems, bifunctional catalysts are highly anticipated, because they only require one electrolyte, which greatly simplifies the trivialness of assembly.132 Therefore, the exploration and study of bifunctional electrocatalysts are critical to achieving functional energy devices. The unique porous structure and adjustable nature of MOFs make MOF-derived materials good candidates for bifunctional electrocatalysts in energy devices.

4.4.1 Overall water splitting. 
Electrolysis of water is currently considered to be the most efficient and sustainable way to obtain clean energy; its energy source can be photovoltaic electricity or valley electricity. Water splitting (H2O → H2 + 1/2O2) involves two half-reactions (oxygen evolution reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction); the OER occurs on the anode with the production of oxygen, while the HER occurs on the cathode with the production of hydrogen.3,133,134 Unfortunately, these reactions require the assistance of catalysts because a large reaction potential and sluggish kinetics need to be overcome during the reactions. In general, noble metals Ir/Ru and Pt are the best OER and HER catalysts, respectively.135–138 Different from the solo HER or OER, overall water splitting usually needs assembly of a two-electrode electrolyzer with the same catalyst.139 3d transition metals (such as Ni, Co, and Fe) and their alloys are popular materials for overall water splitting,140,141 but conventional 3d TM materials always have a low specific surface area, insufficient active sites and unstable performance during catalytic processes. However, 3d TM materials derived from MOFs can overcome these problems; meanwhile the porous structures of MOFs provide the possibility to integrate different active sites. Table 1 summarizes numerous MOF-derived/graphene materials for overall water splitting.
Table 1 Summary of MOF derivatives/graphene composite materials for overall water splitting




Electrolyte
Synthesis method
Electrolyte
HER
OER
Electrolyzer
Ref.



η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)

η
10 (mV)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Cell voltage (V)




Ni NPs/nitrogen-doped graphene
Graphene derived from MOF calcination
1 M KOH
205
160
280
45
1.6

79



Ni NPs/ultrathin graphene shells
Graphene derived from MOF calcination
1 M KOH
240
120
370
66
—

80



Ni2P/rGO
Low temperature phosphorization
1 M KOH
142
58
260
62
1.61

142



Ni7S6/NGO
Solvothermal process
0.1 M KOH
370
145.5
380
45.4
1.95

69



CoNPs/N-graphene
Polydopamine assistance
1 M KOH
453
67
400
65
—

57



CoP/rGO
Two-step calcination
1 M KOH
150
38
340
66
—

63



NG-NiFe@MoC2
Graphene derived from MOF calcination
1 M KOH
150
92
320
31
1.53

81



FeCoNi ternary alloys/graphene
Graphene derived from MOF calcination
1 M KOH
211
77
325
60
1.687

83



Co3S4/EC-MOFs
Vapor-phase method
1 M KOH
84
82
226
92
1.55

143





Xu et al. reported the preparation of Ni nanoparticles (Ni NPs) encapsulated by few-layer nitrogen-doped graphene (Ni@NC) from Ni-MOFs for overall water splitting. Ni@NC-800 exhibited better catalytic performance with a low overpotential of 205 mV and 280 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for the solo HER and OER, respectively. In order to verify that Ni@NC had the ability of being a bifunctional catalyst, an electrolyzer was assembled from Ni@NC-800 as both the anode and the cathode. The electrodes only needed 1.60 V to reach 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte solution, as shown in Fig. 8g.79
 Fig. 8  Overall water splitting performance tests. (a) Polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of NG-NiFe@MoC2 with different contents of Mo and Pt/C electrocatalysts for the HER, (c) polarization curves, and (d) the corresponding Tafel plots of NG-NiFe@MoC2 with different contents of Mo and RuO2 catalysts for the OER, and (e) LSV of water electrolysis based on non-precious NG-NiFe@MoC2 and precious combination of Pt/C//RuO2 in 1.0 M KOH. Insert: a digital image showing the generation of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles at the same time. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. (f) Polarization curves of FeCo/FeCoNi and Pt/RuO2 catalyst couples for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. (g) Linear sweep voltammetric curves of overall water splitting using Ni@NC-800/Ni foam as both the anode and the cathode at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. (h) LSV recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in Ar-saturated 0.1 M KOH with an electrode rotation speed of 1600 rpm on NGO/Ni7S6 showing both the HER and OER. Insert: a digital image of the generation of hydrogen and oxygen. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. 
Due to their rich active sites, higher stability, and better corrosion resistance than metal NPs, transition metal phosphides and sulfide are one of the most important electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. Yan et al. synthesized NiP/rGO from MOFs-74-Ni/GO. It revealed outstanding overall water splitting performance with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.61 V in 1 M KOH, which was very close to that of its Pt/C and RuO2 counterparts. These advantages were attributed to the homogeneous carbon network, large surface areas and active sites of uniform distributed ultra-fine (average of about 2.6 nm) particles.142 In another study, Ni7S6/NGO was derived from NiMOFs-74/GO with a hydrothermal vulcanization process. To demonstrate its bifunctional capability, a positive potential was scanned from the HER region to the OER region in argon-saturated KOH (1.0 M). The results in Fig. 8h showed that the voltage required for electrolysis at 10 mA cm−2 is 1.95 V, which was the sum of the overpotentials of the OER and HER measured separately at the same current density. The authors attributed the excellent bifunctional performance with good stability to the high surface area, high pore volume, and tailored reaction interface that avail plenty of active nickel sites for the reaction, as well as facilitating mass transport and gas release.69
Apart from Ni-MOFs, Co-based MOFs are some of the most popular MOF precursors for the electrocatalytic HER and OER. Zhao et al. fabricated cobalt nanoparticles embedded in nitrogen-doped graphene (CoNPs-N-GR) from ZIF-67/GO with calcination for both the OER and the HER in alkaline media. Dopamine was added into the GO suspension in the preparation of the compound ZIF-67/GO to achieve additional nitrogen doping and to promote the uniform adhesion of cobalt ions to GO. For the HER, the CoNPs-N-GR showed an overpotential of 453 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which was much lower than that of CoNPs-GR (512 mV) without polydopamine. For the OER, the catalysis possessed a comparable potential of 1.63 V at a j value of 10 mA cm−2 with CoNPs-GR (1.69 V). These results support that polydopamine has a positive effect on both the OER and the HER.57 Jiao et al. synthesized CoP/rGO derived from sandwich-type MOFs/GO. The catalyst displayed excellent performances in basic solution for both the HER and the OER, which made it advantageous for bifunctional overall water splitting. The interaction between CoP and rGO was explained to be the key reason for the displayed better activity than Pt/C and IrO2 catalyst couples.63
The solo HER and OER require different reaction centers. Integrating different kinds of metal active sites in one bifunctional catalyst is practically important and yet a challenging task. Hu et al. fabricated MoC2-doped NiFe alloy nanoparticles encapsulated by a-few-layer-thick N-doped graphene (NG-NiFe@MoC2) after one-step calcination of Prussian blue analogues. The NiFe-PBA NPs were encapsulated with PVP, and CN− linkers from PBA and PVP acted as carbon and nitrogen sources, which facilitated the in situ formation of a-few-layer-thick N-doped graphene covering the alloy NPs. In addition, the outer PVP layer could inhibit the aggregation of the alloy NP and MoC2, uniformly dispersing MoC2 on the alloy NiFe NPs. It was known that the NiMo catalyst has a higher HER activity owing to a medium-strength metal–hydrogen (M–H) bonding, but its activity in the OER was low, while bimetallic NiFe had a stronger affinity with the intermediates of OH−, which promoted a stronger OER performance. Taking the advantages of both, the incorporation of Fe into the bimetallic NiMo catalyst will lead to a new catalyst with better HER and OER activities. For the HER in 1 M KOH, as shown in Fig. 8a and b the Ni@NC-800 catalyst exhibited a low overpotential of only 150 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and the smallest Tafel slope (92 mV dec−1) as well as charge transfer resistance (22 Ω) owing to the NG shell. For the OER in 1 M KOH, Fig. 8c and d show a much smaller Tafel slope of 31 mV dec−1 and a small onset potential of 320 mV (vs. RHE) at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. By comparison, a small η at 10 mA cm−2 of NG-NiFe@MoC2 was reported to be much lower than that of a similar catalyst without MoC2, confirming that MoC2 dopants have a positive impact on the OER. The NG-NiFe@MoC2 nanocomposite as a bifunctional electrocatalyst obtained a total decomposition current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a lower potential of 1.53 V, which was superior to that of its Pt/C//RuO2 counterpart, as shown in Fig. 8e.81
Up to now, few articles have studied alloy catalysts. Yang et al. prepared binary alloys or ternary alloys embedded in graphene by direct annealing of mixed MOFs. They proved that the combination of different metals into alloys will change the bond length and lattice of the crystal, thereby affecting the adsorption energy of the crystal for an optimal catalytic activity. It was found that the ternary alloy FeCoNi with certain metal proportions had an optimal OER catalytic performance, while the binary FeCo alloy performed the best for the HER. A water electrolyzer was assembled with FeCo as the cathode and FeCoNi as the anode, and only 1.687 V was needed to get 10 mA cm−2, which was even smaller than that of the Pt/RuO2 couple (1.696 V), as shown in Fig. 8f. These findings provided the theoretical basis for more rational design of effective non-precious OER and HER catalysts through increasing or decreasing the degrees of freedom of alloys.83
The poor conductivity of original MOFs prevents their direct application as an electrocatalyst, while the reported well-aligned Co-based MOFs exhibit satisfactory HER and OER activity. Liu et al. reported an innovative and universal gas phase method for growing MOFs with multiple forms of metal hydroxy fluoride as the self-sacrificing template, and the synthesized Co3S4/EC-MOFs displayed lower overpotentials of 84 and 226 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER and OER, respectively. Furthermore, a voltage of 1.55 V was realized to achieve 10 mA cm−2 when Co3S4/EC-MOFs was used to assemble a water electrolyzer. This work opened a new avenue for the direct application of as-synthesized MOFs for energy conversion.143


4.4.2 OER and ORR. 
Ni and Co are promising non-precious metal catalysts for the ORR and OER due to their inherently high electrocatalytic activity. Due to their unique properties with an adjustable structure, controllable porosity, and strong stability, MOF derived nanomaterials have been widely used as electrode materials for energy conversion applications. Moreover, nitrogen-doped graphene itself has certain OER and ORR activity, and the catalytic activity of catalysts will be enhanced when supported by the doped graphene.144 While nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) materials have advantages such as scalability and lower cost, these materials typically suffer from low activity or gradual deactivation during catalytic processes. Many studies prove that metal–nitrogen/carbon coordination can greatly enhance the intrinsic activity of a catalyst.145 Wen et al. prepared Co/CoOx@nitrogen-doped graphene from the pyrolysis of ZIF-67/GO under a nitrogen atmosphere as a HER, OER and ORR trifunctional electrocatalyst. This catalyst exhibited outstanding ORR and OER performance with a positive half-wave potential of 0.83 V and a low overpotential of only 322 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, respectively. The authors found that Co-Nx in the catalyst had strong ORR activity, while the sites Co–O–Co, Co–N–C, and Co–O–C might promote the OER.112Table 2 summarizes a series of MOF-derived/graphene catalysts for bifunctional OER and ORR.
Table 2 Summary of MOF derivatives/graphene composite materials for the bifunctional OER and ORRa




Electrocatalyst
Synthesis method
OER
ORR
Total oxygen electrocatalysis
Ref.



E
10 mA cm−2 (V)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)

E
onset (V)

E
half-wave (V)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)

N

ΔE (V)





a ΔE is the potential discrepancy between the OER at 10 mA cm−2 and the ORR at −3.0 mA cm−2; N is the electron transfer number.





Porous carbon@graphene

In situ growth of ZIF-8 on GO and pyrolysis under N2
1.63
78
1.01
0.8
66
3.93
—

51



Co/CoOx@nitrogen-graphene

In situ growth of ZIF-67 on GO and pyrolysis under N2
1.552
73.7
0.93
0.83
47.9
—
0.9

112



CoO@Co3O4/N–S-graphene

In situ synthesis ZIF@S-GO and pyrolysis under N2
1.69
366.7
—
0.79
63
4.15
0.9

66



Double-shelled N-carbon@Co–N-microporous carbon
Annealing core–shell ZIF-8@ZIF-67 under N2
1.64
91
0.92
0.82
51
4
0.82

58



carbon@Co–N-carbon

In situ growth of ZIF-67 on vertically oriented graphene and pyrolysis in a flow of Ar and H2
1.587
69.7
—
—
—
3.61
1.02

59



NixCoO4/Co–N-graphene
Calcination of ZIF-67-Ni/GO under N2 and air
1.629
77.2
—
0.804
47.8
3.98
0.833

77



S–Co9–xFexS8@rGO
Semivulcanization and calcination
1.52
66
0.94
0.84
—
3.97
0.68

71



Fe0.5Co0.5Ox/N-rGO
Low-temperature oxidative decomposition
1.487
30.1
—
0.85
62.2
3.95
0.78

116



CoCx/FeCo@C/rGO
Physical mixing of GO and MOFs and pyrolysis under N2
1.62
—
1.01
0.9653
—
3.9
—

76





Heterogeneous atom doping is an important means to improve the properties of MOF-based materials, because of the positive synergetic effect between heteroatom dopants, carbon atoms and transition metals.146 Huang et al. fabricated nitrogen, sulfur co-doped CoO@Co3O4/NSG from ZIF-67 and sulfur-functionalized graphene oxide. For the ORR, CoO@Co3O4/NSG-650 possessed a better half-wave potential of 0.79 V at −3 mA cm−2, much lower than that of the catalysts without GO or any sulfur groups, indicating that GO and the sulfur atoms were advantageous in the ORR process (Fig. 9a andb). For the OER, CoO@Co3O4/NSG-650 displayed a half-wave potential of 1.69 V at 10 mA cm−2, which was merely 10 mV higher than that of IrO2 (1.68 V), and a Tafel slope of 366.7 mV dec−1 similar to that of IrO2 (Fig. 9c and d). The total oxygen electrode activity of CoO@Co3O4/NSG-650 was 0.90 V, much lower than that of Pt/C (1.19 V) and IrO2 (1.33 V) (Fig. 9e). This work shows that multi-heteroatom doping is very helpful to activate carbon atoms, which will create more defects and active sites to enhance electrochemical properties. The work also indicates that sulfone and sulfite groups display high binding energies when decorated in graphene layers toward oxygen electrode reactions.66
 Fig. 9  Bifunctional OER and ORR performance tests. (a) LSV curves and (b) corresponding Tafel slopes of CoO@Co3O4/NSG-550, 650, 750, and Pt/C in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, (c) oxygen evolution activities and (d) corresponding Tafel slopes of CoO@Co3O4/NSG-550, 650, 750, Pt/C, and IrO2 in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, and (e) the overall oxygen electrode activities of CoO@Co3O4/NSG at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm in 0.1 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. (f) FESEM image of cracked double-shelled NC@Co-NGC DSNC and (g) polarization curves of NC@Co-NGC DSNC tested by using a three-electrode system in the full OER/ORR region in 0.1 M KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. 
The precise control of the morphological structure of catalysts is critical to their catalytic activity. Compared to their simple structural counterparts, catalysts with special nanostructures, such as two-dimensional structures, double shells, core–shell, and hollow nanostructures, tend to have better catalytic activity. Liu et al. synthesized hollow double-shelled NC@Co-NGC DSNCs with an inner shell of N-doped micro-porous carbon (NC) derived from ZIF-8 and an outer shell of Co-decorated N-doped mesoporous graphitic carbon (Co-NGC) derived from ZIF-67, as displayed in Fig. 9f. In this hollow double shell structure, the outer Co-NGC shell was highly active to catalyze the ORR/OER, and the inner NC shell acted as a nanostructured hollow framework to facilitate the diffusion kinetics, while the internal hollow cavity could provide a three-phase interface to accelerate the reduction and evolution of oxygen. NC@Co-NGC nanocages displayed outstanding activity and durability for the ORR and OER in comparison with Pt and RuO2, respectively. They exhibited a remarkable ΔE of 0.82 V, much lower than that of Pt/C (0.94 V) and RuO2 (1.0 V) as shown in Fig. 9g. Moreover, their work pointed out that the strong adsorption of intermediates (OOH*) on C atoms and the active C sites at the para position of doped graphitic-type and pyridinic-type N atoms should be responsible for the highest activity in the ORR and OER.58 The latest research suggests that catalytic performance can be further advanced when the catalyst layer is ultrathin, as this will bring in more exposed active sites and enable faster electron transport.147 Zhang et al. prepared free-standing multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) encapsulated Co on vertically oriented graphene (VG) supported on carbon cloth (CC) by pyrolyzing ZIF-67-VG@CC in a flow of Ar and H2 with melamine assistance. CCVG@CoNC-800 had a comparable ORR and OER performance to Pt/C (20%) and Ir/C, respectively, which might be attributed to the fast charge-transfer rate across the interfaces.59
Catalysts derived from Co-ZIF-67 are considered as the most promising alternatives to Pt-based catalysts toward the ORR because of the Co–Nx active sites, but their OER activity is less satisfactory. Meanwhile Ni-derived carbon catalysts exhibit good ORR activity. Their combination into bimetallic MOFs could potentially provide catalysts for both the ORR and the OER. The replaceable nature of metal cations in MOFs will facilitate the tuning of the pyrolytic products, thus affecting the performance.148 Following this line, Hao et al. prepared bimetallic NixCoyO4/Co–NG by introducing nickel into a ZIF-67 precursor. The resulting composites showed a half-wave potential of 0.804 V merely nearing that of Pt/C (0.813 V) and a limited current density closed to that of Pt/C towards the ORR. Towards the OER, it only needed 1.629 V for 10 mA cm−2 current density, which was better than that of IrO2. Meanwhile, it showed a much small overvoltage of 0.833 V between the ORR and OER, compared with that of Pt/C (1.048 V) and IrO2/C (1.135 V). More importantly, it verifies that Co–NG plays a key role in the ORR and NixCoyO4 is a crucial composition for the OER.77 In the same way, Liu et al. synthesized Co9−xFexS8/CoFe–N–C wrapped with rGO from bimetallic CoFe-ZIF@GO. The results showed that OER performance was mainly contributed by Co9–xFexS8 sites, while the ORR activity originated from the CoFe–N–C sites. Fe species can promote oxygen evolution because of their preferred adsorption of OH, OOH, and O.71 Several other MOF-derived FeCo bimetallic composites, such as amorphous Fe0.5Co0.5Ox/n-doped rGO116 and core-shell-structured nitrogen-doped CoCx/FeCo@C/reduced graphene oxide (rGO),76 also displayed excellent bifunctional OER and ORR performance.

4.5 Prospects for MOF derivatives/graphene in electrocatalysis
Although tremendous advances in electrocatalysis have been made, the research on MOF-based/graphene is only in infancy, and there is still a certain gap compared with the best materials in the field.
For example, Xing et al. designed an active site of an iron-cobalt diatomic center for the ORR.149 The onset and half-wave potentials of the constructed FeCoN5–OH are as high as 1.02 V and 0.86 V, which is beyond that of the best ORR catalyst based on MOF derivatives/graphene. We must pay more attention towards developing diatomic active sites on MOFs. Lee et al. prepare silver-doped CoOOH nanosheet arrays by electrochemical deposition and simple electrochemical diffusion methods, and they have a low theoretical overpotential of 60 mV and are better than most OER catalysts,150 because the uniformly distributed silver enhances the phase stability of CoOOH and the exposed silver can also serve as the active site by releasing the –OH adsorbent. Therefore, it is a good way to add precious metals (Ag, Au and Pt) effectively to MOFs to increase the active sites and stability for better OER performance. Chen et al. designed a single-site Ru single-atom catalyst with a more suitable free energy of OH* adsorption, excellent activity, and lower Fenton activity. And the extremely low Fenton activity greatly prompts the potential loss of the catalyst after 20000 cycles to be only 17 mV, which is superior to that of MOF derivatives/graphene.151 It will be a very promising direction to convert MOFs to single-atom catalysts, which will maximize the activation activity, but our work in this area is still very little. Dai et al. combined nitrogen-doped graphene (NG) and ultra-thin black phosphorus nanoflakes to prepare a new metal-free 2D/2D heterostructure (EBP @ NG) with a clear interface and unique electronic structure for overall water splitting, and the battery voltage is only 1.54 V at 10 mA cm−2, which is better than that of most catalysts.152 We need to make more efforts in interface control of MOFs and graphene. As far as we know, the best catalyst for the ORR/OER is Fe0.3Ni0.7Ox/MnOx supported on oxygen-treated multi-walled carbon nanotubes, which has the lowest reversible ORR/OER overpotential of 0.73 V.153 We need to continuously improve MOF-based catalysts from creating higher conductivity and multi-component active sites.
MOF-based/graphene catalysts have many challenges as the most outstanding electrocatalysts, such as a poor combination between MOFs and graphene, weaker catalytic activity, and less diversity of active sites. Meanwhile, materials derived from MOFs always have poor conductivity, and the ordered structure and porous morphology of MOFs usually are destroyed by calcination. These problems can be solved by the following methods: make the best of the advantages of MOFs with a regulative structure, composition and morphology to further improve the electrocatalytic activity of MOFs and introduce multi-component active sites and strengthen the research of monoatomic catalysts; the exploration of theoretical bases for MOFs in electrocatalytic is of great significance and value in the future research for better performance of MOF-based/graphene catalysts.
5. Photocatalytic reactions
Photocatalysis is able to make use of the abundant solar energy for clean energy generation and pollutant treatment.154 Some studies have demonstrated that semiconductor catalysts (such as TiO2, ZnO, CdS, Fe2O3, GaP and ZnS) have a wide range of photocatalytic applications, such as in photodegradable dyes, photo-generation of hydrogen, photoreduction of carbon dioxide and the like.155 However, these inorganic catalysts have their disadvantages, such as difficulty in separation and recovery, easy aggregation, and low solar energy utilization, which limit their large-scale application.156 MOFs, as a class of porous inorganic-organic composites with chromophores that can interact with light and undergo photochemical processes, have become the focus of attention for solar energy conversion applications in recent years.157 Under illumination, the organic linker as a photonic antenna will be excited to generate electrons and holes, which is the basic process of photocatalytic reactions. Compared with traditional inorganic photocatalysts, photoactive MOFs possess crystallinity and unique properties with large surface to volume ratios and high design flexibility.158 The porous structure of MOFs will promote diffusion through the MOF channel and greatly inhibit electron–hole recombination. High crystallinity eliminates defects that may result in recombination of electrons and holes. Controlled chemical and physical properties can be readily achieved by the targeted modulation of the organic functional groups and metal centers at the molecular level. The photocatalytic activity of MOFs is highly dependent on their light-trapping ability, photo-generated electron–hole pair migration, and recombination rate. However, the poor electrical conductivity of MOFs restricts their activity. Combining MOFs with graphene to form a heterojunction is a possible solution.14 The Fermi level of graphene (0 V vs. NHE) is lower than that of most photocatalysts, so electrons can be rapidly transferred from MOFs to graphene due to band alignment, which will reduce the combination of electrons and holes. The application of MOFs for photocatalysis is mostly concentrated on degradation of organic pollutants, hydrogen evolution or the CO2 reduction reaction. There has been little work on water oxidation. This is mainly because that MOFs are composed of carboxylate linkers that generally do not have enough oxidizing power for water oxidation. In addition, water oxidation requires the help of buffer solutions and strong oxidizing agents; however MOFs tend to be unstable under such environments.159 Therefore, in this section, we mainly outline the latest photocatalytic progress in photodegradation of dyes and contaminating organic matter, photocatalytic H2 generation and CO2 reduction on MOFs/graphene composites.
5.1 Photocatalysis mechanism on MOFs/graphene
At present, the most studied photocatalysts are semiconductors. The electron is excited and transferred to the conduction band (CB) undergoing a reduction reaction, when the hole stays in the valence band (VB) undergoing an oxidation reaction after the semiconductor absorbs light. The mechanism of photocatalysis of MOFs is similar to that of semiconductors. Its energy levels are expressed with the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) corresponding to the CB and VB of semiconductors.160 It is the organic linker that absorbs the energy of sunlight to generate electrons and holes. The photoexcited electrons can be transferred to the metal cluster by the junction-cluster charge transfer mechanism (LCCT), confirmed by Li et al.,161 followed by the oxidation–reduction reaction. In general, this approach of ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT) is desirable, because it allows for more efficient charge separation. When MOFs/graphene are applied in photocatalysis, the photocatalysis process is explained as follows: when the organic ligand is stimulated by light, photoelectrons are transferred from the HOMO to the LUMO state and further relay to nodes of MOFs through the LCCT mechanism to activate the metal nodes, followed by a rapid electron transfer from the photocatalyst to graphene. Compared with most photocatalysts, graphene has a much low Fermi level (0 V vs. NHE), so it's very easy to transfer electrons from the photocatalyst to graphene. One of the most appealing ways to enhance the photocatalytic performance of MOFs is to extend the optical absorption range of MOFs to the visible light region to obtain the maximum solar energy utilization rate. One of the biggest advantages of MOF materials is their structural adjustability. We can modify the orbital composition by altering the organic ligand type to change their electronic structure and the chemical properties of the HOMO–LUMO band edges.162 The introduction of primary amines into organic ligands was reported to be a powerful strategy to make various frameworks sensitive to visible light. The amino substituent on the ligand was proved to increase electron density and decrease ionization potential by increasing the HOMO level and absorbing in the visible region (Fig. 12b). Although the visible light response of amine-modified MOFs is still insufficient, the newly emerging porphyrin-based ligands can improve the orbital overlap in MOFs to a greater extent and increase the light response range.163
5.2 Photodegradation
Oxidative dye degradation reactions are relatively easy to achieve because of small kinetic barriers.164,165 Recently, MOFs/graphene-based materials have been the center of attention for the efficient removal of organic contaminants from the environment. Organic dyes such as methyl orange, methylene blue and rhodamine B are the most commonly used in textile factories, and the treatment of industrial wastewater containing dyes is an urgent problem.166 There are a number of reports on polymerizing graphene oxide on the surface of MOFs to form MOFs/graphene oxide complexes to enhance the degradation of organic molecules. MIL-53(Fe), MIL-125(Ti) and MIL-68(In) are the most commonly used MOFs for oxidative dyes, owing to excellent activity. In addition, it should be emphasized that graphene can enhance the light absorption range and structural stability.
Fe-based MOFs are particularly attractive in the field of photocatalysis, because Fe is a low-cost metal with photocatalytic activity in the visible light region.167 To date, a number of Fe-MOFs/GO materials have been successfully prepared for photo-degradation of dyes and organic compounds. Zhang et al. prepared one-dimensional MIL-53(Fe)/graphene as a visible-light-driven photocatalyst with H2O2 as the electron acceptor for the degradation of rhodamine B.168 Motivated by this success, another group of researchers prepared MIL-53(Fe)/rGO hybrid materials for the degradation of methylene blue under both UV and visible light. In their experiments, H2O2 was selected as the electron acceptor, because the photolysis of H2O2 would produce reactive ˙OH which was the active component for degrading organic matter. They found that the hybrid MIL-53(Fe) with 2.5% rGO showed a degradation rate of 0.078 min−1, which was 3.1 times higher that of MIL-53(Fe). The faster degradation was attributed to rGO enjoying the light response in the visible region and better electrical conductivity to suppress electron–hole recombination.169 Following this work, Wu et al. further investigated another Fe-based MOF, MIL-88(Fe)@GO, for MB and RhB degradation under natural sunlight with excellent degradation efficiency.170
Most of the synthesis of Fe-based MOFs needs to be carried out in DMF solvent, but if the subsequent treatment fails to remove the DMF totally, it will lead to secondary contamination of the environment during application. Liu et al. fabricated DMF-free MIL-88A(Fe) with fumaric acid and FeCl3·6H2O. A schematic illustration of oxidation of RhB on an M88/GO-9 nanocomposite under visible light irradiation is shown in Fig. 10a. The electrons generated by photoexcitation were transferred from MIL-88A(Fe) to GO, which effectively reduced the recombination of electron–hole pairs. MIL-88A(Fe)-9 (with 9.0 wt% GO) exhibited excellent photocatalytic performance with RhB being almost totally removed within 80 min. Photocatalytic degradation curves and the apparent reaction rate constants (k) of RhB are shown in Fig. 11a and b. The XRD diffraction patterns and FT-IR spectra showed that M88/GO-9 had superior stability and reusability, because the crystal structure and surface-active groups of M88/GO-9 had no obvious change after five cycles of the reaction. In order to explore the key active substance to degrade RhB in the M88/GO-9/H2O2 system, these scavengers, such as AgNO3 (the electron scavenger), p-benzoquinone (˙O2− scavenger), isopropyl alcohol (˙OH scavenger) and EDTA-2Na (h+ scavenger), which could capture the corresponding active substances, were added into the reaction system, respectively. As seen from Fig. 11c, the degradation rate of RhB was significantly sluggish after BQ, AgNO3 and IPA are added, suggesting that ˙O2−, e− and ˙OH were the main active substances in the photodegradation reaction.171
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of mechanism of RhB photodegradation over M88/GO. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. (b) Schematic diagram of the mechanism over MIL-68(In)-NH2/rGO for photocatalytic degradation of AMX. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. (c) Photocatalytic mechanism for H2 production over MoS2 QDs/UiO-66-NH2/G. Adapted with permission from ref. 173. (d) Z-scheme of O–ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 catalysis for CO2 reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 174. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic degradation curves and (b) the corresponding reaction rate constants of RhB over M88/GO, (c) effect of different scavengers on the photodegradation of RhB with the M88/GO nanocomposite under visible-light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. (d) The photocatalytic activities of MoS2 QDs/UiO-66-NH2 for hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 173. (e) Photocurrent responses and (f) CO2 reduction rate of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2. Adapted with permission from ref. 174. 
Compared with semiconductor titanium dioxide,42 Ti-based MOFs have the outstanding advantages of good crystallinity, high porosity, desired chemical stability, and excellent light-harvesting ability in the field of photocatalysis. Yuan et al. prepared Ag/rGO/MIL-125(Ti) ternary hybrids by an efficient one-step self-assembly and photoreduction strategy for RhB degradation under visible light irradiation. Its photodegradation rate of 0.0644 min−1 was 1.62 times higher than that of pure MIL-125(Ti), owing to the synergistic effect between MIL-125(Ti), Ag NPs and rGO. Ag NPs displayed surface plasmon resonance which can broaden light absorption and also served as an efficient ‘electron reservoir’.175
These traditional MOFs have shown good performance in photodegradation; however, their light absorption in the visible region is limited without the help of precious metals. Since MOFs possess the advantage of flexibility in composition design, the performance of MOF photocatalysts can be adjusted by purposefully selecting organic ligands or metal clusters.158 Some studies have proven that introducing amino groups onto organic ligands can extend the light absorption of MOFs to the visible region. For example, MIL-125(Ti) has an absorption edge of 350 nm, while NH2-MIL-125(Ti) shows an absorption edge extended to ca. 550 nm (Fig. 12a), due to the positive optical absorption of amino functional groups.176 Motivated by this finding, Huang et al. prepared NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO (donated as rGO-NMTi) with NH2-BDC as the organic ligand for methyl blue (MB) degradation under visible-light irradiation. The optical absorption measurement of rGO-NMTi displayed a redshift, suggesting that the nanocomposites enhance the visible light absorption. Meanwhile, rGO-NMTi also exhibited good stability and recyclability, along with an efficiency of above 96.7% after five runs.177
 Fig. 12  (a) UV-vis spectra and corresponding photographs of MIL-125(Ti) (1) and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) (2). Adapted with permission from ref. 176. (b) Experimental linker spectra and corresponding photographs of the pure linkers. Adapted with permission from ref. 162. (c) UV-vis spectra of TCPP, Al-PMOF and 5 wt% NH2-rGO/Al-PMOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. (d) DRS of rGO, rGO + MIL-68(In)–NH2, MIL-68(In)–NH2 and MIL-68(In)–NH2/rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. 
Though MIL-68(In)-NH2 has displayed acceptable photoactivity, it suffers from fast charge recombination. To tackle this problem, Yang et al. prepared a MIL-68(In)-NH2/GO composite via in situ growth for the degradation of an antibiotic, AMX. During the photodegradation process, the electrons on the CB of MIL-68(In)-NH2 rapidly transferred to the GO which acted as an electron acceptor, resulting in efficient carrier separation. DRS verified that GO has certain light absorption capacity, as shown in Fig. 12d. The schematic diagram of the enhanced photocatalytic mechanism over the MIL-68(In)-NH2/rGO composite is shown in Fig. 10b. The photocatalytic degradation rate of MIL-68(In)-NH2/GO toward AMX was nearly 3.0 times higher than that of pure MIL-68(In)-NH2. Meanwhile, experiments revealed that h+ and ˙O2− were the key active species in the degradation process and the solution pH had a nonnegligible influence on the photodegradation of AMX. This work emphasized the importance of GO in promoting the photocatalytic activity of MOFs.172
It is understood that traditional powdery catalysts exhibit some intrinsic shortcomings, such as difficulty in separation and recovery, which is not conducive to practical applications. Introducing a mechanical support into MOFs revolves this problem. Reduced graphene-oxide aerogels (rGA), a class of three dimensional (3D) frameworks composed of interconnected 2D reduced graphene-oxide (rGO), can act as the support of MOFs to facilitate their recovery and recycling. Mao et al. report a general strategy for one-step fabrication of a ZIF-8/reduced graphene-oxide hydrogel as a multifunctional material for separating oils and organic solvents, removing heavy metal ions and degrading pollutants from water with easy recovery. The pseudo-first-order reaction kinetics rate constant of ZIF-8/rGA was 3.7 times that of pure GA under UV light irradiation.27 Zr-based MOF and Al-based MOF compounds can also be used for photodegradation of pollutants. For example, Zhao et al. prepared novel ternary SnO2@UiO-66(Zr)/rGO as a visible-light-driven photocatalyst for the degradation of rhodamine B.178 Yang et al. synthesized NH2-MIL-53(Al)/RGO for the degradation of methylene blue under visible light.179 Pyrolytic treatment of MOFs can be applied to realize high crystallinity, a high specific surface area, and fast mass transport. MOF-derived porous composites possess certain desirable advantages over tradition semiconductors because of their super-high specific surface area, high stability, excellent optical absorption, and improved electron–hole separation.180 Cao et al. synthesized ZnO/3D graphene networks (3DGN) by annealing ZIF-8/3DGN for the photo-degradation of MB under UV light irradiation. ZnO/3DGN exhibited a faster degradation rate and better cycling stability than the traditional semiconductor ZnO.61 Similarly, Zhu et al. successfully prepared visible light responsive ZnO/RGO from ZIF-8/GO with the help of microwaves for catalytic degradation of MB. The photocatalytic activity of ZnO with a 1.5 wt% RGO content was 1.78 times that of pure ZnO.181
5.3 Photocatalytic H2 production
Hydrogen production by means of photocatalytic water splitting is a promising and sustainable route for obtaining clean energy. Since the ground breaking work of photocatalytic hydrogen generation by Fujishima and Honda in the 1970s,182 hydrogen generation by the decomposition of water driven by sunlight has attracted more and more attention. MOFs with their special structure and composition have become new hybrid materials for photocatalytic applications in recent years. The metal centers separated by organic linkers in MOFs can serve as “quantum dots” to realize a short transfer length for charge carriers. More importantly, MOFs have a porous structure, and water molecules can easily diffuse into the pores of MOFs, thereby reducing the proton H to a quasi-homogeneous reaction.193 Graphene is well known as an excellent carrier and a co-catalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen production owing to its high specific surface area and excellent electron mobility. As mentioned above, the catalytic activity of a photocatalyst for the HER is closely linked to the intrinsic nature of the catalyst, such as the bandgap energy, the visible light absorption capacity, the number of active sites, and the charge transferability.125 In the following sections, we will summarize various types of MOFs/graphene composites as photocatalysts for water decomposition under solar radiation and discuss active site/cocatalyst selection and heterojunction construction for better HER performance.
Kataoka presented the first work of MOFs ([Ru2(p-BDC)2x]n) as active sites for visible-light photocatalytic H2 production in the presence of a photosensitizer Ru(bpy)2+, electron transfer agent MV2+, and electron sacrificial agent EDTA-2Na. The turnover number and the apparent quantum yield were 8.16 and 4.82%, respectively.194 Despite the impressive performance, there is still plenty of room for improvement. Currently, many researchers focus on Ti- and Zr-MOFs, because of their low cost, high chemical stability, and high photocatalytic activity.
Ti-based MOFs have high chemical stability and good light-harvesting ability;195 however, they display an unsatisfactory hydrogen production efficiency without using cocatalysts such as precious metals Pt and Au. Rapid electron–hole pair recombination was identified as the root cause for the low efficiency. To solve this problem, Karthik et al. fabricated noncovalently anchored photoactive NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO by introducing graphene oxide as the mechanical support without any noble metals and cocatalyst. The amount of H2 (91 μmol h−1 gcat−1) generated by MIL-125(Ti)/rGO was far more than that of MIL-125(Ti) MOFs (7 μmol h−1 gcat−1) within 120 min. This was due to the strong π–π interaction verified by PPy between NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and rGO, which facilitated the separation of electron–hole pairs.28
Zr-based MOFs (such as UiO-66) are some of the most widely used MOFs in the field of photocatalytic hydrogen production since Garcia and co-workers discovered that UiO-66 can produce a certain amount of hydrogen under UV irradiation.196 However, the efficiency of Zr-based MOFs (0.46 mmol h−1 g−1) remains much inferior to that of conventional semiconductors even with Pt particles as a cocatalyst. Similar to the strategy of synthesizing NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/graphene, Wang et al. prepared amine-functionalized UiO-66-NH2 well wrapped with graphene, where every face of UiO-66-NH2 octahedrons was in contact with graphene via electrostatic attraction. After modifying MOFs with amino groups, NH2-UiO-66 extended the range of light response to the visible region. UiO-66-NH2 with 50 wt% graphene had a better H2 production efficiency of 41.4 mmol h−1 g−1 when Pt was used as the co-catalyst, TEOA as a sacrificial reagent, and ErB a dye sensitizer. The improvement could be contributed to the strong interaction between the MOF and electron sacrificial agent which promoted electron transfer and solar absorption to visible light. This work highlighted the importance of multi-face contact with graphene in promoting the charge transport.20
Although simple assembled MOFs/graphene has made good achievements in photocatalysis, the turnover number of most studied systems is still less than 1, due to the absence of vacancies for substrate activation, inefficient electron transfer between the MOFs and the substrate, and lower charge separation efficiency. Much effort has been made to integrate different functional materials, such as photosensitizers, cocatalysts and another matching photocatalyst, with MOFs to build a heterostructure to enhance water decomposition activity.
Cocatalysts can affect the reaction process of photogenerated electrons and holes on the surface of the photocatalyst and reduce the activation energy of the photocatalytic reaction.197 The semiconductor MoS2 has an unshakable position in the field of photocatalytic hydrogen production and is considered to be the most promising substitute for precious metals. Hao et al. used active MoS2 quantum dots to replace Pt in a UiO-66-NH2/graphene system with Eosin Y as the antenna molecule and TEOA as the sacrificial donor for H2 evolution. The photocatalytic mechanism for H2 production over EY sensitized MoS2 QDs/UiO-66-NH2/G under visible light irradiation is shown in Fig. 10c. Fig. 11d shows that 5 wt% MoS2 QDs/UiO-66-NH2/G exhibits the highest H2 evolution (186.37 μmol) under irradiation for 3 h, and the apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) is 40.5% at 430 nm. The improved activity was attributed to the introduction of co-catalysts MoS2 QDs and graphene and the larger light absorption. MoS2 QDs had a strong quantum effect, and many unsaturated bonds were formed owing to the atoms at the edges that lack coordination, which increased the chance of contact with other atoms, such as H atoms, and they further greatly improved the catalytic activity.173
To build a charge transmission channel between MOFs and rGO for faster changer transfer, Liu et al. prepared a rGO/UiO-66/Co–Mo–S photocatalyst via a facile two-step photocatalytic reduction approach. The result showed that the H2 yield of rGO/UiO-66/Co–Mo–S was nearly 226 times that of pure rGO/UiO-66. The reason comes from Co–Mo–S; the charge transmission channel on the surface of rGO/UiO-66 had effectively promoted the transfer of electrons and inhibited charge recombination.183 Ni4S3 is considered as a better cocatalyst for lowering the activation energy in photocatalytic hydrogen production. Liu et al. constructed a rGO/UiO-66(Zr)/Ni4S3 compound for photocatalytic hydrogen production. The hydrogen production of the rGO/MOFs/Ni4S3 photocatalyst was 185 times higher than that of the pure rGO/MOF photocatalyst under visible light irradiation.184
Although UiO-66-NH2 and TiO2 are both capable of catalysing the HER,198 when used alone they can only exhibit limited activity due to the fast combination of electrons and holes as well as the limited light absorption. When the two materials form a heterojunction structure, a synergistic effort would occur. As an example, Ling et al. designed a ternary heterojunction of TiO2/UiO-66-NH2/GO via an in situ formation method for photocatalytic degradation of RhB and H2 evolution with Erythrosin B as a photosensitizer and H2PtCl6 as a cocatalyst. H2 evolution proceeded in this dye-sensitized system, where RhB was excited to RhB* under visible light, and electrons from the CB band of UiO-66-NH2 were transferred to TiO2 or GO. Since TiO2 has a more negative CB band potential, it could effectively inhibit recombination of electrons and holes.185
However, in some MOF-based complexes, the MOFs do not serve as the photocatalyst. Instead, they only act as a platform for catalytic sites. For example, Liu et al. synthesized a UiO-66/CdS/RGO composite structure for photocatalytic hydrogen production, and CdS was the photocatalyst in UiO-66/CdS/RGO. The hydrogen evolution rate of the composite was 13.8 times higher than that of pure CdS. Compared with UiO-66 with a LUMO position (−0.5 V) and RGO with Fermi energy levels (−0.08 V), CdS had a lower CB position (−0.65 V), so the electrons generated by the CdS first transferred to UiO-66 and then to RGO.186 The porous structures of MOFs make them versatile to combine photosensitizers, cocatalysts, and catalytic centers in a single solid. Bu et al. took advantage of UiO-67, CdS, and SiW12 with strong electron acceptability to synthesize SiW12@UiO-67/MoS2/rGO-CdS SiW12@UiO-67 where MoS2/rGO acted as the cocatalyst for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Mechanism study showed that the electrons on the CB of CdS were transferred either to the LUMO of SiW12@UiO-67 and subsequently to M/G, or directly to M/G for H2 evolution.24 Similarly, with MOFs as the platform, Bag et al. fabricated a ternary composite CdS@NU-1000/RGO which generated 12.1 times more hydrogen than commercial CdS under visible light and exhibited significantly enhanced photo-stability.25
Apart from focusing our thought on the expanded light capture range and higher separation efficiency of photo-charge carriers, we should also note the important role of free radical lifetime in photochemical processes, because most photocatalytic reactions are carried out through free radical intermediates. Since the lifetime of free radicals is much shorter than the duration time of the reaction, the free radicals are often devitalized before the reaction starts. So how to effectively prolong the lifetime of free radicals is also important to improve photocatalytic efficiency. In addition, MOFs have been reported to be useful as molecular containers for encapsulating and stabilizing short-lived intermediates. Shi et al. prepared Cu-BTC MOFs@ZnO/graphene oxide (GO) by incorporating Cu-BTC in ZnO/GO with electrostatic interaction for photocatalytic H2 evolution under UV irradiation. Cu-BTC@ZnO/GO exhibited the highest H2 evolution rate of 191 μmol g−1 h−1, which was about 9 times higher than that of ZnO/GO. Analysis using ESR measurements indicated that Cu-BTC could stabilize and prolong the lifetime of free radicals, so it could increase the opportunity of H˙ radical recombination.187
Similarly, the MOF derivatives obtained by calcination can promote an energy uphill reaction, such as photocatalytic H2 evolution, due to reduced defects and more exposed active sites.199 Fang et al. constructed Ni@C/g-C3N4 for photocatalytic H2 evolution where Ni@C was used as a cocatalyst. The metallic nickel nanoparticles were evenly embedded in the graphitized carbon matrix (Ni@C) with a hollow onion-like structure by pyrolysis of Ni-MOFs and subsequent acid treatment. Ni@C/g-C3N4 displayed a H2 production rate of 2.15 mmol h−1 g−1, which was about 88 times as high as that of pure g-C3N4 and even better than that of Pt/g-C3N4. This was attributed to the mutual assistance of Ni nanoparticles and graphene, which restrained the recombination of electron–hole pairs.188 Iron oxides are earth-abundant and green semiconductor materials with a narrow bandgap (Eg < 3.0 eV). However, the improper conduction band level limits their hydrogen generation. This problem can be solved by the assistance of graphene, which will elevate the CB position of iron oxides. Yao et al. synthesized γ-Fe2O3/rGO via thermolysis of MIL-88B/GO composites under an argon atmosphere. The composites showed a significantly enhanced H2 evolution rate (318.0 mmol h−1 g−1) and excellent recyclability even without noble metal co-catalysts.189
In addition, 3D structured ZnO/rGO/carbon sponge from ZIF-8/GO/MF sponge,190 g-C3N4/rGO/Mo–Co–S from ZIF-67,191 and ZnS/rGO/CuS192 all exhibited impressive photocatalytic H2-production activity under visible light irradiation (Table 3).
Table 3 Summary of MOFs and their derivatives/graphene composite catalysts for photocatalytic H2 production




Photocatalyst
Synthesis method
Sacrificial reagent
Co-catalyst
Light-absorbing region
Production rate
Ref.




NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO
Physical mixing of GO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)
—
—
Visible light
91 μmol h−1 g−1

28



UiO-66-NH2/rGO
Physical mixing of UiO-66-NH2 and GO
TEOA
Pt
Visible light
41.4 mmol h−1 g−1

20



5 wt% MoS2QDs/UiO-66-NH2/graphene

In situ growth of UiO-66-NH2 on GO
TEOA
—
Visible light
62.12 μmol h−1

173



UiO-66/Co–Mo–S/rGO

In situ growth of UiO-66 on GO
TEOA
—
Visible light
67.8 μmol h−1

183



rGO/UiO-66(Zr)/Ni4S3

In situ growth of UiO-66(Zr) on GO
TEOA
—
Visible light
56 μmol h−1

184



TiO2/UiO-66-NH2/rGO
Physical mixing of GO and UiO-66-NH2
TEOA
H2PtCl6
Visible light
270 μmol h−1

185



UiO-66/CdS/rGO
Physical mixing of -GO and UiO-66
TEOA
—
Visible light
13.8 mmol h−1 g−1

186



SiW12@UiO-67/MoS2/rGO-CdS
Physical mixing of GO and SiW12@UiO-67
Lactic acid
—
Visible light
1.27 mmol h−1

24



CdS/NU-1000/rGO
Physical mixing of GO and NU-1000
—
—
Visible light
12 μmol h−1

25



Cu-BTC@ZnO/GO

In situ growth of Cu-BTC on GO
Methanol
—
Ultraviolet
191 μmol h−1 g−1

187



Ni@C/g-C3N4
Graphene derived from MOFs
TEOA
—
Visible light
2.15 mmol h−1 g −1

188



γ-Fe2O3/rGO

In situ growth of MIL-88B on GO and calcination under Ar
—
—
Visible light
318.0 mmol h−1 g−1

189



ZnO/rGO/Carbon sponge
Physical mixing of GO and ZIF-8 and calcination
TEOA
—
Visible light
14.6 μmol g−1

190



g-C3N4/rGO/Mo–Co–S
High-temperature hydrothermal reaction and one-step sulfidation
—
—
Visible light
117.8 μmol h−1

191



ZnS/rGO/CuS
Hydrothermal and cation exchange methods
—
—
Visible light
1.67 mmol h−1 g−1

192





5.4 CO2 reduction
CO2 is the primary cause of global warming. CO2 capture and efficient use are two of the hottest research topics. The best solution would be to convert CO2 into useful organic compounds with the assistance of the abundant solar energy.200 MOFs are good potential materials for the reduction of CO2, as they can be designed to possess a suitable bandgap and intrinsic porosity for the capture and reduction of CO2.201
In 2012, Fu et al. for the first time applied NH2-MIL-125(Ti) for the reduction of CO2 to HCOO− under visible light irradiation. NH2-MIL-125(Ti) showed a better adsorption capacity for CO2 because NH2 could enhance the interaction between the MOF framework and CO2. The result displays that the formed amount of HCOO– can be up to 8.14 mmol in 10 h with acetonitrile as the solvent and TEOA as the sacrificial agent.176 Meanwhile, UIO-66-NH2 was the most widely studied MOF because of its unparalleled thermal stability and strong CO2 absorption capacity. However, its limitations should also be recognized, such as week conductivity and imperfect visible light response. To resolve this problem, Wang et al. used a microwave-assisted in situ growth method to synthesize highly disperse UIO-66-NH2 onto GR. The obtained UIO-66-NH2/GR exhibited the highest HCOOH production (33.5 μmol), which was almost 2.1 and 3.5 times that of the hydrothermal treated sample and the mechanically mixed sample, respectively. This was attributed to the “super-hot spots” on the surface of graphene caused by microwaves, which not only got small UIO-66-NH2 crystals highly dispersed on the graphene, but also made the MOFs and graphene bind tightly together. Moreover, all the prepared samples containing graphene exhibited pretty good activity compared to pure UIO-66-NH2. In addition to the advantages mentioned above, GO could elevate the conduction band of UIO-66-NH2 and also displayed a good CO2 adsorption capacity with a theoretical maximum CO2 uptake of 37.93 wt%.40
In order to make more effective use of solar light resources, it is an undisputed trend to develop MOF materials with response to the full spectrum. Although MOF-based photocatalysts with amino modified organic linkers have already extended the absorption boundary to 500 nm, this is still not enough. Porphyrins were found to be capable of absorbing the whole range of visible light, making them excellent candidates to modify MOFs for better photocatalytic performance (Fig. 12c). Using porphyrins to modify organic ligands, Sadeghi et al. firstly synthesized graphene-based MOFs (Al-PMOFs/NH2-rGO) with tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP) as a linker because of its preferred photochemical electron-transfer ability and predictable rigid structures. The organic ligands were excited to produce photoelectrons and holes under illumination. The holes remained in the MOFs, while photoelectrons were transferred from MOFs to graphene, and subsequently reacted with CO2 adsorbed on graphene to generate the anion radical CO2− and further reduced to HCOO− in the presence of TEOA. NH2-rGO/Al-PMOFs exhibited an excellent formate evolution rate of 685.6 mmol gcat−1 h−1 with almost 100% selectivity.163
Catalysts with strong redox ability and high charge separation efficiency are the goals that people have been pursuing in the field of photocatalytic reduction. However, single component materials are often difficult to meet all above stringent requirements at the same time. One instinctive weakness of MOFs as a photocatalyst is the faster rate of electron–hole recombination, but this can be resolved by the formation of a heterojunction with another semiconductor.202 Compared with conventional type-II heterojunctions, the construction of Z-scheme heterojunctions (as illustrated in Fig. 10d) is a more attractive choice to realize spatial separation of electrons and holes while maintaining stronger redox capabilities simultaneously. Meng et al. prepared a Z-scheme heterojunction of oxygen-defective ZnO (O–ZnO)/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 for reducing CO2 to CH3OH and HCOOH under visible light. The output of CH3OH and HCOOH reached 34.83 and 6.41 μmol g−1 h−1, much higher than that of O–ZnO/UiO-66-NH2 and ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 as shown in Fig. 11e and f, owing to the structural advantages of the Z-scheme heterojunction. The photoelectrons on the CB of O–ZnO would be transferred to the VB of UiO-66-NH2via GO as the electronic channel and combine with holes left on UiO-66-NH2, so that the electrons on the CB of UiO-66-NH2 would not be recombined with the holes on itself, and the same occurred in O–ZnO. The electrons and holes were respectively reserved on different semiconductors. Since the CB level of UiO-66-NH2 was more negative than the CO2 reduction potential, the collective electrons on the CB of UiO-66-NH2 had sufficient potential to reduce CO2 to CH3OH and HCOOH.174
5.5 Prospects for MOFs/graphene in photocatalysis
MOFs/graphene materials are a relatively new class of photocatalytic materials, which are receiving more and more attention, but there is still a lot of room for development, when they are compared with the best catalysts in this field. Liu et al. prepared ordered macro–mesoporous g-C3N4 with N vacancy modification (Nv MM CN). In photocatalytic degradation of norfloxacin, it can reach a 99.9% removal rate within 20 min, which is superior to MOF/graphene, owing to the three-dimensionally connected macroscopic mesoporous structures and the N vacancy.203 Quan et al. proposes a two-dimensional confinement strategy, using the interlayer sub-nanometer space of layered carbon nitride to confine platinum atoms and to realize the construction of a platinum monoatomic photocatalyst with an extremely high hydrogen production rate of 22650 μmol g−1 h−1 and perfect apparent quantum yield of 22.5% at 420 nm, which is better than MOFs/graphene.204 Aiming to get better performance in photocatalysis, creating the finer regulation of nanostructures to enhance the effective separation of charge and holes will be the inevitable route for MOFs/graphene. Lou et al. constructed a NiCoOP NPs@MHCF catalyst by confining highly dispersed NiCoOP NPs in multichannel hollow carbon fibers (MHCF) with a high photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity with a CO generation rate of 16.6 μmol h−1 (per 0.1 mg catalyst), owing to its unique structure and composition advantages.205 We should see that MOFs/graphene materials still have a long way to go in integrating multiple active sites and a better spatial structure.
Although MOFs have many advantages in photocatalysis, the real and efficient practical photocatalytic MOFs are still very limited, often due to poor stability in water or a narrow spectral absorption range and low charge separation efficiency. Although the addition of graphene improves these properties to a certain extent, the poor combination of MOFs and graphene also limits the further improvement of performance. It should also be noted that almost all photocatalytic systems reported based on MOFs/graphene so far need sacrificial agents, which is inconsistent with the concept of sustainable development. Some possible research ideas are as follows: (1) MOF-based composite materials are rationally designed by introducing a plasmon resonance effect or up-conversion strategy to enhance the utilization efficiency of sunlight; (2) optimization of the structural design of photocatalytic materials, such as designing Z-scheme series MOF-based photocatalysts, to achieve more efficient photo-generated electron–hole transfer and separation through band regulation; (3) design and synthesize of highly disperse co-catalysts in a MOF-based catalytic material system, such as metal single atoms, to achieve the maximum atom utilization efficiency of the catalytic active centers, thereby improving photocatalytic activity; (4) use of advanced in situ analysis methods to characterize the synthesized MOF-based photocatalyst in detail for obtaining a clear photocatalytic reaction mechanism, guiding the design and synthesis of subsequent photocatalysts.
6. Conclusion
Metal–organic frameworks, as a class of inorganic–organic coexisting crystal coordination polymers, have been fully developed into direct catalysts or as precursors of catalysts. There are several reviews on MOFs or MOF-derived catalysts for electrocatalysis and photocatalysis; however, very few studies have focused on the preparation and applications of MOFs/graphene composites. MOFs/graphene composites have many advantages, including (1) integrating the advantages and mitigating the weaknesses of the single materials; (2) effectively avoiding aggregation in high-temperature calcination and improving the stability through graphene as a protective coating; (3) more catalytic active sites owing to the coordination and cooperation between doped porous carbon and doped graphene. In this review, we first summarized the two main ways of combining graphene with MOFs: physical mixing and in situ growth, and the different annealing atmospheres (N2, Ar, and a mixture of Ar and H2), as well as a series of post-treatment methods (phosphating, sulfidation, and acid pickling) to obtain MOF derivatives (such as porous carbon, metal oxides, sulfides and phosphates). A summary was made on various strategies to improve the composite performance (MOF amination, polydopamine, building heterogeneous structures, heteroatom doping, graphene aerogel, etc).
We all know that the weak interaction between MOFs and graphene is the major limitation for the performance of MOF-based/graphene materials. It is our goal to have MOFs and graphene more closely connected. The combination of MOFs and graphene is done in two ways: physical adsorption and in situ growth. In terms of physical adsorption, enhancing the electrostatic adsorption of MOF crystals and graphene is an effective strategy. By adjusting the pH value, MOFs and graphene can be oppositely charged, promoting the adsorption of MOFs on graphene. Meanwhile, a covalent bond can be formed between the groups on GO and the group on the MOF ligands by introducing a linker. And compared with physical adsorption, the in situ growth method will make the interactions between the two materials theoretically stronger. For in situ growth, the main problem is the binding competition to the metal cation between oxygen-containing groups on GO and organic ligands on MOFs. If most metal cations are combined with organic ligands to form free MOFs, there would be a weak connection between them. We can let the metal cations react with the GO first, and then add the organic ligands after the metal ions are anchored on the GO, or introduce an excess of metal ions to ensure that there is a sufficient number of metal ions binding to GO, and these two ways both promise the direct nucleation of MOF particles on the GO. In the same way, making GO react with the organic ligands prior to metal cations is another effective solution, owing to the naturally existing π–π bond between organic ligands and GO. Certainly, some introduced macromolecules, such as PVP, can act as a rope to hold GO and metal ions to promote the combination. The reaction conditions can also affect the combination of the two materials, for example, microwave-assisted processing is demonstrated to enhance the combination. All in all, there are many strategies to improve the binding force of MOFs and graphene. However, it should be noted that most linkers are organic macromolecules with poor electrical conductivity, which will have a negative effect on the composite material. Developing a class of conductive liners will be a very promising direction. In addition, we need to pay more attention to determine whether the above improved methods are still effective to promise a close connection between MOFs and graphene after calcination, because MOF derivatives/graphene composites are attractive.
In the field of electrocatalysis, researchers mainly focus on MOF-derivative/graphene composites, because of their good conductivity. In this part, we mainly introduce the electrochemical properties of MOF-derived porous materials/graphene in the ORR, HER, OER and bifunctional catalysis (overall water splitting, ORR and OER). Nowadays, some MOF-derived materials are developed to show good electrocatalytic activity, while there is still a long way to go to meet industrial demands. At the same time, the exposed shortcoming of this group of materials during their research must be mentioned. For example, combining MOF-derived NPs with carbon supports is favorable for improving electronic conductivity, while the binder introduced at the same time (which aims to achieve a close connection between MOFs and graphene) has a negative impact on conductivity. More significantly, single metal atom catalysts are a research hotspot in the field of catalysis owing to their unprecedentedly high catalytic activity. Adjusting the composition and structure of materials at the atomic or molecular level would have a greater impact on the performance of materials than conventional structural engineering. Due to their special inherent structure and composition, MOFs have the potential to be a good precursor of monatomic catalysts. However, there has been little research on this aspect; therefore more attention should be paid in the future. Since poor conductivity is a major factor preventing MOFs from possessing high electrocatalytic properties, some researchers have begun to study highly conductive MOFs, which is an inevitable trend in the future research. Finally, a deeper understanding of the various mechanisms in the energy conversion process is among the top priorities. With the rapid development of computer science and quantum chemistry, the combination of experiment and theory will provide opportunities for the breakthrough of MOFs in electrocatalysis.
The research on photocatalysis mainly focuses on MOFs/graphene composites. Compared with conventional photocatalysts, photoactive MOFs/graphene shows excellent photocatalytic performance in solar-to-chemical energy conversion applications such as CO2 reduction, water splitting, and degradation of organic pollutants due to: (1) the highly porous structure promoting diffusion of the substrate and product through the MOF channel, greatly inhibiting electron–hole recombination and providing more space for the addition of beneficial components; (2) the high crystallinity of MOFs with modest stability under photocatalytic conditions; (3) controllable chemical and physical properties for the targeted modulation; (4) advantages brought about by graphene, as a substrate to achieve the uniform distribution of MOF particles, as a conductor to transfer light-generated electrons, and as an excellent visible light absorber. Despite all these advances, it is fair to admit that MOFs' photocatalytic performance is still far from other state-of-the-art materials. Although some MOFs are capable to respond to visible light, their photocatalytic activity is limited by the relatively poor separation and slow transportation of electron–hole pairs. At the same time, we can find that the types of MOFs used for photocatalysis are very limited; they are mainly based on ZIFs, UiOs and MILs, but there are still a large number of MOFs containing redox active metals (e.g. Fe, Ni, Co, and Mn) or functional organic linkers (e.g. pyridinium, porphyrin, and imidazolyl) that have not been explored and studied for photocatalysis. Last but not the least, more exploration of heterogeneous photocatalysis for artificial photosynthesis is needed, and we expect more work using MOF/graphene composites along this direction.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51972063 and 51502185), 111 Project (No. D17005), and Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (2019J01256) and acknowledge the funds from the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).
Notes and references
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477 RSC .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and S. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, Y. B. Go, N. Aratani, S. B. Choi, E. Choi, A. O. Yazaydin, R. Q. Snurr, M. O'Keeffe, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 329, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
J. Cheng, J. Liang, L. Dong, J. Chai, N. Zhao, S. Ullah, H. Wang, D. Zhang, S. Imtiaz and G. Shan, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 40813–40822 RSC .
R. R. Salunkhe, J. Tang, Y. Kamachi, T. Nakato, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6288–6296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Rosi, J. Eckert, M. Eddaoudi, D. T. Vodak, J. Kim, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2003, 300, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC .
G. W. Xu, Y. P. Wu, W. W. Dong, J. Zhao, X. Q. Wu, D. S. Li and Q. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602996 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .
L. Jiao, Y. Wang, H.-L. Jiang and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703663 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun, M. G. Campbell and M. Dinca, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3566–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804950 CrossRef .
S. Yuan, L. Feng, K. Wang, J. Pang, M. Bosch, C. Lollar, Y. Sun, J. Qin, X. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. Li and H.-C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704303 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dang, Q.-L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 3, 17075 CrossRef .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
F.-L. Li, Q. Shao, X. Huang and J.-P. Lang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1888–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, X. Zhang, Y. Feng, X. Zhang, H. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 231, 317–342 CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Yu, R. Li, H. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Ling, W. Duan and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20136–20140 RSC .
J. Pang, Z. Kang, R. Wang, B. Xu, X. Nie, L. Fan, F. Zhang, X. Du, S. Feng and D. Sun, Carbon, 2019, 144, 321–332 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qin, Y. Huang, K. Wang, T. Xu, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Kang and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 297, 805–813 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, P. Yan, Q. Wan and N. Yang, Carbon, 2018, 134, 540–547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bu, F. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Luo and L. Xu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40560–40566 RSC .
P. P. Bag, X.-S. Wang, P. Sahoo, J. Xiong and R. Cao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 5113–5119 RSC .
J. Cai, J.-Y. Lu, Q.-Y. Chen, L.-L. Qu, Y.-Q. Lu and G.-F. Gao, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 3882–3886 RSC .
J. Mao, M. Ge, J. Huang, Y. Lai, C. Lin, K. Zhang, K. Meng and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11873–11881 RSC .
P. Karthik, R. Vinoth, P. Zhang, W. Choi, E. Balaraman and B. Neppolian, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1913–1923 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1725–1736 RSC .
M. Jahan, Z. Liu and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5363–5372 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, H. Fan, C. Li, J. Caro and H. Meng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5297–5301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amiri, F. Ghaemi and B. Maleki, Mikrochim. Acta, 2019, 186, 131 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Lv, Y. Xie, J. Shu, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and C. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 410–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, R. Chen, Y. Gong, C. Yu, Z. Hui, H. Xu, X. Zhao, Y. Sun, W. Zhao, G. Sun and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 107–111 RSC .
S. Javanbakht, M. Pooresmaeil and H. Namazi, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 208, 294–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, D. Liu, G. Cao, Y. Tang and C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9374–9384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Li, G. Yan, M. Gao and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3701–3709 RSC .
Y. Xiao, W. Wei, M. Zhang, S. Jiao, Y. Shi and S. Ding, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2169–2177 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhao, D. Zhang, G. Li and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 228, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Le, X. Chen, Z. Li, W. Wang, X. Liu, A. Wu, P. Xu and D. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 501–508 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Wang, J. S. Cai, J. J. Mao, S. H. Li, J. L. Shen, S. W. Gao, J. Y. Huang, X. Q. Wang, I. P. Parkin and Y. K. Lai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467, 45–55 CrossRef .
J. J. Mao, J. Iocozzia, J. Y. Huang, K. Meng, Y. K. Lai and Z. Q. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 772–799 RSC .
Q. Yang, R. Lu, S. Ren, C. Chen, Z. Chen and X. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 202–211 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, F. Bu, X. Feng, I. Shakir, G. Hao and Y. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, D. Lin, J. Zhao, C. Liu, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nano Res., 2016, 10, 1213–1222 CrossRef .
W. Xia, C. Qu, Z. Liang, B. Zhao, S. Dai, B. Qiu, Y. Jiao, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, W. Guo, D. Dang, R. Zou, D. Xia, Q. Xu and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2788–2795 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eom, D. W. Kang, M. Kang, J. H. Choe, H. Kim, D. W. Kim and C. S. Hong, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2663–2669 RSC .
Z. Zhu, Y. Yang, Y. Guan, J. Xue and L. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15536–15545 RSC .
K. Shen, X. Chen, J. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5887–5903 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Ge, G. Wang, H. Zhao and W. Cai, Carbon, 2016, 106, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Y. Hu, Y. Liang, B. Kong, J. Zhang, J. Song, Q. Bao, G. P. Simon, S. P. Jiang and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5768–5777 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Z. He, X. Feng, W. Xu, X. Cui, J. Zhang, C. Yan, M. A. Carreon, Z. Liu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10324–10333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Z. Sun, R. Fang, Y. Shi, H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707592 CrossRef .
S. K. Park, J. S. Park and Y. C. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16531–16540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li, C. Dong, W. Dong, D. G. Atinafu, H. Gao, X. Chen and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32093–32101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, M. Fu, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, H. Lu, X. Fan, Y. Zhang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 289, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Zhou, F. Yu, M. Yu, C. Y. Chiang, W. Zhou, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700874 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Sun, Y. Qiu, X. Ji, T. Ma, F. Gao, Z. Ma, B. Zhang and P. Hu, Carbon, 2019, 144, 370–381 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiao, Q. Hao, X. Xia, Z. Wu and W. Lei, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2692–2695 RSC .
L. Jiao, Y. X. Zhou and H. L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
M. Wang, M. Lin, J. Li, L. Huang, Z. Zhuang, C. Lin, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8372–8375 RSC .
X. Ge, Z. Li and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, J. Wang, H. Bao, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7180–7190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, Y. Zhu, N. Zhuang, H. Lei, W. Zhu, Y. Fu, M. S. Javed, J. Li and W. Mai, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17092–17098 RSC .
H. Niu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Luo, N. Xin and W. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8503–8509 RSC .
K. Jayaramulu, J. Masa, O. Tomanec, D. Peeters, V. Ranc, A. Schneemann, R. Zboril, W. Schuhmann and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700451 CrossRef .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
T. Liu, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1703748 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Rezaei, A. R. Taghipour Jahromi and A. A. Ensafi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1359–1365 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Li, T. Si, H. Lei, C. Wei, Y. Sun, T. Zhan, Q. Liu and J. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8266–8273 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, J. Guo, Y. Tang, X. Guo, J. Nie and G. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 72–82 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, L. Jiao, R. Zhang and H. L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23852–23858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, T. Huang, Y. Sun, B. Kang, D. Liang, S. Yao, J. Yu, M. M. Dinesh, S. Wu, J. Y. Lee and S. Mao, J. Catal., 2019, 371, 185–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, Y. Xu, J. Liu and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5594–5600 RSC .
Y. Yang, Z. Lun, G. Xia, F. Zheng, M. He and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3563–3571 RSC .
Y. Xu, W. Tu, B. Zhang, S. Yin, Y. Huang, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605957 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ai, T. Tian and J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4771–4777 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, X. Liu, B. Zhu, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, C. He and Z. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jia, Y. Tan, Z. Cui, L. Zhang and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19604–19610 RSC .
Y. Yang, Z. Lin, S. Gao, J. Su, Z. Lun, G. Xia, J. Chen, R. Zhang and Q. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 469–479 CrossRef .
H. Tabassum, W. Guo, W. Meng, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Q. Wang and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601671 CrossRef .
W. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Chen and J. Jia, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12934–12937 RSC .
Q. Li, P. Xu, W. Gao, S. Ma, G. Zhang, R. Cao, J. Cho, H. L. Wang and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1378–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ortiz Peña, D. Ihiawakrim, M. Han, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, S. Carenco, C. Sanchez, C. Laberty-Robert, D. Portehault and O. Ersen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11372–11381 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Barroo, Z.-J. Wang, R. Schlögl and M.-G. Willinger, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 30–39 CrossRef .
D. Mohanty, S. Kalnaus, R. A. Meisner, K. J. Rhodes, J. Li, E. A. Payzant, D. L. Wood III and C. Daniel, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wolfbeisser, G. Kovács, S. M. Kozlov, K. Föttinger, J. Bernardi, B. Klötzer, K. M. Neyman and G. Rupprechter, Catal. Today, 2017, 283, 134–143 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Zhang, Y.-Q. Deng, P. Tian, H.-H. Shang, J. Xu and Y.-F. Han, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 179–191 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, Z. Feng, F. Fan and C. Li, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 468–481 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B.-J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin and L. Wiles, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450 RSC .
Z. S. Wu, S. B. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-Q. Liao, J.-Q. Shen and J.-P. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 373, 22–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and S. H. Yang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, Z. H. Zhao, Z. H. Xia and L. M. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hu and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736–11758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Chai, K. P. Qiu, M. Qiao, M. M. Titirici, C. X. Shang and Z. X. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1186–1195 RSC .
Y. H. Qian, Z. G. Hu, X. M. Ge, S. L. Yang, Y. W. Peng, Z. X. Kang, Z. L. Liu, J. Y. Lee and D. Zhao, Carbon, 2017, 111, 641–650 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14–19 RSC .
S. J. Yang, T. Kim, J. H. Im, Y. S. Kim, K. Lee, H. Jung and C. R. Park, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 464–470 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shen, X. D. Chen, J. Y. Chen and Y. W. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5887–5903 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhong, J. Wang, Y. W. Zhang, W. L. Xu, W. Xing, D. Xu, Y. F. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14235–14239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Zhang, Q. B. Dai, H. G. Zheng, M. D. Chen and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705431 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Wang, J. W. Zhou, H. Fu, W. Li, X. X. Fan, G. B. Xin, J. Zheng and X. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14064–14070 RSC .
Z. Liang, W. Xia, C. Qu, B. Qiu, H. Tabassum, S. Gao and R. Zou, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2442–2447 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Zhong, Y. Luo, S. He, P. G. Tang, D. Q. Li, N. Alonso-Vante and Y. J. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2541–2549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Hao, Y. Q. Xu, J. F. Liu and X. M. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5594–5600 RSC .
J. Wei, Y. Hu, Z. Wu, Y. Liang, S. Leong, B. Kong, X. Zhang, D. Zhao, G. P. Simon and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16867–16873 RSC .
X. Wen, X. Yang, M. Li, L. Bai and J. Guan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 830–841 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. F. Li, G. Y. Fang, H. G. Nie, Z. Liu, X. M. Zhou, X. Chen and S. M. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Wang, H. G. Zhang, H. H. Lin, S. Gupta, C. Wang, Z. X. Tao, H. Fu, T. Wang, J. Zheng, G. Wu and X. G. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, S. Zhai, H. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701410 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Dong, X. N. Zhang, J. Y. Huang, S. W. Gao, J. J. Mao, J. S. Cai, Z. Chen, S. Sathasivam, C. J. Carmalt and Y. K. Lai, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 93, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Su, Y. Yang, G. Xia, J. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, H. Huang, C. Wang, Y. Liu, T.-L. Hu and X.-H. Bu, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3639–3644 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, L. Han, Y. J. Han, Y. Yu, J. F. Zhai and S. J. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21471–21477 RSC .
J.-S. Li, J.-Y. Li, X.-R. Wang, S. Zhang, J.-Q. Sha and G.-D. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10252–10259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. H. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. C. Dong, C. T. He, H. J. Yin, P. F. An, K. Zhao, X. F. Zhang, C. Gao, L. J. Zhang, J. W. Lv, J. X. Wang, J. Q. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. X. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Q. Liu, H. J. Zhao and Z. Y. Tang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16184 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Islam, K. Barman, S. Jasimuddin and H. Acharya, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 3110–3118 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Hassan, A. B. Soliman, W. A. Elmehelmey, A. A. Abugable, S. G. Karakalos, M. Elbahri, A. Hassanien and M. H. Alkordi, Chem. Commun., 2018, 55, 31–34 RSC .
W. Li, S. Watzele, H. A. El-Sayed, Y. Liang, G. Kieslich, A. S. Bandarenka, K. Rodewald, B. Rieger and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5926–5933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lu, Z. C. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and S. H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. T. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. M. Baiyee, Z. Shao and F. Ciucci, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 9869–9921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pi, N. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4424–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Audichon, T. W. Napporn, C. Canaff, C. Morais, C. Comminges and K. B. Kokoh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2562–2573 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kavian, S.-I. Choi, J. Park, T. Liu, H.-C. Peng, N. Lu, J. Wang, M. J. Kim, Y. Xia and S. W. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12392–12397 RSC .
K. C. Lee, M. R. Sprague, B. J. Sussman, J. Nunn, N. K. Langford, X. M. Jin, T. Champion, P. Michelberger, K. F. Reim, D. England, D. Jaksch and I. A. Walmsley, Science, 2011, 334, 1253–1256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. C. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Liang, A. N. Gandi, D. H. Anjum, X. B. Wang, U. Schwingenschlogl and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7718–7725 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. H. Liu, X. D. Zhuang and X. L. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 RSC .
L. Yan, H. Jiang, Y. Xing, Y. Wang, D. Liu, X. Gu, P. Dai, L. Li and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1682–1691 RSC .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, T. Kong, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806672 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Li, L. P. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. B. Niu and Z. H. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Meng, H. X. Zhong, D. Bao, J. M. Yan and X. B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, Z. D. Wei and X. L. Gou, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4133–4142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, G. X. Feng, Z. G. Song, Y. P. Zhou, H. Y. Chao, D. Q. Yuan, T. T. Y. Tan, Z. G. Guo, Z. G. Hu, B. Z. Tang, B. Liu and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7241–7244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Hao, Y. Q. Xu, J. F. Liu and X. M. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5594–5600 RSC .
M. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Ge and Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17763–17770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, K. Shin, C. Jung, P.-P. Choi, G. Henkelman and H. M. Lee, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 562–569 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, L. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Jin, C. Liu, H. Chen, G. Li and J. Ge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 137, 4815–4822 Search PubMed .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Morales, M. A. Kazakova, S. Dieckhöfer, A. G. Selyutin, G. V. Golubtsov, W. Schuhmann and J. Masa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905992 CrossRef .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341–357 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Y. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Huang, J. Liang, X. S. Wang and R. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 126–157 RSC .
J. Zhu, P.-Z. Li, W. Guo, Y. Zhao and R. Zou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 359, 80–101 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, C. Wang and W. B. Lin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A.
M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, Z. Li and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8134–8172 RSC .
Y. H. Fu, D. R. Sun, Y. J. Chen, R. K. Huang, Z. X. Ding, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hendrickx, D. E. Vanpoucke, K. Leus, K. Lejaeghere, A. Van Yperen-De Deyne, V. Van Speybroeck, P. Van Der Voort and K. Hemelsoet, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10701–10710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sadeghi, S. Sharifnia and T.-O. Do, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18031–18035 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Xu, S. X. Ouyang and J. H. Ye, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7563–7572 RSC .
Y.-P. Wu, X.-Q. Wu, J.-F. Wang, J. Zhao, W.-W. Dong, D.-S. Li and Q.-C. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 2309–2316 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, J.-R. Li, X.-L. Lv, Y.-Q. Zhang and G. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2831–2867 RSC .
C. F. Zhang, L. G. Qiu, F. Ke, Y. J. Zhu, Y. P. Yuan, G. S. Xu and X. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14329–14334 RSC .
C. Zhang, L. Ai and J. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 54, 153–163 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, G. Li, H. Lu, Q. Lv and Z. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 7594–7600 RSC .
Y. Wu, H. Luo and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40435–40438 RSC .
N. Liu, W. Huang, X. Zhang, L. Tang, L. Wang, Y. Wang and M. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. You, J. Cheng, H. Zheng and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 673–680 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, Z. Jin, H. Yang, G. Lu and Y. Bi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meng, Q. Chen, J. Lu and H. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 550–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, H. Wang, Y. Wu, G. Zeng, X. Chen, L. Leng, Z. Wu and H. Li, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 30, 289–296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang and B. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 17873–17879 RSC .
X. Zhao, X. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Liu and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 92011–92019 RSC .
Y. Yang, W. Wang, H. Li, X. Jin, H. Wang, L. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 197, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Cao, B. Zheng, X. H. Rui, W. H. Shi, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, X. Li, H. Wang and L. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2017, 88, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Z. Jin and Y. Bi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4478–4488 RSC .
D. Liu, Z. Jin, Y. Zhang, G. Wang and B. Ma, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 529, 44–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ling, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, Z. Ge, W. Duan and B. Liu, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 1978–1984 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, L. Shen, Z. Ren, W. Wu, Y. Tan, H. Fu, J. Zhang and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8533–8535 RSC .
X. Shi, J. Zhang, G. Cui, N. Deng, W. Wang, Q. Wang and B. Tang, Nano Res., 2017, 11, 979–987 CrossRef .
L. J. Fang, X. L. Wang, Y. H. Li, P. F. Liu, Y. L. Wang, H. D. Zeng and H. G. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 578–584 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, J. Chen, K. Shen and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3571–3582 RSC .
Y. Su, S. Li, D. He, D. Yu, F. Liu, N. Shao and Z. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11989–11998 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and Z. Jin, Catal. Lett., 2018, 149, 34–48 CrossRef .
M.-L. Xu, J.-D. Cui, J.-H. Zhao, F.-T. Liu and K. Li, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 5490–5495 RSC .
M. Wen, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, T. An and H. Yamashita, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 555–569 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Buckley, Yearbook of Psychiatry and Applied Mental Health,  2009, 2009, pp. 344–345 Search PubMed .
Y. Horiuchi, T. Toyao, M. Saito, K. Mochizuki, M. Iwata, H. Higashimura, M. Anpo and M. Matsuoka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20848–20853 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gomes Silva, I. Luz, F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, A. Corma and H. García, Chem.−Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11133–11138 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Das, H. Xu, Z. Y. Wang, G. Srinivas, W. Zhou, Y. F. Yue, V. N. Nesterov, G. D. Qian and B. L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11715–11717 RSC .
X. N. Zhang, M. Z. Ge, J. N. Dong, J. Y. Huang, J. H. He and Y. K. Lai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 558–568 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, T. Muhammad, L. Ma, Z. F. Huang, S. B. Wang, L. Wang, J. J. Zou and X. W. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 181–191 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Wang, Y.-Q. Zhang, J. Li and P. Wang, J. Mol. Struct., 2015, 1083, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Trickett, A. Helal, B. A. Al-Maythalony, Z. H. Yamani, K. E. Cordova and O. M. Yaghi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, Y. M. Yang, Q. L. Sun, Z. Y. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Y. Qin and X. Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7654–7658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, L. Zhou, Q. Zhu, J. Lei, L. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20638–20647 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Y. Su, X. Quan, W. Choi, G. Zhang, N. Liu, B. Kim, S. Chen, H. Yu and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 69, 104409 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, S. B. Wang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17236–17240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Zixi Wang	Zixi Wang has been a postgraduate student supervised by Prof. Lai at the National Engineering Laboratory for Modern Silk and the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering at Soochow University since 2017. Currently, she is a visiting student at the National University of Singapore. Her current scientific interests include the rational design and construction of multifunctional MOFs and MOF derivatives with graphene composites for electrocatalytic and photocatalysis applications.
Jianying Huang	Jianying Huang received her Ph.D. degree in 2007 from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University. During 2007–2011, she was an assistant professor at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter. After that, she acted as a visiting scholar at Muenster University. From 2013, she was an associate Professor at the School of Textile and Clothing Engineering in Soochow University and then moved to the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University in 2018. She is selected as the 2019 Highly Cited Researchers (Clarivate Analytics). Her research interests focus on bio-inspired intelligent textile surfaces with special wettability, ATRP and click-chemistry reactions.
Yuekun Lai	Dr Yuekun Lai is a Fujian province “Minjiang Scholar” chair professor at the College of Chemical Engineering at Fuzhou University, China. He received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Chemistry, Xiamen University. He is selected as the 2018 and 2019 Highly Cited Researchers (Clarivate Analytics) and the recipient of the 2016 Journal of Materials Chemistry A (JMCA, RSC) Emerging Investigators and 2019 Advanced Materials Interfaces (AMI, Wiley) Hall of Fame award. His current research topics are bioinspired intelligent materials with special wettability, multifunctional fabrics, and functional nanostructures for energy and environmental applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the physical mixing methods. (a) Synthetic procedures of graphene wrapped ZIF-8 and the TEM images. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. (b) The synthesis of ZIF-8@rGO hydro-/aerogels. Adapted with permission from ref. 27. (c) Illustration of the preparation of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) MOFs/rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 28.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration presenting the synthesis by in situ growth. (a) The synthetic procedure of sandwich-like GS@ZIF-67. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. (b) Synthesis of a 3D rGO/ZIF-67 aerogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of wrinkled 3D microsphere MOFs@rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 31.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of sandwich-like N-doped porous carbon@graphene. Adapted with permission from ref. 51. (b) The preparation of hollow CoOx/N-graphene. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. (c) The fabrication of Ni2P@C/G. Adapted with permission from ref. 64. (d) The synthesis of NGO/Ni7S6. Adapted with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration showing the preparation of bimetallic Fe–Co/N-rGO from Fe–Co-ZIF/GO. Adapted with permission from ref. 74. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of bimetallic NixCoyO4/Co-NC from ZIF-67-Ni/GO. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. (c) Schematic illustration of FeCo alloy/nitrogen-doped graphene layers from the calcination of Fe3[Co(CN)6]2. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. (d) Synthetic procedures of NiCo2O4@graphene nanorods from the carbonization of ZIF-67@Ni-BTC. Adapted with permission from ref. 82.	 
O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e− → 2H2O (l)
O2 (g) + 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2O2 (l)
H2O2 (l) + 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → 2H2O (l)
O2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 4e− → 4OH− (aq)
O2 (g) + H2O (l) + 2e− → HO− (aq) + OH− (aq)
HO− (aq) + H2O (l) + 2e− → 3OH− (aq)
1/j = 1/jlim + 1/jkin	(1)
Jkin = Bω1/2	(2)
B = 0.2nFCoD2/3v−1/6	(3)

 	Fig. 5  ORR performance tests on Fe3O4@NGA. (a) Preparation process of the Fe3O4 @NGA catalyst, (b) CV curves of Fe3O4@NGA tested in N2 or O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH, (c) LSV curves of Pt/C, Fe3O4@NGA, MIL-900, and NGA-900, (d) LSV curves of Fe3O4@NGA, Fe3O4@GA, and edge poor Fe3O4@NGA, (e) chronoamperometric curve of Pt/C and Fe3O4@NGA, (f) chronoamperometric curve with addition of methanol at 600 s, and (g) HRTEM image of lattice fringes on Fe3O4@NGA. Adapted with permission from ref. 108.	 
2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2 (g)
2H2O (l) + 2e− → H2 (g) + 2OH− (aq)

 	Fig. 6  HER performance tests on Co–N-GA. (a) Illustration of the preparation procedure of Co–N-GA, (b) polarization curves of Co–N-GA, Co/N/GA, MOFs, GA and Pt/C and (e) corresponding Tafel plots of Co–N-GA, Co/N/GA and Pt/C in a 0.5 M H2SO4 medium, (c) polarization curves in a 0.1 M KOH medium, (d) polarization curves in a 1.0 M PBS medium, (f) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms, and (g) pore size distribution curve of Co–N-GA. Adapted with permission from ref. 49.	 
2H2O (l) → O2 (g) + 4H+ (aq) + 4e−
4OH− (aq) → O2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 4e−

 	Fig. 7  OER performance tests. (a) LSV curves, (b) Tafel slopes, and (c) Nyquist plots for Fe–Ni–P/rGO-400, Fe–Ni–P-400, and FeP-400 in 1.0 M KOH solution, and (d) durability test for the electrochemical OER activity. Adapted with permission from ref. 75.	 


Ni NPs/nitrogen-doped graphene	Graphene derived from MOF calcination	1 M KOH	205	160	280	45	1.6	
79

Ni NPs/ultrathin graphene shells	Graphene derived from MOF calcination	1 M KOH	240	120	370	66	—	
80

Ni2P/rGO	Low temperature phosphorization	1 M KOH	142	58	260	62	1.61	
142

Ni7S6/NGO	Solvothermal process	0.1 M KOH	370	145.5	380	45.4	1.95	
69

CoNPs/N-graphene	Polydopamine assistance	1 M KOH	453	67	400	65	—	
57

CoP/rGO	Two-step calcination	1 M KOH	150	38	340	66	—	
63

NG-NiFe@MoC2	Graphene derived from MOF calcination	1 M KOH	150	92	320	31	1.53	
81

FeCoNi ternary alloys/graphene	Graphene derived from MOF calcination	1 M KOH	211	77	325	60	1.687	
83

Co3S4/EC-MOFs	Vapor-phase method	1 M KOH	84	82	226	92	1.55	
143


 	Fig. 8  Overall water splitting performance tests. (a) Polarization curves and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots of NG-NiFe@MoC2 with different contents of Mo and Pt/C electrocatalysts for the HER, (c) polarization curves, and (d) the corresponding Tafel plots of NG-NiFe@MoC2 with different contents of Mo and RuO2 catalysts for the OER, and (e) LSV of water electrolysis based on non-precious NG-NiFe@MoC2 and precious combination of Pt/C//RuO2 in 1.0 M KOH. Insert: a digital image showing the generation of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles at the same time. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. (f) Polarization curves of FeCo/FeCoNi and Pt/RuO2 catalyst couples for overall water splitting in 1.0 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. (g) Linear sweep voltammetric curves of overall water splitting using Ni@NC-800/Ni foam as both the anode and the cathode at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 79. (h) LSV recorded at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in Ar-saturated 0.1 M KOH with an electrode rotation speed of 1600 rpm on NGO/Ni7S6 showing both the HER and OER. Insert: a digital image of the generation of hydrogen and oxygen. Adapted with permission from ref. 69.	 



Porous carbon@graphene	
In situ growth of ZIF-8 on GO and pyrolysis under N2	1.63	78	1.01	0.8	66	3.93	—	
51

Co/CoOx@nitrogen-graphene	
In situ growth of ZIF-67 on GO and pyrolysis under N2	1.552	73.7	0.93	0.83	47.9	—	0.9	
112

CoO@Co3O4/N–S-graphene	
In situ synthesis ZIF@S-GO and pyrolysis under N2	1.69	366.7	—	0.79	63	4.15	0.9	
66

Double-shelled N-carbon@Co–N-microporous carbon	Annealing core–shell ZIF-8@ZIF-67 under N2	1.64	91	0.92	0.82	51	4	0.82	
58

carbon@Co–N-carbon	
In situ growth of ZIF-67 on vertically oriented graphene and pyrolysis in a flow of Ar and H2	1.587	69.7	—	—	—	3.61	1.02	
59

NixCoO4/Co–N-graphene	Calcination of ZIF-67-Ni/GO under N2 and air	1.629	77.2	—	0.804	47.8	3.98	0.833	
77

S–Co9–xFexS8@rGO	Semivulcanization and calcination	1.52	66	0.94	0.84	—	3.97	0.68	
71

Fe0.5Co0.5Ox/N-rGO	Low-temperature oxidative decomposition	1.487	30.1	—	0.85	62.2	3.95	0.78	
116

CoCx/FeCo@C/rGO	Physical mixing of GO and MOFs and pyrolysis under N2	1.62	—	1.01	0.9653	—	3.9	—	
76


 	Fig. 9  Bifunctional OER and ORR performance tests. (a) LSV curves and (b) corresponding Tafel slopes of CoO@Co3O4/NSG-550, 650, 750, and Pt/C in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, (c) oxygen evolution activities and (d) corresponding Tafel slopes of CoO@Co3O4/NSG-550, 650, 750, Pt/C, and IrO2 in a 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, and (e) the overall oxygen electrode activities of CoO@Co3O4/NSG at a rotating speed of 1600 rpm in 0.1 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. (f) FESEM image of cracked double-shelled NC@Co-NGC DSNC and (g) polarization curves of NC@Co-NGC DSNC tested by using a three-electrode system in the full OER/ORR region in 0.1 M KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of mechanism of RhB photodegradation over M88/GO. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. (b) Schematic diagram of the mechanism over MIL-68(In)-NH2/rGO for photocatalytic degradation of AMX. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. (c) Photocatalytic mechanism for H2 production over MoS2 QDs/UiO-66-NH2/G. Adapted with permission from ref. 173. (d) Z-scheme of O–ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2 catalysis for CO2 reduction. Adapted with permission from ref. 174.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic degradation curves and (b) the corresponding reaction rate constants of RhB over M88/GO, (c) effect of different scavengers on the photodegradation of RhB with the M88/GO nanocomposite under visible-light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. (d) The photocatalytic activities of MoS2 QDs/UiO-66-NH2 for hydrogen evolution under visible light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 173. (e) Photocurrent responses and (f) CO2 reduction rate of O-ZnO/rGO/UiO-66-NH2. Adapted with permission from ref. 174.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) UV-vis spectra and corresponding photographs of MIL-125(Ti) (1) and NH2-MIL-125(Ti) (2). Adapted with permission from ref. 176. (b) Experimental linker spectra and corresponding photographs of the pure linkers. Adapted with permission from ref. 162. (c) UV-vis spectra of TCPP, Al-PMOF and 5 wt% NH2-rGO/Al-PMOF. Adapted with permission from ref. 163. (d) DRS of rGO, rGO + MIL-68(In)–NH2, MIL-68(In)–NH2 and MIL-68(In)–NH2/rGO. Adapted with permission from ref. 172.	 

NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/rGO	Physical mixing of GO and NH2-MIL-125(Ti)	—	—	Visible light	91 μmol h−1 g−1	
28

UiO-66-NH2/rGO	Physical mixing of UiO-66-NH2 and GO	TEOA	Pt	Visible light	41.4 mmol h−1 g−1	
20

5 wt% MoS2QDs/UiO-66-NH2/graphene	
In situ growth of UiO-66-NH2 on GO	TEOA	—	Visible light	62.12 μmol h−1	
173

UiO-66/Co–Mo–S/rGO	
In situ growth of UiO-66 on GO	TEOA	—	Visible light	67.8 μmol h−1	
183

rGO/UiO-66(Zr)/Ni4S3	
In situ growth of UiO-66(Zr) on GO	TEOA	—	Visible light	56 μmol h−1	
184

TiO2/UiO-66-NH2/rGO	Physical mixing of GO and UiO-66-NH2	TEOA	H2PtCl6	Visible light	270 μmol h−1	
185

UiO-66/CdS/rGO	Physical mixing of -GO and UiO-66	TEOA	—	Visible light	13.8 mmol h−1 g−1	
186

SiW12@UiO-67/MoS2/rGO-CdS	Physical mixing of GO and SiW12@UiO-67	Lactic acid	—	Visible light	1.27 mmol h−1	
24

CdS/NU-1000/rGO	Physical mixing of GO and NU-1000	—	—	Visible light	12 μmol h−1	
25

Cu-BTC@ZnO/GO	
In situ growth of Cu-BTC on GO	Methanol	—	Ultraviolet	191 μmol h−1 g−1	
187

Ni@C/g-C3N4	Graphene derived from MOFs	TEOA	—	Visible light	2.15 mmol h−1 g −1	
188

γ-Fe2O3/rGO	
In situ growth of MIL-88B on GO and calcination under Ar	—	—	Visible light	318.0 mmol h−1 g−1	
189

ZnO/rGO/Carbon sponge	Physical mixing of GO and ZIF-8 and calcination	TEOA	—	Visible light	14.6 μmol g−1	
190

g-C3N4/rGO/Mo–Co–S	High-temperature hydrothermal reaction and one-step sulfidation	—	—	Visible light	117.8 μmol h−1	
191

ZnS/rGO/CuS	Hydrothermal and cation exchange methods	—	—	Visible light	1.67 mmol h−1 g−1	
192


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
