Perovskite white light-emitting diodes based on a molecular blend perovskite emissive layer   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC01509D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01509D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8634-8642Perovskite white light-emitting diodes based on a molecular blend perovskite emissive layer†

        
          
            Che-Yu 
            Chang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Alexander N. 
            Solodukhin‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Shih-Yu 
            Liao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. P. O. 
            Mahesh
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ching-Ling 
            Hsu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sergei A. 
            Ponomarenko
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Yuriy N. 
            Luponosov
          
        
      *bd and 

        
          
            Yu-Chiang 
            Chao
          
        
      *c
aDepartment of Physics, Chung Yuan Christian University, Chung-Li, Taiwan 32023, Republic of China
bEnikolopov Institute of Synthetic Polymeric Materials of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Profsoyuznaya st. 70, Moscow 117393, Russia. E-mail: luponosov@ispm.ru
cDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei 11677, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: ycchao@ntnu.edu.tw
dChemistry Department, Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory 1–3, Moscow 119991, Russia
Received 
      20th March 2019
    , Accepted 14th June 2019First published on 15th June 2019AbstractPerovskite light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are attractive because of their high efficiency and narrow emission. However, most of the current research on perovskite LEDs with primary color emission is focused on performance enhancement. Only a few studies focused on perovskite white LEDs. Here, we realized a perovskite white light-emitting diode with a single emissive layer by mixing the emission from a sky-blue perovskite material and an orange-near infrared (NIR) organic compound. Compounds with orange-NIR emission are synthesized and the influence of the compounds on the perovskite films is investigated by absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy. Perovskite white LEDs were realized with CIE chromaticity coordinates of (0.3, 0.49), which are approaching the ideal pure white emission coordinates (0.33, 0.33).
Introduction
Organic–inorganic perovskites have recently attracted broad attention because of their amazing optical and electrical properties. Perovskite materials have been utilized as the light absorber in solar cells and have demonstrated a high power conversion efficiency of 22.1%.1 Besides, they have been used as gain media in optically pumped lasers, which show a low amplified spontaneous emission threshold.2 Furthermore, they are promising candidates for light-emitting diodes (LEDs) because of their tunable bandgap and high color purity. Perovskite red and green LEDs based on CH3NH3PbI3−xClx and CH3NH3PbBr3 were demonstrated in 2014 with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.76 and 0.1%, respectively.3 The development of the nanocrystal pinning method, realizing a pinhole-free emissive layer with small grain size, boosts the EQE of perovskite green LEDs to 8.53%.4 Recently, near-infrared LEDs based on two-dimensional (2D) perovskites have also demonstrated EQEs of 11.7%.5 White LEDs were also realized by blending an orange polymer with blue perovskite nanocrystals,6 depositing perovskite quantum dots on a blue LED chip,7 stacking a layer of cyan perovskite quantum dots on another layer of a red perovskite film with an interlayer in between,8 and by using a 2D perovskite material with intrinsic white light emission.9
White light can be obtained by mixing three primary colors (red, green and blue) or two complementary colors (blue and orange). In the field of organic LEDs, the most common structures utilized for the production of white light emission by color mixing are multilayer and single emissive layer structures.10,11 White organic LEDs have been realized using vacuum deposited multilayer structures.12 The simultaneous light emission from two or more emissive layers with different wavelength ranges results in white light emission. However, the fabrication processes of the multilayer structure are complicated. In contrast, white polymer LEDs consisting of a single emissive layer provide a much simpler device structure.13 In the emissive layer, a polymer host is blended with two or three small molecule fluorescent or phosphorescent emitters. Sometimes, charge carrier transport materials are also included in the emissive layer.14,15 Emitters in the red, green and blue regions are mixed with the host polymer for the emissive layer consisting of three emitters, while emitters in the blue and orange regions are blended with the host polymer for the emissive layer consisting of two emitters with complementary emission colors.
In this work, a device structure was developed for perovskite white LEDs with only one emissive layer. An emissive material with emission in the orange-near infrared range was introduced into the sky-blue perovskite layer to realize a perovskite white LED. The light from the emissive material and the perovskite material in different wavelength ranges is mixed to generate the white light emission. Commercially available red emitters and two synthesized organic compounds with emission in the orange-near infrared wavelength range were blended into the perovskite emissive layer to test this idea. Our finding demonstrated that the solubility of the emitter in a suitable solvent to dissolve perovskites is critical to realize this kind of device. Absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy were utilized to understand the influence of the blended organic compounds on the properties of the perovskite materials. Perovskite white LEDs were realized with CIE chromaticity coordinates of (0.3, 0.49), which are approaching the ideal pure white emission coordinates (0.33, 0.33).
Results and discussion
To form a perovskite film blended with emissive molecules, these molecules have to be completely dissolved in the perovskite precursor solution. Four commercially available organometallic or organic red emitters for organic LEDs, bis(2-phenylquinoline)(2,2,6,6-tetramethylheptane-3,5-dionate)iridium(III) (Ir(dpm)PQ2), rubrene, iridium(III) bis(4-(4-tert-butylphenyl)thieno[3,2-c]pyridinato-N,C2′) acetylacetonate (PO-01-TB), and tris[2-(4-n-hexylphenyl)quinoline)]iridium(III) (Hex-Ir(piq)3) were tested in this work. A clear perovskite precursor solution (1 M) of MAPbBr3 was firstly prepared in dimethylformamide (DMF) (Fig. S1a and b, ESI†), then the blended solutions were prepared by blending four red emitters with the perovskite precursor solution. The red emitter concentration was 1 wt% of the precursor solution. The color of the transparent blend solution changed to orange-red. However, residues of these emitters can still be observed even when the solution was kept at 70 °C (Fig. S1c–f, ESI†). The solubility of these four commercially available red emitters in perovskite precursor solutions is limited, which leads to a low concentration of the red emitter in the blend solution. As shown in Fig. S2a (ESI†), the supernatant was withdrawn and the residues were dried to get the weight of the residues for estimating the saturation concentration of the organic materials in perovskite DMF solution. The amounts of organic compound and perovskite DMF solution used for calculating the concentrations of the saturated solutions are listed in the table in Fig. S2b (ESI†). The saturation concentrations of Ir(dpm)PQ2, rubrene, PO-01-TB, and Hex-Ir(piq)3 in the perovskite precursor DMF solution are estimated to be about 0.750 wt%, 0.167 wt%, 0.759 wt%, and 0.110 wt%, respectively. The thickness of all the films prepared from these saturated solutions (Fig. S3, ESI†) is almost similar to the as-prepared perovskite film as shown in Fig. 2a. Moreover the grain size, and photoluminescence (PL) spectra of these films were found to be similar to those of the pure perovskite film. All these results indicated that the inclusion of these commercial organic and organometallic luminophores does not influence the properties of the perovskite films due to the low content of the luminophores. When we succeed in using the supernatant of the blended perovskite solution for the fabrication of the perovskite light-emitting diodes, the electroluminescence (EL) spectrum only shows the emission of MAPbBr3 without noticeable signal observed from the red emitter (Fig. S4, ESI†). Since there are residues of the red emitter in the blended solutions before filtration, the concentrations of the red emitter in the perovskite precursor solution must approach their maximum dissolution limit. Under this circumstance, we attribute the EL spectrum showing only the emission of the perovskite material to insufficient red luminophore in the emissive layer. A red emitter with a higher solubility in the perovskite precursor solution is therefore desired.
Therefore, two organic compounds, namely compound 1 and 2,16 were synthesized to serve as red emissive molecules for testing the idea towards perovskite white light-emitting diodes. The chemical structures of compounds 1 and 2 are shown in Fig. 1a and b, respectively. The detailed synthetic procedures for the novel compound 1 can be found in the ESI,† whereas the synthesis and some characterization of compound 2 have been published previously.16,17 The properties of the pristine compounds were characterized and compared by a number of techniques, including thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), the cyclic voltammetry method (CV), and absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy.
 Fig. 1  Properties of compound 1 and compound 2. (a) Molecular structure of compound 1. (b) Molecular structure of compound 2. (c) TGA curves of compound 1 (black) and compound 2 (red) in the air (solid) and under nitrogen (dashed). (d) Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) of compound 1 (black) and compound 2 (red) at the first (solid) and second heating (dashed). (e) Normalized absorption and (f) normalized photoluminescence spectra of compound 1 (black) and compound 2 (red) in thin films. 
The TGA results of compound 1 and 2 reveal an exceedingly high thermal stability of both materials in air and under an inert atmosphere (Fig. 1c), with decomposition temperatures (Td, for 5% weight loss) up to 477 °C for compound 1 and 400 °C for compound 2. The lower Td values for compound 2 can be explained by its sublimation upon heating due to a smaller molecular weight as compared to compound 1.
The first heating DSC traces (Fig. 1d) revealed that both compounds as-received are mixtures of crystalline and amorphous materials since they have a crystallization above the glass transition, which is less pronounced for compound 1 (see Fig. S5, ESI† for a scaled-up DSC scan region), followed by complete isotropization with melting temperatures (Tm) of 209 °C and 225 °C for compound 1 and 2, respectively. It should be noted that compound 2 together with a higher Tm has a more than 3 times larger value of the melting enthalpy (106 J g−1vs. 31 J g−1), which underlines its better ability to form highly ordered crystalline structures. However, crystallization from the melt is hindered and both compounds in the second heating DSC scans show a glass transition only at 147 °C and 76 °C, for molecules 1 and 2, respectively (Fig. 1d).
The energy values of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) were calculated from the oxidation and reduction potentials measured by the cyclic voltammetry method (CV) and were found to be −3.39 eV and −5.51 eV for compound 1 and −3.38 eV and −5.40 eV for compound 2 (see the ESI† for details).
The absorption spectra of the compounds 1 and 2 in films have a similar shape, but the spectrum maximum of the star-shaped compound 1 is a bit red-shifted (530 vs. 518 nm) (Fig. 1e). Compound 1 and compound 2 exhibit photoluminescence (PL) peaks in films at about 745 nm and 701 nm with a full width at half maximum of 97 nm and 120 nm, respectively (Fig. 1f). The PL quantum yield (QPL) was measured in THF solution and found to be 7% and 4% for compound 1 and 2, respectively.
Compound 1 and compound 2 were mixed either with MAPbBr3 or MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 perovskite DMF solutions to form blended solutions with a compound concentration of 1 wt%. Both compounds 1 and 2 show better solubility compared to those commercially available red emitters (Fig. S1g–j, ESI†). No residues of these compounds can be observed in the vials. Therefore, compounds 1 and 2 are appropriate for the fabrication of electroluminescence perovskite-containing devices via blending in DMF solution.
The influence of blending the compounds on the morphology of the MAPbBr3 and MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films was investigated by SEM (Fig. 2a–f and Fig. S12, ESI†). There are no pinholes in the pure MAPbBr3 film, and only a few pinholes can be observed in the blended MAPbBr3 films. The grain size is ∼200 nm in diameter, and almost every grain can contact the bottom PEDOT:PSS layer and reach the upper surface of the perovskite thin film. As for the pure and blended MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films, the grain size is slightly decreased and there are many small grains near the top surface of the films. From low-magnification SEM images, the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 film shows a wave-like pattern while the MAPbBr3 film is relatively flat (Fig. S13d–f, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  Morphology of the perovskite films. Cross-section and top view SEM images of (a and b) the MAPbBr3 film, (c and d) the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1, and (e and f) the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 2 on ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates. (g) X-ray diffraction pattern of the perovskite films. 
The XRD patterns of the pure and blended perovskite films were also investigated. All these patterns indicate the formation of a cubic crystal structure for all these films. At first glance, impurities cannot be observed from Fig. 2g. However, when the XRD patterns were presented on a logarithmic scale, low-intensity impurity peaks below 15° were observed, as shown in Fig. S14a (ESI†). There are no peaks observed for compounds 1 and 2, which means that the compounds are amorphous in the perovskite films, or the compounds have less crystallinity compared to the perovskite films. Such a property of the compounds is similar to that of the materials used in organic light-emitting diodes, which are usually in an amorphous state. This indicates that the usage of these compounds in this work is a good choice. Furthermore, when comparing with the as-prepared MAPbBr3 film, the diffraction pattern of the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 film shifts toward higher scattering angle (Fig. S14b, ESI†), which was consistent with previous reports.18,19 The (100) reflection peak changes from 14.9° to 15.2°, while the (200) reflection peak changes from 30.1° to 30.7°. Calculated by the equation d = λ/(2sinθ), the lattice constants are 5.95 Å and 5.83 Å for MAPbBr3 and MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3, respectively, which are consistent with previous reports.18,19 A split was observed for the (200) reflection peak (Fig. S14c, ESI†) of the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films, which has been attributed to the formation of cubic perovskites with different ratios of halides.18 Therefore, there might be a small extent of bulk phase segregation in the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films studied in this work, possessing different ratios of halides. Since the ionic sizes of Cl− and Br− are different, the different ratios of halides may lead to different structural differences and thus different energy gaps.20,21
The optical properties of the pure and blended MAPbBr3 and MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films were then investigated (Fig. 3a, b and Fig. S15, ESI†). The absorption spectra of both the MAPbBr3 and MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films contain exciton absorption peaks at 522 nm (2.38 eV) and 470 nm (2.64 eV), respectively, which are consistent with previous reports.19 The band gap, exciton binding energy, and Urbach energy have been calculated for MAPb(Br1−xClx)3 and can be found in ref. 19. The exciton absorption peaks remain at the same wavelengths for the blended perovskite films, but the absorption intensity is increased slightly in the absorption ranges of compound 1 and compound 2. As for the PL spectra of the blended perovskite films, two pronounced peaks can be observed (Fig. 3b and Fig. S15b, ESI†). Since the PL peak in the short wavelength range coincides with that of the pure perovskite film, it was attributed to the PL from the perovskite material. The PL peak position in the short wavelength range for the blended films is slightly red-shifted with respect to the exciton absorption peak position. This red-shift in the PL is attributed to the presence of disorder in the materials, which leads to the presence of an Urbach tail in the absorption spectrum.19 The excited carriers can be thermalized to lower energy levels, leading to a red-shift in the PL. In addition to the peak attributed to the perovskite material in the short wavelength range, another intense peak in the orange to near-infrared wavelength range can also be observed in the blended perovskite films. Since the spectra in the orange to near-infrared wavelength range resemble the corresponding PL spectra of the organic compounds (Fig. 1f and Fig. S16, ESI†), it is reasonable to believe that the compounds are successfully introduced in the perovskite films and contributed to the emission of light.
 Fig. 3  Optical properties of the perovskite films. (a) Absorption spectra and (b) normalized photoluminescence spectra of the MAPbBr3 film, the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1, and the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 2. The PL spectra of the blended films were normalized to the peak in the red region. The PL spectrum of the pure perovskite film was used as a reference and was normalized to its own peak. Confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy spectral images of the MAPbBr3 film (c and d), the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1 (e and f), and the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 2 (g and h) in the wavelength range (c, e and g) 500–600 nm, and (d, f and h) 600–750 nm. 
It is of our interest to understand the uniformity of the emitters in the blended perovskite films, especially when we discuss the mechanism of the perovskite light-emitting diodes. A confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscope with a wide scanning range was then utilized to investigate the emitter uniformity issue (Fig. 3c–h and Fig. S17, ESI†). The MAPbBr3 and MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films show only green and sky blue colors in the spectral images (Fig. 3c and Fig. S17a, ESI†). The spectral images collecting the light in the wavelength range between 600 and 750 nm are black, indicating that no light in that wavelength range can be detected from the pure perovskite films (Fig. 3d and Fig. S17b, ESI†). The colors of all these images correspond to the PL of the pure perovskite films (Fig. 3b and Fig. S15b, S16, ESI†) and indicate that no signal of the organic compounds is noticeable. However, for the blended perovskite films, in addition to the green or sky blue color from the corresponding perovskite materials, the spectral images collecting the light in the wavelength range between 600 and 750 nm are red (Fig. 3e–h and Fig. S17c–f, ESI†). The reddish color indicates the presence of the organic compounds in the perovskite films. Most of these spectral images indicate the uniformity of the compounds in the perovskite materials, except the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 films blended with compound 2. We assume that compound 2 can still be mixed well in the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 film but segregate at some locations.
We also try to use energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping and micro-PL to understand the uniformity of compound 1 and compound 2 in the perovskite layer, as shown in Fig. S18 and S19 (ESI†). Since compound 1 and compound 2 contain sulfur, we try to detect a sulfur signal to demonstrate the presence of the organic material in the emissive layer. The pure MAPbBr3 film on an ITO substrate shows uniform background noise (Fig. S18a, ESI†), indicating the absence of sulfur in the MAPbBr3 film. However, for the ITO substrates coated with MAPbBr3 blended with compound 1 and compound 2 (Fig. S18e and i, ESI†), the upper part of these images shows an intense (more red) sulfur signal, indicating the presence of compound 1 and compound 2 in the emissive layer. A lead (Pb) signal from the perovskites and an indium (In) signal from the ITO are also obtained. The Pb signal present in the upper part of these images (Fig. S18g and k, ESI†) and the In signal present in the lower part of these images (Fig. S18h and l, ESI†) indicate a perovskite film on the ITO substrate. Therefore, we believe that compound 1 and compound 2 indeed exist in the perovskite film. However, it is really not easy to distinguish the organic material is either in the grain or at the grain boundary. Besides, the spot size of the laser beam in our micro PL system is in the micrometer range (Fig. S19a, ESI†), which is too large such that it is not suitable for distinguishing the organic material is either in the grain or at the grain boundary. The spectrum obtained from different locations is similar (Fig. S19c–f, ESI†). Based on the observation in Fig. 3f, compound 1 is assumed to be uniformly distributed inside the perovskite film. Compound 2 is supposed to have some segregation as confirmed from Fig. S17f (ESI†). The underlying reason for low efficiency or even no EL signal at room temperature was mainly attributed to poor charge injection for large band gap perovskite materials and low PL quantum efficiency because of the presence of efficient nonradiative processes at room temperature.
The idea of perovskite white LEDs was demonstrated based on a simple device structure and energy band diagram (Fig. S20, ESI†). Apart from the LiF/Al, which was deposited in a vacuum, all other layers were prepared by spin coating. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) and 2-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-5-(4-biphenylyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (PBD) were used as the hole injection layer and electron transport layer, respectively. The cross-sectional SEM images of the devices containing compound 1 and compound 2 are shown in Fig. S21 (ESI†). The thicknesses of PEDOT:PSS, the emissive layer and PBD layers are estimated to be about 50 nm, 180 nm, and 60 nm, respectively. The hole carriers are injected from ITO/PEDOT:PSS into the emissive layer, while the electron carriers are injected from LiF/Al and transported through PBD into the emissive layer. The properties of these LEDs are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. S22 and S23 (ESI†). For the LED based on MAPbBr3 blended with compound 1, two electroluminescence peaks are observed at ∼535 nm and ∼750 nm, which are attributed to the emission from MAPbBr3 and compound 1, respectively. The Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) chromaticity coordinates change slightly with bias voltage to around (0.33, 0.65) at 9 V. In such a simple device structure, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) is about 0.01% at room temperature. In a previous report, a better EQE of 0.1% was obtained based on a more complex device structure with additional electron blocking/transporting and hole blocking/transporting layers in the device.18 Since MAPbBr3 is a green emitting material which is not suitable for white light generation, we use MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 with sky blue emission in the following experiments. Besides, since the emission peak of compound 1 is at ∼750 nm and only a small part of the emission is in the visible range, compound 2 with an emission peak at about 700 nm with more contribution in the visible range was blended with MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 for testing the idea of white light generation. Interestingly, the CIE chromaticity coordinates change from (0.12, 0.67) to (0.3, 0.49) when the bias voltage is increased from 6 V to 11 V. Such CIE chromaticity coordinates are approaching the ideal pure white emission coordinates (0.33, 0.33). The EQE is on the order of 10−3, which is better than in previous work.18,19 One previous report showed EQEs of about 10−4 for MAPb(Br1.86Cl1.14) and MAPb(Br1.08Cl1.92) based devices,19 while the other report showed no EL emission at room temperature.18 The underlying reason for low efficiency or even no EL signal at room temperature was attributed to poor charge injection for large band gap perovskite materials and low PL quantum efficiency because of the presence of efficient nonradiative processes at room temperature.18,19 The color rendering index (CRI) value of this device is 27.5 at 11 V, which is low when compared to conventional white light LEDs. The highest CRI value is 100, indicating a perfect black body spectrum. This is why incandescent lamps are capable of revealing the true color of objects. Typical inorganic LEDs have CRI values higher than 80. With the help of a color conversion layer containing multi-phosphor, the spectrum is fuller and evenly distributed, leading to an even higher CRI value. Therefore, the low CRI value of our device is attributed to the emission spectrum, which contains two peaks located at ∼500 nm and ∼700 nm.
 Fig. 4  Perovskite light-emitting diodes. Electroluminescence spectra of the device based on (a) the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1, and (b) the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 film blended with compound 2. (c) The corresponding Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of devices. 
In addition to the solubility problem of the four commercially available molecules, which showed only one emission peak of the device (Fig. S4, ESI†), here we also provide another explanation based on the difference in the LUMO levels. The LUMO levels for Ir(dpm)PQ2, rubrene, PO-01-TB, and Hex-Ir(piq)3 have been reported to be −3.1 eV, −3.2 eV, −2.7 eV and −3.1 eV, respectively.22–25 In contrast to the four commercially available molecules, the LUMO levels for compound 1 and compound 2 are −3.39 eV and −3.38 eV, respectively. Compared to the LUMO levels of compound 1 and compound 2, the relatively higher LUMO level for the four commercially available molecules is still a problem while considering the electron injection from the perovskite material into these molecules. Therefore, compound 1 and compound 2 have the advantages of not only higher solubility in the perovskite precursor, but also a lower electron injection barrier between the perovskite material and an organic compound.
The change of the electroluminescence spectrum and CIE chromaticity coordinates with the applied voltage bias is a typical feature in organic LEDs.26,27 The color shift with voltage bias in organic white LEDs has been investigated and ascribed to several factors, such as saturation of dyes,28,29 a shift of the recombination zone,30 a different voltage dependence of trap-assisted and bimolecular recombination,31 and competition between electron trapping on the emitter and unperturbed charge transport through the emissive layer.32 In all these explanations, the organic white LED device structure consists of an emissive layer composed of at least two emitters with short-wavelength emission and long-wavelength emission. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the emitter with long-wavelength emission are inside the HOMO and LUMO levels of the emitter with short-wavelength emission. This energy band diagram is common for organic white LEDs. However, the device energy band diagram of the device proposed in this work is different from the ones discussed in the previous reports. The HOMO and LUMO levels of the organic compounds are not inside the HOMO and LUMO levels of the perovskite materials. The organic compounds show higher LUMO levels, while the perovskite materials show deeper HOMO levels (Fig. S20b, ESI†). Therefore, the origin of the color shift of our device is explained as follows.
For better discussion, the EL spectra normalized to the peak in the short wavelength range are shown in Fig. S24 (ESI†), and the energy transfer between the organic and perovskite emitters is discussed. For the device based on MAPbBr3 blended with compound 1, considering a low concentration of compound 1 and assuming compound 1 is uniformly distributed inside the perovskite film, the charge carriers are first injected into the HOMO and LUMO levels of the perovskite material and recombine to generate light. The assumption of the uniform distribution of compound 1 is based on the observation in Fig. 3f. Part of the hole carriers from the perovskite will relax to the HOMO level of compound 1 and recombine with electron carriers in the LUMO level of compound 1. This means that excitons can be formed in both the perovskite material and compound 1. Besides, because of the overlap of the absorption spectrum of compound 1 and the PL peak of the perovskite material, the excitons in the perovskite may transfer to compound 1. The EL spectra consist of two emission peaks, even at low bias voltage (Fig. S24a, ESI†). With increasing the bias voltage, more charge carriers are injected into the device, and more recombination happened in the perovskite materials because of the low content of compound 1. As for the device based on MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 blended with compound 2, due to the segregation of compound 2, the content of compound 2 in the perovskite film is reduced. The assumption of the nonuniform distribution of compound 2 is based on the observation in Fig. S15f (ESI†). Most of the injected charge carriers recombine in the perovskite material when the bias voltage is low and the EL emission mainly comes from the perovskite material (Fig. S24b, ESI†). When the bias voltage was increased, the contribution from compound 2 to the EL spectra increased. This is because of more electron carriers that can be injected into the LUMO of compound 2 with a slightly higher LUMO level. Besides, the recombination zone may be shifted toward a region with more content of compound 2. This means that the excitons were firstly formed in the perovskite material with little compound 2 due to the segregation of compound 2. With increasing the voltage bias, the recombination zone shifted toward a region with more content of compound 2, leading to energy transfer from the perovksite to compound 2 and thus emission from compound 2.
In the future, many research efforts still need to be done to enhance the device performance. First, an electron blocking layer (hole transporting layer) may be added between PEDOT:PSS and the emissive layer for better exciton confinement. Second, a compound with emission in the visible range is required. Finally, the compound should have high solubility in the perovskite precursor solution.
Conclusions
In summary, two organic compounds were synthesized to test the idea of perovskite white LEDs. By blending a sky-blue perovskite material with an orange-near infrared compound, the red component of the emission of the organic compound was mixed with the sky-blue color to generate white light with CIE chromaticity coordinates of (0.3, 0.49). These coordinates are approaching to the pure white emission coordinates (0.33, 0.33) (for compound 2). It is expected that the efficiency could be further enhanced by device structure modification as well as organic luminescent compound design with a higher value of the PL quantum yield.
Experimental
Synthesis
The detailed preparation and synthetic procedures for the compounds can be found in the ESI.†
Device fabrication and characterization
The perovskite light-emitting diodes were fabricated on glass substrates. The glass substrates were cleaned with acetone, isopropanol, and de-ionized water, respectively. The ITO glass substrates were first treated with ultraviolet-ozone, then PDOT:PSS (Clevios P VP AI4083) was spin coated (2500 rpm) onto the substrate. After baking the PEDOT:PSS at 120 °C for 20 min, the substrates were transferred to a glove box for the following fabrication processes. The perovskite precursors (1 M) of MAPbBr3 (MABr:PbBr2 = 1:1) were prepared in pure DMF, while those of MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 (MABr:PbBr2:PbCl2 = 1:0.4:0.6) were prepared in a mixture of DMF and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in a 3:1 volume ratio. For the blended solution of a perovskite material and a compound, the perovskite precursor solution was used to dissolve the compound (1 wt%). The emissive layer was made by the toluene-dripping method. The precursor solution was filtered and spin-coated on the substrate at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and the toluene was dripped on the substrate at a time of 3 s after spin-coating. The emissive layer was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. PBD solution in toluene (2 wt%) was then spin-coated on the substrate at 2000 rpm for 90 s. LiF/Al was then deposited as a cathode to complete the device. The film morphologies were characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM-7600F). The photoluminescence spectra were recorded using a spectrometer (tecSpec MMS NIR enh.) with a 405 nm laser as an excitation source. As the standards in measuring the PL quantum yield a solution of 1,4-bis(5-phenyloxazol-2-yl)benzene (POPOP) in cyclohexane (QPL = 1) and a solution of rhodamine 6G in ethanol (QPL =1) were used.
The UV-vis absorbance was measured using a microspectrometer (SD1200-LS-HA, Stream-Optics Co.). The spectral resolution of the microspectrometer is 1.3–5.0 nm FWHM, and the detection wavelength range is 300–1000 nm. X-ray diffraction data were obtained on a Philips X’pert Pro MRD diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, λ = 0.15418 nm). The confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscope images were taken using a ZEISS LSM 880 with a laser with a 488 nm wavelength as the excitation source. The images of the MAPbBr3 film and the film blended with compound 1 or compound 2 were constructed using the wavelength ranges 500–600 nm and 600–750 nm, while the images of the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 film and the film blended with compound 1 and compound 2 were constructed using the wavelength ranges 480–550 nm and 600–750 nm. The electrical characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter. The EL spectra, radiance, and EQE were recorded and calculated using a spectrometer (USB2000+, Oceanoptics) and ISM-Nit software (Isuzu Optics Corp.). This ISM-Nit software connects the Keithley 2400 SourceMeter and the USB2000+ spectrometer such that the spectrum, radiance, and luminance can be obtained at the same time for each voltage bias. The spectrometer was calibrated with a spectroradiometer (specbos 1211, JETI).
Thermogravimetric analysis was carried out in dynamic mode in a 30÷900 °C interval using a Mettler Toledo TG50 system equipped with an M3 microbalance allowing measurement of the weight of the samples in a 0–150 mg range with 1 μg precision. The heating/cooling rate was chosen to be 10 °C min−1. Every compound was studied twice: in air and in a nitrogen flow of 200 mL min−1. DSC scans were obtained with a Mettler Toledo DSC30 system with a 10 °C min−1 heating/cooling rate in the temperature range of +20 to 290 °C for all compounds. An N2 flow of 50 mL min−1 was used.
Cyclic voltammetry was carried out using freshly prepared ultrathin films of the compounds, which in turn were prepared separately for oxidation and reduction measurements by repeated dipping of a glassy carbon electrode into a solution of the material in chlorobenzene. Measurements were carried out in CH3CN:o-C6H4Cl2 = 1:4 solution using 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 as a supporting electrolyte and using an IPC-Pro M potentiostat. The scan rate was 200 mV s−1. The glassy carbon electrode was used as a working electrode. Potentials were measured relative to a saturated calomel electrode (SCE). The HOMO and LUMO energy levels were calculated using the first standard formal oxidation and reduction potentials obtained from CV experiments on the films according to the following equations: LUMO = e(φred + 4.40) (eV) and HOMO = −e(φox + 4.40) (eV).33
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
C. Y. C. and A. N. S. contributed equally to this work. This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan under grant number MOST 106-2112-M-003-016-MY3. A. N. S. and Y. N. L. greatly acknowledge the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant 18-29-17073) for the financial support of the preparation and photophysical characterization of compound 2. A. N. S., Y. N. L. and S. A. P. also acknowledge the Russian science foundation (RSF) grant No 19-73-30028 for the financial support of the synthesis and characterization of the star-shaped compound 2. The authors acknowledge P. V. Dmitryakov and S. M. Peregudova for carrying out DSC and CV experiments, respectively, as well as N. M. Surin for measurement of QPL.
References

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png, accessed: august 2018.
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S. H. Jeong, M. H. Park, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, C. L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Yao, Z. Yang, L. Meng, P. Sun, S. Dong, Y. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606859 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wei, H. Xiao, Z. Xie, S. Liang, S. Liang, X. Cai, S. Huang, A. A. Al Kheraif, H. S. Jang and Z. C. J. Lin, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701343 CrossRef .
J. Mao, H. Lin, F. Ye, M. Qin, J. M. Burkhartsmeyer, H. Zhang, X. Lu, K. S. Wong and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cai, X. Wang, H. J. Seo and X. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 153901 CrossRef .
M. C. Gather and S. Reineke, J. Photonics Energy, 2015, 5, 057607 CrossRef .
S. Reineke, M. Thomschke, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2013, 85, 1245 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Kamtekar, A. P. Monkman and M. R. Bryce, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tang, X. D. Liu, F. Liu, X. L. Wang, H. Xu and W. Huang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 314 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Li, C. S. Hsu, F. M. Zhan and Y. C. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Bolink, H. Brine, E. Coronado and M. Sessolo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Kozlov, Y. N. Luponosov, A. N. Solodukhin, B. Flament, O. Douhéret, P. Viville, D. Beljonne, R. Lazzaroni, J. Cornil, S. A. Ponomarenko and M. S. Pshenichnikov, Org. Electron., 2018, 53, 185 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Solodukhin, Y. N. Luponosov, M. I. Buzin, S. M. Peregudova, E. A. Svidchenko and S. A. Ponomarenkoa, Mendeleev Commun., 2018, 28, 415 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadhanala, S. Ahmad, B. Zhao, N. Giesbrecht, P. M. Pearce, F. Deschler, R. L. Z. Hoye, K. C. Gödel, T. Bein, P. Docampo, S. E. Dutton, M. F. L. De Volder and R. H. Friend, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Kumawat, A. Dey, A. Kumar, S. P. Gopinathan, K. L. Narasimhan and D. Kabra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bin, H. Guo, Z. Liu, F. Li and L. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4851 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Brooks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2667 CAS .
H. C. Yeh, H. F. Meng, H. W. Lin, T. C. Chao, M. R. Tseng and H. W. Zan, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 914 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, J. Song, S. Park and J. W. Yu, Macromol. Res., 2017, 25, 944 CrossRef CAS .
M. Berggren, O. Inganäs, G. Gustafsson, J. Rasmusson, M. R. Andersson, T. Hjertberg and O. Wennerström, Nature, 1994, 372, 444 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granström and O. Inganäs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 147 CrossRef .
B. Hu and F. E. Karasz, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1995 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, G. Li, E. Wu, Q. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Wu, S. W. Hwang, H. H. Chen, M. T. Lee, W. J. Shen and C. H. Chen, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 488, 265 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Nicolai, A. Hof and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2040 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gather, R. Alle, H. Becker and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4460 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ponomarenko, S. Kirchmeyer, A. Elschner, N. M. Alpatova, M. Halik, H. Klauk, U. Zschieschang and G. Schmid, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 579 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy images, X-ray diffraction patterns, scanning electron microscopy images and confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy images. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01509d‡ C. Y. Chang and A. N. Solodukhin contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Properties of compound 1 and compound 2. (a) Molecular structure of compound 1. (b) Molecular structure of compound 2. (c) TGA curves of compound 1 (black) and compound 2 (red) in the air (solid) and under nitrogen (dashed). (d) Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) of compound 1 (black) and compound 2 (red) at the first (solid) and second heating (dashed). (e) Normalized absorption and (f) normalized photoluminescence spectra of compound 1 (black) and compound 2 (red) in thin films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphology of the perovskite films. Cross-section and top view SEM images of (a and b) the MAPbBr3 film, (c and d) the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1, and (e and f) the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 2 on ITO/PEDOT:PSS substrates. (g) X-ray diffraction pattern of the perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical properties of the perovskite films. (a) Absorption spectra and (b) normalized photoluminescence spectra of the MAPbBr3 film, the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1, and the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 2. The PL spectra of the blended films were normalized to the peak in the red region. The PL spectrum of the pure perovskite film was used as a reference and was normalized to its own peak. Confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy spectral images of the MAPbBr3 film (c and d), the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1 (e and f), and the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 2 (g and h) in the wavelength range (c, e and g) 500–600 nm, and (d, f and h) 600–750 nm.	 

 	Fig. 4  Perovskite light-emitting diodes. Electroluminescence spectra of the device based on (a) the MAPbBr3 film blended with compound 1, and (b) the MAPb(Br0.6Cl0.4)3 film blended with compound 2. (c) The corresponding Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) coordinates of devices.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Absorption and photoluminescence spectroscopy images, X-ray diffraction patterns, scanning electron microscopy images and confocal laser-scanning fluorescence microscopy images. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc01509d
‡ C. Y. Chang and A. N. Solodukhin contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
