Pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00306B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00306B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2789-2808Pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts

        
          
            Bingyu 
            Huang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Longbin 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiannong 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weijuan 
            Zhai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yaoshuai 
            Hong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ting 
            Hu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yiwang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ac
aInstitute of Polymers and Energy Chemistry (IPEC), College of Chemistry, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. E-mail: kai.yuan@ncu.edu.cn; ywchen@ncu.edu.cn
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China
cInstitute of Advanced Scientific Research (iASR), Key Laboratory of Functional Small Molecules for Ministry of Education, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang 330022, China
Received 
      29th January 2021
    , Accepted 22nd March 2021First published on 22nd March 2021AbstractHigh-performance electrocatalysts play a vital role in various sustainable energy conversion and storage technologies. Although enormous carbon-based materials have been developed and exhibited efficient electrocatalytic ability comparable to precious metal catalysts, the obtained blurry structure seriously hampered the understanding of the nature of electrocatalysis. Pyrolysis-free polymers are a competitive type of materials owing to their high-density uniform building units, tailorable chemical structure and diverse topology structure, which demonstrate promising catalytic performances for multifarious important reactions. In particular, the absence of a pyrolysis process promises well-preserved active sites, laying a solid foundation for mechanism research. In this review, the recent developments of pyrolysis-free polymers including porous organic polymers, metal organic frameworks, and linear conjugated polymers for oxygen electrocatalysis are summarized. The engineering strategies and their influence on boosting the electrocatalytic performance are concluded, particularly the impact of electronic structure engineering and hybrid synergistic effect. Finally, we further discuss current challenges and future directions for maximizing the advantages of polymer-based electrocatalysts without pyrolysis. This review aims to highlight the importance of pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts and their potential to become the guideline for preparing high practical value catalysts by virtue of their clear structure–activity relationship.
Bingyu Huang
Bingyu Huang obtained her BS degree in Chemistry from Nanchang University (2019). She is currently a PhD candidate at Nanchang University under the supervision of Professor Yiwang Chen. Her research interest focuses on the design and synthesis of covalent organic polymers for energy-related applications.
Kai Yuan
Kai Yuan is a Professor of Chemistry at Nanchang University. He received his first PhD from Nanchang University in 2016 under the supervision of Professor Yiwang Chen. In 2014, he joined Professor Ullrich Scherf's group at the University of Wuppertal in Germany, where he obtained his second PhD (summa cum laude) in 2017. His current scientific interests include graphene, porous polymer networks, semiconducting (conjugated) polymers, two-dimensional materials, and carbon nanomaterials, as well as corresponding hybrids for electronic and energy-related applications, e.g., supercapacitors, metal–air batteries, and electrocatalysis.
Yiwang Chen
Yiwang Chen is a full Professor of Chemistry at Nanchang University and Jiangxi Normal University. He received his PhD from Peking University in 1999, conducted his postdoctoral work at Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz and Philipps-Universität Marburg in Germany, and was awarded an Alexander von Humboldt fellowship. He joined Nanchang University in 2004. He was honored by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2014. Currently, he is serving as a Vice-president of Jiangxi Normal University since 2019. He was Dean of the College of Chemistry at Nanchang University from 2009 to 2019. His research interests include polymer solar cells, perovskite solar cells, supercapacitor, electrocatalysis for zinc–air batteries, and intelligent elastomers.

Broader context
To guarantee the large-scale production and commercialization of sustainable energy conversion and storage devices, low-cost yet high performance electrocatalysts for the sluggish oxygen-involved reaction (oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction) are urgently needed. Recently, carbon-based materials have gained tremendous attention and enabled comparable activity with state-of-the-art precious metal catalysts. Nonetheless, the exploration for a fundamental understanding of electrocatalysis is still unsatisfactory, which is mainly hampered by the ambiguous structure of carbon-based materials resulting from the pyrolysis process. Hence, pyrolysis-free polymers with a well-defined structure have become crucially important in electrocatalysis since the unpredictable, inactive aggregation during pyrolysis can be avoided, so pyrolysis-free polymers are able to provide definite structure–performance relationships. This review describes a fundamental comprehension of the oxygen-involved reactions and recent progress of pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts, as well as their corresponding application in practical devices. In addition, the optimization strategies for promoting the intrinsic catalytic activity of pyrolysis-free polymers by electronic structure engineering and hybrid synergistic effect are summarized. By reviewing this burgeoning field, we hope to emphatically highlight the significance of pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts and offer some critical insights to guide their prospective development.

1. Introduction
The balance between scarce resources and rapidly increasing energy demand has become one of the toughest global issues today. There is an urgent need to develop high-efficiency and eco-friendly energy conversion and storage technologies, for example, fuel cells, rechargeable metal air batteries, and water electrolysers.1–6 Oxygen involved electrocatalytic processes, such as the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), are of great importance for these sustainable energy conversion and storage technologies. ORR and OER contain discrete multi-step electron transfer steps and suffer from sluggish kinetics, resulting in a high overpotential and significantly worse performance of devices.7–10 Further investigation proves that the catalytic performance is largely relative to the energy barrier of each step. During the ORR process, O2 first spreads over the electrolyte and adsorbs on the outside surface of the catalysts. With the hydrogenation of the O2 intermediate, the O–O bond is then dissociated, which determines whether the ORR tends to be dominated by the 4e− or 2e− pathway. Eventually, the OH− (or H2O) molecule on the catalyst surface is subsequently released into the alkaline (or acidic) electrolyte.7,11–14 OER is also a complicated electrochemical reaction, which is basically regarded as the reverse process of ORR. Taking an alkaline solution as an example, OH− is first adsorbed onto initial active sites, creating *OH. After the proton and electron removals of *OH, the *O intermediate is produced. Subsequently, O2 can be formed by combining two *O species, or through two steps of proton-coupled electron transfer process, first getting *OOH and finally obtaining O2.15,16
Up to now, various oxygen electrocatalysts have been developed, and the platinum group metal (PGM) catalysts have the most widespread employment and exhibit the highest electrocatalytic activity. However, the scarcity and high cost of PGM are obstacles to their large-scale development. Also, in practical use, its poor stability and intolerance for methanol will severely spoil active sites, leading to the blockage of catalysts.17–19 Hence, for meeting the growing requirement, it is of great significance to develop PGM-free catalysts equipped with both splendid activity and outstanding durability.
Owing to the continuous endeavour of researchers, the performance of PGM-free catalysts, especially carbonaceous electrocatalysts, can be compared to PGM materials.20–23 In contrast, the synthesis routes for the majority of PGM-free catalysts necessitate pyrolysis, planning to obtain better activity, and corrosion resistance by virtue of a higher degree of graphitization. Nevertheless, the intricate pyrolysis process requires the precise element ratio of precursors, and it is possible to form unpredictable active sites during the pyrolysis under the high temperature. It is hard to elucidate how these active sites affect the ORR/OER catalytic activity and which active site is the genuine origin of the catalytic activity. Moreover, to answer the above-mentioned questions, it is necessary to determine the active sites in situ at the atomic level. However, this is very challenging owing to the complexity of the catalyst structures and the limited resolution of the characterization techniques, especially under operando conditions. Therefore, the structure–performance relationship becomes uncertain, which severely hinders the study of the in-depth mechanism for electrocatalysis.24,25
On the other hand, pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts with clear structure–performance relationships offer an inherent advantage for electrocatalytic mechanism studies and performance optimization of electrocatalysts. Abundant efforts and noteworthy progress have been made toward achieving a pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalyst.26–28 After the polymerization of small molecules, a much more robust network can be formed and represents extended π-conjugated structures via orbital hybridization. Due to the strong interaction between the bonding monomers, with the increase of the density of active sites, the long-term durability is also enhanced, especially in acidic condition. Moreover, electron delocalization throughout the backbone builds a uniform electronic distribution, ensuring better electrical conductivity.29,30
Furthermore, the electrocatalysts prepared by polymerization maintain the accurate active site structure with advanced performance. Hence, the pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts demonstrate robust power in electrocatalysis and have gained a lot of attention. The most widely studied materials in this field are porous organic polymers (POPs), including covalent organic frameworks (COFs), covalent organic polymers (COPs), covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs), conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs), metal organic frameworks (MOFs), and linear conjugated polymers (LCPs).
The quality of the catalysts can be mainly evaluated by the following indicators: catalytic activity, selectivity, long-term durability, and even the cost. As summarized in Fig. 1, multitudinous efforts have been devoted to promote these indicators. First, in electronic structure engineering, for example, the efficient intrinsic property is obtained by optimizing the electronic density of the active centres for moderate binding energy with the reaction intermediates.12,31–34 Indeed, the dopants and substituents are usually adopted to adjust the peripheral environment around the active centres. On the other hand, the reasonable design of the nanostructure, such as different geometric shapes, rational pore sizes, and an appropriate crystalline degree can expose more active sites and accelerate the mass transfer.7,35–37 In addition, many researchers have focused on combining the pristine polymers with substrates, which can be used as templates to reduce the stacking of adjacent layers of the polymer and simultaneously improve the conductivity. These hybrid systems are promising electrocatalysts, whose ameliorative activities are mainly attributed to the synergistic effect.38–40 Also, the electrocatalytic performance of the pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts is closely related to the solubility of the polymers. The interlayer interactions, along with the interaction between the polymer and solvents, collectively regulate the solubility of pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts. It is necessary to find a suitable solubility for fitting the different application scenarios. On the one hand, like the most effective ORR catalysts, the pyrolysis-free polymer-based materials as cathode catalysts are normally immobilized on carbon substrates for use. A relatively poor solubility represents better durability since most of the polymers have to overcome the leaching and decomposition problems that can deactivate the active centres. Thus, the insoluble property can partly dissolve the chemically unstable issue, maintaining catalytic activity well after long-term cycling. However, it does not mean that they are incompatible with the electrolyte systems. It only illustrates the structural stability, namely, the development of electrocatalysts that have robust stability, as well as appropriate wettability with electrolytes.41 On the other hand, a highly soluble COF has recently attracted noteworthy interest,42 as it is able to form a true solution that can remain homogeneous over one year. Hence, by rationally improving the solubility, the polymer electrocatalysts can be directly harnessed. Thus, the scope of application is definitely broadened, such as the flow battery, providing unique opportunities for soluble pyrolysis-free polymers.
 Fig. 1  Polarization curves of ORR, OER, and their corresponding mechanisms (left). Summary of the pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts, including porous organic polymers, metal organic frameworks, linear conjugated polymers, and their typical optimization methods (right). 
In this review, we summarize the recent developments of pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts, mainly representing the structure–performance relation on POPs, MOFs, and LCPs, along with their corresponding application in the electrochemical field. Notably, we recognize the limitations of the existing pyrolysis-free polymer-based materials, and put forward some suggestions for future design routes. We believe that this review can furnish some valuable references for the future preparation of high-performance electrocatalysts with practical application capabilities.
2. POP-based oxygen electrocatalysts
As a rising class of materials, porous organic polymers, particularly those with micropores (<2 nm) or mesopores (2–50 nm), have shown great potential in electrocatalysis. Their well-defined structure, high specific surface area, tailorable skeleton and nanopores in terms of the flexibility in regulating the catalytic active sites, and even the post-modified characteristics make POPs a vital platform for developing brand new pyrolysis-free polymer-based materials.43–45 Hitherto, studies focusing on synthetic processes account for a large proportion of the literature. Multiple monomers can be used to establish polymer skeletons with various pore constructions, or utilize particular functionalities to promote their unique features. Nowadays, researchers are still pursuing how to adjust these kinds of materials at a multi-dimensional level with a smaller microscale to obtain polymers with functional modifications.
In this part, COFs and COPs will be discussed in detail, and they are regarded as the most popular POPs. COF is a burgeoning class of crystalline porous organic materials, possessing a multi-dimensional structure established by diverse organic building blocks. Covalent organic polymers can be considered as COFs lacking crystallinity and periodicity. The ultrahigh accessible surface area of POP promises more exposed active sites. Relying on its pore-rich structure, POP provides a golden platform for the three-phase reaction, so that the oxygen species can more easily form contacts with the active centres. Meanwhile, the pore-rich structure obviously improves the electron movement and mass transport.46,47 Except for the large specific surface area, the tunable construction of POP is also very attractive since it combines the precise structural control of the organic synthesis process and processable mechanical property of the polymer.
Currently, the preparation and optimization of electrocatalysts are mainly based on the trial-and-error method, which is absent of precise design and is very costly. Also, the actual property of the active centre and mechanisms remain unclear.9,32,50–54 The topology design of POPs can be realized via changing the monomers. Hence, POPs are tailorable and tunable. Consequently, the predesigned active centres can embed into POPs at an appointed position easily, providing a superexcellent platform for deeply studying the mechanism of electrocatalysis.
2.1 Metal-free POP materials
Metal-free POPs are entirely covalent in nature and constituted with solely organic components. They possess high surface area, controllable pore parameters, high stability, and lower density, and are attracting tremendous interest as electrocatalysts. However, the ordinary POP-based catalysts generally fail to exhibit outstanding catalytic performance for its poor activity. Thanks to the wide-ranging flexibility in the choice and design of building blocks, the components and the physical and chemical properties of POPs can be tailored. Thus, heteroatom-doping and substituent effects are always applied as the most effective methods to improve the catalytic activity of POP-based electrocatalysts.

2.1.1 Heteroatom-doping. 
Systematic investigations have revealed that the activity of the active site is highly related to its local environment, especially the difference in the electronegativity with neighbor atoms.55 The heteroatom-doping strategy modifies the active sites by regulating the atoms that are around or directly connected to the carbon atoms. Compared to the carbon atom, heteroatoms (such as N, S, P, O, F, B and others) have discrepant atomic radius, electronegativity and electron spin density.13,56–62 The incorporation of different heteroatoms will bring distinct structural and electronic distortions. Furthermore, the physicochemical properties of the carbon active sites can be altered, such as the thermal and chemical stability, charge density distribution, and bandgap. In view of the different nature between heteroatoms, the carbon active sites that are close to the heteroatom-dopants can be precisely optimized through the charge redistribution to endow new properties, and meet the various demands for ORR or OER. The adjusted electronic structure guarantees an optimized binding strength with oxygenated intermediates, thereby improving the activity.
The N atom is one of the most widely studied heteroatom dopants in electrocatalysis, especially for ORR. After N-doping, the electro-neutrality of the carbon atom would be destroyed owing to the partial charge transfer from a nearby carbon to the N atom. This leads to the polarization of carbon, which makes it carry a positive charge, and become favourable for both ORR and OER. Meanwhile, the configuration distortion of the polymer will not be so serious owing to the similar atomic size of C and N. Additionally, P and S have similar electronegativity with the C atom, and are proven to improve the catalytic activity. Unlike the N atom, there is no obvious charge transfer that can be observed in the P or S-doped skeletons. The role of the P atom is speculated to provide an electron to the oxygen molecule 2π* states, which makes the O2 2π* states broaden and split. Meanwhile, the P-dopants enable the stretching and weakening of the O–O bond.63,64 Differently, the activity enhancement of the S-dopants may originate from the induced high positive charge and spin densities of the C atoms.65,66 Also, a less electronegative atom, like the B atom, is surprisingly discovered to be beneficial for ORR. The phenomenon of electro-neutrality-breaking still exists, but the electron-deficient B atoms are responsible for boosting the O2 adsorption since they are positively charged. Thereafter, the unoccupied 2pz orbital of the B atom can accumulate π electrons from the C atom and then transfer them to the adsorbed O2, availably accelerating the ORR process.67,68 In general, while the other heteroatoms with similar electronegativity may be more promising for OER, the introduction of the abovementioned heteroatoms with great difference in electronegativity with the C atoms can bring the polymers outstanding ORR activity, resulting from the resultant positively charged active centres.
For instance, the covalent triazine framework is a class of porous organic material with a 1,3,5-triazine ring. Owing to the introduction of nitrogen-rich monomers, electrons have a tendency to shift towards the nitrogen atom with higher electronegativity, leading to the formation of new active sites and a suitable band gap that electrocatalytic reactions prefer. Meanwhile, the forceful CN aromatic bonds in the triazine ring make the framework more stable; hence, the triazine framework demonstrates huge potential in practical devices.69 It is also reported that the polychlorotriphenylmethyl radical based COF with a small energy gap and low-lying LUMO energy level exhibits high electrocatalytic activity and durability toward ORR.70
Furthermore, properly increasing the proportion of heteroatoms is beneficial to enhance the catalytic activity. As given in Fig. 2a, metal-free COFs that are constructed by two building blocks with different amounts of thiophene–S moieties exhibit better catalytic activity than the corresponding COF without thiophene.48 Relying on introducing thiophene, JUC-528 possesses the narrowest band gap (Fig. 2b). It can reduce the ORR overpotential significantly by more than 100 mV compared to the thiophene-free COF. Also, the distance for the O-species transport in the framework is shortened conspicuously. DFT conclusively proves that a higher thiophene ratio in COF ensures better activity performance. Also, JUC-528 was examined for 25 h at 0.7 V vs. RHE, and showed a slight current density loss of 7%, demonstrating its great durability. Moreover, after treatment in a harsh environment that included a variety of organic and KOH solutions for three days, the as-prepared COF can keep the original crystalline and skeletal structures, exhibiting outstanding structural stability. For better summarising the electrochemical performance of the POP materials, the important parameters for JUC-528 and some representative metal-free and nonprecious metal-contained POP catalysts toward ORR and OER are listed in Table 1. As can be seen in Fig. 2c, Li and co-workers designed several ionic covalent organic polymers, and optimized the electrocatalytic activity and H2O2 selectivity by doping the heteroatoms to adjust the electronegativity through the whole skeletons.49 After introducing electron-deficient heterocyclic thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole into the viologen-based COP, the pyridinic N of viologen becomes more electron-withdrawing, resulting in partially positive carbon active sites that boost the adsorption of O2. Moreover, by changing the halide counteranion (F-, Cl-, Br- and I-), the H2O2 selectivity can be effectively optimized. The introduction of the F counteranion brings the best performance for the 2e− ORR. Also attested by DFT calculation in Fig. 2d, the charge states through the whole skeletons of COP changed the result from the different electronegativity of the halogen species, altering the binding energy between *OOH and the catalyst, which dominates the H2O2 selectivity. The stronger binding strength of *OOH ensures the stability of the O–O bonds, so the activity order for producing H2O2 is COP: F > COP: Cl > COP: Br > COP: I.
 Fig. 2  (a) Syntheses and structures of JUC-527 and JUC-528. (b) Optimized structures of PDA-TAPB-COF, JUC-527, JUC-528 (left), and corresponding calculated DOS and free energy diagrams (right). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Synthesis of BPyTTz-COP:Br. (d) The calculation model of BPyTTz-COP:Br with *OOH (left), and relative energy profiles for the ORR processes on BPyTTz-COP:X (X = F, Cl, Br, and I). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Summary of the representative metal-free and nonprecious metal-contained POP materials for ORR and OER




Materials
Strategy
Electrocatalytic centre
Electrolyte

E
1/2


E

j10

Ref.




JUC-528
Heteroatom doping
S atoms
0.1 M KOH
0.70 V
—

48



COF–C4N
Heteroatom doping
C atoms
1.0 M KOH
—
1.58 V

62



CAN–Pc(Co)-p
Substituent effect
Co–N4
0.1 M KOH
0.85 V
—

72



Metal incorporation


Co–PyPc NSs
Metal incorporation
Co–N4
0.1 M KOH
0.82 V
—

74



COFBTC
Metal incorporation
Fe–N4
0.1 M KOH
0.89 V
—

42



Cu–CTF/CP
Metal incorporation
Unsaturated Cu atoms
0.1 M NaOH
0.77 V
—

75



Macro-TpBpy-Co
Metal incorporation
Co ions
0.1 M KOH
—
1.61 V

76



Hierarchical structures






2.1.2 Substituent effect. 
In addition to doping with heteroatoms, the investigation proved that the electronic environment could be tuned by adjusting the substituents on the carbon skeletons or changing the ligands on the macrocycle structure. Wannakao utilized DFT calculations to study poly-porphyrins with a substitution of halogen atoms (F, Cl, Br) at the beta-positions.73 After substitution, the free energy becomes closer to the ideal value, proving that halogens alter the active centre bonding strength with intermediates. Among these atoms, the poly-porphyrin substituted with F atom had the greatest decrease in the overpotential by about 10 mV in both OER and ORR. Li and co-workers used a nitro-group substituent instead of single nitrogen-atom doping to improve the performance of the fully conjugated COP.71 They noted that by introducing an electron-rich nitro group into the COP backbone, the charge density of the original COP can be changed by more than that when only utilizing a single heteroatom, ensuring a more positive adjacent carbon atom environment that is preferred in ORR (Fig. 3a). The density of state (DOS) identified a lower energy band for COP-NO2 (Fig. 3b), so a better electron fluidity would be guaranteed.
 Fig. 3  (a) Designed COP molecular structure and nitrogen-doped sites (M1 and M2). (b) Bader charge density analysis (left) and DOS figures (right) of COP-B5-N1 (up) and COP-B5-NO2(1) (down). Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the edge expansion of CAN-Pc(Co)-o, CAN-Pc(Co)n, CAN-Pc(Co)-b and CAN-Pc(Co)-p caused by the presence of the edge-functionalized anhydride groups. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Also, reasonably designed substituents enabled changing the interaction between interlayers through the volume effect, and then achieving the effect of optimizing the structure. As given in Fig. 3c, by taking advantage of the acid anhydride substituents as edge blocking agents, the distance between the layers at the edge is enlarged efficaciously along with the increased size of the substituent, resulting in a reduced π–π stacking that may stint the axial electron movement and the contact with active sites.72 These attributes resulted in outstanding performance in both ORR activity and stability. CAN-Pc(Co)-p even enables a better half-wave potential (E1/2, 0.85 V) than the state-of-art Pt/C (0.84 V). Notably, for CAN-Pc(Co)-p, the mass activity (43.73 mA mgcat.−1) represents a 6-fold improvement compared to that of Pt/C. Along with the much higher turnover frequency, both exhibit the great intrinsic activity of CAN-Pc(Co)-p. After a long-term cycling of over 12000 s, CAN-Pc(Co)-p retained up to 87.6% of its initial current without aggregation. The excellent electrochemical stability is attributed to the edge substituents and contracted Co–N4 structure, which can avoid the electrolyte attack and the loss of the Co centre.
Introducing additional substituents is conducive to adjusting the electron density of the polymers, and the interaction between the active sites and O-intermediates can be optimized appropriately. In metal-free polymer systems, an electron is drained from the carbon atom upon the addition of electron-withdrawing substituents. This creates a delocalized electron environment and electron-deficient carbon atoms, resulting in a fierce O–O bond polarization and synergistically promoting electrocatalysis.77–80

2.2 Nonprecious metal-containing POP materials
As a result of impendency for finding a substitute whose performance can be comparable to that of the Pt/C catalyst, research studies on nonprecious metal-based catalysts have been brought to an unprecedented level. Nonprecious metal-based catalysts are normally composed of first-row transition metals, whose electronic configuration and physicochemical properties are easy to control. There are two possible mechanisms to explain how the introduction of a nonprecious metal can enhance the catalytic performance. One is a common statement that the transition metal can be regarded as an active site and contribute to the ORR activity. Inspired by various biological ORR catalysts that can promise high-efficiency processes in nature systems, such as cytochrome c oxidase enzymes, many polymer-based materials have incorporated with transition metals to form a metal–N4 structure for mimicking the enzyme system. The reason for the significant activity improvement is that the appropriate d orbitals of the metal centre enable the acceleration of the conversion of O-intermediates and boost O-involved electrocatalytic reactions. The other possible mechanism is that, except for the metal itself, metals arouse the high activity of the nearby carbon atoms. For instance, the excellent ORR activity of the Fe-pyrrolic N species in the single-atom iron catalyst resulted from the synergistic effect of both iron and carbon atoms.81 The single Fe incorporation brings a tremendous increase of the active sites, which contained Fe atom and eight C atoms adjacent to pyrrolic N. Another interesting research study confirmed theoretically that after coupling with metal nanoalloys, the donated number of charges from the carbon atom sites would obviously decrease, leading to an appropriate ΔG*O (oxygen adsorption Gibbs free energy), which enabled enhanced interaction between the C atom with the O-intermediates.82 Moreover, the metal species in the skeletons only act as the bridge to connect different components without being active sites for ORR.83 In this section, nonprecious metal-contained polymer electrocatalysts (including metallomacrocycle-based polymers and post-metallized polymers) will be discussed.

2.2.1 Metallomacrocycle-based polymers. 
Research on metallomacrocycle-based polymers currently revolves around porphyrins, phthalocyanines, corroles, and their derivates, which are equipped with a cavity to immobilize metal cations. The macrocyclic structure guarantees for the metal atom to be embedded into an identical local coordination environment and forms an accurate metal–N4 (M–N4) active site, constructing a homogeneous catalyst that can fully contact with reactants. It has been validated by many research studies that the introduction of a transition metal brings a more obvious influence than only using the aforementioned electron engineering strategies. This is because the metal-containing active site is recognized to have higher catalytic activity. The electrochemical activity of these metal-macrocycle materials without pyrolysis is affected by a lot of factors. The type of metal can be one of the most vital determinants, and we will carry out a specific analysis based on the macrocycle with different chemicals and electronic natures.
2.2.1.1 Metalloporphyrin-based polymers. 
Porphyrin is a macromolecular heterocyclic compound composed of four pyrrole subunits connected by methine bridges. Porphyrin has a great theoretically electrocatalytic ability because of its highly aromatic conjugated structure, which can greatly improve the electron movement during the reaction. In addition, after the deprotonation, the dianionic macrocyclic ligand provides an applicable condition for immobilizing the metal ions in the porphyrin ring. Theoretical calculations have also revealed that the conjugated systems are capable of reducing the work function, which represents the minimum energy needed to move an electron from the inside to the surface.84,85 Taking the ORR process as an example, the transport of multiple electrons from the catalysts to the oxygen molecule is the key core, so the work function is tightly related to the energy barrier of each step and directly determines the efficiency of the whole process. Hence, the porphyrin structure has great operability for designing the expected catalysts.
It should be noted that the construction and bonding strength of the metal species are closely correlated to the overpotential for metal–porphyrin polymers. Lin and co-authors systematically prepared a series of porphyrin COFs containing various 3d transition metals, and calculated their activities for ORR and OER. The configuration energy (CE) and crystal field stabilization energy (CFSE) are proposed as activity descriptors to describe the inherent 3d orbital energy of alkaline-earth metals and transition metals, respectively.86 According to the calculated CFSE, transition metal-COFs are divided into CFSE > 0 and CFSE < 0. Only when it satisfies CFSE < −11 can it complete the ORR process through the 4e− pathway with a low overpotential. As shown in Fig. 4a, the catalytic ability of the transition metal atoms can be estimated. This points out that whether the 2e− transfer or 4e− transfer occurs, largely depending on the types of transition metals, and both in ORR and OER, the Fe and Co elements display the best theoretical electrocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the transition metal-COFs (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) (left) and OER, ORR overpotentials as a function of CFSE in the four-electron reactions (right). Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Structure of the original Co-PyPc NSs. (c) Free energy profile for ORR on the Fe–Pc monolayer (left), Fe–Pc molecule at zero potential (middle), and the free energy change caused by substituting one Fe atom with two protons (ΔGsub) in both Fe–Pc monolayer and molecule as a functional of pH (right). Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Structures of crystalline COFBTC. (e) Exfoliation and dissolution route of COFBTC in alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of phenazine-bridged cobaltocorroles (left). RDE measurements of ORR in 0.5 M H2SO4 (middle) and 0.1 M KOH (right) with BP2000 carbon (green), CoTAC monomer@BP2000 (black), polyCoTAC@BP2000 (red), and the commercial PGM-free Pajarito Powder's catalyst (blue). Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.1.2 Metallophthalocyanine-based polymers. 
Similar to porphyrin, phthalocyanine is a planar macrocyclic structure consisting of four isoindole units. The fully closed π-conjugated and stacked structure of phthalocyanine allows for electron transport over the whole backbone, resulting in superior stability and conductivity, and creating a unique structure for electrocatalysis.29,87 After Jasinski first put forward that cobalt phthalocyanines can act as an ORR catalyst for improving the fuel cell,88 numerous research studies have been proposed around the phthalocyanine macrocycle. Along with the rapid development, the phthalocyanine-based polymer has become a powerful candidate. Even in practical application, it also shows nonnegligible potential.
It has been experimentally proved that the original polymer–cobalt–phthalocyanine nanosheets (Co-PyPc NSs) without any modification (Fig. 4b) enables a high 4e− selectivity toward ORR.74 The faster ion diffusion originates from the mesoporous-rich structure, which can offer a large number of exposed catalytic sites. The onset potential (0.974 V) and half-wave potential (0.815 V) prove that it is comparable to Pt/C, creating possibility for commercialization. Moreover, tremendous theoretical studies of phthalocyanine-based polymers also reveal their superiority. Wang et al. constructed a series of models related to iron–phthalocyanine (Fe–Pc), and took a deep and omnidirectional study on their ORR catalytic ability (Fig. 4c).89 They simulated the binding energy and reaction energy barriers of each model, including the Fe–Pc molecule, Fe–Pc monolayer and Fe–Pc with axial ligands on the iron atom. In particular, the comparison of the Fe–Pc monolayer and Fe–Pc molecule in the acid is highlighted. Their absorbing energy between the Fe atom and intermediates in each step are greatly similar, and the limiting potential of the Fe–Pc monolayer and Fe–Pc molecule are almost the same, proving that their catalytic activity is approximate. However, it is easier to replace the central Fe atom of the Fe–Pc molecule with two protons than form an inactive Pc ring. The demetallation is the main reason for the poor long-term durability. The free energy change (ΔGsub) is caused by the replacement of the Fe atom with two protons for the Fe–Pc monolayer (−0.8 eV) and molecule (−1.0 eV) at pH = 0, indicating a better stability of the polymer.
Furthermore, exfoliating the stacked polymer into single layers is beneficial to increase the density of accessible active sites. As shown in Fig. 4d, an iron phthalocyanine COF was made by using benzene 1,2,4,5-tetranitrile as the building unit.42 In an alkaline medium, hydroxide groups can easily be inserted into the iron phthalocyanine COF layers to achieve in situ exfoliation (Fig. 4e). Moreover, the hydroxide groups absorb on the Fe charged centres, solving the poor solubility of the original COF and forming a stable solution. The closed π-conjugated structure and periodic charged centres of COF ensure outstanding activity and conductivity.
2.2.1.3 Metallocorrole-based polymers. 
The corrole is composed of four pyrrole rings linked by three methynes, bearing a direct pyrrole–pyrrole link and 18 π-electron system.11,92,93 Compared with dianionic as in the porphyrin and phthalocyanine ring, the corrole becomes a tri-anionic ligand after deprotonation, making the corrole a favourable platform for chelating high-valence metal ions. Due to the straight pyrrole–pyrrole connection, corrole has a smaller cavity so that it forms shorter metal–N bonds after coordinating with a metal (1.88 Å in corrole, but 2.0 Å in porphyrin), leading to an agile conductivity and more stable bonding.11 Also, the enhanced covalency of the metal–N bonds in metallocorroles makes a more robust structure toward hydrolysis and decreases the metal loss during catalysis.94,95 More importantly, O2 reduction is always accompanied with an increase in the valence state of the metal centre. The high-valence metal is involved in the breakage of the O–O bonds, which can determine the ORR pathway. Only when a firm *OOH intermediate is formed, can the production of hydrogen peroxide be minimized, since hydrogen peroxide will seriously corrode the catalyst. Thus, the corrole structure is meaningful for promoting durability and selectivity.
By changing the metal centre, the properties of metallocorroles can get close to those of platinum. For example, a comparison of the ORR activity for corroles with various transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu and Mn) centres has been examined, demonstrating a clear relation between the performance and species of the metal centre.96 It is revealed that the metallocorrole activity increased in the order of Co > Fe > Ni > Mn > Cu. Although this research is focused on the corrole molecule, the metal electronic structure of small molecules is similar to that of polymers. Thus, this activity order also possesses great reference value for polymers. Research on the application of corroles is still in the exploratory stage and has aroused flourishing interest, but poly-metalcorroles (Fig. 4f) have been shown to fulfill the high catalytic requirement by virtue of their unique monomer characteristics and the synergistic effect of the metal sites.90 Not limited to electrocatalysis, the desymmetrized corrole-based COF, which combines extended π-conjugated skeletons with noncovalent π–π interactions between layers, can provide excellent absorption capability for photocatalysis.97 Thus, corrole-based polymers have revealed huge potential in extensive fields.


2.2.2 Post-metallized polymers. 
On account of the absence of metal sites in the original POPs constructed by metal-free building blocks, it rarely reveals high electrocatalytic performance. Hence, in addition to metallomacrocycle-based polymers, extra anchoring metal atoms on the backbone of prepared POPs to enhance the electrocatalytic activity are also highly desirable. Getting rid of the limitation for the cavity structure, metal sites can be introduced into the prepared polymer by absorption,98–100 cation exchange,91,101,102 and other methods, so it is more likely to construct new functionalized polymers.
Iwase and co-workers prepared a copper-modified CTF (Fig. 5a)75 and used it as an ORR electrocatalyst in neutral solutions. In this research, the Cu atom is applied to modify the as-prepared CTF, which has already been hybridized with carbon nanoparticles. The introduction of Cu brings a reduction in the overpotential by approximately 0.2 V, and the onset potential of 0.81 V (pH = 0) proves its superiority in pyrolysis-free Cu-based electrocatalysts. They emphasize that the interaction between the O-species and metal centre depends on the vacancies in the metal d orbitals. The as-prepared unsaturated Cu possesses a more accessible d orbital and smaller steric hindrance, resulting in a stronger bonding with O2 and the promotion of O–O bonds rupture. In the meantime, the insolubility for the highly cross-linked structure of CTF ensures better durability in ORR. Also, Gao and co-authors experimentally proved that pristine COFs are capable of acting as a support to load the metal species and manifesting great activity for electrocatalysis.91 NixFe1−x@COF-SO3 (Fig. 5b) prepared by ion exchange between NH4+ of the aminated COF and metal ions permits a high TOF (0.14 s−1) at the overpotential of 300 mV. Moreover, the primitive construction of the metal-free COF can be preserved after metal coordination. The simultaneous incorporation of Ni and Fe triggers a considerable electronic interaction, boosting the improvement of the intrinsic activity of each metal.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of Cu-CTF/CP. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic representation of the preparation process of Ni0.5Fe0.5@COF-SO3. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of macro-TpBpy and macro-TpBpy-Co in the presence of PSs, and corresponding OER polarization curves. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, constructing hierarchical pore structures that efficiently regulate the nanostructure also appears to be an ideal approach to improve the catalytic activity of electrocatalysts.36,103,104 It is acknowledged that micropores and mesopores have a great contribution to increase the surface area, while macropores prefer to offer adequate space for mass transfer.105 As given in Fig. 5c, a COF with micropores and macropores was prepared under PS template assistance.76
After embedding pyridine groups into the COF skeleton, Co2+ can be favourably coordinated with N atoms. Owing to this hierarchical pore structure, the OER catalytic activity is improved owing to the easier contact of the exposed Co active centres, and rapid mass diffusion through interconnected channels, resulting in a great OER potential of 1.61 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Ej10).

2.3 Polymer-based hybrid materials
To obtain a high overall performance, functionalized POPs can be composited with a conductive substrate by covalent bond or noncovalent effect. In a composite system, common templates such as graphene,40,111–115 carbon nanotube (CNT),3,108,109,116–121 TiO2,122 MoS2,123–125 MXene126 and others. are generally applied as stable substrates for polymer growth. Together with the large surface of the templates, the density of the active centres can be remarkably increased, while preventing the stack of polymer layers. Meanwhile, these templates offer abundant conducting channels to overcome the poor conductivity of the polymers. The interaction changes the electronic nature of the hybridization, and the synergistic effect between POPs and supporting materials has been proved to be an efficacious way to promote the performance of the catalysts.110 For better expounding the activity enhancement brought by introducing templates for ORR and OER, the electrocatalytic performances of some representative polymer-based hybrid materials are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the representative polymer-based hybrid materials for ORR and OER




Materials
Electrocatalytic centre
Electrolyte

E
1/2


E

j10

Ref.




PolyCoTAC@BP2000
Polymetallocorroles on carbon
0.1 M KOH
0.83 V (900 rpm)
—

90



FePPc/CNT-1.5
Fe–N–C coated on CNTs
0.5 M H2SO4/0.1 M KOH
0.80 V/0.93 V
—

106



COP-PSO3-Co-rGO
Carbon adjacent to the pyrrole of porphyrin ring
0.1 M KOH
0.72 V
—

83



pfSAC-Fe
Single Fe atoms
0.1 M KOH
0.91 V
—

107



g-FePc
FePc supported by graphene
0.1 M KOH
0.88 V
—

40



(CoP)n-MWCNTs
Cobalt porphyrin framework on MWCNTs
1.0 M KOH
-
1.63 V

108



CC-3
C–S region
0.1 M KOH
0.83 V
1.62 V

109



G@POF-Co
Porphyrin coordinated with Co2+
0.1 M KOH
0.81 V
1.66 V

110





For instance, a coated amorphous iron phthalocyanine layer (FePPc/CNT-1.5) prepared via in situ polymerizing metal phthalocyanine on multiwalled carbon nanotubes exhibited great potential for ORR.106 Because of the strong electronic coupling and the multiple π–π interactions that make FePPc/CNT-1.5 a stable composite, the demetalization of Fe–Pc can be restrained markedly, and bring a highlighted half wave potential and great cycling stability in both alkaline and acid condition. As given in Fig. 6a,108 an OER electrocatalyst ((CoP)n–MWCNTs) was synthesized by in situ polymerizing multilayer covalent cobalt porphyrin on multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) measurements demonstrated that only 400 mV overpotential was required to reach the current density of 10 mA cm−2. The durability test of (CoP)n–MWCNTs at j = 10 mA cm−2 also affirmed its structural stability. Hence, by compositing with CNTs, the OER activity and chemical stability can both be significantly enhanced. Xiang et al. designed a hybrid catalyst by self-assembling porphyrin-based COP with reduced graphene oxide(rGO) (Fig. 6b).83 For facilitating the attraction between COP and rGO, they used sulfonic acid side groups to modify the original COP. Owing to the introduction of positive ions, the assembly of COP with negatively charged graphene can be accelerated, and the solubility of pristine COP is promoted as well. Besides, as shown in Fig. 6c, COF containing atomic-scale Fe–N–C sites is anchored compactly to graphene by van der Waals force. The obtained pfSAC-Fe shows excellent half-wave potential (0.91 V), and four times the kinetic current density compared to Pt/C catalysts.107 The differential charge density distribution reveals that the electrons of graphene are attracted by Fe and forms an electron path, resulting in an effective reduction of the resistivity. In addition, pfSAC-Fe-0.2 held a remarkable stability for a less than 0.1% decline after 300 hours Zn–air battery measurement. Furthermore, upon increasing the current density to 100 mA cm−2, the battery could work over 300 mins without an obvious potential drop, displaying a great practical potential.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (CoP)n–MWCNTs, LSV curves and chronopotentiometry data at 10 mA cm−2 for different materials. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the synthesis of COP–PSO3–Co–rGO and corresponding ORR polarization curves (3 represents COP–PSO3–Co, 4 represents COP–PSO3–Co–rGO). Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Synthesis route of the pfSAC-Fe catalyst and differential charge density distribution on pfSAC-Fe and pfSAC-Fe with the absorption of oxygen (left). Kinetic current density (at 0.85 V versus RHE) and half-wave potentials of pfSAC–Fe–X and 20% Pt/C (right). Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The bi-functional activity and stability of polymer-based hybrid electrocatalysts bring it measureless potency for practical applications, such as a metal–air battery. Li et al. prepared a periodic regular porphyrin framework by the regulation of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and systematically used this compound to carry out detailed research on the zinc–air battery (Fig. 7a).127 In order to conquer the shortcomings that porphyrins are likely to aggregate and difficult to anchor on the conductive carriers, they adjusted the morphology and interface of the cobalt porphyrin COF (POF) at the atomic level with a carbon nanotube to obtain a robust but flexible film. As emerged in Fig. 7b, compared to the dense spherical pure POF, the POF is coated on the CNT (CNT@POF) with an ultra-thin thickness and the hybrids remain a clear tube structure. CNT@POF is used to assemble a flexible all-solid-state Zn–air battery (Fig. 7c), showing a performance even beyond the commercial Pt/C. Furthermore, by connecting two batteries in series, a commercial light-emitting diode (2.0 V) can be driven successfully. Bending the battery from 0° to 150° and then allowing it to recover (Fig. 7d), the LED remains illuminated continuously and steadily during this process, revealing an outstanding practical value and prospect in the field of wearable application.
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of the single-layer POF and schematic of a flexible all-solid-state Zn–air battery assembled with the CNT@POF cathode. (b) SEM images of pure POF, CNT@POF, and high-resolution TEM image of CNT@POF (from left to right); the inset is the contrast profile along the white dashed line. (c) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves at 1.0 mA cm−2 under bending at 0°, 90°, and 180°, respectively. (d) Photographs of a commercial red LED lit by two flexible all-solid-state Zn–air batteries connected in series when bent to various angles. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3. MOF-based oxygen electrocatalysts
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs), a subclass of porous materials with good ordered and crystallinity, are formed by linking inorganic nodes (metal ions/clusters) and organic ligands with coordination bonds.128–130 The expected skeletons can be accurately synthesized through utilizing diverse coordinate connectors to chelate with different metals. A variety of MOFs, such as [Fe2(Fe(tcpp))Cl], [Cu2(OH)(bpy)2(btc)3], [Co(mim)2], and [Cu3(btc)2(H2O)3], have been raised for catalyzing ORR.131–134 The well-defined porous architectures, ultra-high accessible surface area and superb adjustable structure at the molecular level, simultaneously allow MOF to serve as electrocatalysts and apply for understanding fundamental catalytic mechanisms in extensive fields.135
The performance of the electrocatalyst can achieve a huge promotion by adjusting the electronic structure and coordination environment. For instance, by modulating the electronic structure, even the oxidation states of the metal sites are very effective. Recently, in a research study given in Fig. 8a, Lian et al. focused on the interaction between the metal 3d orbital in MOF and the 2p orbital of an oxygen-containing intermediate. The different performance in the conductivity and catalytic activity caused by using varying ratios of Ni/Co to coordinate with hexaiminotriphenylene (HITP) has also been discussed in detail.136 The unpaired electron in the Co 3d orbital causes the distortion of the square-planar coordination, leading to a low crystallinity and relatively weak π–π stacking between the interlayers. This disorder configuration retards the electronic movement and brings worse conductivity. However, as shown experimentally and theoretically, Co3HITP2 manifests a much better electrocatalytic performance than Ni3HITP2. It is emphasized that the catalytic ability depends on the adsorption energy and free energy with intermediates because of the bond with oxygen-containing intermediates. From Gibbs free energy calculations (Fig. 8b), Co3HITP2 prefers to react with oxygen through the 4e− pathway. After forming an *OOH intermediate, the following steps in the ORR processes are all completely downhill, indicating that the subsequent reduction process can be carried out spontaneously. However, the Ni–N4 system has a weak adsorption energy with the O-containing species for it contains dz2 orbital lone pair electrons, so it is much easier for the intermediates to desorb and stop the reaction halfway.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of M3HITP2. (b) Elementary steps involved in the alternative 2e− and 4e− participated ORR pathway (top), different reaction cascades on Co3HITP2 and Ni3HITP2 showing the configuration and bond length of intermediate binding (middle), and free energy diagrams of the intermediates along the reaction coordinates at a potential of 1.23 V (bottom). Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic structure of PcCu–O8–M. (d) In situ Raman analysis of PcCu–O8–Co during the ORR process and proposed reaction mechanism. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Many researchers also use a conductive carrier to composite with MOF, aiming at improving the inherent low conductivity of MOF.135 For instance, Zhong et al. mixed a 2D conjugated MOF with CNTs, obtaining a hybrid material (PcCu–O8–Co) with excellent ORR activity, and comprehensively studied the mechanism for ORR through the change of the active sites (Fig. 8c). By analyzing the in situ Raman spectro-electrochemistry (Fig. 8d), with the increase of the overpotential, the CoIII–O peak (691 cm−1) becomes obvious along with the disappearance of the CoII–O peak (451 cm−1), indicating the transition from CoII to CoIII. A density functional theory (DFT) calculation was conducted to show the Co atom possesses a strong interaction with OOH−. These together prove that Co–O4 is the main active site, while Cu–N4 only catalyzes synergistically. In addition, they compounded PcCu–O8–Co with a carbon nanotube to strengthen the conductivity between the material and the electrode, further boosting the electrochemical activity (E1/2 = 0.83 V vs. RHE, n = 3.93, jL = 5.3 mA cm−2). More importantly, an E1/2 decline of only 16 mV could be found for PcCu–O8–Co/CNT. In addition, as proved by XRD and SEM measurements, there were no significant changes in both configuration and morphology after 5000 ORR cycles, highlighting its promising stability.
4. LCP-based oxygen electrocatalyst
The linear conjugated polymer is a one-dimensional polymer consisting of linear molecules, whose π-orbitals overlap throughout the conjugated molecular chain. The π-electron delocalization adjusts the charge states of the whole backbone. Also, the π–π interchain stacking efficiently increases to obtain dense and stable polymer structures.139–143 Depending on the adjustment of the molecular engineering approach, the properties of LCPs, including the electron transfer, crystallinity, and nanostructure, can be easily optimized to fulfill the requirements for different functional devices. On account of the special structure, LCP can deliver outstanding catalytic performance, favourable long-term durability and high charge-carrier mobility, and has attracted widespread attention.
Long et al. presented an LCP catalyst by bridging a bipyridine unit with B–N coordination bonds (Fig. 9a).137 The experiment and DFT calculation synergistically prove that by changing the unit connected with bipyridine from the catalysis-inactive phenyl group to the N-, S-, or Se-heterocycle, it makes LUMO delocalized throughout the whole chain, inducing a more rapid charge transfer in the conjugated skeleton (Fig. 9b). The gap between the HOMO and LUMO is smaller after the replacement, which represents better activity and lower kinetic stability. Meanwhile, the spin density and charge distribution both changed, which make the adjacent carbon atoms more positive and ensure more active sites. Thus, the half-wave potential for the LCP catalyst reaches 0.79 V without the addition of metal.
 Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of the P–Ph, P–Se, P–T linear conjugated polymers and side view, top view of the molecular packing between the linear conjugated polymers and rGO layers. (b) The optimized structure and corresponding electron density of P–T (up), P–Ph (down) models. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) The proposed preparation mechanisms for two routes of PANI–Co–CNT (+CA, −CA) samples. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
Heumann et al. exploited a strategy involving single dispersed cobalt ions coordinated by linear poly(ionic liquid) and bound to CNT (PIL/CNT).144 The as-prepared PIL/CNT can be used as electrocatalysts for OER, showcasing high activity with impressive stability. Zhang et al. developed a biomimetic bifunctional electrocatalyst by in situ assembly of a Cu(3,3′-diaminobenzidine) polymer on carbon black (polyCuDAB-CB), and explored its application in a N2H4/O2 fuel cell. Finally, they gave insight into the ORR mechanism of the Cu–N active centre in the as-prepared polyCuDAB-CB.145 It was demonstrated that the π-conjugated 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) can not only act as a ligand for complexing Cu2+, but also obviously altered the electronic configuration of Cu. The long-range π–π interaction between polyCuDAB and carbon black, together with the Cu–N complexation collaboratively accelerated the multiple-electron transfer by delocalized electron charge compensation, further regulating the intermediate adsorption/dissociation energy during the electrocatalytic process. Also, as revealed in Fig. 9c, Yin and co-workers mixed CNT, polyaniline (PANI), and a CoCl2 precursor in solution, followed by in situ reduction to prepare the polyaniline–cobalt–carbon nanotube (PANI–Co–CNT) electrocatalyst.138 They further optimized the size of the cobalt nanoparticles in the range of 2–4 nm by pretreating CoCl2 with citric acid (CA). In this research, they deeply studied the effect of CA pretreatment on the material structure. After CA pretreatment, the initial nucleation of Co has been enhanced because of the bonding between COO− of CA and NH2 of aniline. The complex separates during the self-assembly, and the isolated CAs actuate aniline to form a brain-like or nanotube structure of PANI, which is adapted with the CNT surface, leading to the increase of the interfacial adhesion. Also, the stronger π–π interaction generates the formation of a regular structure. PANI–Co–CNT with pretreatment establishes great activity and stability in acids, and is more likely to react through the 4-electron pathway.
5. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, compared with traditional carbonaceous electrocatalysts, pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts possess their unique advantages: (i) the precise and pre-designable structures of polymers (POPs, MOFs, and LCPs) provide a better platform for understanding the structure-catalytic activity relationship and fundamental mechanism investigation; (ii) the highly tunable porous structures (specific surface area and pore size distribution) benefit the mass transfer and greatly facilitate the access of electrocatalytic sites; (iii) the high physical and chemical stabilities of the polymers enable them to perform the electrocatalytic reaction in diverse media; (iv) the electrocatalytic active sites in polymers can be installed by bottom-up or/and post-synthetic strategies due to the wide-range building block selection; and other advantages.
Although the pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalyst with excellent performance needs to be further investigated, this kind of next-generation catalytic materials has shown infinite promise and even has the ability to discard the commercial noble-metal usage. It is easy to establish high active site density for pyrolysis-free electrocatalysts, and the intrinsic activity of each site can be optimized by changing the building blocks. Carefully designing or selecting the dopants, building units, and introducing appropriate substituents could significantly enhance the electrocatalytic property.
For non-noble metal-containing pyrolysis-free polymers, different transition metals can be easily replaced in a certain macrocyclic structure, such as porphyrin, phthalocyanine, corrole and others. Besides, various metal sites were successfully incorporated into the polymer skeleton via the interaction of secondary structural units. Thus, selecting proper centre metal atoms is an efficient strategy to regulate the intrinsic catalytic activity, because the suitable d orbitals of the metal centre can accelerate the conversion of the O-intermediate. Moreover, the polymer-based catalysts show better acid resistance than the monomer molecule, which display a potential for the practical application in fuel cells to a lesser extent. In addition, the polymer-based material hybrid with highly conductive substrates, such as graphene and carbon nanotube, were employed to update the electrochemical performance.
Lastly, the construction of hierarchical porous structures from crystalline polymer-based materials is considered to be a facile strategy to boost the mass transfer for electrocatalyst reactions. Many template-assisted ways have served to form the interconnected porous structures with high crystallinity and chemically stable frameworks. Furthermore, the in situ charge exfoliation of the polymer with abundantly charged centres can prepare the water-soluble 2D polymer nanosheets toward ORR and OER.
Overall, great advances in pyrolysis-free polymer-based materials have been achieved in the last decades, although this new-emerging area is still facing some challenges (Scheme 1): (i) conductivity is crucial for rapid electron transfer in electrocatalytic reactions. For carbon materials, an enhanced π-conjugation graphene analogue can be obtained after subsequent carbonization to further increase the conductivity. Thus, the limited ionic and electron conductivities that feature an intrinsic defect of polymers still need to be earnestly addressed; (ii) the intrinsic activity needs to be further improved, especially in acidic conditions. Although many pyrolysis-free polymers already represented similar and even superior activity to Pt/C for O-involved reactions in alkaline environments, almost all of them were inferior to the Pt/C benchmark in acid solutions. (iii) When thoughts came to realistic electrocatalysis, it is of great importance to construct polymer materials with sufficient active sites and robust backbones. In practical devices, such as the proton exchange membrane fuel cells, the stability and durability in these oxidative and corrosive conditions is still challenging when contrasted to that of the state-of-the-art Pt/C catalysts or even carbon materials. Instead of embedding in a graphitized carbon matrix, it is prone to structural degradation and dementalization in organic polymer systems upon harsh environment. (iv) Conventional electrocatalysts normally exist in powdery form, which have to be mixed with conductive agents and binders for applying as an electrode. The mass and electron movements will be significantly affected and hamper the full use of the active sites. (v) Another key challenge for practical application is the large-scale production of pyrolysis-free polymer-based materials. Most synthetic approaches require precise control and plentiful energy input. Hence, it is highly important to develop a commercially cost-efficient, universal, manageable high-throughput production process.
 Scheme 1  The challenges and future perspectives for pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts. 
In order to relieve the abovementioned disadvantages, we would like to offer our perspectives in improving pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts for more applications. Primarily, more configurations are required to develop the intrinsic superiorities of pyrolysis-free polymers, for example, constructing a fully conjugated structure that allows faster electron transfer within the backbone or rational design of the pore geometry for better mass transportation, as summarized above. Second, extensive structural moieties remain to be further probed. Notably, although the electrocatalytic performance can be indeed improved by heteroatom-doping, the limited regulation of the mono-heteroatom still cannot meet the practical applications. Multi-heteroatom-doping polymers that have been rarely studied may be more active for ORR and OER. This is because their electronic configuration can be further modified. Therefore, it would be of practical significance to develop doping strategies, and the synergistic or inhibited impact between these regulated dopants should be seriously considered. Then, to solve the stability issue of polymers in acidic medium, modifying the metal active sites by charged ancillary groups that have acid resistance may be an effective method. The final vital point of great concern is exploring diverse synthetic approaches to construct film or freestanding air electrodes. Freestanding materials can be used without post-fabrication, which will greatly simplify the assembly for practical devices. In addition to new synthetic chemistry, cutting-edge characterization tools and theoretical research on the electrocatalytic ORR/OER pathways and active sites is pivotal for fundamentally understanding the catalytic mechanism, and further improving the activity and eventually addressing the durability issues of the current pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52073137, 21704038, 51763018), the NSFC-DFG Joint Research Project (51761135114), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20192BCB23001, 20202ZDB01009).
Notes and references
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, D. Cheng, D. Cao and X. C. Zeng, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 339–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Gu, M. Wang, Z. Zhang, W. Pan, Z. Jiang, H. Zheng, M. Lucero, H. Wang, G. E. Sterbinsky, Q. Ma, Y.-G. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Li, H. Dai and Y. Liang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 684–692 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenay, Science, 2017, 357, 479–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Jing, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3565–3604 RSC .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. DiAscro, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2313–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, S. Lei, A. C. Wang, L. K. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. K. Yang and Z. Q. Lin, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104525 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nie, L. Li and Z. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2168–2201 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Higgins, A. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167–3192 RSC .
W. Zhang, W. Lai and R. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3717–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17763–17770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, C. Chen, Y. C. Huang, C. L. Dong, C. J. Chen, R. S. Liu, C. Wang, K. Yan, Y. Li and G. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20118–20126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, L. Shang, T. Zhang and G. I. N. Waterhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2003018 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Zhang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2620–2645 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Kong, J. Kim, S. Choi, F. Ciucci, Y. Hao, S. Yang, Z. Shao and J. Lim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 9154–9196 RSC .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. G. Wang, W. Chen, R. Xu, L. Zheng, J. Zhang, J. Luo, R. A. Shen, Y. Zhu, W. C. Cheong, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17269–17272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wan, Z. Zhao, H. Shang, B. Peng, W. Chen, J. Pei, L. Zheng, J. Dong, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8431–8439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, R. Zhang, G. Wan, W. Yang, X. Wan, H. Zhou, J. Shui, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Zhao, B. Q. Li, J. N. Liu and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4448–4463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Yu, M. Dou, Z. Zhang, L. Dai and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14724–14730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Smith, B. P. Benke, Z. Cao, Y. Kim, E. M. Nichols, K. Kim and C. J. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9684–9688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, P. An, Y. Shi, J. Han, Z. Yang, C. Long, J. Guo, S. Zhao, K. Zhao, H. Yin, L. Zheng, B. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Zhang, G. Li and Z. Tang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abel, S. Clair, O. Ourdjini, M. Mossoyan and L. Porte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1203–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim, S. Jun, Y. Ha, R. K. Yadav, A. Kumar, C. Y. Yoo, I. Oh, H. K. Lim, J. W. Shin, R. Ryoo, H. Kim, J. Kim, J.
O. Baeg and H. Ihee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1873 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803625 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903815 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Wang, T.-N. Gao, H. Xiong, R. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Song, S. Dai and Z.-A. Qiao, CCS Chem., 2021, 3, 870–881 CrossRef .
Y. Han, Y. Wang, R. Xu, W. Chen, L. Zheng, A. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2348–2352 RSC .
H. Ma, B. Liu, B. Li, L. Zhang, Y. G. Li, H. Q. Tan, H. Y. Zang and G. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5897–5903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, Y. Tang, X. Zhang, Y. Oshima, Q. Chen and D. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706330 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Liang, S. Q. Xu, L. Zhang, R. H. A, P. Chen, F. Z. Cui, Q. Y. Qi, J. Sun and X. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4609 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Sa, D. J. Seo, J. Woo, J. T. Lim, J. Y. Cheon, S. Y. Yang, J. M. Lee, D. Kang, T. J. Shin, H. S. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, C. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. Y. Kim and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15046–15056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, H. Li, C. Fan, Q. Meng, Y. Tang, X. Qiu, G. Fu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Jiang, Y. Z. Lu, X. Y. Lv, D. X. Han, Q. X. Zhang, L. Niu and W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1263–1271 CrossRef CAS .
D.-G. Wang, T. Qiu, W. Guo, Z. Liang, H. Tabassum, D. Xia and R. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 688–728 RSC .
P. Peng, L. Shi, F. Huo, S. Zhang, C. Mi, Y. Cheng and Z. Xiang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 878–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Singh, E. J. Bae and J. S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3165–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bildirir, V. G. Gregoriou, A. Avgeropoulos, U. Scherfd and C. L. Chochos, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 546–556 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Peng, S. Peng, Z. Zhang, Y. Tong, P. W. Miller and X. P. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2566–2595 RSC .
C. Tang, H. F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 881–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Z. Yan, C. Chen and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10121–10211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, C. Li, L. Zhang, H. Li, L. Zhu, D. Yang, Q. Fang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8104–8108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Zhao, W. Hu, Q. Cheng, L. Yang, Z. Hu, Y. A. Liu, K. Wen and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 8553–8560 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Chen, M. Zhu, M. Zuo, S. Q. Chu, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. W. Liang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1627–1633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mun, S. Lee, K. Kim, S. Kim, S. Lee, J. W. Han and J. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6254–6262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, J. S. Lee, M. L. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 816–829 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Y. Jia, S. Mukerjee and S. L. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10126–10141 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, Y. Wang, C. Jiang and L. Lu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2396–2409 RSC .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J. Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yuan, D. Lutzenkirchen-Hecht, L. Li, L. Shuai, Y. Li, R. Cao, M. Qiu, X. Zhuang, M. K. H. Leung, Y. Chen and U. Scherf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6937–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, W. Chen, H. Xiao, Y. Gong, Z. Li, L. Zheng, X. Zheng, W. Yan, W. C. Cheong, R. Shen, N. Fu, L. Gu, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, J. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800588 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Wang, L. Dai and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 536–544 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, Z. H. Zhou, J. N. Guo and Z. H. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1308–1314 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Li, Y. Xiao, R. Zeng, X. Tang, W. Yang, J. Huang, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7538–7541 RSC .
C. Yang, Z.-D. Yang, H. Dong, N. Sun, Y. Lu, F.-M. Zhang and G. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, Y.-P. Deng, G. Li, Z. P. Cano, X. Wang, D. Luo, Y. Liu, D. Wang and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2464–2472 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Lu, Z. Fu, Y. Tang, D. Ma and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
I.-Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H.-J. Choi, J.-M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6138–6145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, C. Hu, R. Amal, L. Dai and X. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4536–4563 RSC .
J. L. Liu, Y. J. Hu and J. J. Cao, Catal. Commun., 2015, 66, 91–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, M. Li, H. Phan, D. Wang, T. S. Herng, J. Ding, Z. Lu and J. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8007–8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, P. Peng, Z. J. Liao, F. Huo, Y. J. Liu, X. H. Shao and Z. H. Xiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3728–3733 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Yu, M. Dou, Z. Zhang and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17524–17530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wannakao, T. Maihom, K. Kongpatpanich, J. Limtrakul and V. Promarak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29540–29548 RSC .
K. Selvaraju and G. A. Babu, Ionics, 2019, 25, 5939–5947 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwase, T. Yoshioka, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11068–11072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, T. Langenhahn, M. Ye, C. Schlesiger, S. Praetz, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6623–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Tian, X. Duan, H. Sun, S. Liu and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Baran, H. Gronbeck and A. Hellman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1320–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443–15449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Osmieri, A. H. A. Monteverde Videla, P. Ocón and S. Specchia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17796–17817 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, D. Cheng, H. Xu, X. Zeng, X. Wan, J. Shui, Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6626–6631 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, R. Cao, L. Li, B. Huang, W. Zhai, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25919–25930 RSC .
J. Guo, C. Y. Lin, Z. Xia and Z. Xiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12567–12572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Shui, L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Liu, L. Dai and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804799 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. C. Goddeti, J. Y. Park and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8875–8878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lin, L. Zhang, Z. Zhao and Z. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606635 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Huang, K. H. Lee, Y. Yue, X. Xu, S. Irle, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16587–16593 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jasinski, Nature, 1964, 201, 1212–1213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Yuan, Y. Li and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11633–11641 RSC .
A. Friedman, L. Landau, S. Gonen, Z. Gross and L. Elbaz, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, L. L. Gong, X. Q. He, X. M. Su, L. H. Xiao and F. Luo, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 4995–5003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Qi, Z. Niu, Y. Peng, C. Shan, G. Verma, L. Wojtas, Z. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Feng, Y. S. Chen and S. Ma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14443–14450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Lei, C. Y. Liu, Z. J. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, M. N. Zhang, X. M. Chang, W. Zhang and R. Cao, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6429–6437 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Teo, J. Y. Hwang, J. Termini, Z. Gross and H. B. Gray, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 2711–2729 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Barata, M. G. Neves, M. A. Faustino, A. C. Tome and J. A. Cavaleiro, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3192–3253 CrossRef CAS .
N. Levy, A. Mahammed, M. Kosa, D. T. Major, Z. Gross and L. Elbaz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14080–14084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. Dai, Y. Peng, Z. Niu, Q. Sun, C. Shan, H. Yang, G. Verma, L. Wojtas, D. Yuan, Z. Zhang, H. Dong, X. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Feng and S. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4354–4359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ao, W. Zhang, Z. Li, J. G. Li, L. Soule, X. Huang, W. H. Chiang, H. M. Chen, C. Wang, M. Liu and X. C. Zeng, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11853–11862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Ye, S. Li, X. Zhao, N. V. Tarakina, C. Teutloff, W. Y. Chow, R. Bittl and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Zhang, W. Samarakoon, W. Shan, D. A. Cullen, S. Karakalos, M. Chen, D. Gu, K. L. More, G. Wang, Z. Feng, Z. Wang and G. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18971–18980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, C. Peng, Y. Su, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Peng, Q. Sun, X. Liu and W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20988–20995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. Gan, J. Xu, Y. Wang, H. Lv, S. Fang, Z. Wang, Z. Deng, X. Wang, P. Liu, W. Guo, B. Mao, H. Wang, T. Yao, X. Hong, S. Wei, X. Duan, J. Luo and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12643–12650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lin, D. Zhang, Z. Zhao and Z. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703646 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Liu, M. Li, M. Yu, Y. Luo, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3097–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, X. Duan, S. Liang, M. Zhang and H. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6144–6182 RSC .
X. X. Wang, B. Wang, J. Zhong, F. P. Zhao, N. Han, W. J. Huang, M. Zeng, J. Fan and Y. G. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1497–1506 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, L. Shi, F. Huo, C. Mi, X. Wu, S. Zhang and Z. Xiang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Jia, Z. J. Sun, D. C. Jiang and P. W. Du, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4586–4593 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Liu, H. Li, J. Chen, J. Fei, Z. Yu, Z. Yuan, C. Wang, H. Zheng, Z. Liu, M. Xu, G. Henkelman, L. Wei and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3309–3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Q. Li, S. Y. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Y. Chen, Z. J. Xia and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901301 CrossRef .
Q. Zuo, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 9344–9348 RSC .
J. Wang, X. Huang, S. Xi, H. Xu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19162–19167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yuan, P. Y. Guo-Wang, T. Hu, L. Shi, R. Zeng, M. Forster, T. Pichler, Y. W. Chen and U. Scherf, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7403–7411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, T. Hu, Y. Z. Xu, R. Graf, G. Brunklaus, M. Forster, Y. W. Chen and U. Scherf, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 822–828 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, T. Hu, Y. Z. Xu, R. Graf, L. Shi, M. Forster, T. Pichler, T. Riedl, Y. W. Chen and U. Scherf, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 278–285 RSC .
S. Liu, H. B. Yang, S. F. Hung, J. Ding, W. Cai, L. Liu, J. Gao, X. Li, X. Ren, Z. Kuang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 798–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, J. Chen, L. Huang, R. Ye, J. Xu and Y. F. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6595–6599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, R. Thapa, H. Kim, X. Xu, M. Gyu Kim, Q. Li, N. Park, M. Liu and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2076 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Hijazi, T. Bourgeteau, R. Cornut, A. Morozan, A. Filoramo, J. Leroy, V. Derycke, B. Jousselme and S. Campidelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6348–6354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Wei, G. Q. Yu, Y. Naruta and J. G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6659–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Meng, H. T. Lei, X. L. Li, J. Qi, W. Zhang and R. Cao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4551–4560 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Xu, T. Peng, C. Zhang, T. Li, I. Hussain, J. Wang and B. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. M. Gali, A. Slassi, D. Beljonne and P. Samorì, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002846 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, X. D. Zhuang, T. Hu, L. Shi, S. Sfaelou, U. Polnick, M. Forster, T. Pichler, T. Riedl, X. L. Feng, Y. W. Chen and U. Scherf, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 709–715 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, X. Zhuang, H. Fu, G. Brunklaus, M. Forster, Y. Chen, X. Feng and U. Scherf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6858–6863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. Zhuang, F. Lv, H. Zhu, L. Zhou, M. Luo, J. Zhu, Z. Lang, S. Feng, W. Chen, L. Mai and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803220 CrossRef PubMed .
B.-Q. Li, S.-Y. Zhang, B. Wang, Z.-J. Xia, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1723–1729 RSC .
Y. S. Wei, M. Zhang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12089–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia, S. Q. Zang and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4634–4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. J. Rogge, A. Bavykina, J. Hajek, H. Garcia, A. I. Olivos-Suarez, A. Sepulveda-Escribano, A. Vimont, G. Clet, P. Bazin, F. Kapteijn, M. Daturi, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, I. X. F. X. Llabres, V. Van Speybroeck and J. Gascon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3134–3184 RSC .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cho, S. H. Han and M. P. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15301–15305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. X. Yin, B. H. Chen, X. B. He, P. L. Lv, C. Y. Ye and D. J. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 55–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, L. Yang, P. Yu, X. Wei and L. Mao, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 19, 29–31 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, K. H. Ly, M. Wang, Y. Krupskaya, X. Han, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, V. Kataev, B. Buchner, I. M. Weidinger, S. Kaskel, P. Liu, M. Chen, R. Dong and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10677–10682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lian, W. Yang, C. Zhang, H. Sun, Z. Deng, W. Xu, L. Song, Z. Ouyang, Z. Wang, J. Guo and Y. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 286–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Long, D. Li, B. Wang, Z. Jiang, W. Xu, B. Wang, D. Yang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11369–11373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Yin, T. H. Hu, J. L. Wang, C. Wang, Z. X. Liu and J. W. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 119, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, M. Tang, Y. Wu, X. Su, X. Li, S. Xu, S. Zhuo, J. Ma, D. Yuan, C. Wang and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14731–14739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chang, Z. Su and E. Egap, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 9449–9456 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Kim, E. J. Jeong, J. W. Chung, S. Seo, B. Koo and J. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 659–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Jia, C. Zhang, X. Xiong, K. Sun, R. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Kuang, L. Zheng, H. Tang, W. Liu, J. Liu, X. Sun, W.-F. Lin and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1317–1325 RSC .
G. Cai, P. Cui, W. Shi, S. Morris, S. N. Lou, J. Chen, J. H. Ciou, V. K. Paidi, K. S. Lee, S. Li and P. S. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, A. Klyushin, X. Huang, T. Jones, D. Teschner, F. Girgsdies, T. Rodenas, R. Schlogl and S. Heumann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3514–3518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, L. Mi, Y. Shen, X. Chen, Y. Yang, H. Mei, S. Liu, T. Mori and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17413–17420 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Bingyu Huang
	Bingyu Huang obtained her BS degree in Chemistry from Nanchang University (2019). She is currently a PhD candidate at Nanchang University under the supervision of Professor Yiwang Chen. Her research interest focuses on the design and synthesis of covalent organic polymers for energy-related applications.

Kai Yuan
	Kai Yuan is a Professor of Chemistry at Nanchang University. He received his first PhD from Nanchang University in 2016 under the supervision of Professor Yiwang Chen. In 2014, he joined Professor Ullrich Scherf's group at the University of Wuppertal in Germany, where he obtained his second PhD (summa cum laude) in 2017. His current scientific interests include graphene, porous polymer networks, semiconducting (conjugated) polymers, two-dimensional materials, and carbon nanomaterials, as well as corresponding hybrids for electronic and energy-related applications, e.g., supercapacitors, metal–air batteries, and electrocatalysis.

Yiwang Chen
	Yiwang Chen is a full Professor of Chemistry at Nanchang University and Jiangxi Normal University. He received his PhD from Peking University in 1999, conducted his postdoctoral work at Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz and Philipps-Universität Marburg in Germany, and was awarded an Alexander von Humboldt fellowship. He joined Nanchang University in 2004. He was honored by the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2014. Currently, he is serving as a Vice-president of Jiangxi Normal University since 2019. He was Dean of the College of Chemistry at Nanchang University from 2009 to 2019. His research interests include polymer solar cells, perovskite solar cells, supercapacitor, electrocatalysis for zinc–air batteries, and intelligent elastomers.

Broader context
To guarantee the large-scale production and commercialization of sustainable energy conversion and storage devices, low-cost yet high performance electrocatalysts for the sluggish oxygen-involved reaction (oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction) are urgently needed. Recently, carbon-based materials have gained tremendous attention and enabled comparable activity with state-of-the-art precious metal catalysts. Nonetheless, the exploration for a fundamental understanding of electrocatalysis is still unsatisfactory, which is mainly hampered by the ambiguous structure of carbon-based materials resulting from the pyrolysis process. Hence, pyrolysis-free polymers with a well-defined structure have become crucially important in electrocatalysis since the unpredictable, inactive aggregation during pyrolysis can be avoided, so pyrolysis-free polymers are able to provide definite structure–performance relationships. This review describes a fundamental comprehension of the oxygen-involved reactions and recent progress of pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts, as well as their corresponding application in practical devices. In addition, the optimization strategies for promoting the intrinsic catalytic activity of pyrolysis-free polymers by electronic structure engineering and hybrid synergistic effect are summarized. By reviewing this burgeoning field, we hope to emphatically highlight the significance of pyrolysis-free polymer-based electrocatalysts and offer some critical insights to guide their prospective development.


 	Fig. 1  Polarization curves of ORR, OER, and their corresponding mechanisms (left). Summary of the pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts, including porous organic polymers, metal organic frameworks, linear conjugated polymers, and their typical optimization methods (right).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Syntheses and structures of JUC-527 and JUC-528. (b) Optimized structures of PDA-TAPB-COF, JUC-527, JUC-528 (left), and corresponding calculated DOS and free energy diagrams (right). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Synthesis of BPyTTz-COP:Br. (d) The calculation model of BPyTTz-COP:Br with *OOH (left), and relative energy profiles for the ORR processes on BPyTTz-COP:X (X = F, Cl, Br, and I). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

JUC-528	Heteroatom doping	S atoms	0.1 M KOH	0.70 V	—	
48

COF–C4N	Heteroatom doping	C atoms	1.0 M KOH	—	1.58 V	
62

CAN–Pc(Co)-p	Substituent effect	Co–N4	0.1 M KOH	0.85 V	—	
72

Metal incorporation
Co–PyPc NSs	Metal incorporation	Co–N4	0.1 M KOH	0.82 V	—	
74

COFBTC	Metal incorporation	Fe–N4	0.1 M KOH	0.89 V	—	
42

Cu–CTF/CP	Metal incorporation	Unsaturated Cu atoms	0.1 M NaOH	0.77 V	—	
75

Macro-TpBpy-Co	Metal incorporation	Co ions	0.1 M KOH	—	1.61 V	
76

Hierarchical structures

 	Fig. 3  (a) Designed COP molecular structure and nitrogen-doped sites (M1 and M2). (b) Bader charge density analysis (left) and DOS figures (right) of COP-B5-N1 (up) and COP-B5-NO2(1) (down). Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of the edge expansion of CAN-Pc(Co)-o, CAN-Pc(Co)n, CAN-Pc(Co)-b and CAN-Pc(Co)-p caused by the presence of the edge-functionalized anhydride groups. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the transition metal-COFs (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) (left) and OER, ORR overpotentials as a function of CFSE in the four-electron reactions (right). Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Structure of the original Co-PyPc NSs. (c) Free energy profile for ORR on the Fe–Pc monolayer (left), Fe–Pc molecule at zero potential (middle), and the free energy change caused by substituting one Fe atom with two protons (ΔGsub) in both Fe–Pc monolayer and molecule as a functional of pH (right). Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Structures of crystalline COFBTC. (e) Exfoliation and dissolution route of COFBTC in alkaline media. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of phenazine-bridged cobaltocorroles (left). RDE measurements of ORR in 0.5 M H2SO4 (middle) and 0.1 M KOH (right) with BP2000 carbon (green), CoTAC monomer@BP2000 (black), polyCoTAC@BP2000 (red), and the commercial PGM-free Pajarito Powder's catalyst (blue). Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of Cu-CTF/CP. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic representation of the preparation process of Ni0.5Fe0.5@COF-SO3. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic representation of macro-TpBpy and macro-TpBpy-Co in the presence of PSs, and corresponding OER polarization curves. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

PolyCoTAC@BP2000	Polymetallocorroles on carbon	0.1 M KOH	0.83 V (900 rpm)	—	
90

FePPc/CNT-1.5	Fe–N–C coated on CNTs	0.5 M H2SO4/0.1 M KOH	0.80 V/0.93 V	—	
106

COP-PSO3-Co-rGO	Carbon adjacent to the pyrrole of porphyrin ring	0.1 M KOH	0.72 V	—	
83

pfSAC-Fe	Single Fe atoms	0.1 M KOH	0.91 V	—	
107

g-FePc	FePc supported by graphene	0.1 M KOH	0.88 V	—	
40

(CoP)n-MWCNTs	Cobalt porphyrin framework on MWCNTs	1.0 M KOH	-	1.63 V	
108

CC-3	C–S region	0.1 M KOH	0.83 V	1.62 V	
109

G@POF-Co	Porphyrin coordinated with Co2+	0.1 M KOH	0.81 V	1.66 V	
110


 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (CoP)n–MWCNTs, LSV curves and chronopotentiometry data at 10 mA cm−2 for different materials. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of the synthesis of COP–PSO3–Co–rGO and corresponding ORR polarization curves (3 represents COP–PSO3–Co, 4 represents COP–PSO3–Co–rGO). Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Synthesis route of the pfSAC-Fe catalyst and differential charge density distribution on pfSAC-Fe and pfSAC-Fe with the absorption of oxygen (left). Kinetic current density (at 0.85 V versus RHE) and half-wave potentials of pfSAC–Fe–X and 20% Pt/C (right). Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of the single-layer POF and schematic of a flexible all-solid-state Zn–air battery assembled with the CNT@POF cathode. (b) SEM images of pure POF, CNT@POF, and high-resolution TEM image of CNT@POF (from left to right); the inset is the contrast profile along the white dashed line. (c) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves at 1.0 mA cm−2 under bending at 0°, 90°, and 180°, respectively. (d) Photographs of a commercial red LED lit by two flexible all-solid-state Zn–air batteries connected in series when bent to various angles. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of M3HITP2. (b) Elementary steps involved in the alternative 2e− and 4e− participated ORR pathway (top), different reaction cascades on Co3HITP2 and Ni3HITP2 showing the configuration and bond length of intermediate binding (middle), and free energy diagrams of the intermediates along the reaction coordinates at a potential of 1.23 V (bottom). Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic structure of PcCu–O8–M. (d) In situ Raman analysis of PcCu–O8–Co during the ORR process and proposed reaction mechanism. Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Chemical structures of the P–Ph, P–Se, P–T linear conjugated polymers and side view, top view of the molecular packing between the linear conjugated polymers and rGO layers. (b) The optimized structure and corresponding electron density of P–T (up), P–Ph (down) models. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) The proposed preparation mechanisms for two routes of PANI–Co–CNT (+CA, −CA) samples. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 1  The challenges and future perspectives for pyrolysis-free polymer-based oxygen electrocatalysts.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
