Catalysis by metallic nanoparticles in aqueous solution: model reactions   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35029G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35029G
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5577-5587Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCatalysis by metallic nanoparticles in aqueous solution: model reactions†

        
          
            Pablo 
            Hervés
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Moisés 
            Pérez-Lorenzo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luis M. 
            Liz-Marzán
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Joachim 
            Dzubiella
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Lu
          
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Matthias 
            Ballauff
          
          
        
      *bc
aDepartamento de Química Física, Universidade de Vigo, 36310, Vigo, Spain. E-mail: lmarzan@uvigo.es
bSoft Matter and Functional Materials, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, 14109 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: matthias.ballauff@helmholtz-berlin.de
cInstitute of Physics, Humboldt University Berlin, Germany
Received 
      1st February 2012
    First published on 30th May 2012AbstractCatalysis by metallic nanoparticles is certainly among the most intensely studied problems in modern nanoscience. However, reliable tests for catalytic performance of such nanoparticles are often poorly defined, which makes comparison and benchmarking rather difficult. We tackle in this tutorial review a subset of well-studied reactions that take place in aqueous phase and for which a comprehensive kinetic analysis is available. Two of these catalytic model reactions are under consideration here, namely the reduction of (i) p-nitrophenol and (ii) hexacyanoferrate (III), both by borohydride ions. Both reactions take place at the surface of noble metal nanoparticles at room temperature and can be accurately monitored by UV-vis spectroscopy. Moreover, the total surface area of the nanoparticles in solution can be known with high precision and thus can be directly used for the kinetic analysis. Hence, these model reactions represent cases of heterogeneous catalysis that can be modelled with the accuracy typically available for homogeneous catalysis. Both model reactions allow us to discuss a number of important concepts and questions, namely the dependence of catalytic activity on the size of the nanoparticles, electrochemistry of nanoparticles, surface restructuring, the use of carrier systems and the role of diffusion control.
Pablo Hervés
Pablo Hervés obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 1991 from the University of Santiago de Compostela. He then moved to Durham University (U.K.) where he carried out postdoctoral research in the group of Prof. Lyn Williams. In 1992 he joined, as an assistant professor, the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Vigo where he is now a Full Professor. His current research interest focuses on the study of the catalytic activity of different organized systems such as metallic nanoparticles, core–shell nanocomposites, micelles and vesicles.
Moisés Pérez-Lorenzo
Moisés Pérez-Lorenzo obtained his PhD from the University of Vigo in 2004. After a postdoctoral stay at the University of California at Santa Cruz in the group of Prof. Claude F. Bernasconi, he joined the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Santiago de Compostela as a research associate. In 2009 he returned to the University of Vigo as an assistant professor. His current research interest focuses on the design of plasmonic nanoreactors and their catalytic applications in different organic transformations.
Luis M. Liz-Marzán
Luis M. Liz-Marzán obtained PhD from the University of Santiago de Compostela (1992) and has been a postdoc at Utrecht University and (more recently) a visiting professor at Tohoku University, Michigan, Melbourne, Hamburg and Max-Planck Institute Golm. He holds a chair in Physical Chemistry at the University of Vigo, where he is the head of the Colloid Chemistry Group. He is a co-author of over 250 publications and 5 patents, has received several research awards, and is an editor and editorial advisory board member of several chemistry, nanotechnology and materials science journals. His current interests include nanoparticle synthesis and assembly, nanoplasmonics, and development of nanoparticle-based sensing and diagnostic tools.
Joachim Dzubiella
Joachim Dzubiella received his doctorate in 2002 under the supervision of Prof. C. N. Likos and Prof. H. Löwen in theoretical colloidal physics at the Heinrich-Heine University in Düsseldorf, Germany. After postdoctoral stays with Prof. J.-P. Hansen in Cambridge, UK, and Prof. A. J. McCammon in San Diego, USA, he returned to Germany in 2006 to head an Emmy-Noether research group at the Technical University Munich. Since late 2010 he is the group leader for Soft Matter Theory at the Helmholtz-Center Berlin and Professor for Theoretical Physics at the Humboldt-University of Berlin.
Yan Lu
Yan Lu received her PhD in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Dr H.-J.P. Adler in macromolecular chemistry at Dresden University of Technology. After that, she worked first as a post-doctoral researcher and then a research scientist in Prof. Dr M. Ballauff's group at the University of Bayreuth. Since 2009, she joined the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie as a group leader in Colloid Chemistry. She was awarded “APi-Prize” in 2005 and “Dr Hermann-Schnell-Stipendium” in 2011 by the German Chemical Society. Her research interests cover synthesis and characterization of functional hybrid colloidal particles and their application in catalysis, optics and solar-cells.
Matthias Ballauff
Matthias Ballauff received his doctorate at the Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Mainz, in 1981. From 1981 to 1983, he was a postdoc in Prof. P. J. Flory's group at Stanford University. After his habilitation at the University of Mainz in 1989, he became a Professor in the Faculty of Chemistry at the University of Karlsruhe. From 2003 to 2009, he was a professor for physical chemistry in the University of Bayreuth. Since 2009, he has been the head of the Institute for Soft Matter and Functional Materials in Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, and professor of Physics at Humboldt Universität zu Berlin.
1. Introduction
Metallic nanoparticles are undoubtedly among the most widely studied systems in modern nanoscience.1 This is due to the fact that metals often have totally different properties when dispersed down to nanometre dimensions. For example, gold nanoparticles are active catalysts for oxidation reactions while the bulk metal is inactive. This discovery made by Haruta2 some fifteen years ago has originated a tremendous research activity that is hard to overlook. In the meantime, work on the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticles has been surveyed in books,1 as well as in a number of recent reviews.3,4 Evidently, catalysis by nanoparticles is one of the fastest growing areas in nanoscience.
Up to now, the science of making nanoparticles and nanoalloys4 has been well advanced and a large number of metals can be prepared in the nanometre range with full control over their size and shape.3 Hence, detailed catalytic studies that explore subtle differences in catalytic activities depending, e.g., on the particle shape have become feasible. In addition to this, high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) has become an extremely valuable tool since it allows us to analyse the morphology and crystallinity of nanoparticles with a precision down to 2 pm.5,6 Moreover, optical7 and spectroscopic techniques8 have been developed further and applied to these systems. In this way metal nanoparticles have become highly defined systems that can be used in catalytic studies with the same rigor as earlier investigations done on macroscopic metal surfaces.9
By this time, a number of comprehensive reviews are available, focusing on specific reactions catalysed by metallic nanoparticles, including water splitting, hydrogenation and cross-coupling reactions among others.10 For example, Pd nanoparticles have attracted great interest as one of the most efficient metals for the Suzuki cross-coupling reactions.11 Catalysis by e.g. gold nanoparticles12 has been the subject of numerous reviews and it seems fair to state that many practical issues in this field have been addressed properly in recent years. Here we wish to pursue a different problem that is more related to the fundamental aspects of the catalysis by nanoparticles, namely catalytic model reactions. We define a model reaction in the following way:
(i) It should be a well-controlled chemical reaction that reacts from A to B in the presence of the nanoparticles without side reactions or by-products. Moreover, no reaction should take place if the nanoparticles are not present.
(ii) A full kinetic analysis of the reaction rate as a function of temperature should be possible, leading to a detailed understanding of the reaction mechanism. This implies that the rate of reaction must be measurable with high precision.
(iii) The reaction should proceed under mild conditions, preferably at around room temperature and in mild solvents like water. This condition implies that no degradation or transformation of the nanoparticles must occur during the reaction. It excludes all reactions in which the nanoparticles serve merely as a source for metal ions in solution.
Evidently, such model reactions can be used to study the kinetics of catalysis by nanoparticles in full mechanistic detail. Results from these investigations should possess the same rigor as earlier investigations carried out on macroscopic planar metal surfaces9 and a full comparison of both sets of data should be possible. Issues addressed by this comparison should include e.g. the role of surface restructuring in the catalysis by nanoparticles or the applicability of electrochemical concepts to nanoscopic metal surfaces.
A second problem that can be explored in detail by model reactions is the role of carrier systems. In general, nanoparticles may be taken up by cells and become toxic13,14 and hence, a secure handling requires a tight binding to a suitable carrier and complete recovery after use. In most applications, catalytic nanoparticles are therefore adsorbed onto a colloidal or macroscopic porous material or gel, in order to recover the catalyst after the reaction in an easy fashion. In recent years, such carrier systems have been developed further to become true “nanoreactors” that allow us to handle the nanoparticles and to adjust their catalytic activity to a certain extent.15–17 Model reactions may now serve to investigate the efficiency of different carriers for a given type of nanoparticles. In this way, these reactions are indispensable for a quantitative assessment of such nanoreactors and their optimization.
Aiming to illustrate these points in further detail, we have selected two chemical reactions that qualify as model reactions as defined above, namely the reduction of p-nitrophenol by borohydride18–21 and the reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) ions, also by borohydride.22 Both reactions proceed in water under ambient conditions and may be analysed by spectroscopic methods with highest accuracy. The choice of these reactions has also been prompted by the fact that there is a huge bulk of kinetic data available, in particular on the reduction of nitrophenol.23 Thus, this reaction has become a benchmark reaction to assess the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticles embedded in various nanoreactors (see Table S1 in the ESI†) and carrier systems as e.g. yolk–shell systems.24,25
The review is organised as follows: in Section 2 we first review work done on (A) the reduction of nitrophenol in the presence of various metallic nanoparticles, and (B) the reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) ions. Special emphasis is laid on the problem of diffusion control. In Section 3, recent work on nanoreactors that allow adjusting the catalytic activity will be reviewed for these two model reactions. A brief conclusion in Section 4 will wrap up the entire discussion.
2. Model reactions
2.1. Kinetic control vs. diffusion control
A central problem in kinetic studies of catalytic reactions is a possible control by diffusion. Both model reactions to be considered here take place at the surface of the nanocatalyst. If the chemical turnover at the surface is much faster than the diffusion of the reactants, diffusion control sets in and the measured kinetic constants explicitly contain the diffusion constants of the reactants.26 For most thermally activated reactions, however, diffusion is fast and the measured constants refer to the rate-determining step only. The competition between mass transport and chemical reaction can be estimated by the second Damköhler number (DaII) which is the ratio of the rate of the reaction to the rate of diffusion.26 (1)where k is the reaction rate constant, c is the concentration, n is the reaction order (here: first order), β is the mass transport coefficient and a is the total area of the interface. In general, β is given by the diffusion coefficient divided by characteristic length scale δ over which mass transport takes place.26 When DaII ≪ 1, diffusion of the reactants to and from the nanoparticles is much faster than the chemical reaction on their surface. If DaII > 1, diffusion control must be taken into account. In general, DaII can be calculated easily once the kinetic constant has been measured so that the problem of possible diffusion control can be resolved without restriction.
The analysis of the model reactions to be discussed here shows that the reduction of nitrophenol is not controlled by diffusion since DaII is of the order of 10−3.21 In contrast, hexacyanoferrate reduction is diffusion-controlled. Both model reactions illustrate at the same time the necessity of basic analysis of kinetic data deriving from chemical reactions catalyzed by nanoparticles. A more complicated problem arises when considering nanoparticles embedded in a nanoreactor in which the activity is controlled by diffusion. This point will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.
2.2. Reduction of p-nitrophenol in aqueous solution
The catalytic reduction of p-nitrophenol (Nip) is perhaps the most often used reaction to test the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticles in aqueous solution (see Table S1 of ESI†). Pal et al.18 and Esumi et al.19 were the first to identify this reaction as a suitable reaction for testing the catalytic activity of free or immobilized nanoparticles. The reaction can be easily monitored by UV-vis spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 1. The decrease in the strong absorption of 4-nitrophenolate ions at 400 nm can be readily monitored by UV-vis spectroscopy and thus determination of the apparent rate constant kapp from the slope of the linear correlation of ln(A/A0) with time t is straightforward. After an induction time t0 in which no reduction takes place, the reaction starts and can be described by a first-order rate law. The apparent rate constant kapp is found to be proportional to the total surface area S available in the metal nanoparticles.27 Hence, two kinetic constants kapp and k1 can be defined by:27 (2)where ct is the concentration of p-nitrophenol at time t, k1 is the rate constant normalized to S, the total surface area of metal nanoparticles normalized to the unit volume of the solution. In what follows, we only discuss the initial rates of reaction, that is, kapp will be determined at the early stages where conversion is still small. In this way the concentrations of the reactants at t = 0 can be used in the subsequent analysis.
 Fig. 1  Reduction of nitrophenol by sodium borohydride. (a) Absorption spectra of the solution as a function of time. The time between two consecutive curves is 2 minutes. Full conversion takes place in 20 minutes. The main peak at 400 nm (nitrophenolate ions) decreases as reaction time proceeds, whereas a second peak at 300 nm, referring to the product aminophenol, slowly increases (see arrows). Two isosbestic points are visible at 280 nm and 314 nm and indicate that only one product is formed during this reaction. (b) Typical time trace of the absorption of 4-nitrophenolate ions at 400 nm during their reduction. The reaction starts after an induction period t0, the blue portion of the line corresponds to the linear section, from which kapp can be accurately determined. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. 

2.2.1. Langmuir–Hinshelwood analysis. 
A comprehensive analysis of the rate constants thus defined can be done using the classical Langmuir–Hinshelwood model.26 This model is schematically represented in Fig. 2. Borohydride ions react with the surface of the nanoparticles and transfer a surface-hydrogen species to it.28,29 At the same time, Nip molecules are adsorbed, also on the surface of the nanoparticles. These two steps are reversible and can be modelled by a Langmuir isotherm. Assuming that the diffusion of the reactants to the nanoparticles as well as all the adsorption–desorption steps are fast, the reduction of Nip adsorbed on the surface by the surface-hydrogen species becomes the rate-determining step. The final step of the catalytic cycle, namely the desorption of the product aminophenol (Amp) is fast again and does therefore not enter into the kinetic equations. Hence, eqn (2) can be rewritten as:20,21 (3)where θNip and θBH4 are the degree of surface coverage by the respective reactants, k is the molar rate constant per square meter of the catalyst, KNip is the adsorption constant of nitrophenol, KBH4 is the adsorption constant of borohydride, cNip and cBH4 are the concentrations of nitrophenol and borohydride, respectively. The exponents, n and m, are related to the heterogeneity of the sorbents. It is important to stress that the analysis described above is based on experiments using metal nanoparticles immobilized onto the surface of spherical polyelectrolyte brushes (SPB) that serve as carriers.20,21,30Fig. 3 displays the details of this carrier system. The SPB particles consist of a polystyrene (PS) core with a diameter of approximately 100 nm, onto which long chains of cationic polyelectrolyte brushes are densely grafted. Well-defined metal nanoparticles can be generated in situ at the surface layer of polyelectrolyte chains. The total surface area S of the nanoparticles can be precisely calculated from the particle size determined from electron micrographs and used in the analysis of the kinetic data. The amount of metal nanoparticles in the composites can be determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA).
 Fig. 2  Reduction of nitrophenol (Nip) by borohydride in the presence of metallic nanoparticles. (a) Scheme of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism of the reduction on the surface of the metal nanoparticles (gray spheres). (b) Dependence of the apparent rate constant kapp on the concentrations of Nip (b) and BH4− (c). The blue solid lines are fits to the data using the Langmuir–Hinshelwood-model. SPB–Pt composite particles have been used as catalysts. (d) Relation of the substrate-induced surface restructuring to the coverage of the nanoparticles by the substrate nitrophenol. Dependence of 1/t0/k on the surface coverage θNip of nitrophenol at different temperatures. [BH4−] = 5 mM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. 
 Fig. 3  Structure of the composite particles used in the kinetic studies. Upper-left panel: scheme of the composite particles consisting of spherical polyelectrolyte brushes (SPB) and gold nanoparticles. Au NPs were generated in an SPB consisting of poly([2-aminoethyl]-methacrylate hydrochloride) chains that were attached on polystyrene cores with a diameter of 88 ± 5 nm. The thickness of the layer made of the polyelectrolyte chains (L) was 66 ± 7 nm as determined through dynamic light scattering. Upper-right panel: TEM micrograph of a composite particle. Lower panel: high resolution electron microscopy (HRTEM) micrograph of faceted gold nanoparticles on an SPB. The central image shows a twin marked by red lines. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. 

Fig. 2b and c show kapp as a function of the concentrations of either Nip or BH4−, from which the characteristic dependence of kapp on the concentrations of both reactants can be easily observed. All data can be modelled well by the Langmuir–Hinshelwood eqn (3) (blue lines). The apparent rate constant (kapp) decreases with the concentration of Nip. This can be traced back to the competition between both reactants for the free sites on the metal surface. The reaction can only take place for species adsorbed on the surface and a strong surplus of one species must be followed by a decrease in the overall rate.
Three constants can be obtained by fitting the experimental data with the Langmuir–Hinshelwood model: a kinetic constant k describing the surface reactivity of the adsorbed species and the thermodynamic adsorption constants for both components, namely KNip for nitrophenol and KBH4 for borohydride. All available data are compatible with n = 0.6 whereas the adsorption of borohydride can be described through the classical Langmuir isotherm with m = 1.20,21 Recent measurements of the reaction rate at different temperatures have allowed the determination of the adsorption constants KNip and KBH4 as a function of temperature, which in turn leads to obtaining the adsorption enthalpy and entropy for both reactants.21


2.2.2. Induction period t0. 
During the catalytic reduction of p-nitrophenol in the presence of different catalysts, an induction period has been observed by many groups,31,32 which can be as long as several minutes. This period is usually ascribed to the diffusion time required for p-nitrophenol to be adsorbed onto the catalyst's surface before the reaction could start. In the catalytic studies of the SPB–metal nanocomposite system, however, diffusion control can be definitely ruled out for the induction period on the basis of the estimated DaII.21 In addition, it is found that the induction period is nearly independent of BH4− concentration, but strongly dependent on the concentration of Nip. As outlined in ref. 21, the induction time can be assigned to a surface restructuring necessary to render the metal nanoparticles as an active catalyst. The arguments for this conjecture are as follows. Recently, Zhou et al. studied the reduction of reazurin with hydroxylamine catalyzed by gold nanoparticles.33 An induction period of ∼60–250 s was found to be necessary to start the reaction. This is right in the time scale of the t0 values determined by many authors for the reduction of p-nitrophenol. Moreover, as diffusion control can also be ruled out, Zhou et al. concluded that t0 is caused by processes related to a dynamic restructuring of the surface of the nanoparticles. These observations suggest that t0 observed during the reduction of nitrophenol is related to surface restructuring as well, and 1/t0 can be treated in first approximation as the reaction rate of this process. This conjecture gets support from a large body of studies related to the catalysis by planar macroscopic surfaces.34 Results deriving from these investigations furthermore indicate that this surface restructuring is caused partially by the adsorbed substrate. Its rate is found to be proportional to a certain power of the degree of surface coverage of this substrate. For example, the rate of surface restructuring observed for the reduction of carbon monoxide on Pt(100) surfaces is proportional to the fourth power of the degree of coverage of this substrate.
The analysis of the data referring to the catalysis of nitrophenol reduction can be analysed in the same way.21 1/t0 depends only on the surface coverage by the substrate nitrophenol as shown in Fig. 2d. It is found that normalised 1/t0 is proportional to the square of the surface coverage by nitrophenol, that is, at least two Nip-molecules should interact to induce the change in surface structure.21 Moreover, a spontaneous effect on t0 in the absence of Nip has been observed from an intercept at θNip = 0. This indicates that there is a spontaneous surface-reconstruction of the metal–nanoparticle that occurs in the absence of a substrate.
Obviously, the relation between the induction period t0 and surface restructuring has been derived solely from kinetic data, no direct evidence from structural studies can be provided so far. However, the Au-nanoparticles studied in ref. 21 possess well-defined crystallographic facets (see Fig. 3) and the analysis of the induction period for two different reactions21,33 taking place on the surface of Au particles leads to the same conclusion. Studies of this problem by HRTEM would certainly be helpful to elucidate this point in further detail.


2.2.3. Dependence on temperature. 
If the reaction is analysed as a function of temperature, the apparent rate constant kapp can be analysed in terms of the classical Arrhenius equation. For most studies using free nanoparticles or nanoparticles in an open carrier system, a linear relationship between ln(kapp) and the reciprocal temperature is found. This leads to the activation energy EA and the frequency factor k0. A different situation arises when considering nanoparticles embedded in a nanoreactor. Here a non-linear Arrhenius-relation is found that will be discussed in Section 3.
The above discussion of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetics demonstrates that the reduction of nitrophenol proceeds on the surface of the particles. Hence, data deriving from different systems must be normalized to the total surface of all metal nanoparticles in the system to render a comparison of the data meaningful. Moreover, the apparent rate constant kapp (cf.eqn (3)) contains terms of thermodynamic origin as well. Thus, the temperature dependence of the adsorption constants will be given by the respective adsorption enthalpies that will then contribute to the measured activation energy. All pertinent parameters may depend to a certain extent on the carrier system and a comparison of the catalytic activity of metal nanoparticles in different systems must be carried out with caution.
However, a first comparison of the data in the literature can be done using the so-called compensation plot. A linear correlation has been found for the apparent activation energies and the logarithm of the corresponding frequency factors k0 (cf.ref. 35). Fig. 4a shows the compensation plot calculated from the normalized rate constants k1 of nanoparticles of different noble metals embedded in SPBs for the reduction of nitrophenol. In addition, the rate constants k1,θ of Au nanoparticles were calculated at a given constant coverage but at different temperatures, from which the activation energy for k1,θ can be determined. It is found that the resulting activation energies are approximately the same (60 kJ mol−1) for a constant surface coverage, only the frequency factors change. Thus, it becomes obvious that the compensation law is a natural consequence of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetics and can be traced back to a change of the surface coverage by changing temperature. In addition, a compensation plot of reported data for the reduction of nitrophenol has been summarized in Fig. 4b.20,21,32,35–48 A linear correlation was found for the activation energies and the logarithm of the frequency factors kapp,0, regardless of the type of metallic particles, particle size and shape, and carrier system. As shown in Fig. 4b, a large variation in apparent activation energies can be observed for different metal nanocatalysts, which vary in the range from 10 to 115 kJ mol−1. Taking into account that the true activation energy of the reaction should remain the same, such variation of the apparent activation energy can be caused from differences in the surface coverage or in the adsorption enthalpies.49
 Fig. 4  Compensation plot for (a) metal nanoparticles embedded in SPBs (open symbols) and values for selected concentrations of Nip and BH4− (full symbols) for SPB–Au nanocomposite particles; and (b) reported data for the reduction of nitrophenol. All data can be described by a compensation line. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. 
Hence, all data published so far by different groups show that the reduction of nitrophenol proceeds on the surface of the particles and a quantitative analysis of this surface reaction can be performed.20,21 The dependence of the apparent rate constant kapp on temperature, measured by various groups, is in full agreement with this model (see the discussion of Fig. 4). Within this model the generally observed induction period t0 can be treated in terms of surface restructuring although a full structural evidence has not been provided yet.

2.3. Reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) in aqueous solution
Another electron transfer reaction that has been used as a model reaction to study catalysis by metallic nanoparticles is the reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) by borohydride ions. This is an interesting reaction because both oxidation states in iron (+2 and +3) are stable with respect to dissociation and hydrolysis and possess the same geometry and chemical composition. Unlike nitrophenol reduction, in this case no induction period has been observed, indicating that the redox events may occur under diffusion control, thus offering alternative ways to manipulate the catalytic process. This reaction in aqueous solution can be written as:50 BH4− + 8Fe(CN)63− + 2H2O → BO2− + 8Fe(CN)64− + 8H+(4)The redox potential corresponding to the reaction E0(Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−) is +0.44 V versus a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Since the standard reduction potential for the borate ion is E0 = −1.24 V vs. NHE, the free energy change associated with the reaction is very high. However, in the absence of a catalyst, it has been reported that this is a slow reaction (half-life around 5000 s) that follows zero-order kinetics.50 Interestingly, citrate stabilized gold nanoparticles22 can be efficiently used as catalysts for this electrochemical reaction. It has been shown that citrate ions adsorbed on the surface of the metallic particles provide sufficient surface charge to prevent nanoparticle aggregation, while the metal surface can participate in various physical and chemical processes. In fact, related electron injection processes were reported in the past for gold and silver colloids, which demonstrated this ability of nanoparticles to function as nanoelectrodes.51 Thus, once the nanoparticle surface is charged by the addition of a reducing agent, the stored electrons can be discharged if an electron acceptor is introduced into the system. In this regard, redox titration by thionine has been described as an efficient method to obtain quantitative information about the stored electrons on the metal surface.52 In this case, the electron transfer to the dye takes place until most of the stored electrons are extracted.
Systematic studies have been recently carried out to test the catalytic ability of gold nanoparticles in the context of this particular reaction, by studying the influence of the various reactants on the reaction rate. It is important to note that, for simplicity, the authors chose to consistently carry out the experiments under pseudo-nth-order conditions such that [Fe(CN)63−] ≪ [NaBH4]. Under these conditions, the reduction of the ferrocyanide ion obeys the general rate law: (5)where kapp is the pseudo-nth-order rate constant for the reaction. Another important aspect of this reaction is that it can be monitored by UV-vis spectroscopy, following the decrease in the hexacyanoferrate (III) absorption band at 420 nm, which does not overlap with the localized surface plasmon band of gold nanoparticles (520 nm). The invariance of the Au plasmon band during the period required for the complete reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) can be used as evidence that the gold particles do not aggregate during their catalytic activity. Furthermore, there is no chemical reaction between the reactants and the nanoparticles, which means that the redox reaction can be independently monitored. This is in contrast with other reactions in which the size and the shape of the catalyst change during the reaction, such as the electron transfer reaction between hexacyanoferrate (III) ions and thiosulfate ions using spherical, tetrahedral and cubic platinum nanoparticles (see below).53,54 Similar effects were found in the Suzuki cross-coupling reaction between phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, where the tetrahedral platinum nanoparticles used to catalyze the reaction55 underwent drastic shape changes into spheres, dramatically reducing their catalytic activity. Thus, the colloidal stability of the gold nanoparticles during the time needed to complete the reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) by borohydride makes this system very attractive for detailed studies of their catalytic activity.
Gold nanoparticles were indeed found to dramatically increase the reaction rate, but most interestingly, they also changed the order of the reaction. Compared to the direct reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) to hexacyanoferrate (II) with borohydride ions, when gold nanoparticles are present, first-order kinetics have been consistently determined (see Fig. 5) with typically a much shorter half-life of 7.48 s under the same conditions and starting reactant concentrations. As expected, the catalytic effect of the nanoparticles depends linearly upon both the nanoparticle concentration and the surface area per particle. Eqn (5) can therefore be written as eqn (6) (the same as that for nitrophenol reduction, eqn (2)): (6)where ct is in this case the concentration of hexacyanoferrate (III) at time t, S is the surface area of Au nanoparticles and k1 is the rate constant normalized to the total surface area of gold per unit volume of solution. These findings indicate that the catalysis takes place on the surface of nanoparticles and these are indeed involved in the rate-determining step. In this model reaction, the metal nanoparticles act as a reservoir for electrons and become cathodically polarized in an initial step, where borohydride ions inject electrons into the gold nanoparticles. The reaction is completed in a second slow step whereby ferricyanide ions diffuse to the nanoparticle surface and are reduced by excess surface electrons. This scheme (inset of Fig. 5) explains the change in the reaction order of ferricyanide reduction in the presence of gold nanoparticles. Note that, in contrast with the case of nitrophenol reduction, no induction period is registered for this reaction, apparently reflecting a simpler mechanism. Interestingly, an increase in borohydride concentration increases the rate constant by raising the steady state concentration of electrons on the gold catalyst. At higher [BH4−], the gold particles accumulate a large number of electrons and the overpotential for electron transfer to ferrocyanide ion becomes large enough so that the reduction rate becomes limited by the rate of diffusion of ferricyanide ions to the gold particles. In this case, the reaction rate becomes independent of [BH4−] indicating a change from chemical control to a diffusion-controlled process. Regarding the influence of temperature, excellent agreement with Arrhenius law has been found, and the activation energy for the catalysed reaction (15.6 ± 1.1 kJ mol−1) turned out to be half that of the non-catalysed reaction.50
 Fig. 5  Spectral evolution of a mixture of hexacyanoferrate (III) and Au nanoparticles upon borohydride addition. Inset: kinetic trace of the absorbance at 420 nm during Fe(CN)63− reduction and linearized data for first order analysis. The proposed mechanism is sketched on top. Adapted with permission from ref. 22. 
Size effects have also been found in the catalytic activity, so that 3.5 nm gold nanoparticles display a larger catalytic activity than 6 nm gold. This could be related to a higher driving force in smaller particles for particle-mediated electron transfer stemming from their larger Fermi level shift, in the presence of highly electron injecting species such as BH4− ions. However, in the case of larger nanoparticles (15 or 30 nm), some factor(s) other than the Fermi level shift are likely to become important since Fermi level shifts for such large particles are negligible.56 At various times the catalytic activity has been associated with geometric structure (size and shape), electronic constitution or energetic parameters, before it was finally understood that these and many other properties of metals are themselves intimately related. Thus, the variation in the catalytic activity should not be ascribed to a single metallic property but rather to a number of factors acting in concert to decide the interaction of the reactants with the metallic atoms on the particle surface.
We thus can conclude that this system is a useful model for the study of redox catalysis in aqueous solution. The main advantages are that the whole reaction can be monitored spectroscopically, and the gold particles remain colloidally stable, with no aggregation taking place during catalysis, so that the catalytic activity of different nanoparticles can be readily compared. However, the general tendency of metal nanoparticles to aggregate during the catalytic reactions can be overcome by using appropriate supports or stabilizing agents. An interesting example is the use of colloidal nanocomposites where the nanoparticles are supported on carbon nanotubes or included within hollow capsules. Borohydride reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III) has been used as a model reaction to compare the catalysis by spherical and dendritic platinum nanoparticles assembled onto carbon nanotubes,57 as well as to characterize the catalysis by gold nanorods within metallodielectric hollow shells of SiO2 or TiO2.58 Apart from the higher stability of these composites towards increased ionic strength, these supported nanoparticles can be easily removed (by centrifugation) upon completion of the catalytic process.
3. Nanoreactors
In this part of the review, we will show that carrier systems can also play an important role in catalytic reactions occurring at immobilized metal nanoparticles. It has been reported that when thermosensitive core–shell microgels are used as the “nanoreactor” containing the metal nanocatalyst for p-nitrophenol reduction, the influence of temperature on the rate constant kapp of the reaction does not follow a typical Arrhenius-type dependence on temperature.16,17 Such thermosensitive core–shell microgels comprised a PS core and a network shell made of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPA) cross-linked by N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide. The PNIPA networks can undergo a volume transition: whereas in cold water these networks swell by uptake of the solvent, raising the temperature leads to a phase transition in which most of the water is expelled as visibly indicated in the cryo-TEM images shown in Fig. 6. When the reaction temperature is higher than 32 °C, the microgel shell shrinks markedly followed by a concomitant slowing down of the diffusion of reactants within the network. This in turn decreases the rate constant kapp catalysed by the metal nanoparticles immobilized in microgels. Thus, the rate constant kapp must reach its minimum at the transition temperature.15
 Fig. 6  Cryo-TEM images of PS-PNIPA core–shell particles. The sample was stored at 23 °C (left) and 45 °C (right) before vitrification. Schematic representation of metal nanoparticles immobilized in the thermosensitive core–shell particles. At lower temperatures, the PNIPA networks swell and the reagents can diffuse freely to the nanoparticles which act as catalysts. At higher temperatures (T > 32 °C) the network shrinks and the catalytic activity of the nanoparticles is strongly diminished in this state. 
A similar phenomenon has been observed for Au nanoparticles encapsulated in PNIPA microgels and used as catalysts for the reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III), as shown in Fig. 7.17 At low temperature, when the PNIPA shell is in the fully swollen state, the reactants can easily diffuse through the pores and reach the gold nanoparticle surface, so that the observed rate constant is found to increase with temperature as expected from Arrhenius law. However, in the proximity of the LCST, the particle diameter starts to decrease (the shell shrinks) due to a decreased solubility of PNIPA in water, which results in water expelling and compression of the porous network. This decrease in porosity affects the diffusion of reactants through the polymer shell, which gets slowed down as the temperature is increased, thus leading to a decrease in the observed rate constant. This decrease in the diffusion coefficients is not compensated by the Arrhenius-like increase in the reaction rate with temperature. Once the shell is fully collapsed, the diffusion of reactants is no longer affected by changes in the polymer shell and further temperature increase leads again to a gradual increase in the observed rate constant. The thermosensitive PNIPA network can act as a “nanogate” that can be opened or closed to a certain extent, thereby controlling the diffusion of the reactants toward the catalytic core.
 Fig. 7  Influence of temperature on the pseudo-first order rate constant, kobs, (filled squares) measured in the presence of Au@PNIPA particles, compared with the corresponding hydrodynamic diameters (open circles). The solid line shows the fit of eqn (12) to the kinetic data. The inset is a scheme of the reversible swelling of the PNIPA shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. 
The foregoing qualitative considerations can be quantitatively modelled for metal nanoparticles embedded in a thermosensitive network, as reported by Carregal-Romero et al.17 The diffusion through a spherical network was treated quantitatively and the slowing down of the reaction above the transition temperature was treated in terms of a two-state model (see below). Recently, a similar model has been proposed for yolk–shell systems.25 Both models agree in essence and present a major step forward in treating such nanoreactors. The model developed for yolk–shell systems is schematically shown in Fig. 8. A spherical nanoparticle with radius R0 is enclosed in a spherical nanoreactor of radius R2. Diffusional control is achieved by a thermosensitive network extending between R1 and R2. If R1 = R0, this model can be directly applied to the systems shown in Fig. 7. In a broader sense, it may serve for the modelling of nanoparticles embedded in networks as discussed in conjunction with Fig. 6. If R1 > R0, the model describes yolk–shell-type nanoreactors, where a single nanoparticle is enclosed in a cavity, formed by a polymeric or an organic shell.24,25
 Fig. 8  Schematic presentation of the model assumption used for the analysis of the kinetic behaviour by eqn (7)–(10)25 and eqn (11) and (12).17 See main text for further explanation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. 
With full generality the rate constant kapp in the system can be split into a term ksurf related to the kinetics of the chemical surface reaction and a term c−1k−1D which defines the mean time the reactants of concentration c need to diffuse from the bulk solution to the surface of the gold particle: k−1app = k−1surf + k−1Dc−1(7)The diffusion-controlled rate constant kD for a spherical sink of radius R0 under perfect adsorbing boundary conditions can be calculated by the standard diffusion (or Smoluchowski) equation in spherical coordinates, which describes the diffusion of an ideal gas in an external potential G(r).59 In the steady-state situation the solution yields the classical Smoluchowski–Debye expression60 (8)where D(r) denotes the (radial) distance-dependent diffusion constant for the reactants diffusing toward the nanoparticle, and G(r) can be interpreted as representing the solvation free energy (with respect to the bulk) of the reactants along their pathway to the gold particle with radius R0. Thus, the rate of diffusional approach kD is regulated by two mechanisms: the equilibrium interaction (free energy) between the reactant and the nanoreactor, and the kinetic mobility of the reactants in bulk and in the nanoparticle environment. For the sake of simplicity we assume that the reactants have a diffusion constant inside the gel Dg that is much smaller than the bulk diffusion constant D0. Moreover, G(r) is modelled by a constant transfer free energy ΔGT from bulk solvent into the gel (see Fig. 8). Given these simplifying assumptions we obtain25 kD ≃ 4πDgR1exp(−ΔGT/kBT)(9)Here, terms of order 1/R2 have been neglected inasmuch as R0 and R1 are typically considerably smaller than R2. Since ΔGT = ΔHT − TΔST, the logarithm of the diffusion-controlled rate constant kD is given by  ln[kD] = ln(4πDgR1) + ΔST/kB − ΔHT/kBT(10)Eqn (10) shows that the diffusional barrier within such a nanoreactor consists of two terms: first, the diffusion of the reactants through the network is slowed down as compared to the bulk solution since Dg < D0. The transfer free energy ΔGT, which is the second factor, enters exponentially and will have a profound influence on the measured temperature dependence. Hence, the intercept of the Arrhenius plot of kD will be partially determined by the transfer entropy ΔST while the slope will be dominated by the respective enthalpy ΔHT of the solute from the bulk into the network.
When a core of Au nanoparticles encapsulated in PNIPA microgels (then R1 = R0 in Fig. 8) is used as catalyst for the reduction of hexacyanoferrate (III), the kinetic traces follow pseudo-first-order kinetics, indicating that a steady-state situation is reached very rapidly. As implied by eqn (7), a reaction occurring at the surface of the nanoparticle involves diffusion of the reactant across the nanoparticle shell with a diffusion coefficient Dg, followed by reaction at the surface of the nanoparticle, with a rate constant ksurf. Then, the overall temperature dependence of kapp within a certain temperature regime results from the combined temperature dependence of the diffusion-controlled rate [eqn (10)] and ksurf. Application of eqn (9) in eqn (7) leads to  (11)where we define the T-dependent permeability g = Dgexp(−ΔGT/kBT), which in the following serves as a fit function. In the case of a temperature sensitive permeable shell, such as PNIPA, the extended-collapsed transition can be approximated as a two-state transition with a temperature-dependent equilibrium constant Kcollapse.17 This assumption allows the use of the Van't Hoff equation (Kcollapse = exp −(ΔHcollapse − TΔScollapse)/RT) to describe the temperature dependence of the equilibrium constant for PNIPA collapse and hence the temperature dependence of the PNIPA state. We distinguish between rate constants below and above the LCST, viz. kapp,T<LCST(T) and kapp,T>LCST(T), obtained for the overall temperature dependence of the observed rate constant, (12)An example of the fit to experimental kinetic data that can be obtained with eqn (12) is shown in Fig. 7. The fit allows us to calculate Tcollapse (defined as the temperature at which Kcollapse equals 1, i.e. the temperature where 50% of the gel is in the collapsed state and 50% is in the extended state; Tcollapse = ΔH/ΔS) for the PNIPA shell. The kinetic parameters can be analysed in terms of the limiting models, i.e. either assuming the reaction at the nanoparticle surface to be fully rate determining or assuming that diffusion is fully rate determining. Assuming ksurf to be fully rate determining, the calculated rate constants for the surface reaction are very similar to values typically expected for diffusion-controlled reaction and are in agreement with a model where diffusion is rate limiting. Despite the indications that diffusion is rate-limiting, effects on ksurf cannot be excluded completely as it is easily conceivable that ksurf is subject to changing medium effects upon PNIPA shell collapse.
4. Conclusions
The discussion given in this review has demonstrated that model reactions may serve for a complete, quantitative investigation of the catalytic activity of nanoparticles. The reduction of nitrophenol catalyzed by metallic nanoparticles can be understood in quite some detail and the reduction of ferricyanide ions serve as an example for electrochemical reactions on the surface of nanoparticles. Based on these results a better understanding of the handling of the particles within nanoreactors could be achieved. All results point clearly towards future research which may include work on nanoalloys or a more quantitative analysis of nanoreactors in terms of eqn (7)–(10).
Acknowledgements
YL and MB gratefully acknowledge financial support by the DFG, SPP “Intelligente Hydrogele”. PH and MPL acknowledge funding from the Spanish MICINN (CTQ2010-18576) and LML-M from Xunta de Galicia (09TMT011314PR).
Notes and references

          D. Astruc, Nanoparticles and Catalysis, Wiley-VCH,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Haruta, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 153–166 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845–910 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Chang, A. S. Barnard, L. C. Gontard and R. E. Dunin-Borkoski, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3073–3076 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Barnard and L. Y. Chang, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 76–81 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rycenga, C. M. Cobely, J. Zeng, W. Li, C. H. Moran, Q. Zhang, D. Qin and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3669–3712 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Banholzer, J. E. Millstone, L. Qin and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 885–897 RSC .
R. Imbihl and G. Ertl, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 697–733 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zahmakıran and S. Özkar, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3462–3481 RSC .
M. Pérez-Lorenzo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 167–174 CrossRef .
See the articles in the virtual issue in the Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011.
D. F. Moyano and V. M. Rotello, Langmuir, 2001, 27, 10376–10385 CrossRef .
N. Gilbert, Nature, 2009, 460, 937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, M. Yu, M. Drechsler and M. Ballauff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 813–816 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu and M. Ballauff, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 767–792 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carregal-Romero, N. J. Buurma, J. Pérez-Juste, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Hervés, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3051–3059 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pradhan, A. Pal and T. Pal, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 196, 247–257 CrossRef CAS .
K. Esumi, R. Isono and T. Yoshimura, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 237–243 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wunder, F. Polzer, Y. Lu, Y. Mei and M. Ballauff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8814–8820 CAS .
S. Wunder, Y. Lu, M. Albrecht and M. Ballauff, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 908–916 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carregal-Romero, J. Pérez-Juste, P. Hervés, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1271–1277 CrossRef CAS .
A rather complete survey of papers related to this reaction may be found in ref. 21 and in the ESI†.
J. Lee, J. C. Park and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523–1528 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, J. Dzubiella, J. Kaiser, M. Drechsler, X. Guo, M. Ballauff and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2229–2233 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Vannice, Kinetics of Catalytic Reactions, Springer,  2005 Search PubMed .
Y. Mei, G. Sharma, Y. Lu, M. Drechsler, T. Irrgang, R. Kempe and M. Ballauff, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Liu and Z. B. Li, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guella, B. Patton and A. Miotello, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18744–18750 CAS .
Y. Lu, A. Wittemann and M. Ballauff, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 806–815 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. K. Sinha, M. Pradhan, M. Basu, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1659–1673 CAS .
J. Zeng, Q. Zhang, J. Chen and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, W. Xu, G. Liu, D. Panda and P. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ertl, Faraday Discuss., 2002, 121, 1–15 RSC .
M. A. Mahmoud, F. Saira and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3764–3769 CrossRef CAS .
S. Panigrahi, S. Basu, S. Praharaj, S. Pande, S. Jana, A. Pal, S. K. Gosh and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4596–4605 CAS .
X. Chen, D. Zhao, Y. An, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, B. Wang and L. Shi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 322, 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chang and D.-H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 165, 664–669 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuroda, T. Ishida and M. Haruta, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 298, 7–11 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Shin, J.-Y. Choi, C. S. Park, H. J. Jang and K. Kim, Catal. Lett., 2009, 133, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arora, P. Kapor and M. L. Singla, React. Kinet., Mech. Catal., 2010, 99, 157–165 CAS .
M. A. Mahmoud, B. Snyder and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Manesh, A. I. Gopalan, K.-P. Lee and S. Komathi, Catal. Commun., 2010, 11, 913–918 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sahiner, H. Ozay, O. Ozay and N. Aktas, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 385, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sahiner, H. Ozay, O. Ozay and N. Aktas, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 101, 137–143 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhandari and M. R. Knecht, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 89–98 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Jiang, T. Akita, T. Ishida, M. Faruta and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1304–1306 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmoud and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 946–953 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Bond, M. A. Kaene, H. Kral and J. A. Lercher, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 2000, 42, 323–383 CAS .
T. Freund, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1959, 9, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ung, M. Giersig, D. Dunstan and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 1773–1782 CrossRef CAS ; T. Ung, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6770–6773 CrossRef .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12416–12424 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12663–12676 CrossRef CAS .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2027–2033 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 5457–5471 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sanles-Sobrido, M. A. Correa-Duarte, S. Carregal-Romero, B. Rodríguez-González, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, P. Hervés and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1531–1535 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, S. Carregal-Romero, P. Hervés and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem.–Asian J., 2006, 1, 730–736 CrossRef CAS .
O. G. Berg and P. H. von Hippel, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem., 1985, 14, 131–158 CrossRef CAS .
P. Debye, Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 1942, 82, 265–273 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cs35029gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Pablo Hervés
	Pablo Hervés obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 1991 from the University of Santiago de Compostela. He then moved to Durham University (U.K.) where he carried out postdoctoral research in the group of Prof. Lyn Williams. In 1992 he joined, as an assistant professor, the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Vigo where he is now a Full Professor. His current research interest focuses on the study of the catalytic activity of different organized systems such as metallic nanoparticles, core–shell nanocomposites, micelles and vesicles.

Moisés Pérez-Lorenzo
	Moisés Pérez-Lorenzo obtained his PhD from the University of Vigo in 2004. After a postdoctoral stay at the University of California at Santa Cruz in the group of Prof. Claude F. Bernasconi, he joined the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Santiago de Compostela as a research associate. In 2009 he returned to the University of Vigo as an assistant professor. His current research interest focuses on the design of plasmonic nanoreactors and their catalytic applications in different organic transformations.

Luis M. Liz-Marzán
	Luis M. Liz-Marzán obtained PhD from the University of Santiago de Compostela (1992) and has been a postdoc at Utrecht University and (more recently) a visiting professor at Tohoku University, Michigan, Melbourne, Hamburg and Max-Planck Institute Golm. He holds a chair in Physical Chemistry at the University of Vigo, where he is the head of the Colloid Chemistry Group. He is a co-author of over 250 publications and 5 patents, has received several research awards, and is an editor and editorial advisory board member of several chemistry, nanotechnology and materials science journals. His current interests include nanoparticle synthesis and assembly, nanoplasmonics, and development of nanoparticle-based sensing and diagnostic tools.

Joachim Dzubiella
	Joachim Dzubiella received his doctorate in 2002 under the supervision of Prof. C. N. Likos and Prof. H. Löwen in theoretical colloidal physics at the Heinrich-Heine University in Düsseldorf, Germany. After postdoctoral stays with Prof. J.-P. Hansen in Cambridge, UK, and Prof. A. J. McCammon in San Diego, USA, he returned to Germany in 2006 to head an Emmy-Noether research group at the Technical University Munich. Since late 2010 he is the group leader for Soft Matter Theory at the Helmholtz-Center Berlin and Professor for Theoretical Physics at the Humboldt-University of Berlin.

Yan Lu
	Yan Lu received her PhD in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Dr H.-J.P. Adler in macromolecular chemistry at Dresden University of Technology. After that, she worked first as a post-doctoral researcher and then a research scientist in Prof. Dr M. Ballauff's group at the University of Bayreuth. Since 2009, she joined the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie as a group leader in Colloid Chemistry. She was awarded “APi-Prize” in 2005 and “Dr Hermann-Schnell-Stipendium” in 2011 by the German Chemical Society. Her research interests cover synthesis and characterization of functional hybrid colloidal particles and their application in catalysis, optics and solar-cells.

Matthias Ballauff
	Matthias Ballauff received his doctorate at the Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Mainz, in 1981. From 1981 to 1983, he was a postdoc in Prof. P. J. Flory's group at Stanford University. After his habilitation at the University of Mainz in 1989, he became a Professor in the Faculty of Chemistry at the University of Karlsruhe. From 2003 to 2009, he was a professor for physical chemistry in the University of Bayreuth. Since 2009, he has been the head of the Institute for Soft Matter and Functional Materials in Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie, and professor of Physics at Humboldt Universität zu Berlin.
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Reduction of nitrophenol by sodium borohydride. (a) Absorption spectra of the solution as a function of time. The time between two consecutive curves is 2 minutes. Full conversion takes place in 20 minutes. The main peak at 400 nm (nitrophenolate ions) decreases as reaction time proceeds, whereas a second peak at 300 nm, referring to the product aminophenol, slowly increases (see arrows). Two isosbestic points are visible at 280 nm and 314 nm and indicate that only one product is formed during this reaction. (b) Typical time trace of the absorption of 4-nitrophenolate ions at 400 nm during their reduction. The reaction starts after an induction period t0, the blue portion of the line corresponds to the linear section, from which kapp can be accurately determined. Adapted with permission from ref. 21.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Reduction of nitrophenol (Nip) by borohydride in the presence of metallic nanoparticles. (a) Scheme of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism of the reduction on the surface of the metal nanoparticles (gray spheres). (b) Dependence of the apparent rate constant kapp on the concentrations of Nip (b) and BH4− (c). The blue solid lines are fits to the data using the Langmuir–Hinshelwood-model. SPB–Pt composite particles have been used as catalysts. (d) Relation of the substrate-induced surface restructuring to the coverage of the nanoparticles by the substrate nitrophenol. Dependence of 1/t0/k on the surface coverage θNip of nitrophenol at different temperatures. [BH4−] = 5 mM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structure of the composite particles used in the kinetic studies. Upper-left panel: scheme of the composite particles consisting of spherical polyelectrolyte brushes (SPB) and gold nanoparticles. Au NPs were generated in an SPB consisting of poly([2-aminoethyl]-methacrylate hydrochloride) chains that were attached on polystyrene cores with a diameter of 88 ± 5 nm. The thickness of the layer made of the polyelectrolyte chains (L) was 66 ± 7 nm as determined through dynamic light scattering. Upper-right panel: TEM micrograph of a composite particle. Lower panel: high resolution electron microscopy (HRTEM) micrograph of faceted gold nanoparticles on an SPB. The central image shows a twin marked by red lines. Adapted with permission from ref. 21.	 

 	Fig. 4  Compensation plot for (a) metal nanoparticles embedded in SPBs (open symbols) and values for selected concentrations of Nip and BH4− (full symbols) for SPB–Au nanocomposite particles; and (b) reported data for the reduction of nitrophenol. All data can be described by a compensation line. Adapted with permission from ref. 21.	 
BH4− + 8Fe(CN)63− + 2H2O → BO2− + 8Fe(CN)64− + 8H+	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Spectral evolution of a mixture of hexacyanoferrate (III) and Au nanoparticles upon borohydride addition. Inset: kinetic trace of the absorbance at 420 nm during Fe(CN)63− reduction and linearized data for first order analysis. The proposed mechanism is sketched on top. Adapted with permission from ref. 22.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cryo-TEM images of PS-PNIPA core–shell particles. The sample was stored at 23 °C (left) and 45 °C (right) before vitrification. Schematic representation of metal nanoparticles immobilized in the thermosensitive core–shell particles. At lower temperatures, the PNIPA networks swell and the reagents can diffuse freely to the nanoparticles which act as catalysts. At higher temperatures (T > 32 °C) the network shrinks and the catalytic activity of the nanoparticles is strongly diminished in this state.	 

 	Fig. 7  Influence of temperature on the pseudo-first order rate constant, kobs, (filled squares) measured in the presence of Au@PNIPA particles, compared with the corresponding hydrodynamic diameters (open circles). The solid line shows the fit of eqn (12) to the kinetic data. The inset is a scheme of the reversible swelling of the PNIPA shell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic presentation of the model assumption used for the analysis of the kinetic behaviour by eqn (7)–(10)25 and eqn (11) and (12).17 See main text for further explanation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25.	 
k−1app = k−1surf + k−1Dc−1	(7)
	(8)
kD ≃ 4πDgR1exp(−ΔGT/kBT)	(9)
ln[kD] = ln(4πDgR1) + ΔST/kB − ΔHT/kBT	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cs35029g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
