Green electrochemical approach for delignification of wheat straw in second-generation bioethanol production   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00226G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00226G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 551-557Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsGreen electrochemical approach for delignification of wheat straw in second-generation bioethanol production†

        
          
            Elena 
            Tamburini
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tatiana 
            Bernardi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Castaldelli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Giorgio 
            Tumiatti
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Sergio 
            Ferro
          
        
      *c
aAGRIUNIFE Research Center, P.le L. Chiappini s/n, 44123, Ferrara, Italy
bUniversity of Ferrara, Department of Chemistry, via L. Borsari 46, 44121, Ferrara, Italy
cUniversity of Ferrara, Department of Biology and Evolution, via L. Borsari 46, 44121, Ferrara, Italy. E-mail: fre@unife.it;  Fax: +39 0532 240709
Received 
      5th July 2010
    , Accepted 4th November 2010First published on 17th December 2010Abstract
Ethanol is considered as one of the most promising next-generation automotive fuels, as it is carbon-neutral and can be produced from renewable resources, like lignocellulosic materials. However, owing to biomass characteristics, some technological barriers, such as delignification pretreatment, need to be addressed for an efficient conversion of wood to bioethanol. This paper describes a mild and harmless delignification of wheat straw, carried out at room temperature and requiring only 10 min, using an environmentally-friendly HOCl-containing electrochemically activated water solution, synthesized from diluted brines. Holocellulose (i.e. the sum of cellulose and hemicellulose) rich materials can be obtained with approximately 64% reduction of the initial lignin content. Both the absence of lignin degradation products, which could act as inhibitors during fermentation, and a promising, non-optimized ethanol yield (68% w/w on theoretical value) confirm the potential of this alternative approach towards resolving the challenges to develop a sustainable and low-cost process.

Broader context
Presently, the recourse to alternative energetic forms has become increasingly important not only because of the continuous depletion of fossil stock, but also for preserving environmental safety. In this view, bioethanol would be more than just complementing solar, wind and other renewable energy sources in the long run. Ethanol made from biomass could provide several environmental, economic and strategic benefits and can be considered as a viable solution. Significant advances have been made towards bioethanol generation from lignocellulosics, which are the most abundant material worldwide. However, there are still technical and economical hurdles that hinder the utilization of second-generation bioethanol at a commercial scale. Research efforts are needed to improve the process, which would produce sustainable and economically feasible fuel. Improvements in process economics could be attained using waste biomass, as well as alternative delignification treatments, in order to allow a subsequent conversion to ethanol. Our research is aimed at evaluating the delignification capacity of a HOCl-based treatment on a lignocellulosic material such as raw wheat straw, for obtaining a cellulose-rich material to be fermented to ethanol. The obtained results support the potentiality of this alternative approach towards the challenges to develop a sustainable and low-cost process.

Introduction
The inevitable depletion of fossil fuels has been increasing the worldwide interest in alternative sources of energy. It is now recognized that biomass resources may play an important role in the renewable energy outlook for the future,1 towards the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, which constitutes one of the most important challenges to sustainable development in the next decades, and can serve as an indicator for the sustainability of all future energy strategies.2 In recent years, growing attention has been devoted to the conversion of biomass into second-generation ethanol, which represents one of the most promising frontiers of research into bio-fuel.3 As opposed to first-generation bio-fuels, those of the second-generation differ in both the nature of adopted raw materials and, partially, in the processes used to obtain them. At present, the raw material used in the production of ethanolviafermentation consists of sugars (from sugarcane, sugar beets and fruits) and starches (from corn, potatoes and root crops), while the second-generation product would not come from the edible parts of plants, but from stems, leaves and other types of waste containing carbohydrates.
Being not in competition with the food chain, the second-generation ethanol is thus an interesting source of profit for rural areas, allowing the exploitation of agricultural resources, either as energy plantations or agricultural residues. In addition, according to the US Department of Energy (Washington, March 2008), ethanol produced from lignocellulosic biomass is the only solution ensuring an 85% reduction of greenhouse gases, when compared to using gasoline.4
Although the benefits of developing lignocellulosic biomass-to-ethanol technology are widely recognized,5 a widespread utilization of lignocellulosic materials has not occurred yet, and they remain largely unutilized. The main challenge for its application on a large scale is to reduce the major operating costs of conversion procedures (primarily pre-treatments), which may represent up to 35% of the total cost of the entire process. In fact, to liberate holocellulose, permitting the subsequent depolymerization to fermentable monomers (e.g.glucose and xylose), lignocellulosic material has to be treated in advance, destroying the lignin structure, i.e. the three-dimensional polymer that binds the cellulose fibers together and forms an impermeable barrier preventing degradation.6
Different delignification techniques are currently used in pulp and paper industries: mechanical pulping began in Germany about two centuries ago,7 but most modern mills now exploit chemical and chemi-thermo-mechanical methods.8 The Kraft process employing caustic soda is the dominant and historically first successful chemical pulping method, with the sulfite process being second.
Produced pulp is then bleached, to further separate the cellulose fibers and to produce a white paper product.9 Despite its popularity and efficiency, Kraft pulping involves the use of a variety of toxic and hazardous chemicals and generates large amounts of air and water pollutants.10 As a matter of fact, chemicals used to bleach pulp have been a source of environmental concern, and recently the pulp industry has been using alternatives to chlorine, such as chlorine dioxide, oxygen, ozone, peracids and hydrogen peroxide. Actually, it has been found that bleaching can result in the formation of dioxin in the pulp when chlorine reacts with organic constituents of wood.11
The use of “greener” alternative technologies for delignification is nowadays strongly recommended and several efforts have been recently documented for the production of cellulose-based materials. Ionic liquids, i.e.methylimidazolium salts, has been suggested as eco-friendly solvents for partial delignification,12 but considering their toxicity,13 they are unlikely to be used as a pre-treatment in bioprocesses, unless combining an onerous solvent removing/recycling system. The same limiting step would occur using polyoxometalates, studied since the 1990s as alternative lignocellulosic pulp delignification agents in paper industry.14 Polyoxometalates are metal-oxygen cluster anions,15 which act as oxidation catalysts able to remove up to 70% of lignin.16 Direct oxidation of dissolved lignin on Ni, PbO2 and dimensionally stable anodes has been also attempted,17 but with low efficiency, due to the limited accessibility of lignin to the electrode. The capability of basidiomycetes (or white-rot fungi) and oxidative enzymatic systems (i.e. xylanases, peroxydases, laccases) in degrading lignin has been known for over 40 years.18 Also, the use of electron transfer mediators, to enhance the efficiency of the above agents, represents a very promising approach, but nowadays it is still limited by the cost of the mediators, as well as by their potential harmfulness to biosystems.19
As discussed herein, our research is aimed at evaluating the delignification capacity of a HOCl-based treatment for obtaining a cellulose-rich material to be fermented to ethanol. The bleaching activity of electrochemically synthesized chlorine and Cl-related oxidizing species toward Kraft-treated bagasse pulp has been recently discussed by El-Ashtoukhy,20 while the reactivity of HOCl toward lignin and carbohydrates has been investigated by Zhou et al.21 However, our purpose was the exploitation of HOCl-containing, electrochemically activated solutions on a crude lignocellulosic material such as raw wheat straw, to be inserted in a biofuel chain. Electrochemical activation of water is a relatively new concept, which applies to diluted water solution: effects are more marked and persistent, the lower the degree of mineralization of the treated water.22 Wheat straw, yielding about 4 tons/ha of biomass annually, is an abundant and low-cost feedstock, which contains greater potential energy than simple starches and sugars. Currently, in our region, straw is harvested and used for farming, or plowed to increase the organic content of soil. As an additional benefit, collection and sale of crop residues could offer farmers a new source of income. Then, HOCl-delignificated wheat straw were subjected to enzymatic hydrolysis for treating the unchained cellulose, and to fermentation by an ethanologenic yeast (Candida tropicalis), selected owing to its capability to ferment both hexoses and pentoses. Preliminary results are presented on the possibility to apply a combined technology, from electrochemistry to fermentation, for an eco-sustainable ethanol production from lignocellulosic by-products.
Experimental
Solution preparation

          HOCl can be synthesized either by dissolving hypochlorous anhydride (Cl2O) in water, or by oxidizing aqueous chloride solutions. The latter (electrochemical) approach was followed in this work, as it is a much more convenient and harmless procedure. The only concern refers to the geometry of the electrochemical cell, which is critical to ensure that the produced chlorine dissolves in the aqueous solution, rather than simply bubbling out from the cell. Under particular conditions, the synthesis may allow the obtainment of a so-called electrochemically activated (ECA) solution. Considering the relaxation phenomena that restore the water conditions to what they were before the electrochemical activation, the most significant changes occur when the treated water has a mineral content between 0.1 and 1 g L−1. The magnitude of these changes decreases if the degree of mineralization is either reduced from 0.1 g L−1 to zero, or increased from 1 to 5 g L−1; for a mineralization content exceeding 5 g L−1, changes related to the relaxation phenomena become progressively less evident, disappearing completely if the mineral content increases to approximately 100 g L−1.22
A diluted brine solution containing 5 g L−1 of NaCl was treated in a flow-through, undivided electrochemical cell, consisting of vertical cylindrical coaxial parts. An internal anodic rod (external diameter 8 mm, length 200 mm), provided with an noble-metal-oxide-based catalytic coating,23 and an external cathodic titanium cylinder (internal diameter 14 mm, length 250 mm) were used. Preparative electrolysis was carried out for about ten minutes, using a 12 V DC power generator, adjusting the solution pH with HCl before and after the synthesis (initial pH ≈ 3, in order to maximize the chloride oxidation yield; final pH ≈ 6, to allow the hypochlorite → hypochlorous acid conversion). As a result, ECA aqueous solutions with a redox potential around +950 mVSCE (measured by a platinum wire against a saturated calomel electrode, hereinafter indicated by the initials SCE) and an oxidizing substances content (determined by iodometric titration and expressed as “active chlorine”) of about 1500 mg L−1 were obtained. Such solutions can be stored in glass containers, preferably in the dark, maintaining their properties for some days.
Matrix preparation
Various tests were performed on ordinary wheat straw from fields around the city of Ferrara (northeast Italy); the matrix was chopped and ground with a blender and sieved using three mesh sizes (4, 2 and 0.5 mm) in order to work with homogeneous samples (below 0.5 mm, from 0.5 and 2, and from 2 to 4 mm).
The moisture content of the straw was determined by placing a number of samples in an oven at 105 °C overnight; wet and dry weights were measured using an analytical balance.
Analytical tests
To assess the effectiveness of delignification treatments, three analytical methodologies, for the estimation of residual lignin content in the samples, were followed: the Klason gravimetric method,24 the ISO 302:2004 standard method for the determination of Kappa number in pulps,25 and the spectro-photometric approach described in the US 6,475,339 B1 patent.26 Delignificated samples were thoroughly washed with water before further analysis, in order to eliminate the possible interference of residual chlorides, and always dried before being properly stored.
The features of untreated and treated straw samples were investigated using a Zeiss EVO-40 Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope, while the test for chlorinated compounds was performed with an electrospray ionization mass spectrometer (ESI-MS).

          Sugars and ethanol concentrations were analyzed by HPLC (Aminex HPX-87N), using a 0.015 M Na2SO4 solution as the eluent; investigations were carried out at room temperature.
Enzymatic hydrolysis procedure
Following Galbe et al.,27 weighted amounts of delignificated matrix were suspended in water (e.g. 3 g in 250 mL), added to a mixed solution of β-glucosidase, β-glucanase and cellobiohydrolase (Biocatalysts, UK), and then heated at 55 °C for one hour. After that, the solutions were cooled and filtered, and sugar composition was determined by HPLC.

Fermentation assays
The Candida tropicalis yeast (DSM 7425) was purchased from the German Resource Centre for Biological Material (DSMZ). Hydrolyzed mixtures (containing about 10 g L−1 of carbon sources) were added to a combined medium specifically prepared to satisfy nutrient requirements of selected yeast. A nutritive solution was prepared by dosing 3 g L−1 of a commercial yeast extract medium (YEM - Oxoid, UK), 5 g L−1 of bacteriological peptone (BP - Oxoid, UK), and adding essential factors (vitamins and minerals) for microorganism growth; mixtures were then autoclaved at 121 °C for 20 min prior to yeast inoculums, to avoid environmental microbe contaminations. In every case, about 2 mL of yeast were used, to attain an optical density of about 0.1 AU @ 600 nm, corresponding to the appropriate amount of yeast cells to start the fermentation process. Batch fermentations were carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks (100 mL) with 50 mL of fermentable solution. For ethanol production, the following suitable fermentation conditions were adopted: T = 30 °C, pH = 5.8 and low dissolved oxygen tension (DOT < 1% sat.). Blank tests were performed at the same conditions, in media containing YEM, BP, standard glucose and xylose (Carlo Erba, Italy; 3, 5 and 10 g L−1, respectively).
Results and discussion
Ten different wheat straw aliquots were considered for moisture content estimation, attaining an average humidity content equal to 7.5%. Then, as a first analysis, the Kappa number of simply cut and chopped samples was ascertained, through different methods (see experimental section). The Kappa number is an indication of the residual lignin content of wood pulp and assumes values in the range from 0 to 100. Being approximately proportional to the residual lignin content,28 it can be used to monitor the effectiveness of the lignin-extraction phase of a delignification process. As reported in the matrix preparation section, different specimens were considered, differing in the average dimension of particles (below 0.5 mm, from 0.5 and 2 mm, and from 2 to 4 mm); fragments and pieces larger than 4 mm were discarded. For the three specimens, Kappa numbers equal to 14 ± 4, 16 ± 3 and 59 ± 1 were obtained (n = 3; mean ± s.d.), from the largest to the smallest fraction sizes, respectively. Because of the highest reactive surface, the highest Kappa number of the straw sample with particle sizes smaller than 0.5 mm seemed to be closer to reality; a low standard deviation also supported this conclusion.
The Klason method for lignin content determination was also applied to untreated straw, resulting in an estimate of 27.7% w/w. Dividing the relative Kappa number by this value, a correlation factor of 2.13 was obtained, which allowed the estimation of residual lignin content of further samples from their respective Kappa numbers.
The Kraft process, properly scaled-down for this lab study, was then adopted as the reference treatment for delignification; straw samples were cooked at boiling temperature for 4 h in Erlenmeyer flasks containing 50 g L−1NaOH and 21.4 g L−1 Na2S, and assuring a 3:5 ratio between the cooking liquor and each straw sample.29 On the washed and dried samples, the Kappa number estimation gave a mean value of 18 ± 1 (residual lignin: 8.5% w/w), significantly lower than the initial value, demonstrating the relevant delignification activity exerted by the caustic hydrolysis (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  
ESEM
          micrographs of wheat straw specimens: an untreated fragment (left image) and a Kraft-delignificated one (right image), in which cellulose fibrils can be easily recognized. 
The delignification activity of the HOCl-containing ECA solution was tested by mixing 5 g aliquots of finely chopped, sieved and dried straw (size < 0.5 mm) in 250 mL of electrochemically activated solution. In order to monitor the reaction, the redox potential was measured by means of a platinum wire against the SCE. The initial value (around +950 mVSCE) gradually decreased, reaching a stationary value slightly lower than +600 mVSCE after about 30 min (Fig. 2). Insignificant variations were recorded for a longer reaction time: in fact, the amount of active chlorine in the solution showed no residual oxidizing activity. By reducing the reaction time to only 10 min, up to 90% of the oxidizing capacity could be reached, making negligible the advantage of continuing for a further 20 min. The confirmation that such a short time-treatment allowed the completion of the delignification process was attained through the determination of Kappa numbers: starting from 59, values of 23 ± 1, 22 ± 1 and 24 ± 1 were obtained, corresponding to residual lignin contents of 10.8, 10.3 and 11.2% w/w, for the samples subjected to 30, 120 and 10 min reactions, respectively. An ESEM image of a sample treated with a HOCl-containing ECA solution for 10 min is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 2  
          Redox potential (Pt probevs.SCE) as a function of reaction time. 
 Fig. 3  
ESEM
micrograph of a wheat straw specimen delignificated with a HOCl-containing ECA solution. 
A further test was carried out, in order to ascertain if a second treatment with a freshly activated solution could improve the result: accordingly, a single straw aliquot (particle size < 0.5 mm) was subjected to a first oxidation treatment, filtered after 10 min and then mixed with a second amount of ECA solution, for other 10 min. After analytical determinations, a Kappa number of 22 ± 1 was found, which confirmed that the delignification treatment was already accomplished with the first treatment.
Further investigations were also carried out in order to exploit the possible use of other oxidants, focusing in particular on Ce(IV) and peroxycarbonates. As to the former, a 10 mM Ce(NO3)4 solution in 0.5 M H2SO4 was used, and the delignification reaction was attempted at 25 and 60 °C, treating 4 g of dried straw (size < 0.5 mm) with 200 mL of solution, for 1 h. The underlying idea would be the realization of a process in which the oxidant is used, reduced to Ce(III) and subsequently regenerated through an electrochemical oxidation. Concerning percarbonates, the synthesis described by Saha and coworkers was applied,30 with straw directly inserted in the electrochemical cell. The test was performed by dispersing 4 g of straw in 200 mL of 1 M Na2CO3 solution. The following experimental conditions were chosen: both the silicon-supported boron-doped diamond anode and the zirconium cathode had a geometrical area of 16 cm2 each; the electrolysis lasted 30 min, and was performed at 0 °C, at a current intensity of 1.6 A, which required a cell voltage of 9 V.
In all cases, straw specimens were subsequently washed with water, dried overnight at 105 °C and then subjected to Kappa number estimation. The pertaining data are collected in Table 1, while ESEM images of treated samples are shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  
ESEM
          micrographs of wheat straw specimens delignificated with Ce(IV) (left image) and peroxycarbonate (right image). 
Table 1 Results of the other electrochemically-based delignification approaches




Oxidant

                  Kappa number
Residual lignin content (% w/w)





                  Ce(IV) @ 25 °C
56 ± 1
26.3



                  Ce(IV) @ 60 °C
55 ± 1
25.8



                  peroxycarbonate
                
45 ± 1
21.1




All obtained data, expressed as a percentage of delignification with respect to the untreated sample, are summarized in Fig. 5. Although the HOCl-based delignification treatment on wheat straw was slightly less effective than the Kraft process (61.4% of delignification vs. 69.3%, respectively), the latter required an aggressive and harmful processing with boiling soda solution and a long reaction time (4 h). Our treatment offers the great advantage of a mild and harmless reaction, lasting only 10 min, leaving as a residue a quite diluted salty solution. The other tested oxidants gave unsatisfactory results. It's worth mentioning that the adopted synthesis of ECA solution (1 L) requires less than 30 W h, which means about 0.6 € cents (assuming an energy cost of 0.20 €/kW h).
 Fig. 5  Comparison between residual (dark bars) and degraded (light bars) lignin (% w/w) of untreated and treated wheat straw samples. 
With the aim of bioethanol production, the absence of chlorinated bio-toxic compounds was assessed both in the liquid waste, and in the remaining cellulosic matrix, after the HOCl-based treatment. The aqueous waste was extracted with ethyl acetate, which was then evaporated off with a rotavapor; the resulting oily organic residual was analyzed by ESI-MS and no chlorine-related signals could be detected (the instrument sensitivity was at the picomolar level). Concerning the cellulosic matrix, it was hydrolyzed and then used as a fermentative broth.
Enzymatic hydrolysis of treated wheat straw
It is well known that, in lignocellulosic materials, cellulose is associated with hemicellulose and lignin to prevent its attack by enzymes.31 There are several studies on the effect of this hemicellulose and lignin matrix on enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose,32 and it is generally accepted that the efficiency of enzymatic hydrolysis is correlated with enzyme accessibility to the substrate. It was demonstrated that the main effect of pre-treatments is to increase the number of active sites and thus the enzyme activity.33 Oxidant-treated wheat straw samples, together with untreated and Kraft-treated samples, were hydrolyzed as described in the experimental section: the consequent yield in monomers can be taken as a proof of pre-treatment efficiency (see Table 2; missing data were below detection limit).
Table 2 Compositional analysis of treated wheat straw samples after enzymatic hydrolysis treatment




 
Untreated (%)
Kraft (%)

                    HOCl (%)

                    Ce(IV) (%)

                    Peroxycarbonate (%)





Glucose

—
35.7 ± 0.8
51.1 ± 1.3
—
—



Xylose

—
—
2.0 ± 0.1
—
—



Arabinose

12.3 ± 0.3
11.9 ± 0.3
13.1 ± 0.3
12.9 ± 0.3
17.4 ± 0.4




The greater recalcitrance of untreated and both Ce(IV)- and peroxycarbonate-treated samples can be justified on account of their high lignin content, which is supposed to reduce the swelling capacity of fibers and thus the amount of cellulose surface area available for enzyme attack.34
After enzymatic hydrolysis of the HOCl-treated sample, a 66% recovery of fermentable monomers (glucose, xylose and arabinose, see Table 2) was observed. A lower yield was attained with the Kraft-treated sample, probably because of an over-aggressive attack of the alkali treatment on straw matrix. Structure and crystallinity modifications of holocellulose fibers could have modified the accessibility of enzymes to the active sites. In agreement with the literature concerning wheat straw hemicellulose composition,35 monomers as mannose and galactose were not found.

Ethanol production
Once cellulose and hemicellulose have been unchained and hydrolyzed to their respective monomers, a major problem correlated with ethanol production by lignocellulosic material fermentation is the difficulty for common ethanologenic microorganisms to ferment pentoses, which represents a considerable fraction of fermentable sugar content. Unlike the more conventional Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the genus Candida is able to ferment both hexoses and pentoses, producing ethanol as the main product, even though it results in a lower final yield. A specifically engineered bacterium was not considered at this stage, being out of the scope of the present study. Also, fermentations were carried out not to optimize ethanol yield (which will be possibly considered in a second stage), but to verify whether HOCl-oxidation treatment generates inhibitors, deriving either from the deactivation of ECA solution or from degradation products arising from the delignification procedure. After 48 h of fermentation, all sugars were depleted, and the ethanol yield was 34% (w/w). This estimate was calculated with respect to the initial concentration of total fermentable monomers, the maximum theoretical ethanol yield being 51% w/w. It is worthwhile noting that actual industrial yields, using engineered bacteria,36 do not exceed 45% w/w. On the other hand, the fact that C. tropicalis is able to grow in the treated solution, in a way comparable to that attainable in a standard medium at very similar environmental conditions (temperature, pH and DOT), did not allow us to rule out the possible presence of inhibitory compounds in the delignificated and hydrolyzed solution.37
Actually, ethanol was not the only fermentation product: glycerol and minor amounts of other sugar alcohols (xylitol and arabitol) were also synthesized. The possibility of increasing the ethanol yield while decreasing the amount of by-products depends on the optimization of fermentation conditions, especially oxygen concentration, which regulates the direction of metabolic pathways varying the yield of each product.
Environmental and economic issues
Environmental concerns on the proposed approach are mainly related to the use of HOCl, i.e. a chlorine-containing oxidizer. The chemistry of bleaching and oxidizing agents has long since been discussed in the literature,38 but there still exist uncertainties about the possible reaction pathways. Concerning HOCl, it may act as a dehydrogenating agent, it may add to double bonds forming chlorohydrins, or it may react with heteroatoms, chlorinating thiols and amines. The chlorinated intermediates may further react, especially in water media, often to form chlorine-free compounds.39 However, HOCl may also act as a “box” of hydroxyl radicals, and its oxidative action may be the result of OH˙ reactivity. In this sense, the fact that HOCl is biologically produced by phagocyte cells in the human body (through the reaction between H2O2 and chloride ions), and that the Health, Labor and Welfare Ministry of Japan designated it as a food additive in 2002, may limit significantly the apprehension arising from its utilization.
As a further proof that our HOCl-containing ECA solutions exert their oxidative action through OH˙ attacks, unlike chlorine and other chlorinated oxidants, the outcomes of an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) investigation can be recalled (see Fig. 6).40
 Fig. 6  
EPR spectrum of ECA solution (active chlorine ≈ 900 ppm, pH ≈ 6.5) in the presence of a slight excess of phenyl N-tert-butylnitrone (PBN). 
By measuring the hyperfine coupling constants, values comparable with those assigned to the PBN-OH adduct in aqueous media, as reported in literature,41 were obtained. Thus, a homolytic splitting of HOCl is most likely responsible for OH˙ radical formation (they can also be produced through the reaction of Cl˙ radicals with water42).
In summary, we did not find chlorinated organic compounds at a measurable level (below picomolar), because they are presumably not formed under the chosen experimental conditions.
The economic issues concerning the use of renewable resources are primarily local matters. In fact, at the local level, specific agricultural practices and their environmental issues, such as CO2 production, water and groundwater consumption and contamination, and soil organic matter reduction, must be carefully taken into account, in order not to reduce, or even reverse, their potential and promising benefits. Therefore, a number of questions need to be answered to determine the viability of a cellulosic ethanol industry in the Italian scenario, both at the national and regional level. Is there a sufficient quantity of raw materials available at a competitive cost, and is the technology for converting wheat straw to ethanol mature enough to compete with other bio-based industries? What are the existing legislative barriers to establish a cellulosic ethanol industry and what type of incentives may be necessary to really support a positive trend?
The ethanol industry could represent an economic opportunity for Italy, especially in the perspective of realizing the short-supply-chain model, strongly sustained by the recent Italian legislation on bio-energy. Wheat straw could have favourable utilization potential for bio-based industrial products because of its quantity (an average straw quantity generated of 60–70 tons/ha on 1.5 Mha/year of wheat cropping), at an average price of around 50 €/ton. Anyway, the market is subjected to wide fluctuations, depending on the local availability of the material. Also, cost competitiveness of the use of crop residues for bio-based product will depend strongly on transportation logistics and facilities (now about 0.25 €/ton km) and, consequently, on fuel price. To sustain their use as substrates for fermentation (not only to ethanol, but also to biomethane and/or biogas) it is therefore important to have a relatively constant supply that might be given not only by wheat straw but by other cereals and crops/crop residues. This could open more interesting and consistent perspectives for this technology and would contemporarily add value to the entire agricultural supply chain. Taking into account the above reported data on wheat straw productivity, together with the experimental yields of 66% and 34% for hydrolysis and fermentation, respectively, we could envisage an ethanol production from wheat straw of around 10 tons/ha, corresponding to 0.25 L kg−1 of dry straw, at an actual sustained price of 650 €/ton on the Italian market.
The supply of raw materials for biomass-to-fermentable sugars conversion generally accounts for 40–50% of the total cost of production, but, straight after, pre-treatments costs heavily weigh on the overall budget (15–30%).43 While the cost of raw materials depends on market factors that are independent of the technology used and must be considered as external costs (often beyond control, except with wider dynamic market strategies), the use of a low-cost and low-environmental-impact technology, such as that proposed, could have a great potential for improving the efficiency and lowering the cost.
Conclusions
We have presented some preliminary results on a HOCl-based delignification of wheat straw, which was subsequently used for bioethanol production via enzymatic hydrolysis. Contrary to the conditions of the Kraft-like process, which is lengthy, aggressive and harmful (treatment based on boiling caustic soda for a few hours), our approach allowed the obtainment of comparable results, in terms of residual lignin content, while exploiting mild and harmless experimental conditions (room temperature, for only 10 min). No chlorinated compounds could be detected by ESI-MS on extracts from the liquid waste. On the other hand, a non-optimized fermentation of the enzyme-hydrolyzed cellulosic matrix resulted in a 68% bioethanol production with respect to the theoretical yield, indicating that either the delignificated medium did not contain toxic compounds or that the adopted yeast (C. tropicalis) was insensitive to the potential inhibitory compounds possibly present in the solution.
Concluding, these first results should not be seen as self-consistent, but seen with the broader perspective of agricultural residue utilization as biofuel, and therefore as a guideline to strengthen the role of agriculture in carbon sequestration and mitigation of CO2 global emissions.
Acknowledgements
Authors are indebted to Dr Claudio Trapella (Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ferrara, Italy) for the ESI-MS investigation, to Dr Martin Reilly (Sector Sales Manager at Biocatalysts, UK) for the supply of enzymes and related discussion, to Mr Paolo Miolo for his helpful suggestions in the economic issues, and to Mr Owen Skinner for proofreading the manuscript.
Notes and references

Handbook of plant-based biofuels, ed. Ashok Pandey, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2009 Search PubMed ; M. J. Groom, E. M. Gray and P. A. Townsend, Conserv. Biol., 2008, 22, 602–609 Search PubMed .
D. J. Gielen, M. A. P. C. de Feber, A. J. M. Bos and T. Gerlagh, Energy Policy, 2001, 29, 291–302 CrossRef .
P. R. D. Williams, D. Inman, A. Aden and G. A. Heath, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4763–4775 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Lu, H. Wang and D. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 1565–1570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Feng, H. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Yu, N. Ren, N. Li, E. Wang, H. Lee and B. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 6088–6093 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Gírio, C. Fonseca, F. Carvalheiro, L. C. Duarte, S. Marques and R. Bogel-Łukasik, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 4775–4800 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Burger, Charles Fenerty and his paper invention, Library and Archives Canada, Toronto,  2007, ISBN 978-0-9783318-1-8 28, pp. 33 Search PubMed .
Y. Sun and J. Cheng, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 83, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suchy and D. S. Argyropoulos, Tappi J., 2002, 1, 1–18 Search PubMed .

Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 4th edn,  1996, vol. 20, pp. 494–582 Search PubMed ; 
          Profile Of The Pulp And Paper Industry, EPA Office of Compliance Sector Notebook EPA/310-R-02-2002, US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, 2nd edn,  2002 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Technologies for Reducing Dioxin in the Manufacture of Bleached Wood Pulp, OTA-BP-O-54, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC,  May 1989) Search PubMed .
D. A. Fort, R. C. Remsing, R. P. Swatloski, P. Moyna, G. Moyna and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 63–69 RSC ; N. Sun, M. Rahman, Y. Qin, M. L. Maxim, H. Rodriguez and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 646–655 RSC .
R. P. Swatloski, J. D. Holbrey, S. B. Memon, G. A. Caldwell, K. A. Caldwell and R. D. Rogers, Chem. Commun., 2004, 6, 668–669 Search PubMed .
R. Neumann and M. Levin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 7278–7286 CrossRef CAS .

Polyoxometalates Chemistry, From Topology via Self-assembly to Applications, ed. M. T. Pope and A. Muller, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  2001 Search PubMed .
A. R. Gaspar, J. A. F. Gamelas, D. V. Evtuguin and C. P. Neto, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 717–730 RSC .
E. M. Belgsir, A. P. Bettencourt, A. M. Carvalho and P. Parpot, Port. Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 15, 413 Search PubMed .
T. K. Kirk and A. Kelman, Phytopathology, 1965, 55, 739–745 CAS ; M. Tien and T. K. Kirk, Methods Enzymol., 1988, 161, 238–249 Search PubMed ; M. H. Gold and J. K. Glenn, Methods Enzymol., 1988, 161, 258–264 Search PubMed .
D. Rochefort, D. Leech and R. Bourbonnais, Green Chem., 2004, 6, 14–24 RSC .
E.-S. Z. El-Ashtoukhy, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2010, 88, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, A.-S. Jääskeläinen and T. Vuorinen, J. Pulp Pap. Sci., 2008, 34, 212 Search PubMed .

          V. M. Bakhir, in Summaries of papers and brief reports, Second International Symposium on Electrochemical Activation in Medicine, Agriculture and Industry, Moscow,  1999 Search PubMed .
L. Vazquez-Gomez, S. Ferro and A. De Battisti, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 67, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .

          C. W. Dence, in Methods in Lignin Chemistry, ed. C. Dence and S. Lin, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,  1992, pp. 33–61 Search PubMed .
Pulps - Determination of Kappa number (Revision of ISO 302:1981). ISO International Organization for Standardization, 14pp.

          X. S. Chai and J. Y. Zhu, U.S. Pat. 6 475 339 B1 ( 2002) .
M. Galbe and G. Zacchi, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2002, 59, 618–628 CrossRef CAS .

Review of new source performance standards for Kraft pulp mills, EPA-450/3-83-017, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC,  September 1983 Search PubMed .

Riegel's handbook of industrial chemistry, ed. E. R. Riegel, J. A. Kent, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  2003, p 189; http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kraft_process; the Italian version (http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Processo_Kraft) is even more detailed Search PubMed .
M. S. Saha, T. Furuta and Y. Nishiki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, D5–D7 CrossRef CAS .
M. Samejima, J. Sugiyama, K. Igarashi and K. E. L. Eriksson, Carbohydr. Res., 1998, 305, 281–288 ; J. Perez, J. Munoz-Dorado, T. de la Rubia and J. Martinez, Int. Microbiol., 2002, 5, 53–63 Search PubMed .
W. Liao, Z. Wen, S. Hurley, Y. Liu, C. Liu and S. Chen, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol, 2005, 121, 1017–1030 CrossRef ; C. A. Mooney, S. D. Mansfield, M. G. Touthy and J. N. Saddler, Bioresour. Technol., 1998, 64, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. Davied and R. Fornasier, Macromolecules, 1986, 19, 552–557 CrossRef .
M. Chen, J. Zhao and L. Xia, Carbohydr. Polym., 2008, 71, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Reddy, J. K. Palmer, M. D. Pierson and R. J. Bothast, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1983, 31, 1308–1313 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Dien, M. A. Cotta and T. W. Jeffries, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2003, 63, 258–266 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salmerón-Alcocer, N. Ruiz-Ordaz, C. Juárez-Ramírez and J. Galíndez-Mayer, Biochem. Eng. J., 2007, 37, 201–211 CrossRef CAS .
G. Holst, Chem. Rev., 1954, 54, 169–194 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Hawkins, D. I. Pattison and M. J. Davies, Amino Acids, 2003, 25, 259–274 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Donatoni, PhD thesis, University of Ferrara,  2007 .
G. R. Buettner, Free Radical Biol. Med., 1987, 3, 259–303 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Folkes, L. P. Candeias and P. Wardman, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1995, 323, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim and B. E. Dale, Biomass Bioenergy, 2004, 26, 361–375 CrossRef ; N. Mosier, C. Wyman, B. E. Dale, R. Elander, Y. Y. Lee, M. Holtzapple and M. Ladisch, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 673–686 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This paper is dedicated to the memory of our esteemed colleague, Dr Edoardo Priani, who recently passed away.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Presently, the recourse to alternative energetic forms has become increasingly important not only because of the continuous depletion of fossil stock, but also for preserving environmental safety. In this view, bioethanol would be more than just complementing solar, wind and other renewable energy sources in the long run. Ethanol made from biomass could provide several environmental, economic and strategic benefits and can be considered as a viable solution. Significant advances have been made towards bioethanol generation from lignocellulosics, which are the most abundant material worldwide. However, there are still technical and economical hurdles that hinder the utilization of second-generation bioethanol at a commercial scale. Research efforts are needed to improve the process, which would produce sustainable and economically feasible fuel. Improvements in process economics could be attained using waste biomass, as well as alternative delignification treatments, in order to allow a subsequent conversion to ethanol. Our research is aimed at evaluating the delignification capacity of a HOCl-based treatment on a lignocellulosic material such as raw wheat straw, for obtaining a cellulose-rich material to be fermented to ethanol. The obtained results support the potentiality of this alternative approach towards the challenges to develop a sustainable and low-cost process.


 	Fig. 1  
ESEM
          micrographs of wheat straw specimens: an untreated fragment (left image) and a Kraft-delignificated one (right image), in which cellulose fibrils can be easily recognized.	 

 	Fig. 2  
          Redox potential (Pt probevs.SCE) as a function of reaction time.	 

 	Fig. 3  
ESEM
micrograph of a wheat straw specimen delignificated with a HOCl-containing ECA solution.	 

 	Fig. 4  
ESEM
          micrographs of wheat straw specimens delignificated with Ce(IV) (left image) and peroxycarbonate (right image).	 


                  Ce(IV) @ 25 °C	56 ± 1	26.3

                  Ce(IV) @ 60 °C	55 ± 1	25.8

                  peroxycarbonate
                	45 ± 1	21.1

 	Fig. 5  Comparison between residual (dark bars) and degraded (light bars) lignin (% w/w) of untreated and treated wheat straw samples.	 


Glucose
	—	35.7 ± 0.8	51.1 ± 1.3	—	—

Xylose
	—	—	2.0 ± 0.1	—	—

Arabinose
	12.3 ± 0.3	11.9 ± 0.3	13.1 ± 0.3	12.9 ± 0.3	17.4 ± 0.4

 	Fig. 6  
EPR spectrum of ECA solution (active chlorine ≈ 900 ppm, pH ≈ 6.5) in the presence of a slight excess of phenyl N-tert-butylnitrone (PBN).	 
Footnote
† This paper is dedicated to the memory of our esteemed colleague, Dr Edoardo Priani, who recently passed away.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
