The inspiration and challenge for through-space charge transfer architecture: from thermally activated delayed fluorescence to non-linear optical prop ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP02565A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP02565A
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 15881-15898The inspiration and challenge for through-space charge transfer architecture: from thermally activated delayed fluorescence to non-linear optical properties

        
          
            Jin-Ting 
            Ye
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yong-Qing 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Functional Material Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, 130024, China. E-mail: qiuyq466@nenu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 431 85098768
bCollege of Chemistry and Materials Science, Inner Mongolia University for the Nationalities, Tongliao, 028000, China
Received 
      8th June 2021
    , Accepted 8th July 2021First published on 8th July 2021AbstractOrganic molecules consisting of electron donor (D) and electron acceptor (A) subunits linked by π-conjugated bridges are promising building blocks for thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) and non-linear optics (NLO) materials due to their intramolecular charge transfer (CT) processes in response to external stimuli. According to the electron interaction pattern, the CT process in D–π–A architectures can be divided into two categories, through-bond/-space charge transfer (TB/TSCT). To date, research into the TADF properties of TSCT characteristic molecules has since seen significant growth. In fact, TSCT characteristic materials show great advantages in such NLO responses. In this perspective, we first briefly introduced the basic principles of NLO and TADF effects. Successively, we discuss the influence of TBCT and TSCT patterns on NLO and TADF properties, especially for TSCT characteristic. In the final part, we address the diversity and potential advantages of TSCT characteristic molecules as high-performance NLO materials. With these, it is expected that the greater structural flexibility of spatial conjugation can bring more functionality to NLO materials in the future.
Jin-Ting Ye
Jin-Ting Ye received her PhD degree from Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China in 2019. Currently, she is working as a lecturer at the College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Inner Mongolia University for the Nationalities, China. Her research focuses on the theoretical design of organic molecules with non-linear optical- and thermally activated delayed fluorescence properties using density functional theory.
Yong-Qing Qiu
Yong-Qing Qiu received his PhD in inorganic chemistry from Northeast Normal University (China) in 2003. He then moved to Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences for postdoctoral research, as well as the University of Gloucestershire (United Kingdom) as a visiting scholar. He is currently full Professor at the Northeast Normal University. His research focuses on the design of organic magnetic materials and non-linear optical materials using density functional theory.
1. Introduction
In recent years, organic optoelectronic functional materials with a delocalized π-system of electrons, including not only organic semiconductors but also organic conductors, dielectrics, and light emitters, have been widely used in a variety of fields, such as organic field effect transistors (OFETs),1,2 dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),3 organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs),4 and non-linear optics (NLO)5–7 devices. Next, we first briefly introduced the basic principles of NLO and thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) effects.
1.1 NLO effect
Since Franken et al. first published the production of second harmonic generation (SHG) in a scientific publication,8–10 the development of compounds with large second-order NLO responses has been studied widely both theoretically and experimentally due to their great potential in the field of smart materials (including anti-counterfeiting systems, data storage, molecular devices, and optical telecommunications)11–13 and biology (including in sensing, vivo bioimaging, and therapy).14 Generally, according to the properties of NLO materials, they mainly exist in three generic classes: inorganic, organic, and organic–inorganic hybrid materials. However, compared to other materials, organic NLO materials have several advantages such as lower dielectric constants, structural flexibility, and faster response times. Compared with other classes of materials, organic materials have several advantages including their lower and more economical cost, the ease of synthesis, and structural flexibility.15
It is well known that the NLO phenomenon is a result of the interaction between light and media. The electrons in the molecule are bound to move around the nuclei. However, the movement of electrons will be disturbed when an electromagnetic field is applied. In an external resonant field, electrons will have same resonance as the external electric field, which will induce the separation of positive and negative charges, i.e., the polarization effect. Under a medium field strength, there is a proportional relationship between the amplitude of the induced polarization and applied field strength, i.e., a linear relationship, as shown in Fig. 1a.16 P = χ(1)F(1)Where, F is the field intensity, P is the induced polarization intensity, and χ(1) shows the linear polarizability. The NLO phenomenon is caused by polarization induced in the material under the action of an intense electric field. With the increase in the external field intensity, the P of the medium becomes non-linear, as shown in Fig. 1b and c. Only after the appearance of the laser can a light field of sufficient intensity be generated to observe this effect.8 In the bulk medium, the relationship between the P and F is given as follows. P = χ(1)F + χ(2)FF + χ(1)FFF(2)where χ(2) and χ(3) coefficients are the second and third-order NLO coefficients, also known as the first and second hyperpolarizabilities, respectively. However, the non-linear polarization of a centrosymmetric medium in the +F direction (P(+F)) and the opposite direction (P(−F)) are equal,16 that is to say that the even order NLO response in a centrally symmetric material is zero. Fig. 1c depicts the non-linear polarization induced in a non-centrosymmetric material because of P(+F) ≠ P(−F).16 If the macroscopic material polarization phenomenon is traced to the microscopic molecular level, the expression of its P can also be written similarly. The polarization intensity of the molecule is the dipole moment (μ) induced by the electric field. The dipole moment of a molecule interacting with an electric field can be written as P = μ − μ0 = αF + βFF + γFFF +…(3) (4)or (5)
 Fig. 1  Diagram depicting the optical polarization in linear (a), centrosymmetric non-linear (b), and non-centrosymmetric non-linear media (c), ref. 16. 
In eqn (3)–(5), μ0 is the dipole moment in the absence of a field. For calculating the polarizabilities at the theory level, the induced polarizability can also be expressed as the energy of the perturbed system in a uniform electrostatic field, which can be written as a Taylor expansion.17 (6)
The above equation contains implied sums over repeated indices, where E(0) is the energy in the absence of a field, αij is the polarizability, and βijk and γijkl are the first and second hyperpolarizability tensors, respectively. The subscripts i, j, and k represent the x, y, and z components.
The measure of non-linear polarizability is an important means to study the second or third-order NLO properties of materials. There are many measurement techniques, such as the electric field induced second harmonic generation (EFISH),18 hyper-Rayleigh scattering (HRS),19 Kurtz powder techniques, and Z-Scan.20 The EFISH technique18 is the first method used to determine the second-order NLO properties of molecules, which allows the determination of the projection of the vector part of β on the dipole (μβ) dot product when an electric field is applied to a solution of an NLO-active species. Alternatively, the HRS technique19 consists of measuring incoherently scattered second harmonic generated by an isotropic solution, which allows the determination of the mean value of the β × β tensor product. The advantage of this method is that it can be used even for non-dipole or charged molecules. In addition, Z-Scan technology20 was first proposed by Van Stryland research group in 1989 as a method to detect and evaluate the third-order NLO properties of materials. It can easily and conveniently study the self-focusing or self-defocusing and non-linear absorption phenomena of NLO materials.21–23 It is a simple method to determine both the real part and the imaginary part of the third-order NLO susceptibility of new materials.
In the past two decades, intramolecular charge transfer (ICT)-based organic compounds have been a great interest in NLO response studies because of their high flexibility, durability, as well as ease of synthesis. In general, the push–pull chromophores containing electron donor (D) and electron acceptor (A) groups separated though a π-electron bridge (D–π–A design) lead to an efficient ICT from the D to the A part and a large difference in the dipole moment between the ground and excited states. The CT process is one of the key factors of high two-photon response. One of the basic structural features giving rise to the CT process is the existence of the D group, A group, or both groups simultaneously. Therefore, larger π-conjugated length and/or stronger D and A groups are often used to design molecules for larger first and second hyperpolarizabilities values (β and γ) because they can improve the polarization abilities of NLO chromophores and reduce their optical gap. Under the D–π–A scheme, it is very important that a suitable π-conjugated bridge is selected. Therefore, the development of a novel π-conjugated bridge is an effective strategy to achieve high performance NLO materials.
1.2 TADF effect
On the other hand, OLEDs have attracted extensive attention of the industry and academia due to their superior performance and low cost of production.24,25 However, traditional organic fluorescent materials can only use singlet excitons formed by the electrical excitation process. Therefore, the maximum internal quantum efficiency of the device is only 25%. For the phosphorescent material, even though the strong spin–orbit coupling of the heavy atom center enhances the intersystem crossing, the singlet excitons and triplet excitons for electroluminescence (EL) can effectively achieve the ideal 100% internal quantum efficiency (IQE). However, the application of phosphorescent materials in OLEDs is limited by the problems of high price, poor material stability, and serious device efficiency roll-off.
TADF materials are third-generation OLED materials developed after organic fluorescent and phosphorescent materials, which have attracted widespread attention and become a hot research focus for OLED studies since 100% exciton usage efficiency and low cost can be obtained in TADF emitters.26,27 In general, when the energy difference (ΔEST) between the lowest singlet excited state (S1) and triplet state (T1) is sufficiently small (<0.1 eV),28 as shown in Fig. 2,29 the triplet excitons can realize full utilization in pure organic materials with TADF characteristics by efficient reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) from T1 to S1.30,31 Achieving small ΔEST occurs by minimizing the overlap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) by introducing either a twisted structure composed of donors and acceptors or a bridge between them. Recent advances in the design and synthesis of TADF materials are presented by Xie et al. in their review,32 which are controlled by the different number and position of D and A units in the molecular structures. However, there is limited research on the connection bridge between D and A units, and only for several special molecular structures.
 Fig. 2  Potential energy surfaces of the photophysical processes in TADF compounds. S0, S1, and T1 represent the singlet ground state, lowest singlet, and triplet excited states, respectively. 
Recently, for the conjugated TADF emitters with the D–π–A feature, in addition to the so-called through-bond charge transfer (TBCT) architecture, through-space charge transfer (TSCT) materials have also attracted special attention.27,33,34 Researchers conceptually consider that the intramolecular non-covalent interaction between the D/A units in face-to-face alignment could be a new option to realize TADF.35,36 Early and more recent review articles on through-space conjugated (TSC) TADF materials show the breadth of active investigation in this field.37,38 Constructing TADF materials in this TSC manner may have a smaller ΔEST value with substantial transition dipoles to obtain higher luminous efficiency.39,40
In the experiment, steady spectroscopy is used to study the ICT properties of the molecules, and the decay processes and lifetimes of ICT states are analyzed by transient optical spectra.41 For theoretical calculation, the CT characters in the frontier orbitals and their contributions to the transitions can be obtained based on density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT. In addition, the Multiwfn program42 is very powerful, which is a collection of electron excitation analysis tools and is able to provide a very deep insight into electron transition problems. In single-electron excitation process, hole and electron distributions respectively denote the region where an electron leaves and goes to. For CT excitation, the spatial separation of the hole and electron is large, leading to the evident movement of charge density from one place to another. In addition, the charge density difference and transition density matrices can provide information about the electron hole localization and coherence of a specific excitation; to visualize it, we can employ Multiwfn. Then, how to determine the proportion of TBCT and TSCT characteristics? Liao and coworkers43 have performed intrafragment CT analysis on the relaxed S1 states. Meanwhile, the contribution ratios (η) for electron transition from D to the linker, D to A, and the linker to A at the S1 state have been successfully measured and used to characterize and compare the effects of the fluorene spacer on the CT state formation in the space-confined CT (SCCT) molecules. Indeed, the η index can also be used as a diagnostic tool of TBCT or TSCT characteristics obtained at the TDDFT level.
As already proved, understanding the ICT states is of great significance for the development of organic photoelectric materials. On the one hand, CT excitations in organic systems can significant improve the NLO response44,45 and are therefore common in NLO materials.46 On the other hand, to achieve high efficiency, TADF emitters should have a small singlet–triplet gap ΔEST, which has largely been achieved by the CT states to minimize the exchange energy.47 The D/A units orientate in a π-stacking or face-to-face manner, favoring D/A charge transfer, which can improve electronic coupling to enhance PLQY. To date, a number of novel molecules with TADF and AIE properties using TSC as the connecting bridge have been synthesized and characterized by experimental and theoretical studies (Fig. 3). However, a systematic study of such compounds with TSCT characteristic for NLO properties has not been reported, as far as we know. Therefore, the potential NLO applications of this kind of TSCT compounds have attracted our attention and have high expectations. From the standpoint of the high transparency and the relatively medium NLO responses, this is a major advantage of TSCT characteristic molecules as the NLO material and an effective way to solve the contradiction between the NLO responses and transparency. Starting from the structures of TSC derivatives with TADF properties, we innovatively modify their structures by the adjustment of the D/A groups and the linker bridge to developed a new model for the design of new organic optoelectronic functional materials. This review aims to provide more possibilities for the design of NLO materials and broaden the applications of TADF materials, which will be followed by various interesting applications of molecules of this class.
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of the through-space charge transfer characteristic. 
2. Intramolecular charge transfer architectures
2.1 Through-bond charge transfer (TBCT)
According to the electron interaction pattern, the CT process in D–π–A architectures can be divided into two categories. One is TBCT characteristic, conventional ICT schemes, in which strong electron coupling is mediated by conjugated bonds.48–50 These π-conjugated organic molecules are characterized by D and A substituents covalently connected by through-bond π-conjugated bridges in a rod-like manner, which is the so-called push–pull systems or D–π–A dyads. This kind of structures makes the π-bond very polarized so that the rotational barrier for a push–pull molecule becomes lower with respect to ordinary molecules.51 Generally, almost all the through-bond conjugation (TBC) molecules are connected directly with the aliphatic and aromatic groups along the C–C, CC, or CC bonds consisting of sp, sp2, or sp3 carbon frame structures.52–54
In earlier reports, large efforts have been devoted to study the TBCT effect, such as the linear ethylene, acetylene, benzene, and other aromatic heterocycles, and the related systems exhibited considerable NLO response. Among them, p-nitroaniline is the most typical D–π–A system (Fig. 4). Compared with D-Ph or Ph-A containing one substituent reported by Feng et al. (Fig. 4a), the D-Ph-A containing multi-substituted units show much higher βx values due to the delocalization of π-electrons.
 Fig. 4  (a) The calculated second-order NLO coefficient βx values (10−30 esu) for a series of substituted benzene molecules, the experimental values represented in brackets; (b) chemical structures of NEPEA-nn′ and NEPEA-m. (c) Schematic representation of octupolar symmetries.59,60 
Besides, the βx value varied with the attachment of D and A groups to different positions of benzene. We found that the βx value go as: para > ortho > meta (Fig. 4a). However, then, the trend of both β and γ values become para > meta > ortho when the D group is replaced by a weak one, such as the methyl group, which were consistent with those predicted from the theoretical calculations. In general, the para-connection of the D and A groups by the π-bridge shows excellent NLO property, which has been interpreted as a competition between the effects related to structural resonance and charge separation length.55 In general, the NLO response of the system increases with the increase in the conjugated chain length,56 which is mainly due to (1) a proportional relationship between the β value with the power of the conjugated chain length (β = kL3); (2) the excitation of π electrons will be easier due to the reduction in the difference in the HOMO–LUMO energy level; (3) π-conjugated systems with more electron delocalization. However, when the number of conjugated chain length reaches six (Fig. 4b), the β value of the molecule will reach saturation.57,58
In the studies of conjugated bridge structures, it was found that styrene shows better performance when the length of the conjugated bridge is not long. However, with the increase in the length of the conjugate bridge, the charge transfer in the whole chromophore is incomplete due to the higher resonance energy of benzene (36 kcal mol−1), and their thermal stability decreases sharply with the polyene bridge. Later, the five- and six-membered heterocyclic rings with lower resonance energy, such as furan (16 kcal mol−1), thiophene (29 kcal mol−1), pyrrole (21 kcal mol−1), and pyridine (32 kcal mol−1), were proposed to replace the benzene ring as the main conjugated bridge.61–66 In addition, the consequent non-centrosymmetric electronic structure is also one of the critical factors67,68 in the design of second-order NLO materials, even if this is often neglected. Although the dipolar character of D–π–A structures usually exhibits excellent NLO properties, the packing fashion of the molecules in the crystal has an important influence on the NLO effect. When they are arranged in an antiparallel form during crystallization, their dipole–dipole electrostatic interactions will form a centrosymmetric crystal space group, which makes the dipoles of the molecules cancel each other, resulting in a great reduction of the macroscopic NLO response.69 Meanwhile, one limitation of the dipole molecule is that the enhancement of the second-order NLO response tends to induce a large red-shift in the maximum absorbance, which results in a loss of transparency. After the concept of octupolar non-linearities was proposed in the early 1990,70 it is not only easy to form ideal single crystals but it can also effectively solve the contradiction between the non-linearity and transparency trade-off, which also displays large molecular hyperpolarizabilities.71 Basically, purely octupolar molecules can be derived from a cubic structure, for example, the projection along a C3 axis contribute to D3h symmetries and the fusion of one type of charge in the center, resulting in triangular (D3, D3h, and C3v), tetrahedral (Td), and octahedral (Oh) geometries (Fig. 4c).72 The NLO properties of octupole molecules will be illustrated in detail in the following TSCT section.
So far, TADF materials with D–A/D–π–A structures are mostly based on conjugated backbones with the TBCT features, from covalently bonded D group and A group, which have been extensively studied.48,73 In 2011, Adachi et al. reported the first pure organic TADF molecule PIC-TRZ and obtained a device with an EQE of 5.3%, approaching the theoretical limitation.74 Then, this group studied a series of small molecules in 2012, such as spiro-bifluorene and spiro-acridine derivatives. Their luminescence ranges from pure blue to orange, and the luminous efficiency of the device is significantly improved.75–77 Subsequently, D–π–A molecules were found to exhibit superior TADF properties. Herein, Adachi and co-workers78 demonstrated that increasing the conjugation between the D and A segments is a promising strategy for achieving a large fluorescence decay rate constant and small influence on the rate constant of the internal conversion process from the S1 to the S0 state. Similarly, in 2017, Wang et al.79 reported a series of red TADF emitters bearing the D–Ph–A structure with long-wavelength, which also obtained better device performance than the corresponding D–A structures. Importantly, an optimal conjugation length of the connecting bridge between the D and A units will often lead to maximum delayed fluorescence efficiency and internal quantum efficiency (IQE), which induce the efficient TADF property.80 Similar to the design of NLO materials, the difference in the substituted positions also has a significant effect on the TADF properties. Recently, Yang's research group combined three phenanthroline isomers with phenoxazine unit (D) into ortho-, meta-, or para-positions of a rigid phenanthroline core (A). They are named as o-PXZP, m-PXZP, and p-PXZP, which have revealed that the m-PXZP and p-PXZP compounds possess excellent TADF properties relative to the ortho-position isomer, especially for the m-PXZP compound (Fig. 5a).81 These results are consistent with the conclusions of other investigations of this research group.82
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of x-PXZP and the DACQ molecule (a) and its HOMO and LUMO distributions (b). 
Adachi and co-workers83 have reported the DACQ molecule, combining the D groups containing carbazolyl and diphenylamino with a quinoxaline-based acceptor. The HOMO and LUMO distributions of DACQ are depicted in Fig. 5b, in which LUMO is strictly located on the quinoxaline fragment, while the HOMO is mostly located on the carbazolyl and diphenylamino fragments, indicating the intramolecular CT. Meanwhile, it exhibits high photoluminescence and electroluminescence efficiencies in the experimental characterization and quantum chemical calculations. In order to study the NLO response of these molecules with TADF properties, from the previous research of our group, we found that the DACQ molecule could actually exhibit a better optical non-linearity.84
2.2 Through-space charge transfer (TSCT)
Another is TSCT between the D and A groups, which provide a scaffold for non-covalent interactions through space,85 which are physically separated but, meanwhile, are spatially proximate. In the aspect of theoretical calculations, the reduced density gradient map and Sign(λ2)*ρ value are a pair of very important functions to show the π–π interaction for the TSC molecules using the Multiwfn and VMD programs.42,86 In parallel with the TBCT studies, the TSCT character has received more limited attention, and it will provide us a new perspective for the design of novel multifunctional materials with promising properties.

2.2.1 [2.2]paracyclophane derivatives. 
[2.2]paracyclophane ([2.2]pCp) and its derivatives have a wide range of applications in the design of organic solar cells (OSCs),87 NLO materials, and asymmetric synthesis. The discovery and successful synthesis of [2.2]pCp provides an ideal model for studying aromatic compounds with spatial conjugation properties.88 In a [2.2]pCp molecule, the distance between the centers of the benzene ring stacked face-to-face is approximately 3.10 Å, which is shorter than the distance of typical π–π stacking graphite (3.35 Å). Moreover, the interbenzenoid distance between the carbons carrying the bridges is about 2.80 Å. The shorter π–π stacking distance of these molecules makes it possible to study the existence of π-electron delocalization through the two benzene rings and strong orbital overlap. In addition, the slightly bent but stable structure of [2.2]pCp enables TSCT between the benzene decks and makes it possible to investigate their photoelectric properties.
In TADF materials, Bräse et al. have reported the first examples that the [2.2]pCp-based TADF emitters with stacked (coplanar) D–A groups can be incorporated into OLED devices (Fig. 6).89,90 Further, new types of [2.2]pCp derivatives, g-BNMe2-Cp (pseudo-gem) and m-BNMe2-Cp (pseudo-meta), have been designed and synthesized by Zhao et al., which exhibit strong circularly polarized luminescence and intense fluorescence with TADF characteristics due to the efficient TSCT character (Fig. 6).91 In addition, Bazan and coworker also studied the effects of conjugated chain lengths, substitution positions, and numbers of [2.2]pCp-based systems on the fluorescence properties.92–94
 Fig. 6  [2.2]pCp based TADF systems. 
Zyss and coworkers reported that the first hyperpolarizability tensor of the fully double-substituted [2.2]pCp molecule is significantly higher than that of single substitution, which proves the important role of TSCT in NLO response.59 In addition, since the [2.2]pCp framework can be used as a suitably flexible backbone, it allows for subsequent functionalization in its original structure. In order to make full use of the 2D and 3D expansion of the octupolar charge distributions systems, the substitution pattern at the 4, 7, 12, and 15 positions in [2.2]pCp can be used as an octupole charge template, as shown in Fig. 7a. It is made into an elongated cubic molecular structure with orthogonal symmetrical characteristic arrangement, allowing 3D multipole spatial distribution, including the boundary conditions of the octupole, which provides more possibilities for the diversity of properties. By analyzing the clear experimental results of the dipolar (βJ=1) and octupolar (βJ=3) tensorial components, it is revealed that there is a strong 3D TSCT interaction (Fig. 7b).95 This work is of great significance to study the NLO property of various multipolar D–A [2.2]pCp derivatives.96–98 This work may play a key role in the study of 3D organic non-linear octupolar molecules in the future. And then, literature reports by Hong et al. have shown that through-space delocalization across the [2.2]pCp core is more polarizable in the excited state.99 In recent years, Su et al. have studied the second-order NLO response of [2.2]pCp as a conjugated bridge D–S–A system (Fig. 7c),100 and found that the sp2 hybrid CHCH at both ends of the double-substituted [2.2]pCp can effectively enhance the first hyperpolarizability of the system. In our recent work,101 we have designed and calculated several new [2.2]pCp-based cis and trans derivatives (ref. 101, Fig. 6) that possess TSCT characters to systematically investigate the effect of the relative configuration on the second-order NLO response. The results indicate that the second-order NLO properties of the trans isomers are superior than that of the corresponding cis isomers.
 Fig. 7  (a) Substitution at the 4, 7, 12, and 15 positions for [2.2]pCp as a point-charge template of an octupole; (b) the θ dependence of βJ=1 and βJ=3 values, as proposed previously in ref. 95; (c) the structures and crucial transitions (d) for four substituted [2.2]pCp molecules (ref. 88). 
In addition, according to the location of the –CH2CH2– bridges and the orientation of the benzene rings (anti and syn), these cyclophanes can be classified as [2.2]pCp; anti-/syn-[2.2]metacyclophane and [2.2]metaparacyclophane.96,102–104 Although the molecule of [2.2]pCp has been studied via both theoretical calculation and experimental synthesis, the nature of the π–π through-space interaction between the aromatic rings in the diversity of the [2.2]pCp derivatives has not been elucidated. I believe that the relationship between the NLO response of the [2.2]pCp derivatives and the TSC characteristic is a very interesting topic.


2.2.2 Naphthalene molecules. 
Similarly, the TSCT characteristic is present in naphthalene molecules. Naphthalene is a condensed ring aromatic hydrocarbon composed of two benzene rings, in which the carbon and hydrogen atoms are all coplanar; thus, it is a planar rigid conjugated small molecule. The positions of all the carbon atoms in naphthalene are divided into two types, of which positions 1, 4, 5, and 8 belong to the α-position, while positions 2, 3, 6, and 7 belong to another type, namely, the β-position (Fig. 8a). Different substitutions on the naphthalene ring have a remarkable influence on the intramolecular charge transfer.105 For instance, Wenger et al. reported disubstituted naphthalene derivatives in different ways in 2016. The close proximity of the two arylamines makes the TSCT channel possible and successfully explains why electronic communication is significantly stronger for the 1,8-position disubstituted (N − 1,8)+. Furthermore, two excimer-emitting molecules containing stacked π-conjugated groups covalently linked at the 1,8-positions of naphthalene have been reported by Kido and coworkers (Fig. 8b), generating highly efficient blue and green OLEDs properties.106 From the corresponding frontier molecular orbital diagram shown in Fig. 8b, it can be seen that different substituents also have an important effect on the HOMO–LUMO orbital distribution, even if the substitution position is the same.
 Fig. 8  The chemical structures of naphthalene and the corresponding substituted molecules (a); The chemical structures and spatial distributions of the frontier orbitals of BCzPN and BPAPN (b). 
Although the naphthalene-bridged molecules have been developed rapidly into electronic communication and OLED fields, few investigations devoted to the NLO field in naphthalene-based derivatives have appeared in the literature to the best of our knowledge. Thus, on this basis, we consider this is an interesting research to clarify the relative importance of TBCT versus TSCT pathways on NLO response regulation.


2.2.3 TPE compounds. 
Tetraphenylethene (TPE), a new kind of folded molecule with two parallel aligned aryl chains, results from efficient π–π interaction between aryl chains and could apparently lead to the unique photophysical phenomena107 and optoelectronic properties.108 In recent years, Tang and coworkers have reported a lot of research work and found that TPE has important applications as pure hydrocarbon fluorophores107 and aggregation-induced emission (AIE) materials.37,109 Due to the existence of the TSC effect, these more rigid structures lead to enhanced luminescence in the aggregated states, showing typical AIE characteristics. In these TPE derivatives, the archetypal molecule is (Z)-o-BPTPE illustrated in Fig. 9a.110 Further, the introduction of benzene or the fused ring to the TPE core will result in different degrees and patterns of accumulation, in which the stacked aromatic rings are malposed not perfectly parallel, such as o-TPEPh o-2-TPENp, o-TPEAn, o-TPEPa, and o-TPEPy, as shown in Fig. 9b.111 In addition, the folding compounds f-TPEF, f-TPEC, f-TPEI, and f-TPEB were symmetrically modified at both ends of the folded TPE cores with common D groups (fluorene and carbazole) and A groups (imidazole and dimesitylborane).112 Moreover, based on the TPE cores, Rajneesh Misra and coworkers designed and synthesized phenanthroimidazoles. The results demonstrated the reversible mechanochromism effect with contrast colors and enhanced AIE activity.113
 Fig. 9  (a) Molecular and crystal structures, and frontier molecular orbital map of the archetypal folded molecule (Z)-o-BPTPE; (b) Crystal structure of the TPE derivatives and the distance between its corresponding π–π stacked aromatic rings (Å). 
On the other hand, some molecules with second-order NLO property have been reported with asymmetric TPE derivatives with different D and A groups attached to the phenyl rings, in which the D and A blocks are generally applicable in both the chiral AIEgens and NLO materials.114 For example, amine-functionalized TPE (TPE-NH2) has been successfully used for the detection of trace nitrite ions in water as a high fluorescent probe.115 Meanwhile, TPE-NH2 possesses large NLO response.116 In 2013, Xu et al. synthesized and defined a novel two-photon fluorescence aggregation-induced luminescent material (ENPome), which was constructed by TPE and acrylonitrile groups. It was found that the ENPome excited by a laser pulse at 740 nm has large two-photon absorption cross-section.117 Recently, Liu et al. have studied the effect of different substituent groups/positions of chiral TPE derivatives on the second-order NLO properties using the DFT method (Fig. 10). The results show that the TPE derivatives have an advantage in second-order NLO materials and are excellent candidates.118 Normally, the substituted TPE molecule arrangement is intrinsically polar and non-centrosymmetric, which might lead to TPE materials with higher even-order NLO responses. So far, limited investigations devoted to the effects of model TPE-based and of TSC feature on the NLO properties have appeared in the literature.
 Fig. 10  (a) Chemical structures and (b) the βHRS values of the studied compounds calculated using the DFT method. 


2.2.4 Hexaarylbenzene (HAB) and Hexaphenylbenzene (HPB) derivatives. 
Hexaarylbenzene (HAB) derivatives119 have important applications in the field of organic functional materials because of their three-dimensional topological structure. Taking HAB as an example, the crystal structure shows that the six aromatic rings around the central benzene ring present propeller-shaped configuration. This structure forces the aromatic groups to face each other, in which the shortest C–C distance between two adjacent benzene rings is ∼2.9 Å.120 The through-space electron interactions between the peripheral benzene rings can be considered as a desired annular spatial conjugation model.121 In recent years, the conventional properties and applications of HAB derivatives, such as the detection and recognition of fluoride ion and organic amine, can be improved by the introduction of suitable donors and acceptors substitution on the HAB core.122,123 Wang et al.124 have investigated the TSCT-HABs with the circular arrangement of D fragments (acidine/dendritic triacidine) and A group (triazine) around the HAB core, as shown Fig. 11c, which not only shows TADF properties but also possesses the AIE effect. In another report studying the novel single-molecule wires built on TSC characteristic hexaphenylbenzene (HPB) (Fig. 11a and b), Zhou and co-workers53 observed that the conductance increases to a significant value (12.28 nS) with an improvement in the TSC, which is much higher than that of the traditional TBC counterpart (2.45 nS).
 Fig. 11  Molecular structure (a) and illustration of the toroidal delocalization of the π electrons (b) of hexaphenylbenzene (HPB); (c) molecular design and chemical structures of TSCT-HABs; (d) few-(D–A) and multi-(D/A)-based TADF materials; (e) the charge distribution of prototypical dipolar and trigonal octupolar systems. 
Yang's research group has synthesized a new TADF material by integrating the TSCT and TBCT effects and multiple (D/A) characteristics into a molecular structure.125 The TSCT and TBCT effects allow the material to have a small ΔEST value and high transition dipole moment. As a multi-donor/acceptor property, on the one hand, more reverse intersystem traverse (RISC) channels can be opened through degenerate molecular orbitals to improve the utilization of triplet excitons. On the other hand, the twisted molecular structure can effectively control the intermolecular aggregation and improve the fluorescence quantum yield (PLQY). In this work, the 3D–π–3A structure containing three D and three A units achieves a small ΔEST value and a high PLQY. In contrast, the device efficiency of other materials with weaker TSCT/TBCT effects and fewer (donor/acceptor) units render inferior performances (Fig. 11d).
In the NLO materials, multi-donor/acceptor molecules can be regarded as octopolar systems. In general, the charge distribution of prototypical dipolar and trigonal octupolar (D3 or D3h) chromophore are shown in Fig. 11e. For example, the subtriazaporphyrin skeletons can be used as an excellent typical molecule to study the contribution of dipolar/octupolar to the second-order NLO response. In 2012, Qi and coworkers126 have calculated the Hyper–Rayleigh Scattering response coefficient (βHRS) of the subtriazaporphyrin skeletons using the DFT method. The results reveal that the second-order NLO contribution ratio of dipolar/octupolar by changing the number and orientation of the peripheral fused benzene moieties. Therefore, we can use this multi-donor/acceptor structure to adjust the contradiction between non-linearity and transparency trade-off are expected to be improved quickly in the near future.


2.2.5 TSCT on Asymmetric Spiro Skeletons and Xanthene. 
Besides, a variety of linkers have been used as the scaffold in the design of optoelectronic materials, such as spiro skeletons, xanthene,127–129 anthracene,130 or o-carborane,131 in which the required aromatic systems are covalently connected face-to-face at a close distance in order to induce π–π interaction and the TSCT of the excited state (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of asymmetric spiro skeletons and xanthene. (b) Chemical structures of DM-B, DM-Bm, and DM-G; (c) Molecular structures and design strategy of the TBCT and TSCT TADF emitters. 
Let us start with spiro skeletons molecule. In 2015, the R/S-DPHN compound was reported and constructed using carbon atoms connected to four different atoms or groups,132 in which the non-conjugated carbon atom destroys the intramolecular D–A conjugation. Therefore, their TADF properties are formed by the TSCT interaction between the D and A groups. In general, a common strategy for the construction of both the circularly polarized TADF (CP-TADF) molecules is chiral perturbation, i.e., to form CP-TADF luminescent materials with TBCT characteristics by bonding chiral groups to known TADF fragments through covalent bonds.133 Recently, Jiang and Liao's group developed a series of TSCT molecules using the spatial π-stacked structure to cleverly fix the D group and employing their short-distance steric hindrance to inhibit the free rotation of the A group. The new strategy, as spatially confined (limited) CT different from the traditional TSCT feature, can observe photophysical phenomena and achieve high quantum yield and excellent OLED device performance.134 This group reported that two CP-TADF molecules, namely, SFST (PTZ + TPZ) and SFOT (PXZ + TPZ), based on the TSCT strategy and the asymmetric spiral skeleton, were constructed.27,135–138 In contrast to the DM-B previously reported by the group (Fig. 12b), sp3 hybridized spiro-carbons are chiral because they are attached to four different substituents.43 Moreover, for SFST and SFOT molecules, the D unit (PTZ or PXZ) and the A unit (TPZ) are non-conjugated to each other, leading to their TADF properties becoming completely dependent on the TSCT interactions between D/A. The molecular structures of the SFST and SFOT differ by only one atom from each other, in which SFST contains one sulfur atom and SFOT has one oxygen atom. This slight difference can have an important impact on their photophysical properties and similar effects have been studied in many theoretical and experimental literatures.139,140 Subsequently, Qi et al. have realized the evolution of TBCT to TSCT and achieved the obviously improved luminescence efficiency by adjusting the relative position of the D and A units in a series of AIE-active TADF emitters (Fig. 12c).141
Here, for the xanthene molecules, Swager and coworkers have developed three novel emissive molecules (XPT, XCT, and XtBuCT) comprising D and A groups bridged by 9,9-dimethylxanthene, which can be used as an appealing TADF candidate in both the solution and solid states owing to the intrinsic small ΔEST of TSCT.128 Subsequently, we have calculated and studied the effects of substituents and TSC on the NLO properties of the aforementioned systems.142


2.2.6 Homoconjugation effect. 
Triptycene (TP), a 3D paddle-wheel fashion molecule with a large internal free volume143 (Fig. 13), was first synthesized in 1942 by Bartlett et al.,144 in which the three fused phenyl rings connected to a [2.2.2]bicyclooctatriene unit can communicate via two sp3-hybridized methine bridges, which is called as homoconjugation (Fig. 13a).145,146 Homoconjugation and intramolecular TSCT are molecular phenomena that have been studied since the 1960s. Importantly, such rigid molecules possess extended π-conjugation in three directions, which will affect the electronic properties, solubility, and device performance. So far, Martin and Rathore et al. unequivocally demonstrated the existence of homoconjugation in triptycenes by combining theoretical considerations in combination with experimental methods (Fig. 13),147,148 which can serve as key components in OLED materials,40,149 metal organic frameworks (MOFs),150 and other research areas.151 For instance, Grimsdale et al. reported the three TP-based molecules used for efficient perovskite solar cells as the hole transporting materials.152 Recently, Swager et al. synthesized two triptycene-based D–A molecules, TPA-QNX-(CN)2 and TPA-PRZ(CN)2 (Fig. 13b), which have small ΔEST and acted as potential TADF materials due to the relatively weak coupling afforded by homoconjugation.128 This laboratory team has been committed to the study of the TADF property of triptycene scaffold derivatives in recent years. In 2018, Swager et al. further studied the homoconjugative triptycene scaffold derivatives containing methyl groups and explained the effect of dihedral angle tuning on the TADF properties (Fig. 13c).149 Then, Wright et al. investigated the photophysical and electrochemical properties of a new iptycene structure (Fig. 13d) based on an electron poor ring-fused triptycene core and demonstrated the superiority of transition probability both to and from the ICT state.153 Meanwhile, Chou and coworkers have designed and synthesized two novel TP-pyridine-based electron-transporting molecules (TPP and TPDP) that enabled high-efficiency OLEDs.154
 Fig. 13  Chemical structures of homoconjugation characteristic compounds from the representative literature. 
Our research group theoretically studied the NLO and TADF properties of both the homoconjugation and conventional conjugated D–A compounds. It was found that the main excited state of the conventional conjugated compound has a lower excitation energy and a larger first hyperpolarizability density distribution, which exhibits excellent NLO performance. At the same time, the βtot and ΔEST values depend on the properties of the A groups from pyrazine, dicyanopyrazine to dicyanoquinoxaline. In addition, for solid-state polarization environment, the ΔEST values of the substituted dicyanopyrazine/dicyanoquinoxaline are decreased by an order of magnitude, which proved that they are potentially effective TADF materials in theory.84 Although the homoconjugation characteristics of these compounds are not the traditional types of space conjugation, it is possible to study the existence of this kind of TSC interaction and its effect on the second-order NLO properties.


2.2.7 [2+2] cycloaddition. 
In the field of photo and solid-state chemistry, it has always been the focus of scientists to find highly efficient luminescent materials with roughly the same function in different states; thus, it is of great significance to design and search new luminescent materials with practical applications and technological innovation.155,156 However, most luminescent materials that exhibit high quantum yields in solution become almost non-luminescent in the solid or aggregated states because of the strong intermolecular interactions.157 The development of solid-state photochemistry is greatly limited by this effect of aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ). Lu's group reported that the [2+2] cycloaddition reaction of styrylbenzoxazole derivative in the crystal under UV light can make the molecular crystal exhibit bending, curling, rolling, and salient behaviors (Fig. 14a).158 Recently, the research team designed a series of styrene benzoxazole class of molecules through a simple solid-state light induced [2+2] cycloaddition, which successfully realized the in situ conversion of ACQ to an AIE material. In their work, t-FSBO and t-2FSBO compounds with strong π–π interaction in the solid-state are typical ACQ molecules. However, under UV irradiation and the [2+2] cycloaddition reaction in the solid state, t-FSBO and t-2FPCBO can generate AIE activity molecules t-FPCBO and c-2FPCBO (Fig. 14b), respectively. It is proved by the crystal structure and theoretical calculation that the intramolecular and intermolecular TSC effect is the cause of the anomalous phenomenon.159 In addition, fluorine-containing styrylbenzoxazoles and styrylebenthiazoles derivatives were designed, as shown in Fig. 14c. By adjusting the number and position of fluorine atoms on the benzene ring, the different bending behavior of the molecular crystal was realized, which opens a novel path for crystal engineering.160 In addition, the color variation of ultralong organic luminescence (UOL) can be regulated by intermolecular TSCT character.161 Lu et al. designed two compounds, namely, CzSO and β-CzSO, with an intermolecular TSCT character (structures are shown in Fig. 14d), which demonstrated that a bluish-green UOL material based on this mechanism is obtained successfully.162
 Fig. 14  (a) Molecular structures of styrylbenzoxazole derivatives and single crystal structure of BOACl24 and DBOACl24. (b) Chemical and single crystal structures of t-FSBO and t-2FSBO. (c) Molecular structures and schematic illustration of the bending of BOAF4 and BOAF24 under UV irradiation. (d) Schematic illustration of charge-transfer character, single-crystal, and orbital distributions of the CzSO dimer. 
In our previous work, we theoretically studied that the effects of the donors and increased layers n (n = 1–3) on the interlayer spacing of naphthalimide (1a), -phenyl (1b), and -naphthyl (1c), as well as the corresponding dimers and trimers on the π–π interaction and second-order NLO response (Fig. 15a).163 The results find that there is a proportional relationship of β value with the layer number n and the interaction energy of the antiparallel stacking mode is larger. In addition, Xu et al. systematically and comprehensively investigated the NLO properties of phenalenyl (PLY) and its dimer by theoretical calculation, which possess an interesting 12-center 2-electron (12c/2e) bond formed by effective π–π overlap (Fig. 15b). They also found that the highly delocalized π-electron, unconventional bonding, and good chemical stability of PLY and its derivatives are promising as high-performance NLO materials.164,165
 Fig. 15  (a) Molecular structure and intermolecular distance in the dimers of naphthalimide (1a), -phenyl (1b), and -naphthyl (1c) dimers; (b) Geometric structures, NPA charges, and electrostatic potential of the two phenalenyl compounds. 
In addition, the UV light condition is similar to the NLO switches we studied before, except for the irreversibility of the [2+2] cycloaddition reaction. However, there are few theoretical studies on the variation of the NLO properties through the [2+2] cycloaddition reaction, which will be interesting due to the existence of the TSCT characteristic.
In general, the NLO response mainly depends on the transferred charge and the associated CT distance (i.e., the transition dipole moment), as well as the lower dihedral angles between the D-linker-A of the molecules.166 In recent years, the highly unsaturated organic frameworks with large dipole moments and hyperpolarizability have received more attention.167,168 In this case, a higher transition dipole moment indicates a better coupling/interaction between the D–A junctions. This will subsequently lead to a better energy transfer between the two moieties. To compare the regulating effect of the TBCT/TSCT characteristics on the NLO response, the previous works of our research group have studied the second-order NLO properties of L-shaped and U-shaped molecules.142 The result found that the L-shaped molecules with TBCT characteristics have maximum CT and the associated CT distance compared to the corresponding U-shaped molecules, which are indispensable requirements to obtain high NLO response. Therefore, this indicates that the molecule with larger transition dipole moment will result in a higher NLO response.

3. Current challenges and outlook
Through-space conjugation, which is based on the close π–π interaction and is different from through-bond conjugation, plays an important role in both novel functional materials and biomacromolecules. This perspective is an account of recent advances in the field of NLO and TADF materials based on TBCT and TSCT characteristics, especially for the TSCT characteristic. Although researches on the optoelectronic properties and applications of TSC molecules with novel structures have been carried out by various research groups, a systematic and thorough study of through-space conjugated systems on the regulation of the NLO response is still in the development stage. It is hoped that this perspective will provide more new ideas for the structural design and performance optimization of new NLO materials. As we known, in the design of NLO materials, the contradiction between NLO and light transmittance is an important challenge at present. The studies have found that the maximum absorption wavelength λmax will be redshifted when the length of the conjugated π-electron system increases, showing that the second-order NLO response will increase. This means that transparency to visible light will become worse, which limits the practical application of these compounds. However, if we link the stronger D/A groups or the conjugated chains with the various kinds of TSC core, their NLO responses are generally increased but the influence on the transparency is relatively small. Therefore, from the standpoint of the high transparency and the relatively medium β values, this is a major advantage of TSCT characteristic molecules as NLO materials and an effective way to solve the contradiction between NLO responses and transparency. For outlook, the further work is divided into the following aspects: (1) Based on the various kinds of TSC core such as [2.2]pCp, naphthalene, TPE, and spiro skeletons, the molecules with NLO properties can be designed to explore the role of TSCT in the design of NLO materials. The TSCT mechanisms in NLO materials need to be studied in detail by theoretical and experimental studies. Further, establishing the relationship between the geometry and property is of high significance to deepen the insights into the TSC feature. (2) Design molecules with both TBCT and TSCT properties to explore the regulation mechanism and variation trend of the NLO coefficient of the system that TSC and TBC exist simultaneously. It is expected that the synergistic effect between the two channels exhibit excellent NLO performance. Overall, we believe that continued research and development on through-space conjugation interaction will be fully developed in future innovative applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the “12th Five-Year” Science and Technology Research Project of the Education Department of Jilin Province ([2016] 494), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21173035), Natural Science Foundation of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region of China (2020BS02013), and Inner Mongolia University for Nationalities (IMUN) Doctoral Research Start-up Foundation (BS566).
References
H. Dong, C. Wang and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5211–5222 RSC .
H. R. Tseng, L. Ying, B. B. Y. Hsu, L. A. Perez, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6353–6357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ooyama, Y. Hagiwara, Y. Oda, T. Mizumo, Y. Harima and J. Ohshita, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2336–2340 RSC .
K. R. Wee, H. C. Ahn, H. J. Son, W. S. Han, J. E. Kim, D. W. Cho and S. O. Kang, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 8472–8475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, S. Chen, Z. Xue, Y. Li, H. Liu, W. Yang and Y. Li, Dyes Pigm., 2016, 125, 100–105 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Suponitsky, Y. Liao and A. E. Masunov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 10994–11001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Kalinin, S. M. Sharipova, T. I. Burganov, A. I. Levitskaya, Y. B. Dudkina, A. R. Khamatgalimov, S. A. Katsyuba, Y. H. Budnikova and M. Y. Balakina, Dyes Pigm., 2018, 156, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Franken, A. E. Hill, C. W. Peters and G. Weinreich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1961, 7, 118–119 CrossRef .
M. Bass, P. A. Franken, J. F. Ward and G. Weinreich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1962, 9, 446–448 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Franken and J. F. Ward, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1963, 35, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Dalton, P. A. Sullivan and D. H. Bale, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 25–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Evans, T. L. Hanley, M. A. Skidmore, T. P. Davis, G. K. Such, L. H. Yee, G. E. Ball and D. A. Lewis, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 249–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawata and Y. Kawata, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1777–1788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Champagne, A. Plaquet, J. L. Pozzo, V. Rodriguez and F. Castet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8101–8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Muhammad, A. Irfan, A. R. Chaudhry and A. G. Al-Sehemi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7102–7109 RSC .
D. R. Kanis, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 195–242 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Wang, J. T. Ye, Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Zhao and Y. Q. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7531–7547 RSC .
M. G. Humphrey, Aust. J. Chem., 2018, 71, 731–742 CrossRef CAS .
K. Clays and A. Persoons, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 2980–2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sheik-Bahae, A. A. Said, T. Wei, D. J. Hagan and E. W. V. Stryland, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1990, 26, 760–769 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Banziger, R. A. Clendening, B. M. Oxley and T. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 11901–11909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, Y. Li, P. Song, Y. Yang and F. Ma, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 245, 118897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, J. Sun, J. Yang and Y. Song, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 10808–10816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Lo and P. L. Burn, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1097–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. T. Siddiqui, A. A. Awasthi, P. Bhui, M. Muneer, K. R. S. Chandrakumar, S. Bose and N. Agarwal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 1003–1014 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Wang, S. Y. Yang, Q. S. Tian, C. Zhong, Y. K. Qu, Y. J. Yu, Z. Q. Jiang and L. S. Liao, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saigo, K. Miyata, S. I. Tanaka, H. Nakanotani, C. Adachi and K. Onda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2475–2480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Adachi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 060101 CrossRef .
M. Moral, L. Muccioli, W. J. Son, Y. Olivier and J. C. Sancho-García, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015, 11, 168–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28330–28336 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Xie, J. X. Zhou, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9476–9494 RSC .
Q. Li, J. Hu, J. Lv, X. Wang, S. Shao, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20174–20182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, J. Hu, X. Wang, S. Shao, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1112–1120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, J. Hu, X. Wang, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17739–17742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Woon, C. L. Yi, K. C. Pan, M. K. Etherington, C. C. Wu, K. T. Wong and A. P. Monkman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 12400–12410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, P. Shen, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, CCS Chem., 2019, 1, 181–196 CAS .
J. Yang, M. Fang and Z. Li, Aggregate, 2020, 1, 6–18 CrossRef .
C. C. Peng, S. Y. Yang, H.-C. Li, G. H. Xie, L.-S. Cui, S. N. Zou, C. Poriel, Z.-Q. Jiang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kawasumi, T. Wu, T. Zhu, H. S. Chae, T. Van Voorhis, M. A. Baldo and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11908–11911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shen, Z. Zhuang, X. F. Jiang, J. Li, S. Yao, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2648–2656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu and F. W. Chen, J. Comput. Chem., 2012, 33, 580–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, L. S. Cui, H.-C. Li, A. J. Gillett, F. Auras, Y. K. Qu, C. Zhong, S. T. E. Jones, Z. Q. Jiang, R. H. Friend and L. S. Liao, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1332–1338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Nalwa, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 341–358 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, J. L. Brédas, G. Chen and S. Mukamel, Chem. Phys., 1996, 210, 353–366 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun and J. Autschbach, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2013, 14, 2450–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4407–4416 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, P. Kleine, Y. Karpov, X. Qiu, H. Komber, K. Sahre, A. Kiriy, R. Lygaitis, S. Lenk, S. Reineke and B. Voit, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605051 CrossRef .
D. L. Sun, S. V. Rosokha, S. V. Lindeman and J. K. Kochi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15950–15963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, G. Lu, J. Zhuo, J. Wang, X. Li and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 2489–2496 RSC .
B. Patrizi, C. Cozza, A. Pietropaolo, P. Foggi and M. Siciliani de Cumis, Molecules, 2020, 25, 430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Morisaki and Y. Chujo, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1249–1257 RSC .
S. Zhen, J. C. Mao, L. Chen, S. Ding, W. Luo, X. S. Zhou, A. Qin, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4200–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Morisaki, S. Ueno, A. Saeki, A. Asano, S. Seki and Y. Chujo, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4216–4224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shuai, S. Ramasesha and J. L. Brédas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 250, 14–18 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Gieseking, S. Mukhopadhyay, C. Risko and J. L. Brédas, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Gao, J. K. Feng and C. C. Sun, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1992, 42, 1747–1758 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Liu, J. K. Feng, A. M. Ren, X. Zhou and W. N. Leng, Chin. J. Chem., 2003, 21, 9–15 CAS .
J. Zyss, I. Ledoux, S. Volkov, V. Chernyak, S. Mukamel, G. P. Bartholomew and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 11956–11962 CrossRef CAS .
O. Maury and H. Le Bozec, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 691–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Liu, Y. Yang, H. Xu, C. Peng, S. Bo, Z. Zhen, X. Liu and L. Qiu, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 112, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Xiao, F. Liu, F. Huo, L. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Bo, L. Qiu and Z. Zhen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6704–6712 RSC .
H. T. Bai, H. C. Lin and T. Y. Luh, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 4591–4595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, Y. Qian and W. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12375–12380 RSC .
B. J. Coe, J. A. Harris, J. J. Hall, B. S. Brunschwig, S. T. Hung, W. Libaers, K. Clays, S. J. Coles, P. N. Horton, M. E. Light, M. B. Hursthouse, J. Garín and J. Orduna, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5907–5918 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venkatraman, S. V. K. Panneer, E. Varathan and V. Subramanian, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 3374–3385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gingras, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1051–1095 RSC .
E. Botek, J.-M. André, B. Champagne, T. Verbiest and A. Persoons, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 234713 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Duan, C. Ju, G. Yang, E. Fron, E. Coutino-Gonzalez, S. Semin, C. Fan, R. S. Balok, J. Cremers, P. Tinnemans, Y. Feng, Y. Li, J. Hofkens, A. E. Rowan, T. Rasing and J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8968–8977 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ledoux, J. Zyss, J. S. Siegel, J. Brienne and J. M. Lehn, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 172, 440–444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, S. Xu, M. Chen, J. Qian and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2021, 37, 25–37 CrossRef CAS .
R. Medishetty, J. K. Zaręba, D. Mayer, M. Samoć and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4976–5004 RSC .
H. Kaji, H. Suzuki, T. Fukushima, K. Shizu, K. Suzuki, S. Kubo, T. Komino, H. Oiwa, F. Suzuki, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and C. Adachi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Endo, K. Sato, K. Yoshimura, T. Kai, A. Kawada, H. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 083302 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, J. Li, K. Shizu, S. Huang, S. Hirata, H. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14706–14709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tanaka, K. Shizu, H. Miyazaki and C. Adachi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11392–11394 RSC .
G. Méhes, H. Nomura, Q. Zhang, T. Nakagawa and C. Adachi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11311–11315 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, H. Kuwabara, W. J. Potscavage, S. Huang, Y. Hatae, T. Shibata and C. Adachi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 18070–18081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Z. Cheng, X. Song, X. Yan, K. Ye, Y. Liu, G. Yang and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9892–9901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xue, B. Cui, S. Xie and S. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 302–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, T. Zhang, L. Zhan, C. Zhong, S. Gong, Z.-H. Lu and C. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1558–1566 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, Z. Wang, L. Zhan, C. Zhong, S. Gong, G. Xie and C. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1547–1553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shizu, H. Tanaka, M. Uejima, T. Sato, K. Tanaka, H. Kaji and C. Adachi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1291–1297 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Ye, H. Q. Wang, Y. Zhang and Y. Q. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 921–931 CrossRef CAS .
M. Steeger, M. Holzapfel, A. Schmiedel and C. Lambert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13403–13412 RSC .
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, J. Mol. Graph., 1996, 14, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, L. Arunagiri, L. Zhang, J. Huang, W. Ma, J. Zhang and H. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6501–6509 RSC .
D. J. Cram and J. M. Cram, Acc. Chem. Res., 1971, 4, 204–213 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sharma, E. Spuling, C. M. Mattern, W. Li, O. Fuhr, Y. Tsuchiya, C. Adachi, S. Bräse, I. D. W. Samuel and E. Zysman-Colman, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6689–6696 RSC .
E. Spuling, N. Sharma, I. D. W. Samuel, E. Zysman-Colman and S. Bräse, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9278–9281 RSC .
M. Y. Zhang, Z. Y. Li, B. Lu, Y. Wang, Y. D. Ma and C. H. Zhao, Org. Lett., 2018, 20, 6868–6871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Oldham, Y.-J. Miao, R. J. Lachicotte and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 419–420 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Bazan, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 8615–8635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Bazan, W. J. Oldham, R. J. Lachicotte, S. Tretiak, V. Chernyak and S. Mukamel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9188–9204 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Bartholomew, I. Ledoux, S. Mukamel, G. C. Bazan and J. Zyss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13480–13485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Caramori and S. E. Galembeck, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 1705–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Q. Fang, Q. Lu, S. J. Zhang, Y. Y. Jin and Z. Q. Liu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4164–4167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ayhan, A. Singh, E. Jeanneau, V. Ahsen, J. Zyss, I. Ledoux-Rak, A. G. Gürek, C. Hirel, Y. Bretonnière and C. Andraud, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 4359–4370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Hong, H. Y. Woo, B. Liu and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7435–7443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Q. Wu, H. L. Xu, S. L. Sun and Z. M. Su, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 767–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Ye, J. H. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Q. Qiu and L. H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 21692–21701 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Caramori and S. E. Galembeck, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 11784–11800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Boekelheide, Syntheses and properties of the [2n]Cyclophanes. Berlin, Heidelberg,  1983 Search PubMed .

          H. Hopf and R. Gleiter, Modern Cyclophane Chemistry, Weinheim, Wiley-VCH,  2004 Search PubMed .
T. Hirose, Y. Tsunoi, Y. Fujimori and K. Matsuda, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 1637–1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Hu, Y. J. Pu, Y. Yamashita, F. Satoh, S. Kawata, H. Katagiri, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3871–3878 RSC .
B. He, H. Nie, L. Chen, X. Lou, R. Hu, A. Qin, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 6174–6177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. H. Wang, B. He, H. Nie, R. Hu, F. Huang, A. Qin, X.-S. Zhou, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4231–4235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Feng, Y. X. Yuan, J. B. Xiong, Y. S. Zheng and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7452–7476 RSC .
Z. Zhuang, P. Shen, S. Ding, W. Luo, B. He, H. Nie, B. Wang, T. Huang, R. Hu, A. Qin, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10842–10845 RSC .
B. He, H. Nie, W. Luo, R. Hu, A. Qin, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, Org. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 1091–1095 RSC .
B. He, W. Luo, S. Hu, B. Chen, S. Zhen, H. Nie, Z. Zhao and B. Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 12553–12560 RSC .
R. Misra, T. Jadhav, B. Dhokale and S. M. Mobin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9076–9078 RSC .
J. Xiong, X. Li, C. Yuan, S. Semin, Z. Yao, J. Xu, T. Rasing and X. H. Bu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 2263–2271 RSC .
A. Chatterjee, D. G. Khandare, P. Saini, A. Chattopadhyay, M. S. Majik and M. Banerjee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 31479–31484 RSC .
M. Rana, N. Singla, A. Chatterjee, A. Shukla and P. Chowdhury, Opt. Mater., 2016, 62, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, M. Xie, J. He, B. Xu, Z. Chi, W. Tian, L. Jiang, F. Zhao, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Xu and J. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 273–275 RSC .
C. Liu, G. Yang, Y. Si and X. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5032–5039 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vij, V. Bhalla and M. Kumar, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9565–9627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xiao, M. Myers, Q. Miao, S. Sanaur, K. Pang, M. L. Steigerwald and C. Nuckolls, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 7556–7560 CrossRef .
D. Sun, S. V. Rosokha and J. K. Kochi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5133–5136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Steeger and C. Lambert, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11937–11948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pramanik, H. Deol, V. Bhalla and M. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12112–12123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Wang, J. Lv, S. Shao, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2915–2923 RSC .
X. Zheng, R. Huang, C. Zhong, G. Xie, W. Ning, M. Huang, F. Ni, F. B. Dias and C. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, D. Qi, L. Zhao, C. Chen, Y. Bian and W. Li, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 10249–10256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Chang, Y. Deng, A. F. Heyduk, C. K. Chang and D. G. Nocera, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 959–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsujimoto, D. G. Ha, G. Markopoulos, H. S. Chae, M. A. Baldo and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4894–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Li, W.-C. Chen, X. Lv, C. Zhou, C.-S. Lee and C. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 25489–25498 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagata, A. Osuka and K. Maruyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 3054–3059 CrossRef CAS .
H. Naito, Y. Morisaki and Y. Chujo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5084–5087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Imagawa, S. Hirata, K. Totani, T. Watanabe and M. Vacha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13268–13271 RSC .
S. Feuillastre, M. Pauton, L. Gao, A. Desmarchelier, A. J. Riives, D. Prim, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, G. Muller, G. Clavier and G. Pieters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3990–3993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Zou, C. C. Peng, S. Y. Yang, Y. K. Qu, Y. J. Yu, X. Chen, Z. Q. Jiang and L.-S. Liao, Org. Lett., 2021, 23, 958–962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, Y. K. Wang, C. C. Peng, Z. G. Wu, S. Yuan, Y. J. Yu, H. Li, T. T. Wang, H. C. Li, Y. X. Zheng, Z. Q. Jiang and L. S. Liao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17756–17765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, Z. Liu, C. Yang, C. Zhong, J. Qin, G. Yu and Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3987–3995 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Wang, G. Xie, H. C. Li, S. Y. Yang, H. Li, Y. L. Xiao, C. Zhong, K. Sarvendra, A. Khan, Z.-Q. Jiang and L. S. Liao, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 1757–1763 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, Q. S. Tian, Y. J. Yu, S. N. Zou, H. C. Li, A. Khan, Q. H. Wu, Z. Q. Jiang and L. S. Liao, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 10628–10637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, H. Park, S. R. Park, S. H. Lee, Y. Ahn, Y. S. Lee and M. C. Suh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 28576–28587 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, K. Shizu, J. Lee and C. Adachi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2948–2955 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, H. Ji, D. Zhang, K. Xue, P. Zhang, Z. Qi and H. Zhu, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 188, 109208 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Ye, L. Wang, H. Q. Wang, X. M. Pan, H. M. Xie and Y. Q. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18850–18859 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Tsui, A. J. Paraskos, L. Torun, T. M. Swager and E. L. Thomas, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 3350–3358 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Bartlett, M. J. Ryan and S. G. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1942, 64, 2649–2653 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama, Y. Hirao, T. Nishiuchi and T. Kubo, ChemPlusChem, 2017, 82, 1006–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kodama, S. Miyazaki and T. Kubo, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 560 CrossRef .
H. D. Martin, B. Mayer, R. Gleiter, W. Schäfer and F. Vögtle, Chem. Ber., 1983, 116, 2546–2553 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Talipov, T. S. Navale and R. Rathore, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14468–14472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, M. Einzinger, T. Zhu, H. S. Chae, S. Jeon, S.-G. Ihn, M. Sim, S. Kim, M. Su, G. Teverovskiy, T. Wu, T. Van Voorhis, T. M. Swager, M. A. Baldo and S. L. Buchwald, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1462–1466 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Crane, B. O. Patrick and M. J. MacLachlan, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 8026–8033 RSC .
K. Baumgartner, M. Hoffmann, F. Rominger, S. M. Elbert, A. Dreuw and M. Mastalerz, J. Org. Chem., 2020, 85, 15256–15272 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Krishna, D. Sabba, H. Li, J. Yin, P. P. Boix, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2702–2709 RSC .
S. Montanaro, D. G. Congrave, M. K. Etherington and I. A. Wright, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12886–12890 RSC .
J. Jayakumar, W. L. Wu, C. L. Chang, T. Y. Han, L. Y. Ting, C. M. Yeh, H. W. Hung and H. H. Chou, Org. Electron., 2021, 88, 106013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Y. Yue, G. Qian and B. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1126–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tian, F. Qi, H. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Pan, R. Chen, Z. Shen, Z. Liu, L. Huang and W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2688 CrossRef PubMed .
E. A. Chandross and C. J. Dempster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1970, 92, 3586–3593 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. Chen, Z. Wu, J. Zhao, J. Sun and R. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9463–9467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Xing, J. Gong, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Wei, G. Yang, J. W. Y. Lam, R. Lu and B. Z. Tang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1566–1572 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Liu, K. Ye, Q. Li, J. Zhang, H. Xing, P. Wei, J. Sun, F. Ciucci, J. W. Y. Lam, R. Lu and B. Z. Tang, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 1491–1500 Search PubMed .
W. C. Chen, B. Huang, S. F. Ni, Y. Xiong, A. L. Rogach, Y. Wan, D. Shen, Y. Yuan, J. X. Chen, M. F. Lo, C. Cao, Z. L. Zhu, Y. Wang, P. Wang, L. S. Liao and C. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903112 CrossRef .
Y. Luo, Z. Pang, C. Li, K. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Huang and Z. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 11603–11609 RSC .
L. Wang, J. T. Ye, H. Q. Wang, H. M. Xie and Y. Q. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 21616–21626 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Gao, H. L. Xu, S. Muhammad and Z. M. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 18699–18706 RSC .
F. W. Gao, R. L. Zhong, H. L. Xu and Z. M. Su, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 25472–25478 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Vázquez, H. Kim, B. M. Kobilka, B. J. Hale, M. Jeffries-El, P. Zimmerman and T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14382–14392 CrossRef .
D. F. S. Machado, T. O. Lopes, I. T. Lima, D. A. da Silva Filho and H. C. B. de Oliveira, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17660–17669 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Flynn, G. Ramakrishna, H.-B. Yang, B. H. Northrop, P. J. Stang and T. Goodson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1348–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:

Jin-Ting Ye
	Jin-Ting Ye received her PhD degree from Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China in 2019. Currently, she is working as a lecturer at the College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Inner Mongolia University for the Nationalities, China. Her research focuses on the theoretical design of organic molecules with non-linear optical- and thermally activated delayed fluorescence properties using density functional theory.

Yong-Qing Qiu
	Yong-Qing Qiu received his PhD in inorganic chemistry from Northeast Normal University (China) in 2003. He then moved to Changchun Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences for postdoctoral research, as well as the University of Gloucestershire (United Kingdom) as a visiting scholar. He is currently full Professor at the Northeast Normal University. His research focuses on the design of organic magnetic materials and non-linear optical materials using density functional theory.
P = χ(1)F	(1)
P = χ(1)F + χ(2)FF + χ(1)FFF	(2)
P = μ − μ0 = αF + βFF + γFFF +…	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Diagram depicting the optical polarization in linear (a), centrosymmetric non-linear (b), and non-centrosymmetric non-linear media (c), ref. 16.	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  Potential energy surfaces of the photophysical processes in TADF compounds. S0, S1, and T1 represent the singlet ground state, lowest singlet, and triplet excited states, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of the through-space charge transfer characteristic.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The calculated second-order NLO coefficient βx values (10−30 esu) for a series of substituted benzene molecules, the experimental values represented in brackets; (b) chemical structures of NEPEA-nn′ and NEPEA-m. (c) Schematic representation of octupolar symmetries.59,60	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of x-PXZP and the DACQ molecule (a) and its HOMO and LUMO distributions (b).	 

 	Fig. 6  [2.2]pCp based TADF systems.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Substitution at the 4, 7, 12, and 15 positions for [2.2]pCp as a point-charge template of an octupole; (b) the θ dependence of βJ=1 and βJ=3 values, as proposed previously in ref. 95; (c) the structures and crucial transitions (d) for four substituted [2.2]pCp molecules (ref. 88).	 

 	Fig. 8  The chemical structures of naphthalene and the corresponding substituted molecules (a); The chemical structures and spatial distributions of the frontier orbitals of BCzPN and BPAPN (b).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Molecular and crystal structures, and frontier molecular orbital map of the archetypal folded molecule (Z)-o-BPTPE; (b) Crystal structure of the TPE derivatives and the distance between its corresponding π–π stacked aromatic rings (Å).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Chemical structures and (b) the βHRS values of the studied compounds calculated using the DFT method.	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structure (a) and illustration of the toroidal delocalization of the π electrons (b) of hexaphenylbenzene (HPB); (c) molecular design and chemical structures of TSCT-HABs; (d) few-(D–A) and multi-(D/A)-based TADF materials; (e) the charge distribution of prototypical dipolar and trigonal octupolar systems.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of asymmetric spiro skeletons and xanthene. (b) Chemical structures of DM-B, DM-Bm, and DM-G; (c) Molecular structures and design strategy of the TBCT and TSCT TADF emitters.	 

 	Fig. 13  Chemical structures of homoconjugation characteristic compounds from the representative literature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Molecular structures of styrylbenzoxazole derivatives and single crystal structure of BOACl24 and DBOACl24. (b) Chemical and single crystal structures of t-FSBO and t-2FSBO. (c) Molecular structures and schematic illustration of the bending of BOAF4 and BOAF24 under UV irradiation. (d) Schematic illustration of charge-transfer character, single-crystal, and orbital distributions of the CzSO dimer.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Molecular structure and intermolecular distance in the dimers of naphthalimide (1a), -phenyl (1b), and -naphthyl (1c) dimers; (b) Geometric structures, NPA charges, and electrostatic potential of the two phenalenyl compounds.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
