Recent synthetic methods involving carbon radicals generated by electrochemical catalysis  - Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2OB00424K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2OB00424K
(Review Article)
Org. Biomol. Chem., 2022, 20, 5907-5932Recent synthetic methods involving carbon radicals generated by electrochemical catalysis

        
          
            Phuc H. 
            Pham
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Haley A. 
            Petersen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jaclyn L. 
            Katsirubas
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Oana R. 
            Luca
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, University of Colorado Boulder and the Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, Boulder, CO 80300, USA. E-mail: oana.luca@colorado.edu;   Tel: +1-(303) 739-6721
Received 
      2nd March 2022
    , Accepted 24th March 2022First published on 19th April 2022AbstractDriven by a resurgence of interest in electrode-driven synthetic methods, this paper covers recent activity in the field of mediated electrochemical and photoelectrochemical bond activation, inclusive of C–H, C–C, C–N, and other C–heteroatom bonds.Phuc H. PhamPhuc Pham received his B.E. in Chemical Engineering from HCMC University of Technology, Vietnam in 2018. He then joined Prof. Oana R. Luca's lab at the University of Colorado Boulder (USA), where he is currently working on developing new redox strategies for polymer re- and upcycling.Haley A. PetersenHaley Petersen graduated from the University of Arizona in 2018 with a BS in chemistry. She is currently a PhD candidate in the Luca group at the University of Colorado Boulder, where her current research focus is the electrochemical capture and conversion of carbon dioxide.Jaclyn L. KatsirubasJackie is an undergraduate researcher majoring in chemistry and atmospheric & oceanic sciences at University of Colorado Boulder. She currently develops electrocatalysts to be used in the conversion of carbon dioxide and nitrogen to chemical fuels. She has a passion for the climate sciences and green synthesis and wants to apply her chemical knowledge to sustainability goals in the future.Oana R. LucaOana Luca is an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at University of Colorado Boulder, a fellow of the Renewable & Sustainable Energy Institute and an affiliate of the National Renewable Energy Laboratories. She is also a Mercator Fellow of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, the German National Science Foundation. Her research team at Colorado develops electrochemical solutions to large societal issues through sustainable chemical transformations. Her work focuses on catalysis and mechanistic science for the capture and conversion of carbon and nitrogen into useful products, as well as organic electrosynthesis applied to polymer re- and upcycling.
1. Introduction
The addition and removal of electrons through the use of electricity at an electrode surface has emerged as a strategy for the development of new synthetic disconnections in organic, inorganic and organometallic synthesis.1,2 The use of electrical current or voltage allows for generation of highly energetic oxidizers or reductants that can, in turn, participate in chemical reactions. Electrochemical methods therefore avoid the use of energetic reagents that often require special safety precautions for use, handling, and disposal.
1.1. Ohm's law
In order to understand the quantification of number of electrons and holes in the electrochemical experiment, we first need to understand some basic relationships between voltage, current and the underlying resistance. The first relationship we will look at is Ohm's law: eqn (1). The term V is the voltage (measured in Volts V, also interchangeably referred to as potential), which is directly proportional to a term I which is the current (units in Amperes A or Coulombs C per second) being passed in a chemical experiment. In Ohm's law R is the resistance of the system (measured in Ohms Ω). R is a combination of the inherent resistance of the electrochemical cell/separators/solvent and the chemical reaction itself which is, in effect, a resistance being overcome during the experiment. V = I × R(1)
In an electrochemical experiment, R is almost never measured. However, its presence and importance cannot be understated. Resistance measurements are crucial in addressing experimental design issues such as resistive heating and limitations in holding experimental parameters constant throughout the experiment such as exceeding compliance of the electrochemical instrumentation.
The relationship between voltage and current can be explained through an analogy with a faucet with variable diameter. The current in coulombs per second is a measure of charge passed over a unit of time, in effect being directly analogous to the rate of flow of water out of the faucet. On the other hand, a voltage change in relationship to a current I would be analogous to changing the diameter of the faucet. A higher voltage i.e. a larger faucet diameter would allow for a higher current/flow of water to pass.
1.2. Faraday's law
An additional useful mathematical relationship is shown in eqn (2). These equations allow us to quantify the overall charge passed Q (in units of Coulombs) as the integral of the current (in units of Coulombs per second) change over time when keeping the voltage constant. The charge passed in an experiment is related to the number of moles of electrons or holes delivered to the system through Faraday's law (eqn (2)). Q is therefore equal to the number of moles of reactant transformed multiplied by Faraday's constant 96485 C mol−1 and the number of total electron equivalents exchanged in a transformation. (2)
1.3. Equipment and cell design
The preparative scale electrochemical synthesis is commonly called an electrolysis – simply meaning that there is a change induced in the system through the passage of electricity. Electrolysis experiments are conducted in electrochemical cells, often just simple glass vessels and vials with the use of electrodes which can be made of different types of conductive materials. The electrodes are connected to a potentiostat or a power source using wires. The power source or potentiostat in turn, may be attached to a computer, but that is not necessary especially in the case of a controlled current electrolysis, in which there is no requirement to use a reference electrode (Fig. 1a). Several designs for electrochemical cells are known and many of them are available commercially. Electrochemical synthesis can be conducted by holding either the current or voltage fixed. An electrolysis conducted while holding the voltage constant is a controlled potential electrolysis (CPE) (Fig. 1b), while an electrolysis at constant current is commonly abbreviated CCE (Fig. 1a). CPE is executed with the use of a computer-connected potentiostat and requires the use of a reference electrode. The reference electrode is used as a static potential comparison in this experiment, and it is imperative that the reference not change during the experiment.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a controlled current electrolysis setup shown as undivided. (b) Schematic of a controlled potential electrolysis. 
1.4. Diagnostics and analogy with chemical redox reactions
A useful diagnostic technique in electrochemical measurements is cyclic voltammetry, also known as CV. Several resources are available to introduce the reader to the technique.3,4 Cyclic voltammetry may be used to determine either reduction or oxidation potentials for various different types of chemical compounds, as long as they are freely diffusing in solution. These potentials are useful in comparing the relative oxidizing or reducing strength of chemical species through the mapping of redox potentials.
A ranking of formal redox potentials for various redox reagents has been previously reported.1 Additionally, CVs may be used as a useful tool to screen for catalytic activity. A multi-fold increase in current responses at otherwise “duck-shaped” reversible waves is a quick diagnostic for catalytic response. When observed, the screening experiment is followed by a preparative scale bulk electrolysis coupled to product analysis and isolation, to determine the efficiency of the conversion.
As mentioned previously, the replacement of chemical reducing (Fig. 2a) or oxidizing agents (Fig. 2c) with cathodes (Fig. 2b) and anodes (Fig. 2d), respectively, has a positive impact on the overall safety of the chemical process. Several of the common strong reducing and oxidizing agents have extensive handling, use and disposal precautions listed in their materials safety datasheets and require training to use.
 Fig. 2  Chemical vs. electrochemical oxidation and reduction reactions. (a) Generic chemical reduction. (b) Electrochemical reduction. (c) Generic chemical oxidation. (d) Electrochemical oxidation reaction. 
Let's next look at an example of a standard chemical reduction reaction. In a reduction reaction, a molecule receives an electron from a chemical species (the reducing agent), which in turn becomes oxidized (Fig. 2a). An analogous electrochemical process replaces the reducing agent with a cathode (Fig. 2b). The cathode then delivers the electrons to the molecule to be reduced. To account for all the charge passed, however, the anode of the experiment will need to remove electrons from the system. For this to occur, a sacrificial redox couple is usually employed. Additionally, a separator may be used to ensure that the species in the cathodic chamber are isolated from the anodic side of the cell. Akin to the side-by-side comparison in Fig. 2a and b, a chemical oxidation process can be translated into an electrochemical step. Instead of using the chemical oxidizer to remove an electron from the molecule of interest (Fig. 2c), the anode in the experiment removes the electrons instead (Fig. 2d). The cathode in this experiment delivers the necessary charge to maintain neutrality to a sacrificial agent to be reduced. The electrode where the desired chemistry is occurring is additionally referred to as the working electrode, whereas the electrode that is used to maintain charge neutrality is dubbed the counter electrode, because it provides the counter charge.
1.5. Conventions
Several conventions are utilized in electrochemical measurements. For the purposes of this paper, we use positive current and voltage as corresponding to oxidation/anodic processes, with negative current and voltage pertaining to cathodic reactions.
1.6. Conversion of potentials and reference electrodes
With a mature science of electrochemistry also comes a wide variety of ways to measure potential and currents. In controlled potential experiments, the potential is measured against a reference, which does not change over time.1 Some common references stable in aqueous media across a wide pH range are the saturated calomel electrodes (SCE) which stands at 254 mV vs. the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) and silver/silver chloride Ag/AgCl at 200 mV vs. NHE. A reference that is stable and commonly utilized in organic media is the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple, Fc/Fc+ at 590 mV vs. NHE. For the purposes of a common scale, all potentials in this paper are reported vs. Fc/Fc+ to facilitate side-by-side comparisons.
1.7. Metrics
In the field of homogeneous catalysis, number of turnovers and turnover frequencies (turnovers per unit time) are common metrics of relative activities. Through the lens of a mediated electrochemical process, such metrics still apply when the mediator, or catalyst is driven by either electrical current or potential. However, additional types of metrics become relevant when considering electrode-driven processes at catalytically active surfaces: electrochemically active surface areas and consequently current densities measured in units of current per surface area.5 A higher catalytically active surface area has more active sites. Additionally, a higher current density can in principle enable a higher rate of chemical conversion per unit time. In fact, relative catalytic activity for electrochemical reactions in the field of solar fuel synthesis is defined as the overpotential necessary to achieve a 10 mA cm−2 sustained current density during bulk electrolysis.6 Comparisons of catalytic activity based on these parameters require good faradaic efficiencies and an accurate way to measure the active surface area of the electrode.
The present review acknowledges these important catalytic metrics but points out that such elements have not permeated the field of mediated electrochemical synthesis. For the purposes of our discussion, we focus on descriptive molecular aspects of mediated electrochemical transformations. While the nature of the electrodes chosen and their size may play a role in the chemistries observed, further studies are likely necessary to produce experimental evidence for the discrete chemical steps at surfaces.
With this knowledge in mind, we now begin to describe recent one-electron chemistries that have been utilized to construct bonds to C through radical mechanisms (Fig. 3). Recent advances have shown that radicals can be generated by mediated reduction (blue) or mediated oxidation (orange red). Carbon dioxide, carbon-halogen bonds and even nitriles can be electrochemically or photoelectrochemically reduced by strong reducing reagents generated at electrodes. Potent electrode-generated oxidants can also be used to trigger the formation of radicals across a variety of functional groups such as carbons alpha to a nitrogen, carboxylates, trifluoroborate salts (RBF3K), carbon-halogen bonds and even C–H bonds.
 Fig. 3  Potential matching for mediators and reaction substrates in this review. 
2. C–C bond coupling reactions
C–C bond formation via radical mechanisms enabled by electrochemistry has been heavily investigated over the past two decades, in part due to the extensive use of cross coupling reactions in pharmaceutical synthesis.7,8 From Kolbe's 1848 work, numerous synthetic methodologies from direct electrolysis to electrocatalysis have been realized to selectively generate reactive carbon-centered radical species, which are further oxidized or trapped by various reagents to forge new bonds to carbon.9 In the following sections, we summarize the recent advances in electrochemical and electrophotochemical C–C bond-forming reactions that involve C-radical intermediates.
2.1. Mediated C–C bond formation at anodes

2.1.1. C–C decarboxylation. 
The homolytic cleavage of weak heteroatom–halogen bonds is a powerful approach for the generation of reactive radical species that further react to form carbon–heteroatom bonds. In 2019, Kong et al. reported an electrochemical approach to synthesize unprotected enaminones from decarboxylative coupling between α-keto acids and organic azides (Fig. 4).10 For this C–C bond deconstructive functionalization method, iodide salt was used as a redox mediator. Interestingly, control experiments and CVs revealed that the conjugated base 4-4 is the active intermediate, which would react with the anodically generated molecular iodine to form the hypoiodite 4-5.10,11 A catalytic current increase for I−/I3−/I2 redox couples by addition of a carboxylate salt was also observed by Wang et al. in a related Minisci-type acylation of N-heteroarenes.11 Upon homolytic dissociation of the O–I bond, radical 4-6 is generated and undergoes decarboxylation to form the acyl radical 4-7. Further trapping of 4-7 by vinyl azide 4-2 with nitrogen extrusion leads to the formation of intermediate 4-8, which undergoes cathodic reduction followed by protonation to form the enaminone product. The key intermediate anion 4-4 is formed through proton reduction on the cathode.
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical enaminone formation mediated by iodide. GF = graphite felt. (a) Reaction conditions for enaminone formation, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.10 
In 2019, Lin and Huang reported a method for electrochemical C3-formylation of indoles with glyoxylic acid as a C1 synthon.12 The presence of catalytic loading of a primary or secondary amine facilitates the decarboxylation of glyoxylic acid through a proposed α-iminium carboxylate intermediate. An analogous iminium had been previously observed.13 Under the standard reaction conditions, a broad variety of N-protected and unprotected indoles reacted smoothly to form the formylated products (Fig. 5). The reaction is initiated by an imine condensation to form intermediate 5-7, which undergoes deprotonation with a loss of hydrogen on the cathode to form the reactive species 5-4. CV experiments showed that the peak potential for the irrevesible oxidation of the corresponding α-iminium carboxylate 5-4 is about 0.62 V lower than the potential necessary for the oxidation of glyoxylic acid.12 Subsequent anodic oxidation and decarboxylation of 5-4 delivers radical cation species 5-5. Rapid anodic oxidation of 5-5, followed by a nucleophilic attack by indole, generates intermediate 5-6. Further hydrolysis of 5-6 yields the product and regenerates the amine catalyst. Thoughout the whole process, the amine organocatalyst promotes both the electrochemical decarboxylation and the nucleophilic reaction.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical C3-formylation of indole with glyoxylic acid. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.12 
In 2020, Lai et al. reported electrophotochemical approaches for the alkylation of N-heteroarenes with aliphatic carboxylic acids.14 The relatively inexpensive CeCl3·7H2O was proved to be an efficient photocatalyst under acidic conditions, to promote both the decarboxylation of carboxylic acids and to activate the N-heteroaromatic substrates. For this decoupled electrophotocatalysis, the oxidizing CeIV intermediate 6-6 is produced by anodic oxidation and coordinates a carboxylate anion to form the complex 6-7. This complex then undergoes photo-induced ligand-to-metal charge transfer to afford a carboxyl radical and regenerate the CeIII6-8 species back to the catalytic cycle. Upon decarboxylation of the carboxyl radical 6-9, the generated alkyl radical 6-10 is then trapped by a protonated pyridine to form 6-11. Further oxidation, mediated by the CeIV/CeIII redox couple, and deprotonation of this transient species 6-11 generates the alkylated product 6-3. This example demonstrates an efficient decarboxylative C–H bond functionalization strategy through a combination of photo-induced radical formation with electrode driven catalyst regeneration. The proposal of a mechanism that involves an alkyl radical species is supported by radical clock experiments.14
The authors also extended the reaction scope to electrophotochemical carbamoylation of heteroaromatics with oxamic acids. The photocatalyst 4CzIPN (2,4,5,6-tetrakis(9H-carbazol-9-yl)isophthalonitrile) was employed as the redox mediator for the oxidation of oxamic acids (Fig. 6). The excited species 4CzIPN* (Eredp/2 = 0.97 V vs. Fc/Fc+) undergoes thermodynamically favorable single-electron transfer (SET) with an oxamic acid molecule to generate the carbamoyl radical 6-15. Decarboxylation of 6-15, followed by trapping with a protonated pyridine, affords the radical cation 6-17. The observation of a dihydroquinoline intermediate during the electrolysis of an analogous quinoline suggests that 6-17 further accepts an electron from the persistent and highly reducing 6-14 to afford intermediate 6-18. Ultimately, 2-electron oxidation of the stable species 6-18 produces the carbamoylated product. Hydrogen evolution from the cathodic side compensates for the electrons transferred to the anodic surface.
 Fig. 6  Electrophotocatalysis for alkylation and carbamoylation through oxidative decarboxylation of carboxylic and oxamic acids. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. HFIP = 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroisopropanol. TFE = 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol. 4CzIPN = 2,4,5,6-tetrakis(9H-carbazol-9-yl)isophthalonitrile. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.14 


2.1.2. C–H bond activation. 
2.1.2.1. α-Csp3–H activation of carbonyl compounds. 
In 2017, Wu and Xu described an intramolecular cross-coupling between Csp2–H and Csp3–H bonds that involved a carbon radical. Using reactions at electrodes, C3-fluorinated oxindoles were synthesized under mild electrocatalytic conditions.15 Ferrocene (Fc) was employed as an oxidative mediator for the oxidation and C–H activation of one of the starting materials: fluorinated malonate amides (Fig. 7). For CV experiments, a catalytic current was observed for the oxidation of Fc in the presence of substrate 7-1 and LiOMe as the base, while no electron transfer was observed between Fc+ and the starting material 7-1 due to a large potential difference of 1.41 V between the redox signatures of the two species. Mechanistically, the key anionic intermediate 7-3 is expected to form through deprotonation by added LiCp or MeO− (generated upon cathodic reduction of MeOH). Though this deprotonation step is thermodynamically unfavorable, the driving force for the process is the facile electron abstraction by Fc+ and oxidation of 7-3 to form the carbon radical 7-4. Sequential radical cyclization and oxidative re-aromatization produces the final oxindole 7-2. This mild electrocatalytic cyclization method allows access to a broad variety of C3-fluorinated oxindoles bearing halogen, protected alcohol, and protected amine functional groups in good to excellent yields.
 Fig. 7  Intramolecular cyclization to synthesize C3-fluorinated oxindoles with ferrocene as redox mediator. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions for enaminone formation, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.15 
A follow-up study reported the intramolecular assembly of oxindole derivatives using Fc as an electrocatalyst and Y(OTf)3 as a Lewis acid additive (Fig. 8).16 The presence of a strong base like LiOMe is essential for the activation of the substrate. Noteworthily, substrates bearing acidic α-alkyl malonic ester moieties are reactive without the need for a Lewis acid additive or a strong base. Substrate 8-3 can react smoothly under optimized conditions to produce 3,4-dihydro-1H-quinolin-2-one derivatives 8-4 in good to excellent yields.
 Fig. 8  Ferrocene-electrocatalyzed intramolecular Csp2–Csp3 coupling reaction. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. PMP = para-methoxyphenyl. (a) reaction conditions (b) representative product examples.16 
Taking advantage of the 1,3-dicarbonyl functionality as precursor to electrophilic C-radicals,17 Xu and co-workers developed a method for cascade dehydrogenative annulation of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds with N-allyl amide to synthesize 5- and 6-membered N-heterocycles.18 Phenothiazine derivatives were used as electrocatalysts for the transformation, which showcased better reactivity compared to analogous triarylamines (Fig. 9). CV experiments revealed that direct electrolysis of both substrates is not feasible due to their high oxidation potentials. Additionally, the sodium formate additive was unable to promote the oxidation of 1,3-dicarbonyls. Instead, the substrate 9-2 is deprotonated by hydroxide, generated via cathodic water reduction, to form the anionic species 9-6 (Ep/2 = −0.07 V vs. Fc/Fc+, R = OMe). Thermodynamically favorable electron transfer between the oxidized phenothiazine [9-5a]˙+ (Eredp/2 = 0.14 V vs. Fc/Fc+) and 9-6 generates the C-radical 9-7. Trapping of this radical species by the alkenyl moiety of the N-allyl amide substrate, followed by another loss of electron delivers the intermediate 9-9. A nucleophilic attack by OH− or H2O affords 9-10, which undergoes a selective C–N bond cleavage to produce the secondary amine intermediate 9-11. In case of malonic esters (R = OMe), two proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) events occurred to form the pyrrolidine product 9-12, as supported by observations of catalytic current in CV experiments.18 Alternatively, the tetrahydropyridine product 9-13 can be formed upon intramolecular dehydration of amine 9-11 in the case of β-keto esters (R = Me).
 Fig. 9  Phenothiazine-mediated electrochemical annulation of N-allyl amides with 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. The numbers in the parentheses are the anodic half-peak potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+). (a) reaction conditions, (b) redox mediators and (c) mechanism.18 
2.1.2.2. Activation of cycloalkanes and heteroatom-adjacent Csp3–H bonds. 
Cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions are among the most powerful strategies for forging new C–C bonds. This type of coupling has a high atom economy and the wide availability of starting materials renders it especially useful. In this context, there has been significant interest in developing new methods for radical coupling between aliphatic C–H bonds and heteroarenes (Fig. 10).19 However, the generation of reactive radical intermediates from alkanes and other heteroatom-adjacent Csp3–H bonds is non-trivial. This challenge is due to their inherently high bond dissociation energies (BDE). General methods for the generation of radical intermediates from aliphatic C–H bonds employ the use of chemical oxidants such as peroxide, persulfate, hypervalent iodine, or Selectfluor.20–22 However, the use of stoichiometric chemical radical initiators limits their application in large-scale synthesis and lower the atom economy of the whole process.23 In 2020, Xu et al. addressed this challenge in aliphatic C–H bond activation by electrophotocatalysis.24 In this chemistry, chlorine radicals are produced in situ by anodic oxidation of chloride salts followed by light-induced Cl–Cl bond homolysis. These radicals act as a hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) catalyst to abstract hydrogen atoms from a broad variety of C–H bonds to form alkyl radicals. The driving force for the process lies in the relatively large BDE of HCl (102 kcal mol−1) compared to most unactivated aliphatic C–H bonds in cycloalkanes, methylarenes, ethers, and amides. The resulting radicals can then add to a protonated N-heteroarene to furnish the C2- or C4-alkylated pyridine products through a Minisci-type mechanism (Fig. 10b). In this process, the reactive chlorine radical can also act as an oxidant for the rearomatization of intermediate 10-5.
 Fig. 10  Chloride-mediated electrophotochemical alkylation of N-heteroarene. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.19 
In separate work, Lambert and co-workers developed a method for direct C–H functionalization of ethers with a triaminocyclopropenium cation (TAC+) as an electrophotocatalyst (Fig. 11).25 Mechanistically, the chemistry was driven by the oxidation of TAC+ at the anode to form the radical dication TAC˙2+ (E = 0.88 V vs. Fc/Fc+), followed by visible light photoexcitation to afford the highly oxidizing excited species [TAC˙2+]* (E ≈2.95 V vs. Fc/Fc+). The excited radical dication [TAC˙2+]* reacts with ether to produce an α-alkyl radical through a hydrogen atom transfer. This reaction regenerates TAC+ back to the electrophotocatalytic cycle. Further trapping of the radical 11-4 with quinolines, electron-deficient alkenes, or azoles produces the Minisci-type C2-alkylated quinolines, hydroalkylated alkenes, or N-alkylated heteroaromatic products. It should be noted that the ether functionalization by direct electrolysis can be challenging since the radical intermediate 11-4, formed upon 1-electron oxidation of ether, is more easily oxidized than the ether itself. Therefore, the anode provides the capacity for multiple sequential oxidation events that can lead to undesired side-reactions. In contrast, the electrophotocatalytic approach maintains only a minute concentration of active oxidant and leads to productive 1-electron chemistry.25
 Fig. 11  TAC+-mediated cross-dehydrogenative coupling between N-heteroarenes and ethers. CF = carbon felt. TFA = trifluoroacetic acid. aOne regioiosmer formed. bC1:C2 = 1.2:1.4. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.25 
2.1.2.3. Alkenes and alkynes functionalization. 
In 2020, Song et al. demonstrated two radical reactions in tandem – Co-mediated HAT and Cu-mediated radical cyanation – to enable highly enantioselective hydrocyanation of conjugated alkenes (Fig. 12).26 For this dual electrocatalytic approach, reactive CoIII–H and CuIII–CN complexes are generated by anodic oxidation simultaneously. Mechanistically, the alkene substrate is first activated by CoIII–H through HAT to deliver the radical species 12-6, which undergoes cyanation by another equivalent of CuIII–CN to produce 12-2. The enantioselectivity of this approach was accomplished using a chiral sBox(tBu) ligand (Fig. 12b), which coordinates with copper to form a chiral complex. Based upon density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the pendant ester group on the chiral ligand played a key role in enhancing the stereoselectivity of the reaction via a C–H⋯π interaction with the aryl moiety of the alkene substrate.
 Fig. 12  Copper and cobalt co-catalyzed electrochemical hydrocyanation of alkenes. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.26 
In 2018, Ye et al. combined two distinct anodic events for selective functionalization of alkenes (Fig. 13).27 In this anodically coupled electrolysis, the pairing of the two radical precursors with a metal catalyst was carefully controlled to achieve high chemoselectivity and regioselectivity of the products. Langlois's reagent CF3SO2Na (Ep/2 = 0.8 V vs. Fc/Fc+) was chosen as the CF3 radical source, while [MnIII–Cl] serves as the chlorine radical source with E1/2 (MnII/MnIII) = 0.78 V vs. Fc/Fc+. The [MnIII–Cl]/[MnII–Cl] redox couple showed a pair of reversible redox waves, indicating the lifetime of the latent Cl radical 13-9 is comparable to the timescale of CV experiments. In the proposed mechanism, the alkene substrate is first activated by the addition of CF3 radical, which is formed by 1-electron anodic oxidation of CF3SO2Na salt, to form the intermediate 13-6. The highly persistent [MnIII–Cl] species then transfers a chlorine atom to 13-6 to yield the product and regenerate a MnII species back to the MnII/III cycle. The mechanism and the order of radical addition are supported by radical clock experiments (Fig. 13c). The method was also applied for the synthesis of chlorotrifluoromethylated pyrrolidines via radical ene–yne cyclization in a separate work (Fig. 14).28 The alkene Z/E stereoselectivity in product formation was driven by the geometry of the intermediate 14-3.
 Fig. 13  Anodically coupled electrocatalytic difunctionalization of alkenes. CF = carbon felt. TFA = trifluoroacetic acid. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) radical clocks.27 
 Fig. 14  Synthesis of chlorotrifluoromethylated pyrrolidines by electrocatalytic radical ene-yne cyclization. CF = carbon felt. (a) reaction conditions and (b) representative product examples.28 


2.1.3. C–B deboronation of alkyl trifluoroborates and boronic acids. 
Organotrifluorobotates have recently become the preferred nucleophilic partners in cross-coupling reactions due to their ease of synthesis, high reactivity, relative stability under dry conditions, and excellent toleration of sensitive functional groups.29 There has been increasing number of electrochemical radical coupling reactions using organotrifluoroborate salts as Csp3-radical precursors in recent years.30 In 2019, Yan et al. reported an electrophotochemical method for Minisci-type alkylation of N-heteroarene with alkyl trifluoroborates.31 The reactions proceeded smoothly with the organic dye [Mes-Acr]ClO4 (9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium perchlorate) perchlorate as the electrophotocatalyst and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as the additive, in the mixed solvent system MeCN/H2O at room temperature (Fig. 15a). Under blue LED irradiation, the highly oxidizing excited species [Mes-Acr+]* (Ered ≈1.68 V vs. Fc/Fc+) is formed. Single-electron transfer between [Mes-Acr+]* and the alkyl trifluoroborate generates the alkyl radical 15-4. No reaction occurs between the ground-state catalyst [Mes-Acr+] (Ered = –0.95 V vs. Fc/Fc+) and the organotrifluoroborate in the absence of light. The alkyl radical 15-4 then adds to the protonated substrate 15-1H+ to form the adduct 15-5, which then undergoes thermodynamically favorable SET to the ground-state catalyst to form the product. The catalyst can be regenerated by anodic oxidation of the stable acridinium radical [Mes-Acr]˙. Under these mild photocatalytic conditions, overoxidation of alkyl radicals usually does not occur and sensitive functional groups are well tolerated.
 Fig. 15  Electrophotochemical alkylation of N-heteroarenes by alkyl trifluoroborate salts. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.31 
Boronic acid derivatives, which are bench-stable and widely available, have also been demonstrated to be excellent precursors for carbon-radicals. The activation of boronic acids to form radical species often requires SET to stoichiometric oxidants such metal salts, persulfate, and hypervalent iodine.30,32,33 In 2020, Yuan et al. reported the use of a manganese salt as an electrocatalyst for the radical coupling reaction between N-substituted benzimidazoles and alkylboronic acids (Fig. 16).34 CV experiments revealed that alkylboronic acids are first oxidized on the anodic surface to form the radical species 16-4, as confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiments. The presence of Mn salt is crucial for the transformation, since only 4% yield of desired product was detected without Mn catalyst. Mn(OAc)3 promotes the activation of boronic acid 16-2 through the persistent MnIII species 16-5, formed by transmetalation to a boronic acid or by trapping of the radical 16-4 by a MnII species. Complex 16-5 then transfers the radical R˙ to the alkene moiety of a benzimidazole 16-1 to regenerate the MnII and form the intermediate 16-6. Subsequent radical cyclization and oxidation occur to deliver the benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-a]-isoquinolin-6(5H)-one product 16-8. Protons are reduced on the cathodic side to form hydrogen gas as a byproduct.
 Fig. 16  Mn-Catalyzed electrochemical dual C–H bond activation for the synthesis of benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-a]isoquinolin-6(5H)-one derivatives. CC = carbon cloth. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.34 

2.2. Mediated reactions at cathodes
Compared to the anodic counterparts, the electroreductive methodologies for the generation of reactive carbon radicals remain relatively underexplored. This is due to a dearth of sufficiently reducing mediators and the need to use strong reducing conditions to activate certain functional groups. In contrast to the anodic processes, which are often coupled with proton reduction to form hydrogen gas as the sole by-product, the reductive electrolysis requires the use of “sacrificial” electron donors that can lead to undesirable side-reactions or electrode passivation.8 In this section, we discuss the recent progress in electrocatalytic reductive coupling reactions that involve the generation of carbon-based radicals.

2.2.1. C–halogen bond cleavage. 
Nickel complexes are widely used as electrocatalysts in reductive chemistry.8,35,36 Electrochemical methods allow for in situ generation of sensitive Ni species through cathodic reduction of shelf stable Ni precursors. Consequently, the reactive Ni species can undergo various reaction pathways involving oxidative addition to aryl halides or SET to alkyl halides that enables cross-electrophile coupling, C–H bond activation, alkene functionalization, and other C–heteroatom bonds formation.37–39
In 2020, Ackermann and co-workers developed a method for Csp2–H alkylation of carboxylic acid derivatives with alkyl iodides (Fig. 17).40 8-Aminoquinoline was utilized as an efficient ortho-directing group under relatively mild conditions. Based on the mechanistic studies (Fig. 17b), a nickel(II/III/I) redox manifold was proposed. The catalytic cycle starts with cathodic reduction to deliver NiI intermediate 17-4, which then reacts with alkyl iodide to form an alkane 17-5 and the cyclometalated intermediate 17-6 after an irreversible C–H activation step. The NiIII complex 17-6 is catalytically incompetent in the absence of electric current, which implies that cathodic reduction is essential for the generation of active NiII species 17-7. Afterwards, single-electron transfer to alkyl iodide generates the intermediate 17-8. Radical clock experiments suggest a homolytic cleavage of C–I bond in the alkylation step. Intermediate 17-8 then undergoes cathodic reduction to form the NiIII complex 17-9. Subsequently reductive elimination delivers the reaction product 17-3 and the NiI species 17-4 is simultaneously regenerated upon coordination of substrate 17-1. To compensate for the cathodic reduction, zinc was used as the sacrificial anode which also facilitates the alkyl iodide dissociation. A mechanism that involves zinc as potential redox mediator, or a transmetallation step from an alkylzinc iodide intermediate was ruled out based on control experiments.40
 Fig. 17  Electroreductive alkylation of Csp2–H bonds by nickel Zn is a reducing agent. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.40 
Aryl chlorides are among the most abundant, stable, and easily accessible carbon aryl radical precursors. The inherently low reactivity of the C(sp2)–Cl bonds allows these types of bonds to be installed early in a synthetic process and further diversified in late-stage functionalization.41,42 The relatively inertness and high BDEs of the unactivated C(sp2)–Cl bonds make their application in reductive cross-coupling a synthetic challenge.43,44 Due to their high reduction potentials (<−2.2 V vs. Fc/Fc+), which lie at or beyond the reduction limits of conventional visible-light photoredox catalysts, aryl chloride substrates are often overlooked in electroreductive and photoreductive chemistry.35,45,46
In 2020, Wickens and co-workers reported an electron-primed photoredox catalyst that can activate aryl chlorides for radical couplings (Fig. 18).47 The authors explored electrophotochemistry to overcome the energetic limitations of visible light by electrochemical reduction of an imide or diimide photocatalyst prior to excitation. NpMI (2-(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)- 1,8-naphthalimide) exhibited the best reactivity in reducing the challenging aryl chloride substrates. By addition of aryl radical-trapping agents like N-methylpyrrole or triethyl phosphite, the coupling products can be formed selectively under mild controlled current electrolysis conditions. Notably, an exceptionally electron-rich aryl chloride substrate (−3.80 V vs. Fc/Fc+) can be converted to the C–C or C–P coupling product in 47% and 51% yields, respectively. Other aryl chlorides bearing strong electron-donating groups, and potentially sensitive reducible functional groups are also compatible with the reaction conditions (Fig. 18c).
 Fig. 18  Reaching extreme electroreductive conditions by electrophotocatalysis. CF = carbon felt. (a) reaction conditions, (b) electrophotochemical generation of reducing species (c) representative product examples.47 


2.2.2. C–C bond cleavage. 
In 2018, Li et al. demonstrated a complementary approach to electrochemical Ni-catalyzed cross coupling of N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHP) esters and (hetero)aryl halides.48 The reaction proceeds under mild conditions in a divided electrochemical cell and employs triethylamine as the sacrificial reductant on the anodic side (Fig. 19). The catalytic cycle is initiated by cathodic reduction to deliver an active Ni0 species 19-5. Subsequent oxidative addition of aryl halide forms NiII complex 19-6. At the same time, single-electron transfer from the electrode surface to the NHP ester, followed by decarboxylation produces the radical species 19-9. This reductive decarboxylation pathway is also supported by radical clock experiments. Upon coordination of 19-9 and SET to the preformed NiII complex 19-6, reductive elimination occurs to deliver the coupling product and regenerates the NiI species back to the catalytic cycle. The major reduction event is the reduction of the NiII precursor at −1.19 V vs. Fc/Fc+, as supported by CV experiments. This reduction potential is less negative than the reductive potential of both NHP ester at around −1.59 V vs. Fc/Fc+ and iodobenzene at −2.69 V vs. Fc/Fc+.
 Fig. 19  Ni-mediated reductive functionalization of arenes and NHPI-esters. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) recent reaction examples.48 
In 2019, Koyanagi et al. reported an analogous strategy for the Csp2–Csp3 electrochemical cross-coupling between aryl iodides and NHP esters. The NHP esters in this example are generated in situ upon reaction of carboxylate salts with PITU reagent (PITU = N-hydroxyphthalimide tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate).49 The reaction can be performed in an undivided electrolysis cell with zinc as the sacrificial anode, which simplifies overall complexity compared to the common divided cell setup.
Additionally, Lian et al. reported a similar Ni-mediated system with the coupling partner extended to quinoxalinone Csp2–H bonds.50 The authors propose that SET from the NiII/NiI redox couple would facilitate the reduction of NHP esters to form the corresponding radical species upon CO2 loss, though direct electron transfer pathways from the cathode to the NHP ester are also possible. Upon Minisci-type radical trapping by quinoxalinone, the formed radical cation is further oxidized to generate the desired coupling product with the assistance of Ni coordination.
In 2020, Zhang et al. reported an electrochemical Ni-promoted decyanative pyridylation of electron-poor alkenes, using 4-cyanopyridine as the precursor to the pyridine moiety.51 A variety of coupling products are obtained in moderate to good yield under optimal reaction conditions (Fig. 20). Based on CV experiments, the authors proposed that metal additive Ni(acac)2 diminished the reduction of 4-cyanopyridine by coordination and promoted the reduction of the Michael-acceptor substrate to form the corresponding radical anion. Following that, a radical–radical cross-coupling with an electrogenerated cyanopyridyl radical anion or a radical addition to a Ni-coordinated cyanopyridine yields the C–C coupling product after elimination of cyanide anion.
 Fig. 20  Ni-mediated electroreductive pyridylation of electron-deficient alkenes. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism (c) representative product examples.51 

2.3. Paired electrolysis
Paired electrolysis has recently attracted significant interest for its ability to perform two desirable electrochemical half reactions simultaneously within the reaction system. This effective and atom-economical synthetic strategy has found applications in industrial electrosynthesis and energy conversion processes.36,52,53 The big challenge in paired electrolysis arises from the competition between interelectrode mass transfer of reactive radical intermediates, generated from both anodic and cathodic events, and their undesirable degradation pathways. Considering these challenges, the reaction design for paired electrolysis requires carefully controlled reaction conditions and selection of the coupling partners to enhance the reaction selectivity. In some examples described in previous sections the paired reactions on the counter electrode are crucial for overall transformation and in these instances, the whole system can be considered paired electrolysis. In this section, we describe recent advances in which paired electrocatalysis is ingeniously implemented to enhance the reaction efficiency and selectivity.
In 2019, Ma et al. reported a method for C(sp3)–C(sp2) radical coupling between alkylamines and electron-deficient benzonitriles (Fig. 21).37 This cross coupling reaction of tertiary amine and benzonitrile could be accomplished through convergent paired electrolysis, in which the anodically generated α-amino radical reacts with the arene radical anion formed at the cathode, yielding the final coupling product. TEMPO(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl)/TEMPO+ redox couple, which has previously been utilized in various electrooxidation chemistries,55 is used to promote the oxidation of amine 21-4 on the anodic side to form the radical cation species 21-5. 2,6-Lutidine is an added base that facilitates the deprotonation of amino radical cation 21-5, while shifting the equilibrium to TEMPO. Additionally, it greatly increases the catalytic current as observed in CV experiments. The carbon-radical species 21-6 then couples with the radical anion 21-8, formed upon cathodic reduction of the benzonitrile substrate, to form the key intermediate 21-9. Subsequent elimination of cyanide and rearomatization of 21-9 affords the desired product 21-10. Interestingly, the oxidation potentials of amine substrates inversely associate with the rates of oxidation and are important to drive this paired electrolysis, since no coupling products are detected in the case of electron-deficient amines.
 Fig. 21  Electrochemical arylation of α-amino C(sp3)–H bonds by convergent paired electrolysis. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.54 
Moving to mediated cathodic reduction, the same research group developed an electrochemical nickel-catalyzed aminomethylation of aryl bromides (Fig. 22).37 The combination of Ni and dtbbpy (4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-dipyridyl) ligand activates the aryl bromide substrate through a conventional oxidative addition pathway to form complex 22-5, initiated by cathodic reduction of NiII to the active NiI complex 22-4. This intermediate then undergoes a second cathodic reduction to form the NiII species 22-6. Meanwhile, α-amino carbon radical 22-8 is simultaneously formed upon oxidation and deprotonation at the anode. This radical intermediate is then rapidly captured by the NiII complex 22-6, generating the high-valent NiIII intermediate 22-9.37,56 Subsequent reductive elimination occurs to produce the coupling product 22-3 and regenerate the NiI complex. Under these mild electrolysis conditions, a broad range of substrates bearing sensitive functional groups are well-tolerated with excellent selectivity.
 Fig. 22  Paired electrolysis for redox-neutral cross-coupling between methylanilines and aryl bromide via Ni catalysis. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.37 
In 2021, Luo et al. described the use of convergent paired electrolysis to achieve a similar radical coupling reaction between aryl or alkenyl bromides with organofluoroborate salts via nickel catalysis (Fig. 23).38 The coupling partners were selected through extensive CV screening between potential substrates and nickel complexes. The combination of anodic oxidation of benzyl trifluoroborate salts and cathodic reduction of organonickel intermediates, formed upon oxidative addition of the aryl bromide substrates, affords the desired coupling products in high to excellent yields. Mechanistic studies suggest that electricity is crucial for the transformation despite the redox-neutral nature of the designed paired electrolysis scenario. The reaction is initiated by electroreduction of NiII precursor 23-6 to NiI complex 23-7, followed by oxidative addition of aryl bromide or alkenyl bromide substrate to form NiIII intermediate 23-8. This NiIII intermediate then undergoes a second reduction at the cathode to form the NiII complex 23-9. The addition of anodically generated alkyl radical 23-10 to the NiII complex 23-9, followed by a final reductive elimination furnishes the desired coupling product and turns over the NiI catalyst 23-7. Under this relatively mild set of reaction conditions, a wide variety of benzyl trifluoroborates and bromides are successfully coupled, inclusive of ones bearing sensitive functional groups such as acetals, aldehyde, and protected amines.
 Fig. 23  Paired electrolysis for redox-neutral cross-coupling between organic bromides and organotrifluoroborate salts via Ni catalysis. (a) Reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative examples.38 
3. C–N bond coupling reactions
Historically, many types of C–N bond forming reactions have depended on the use of stoichiometric amounts of chemical oxidants. Such oxidants can be expensive and often generate large amounts of waste.57 These types of reactions are especially critical in organic synthesis for biomedical applications and it is important that cheaper, cleaner processes are developed.58 This section highlights recent advancements in electrochemical and electrophotocatalytic C–N coupling reactions. While C–C bond formation was enabled at both cathodes and anodes, the mediated C–N bond-forming chemistries are limited to exclusively anodic processes.
3.1 Decarboxylative C–C bond cleavage
In 2018, Lin and Huang demonstrated the successful N-formylation of amines through electrochemical decarboxylation of glyoxylic acid.59 The optimized reaction conditions (Fig. 24) involve reacting N-methylaniline with glyoxylic acid along with 10 mol% Cu(OAc)2·2H2O and 20 mol% NiCl2·6H2O in the presence of cesium carbonate, sodium perchlorate electrolyte, and DMSO (dimethylsulfoxide) solvent in an undivided cell with a 5 mA constant current for 10 hours. Yield decreased when the Cu(OAc)2·2H2O and Ni salt were omitted or the current was increased or decreased. Additionally, only trace product was obtained without the presence of cesium carbonate and no product was obtained without an electric current present.
 Fig. 24  Electrochemical N-formylation of amines via copper-catalyzed decarboxylation of glyoxylic acid. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.59 
The proposed mechanism for this reaction is illustrated in Fig. 24b. Cesium carbonate deprotonates the acid, which is then condensed with aniline to from the 24-4 intermediate. This species then loses a proton to yield 24-5, which exists in equilibrium with 24-6. The 24-6 intermediate is then oxidized by the cupric acetate and decarboxylation occurs to produce 24-7. This species loses one electron and one proton to form 24-3, the desired formylation product, as a result of electron-donating substituent at the alpha position. In the presence of substoichiometric amounts of radical scavengers, the reaction yields decreased.
Both primary and secondary amines are good substrates, as well as both aliphatic and aromatic amines. Some applicable examples are shown in Fig. 24c. Amines with bulky substituents were not tolerated.
3.2 C–H bond activation
In 2020, Niu et al. published their methodology for the use of nucleophilic NaN3 as an azide source to perform oxidative azidation of C(sp3)–H bonds using a manganese electrophotocatalytic method to form various alkyl azides.57 The optimized reaction is shown in Fig. 25 and involves the reaction of C(sp3)–H bonds with NaN3 in the presence of a Mn catalyst, a photocatalyst, ligand, acid, and electrolyte under blue LEDs and 4.5 mA of current over 15 hours. Ligand choice was shown to be important, as ligands with electron withdrawing groups or steric hindrance impaired yield, and electron rich ligands led to no product at all.
 Fig. 25  Manganese-mediated oxidative Csp3–H azidation under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative examples.57 
The proposed mechanism for this reaction is illustrated in Fig. 25b and suggests that NaN3 is directly oxidized to the azide radical on the anodic surface while LnMn(II) 25-4 simultaneously undergoes anodic oxidation to form the LnMn(III)–N3 intermediate 25-5. Kinetic studies indicated that cleavage of C(sp3)–H could be the rate determining step and that 25-5 determined the capture of the radical to produce the final product. Irradiation of the photocatalyst 26-6 then results in the hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) event to generate the C(sp3) radical 26-10, which is followed by final alkyl azide product formation from azide transfer from 25-5 to an alkyl radical, while simultaneous Mn(II) turnover occurs. Other mechanistic possibilities include HAT regeneration via anodic oxidations, the possibility that 25-5 is involved in turnover of the photocatalyst, and that the azide radical could also potentially abstract the hydrogen from the C(sp3)–H bonds to generate the C(sp3) radical. The proposed mechanism is supported by radical inhibition and CV experiments. 5,5-Dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) captured the azide radical, suggesting its existence during the reaction. Carbon radicals were also confirmed during irradiation of the HAT photocatalyst. Experiments show that the generation of C(sp3) radical most likely comes from the photocatalytic process and abstraction of the N3 radical. CV analyses indicate that oxidation of NaN3 to the azide radical on the anodic surface was facile and that conversion of 25-3 to 25-5 would be unrealistic with direct oxidation only.
The azidation reactivities of tertiary C(sp3)–H bonds were generally better than secondary, possibly due to a more stable radical. Tertiary aliphatic C(sp3)–H bonds showed selective reactivity, an important advance for installing nitrogen functionality at a tertiary alkyl group.
In a related study, Huang and Lambert performed electrophotocatalytic nucleophilic aromatic substitution (SNAr) reactions on unactivated aryl fluorides using mild conditions and without strong base. This report is significant because high temperatures and strong bases have historically been necessary to transform unactivated substrates.60 The optimized reaction conditions are shown in Fig. 26. This reaction was first discovered using the trisaminocyclopropenium (TAC+) electrocatalyst, which will be discussed in more detail later in this section, but 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyanoquinone (DDQ) was found to provide a better yield.
 Fig. 26  DDQ-mediated activation of aryl fluorides under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.60 
A proposed mechanistic rationale for this reaction is shown in Fig. 26b. A potently oxidizing excited state species DDQ* is produced by the photoexcitation of DDQ, which is strong enough at Ered = 2.80 V vs. Fc/Fc+ (originally measured as 3.18 V vs. SCE) to go on to oxidize the fluoroarene 26-4. The pyrazole 26-6 then performs a nucleophilic attack on 26-5, which produces the radical 26-7. It is proposed that 26-7 then undergoes a single electron reduction in order to expel the fluoride leaving group to produce the final desired product, 26-9. These reaction conditions also demonstrated the possibility for chemoselectivity, notably producing only product 26-10 when pyrazole and a 1-1 mixture of 1-chloro-4-fluorobenzene and 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene were subjected to standard reaction conditions, with the aryl fluoride left intact. This was also observed with the selective conversion of 1-chloro-4-fluorobenzene to 26-10 in the presence of 4-fluoroanisole, which did not react.
In a follow-up study DDQ was used to perform electrophotocatalytic heterofunctionalization of arenes, including oxidant-free hydroxylation, alkoxylation, and amination reactions.61 While the reaction was initially performed under conditions mimicking their 2020 study, conditions were optimized to use 6 equivalents of LiClO4 as the electrolyte, 50 equivalents of water, blue LEDs, and Ucell = 1.5 V in an undivided cell for 24 hours (Fig. 27a). The mechanism of this reaction is speculated to be very similar to Fig. 26b, with the primary difference being that DDQ would be regenerated by anodic oxidation by produced DDQH2 with reduction of protons to hydrogen gas at the cathode to complete the electrochemical cycle. The scope of this reaction is broad; under the proposed conditions, water, alcohols, acids, amides, or carbonates can be appended to arenes without the need for external chemical oxidants. Examples of products are provided in Fig. 27b. Notably, alkoxybenzenes and phenols did not undergo reaction, likely due to the outcompetition of the nucleophilic attack to the transient radical cation intermediate by a rapid back-electron transfer process. Amines were also not reactive, most likely due to acidic conditions. Additionally, an optimized continuous flow system was developed to reduce reaction time. By coupling three photochemical channels to an undivided electrochemical cell and using a residence time of 3 minutes and a controlled potential of 1.5 V, a 4 mmol scale reaction produced a 60% yield of phenol in 22 hours.
 Fig. 27  DDQ-mediated oxidative functionalization of unactivated Csp2–H bond under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions and (b) representative product examples.61 
In a different example, Huang et al. showed that TAC+ could be used as a potent yet selective oxidative electrophotocatalyst.62 TAC+ meets the challenging criteria that the electrocatalytic species must be able to yield a stable intermediate via a one-electron transfer event, absorb visible light once oxidized, remain in the excited state long enough to interact with the substrate, and is stable throughout the reaction process. The TAC+ is unique in that it can be reversibly oxidized to the corresponding radical dication, which when photoexcited has a calculated excited state reduction potential of vs. Fc+/Fc (originally reported as 3.33 V vs. SCE). Under the optimized reaction conditions shown in Fig. 28a, it was shown that TAC+ catalyzes the reaction between benzene and pyrazole to produce 28-6 (Fig. 28b) cleanly with 65% yield. It was observed that the 1H NMR spectrum of the electrophotocatalytic product was much cleaner than the spectrum resulting from a purely direct electrolysis procedure.
 Fig. 28  Electrophotocatalytic N-arylation of azole with unactivated benzene and aryl halides. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.62 
The proposed mechanism for TAC+ electrophotocatalysis is illustrated in Fig. 28b. The radical dication is generated by electrochemical oxidation of the TAC+, which is followed by photoexcitation to produce the reactive intermediate. The intermediate can go on to oxidize benzene via single-electron transfer to produce the radical cation 28-5, which allows the reaction to proceed to nucleophilic trapping by 28-6, deprotonation to yield the radical 28-7, further oxidation of 28-7, and ultimately re-aromatization that produces the product 28-8. The authors clarify that although this is the most likely mechanistic explanation, further study is warranted. As far as the scope of the reaction, carboxyl, aldehyde, and ketone functional groups were all well-tolerated. It was shown that the regioselectivity of azole coupling was significantly influenced by the chosen azole partner. Although TAC+ demonstrated very strong oxidizing power, the limit was discovered to be the trifluoromethyl group, which proved to be too strongly deactivating for the catalyst.
In a recent report, Shen et al. demonstrated that TAC+ could also be utilized to perform vicinal C–H diamination reactions to form 1,2-diamine derivatives.58 This is significant because historically, existing strategies for the conversion of C–H to C–N bonds can only accomplish the reaction at a single C–H site. The ideal reaction conditions are shown in Fig. 29a. The proposed mechanism is highlighted in Fig. 29b and is similar to that shown in Fig. 28b; photoexcitation of the TAC radical dication triggers the reaction cascade. Notably, the mechanism for the second amination is not as certain as the first, and it is speculated that the Ritter product 29-7 produces alpha-methylstyrene 29-8via a reversible acid-catalyzed elimination reaction. Single electron oxidation of 29-8 to 29-9 would then allow the reaction to proceed to product formation. As demonstrated in Fig. 29a, depending on the electrolyte used, the product can be either dihydroimidazole 29-2 or aziridine 29-3.
 Fig. 29  Double C–H amination of ethylbenzene under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions and (b) proposed reaction mechanism.58 
4. Other C–heteroatom bond formation
Over the past few years, there has been a significant interest in electrochemical radical coupling reactions to enable the generation of C–O, C–S, C–N, C–P, and C–halogen bonds.7,19 However, most examples are reported to mechanistically proceed through the formation of non-carbon radicals or are non-catalytic. In this section, we summarize the most recent advances in C–heteroatom bond formation that involve electrogenerated carbon-centered radical species.
Stahl and co-workers developed an electrochemical N-hydroxyphthalimide-mediated (NHPI) C–H iodination of methylarenes under mild conditions (Fig. 30).63 NHPI is well known to undergo proton-coupled oxidation at the anode to generate phthalimido-N-oxyl (PINO), which then mediates hydrogen-atom transfer (HAT) from activated benzylic C–H bonds.55 The formed C-radicals can then be trapped by molecular iodine to generate benzyl iodide coupling products in 40–83% yields. Additionally, the benzyl iodide product can further be trapped by a nucleophile like pyridine to furnish benzylpyridinium derivatives, which serve as precursor to some valuable pyrido-fused N-heterocycles.64
 Fig. 30  Electro-oxidative iodination of methylarenes mediated by N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI).63 Lut = 2,6-lutidine. 2,6-di-tBuPy = 2,6-di-tert-butylpyridine. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. 
In 2020, Kim et al. developed an electrophotochemical method for reductive functionalization of aryl halides with the use of DCA (9,10-dicyanoanthracene) as an electrophotocatalyst (Fig. 31).35 The DCA catalyst is first electro-primed at the cathode prior to photoexcitation to generate the excited species [DCA˙−]* (Ered* ≈−3.50 V vs. Fc/Fc+). This highly reducing radical anion can then donate an electron to the π-system of the aryl halide 31-1 to produce the radical anion 31-3 and regenerate the DCA catalyst. Subsequent dehalogenation and trapping of intermediate 31-3 with B2(pin)2, Me3Sn–SnMe3, or (hetero)arene leads to the formation of synthetically valuable boronate, organotin, and heterocycle products (Fig. 31b). Pyridine was used as an additive to promote the formation of the C–B coupling product, by coordinating to B2pin2 to form a B-centered persistent radical adduct. Aryl bromides exhibit high reactivity compared to the chloride counterparts, presumably due to the back electron transfer from the corresponding radical anion to DCA (Fig. 31c).
 Fig. 31  Electrophotocatalysis for reductive functionalization of aryl halides. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.35 
5. Fixation of CO2 by electrocatalysis
Carbon radical chemistry also drives a variety of electrochemical CO2 fixation reactions, in which CO2 is reduced and incorporated into a larger organic product. CO2 fixation has drawn interest due to the pressing environmental need for greenhouse gas mitigation as well as the abundance and low cost of CO2 as a C1 source for the generation of value-added products.
Among the simplest C–C bond-forming CO2 fixation methods is the reduction of CO2 to oxalate, C2O42−, which transforms a C1 source into a C2 building block. Across a variety of previously demonstrated electrocatalytic systems, this reaction has long been thought to proceed through a CO2˙− radical intermediate,65 but the short nanosecond-scale half-life and large dimerization rate constant of CO2˙− render direct detection of the intermediate difficult. More recently, Kai et al. have circumvented this issue and demonstrated the ability to directly detect and monitor this radical intermediate en route to oxalate production by using scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) at an ultramicroelectrode (UME).66 As depicted in Fig. 32, the CO2˙− generated at a Hg/Pt UME tip with applied negative potential can be collected and reoxidized at an Au UME substrate at a more positive potential, provided that the distance d between the tip and substrate is sufficiently small for CO2˙− to rapidly diffuse to the substrate before undergoing any other reactions. This real-time detection and quantification of the radical intermediate opens the way for further investigation of radical mechanisms in this ongoing research vein. Although Paris and Bocarsly have recently shown reductive electrochemical conversion of CO2 to oxalate at potentials positive of the thermodynamic potential for CO2 reduction to CO2˙−,67 radical chemistry continues to play a significant role in many of the reactions reported for this electrochemical transformation.
 Fig. 32  Using the method of Kai et al., CO2˙− generated at a Pt/Hg UME can be detected and quantified at an Au UME substrate given a sufficiently small interelectrode distance d.66 
Fixation of CO2 into a larger aromatic product as a carboxylate group has also attracted attention as a renewable and cost-effective transformation. Bazzi et al. have developed an electrochemical carboxylation of both aryl and benzyl halides from CO2 using anodically generated Sm complexes.68,69 Conditions shown in Fig. 33a resulted in successful carboxylation of aryl halides under controlled current conditions in an undivided cell with a sacrificial Sm anode.68 The reaction proved tolerant of a variety of electron-donating and -withdrawing groups on the substrate, with the exception of para-nitro groups and phenolic substrates thought to coordinate to the SmII species in solution. Control experiments in the absence of aryl halide resulted in selective production of oxalic acid, leading the authors to suggest the formation of a SmII-CO2˙− species 33-3 capable of undergoing either homocoupling to produce oxalate or reaction with aryl halide 33-1 to yield the desired carboxylation product 33-2. Further supporting the notion of a radical mechanism centered on CO2, the addition of TEMPO to the solution arrested the reaction while aryl halide starting materials were fully recovered. Notably, non-electrochemical addition of SmX2 salts directly to solutions of aryl halides did not yield carboxylation products. The proposed mechanism is shown in Fig. 33b, in which the required SmII species is generated at the anode, followed by complexation with CO2 to yield 33-3. Reaction with 33-1 yields intermediate 33-4, which then dissociates from the SmII complex and is protonated to yield the product 33-2. In a subsequent report, the carboxylation of benzyl halides to yield phenylacetic acids was found to be similarly effective, this time with the relevant SmII species being generated anodically before reversing the electrode polarity for electrolysis.69 Addition of TEMPO in this instance prevented the reaction from proceeding, and lack of formation of benzylated TEMPO adducts suggests once more that a SmII-CO2˙− radical species could be central to the reaction, similar to the case of the aryl halides, rather than a benzylic radical.
 Fig. 33  (a) Optimized carboxylation conditions of Bazzi et al. for carboxylation of aryl halides and (b) proposed mechanism.68 
Similarly, electrochemical (hydro)carboxylation of styrene and related olefins is thought to proceed through carbon radical intermediates. Several authors have investigated the role of radical coupling in these transformations and have been unable to rule out the involvement of CO2˙−. For instance, Kim et al. found that styrene is successfully carboxylated in the presence of 1 atm CO2 under controlled current conditions described in Fig. 34a.70 In dry dimethylformamide (DMF), the dicarboxylated product was formed in high yield, while increasing amounts of H2O as a proton source yielded the β-hydrocarboxylation product in increasing amounts. Tafel analysis of the reaction with varying amounts of H2O additive from 0 to 0.1 M yielded Tafel slopes of 113 to 120 mV dec−1, indicating the involvement of a 1e− transfer in the RDS. This is consistent with possible rate-determining formation of CO2˙− or a styrene radical anion. Addition of radical scavengers TEMPO and DMPO appeared to inhibit the production of the dicarboxylation product, while faradaic efficiencies for the β-hydrocarboxylation product remained largely unaffected relative to the scavenger-free case (68% with TEMPO vs. 65% without) or even increased (86% with DMPO). With this information in hand, the authors propose the mechanism outlined in Fig. 34b, whereby the reaction may be initiated through a one-electron reduction of CO2 to CO2˙− or of styrene (34-1) to 34-4. The reaction of either radical with its counterpart (CO2˙− with styrene or 34-4 with CO2) then results in production of 34-5. A subsequent one-electron reduction then yields shared intermediate 34-6, which may then be protonated to yield hydrocarboxylation product 35-3 or react with CO2 to form dicarboxylation product 34-2. Although the reaction pathways for both products may proceed through shared intermediates 34-5 and 35-6, the differential effect of radical scavengers on the faradaic efficiency for each product suggest that the dicarboxylation reaction follows a pathway that requires additional radical intermediates or otherwise more sensitive radical chemistry. For instance, the dicarboxylation and hydrocarboxylation reactions may proceed through different initial steps (lefthand vs. righthand pathway in Fig. 34b), or the dicarboxylation reaction may involve direct coupling of CO2˙− to 34-5. Thus, although the (hydro)carboxylation of styrene under these conditions may theoretically proceed without ever involving direct C–C radical coupling, the possible involvement of CO2˙− cannot be ruled out and may be especially likely in the case of dicarboxylation.
 Fig. 34  (a) Optimized reaction conditions of Kim et al. (b) Proposed mechanisms for carboxylation and dicarboxylation. As shown by the dashed arrow, we posit that the differential effect of radical scavengers on the formation of the two products 34-2 and 34-3 may support a pathway for dicarboxylation that does not proceed through the same intermediate 34-6 as the hydrocarboxylation pathway.70 
Alkayal et al. subsequently examined the hydrocarboxylation of styrene-related compounds with a wide substrate scope, including even di- and tri-substituted alkenes (Fig. 35).71 The standard conditions produced highly regioselective β-hydrocarboxylation regardless of the electron-withdrawing or -donating ability of R, with minimal α-hydrocarboxylation side products (β:α ratios of select examples presented in Fig. 35c). The conditions proved to be tolerant of a wide variety of R groups, with the exception of R = OH, R = NH2, and R = Br. Similar to the findings of Kim et al., CO2˙− cannot be ruled out due to the similar reduction potentials of CO2 and the olefin substrates. The authors thus propose two plausible mechanisms shown as Route A and Route B in Fig. 35b, similar to the results of Kim et al., where neither pathway can be definitively disproven.
 Fig. 35  (a) Optimized reaction conditions of Alkayal et al.71 (b) Mechanistic proposals based upon the possibility of initial reduction of CO2 (Route A) and initial reduction of 35-1 (Route B). (c) Representative product examples. 
Finally, electrochemical CO2 fixation has also been investigated in the context of C–N bond-forming reactions. In particular, many electrochemical reactions for the synthesis of urea from CO2 and N2 or NO32− have been investigated, primarily operating through the use of heterogeneous catalysts.72 Many existing mechanistic proposals posit that product formation occurs from surface-adsorbed *NH2 or *CO species, or alternatively *NH2 and *COOH. In the work of Wang et al., urea formation from heterogeneous PdCu alloy nanoparticles on an oxygen vacancy-rich TiO2 surface was proposed to occur through a “tower-like” surface-adsorbed *NCON* intermediate, consistent with DFT studies and intermediates observed via isotopically confirmed synchrotron radiation FTIR spectroelectrochemistry.73 However, such mechanisms are still a topic of debate. Notably, the work of Comer et al. has shown that adventitious C radicals on the surface of TiO2 play an important role in the electrochemical fixation of N2 to ammonia, rather than often-cited oxygen vacancies.74 Therein, metastable adsorbed *C radical species were found through a combination of experimental and DFT results to be plausible agents for N2 adsorption and reduction on heterogeneous catalysts in scenarios where adventitious carbon is possible.
Additionally, beyond urea formation, Wu et al. have reported the direct electrocatalytic fixation of CO2 into methylamine.75 The heterogeneous carbon nanotube (CNT) surface-attached Co phthalocyanine (CoPc-NH2/CNT) molecular catalyst shown in Fig. 36 is the first known example for the electrochemical conversion of nitrate and CO2 into methylamine in aqueous media under ambient conditions. The catalyst had been previously shown to successfully catalyze electrochemical CO2 reduction to methanol, with CO as an intermediate reduction product,76 consistent with other studies of electrochemical reduction of CO2 using CoPc catalysts.77 Furthermore, CoPc-NH2/CNT also catalyzes the reduction of NO3− to NH3 with NO2− and NH2OH intermediates detected. Thus, the production of methylamine was hypothesized to occur through simultaneous reduction of CO2 and NO3− followed by interaction of intermediates from each independent pathway. To probe the mechanism and identify plausible intermediates, the C and N sources for the reaction were systematically replaced with known intermediates of CO2 and NO3− reduction by the complex. Several such intermediates or reduction products produced methylamine when co-reduced with the other starting material using the catalyst, but NH3 and NH4+ were found to be ineffective as N sources, while methanol was ruled out as a C source. Hydroxylamine and formaldehyde were therefore determined to be the most likely N and C sources for the reaction, respectively, on the basis of nucleophilicity, successful reductions using these two reagents as the starting material, and the detection of formaldoxime and N-methylhydroxylamine in the reaction mixture.75 The resulting mechanistic proposal is presented in Fig. 36b. Additionally, the related CoPc/CNT without –NH2 decoration78 has been shown to convert a variety of N-nucleophiles + CO2 to C–N coupling products under similar conditions, thus suggesting a wider scope of substrates and organic products is possible for this process.
 Fig. 36  Conversion of CO2 and NO3− to methylamine and proposed mechanism as described by Wu et al.,75 including (a) reaction conditions at −1.965 V vs. Fc/Fc+ (originally reported as −0.94 V vs. RHE) and (b) proposed reaction mechanism for the cascade reaction. *Denotes species on or near the electrode surface. 
6. Summary and outlook
The resurgence of interest in electrochemical methods over the past few years has been punctuated by novel chemistries that repurposed some of the traditional redox reagents towards new chemical reactions. Significant advances have been made towards the electrochemical regeneration of highly reactive redox reagents and new chemistries continue to emerge at the interface of material science, inorganic and organic chemistry. We remain forward looking to advances in the knowledge and mechanistic understanding of radical-enabled use of organic redox mediators to perform new types of chemical reactions that span the research fields of solar fuels and chemical synthesis for pharmaceutical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE 2040434 (H. A. P.). O. R. L., P. H. P. and J. L. K. thank the University of Colorado for startup funds. This work was supported in part (OL and PP) by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. This work was supported by the Laboratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Program at NREL. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
Notes and references
O. R. Luca, J. L. Gustafson, S. M. Maddox, A. Q. Fenwick and D. C. Smith, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 823–848 RSC .
R. Francke and R. D. Little, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4373–4382 CrossRef CAS .
N. Elgrishi, K. J. Rountree, B. D. McCarthy, E. S. Rountree, T. T. Eisenhart and J. L. Dempsey, J. Chem. Educ., 2018, 95, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Rountree, B. D. McCarthy, T. T. Eisenhart and J. L. Dempsey, Journal, 2014, 53, 9983–10002 CAS .
A. Dey, T. B. Gunnoe and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13156–13158 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Yang and A. Lei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10058–10086 RSC .
L. F. T. Novaes, J. Liu, Y. Shen, L. Lu, J. M. Meinhardt and S. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7941–8002 RSC .
H. Kolbe, Ann. Chem. Pharm., 1848, 64, 339–341 CrossRef .
X. Kong, Y. Liu, L. Lin, Q. Chen and B. Xu, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 3796–3801 RSC .
Q.-Q. Wang, K. Xu, Y.-Y. Jiang, Y.-G. Liu, B.-G. Sun and C.-C. Zeng, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5517–5520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Z. Lin and J.-M. Huang, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 5862–5866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rudolphi, B. Song and L. J. Gooßen, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 337–342 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Lai, X.-M. Shu, J. Song and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10626–10632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Wu and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4734–4738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Wu, S.-R. Li, H. Long and H.-C. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4601–4604 RSC .
B. B. Snider, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 339–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Wu, S.-R. Li and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14070–14074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Gao, Z. Lv, T. Abdelilah and A. Lei, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 6769–6787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-X. Li, X. Hu, G. He and G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11847–11853 CrossRef CAS .
X.-A. Liang, L. Niu, S. Wang, J. Liu and A. Lei, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 2441–2444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hu, J.-J. Guo, H. Pan and Z. Zuo, Science, 2018, 361, 668–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Caron, R. W. Dugger, S. G. Ruggeri, J. A. Ragan and D. H. B. Ripin, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 2943–2989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, P.-Y. Chen and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14275–14280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, Z. M. Strater and T. H. Lambert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1698–1703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, N. Fu, B. G. Ernst, W. H. Lee, M. O. Frederick, R. A. DiStasio and S. Lin, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 747–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Ye, G. Pombar, N. Fu, G. S. Sauer, I. Keresztes and S. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2438–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Ye, Z. Song, G. S. Sauer, J. H. Harenberg, N. Fu and S. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 12274–12279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Molander, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 7837–7848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Duan, X. Yan, Y. Liu and Z. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2018, 360, 2781–2795 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Z.-W. Hou and H.-C. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4592–4595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-X. Li, C. A. Morales-Rivera, Y. Wang, F. Gao, G. He, P. Liu and G. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6407–6412 RSC .
S. Castro, J. J. Fernández, F. J. Fañanás, R. Vicente and F. Rodríguez, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 9068–9071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Y. Zheng, B. Xu, J. Liao, F. Bu, S. Wang, J.-G. Hu and A. Lei, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6676–6681 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, H. Kim, T. H. Lambert and S. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2087–2092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. P. Cardoso, B. Šljukić, D. M. F. Santos and C. A. C. Sequeira, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 1213–1226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, J. Hong, X. Yao, C. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Fu, M. Sun, R. Cheng, Z. Li and J. Ye, Org. Lett., 2021, 23, 9387–9392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, B. Hu, W. Wu, M. Hu and T. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 6107–6116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Perkins, D. J. Pedro and E. C. Hansen, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3755–3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Samanta, J. Struwe and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14154–14159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Grushin and H. Alper, Chem. Rev., 1994, 94, 1047–1062 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4176–4211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, M. J. Goldfogel, M. M. Gilbert and D. J. Weix, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9902–9907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Goldfogel, L. Huang and D. J. Weix, in Nickel Catalysis in Organic Synthesis,  2020, pp. 183–222,  DOI:10.1002/9783527813827.ch9 .
H. G. Roth, N. A. Romero and D. A. Nicewicz, Synlett, 2016, 27, 714–723 CAS .
A. Matsunaga and A. Yasuhara, Chemosphere, 2005, 58, 897–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. W. Cowper, C. P. Chernowsky, O. P. Williams and Z. K. Wickens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2093–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. P. Breen, H. Seo, T. F. Jamison, Y.-Q. Fang and M. M. Bio, Org. Lett., 2018, 20, 1338–1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Koyanagi, A. Herath, A. Chong, M. Ratnikov, A. Valiere, J. Chang, V. Molteni and J. Loren, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 816–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lian, K. Xu, W. Meng, H. Zhang, Z. Tan and C. Zeng, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14685–14688 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Li, X. Li, J. Zhang, K. Xu, G. Li and M. Findlater, Org. Lett., 2020, 22, 3570–3575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, X. Qu, J. Qu, X. Chen, H. Xie, P. Xing, D. Wang and H. Yin, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 8633–8641 RSC .
E. Steckhan, T. Arns, W. G. Heineman, D. Hoormann, J. Jörissen, L. Kröner, B. Lewall and H. Pütter, Chemosphere, 2001, 43, 63–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schendzielorz, M. Finger, J. Abbenseth, C. Würtele, V. Krewald and S. Schneider, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 830–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Nutting, M. Rafiee and S. S. Stahl, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4834–4885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Bakhoda, S. Wiese, C. Greene, B. C. Figula, J. A. Bertke and T. H. Warren, Organometallics, 2020, 39, 1710–1718 CrossRef CAS .
L. Niu, C. Jiang, Y. Liang, D. Liu, F. Bu, R. Shi, H. Chen, A. D. Chowdhury and A. Lei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17693–17702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shen and T. H. Lambert, Science, 2021, 371, 620–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Z. Lin and J.-M. Huang, Org. Lett., 2018, 20, 2112–2115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang and T. H. Lambert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 658–662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang and T. H. Lambert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11163–11167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, Z. M. Strater, M. Rauch, J. Shee, T. J. Sisto, C. Nuckolls and T. H. Lambert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13318–13322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rafiee, F. Wang, D. P. Hruszkewycz and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 22–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Hu, J. Zhou, W. Wang, Y. He and C. Wang, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 5016–5024 RSC .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
T. Kai, M. Zhou, Z. Duan, G. A. Henkelman and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18552–18557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Paris and A. B. Bocarsly, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2324–2333 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bazzi, G. Le Duc, E. Schulz, C. Gosmini and M. Mellah, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2019, 17, 8546–8550 RSC .
S. Bazzi, E. Schulz and M. Mellah, Org. Lett., 2019, 21, 10033–10037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, G. D. Park, M. Balamurugan, J. Seo, B. K. Min and K. T. Nam, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1900137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alkayal, V. Tabas, S. Montanaro, I. A. Wright, A. V. Malkov and B. R. Buckley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1780–1785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tao, C. L. Rooney, Y. Liang and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19630–19642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, P. Qian, K. Hu, Z. Zha and Z. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4292–4296 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Comer, Y.-H. Liu, M. B. Dixit, K. B. Hatzell, Y. Ye, E. J. Crumlin, M. C. Hatzell and A. J. Medford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15157–15160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Z. Jiang, Z. Lin, Y. Liang and H. Wang, Nat. Sustainability, 2021, 4, 725–730 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Lu, Y. Liang and H. Wang, Nature, 2019, 575, 639–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Boutin, M. Wang, J. C. Lin, M. Mesnage, D. Mendoza, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo and M. Robert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16172–16176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Rooney, Y. Wu, Z. Tao and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19983–19991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Phuc H. Pham	Phuc Pham received his B.E. in Chemical Engineering from HCMC University of Technology, Vietnam in 2018. He then joined Prof. Oana R. Luca's lab at the University of Colorado Boulder (USA), where he is currently working on developing new redox strategies for polymer re- and upcycling.
Haley A. Petersen	Haley Petersen graduated from the University of Arizona in 2018 with a BS in chemistry. She is currently a PhD candidate in the Luca group at the University of Colorado Boulder, where her current research focus is the electrochemical capture and conversion of carbon dioxide.
Jaclyn L. Katsirubas	Jackie is an undergraduate researcher majoring in chemistry and atmospheric & oceanic sciences at University of Colorado Boulder. She currently develops electrocatalysts to be used in the conversion of carbon dioxide and nitrogen to chemical fuels. She has a passion for the climate sciences and green synthesis and wants to apply her chemical knowledge to sustainability goals in the future.
Oana R. Luca	Oana Luca is an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at University of Colorado Boulder, a fellow of the Renewable & Sustainable Energy Institute and an affiliate of the National Renewable Energy Laboratories. She is also a Mercator Fellow of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, the German National Science Foundation. Her research team at Colorado develops electrochemical solutions to large societal issues through sustainable chemical transformations. Her work focuses on catalysis and mechanistic science for the capture and conversion of carbon and nitrogen into useful products, as well as organic electrosynthesis applied to polymer re- and upcycling.
V = I × R	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a controlled current electrolysis setup shown as undivided. (b) Schematic of a controlled potential electrolysis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical vs. electrochemical oxidation and reduction reactions. (a) Generic chemical reduction. (b) Electrochemical reduction. (c) Generic chemical oxidation. (d) Electrochemical oxidation reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  Potential matching for mediators and reaction substrates in this review.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical enaminone formation mediated by iodide. GF = graphite felt. (a) Reaction conditions for enaminone formation, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.10	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical C3-formylation of indole with glyoxylic acid. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.12	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrophotocatalysis for alkylation and carbamoylation through oxidative decarboxylation of carboxylic and oxamic acids. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. HFIP = 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroisopropanol. TFE = 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol. 4CzIPN = 2,4,5,6-tetrakis(9H-carbazol-9-yl)isophthalonitrile. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.14	 

 	Fig. 7  Intramolecular cyclization to synthesize C3-fluorinated oxindoles with ferrocene as redox mediator. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions for enaminone formation, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.15	 

 	Fig. 8  Ferrocene-electrocatalyzed intramolecular Csp2–Csp3 coupling reaction. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. PMP = para-methoxyphenyl. (a) reaction conditions (b) representative product examples.16	 

 	Fig. 9  Phenothiazine-mediated electrochemical annulation of N-allyl amides with 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. The numbers in the parentheses are the anodic half-peak potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+). (a) reaction conditions, (b) redox mediators and (c) mechanism.18	 

 	Fig. 10  Chloride-mediated electrophotochemical alkylation of N-heteroarene. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.19	 

 	Fig. 11  TAC+-mediated cross-dehydrogenative coupling between N-heteroarenes and ethers. CF = carbon felt. TFA = trifluoroacetic acid. aOne regioiosmer formed. bC1:C2 = 1.2:1.4. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.25	 

 	Fig. 12  Copper and cobalt co-catalyzed electrochemical hydrocyanation of alkenes. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.26	 

 	Fig. 13  Anodically coupled electrocatalytic difunctionalization of alkenes. CF = carbon felt. TFA = trifluoroacetic acid. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) radical clocks.27	 

 	Fig. 14  Synthesis of chlorotrifluoromethylated pyrrolidines by electrocatalytic radical ene-yne cyclization. CF = carbon felt. (a) reaction conditions and (b) representative product examples.28	 

 	Fig. 15  Electrophotochemical alkylation of N-heteroarenes by alkyl trifluoroborate salts. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.31	 

 	Fig. 16  Mn-Catalyzed electrochemical dual C–H bond activation for the synthesis of benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-a]isoquinolin-6(5H)-one derivatives. CC = carbon cloth. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.34	 

 	Fig. 17  Electroreductive alkylation of Csp2–H bonds by nickel Zn is a reducing agent. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.40	 

 	Fig. 18  Reaching extreme electroreductive conditions by electrophotocatalysis. CF = carbon felt. (a) reaction conditions, (b) electrophotochemical generation of reducing species (c) representative product examples.47	 

 	Fig. 19  Ni-mediated reductive functionalization of arenes and NHPI-esters. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) recent reaction examples.48	 

 	Fig. 20  Ni-mediated electroreductive pyridylation of electron-deficient alkenes. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism (c) representative product examples.51	 

 	Fig. 21  Electrochemical arylation of α-amino C(sp3)–H bonds by convergent paired electrolysis. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.54	 

 	Fig. 22  Paired electrolysis for redox-neutral cross-coupling between methylanilines and aryl bromide via Ni catalysis. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.37	 

 	Fig. 23  Paired electrolysis for redox-neutral cross-coupling between organic bromides and organotrifluoroborate salts via Ni catalysis. (a) Reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative examples.38	 

 	Fig. 24  Electrochemical N-formylation of amines via copper-catalyzed decarboxylation of glyoxylic acid. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.59	 

 	Fig. 25  Manganese-mediated oxidative Csp3–H azidation under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative examples.57	 

 	Fig. 26  DDQ-mediated activation of aryl fluorides under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.60	 

 	Fig. 27  DDQ-mediated oxidative functionalization of unactivated Csp2–H bond under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions and (b) representative product examples.61	 

 	Fig. 28  Electrophotocatalytic N-arylation of azole with unactivated benzene and aryl halides. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.62	 

 	Fig. 29  Double C–H amination of ethylbenzene under electrophotocatalytic conditions. (a) reaction conditions and (b) proposed reaction mechanism.58	 

 	Fig. 30  Electro-oxidative iodination of methylarenes mediated by N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI).63 Lut = 2,6-lutidine. 2,6-di-tBuPy = 2,6-di-tert-butylpyridine. RVC = reticulated vitreous carbon.	 

 	Fig. 31  Electrophotocatalysis for reductive functionalization of aryl halides. (a) reaction conditions, (b) proposed reaction mechanism and (c) representative product examples.35	 

 	Fig. 32  Using the method of Kai et al., CO2˙− generated at a Pt/Hg UME can be detected and quantified at an Au UME substrate given a sufficiently small interelectrode distance d.66	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Optimized carboxylation conditions of Bazzi et al. for carboxylation of aryl halides and (b) proposed mechanism.68	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Optimized reaction conditions of Kim et al. (b) Proposed mechanisms for carboxylation and dicarboxylation. As shown by the dashed arrow, we posit that the differential effect of radical scavengers on the formation of the two products 34-2 and 34-3 may support a pathway for dicarboxylation that does not proceed through the same intermediate 34-6 as the hydrocarboxylation pathway.70	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Optimized reaction conditions of Alkayal et al.71 (b) Mechanistic proposals based upon the possibility of initial reduction of CO2 (Route A) and initial reduction of 35-1 (Route B). (c) Representative product examples.	 

 	Fig. 36  Conversion of CO2 and NO3− to methylamine and proposed mechanism as described by Wu et al.,75 including (a) reaction conditions at −1.965 V vs. Fc/Fc+ (originally reported as −0.94 V vs. RHE) and (b) proposed reaction mechanism for the cascade reaction. *Denotes species on or near the electrode surface.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
