Metal-related electrocatalysts for Li–CO 2 batteries: an overview of the fundamentals to explore future-oriented strategies  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA05756E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05756E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 25406-25430Metal-related electrocatalysts for Li–CO2 batteries: an overview of the fundamentals to explore future-oriented strategies

        
          
            Huanzhu 
            Lv
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiang Long 
            Huang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoqi 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731, China. E-mail: binwang@uestc.edu.cn
bYangtze Delta Region Institute (Huzhou), University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Huzhou, 313001, China
Received 
      21st July 2022
    , Accepted 23rd September 2022First published on 4th October 2022AbstractIn the context of carbon peaking and carbon neutrality, the recovery and utilization of clean CO2 in energy storage systems have attracted significant attention from researchers. Recently, Li–CO2 batteries, that utilize CO2 as the cathode material, have been proposed to improve the economics of CO2 capture and reduce the accumulation of CO2, which can be applied to address problems with the operating environment. However, as an emerging research direction, this Li–CO2 battery system still faces many difficulties that require to be overcome, such as poor reversibility, low energy efficiency, and high overpotential, which are caused by poor electrochemical reaction kinetics. Therefore, designing and developing catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries with excellent catalytic activity and stability is pivotal in settling the above problems. In this review, the reduction and oxidation mechanisms of Li–O2/CO2 and Li–CO2 batteries are introduced first. Next, a comprehensive and exhaustive review is provided to discuss the cutting-edge design strategies of materials and structures of metal-based electrocatalysts oriented by Li–CO2 batteries. Finally, based on the research progress of advanced Li–CO2 batteries in the past few years, the opportunities and challenges for the future development of Li–CO2 batteries are highlighted.Huanzhu LvHuanzhu Lv is currently a master's student at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). His research focuses on design and functional synthesis of emerging energy materials for storage and catalysis.Xiang Long HuangXiang Long Huang carries out research on rechargeable battery technologies under the joint supervision of Prof. Shi Xue Dou and Prof. Zhiming Wang and focusses on design of electrode materials with unique nanostructures and functional properties for sustainable energy conversion and storage, encompassing metal-ion batteries, metal–chalcogen batteries, hybrid ion capacitors, etc.Xiaoqi ZhuXiaoqi Zhu is currently a doctoral student at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). Her research focuses on functional materials and flexible wearable energy storage and its application devices.Bin WangBin Wang is currently a professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). He was a postdoctoral scholar at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab (LBNL, USA) during 2009–2013. His research focuses on the development and applications of novel materials for flexible energy conversion and storage systems.
1. Introduction
Human society is looking forward to a green, low-carbon, and environmentally friendly lifestyle. Recently, the International Energy Agency released a 6% year-over-year increase in CO2 emissions to 36.3 billion tons in 2021 compared to 2020, reaching the highest annual level ever, which is a far cry from following a sustainable path.1 With this critical background, new materials are being studied in an attempt to acquire fuels and chemicals from CO2, which has become a hot research direction. This research direction includes electrochemical reduction of CO2,2 photocatalytic reduction of CO2 (ref. 3 biological treatment of CO2,4etc. Recently, Li–CO2 batteries (composed of a metallic lithium anode, separator, electrolyte, and CO2 gas cathode5), an emerging electrochemical utilization technology of CO2, have attracted worldwide attention from the scientific community.
Another crucial aspect, with the rapid development of global technology, fuel cars are expected to be replaced by electric cars as the hot transportation in the future. For electric vehicles, the core of electric vehicle technology consists of three electric technologies (battery, motor, and electric control).6–8 Therefore, the development of high energy density batteries is indispensable to improving the battery life of electric vehicles. As far as the existing technology is concerned, to achieve a long endurance level of ≥500 km, the energy density of the battery needs to reach at least 500 W h kg−1. However, the theoretical energy density of traditional lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is 350 W h kg−1, which obviously cannot satisfy the demand for long battery life.9 Therefore, the design of advanced high energy density battery systems is regarded to be the inevitable trend for the development of new energy electric vehicles. It is generally known that the energy density of metal gas batteries ranks at the forefront of the battery field. As an excellent representative of metal gas batteries, Li–CO2 batteries have a high energy density of 1847 W h kg−1.5 Considering the practical application, although the theoretical energy density of Li–CO2 batteries can match the demand of electric vehicles, the feasibility of Li–CO2 batteries in electric vehicles is questionable due to the influence of power, lifetime, fast charging and safety issues of Li–CO2 batteries faced by gas storage tanks in electric vehicles. In addition, the new application field of Li–CO2 batteries has been thought of by researchers. After nearly ten years of research accumulation (Fig. 1a), researchers have found that power sources of wearable electronic products are another potentially applicable scenario for Li–CO2 batteries.10–13 The main reasons are that the size of Li–CO2 batteries is similar to that of LIBs in existing electronic products, while they are less expensive and have a longer lifetime. Also, Li–CO2 batteries have significant potential applications in the aerospace field. Mars is also surrounded by an atmosphere, similar to that of the Earth. The main component of the Martian atmosphere is CO2, which accounts for 95.3%. Therefore, such a gas environment provides a great advantage for Li–CO2 batteries to be used in rovers.14–16
 Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications containing Li–CO2 batteries according to Web of Science (as of April 2022). (b) Substance usage of noble metal-based catalysts in Li–CO2 batteries according to Web of Science statistics (as of April 2022). (c) Timeline of the development of Li–CO2 batteries in recent years. Reproduced with permission:16 copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.41 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.42 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.79 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.105 copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.160 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons. 
Based on the above-mentioned significant contribution of Li–CO2 batteries to carbon neutrality and their rich application areas, Li–CO2 batteries have emerged as a hot research area from metal–gas batteries, and the ground breaking work of recent years is shown in Fig. 1c. Nevertheless, Li–CO2 batteries are still facing numerous key problems as follows that need to be solved urgently: (1) the lack of active catalysts and stable catalytic behaviour leads to slow reaction kinetics in most Li–CO2 batteries, making the power and energy density severely compromised; (2) the high overpotential will increase the internal pressure of Li–CO2 batteries, and the reversibility of the positive and negative active substances will be damaged, directly affecting their service life; (3) the low long-term reversibility of Li–CO2 batteries is a great obstacle to their practical application. The above problems of Li–CO2 batteries are mainly attributed to the high stability of the CO bond in Li2CO3, and the semi-open system of the gas batteries which makes it tricky to achieve efficiently long-term reversible cycles without the assistance of effective catalysts. Therefore, exploring and developing catalysts with high catalytic activity and chemical/electrochemical stability by promoting decomposition kinetics is a significant direction to prevent severe oxidation and side reactions of electrolytes and electrodes caused by high charging potential and possible formation of lithium dendrites that still need to be worked on. The catalysts used in Li–CO2 batteries can be classified into metal-based catalysts and nonmetal-free carbon-based catalysts. Carbon-based catalysts are worth being noticed due to their abundant resources, excellent electrical conductivity, and environmental friendliness. For example, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, graphdiyne, and carbon quantum dots have made substantial progress as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries.17–19 However, carbon-based materials face huge obstacles in the application of Li–CO2 batteries because it is difficult to fulfil the high catalytic activity requirements for the decomposition of the discharge product Li2CO3. On the other side, metal-based materials are considered as effective catalysts in many fields such as electrocatalysis, industrial catalysis, and even biocatalysis.20–26 Consequently, noble metals and their complex-based catalysts and transition metals and their complex-based catalysts are widely employed in Li–CO2 batteries with excellent catalytic performance (Fig. 1b). In 2021, Zhang et al.73 reported that Ru(bpy)3Cl2 was used as a solution-phase catalyst for Li–CO2 batteries, leading to an increase in the initial discharge capacity to 22119 mA h g−1 and an elevated discharge plateau to 2.68 V was achieved. Metal–organic framework (MOF) and covalent organic framework (COF) materials contain regular channels and ultra-high specific surface area,27–33 which provide advantageous pathways for the fast transport of electrons and CO2. Based on this, researchers in recent years have found that these two types of porous framework structures can make a significant catalytic contribution in Li–CO2 battery systems. In 2021, Jiang et al.136 successfully fabricated large-scale and ultrathin MnO2/2,6-diaminoanthraquinone-2,4,6-triformylphloroglucinol (DQTP)-COF-nanosheet (NS) hybrid materials as effective catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. The MnO2/DQTP-COF-NS based Li–CO2 batteries achieved an ultra-high discharge capacity of 42802 mA h g−1, which was higher than that of previously reported work and opened a new way for Li–CO2 batteries. As a rising star, single-atom catalysts (SACs) are also of interest to researchers in the field of Li–CO2 batteries.177–180 The main reasons are: (1) the isolated metal sites have nearly 100% atomic utilization; (2) SACs have fully exposed active sites. These two points together determine the outstanding catalytic activity of SACs.182,183 In 2019, single-atom catalysts were first proposed by Zhang184 for application in Li–CO2 batteries. Co single-atom anchored on graphene oxide provides highly catalytically active sites for the decomposition of Li2CO3, achieving ultra-long cycling performance. However, there is still a long way to go for metal-based catalysts to be applied in Li–CO2 batteries to improve their reversibility, specific full capacity, energy efficiency, mechanism research, and so on.
Herein, despite numerous problems presently associated with Li–CO2 batteries, such as anode protection, catalyst development, and electrolyte improvement, we focus this review on cathode catalysts, while concentrating more on recent advances in metal-based catalysts to overcome the above problems (Fig. 2). First, the reduction and oxidation reaction mechanisms of Li–O2/CO2 and Li–CO2 batteries are introduced. Next, the latest research results on metal-based catalysts are summarized. Eventually, opportunities and challenges for the future development of Li–CO2 batteries are highlighted. This review is a reference for the future development of advanced metal-based catalysts to enhance the competitiveness of Li–CO2 batteries.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of designing strategies toward metal-based catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. Reproduced with permission:60 copyright 2020, Elsevier.67 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.79 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.85 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.121 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.136 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.161 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.162 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.163 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.164 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.180 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons. 
2. Electrochemical mechanisms
The Li–CO2 battery is defined as a secondary battery, in which lithium metal is used as the anode electrode, and CO2 is reduced/evolved at the cathode electrode. The working mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery is shown in Fig. 3. In the past ten years, the intricate electrochemical mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery has been deeply studied. Based on the latest frontier research progress, we highlight the electrochemical reduction mechanism of CO2 and the electrochemical evolution mechanism of CO2 in Li–CO2 batteries.
 Fig. 3  The working mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery. 
2.1 Electrochemical reduction reaction mechanism of CO2

2.1.1 CO2 reduction reaction mechanism (CORR) of the Li–O2/CO2 battery. 
The rechargeable Li–O2 battery was first reported by Abraham et al.34 in 1996, and a good deal of innovative results were produced afterward. With the deepening of the research, the researchers found that CO2 has a huge interference with the electrochemical reaction of Li–O2 batteries. Gowda et al.35 proposed the Li–O2/CO2 battery based on the following reaction: 2CO2 + O2 +4e− → 2Li2CO3(1)
Through an in situ quantitative differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) investigation, Wang et al.36 confirmed that the consumption ratio of O2/CO2 is quantified to be about 0.44, close to 0.5. This coincides well with the reaction pathway (1).
In the Li–O2/CO2 battery system, O2 is first reduced to Li2O2 at the cathode. Due to the poor thermodynamic stability of Li2O2, Li2O2 reacts with CO2, ulteriorly, to produce Li2CO3 which is more thermodynamically stable (reaction pathway (2)).37 2Li2O2 + 2CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + O2(2)
In another pathway, CO2 can react with the intermediate O2− and finally form Li2CO3 proposed by Kyu Lim et al.37 The CORR pathway (dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) electrolyte) is shown in Table 1:
Table 1 Probable reaction pathway for Li2CO3 formation, as determined from density functional theory (DFT) calculations7




Elementary reaction
Reaction energy (kcal mol−1)




4O2 + 4e− → 4O2−
−61.0 × 4


O2− + CO2 → CO4−
−1.6


CO4− + O2− → CO42− + O2
−9.9


CO42− + CO2 → C2O62−
−17.4


C2O62− + Li+ → LiC2O6−
+0.9


LiC2O6− + O2− → LiC2O62− + O2
−16.1


LiC2O62− + O2− → LiC2O63− + O2
−27.3


LiC2O63− + Li+ → Li2C2O62−
−12.5


Li2C2O62− + Li+ → Li3C2O6−
−4.1


Li3C2O6− + Li+ → (Li2CO3)2
−6.3


Overall: O2 + 2CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → (Li2CO3)2
−351.22






2.1.2 CO2 reduction reaction mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery. 
Excluding the interference of O2, the chemical mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery is commonly reputed to be simpler. In the mechanism of the CO2 environment, reversible Li2CO3 was first identified as the end product confirmed by Xu et al.38 For the discharge mechanism of Li–CO2 batteries, it is generally accepted that there are three possible CORR pathways as follows:
The first possible CORR of the Li–CO2 battery used a nonaqueous electrolyte. 4Li+ + 3CO2 + 4e− → 2Li2CO3 + C (Eo = 2.80 V vs. Li/Li+)(3)
The specific reaction pathway is as follows:39 2CO2 + 2e− → C2O42−(4) C2O42− → CO22− + CO2(5) C2O42− + CO2 → 2CO32− + C(6) 2Li+ + CO32− → Li2CO3(7)
Li et al.40 anchored a highly folded and N-doped porous CNT network on the surface of Ti wires as the fibrous cathode of the Li–CO2 batteries, and further experimentally confirmed the electrochemical reaction mechanism of the Li–CO2 batteries in accordance with the above equation by in situ/non-in situ characterization and DFT calculations.
The second possible electrochemical reaction mechanism was proposed by Xie et al.41 Based on a three-dimensional (3D) porous fractal zinc material, the Li–CO2 battery system with fuel–gas CO as the main product was realized (reaction pathway (8)).41 2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e− → CO + Li2CO3(8)
The third possible electrochemical reaction mechanism has been speculated by several groups.165 Recently, ultrafine Mo2C nanoparticles anchored on CNT cloth-independent hybrid films (CC@Mo2C NPs) employed as the cathode of the Li–CO2 battery were proposed by Zhou et al.42 That C2O42− radicals and Mo2C can interact strongly in the form of Mo–O bonds is demonstrated and the formed discharge product Li2C2O4 is experimentally confirmed by in situ analysis and the chemical reagent test in this work. Therefore, Li2C2O4 can exist stably on the surface of Mo2C (reaction pathways (9) and (10)).42 2CO2 (sol) + 2e− → C2O42−(9) 2Li+ + C2O42− → Li2C2O4(10)

2.2 CO2 evolution reaction mechanism (COER)
Two reaction products (Li2CO3 and C or Li2C2O4) on the surface of the cathode are revealed during the CORR process. Therefore, the evolution process of CO2 may be closely related to the self-decomposition of Li2CO3 and the reaction process of Li2CO3 and C.
A major obstacle to the development of Li–CO2 batteries is the slow kinetics of Li2CO3 (ΔfG0 (Li2CO3) = −1132.1 kJ mol−1) decomposition because Li2CO3 is an insulator with a wide bandgap and therefore is thermodynamically very stable.43,44
The relevant reaction processes can be divided into four possible pathways:
Li et al.45 prepared a flexible fibrous Li–CO2 battery employing bamboo-like N-doped CNTs (B-NCNTs). The first COER mechanism is realized:45 2Li2CO3 → 4Li+ + 2CO2 + O2− + 3e−(11)
Wang et al.46 confirmed that when Ru is used as a catalyst, the decomposition process of Li2CO3 is more biased towards the reaction between Li2CO3 and C, which is the second reaction mechanism. The details are as follows:46 2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−(12)
Another reaction mechanism is related to the decomposition of Li2C2O4. Specifically, the following reaction process occurs:47 Li2C2O4 → 2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e−(13)
Meanwhile, Li2C2O4 has been shown to decompose into Li2CO3 (2C2O42− + 4Li+ → CO2 + C + 2Li2CO3), and the specific reaction process is:173 C2O42− → CO22− + CO2(14) CO22− + C2O42− → 2CO32− + C(15) 2Li+ + CO32− → Li2CO3(16)
Thermodynamically, Li2C2O4 is unstable, so it is more prone to decomposition than Li2CO3, which will effectively reduce the charging potential of the Li–CO2 battery and improve its cycling performance.
In short, the specific reaction pathway of Li–CO2, including the CO2 electrochemical reduction and evolution mechanism, is strongly influenced by the electrocatalysts. Therefore, the design, preparation, and application of electrocatalysts are critical for optimizing the performance of the Li–CO2 battery. We introduce and summarize the latest progress made by researchers in metal-related electrocatalysts for Li–CO2 batteries in detail.
3. Metal-related catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries
3.1 Noble metals and their composite based materials
It is generally known that since d-layer electron orbitals of noble metals are in an unfilled state48 the reactants are easily adsorbed on the surface, which is conducive to the formation of “intermediate active compounds”, so noble metals generally exhibit high catalytic activity. Based on their excellent catalytic performance, noble metals are widely used in chemical, battery, pharmaceutical, and other fields.49–54 As one of the noble metals, Ru has been widely utilized in the catalysis of methanol carbonylation, olefin metathesis, and other reactions.55–58 Therefore, Ru has a broad prospect to be applied to the reversible reaction process of CO2.59–65 Based on this, Chen et al.59 synthesized Ru nanoparticles and immobilized them on carbon nanotubes as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. The conductivity of Ru is improved by the matrix of carbon nanotubes, and the porous structure of the cross-linked Ru/carbon nanotube nanostructures has a strong positive effect on the diffusion of CO2 and electrolyte during the charging and discharging process. The author found that the discharge product of the Li–CO2 battery was Li2CO3 through the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the ectopic grazing incidence synchrotron, and disappeared during the charging process (Fig. 4a). It was found that the porous structure formed by Ru nanoparticles/carbon nanotubes was covered by cubic grains of Li2CO3 during the charging process (Fig. 4b). The above analysis results show that the formation and decomposition of discharge products of Li–CO2 batteries are effectively catalysed by Ru/CNTs. The evaluation results of the cycling performance of the catalyst cathode showed that the Ru/CNT catalyst has more excellent durability than that of CNTs (Fig. 4c, d). The mechanism of battery degradation based on different cut-off capacities was deeply analysed. When the battery was measured with a low cut-off capacity of 100 mA h g−1, battery degradation was caused by the continuous accumulation of Li2CO3 on the cathode material. With a high cut-off capacity of 500 mA h g−1, the cause of battery degradation was the passivation materials and dendrites on the anode including LiOH and Li2CO3 (Fig. 4e and f). Qiao et al.60 successfully prepared ultrafine Ru nanoparticles uniformly coated on the surface of N, S co-doped graphene as cathode materials for Li–CO2 batteries. The main reason for the introduction of doping N and S into carbon materials is to prevent the electrode from corroding by the free radicals formed by the discharge products, leading to the decomposition of the electrolyte. At the same time, there are three types of N atoms on the surface of the positive electrode, among which pyrrole-N (N-5) is beneficial to the adsorption of Li+, pyridine-N (N-6) has a strong adsorption effect on CO2 molecules, and graphite-N (NQ) is beneficial to improve the conductivity. In addition, doping S can impart a larger spin density, so that the catalytic activity of the cathode is improved to some extent. The morphology and structure of the pristine, discharged, and recharged Ru/NS-G cathodes were characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The results showed that some parts of the cathode surface were covered by granular products, while the folded features remained. After recharging, the granular product completely disappeared, and the folded morphology was restored, indicating excellent reversibility of the Ru nanoparticle cathode. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) and Raman spectroscopy of the cycled cathode further indicated that the discharge product was Li2CO3 and had good reversibility during cycles.
 Fig. 4  (a) Grazing incidence synchrotron XRD patterns of the Ru/CNT catalyst cathode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and cut-off capacity of 2000 mA h g−1. (b) SEM image of the discharged and charged Ru/CNT cathode material. Cycling performance of (c) CNT and (d) Ru/CNT catalyst cathodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and a cut-off capacity of 100 mA h g−1. Suggested sources for deteriorating Li–CO2 batteries with Ru/CNT cathodes at (e) low (100 mA h g−1) and (f) high (500 mA h g−1) cut-off capacity. Reproduced with permission:59 copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the superior catalytic performance of metallic Ru, its oxide has also proved to be an excellent candidate catalyst material for Li–CO2 batteries, which can reduce the charging voltage by promoting the decomposition of Li2CO3.66 Du et al.67 reported a novel all-solid-state Li–CO2 battery using RuO2 nanoparticles combined with single-walled CNTs (RuO2/SWCNTs) as catalyst cathodes. The charging plateau of the RuO2/SWCNT based Li–CO2 batteries is reduced to about 4.2 V, showing that the decomposition of discharge product Li2CO3 can be stably catalysed by RuO2/SWCNTs. Interestingly, it was calculated that 84.99% of the charging power was used to generate CO2 using RuO2/SWCNTs, while the other 15.01% of the energy was consumed by by-products and thermal effects. However, the cycle performance of RuO2/SWCNT cathode based Li–CO2 batteries needs to be further improved. Yue et al.68 synthesized RuO2−x nanoparticle-decorated amorphous CoSnO3 nanoboxes by a stoichiometric coprecipitation method and liquid-plasma route. More catalytically active sites are provided by oxygen vacancies of RuO2−x nanoparticles, reducing the catalytic activation energy and improving the catalytic efficiency and service life. The CoSnO3 nanobox has a high specific surface area in the porous structure, which provides more channels for the transport of ions and gases. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between RuO2−x nanoparticles and CoSnO3 nanoboxes, the overpotential of RuO2/CoSnO3 based Li–CO2 batteries can be reduced to 0.88 V with excellent long-term cycling performance (145 cycles).
Two or more composite catalysts containing active components with different catalytic functions can further enhance the catalytic performance through synergistic effects. At present, metals/oxides, metals/metals, alloys, etc., have been applied to Li–CO2 batteries.69,70 Lian et al.71 synthesized an ultrafine Ru/RuO2 nanoparticle anchored in a hierarchical porous carbon shell (Ru/RuO2-HPC) as the cathode of Li–CO2 batteries (Fig. 5a). Ru@RuO2 based Li–CO2 batteries exhibit petal-like nanosheet structures on the cathode surface after discharge (Fig. 5b). The space occupied by the structure is smaller and tighter, which is beneficial to further improve the discharge capacity of the battery, so it has a deep discharge capacity of up to 12398 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of approximately 100%. At the same time, during the charging process, the discharge products with smaller and thinner nanosheet structures can have better contact with active sites, leading to the further reduced overcharge potential to 1.22 V. It also has excellent durability up to 303 cycles (Fig. 5c). Xing et al.72 prepared ultrathin triangular RuRh alloy nanosheets as cathode active catalysts (Fig. 5d and e). The local structure of the CO2 redox process was obtained from DFT calculations that either (O)-frontal or c-adsorption architectures are energetically advantageous (Fig. 5f). The authors propose that Ru sites in RuRh based Li–CO2 batteries have higher electron activity, and different electron transfer is promoted by Rh sites, so the battery capacity and rate performance are improved based on the synergistic effect of Ru and Rh.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of Ru/RuO2 nanoparticles anchored in a hierarchical porous carbon shell (Ru/RuO2-HPC). (b) SEM image of the discharged Ru/RuO2-HPC cathode. (c) Stability of Ru/RuO2-HPC anode cells at 250 mA g−1. (d and e) High angle angular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) representative images of RuRh nanosheets (d) tiled on the transmission electron microscope (TEM) grid, perpendicular to the TEM grid. (e) The inset shows the thickness distribution of RuRh nanosheets. (f) Local structural configurations of various initial reactants, intermediates, and final products. Ru, light blue; Rh, dark green; Li, pink; O, red; C, grey. Reproduced with permission:71 copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Due to the continuous accumulation of solid-state discharge products in deep cycling, the active sites of the heterogeneous catalysts at the electrode/electrolyte interface will deteriorate, resulting in the “death” of the battery. Liquid mobile catalysts were introduced by Zhang et al.73 to solve the above problems. Tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)-dichloro-ruthenium(II) (Ru(bpy)3Cl2) was proposed as a ruthenium complex-based mobile catalyst for the Li–CO2 battery. Spectroscopic and electrochemical analyses revealed that the Ru(II) complex catalyst reacted with dissolved CO2 to promote the formation of oxalic group based intermediates through the CORR for the first time. Next, the Ru(II) complex will interact with the oxalic group based intermediate, so that the oxalic group based intermediate can exist stably. Since the oxalic group based intermediate is easier to decompose than the carbonic group based intermediate under the action of electric charge, the energy efficiency is effectively improved and side reactions are reduced. Due to the flexible tunability and high catalytic activity of Ru(II) complexes, it can be used as a very cutting-edge Li–CO2 battery mobile catalyst.
Owing to the high chemical stability of Ir and IrO2, they can be used as catalyst candidates for Li–CO2 batteries.74–76 Li et al.16 proposed using the Ir-coated gas diffusion layer (GDL) as the catalyst. Electrochemical analysis showed that with the introduction of the Ir catalyst, the polarization gap was significantly reduced, and the number of cycles was greatly improved (150 cycles). At the same time, it has shown that Ir based Li–CO2 batteries can work stably at extremely low temperatures (≤−60 °C). It is worth noting that although the substrate material of Ir was not provided in this work, Parafilm was used as the cathodic protection layer. Recently, Zhai et al.77 successfully fabricated Ir atomic clusters that were uniformly super assembled on the surface of Te nanowires by a swirling hydrothermal method, forming an amorphous surface layer as a cathode catalyst (Fig. 6a and b). From the SEM and high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) results, it can be seen that there is an Ir-substituted layer with a thickness of about 3 nm on the surface of the Te nanowires (NWs), which is observed as an amorphous structure (Fig. 6a). DFT calculations and ex situ and in situ tests were applied to further study the charge–discharge reaction mechanism of Ir/Te NW based Li–CO2 batteries, as shown in Fig. 6c–e. During the discharge process, the reaction intermediate is generated by the adsorption of Li ions caused by the formation of , and then  interacts with Li ions and CO2 to generate  and C. This pathway conforms to reaction pathway 1. The reaction mainly occurs at the Ir active site. In addition, Te NW has excellent Li ion adsorption properties and a large  formation voltage window, which can accelerate the formation of . At the same time, the positive adsorption energy of CO2 can deeply refine the catalytic reaction of Ir active sites. During the charging process, reaction path 2 is followed. Amorphous C first reacts with  to form , and then  undergoes delithiation and CO2 formation through the decomposition of intermediate . During this process, the reaction kinetics can be accelerated by the desorption capacity of CO2 due to the positive adsorption energy of the Te substrate. The above analysis of the surface Ir atomic clusters and Te nanowires has an excellent synergistic ability, which has a positive effect on improving the comprehensive catalytic ability. Ir oxides have also been shown to have excellent catalytic properties for Li–CO2 batteries. Wu et al.76 introduced ultrafine IrO2 particle-modified nitrogen-doped CNTs (IrO2/N-CNTs) as cathode catalysts to improve the performance of Li–CO2 batteries. The doping of N enables more defects to be introduced into the CNTs, while the density of active sites is increased owing to the loading of IrO2. During the discharge process, with the synergistic effect of IrO2 and N doping, the discharge products are encapsulated on the IrO2/N-CNTs to form a thin layer of stacked plates, which can be rapidly decomposed at lower charging voltages. IrO2/N-CNT based Li–CO2 batteries exhibit high specific capacity (4634 mA h g−1), low charging plateau and overpotential (3.95 V/1.34 V), and ultra-long cycle life (316 cycles).
 Fig. 6  (a) HRTEM images of atomic Ir–Te NWs; (b) schematic representation of the synthesis process of Te NWs and atomic Ir–Te NWs; calculated energy diagrams of (c) path 1, (d) path 2 for CORR and COER on the Ir (111); (e) schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism for electrocatalytic reactions during the discharge process. Reproduced with permission:77 copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Besides Ru, Ir, and their oxides, Au and Ag are also recognized as noble metals with high catalytic activity and good catalytic selectivity, which are excellent catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. Kong et al.78 prepared Au nanoparticle composites uniformly distributed on CNTs (AuNPs/CNTs) by the impregnation method as efficient cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. The AuNPs/CNT cathode can be stably cycled for 46 cycles continuously. However, the effect mechanism of AuNPs/CNTs on the COER and CORR was not clear. Recently, Zhang et al.79 designed silver nanoparticle (AgNP)-decorated TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNAs) as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. It is worth mentioning that in this work, the synergistic photoelectric effect and plasmonic interaction are introduced to accelerate the oxidation and reduction of CO2 in Li–CO2 batteries. The synergistic mechanism is that a large number of photogenerated electrons and holes will be formed on the surface of the TiO2 nanotube array in response to light; the locally enhanced electric field of silver nano-ions has a strong promotion effect on the separation and transfer of photogenerated carriers. So, the full utilization of the carrier in the process of CO2 reduction and oxidation is achieved (Fig. 7a and b). At the same time, due to the effect of enhanced electric field, the mediated morphology of the discharge products can achieve efficient decomposition of the discharge products. The finite-difference time-domain method was applied to discover the electric field intensity distribution around TNA and TNAs/AgNPs (Fig. 7a). It can be seen that compared with TNAs, the electric field intensity of TNAs/AgNPs at the interface between TNA and Ag nanoparticles is greatly improved. Due to the presence of the Ag-enhanced electric field, the recombination of photogenerated carriers is significantly suppressed on the surface analysed by steady-state photoluminescence spectroscopy (Fig. 7b). The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of TNAs/AgNPs show very low resistance, indicating that the photogenerated carriers can be rapidly transferred to participate in the COER and CORR reaction processes under the enhanced electric field (Fig. 7c). The reduction and oxidation processes of CO2 during charge and discharge were deeply analysed by DFT. Under the effect of the locally enhanced electric field,  is more easily desorbed from the surface of TNAs/AgNPs and diffuses into the electrolyte solution. The specific reaction mechanism and details are shown in Fig. 7d and e. During the discharge process, the formation energy of Li2CO3 in the solution pathway is −4.31 eV, which indicates that under the photoelectric effect and plasmonic interaction, the Li2CO3 in solution is easier to nucleate according to the thermodynamic angle, and then is deposited in a granular form on the cathode surface. During the charging process, electron transfer occurs simultaneously on the C–O bond in Li2CO3 and the Ag–O bond in the TNAs/AgNP cathode, which will lead to the activation of C–O, which is favourable for the rapid and complete decomposition of Li2CO3. The round-trip efficiency of TNAs/AgNP based Li–CO2 batteries can still reach 86.9% after 100 cycles, with ultra-low charging voltage and high-rate performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) Finite difference time domain simulations and complementary schematics of the charge carrier migration inside the TNAs/AgNPs. E0 and E represent the intensities of the incident and localized electric field, respectively; (b) photoluminescence emission spectra and (c) electrochemical impedance spectra of TNAs and TNAs/AgNPs; (d) working mechanism of the dual-field assisted Li–CO2 battery; (e) mechanistic investigations of the product generation and decomposition at the TNAs/AgNP cathodes. Reproduced with permission:79 copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons. 
3.2 Transition metals and their composite based materials

3.2.1 Transition metals and their alloy materials. 
From the above analysis, it is known that precious metals such as Ru/Ir have excellent catalytic properties, which have been extensively reported in the field of Li–CO2 batteries. However, owing to the expensive cost of noble metal-based materials, their widespread application has been greatly limited. Therefore, exploring and developing transition metal-based alternative materials to achieve low-cost and high-performance goals is a strategic measure to develop cutting-edge metal-based catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. Transition metals (Fe, Cu, Ni, etc.) can provide empty orbitals to act as electrophiles in chemical reactions, or provide lone pairs of electrons to act as nucleophiles to form intermediate products, thereby reducing the activation energy of the reaction and promoting the reaction kinetics.80–83 Therefore, transition metals can be utilized as substitute materials for noble metals. Recently, Hu et al.84 synthesized a cathode catalyst for Li–CO2 batteries by implanting single iron atoms into a 3D porous carbon structure composed of interconnected N,S-co-doped porous graphene (HG) sheets (Fe-ISA/N, S-HG). They found that the electrochemical performance of Li–CO2 batteries was improved by using Fe-ISA/N, S-HG, which included remarkable capacity (23174 mA h g−1) and excellent cycling performance (over 200 cycles). It is worth noting that Li2CO3 nanoparticles (less than 10 nm in diameter) are uniformly dispersed on the HG sheet after discharge, and are much smaller compared with previously reported Li2CO3 (more than 50 nm in diameter), which facilitates complete decomposition during charging. On this basis, DFT calculations were performed to reveal the synergistic effect between the charge and spin redistribution induced by N, S-co-doping and the “Fe–N4” in the carbon framework, which actively catalyses the redox of the CO2 effect. Afterward, Kim et al.85 proposed a sustainable, biodegradable biocatalyst, iron (Fe) nanoparticles embedded in N-doped CNTs (Fe NPs@N-CNTs) via the capillary action route of haemoglobin solution as cathode catalysts for efficient Li–CO2 batteries. The synthesis of Fe NPs@N-CNTs exploited the strong capillary motion of the haemoglobin solution autonomously entering the nanoscale voids, and finally, Fe nanoparticles (less than 5 nm) were successfully embedded into the CNTs (Fig. 8a). Tadpole-shaped nanoparticles can be observed from CNTs by TEM (Fig. 8b). The catalytic mechanism of Fe nanoparticles in Fe NPs@N-CNTs was explored by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. 8c and d). During the charging process, the iron element is in a bound state, forming Fe–O–C bonds. During the discharge process, the Fe–O–C bond participates in the electrochemical reaction as an effective catalyst for the redox reaction of Li–CO2 batteries. The iron element is in the metallic state and exists in the form of Fe0. At the same time, it is proved that although CNTs are doped with the N element in haemoglobin. In fact, the N element does not participate in the electrochemical catalysis process but improves the conductivity of CNTs. This report proposed using biological waste as a catalyst for Li–CO2 batteries, which is in line with the development direction of green and efficient catalysts.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of Fe NPs@N-CNT catalyst synthesis derived from hemoglobin blood protein and the cycle process of discharge/charge reactions in Li–CO2 cells with Fe NPs@N-CNT electrodes; (b) STEM image of tadpole-shaped Fe NPs (inset shows related EDS mapping); (c) XPS spectra obtained from each stage of electrodes collected in the (c) O 1s, and (d) Fe 2p. Reproduced with permission:85 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
Other transition metals such as Co, Ti, Fe, Cu, etc., have also been widely reported. Li et al.86 annealed the Prussian blue analogs and utilized them to synthesize cobalt-embedded N-CNTs (Co–N-CNTs) as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. It is found that N-CNTs have better discharge capacity than Co–N-CNTs, and the authors believe that the core reason for this result is the lower density of N-CNTs. However, N-CNTs have poor reversibility and large potential. At this time, the advantage of Co–N-CNTs with lower polarization is significantly highlighted, which proves the excellent catalytic performance of Co nanoparticles in the redox process of CO2. The reason is that Co nanoparticles enhance the catalytic activity through electron transfer, resulting in the reduced work function of the carbon-localized surface. Therefore, superior cycle performance (90 cycles) of Co–N-CNT based Li–CO2 batteries was achieved. At the same time, Ti is also utilized as a transition metal in the catalytic process of Li–CO2 batteries. Li et al.87 developed 3D channel-free vertically aligned N-doped CNT (VA-NCNT) arrays grown on Ti wires as cathode catalysts for flexible Li–CO2 batteries (Fig. 9a). The advantages of VA-NCNT/Ti can be summarized as follows: (1) the array distribution of VA-NCNT/Ti is quite dense, the N-doping content reaches 7.92%, and the structure has thicker carbon walls and abundant void space, so that rapid transport of CO2 and structural stability are jointly guaranteed; (2) during the discharge process of Li–CO2 batteries, due to the 3D vertical channels of VA-NCNTs, the uniform distribution of discharge products can be achieved, and it is ensured that the discharge products will not accumulate excessively in the active site; (3) the strong adhesion of the CNT array enables the VA-NCNT/Ti fiber electrode to maintain its structural integrity even under mechanical deformation. Based on the above significant advantages of VA-NCNT/Ti, the battery has an ultra-wide discharge capacity of 23328 mA h g−1 with a low potential gap of up to 1.96 V. It is worth mentioning that the superb stability of more than 360 cycles can be achieved with excellent flexibility. This work shows a new pathway for further designing cathode catalysts for flexible wearable Li–CO2 batteries.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of VA-NCNT arrays on the Ti wire via the FCCVD method; (b) scheme of the discharge−charge mechanism for the Li–CO2 battery with the bimetallic Ru82Co18/CNF cathode; (c) the proposed mechanism of Cu/N-CNFs and PdCu/N-CNFs in Li–CO2 batteries. Reproduced with permission:87 copyright 2021, Elsevier.90 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.91 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared with single-transition metals, double-transition metals have been reported to be more widely used as catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries, mainly owing to the lack of promoting factors of single-transition metals resulting in poor catalytic performance. Double transition metals can greatly enhance the catalytic performance through the strong synergistic effect between two metals.88,89 Based on this, Jin et al.90 designed and synthesized RuCo nanoparticle alloys uniformly dispersed on carbon nanofibers (RuCo/CNFs) as high-performance catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. The authors pointed out that the composition of the RuCo/CNF cathode has a key influence on the performance of Li–CO2 batteries. It was confirmed by experiments that Ru82Co18 could have the best catalytic performance, caused by Ru82Co18/CNFs having a suitable combination with discharge products. At the same time, the ultrafine Ru82Co18 alloy nanoparticles were uniformly distributed on the surface of CNFs to provide abundant active sites (Fig. 9b). Recently, PdCu-decorated nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers (PdCu/N–CNFs) as an efficient cathode catalyst for Li–CO2 batteries were reported by Gong et al.91 Cu has a strong absorption effect on CO2, but Cu is easy to oxidize to form a stable interface. The introduction of Pb into the PbCu alloy can not only strongly inhibit the oxidation of Cu, but also provide more active sites. The overall performance of Li–CO2 batteries is enhanced through the synergistic effect between double-transition metals. PdCu/N–CNF based Li–CO2 batteries have the characteristics of large capacity, long cycle and low polarization. The authors believe that the main reasons are: (1) owing to the synergistic effect between the bimetals, a large number of active sites are provided for the redox reaction of Li–CO2 batteries and the morphology of the discharge products is optimized by the co-type growth. The shape of the discharge product is changed from the block to a nanosheet and uniformly distributed on the nanofibers, which is beneficial to the complete decomposition of the discharge products during the charging process (Fig. 9c); (2) the excellent chemical stability of bimetals prevents Cu from forming a passivation layer, so that the catalytic performance is stabilized and sustained. The improved catalytic performance and chemical stability of PdCu/N–CNFs result in high-performance Li–CO2 batteries.


3.2.2 Transition metal oxide based materials. 
The d electron shell of metal cations in transition metal oxides is easy to lose electrons or take electrons, so they have fast redox properties. At the same time, transition metal oxides have the characteristics of low cost, heat resistance, strong anti-toxicity, rich crystal structures, etc.92,93 Because of these excellent properties, transition metal oxides are considered to be economical and promising catalyst choices for Li–CO2 batteries.94–98 Zheng et al.99 designed NiO nanosheets with vertically grown oxygen vacancies on carbon fiber clothing (NiO-Vo@CC) as viable catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. This work lies in electrode structure design and defect engineering surface modification. In terms of electrode structure design, the independent 3D electrode structure can not only provide unimpeded electron transport and CO2 diffusion channels, but also expose more active catalytic sites. In terms of surface modification of defect engineering, the reduced NiO surface was prepared by producing oxygen vacancies. The authors believe that the Ni ions on the surface of defective crystals will preferentially adsorb CO2, while oxygen vacancies play a key role in breaking the coordination equilibrium environment, and the Louis base plane formed in the process is conducive to electron transfer and CO2 activation. So NiO-Vo@CC cathode based Li–CO2 batteries exhibit low overpotential (1.2 V) and improved cycle life.
Solar energy is assessed as a key source of next-generation energy due to its clean nature, abundance, ubiquity, and environmental benignity. In previous reports, solar energy has been introduced into H2–O2 fuel cells, Li-ion batteries, and metal–air batteries to accelerate reaction kinetics and improve electrochemical performance.100–104 Recently, Wang et al.105 proposed light-promoted rechargeable flexible Li–CO2 batteries using TiO2/CC as its cathode catalyst. Under the condition of illumination, a large number of electrons in the valence band (VB) of TiO2 are excited to the conduction band (CB) to generate photoelectrons, and the generated photoelectrons migrate along the longitudinal direction of TiO2/CC. During the massive injection of photoelectrons into the battery, the diffusion rate of lithium ions also increases substantially, further improving the intrinsic kinetics of the battery (Fig. 10a–c). An extremely low initial charge voltage of 2.88 V (3.97 V in the dark) and an equilibrium voltage of 2.80 V and high energy efficiency of 97.9% can be achieved under light illumination conditions (Fig. 10d). The mechanism of the polarization-reducing effect under illumination conditions is that photons are captured by TiO2/CC and photoelectrons and holes are generated. Affected by the voltage difference between the CB and the equilibrium voltage, the remaining holes in the VB will diffuse towards the cathode and oxidize Li2CO3 and C. The authors assess that the high charge potential of photo-promoted Li–CO2 batteries will be compensated by the internally generated photovoltage, so the advantage of lighting in reducing power consumption during charging is highlighted (Fig. 10e). The mechanism of the nucleation and decomposition of discharge products on TiO2/CC under light conditions is further illustrated based on the SEM results. The authors believe that a large number of photogenerated electrons migrate to the surface of TiO2/CC due to the influence of illumination during the discharge process, making it electronegative. And the electronegative TiO2–NAs can promote CO2 adsorption and electron transfer, exposing more nucleation sites; During charging, the photoelectrons move in reverse through an external circuit to reduce Li+ at the anode. The rapid decomposition of the Li2CO3/C layer is promoted by the strong chemical oxidation ability of the remaining hole pairs in the VB of the TiO2/CC cathode surface (Fig. 10e). The flexible battery can be stably cycled under different bending states (Fig. 10f and g).
 Fig. 10  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra of Li–CO2 batteries with the TiO2/CC cathode with and without illumination and calculated Li+ diffusion coefficient; (b) schematic diagram of light absorption and its effect on the discharge process; (c) charge curves of Li–CO2 batteries with the TiO2/CC cathode with and without illumination; (d) schematic of energy diagrams for the reduced charge voltage of the Li–CO2 battery under illumination; (e) model illustrating the effect of illumination on deposition and decomposition of discharge products in Li–CO2 batteries; (f) illustration of the structure of the flexible Li–CO2 battery; (g) digital photographs of the prepared TiO2/CC cathode at different bending angles (0°, 90°, 180°, and 360°). Reproduced with permission:105 copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 
Due to abundant crystal structures, tunable valence states, and the unique MnO6 octahedral effect, manganese-based materials are widely used in the field of catalysis, and the researchers have verified their applicability in the field of Li–CO2 batteries.106–112 Tang et al.113 synthesized K+ doped MnO2 nanowires with three-dimensional interconnections (3D KMO NWs) using a facile hydrothermal method. In previous studies, the structure of MnO2 will undergo severe degradation during cycling, which directly affects its catalytic performance. In this work, the introduction of K+ can not only stabilize the Mn-based structure, but also effectively promote the diffusion of electrons and ions in the MnO2 tunnel to form the MnO6 octahedral effect. Meanwhile, KMO nanowires with a 3D interconnected structure can facilitate charge transfer and enhance energy storage. Thanks to the above improvements, the designed 3D KMO NW based Li–CO2 battery achieves an excellent total discharge capacity of 9043 mA h g−1, a low overpotential of ∼1.25 V and more extended cycle performance. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted more interest because of the unusual properties emerging in confined structures. MXenes are novel 2D nanomaterials derived from a large family of transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbon nitrides with excellent conductivity and efficient charge transport.114–116 Recently, Wang et al.117 used vacuum-assisted filtration and in situ reduction to prepare MXene–MnO2 composite membranes as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries (Fig. 11a). DFT calculations show that the MnO2 sheet gap is a tetrahedral gap, which becomes an octahedral gap after in situ growth on MXene/δ-MnO2, which provides fast transport channels for electrons and ions (Fig. 11b). Fig. 11c shows that the adsorption energy of lithium on MXene/δ-MnO2 is the highest. The density of states (DOS) results showed that replacing Mn with Ti enhanced the adsorption of Li ions and accelerated the rapid decomposition of the discharge product Li2CO3/C(Fig. 11d and e). Another crucial point is that the synergistic effect of MXene and MnO2 exposes a large number of active sites, which the authors believe is the main reason for the increased capacity of the Li–CO2 battery. Therefore, subsequent studies on Mn oxides should focus on the effects of ion introduction and crystal structure changes on the catalytic and electrochemical mechanisms.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ti3C2–MnO2 films; schematic model for adsorption of lithium in (b) Ti3C2 (001), Ti3–xMnxC2 (001), Ti3C2O2 (001), and Ti3–xMnxC2O2 (001), respectively; (c) adsorption energy of lithium in Ti3C2 (001), Ti3–xMnxC2 (001), Ti3C2O2 (001), and Ti3–xMnxC2O2 (001), respectively; the DOS of (d) MnO2 and (e) Ti3C2–MnO2 films, respectively. Reproduced with permission:117 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Transition metal carbide based materials. 
Transition metal carbides have noble metal-like electronic properties, and catalytic behaviour, so they are widely used in fuel cells, air batteries and other fields.118 In 2017, the transition metal carbide Mo2C was first explored for application in Li–CO2 batteries, mainly due to its excellent electrochemical performance and reversibility in previous Li–O2 battery systems. Hou et al.165 employed Mo2C/CNTs as the cathode of rechargeable Li–CO2 batteries. They found for the first time by XRD mapping that amorphous products were formed on the surface of Mo2C/CNTs instead of the usual crystalline Li2CO3. Further analysis by Raman spectroscopy revealed that the oxygen in CO2 may combine with the molybdenum in Mo2C to form the coupling intermediate Mo–O during the whole discharge process. This strong coupling and the resulting special electron leaving domains in the electron pairs are crucial for the formation of amorphous products. The amorphous product is proposed to be Li2C2O4 by comparing and learning from the reaction mechanism of Li–O2 batteries, which decomposes well below 3.5 V due to the instability of Li2C2O4. Therefore, this work is a milestone in the exploration of Li–CO2 batteries to achieve high electrical efficiency and reversibility. After this work, advanced work was also presented; Yang et al.119 used DFT calculations to study the reaction mechanism of Mo2C as a cathode catalyst in Li–CO2 batteries. Mo2C contains a series of stable and metastable carbide phases, among which α-Mo2C (001), β-Mo2C (001) and β-Mo2C (101) surfaces are deemed to be exposed on the crystal surface. The catalytic effects of these three Mo2C surfaces on Li–CO2 batteries were intensively studied. DFT calculations show that β-Mo2C (001) and (101) surfaces can be used as effective catalyst sites to promote the decomposition of discharge products owing to their lowest Gibbs free energy. At the same time, because of the charge transfer between Mo2C and the intermediate product Li2C2O4, the decomposition path of the Li2C2O4 disproportionation reaction into Li2CO3 is obviously inhibited. After this, the utilization of graphene nanosheets\molybdenum carbide β phase (GNPs\β-Mo2C) as a cathode catalyst for the Li–CO2 battery was proposed by Wu et al.120 Interestingly, the authors found that the dielectric electrolyte has a greater impact on the reaction pathway through theoretical and experimental results. The adsorption energies of intermediates formed in the presence of electrolytes with different dielectric constants were investigated: tetraethyleneglycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME) with a low dielectric constant and dimethyl adipate (DMA) with a high dielectric constant. DFT calculations proved that four oxygen atoms of the model C2O42− combined with the four Mo atoms in Mo2C are the most stable configuration (Fig. 12a). The adsorption energy calculation results showed that the adsorption of C2O42− on the Mo2C surface was disrupted by DMA instead of reacting to form Li2C2O4, while Li2C2O4 was formed in the presence of TEGDME (Fig. 12b). To further analyse the effect of the dielectric constant of the electrolyte on the formation of Li2C2O4 from C2O42−, a clustering model was applied to study the structure of Li2C2O4. Clustering model 2 was considered as the most likely structure owing to its lower energy compared to clustering model 1 (Fig. 12c). Next, the reaction energies of Li2C2O4 in different electrolytes of DMA and TEGDME were calculated based on clustering model 2(Fig. 12d). It is shown that the higher dielectric constant of DMA increases the Li–O distance, so the C2O42− to Li2C2O4 reaction is interrupted. The above calculation results are proved by means of experiments. The role of electrolytes in the reaction mechanism is deeply considered, which provides a crucial idea for future research on the mechanism of Li–CO2 batteries.
 Fig. 12  (a) Four configurations of C2O42− on the (100) surface of Mo2C. While model 1 and model 2 are initial configurations because they fail to converge, model 3 and model 4 are optimized configurations. Model 1: one oxygen atom of C2O42− is bound to one Mo atom in Mo2C. Model 2: two oxygen atoms of C2O42− are bound to two Mo atoms in Mo2C. Model 3: two pairs with two oxygen atoms of C2O42− are bound to one Mo atom in Mo2C. Model 4: four oxygen atoms of C2O42− are bound to four Mo atoms in Mo2C. (Green: molybdenum, red: oxygen, gray: carbon); (b) adsorption energy of C2O42− in each electrolyte (TEGDME and DMA), as calculated using model 4; (c) two possible configurations of Li2C2O4: cluster model 1 and cluster model 2; (d) distances of atoms calculated for TEGDME and DMA electrolytes using the Gaussian 09 code and cluster model 2; (e) schematic diagram of the W2C-CNT synthesis process; (f) Fourier transform EXAFS spectra and associated fitting curves of the pristine, discharge W2C-CNT cathodes, and the WO3 reference at the W L3-edge; (g) the wavelet transform EXAFS; (h) the decomposition barrier of Li2CO3 on CNT and W2C (101) surfaces. Inset: the decomposition process on CNT (top) and W2C (101) (bottom) substrate surfaces. The green, brown, red, and gray balls represent Li, C, O, and W, respectively. Reproduced with permission:120 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission:121 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
Based on the excellent catalytic performance of W2C catalysts in air batteries, Zhang et al.121 recently incorporated W2C nanoparticles into CNT walls (W2C-CNTs) as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries (Fig. 12e). Advanced characterization techniques were utilized to study the reaction mechanism of the W2C-CNT based Li–CO2 battery. The results of Fourier transform extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy and wavelet analysis showed that the W–O bond was formed during CO2 reduction because of the interaction of W2C with the discharge product Li2CO3 (Fig. 12f and g). The authors believe that the electrons of the electron-rich W atom were transferred to the O atom of Li2CO3, so the stable triangle of carbonate was broken, which was beneficial to the efficient dissociation of Li2CO3. The interaction of the W2C (101) surface with Li2CO3 to form W–O bonds was confirmed by DFT calculations, resulting in further reduction of the decomposition barrier of Li2CO3 on the W2C substrate surface (Fig. 12h).

3.3 SACs, MOFs, and COFs
The single-atom ones have a dramatically increased surface free energy, quantum size effect, unsaturated coordination environment, and metal–carrier interactions. Based on these properties, SACs not only expose abundant active catalytic sites but also have a higher atom utilization rate.185–188 They have been widely used in many fields such as oxidation reactions,189 electrocatalysis,186 photocatalysis,190 and hydrogenation catalysis.191 Therefore, in recent years, researchers have extended their application to Li–CO2 batteries to investigate their catalytic performance in this new field. In 2022, Xu et al.192 proposed that nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers were utilized as copper single-atom carriers (Cu/NCNFs) for the preparation of Li–CO2 batteries as an effective catalyst. The wavelet transform (WT) analysis shows that there is no significant Cu–Cu signal peak caused by Cu aggregation in the Cu/NCNFs, demonstrating that the distribution of Cu single atoms in the Cu/NCNF is uniform and dispersed. SEM images of the cathode in different states showed that even after 40 cycles the spherical particles formed by the discharge products can still be almost completely decomposed during the charging process. This further demonstrates that the electronic structure and Fermi energy level of the carbon material can be effectively modulated by the abundant nitrogen in the fiber. In addition, Cu single atoms have an important contribution to the effective adsorption and activation of CO2. In 2021, Lian et al.179 proposed an innovative study based on SACs. They prepared single-atom catalysts by introducing Ru atoms into Co3O4 nanosheet arrays (SA Ru–Co3O4/CC) grown on carbon cloth to achieve efficient reversible charging and discharging of Li–CO2 batteries (Fig. 13a). The Raman peaks on the surface of the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode remained almost unchanged in nature after completing 5 and 30 cycles (Fig. 13b). This result verifies that the presence of single atoms is stabilized, which is essential for the maintenance of catalytic performance. Through the following density functional theory (DFT) simulations, the authors believed that the introduction of Ru atoms as driving force centres can significantly enhance the intrinsic affinity of the key intermediate (oxalic acid), which is greatly beneficial for the CORR process (Fig. 13c). Meanwhile, the calculation of the Co/Ru electronic charge showed that Ru atoms also act as electron-deficient centres, which is beneficial to the COER process of the battery (Fig. 13d). The growth path of surface adsorption based on SA Ru–Co3O4/CC@Li–CO2 batteries during the discharge process was achieved by enhancing the adsorption energy of the intermediates as shown in Fig. 13e. Finally, a thin and homogeneous discharge product was formed, which is in close contact and bound to the monoatomic active site of Ru, enabling its easier and more complete decomposition during the charging process. The SA Ru–Co3O4/CC@Li–CO2 batteries achieved a discharge capacity of 16510 mA h g−1, which is one of the largest discharge capacities reported so far for Li–CO2 batteries, while they can operate for 2000 h and remain stable. Although SACs can be considered the “holy grail” of catalysts, they also have the disadvantage that when the metal particles are reduced to the single-atom level, the specific surface area increases dramatically, resulting in a dramatic increase in the free energy of the metal surface, which can easily lead to agglomerative coupling and the formation of large clusters during preparation and reaction, thus leading to catalyst deactivation.193 Based on this, the current very cutting-edge solution strategy is to combine SACs with another legendary structure, MOFs, which will surely further solve the above problem. Next, the application of MOFs in Li–CO2 batteries will be further outlined, and the related innovative work of combining MOFs with SACs will also be highlighted.
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the synthesis process of SA Ru–Co3O4/CC; (b) Raman spectra of the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode with different cycles; (c) adsorption energy of reaction intermediate Li2C2O4 on Co3O4 and SA Ru–Co3O4 active sites; (d) Bader charge distribution on Co3O4 and SA Ru–Co3O4; (e) schematic illustrations of the working mechanism for the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathodes. Reproduced with permission:179 copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. 
In addition to the conventional metal-based catalysts reported above, some metallic crystalline porous skeletal materials and crystalline organic porous polymers have emerged as the mainstay of cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. MOFs have been widely used in many fields such as catalysis, gas separation and storage, sensing, and proton conduction because of their unique crystalline porosity, flexible and tailorable properties, and ultra-high specific surface area.122–125 Especially in the field of catalysis, MOFs effectively integrate the respective advantages of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts by virtue of their unique structure, filling the gap of the pore size between traditional microporous and mesoporous materials.126–128 Dong et al.129 synthesized porphyrin-based 2-dimensional MOFs MTPzP-Mn as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries by self-assembling 5,10,15,20-tetra(1H-pyrazol-4-yl)porphyrin. Through characterization techniques such as XRD, SEM, and FTIR tests, the double Mn sites containing Mn-Por sites and Mn-Pz sites in the MnTPzP-Mn cathode catalyst were prepared. Meanwhile, two intrinsically active sites play crucial roles in promoting the reduction of CO2 during discharge and complete decomposition of Li2CO3 during charge, respectively. Just recently, a metal–organic skeleton-derived Fe–N–C electrocatalyst (Fig. 14a) was designed by Ding et al.174 and applied to Li–CO2 batteries. The Fe–N–C catalyst consisting of dodecahedral nanoparticles exhibits a three-dimensional structure with a large specific surface area, as shown in Fig. 14b. The presence of a single Fe atom results in a significant acceleration of electron/ion transport in the Fe–N–C cathode (Fig. 14c). Thanks to the unique pore space of the Fe–N–C cathode and the single Fe atom, the activity of Li2CO3 formation and decomposition is therefore well motivated. The final Li–CO2 battery exhibits excellent reversibility with 140 stable cycles (Fig. 14d) and can provide a high discharge capacity of more than 13238 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the host–guest chemistry strategy to fabricate the MOF-derived Fe–N–C catalysts; (b) TEM and HRTEM images of Fe–N–C; (c) EIS spectra of Fe–N–C and N–C; (d) cycling performance of the Fe–N–C and N–C cathodes at 200 mA g−1 and a curtailed specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission:174 copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.91 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As a new class of heterogeneous catalysts, COFs have the advantages of highly ordered pore structures, tunable pore size, large specific surface area, diverse synthesis methods, and easy functional modification.130–134 The reasons why COFs can be used as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries are as follows: (1) the channels of COFs can be flexibly designed to provide favourable support for the transport of Li+ and CO2; (2) the structure of COFs can be functionalized by using different functional groups or metals; (3) COFs can form a synergistic effect with other materials to further improve the electrochemical performance and stability of the battery.135 Recently, Jiang et al.136 successfully exfoliated quinone-based COFs into large-scale and ultrathin MnO2/2,6-diaminoanthraquinone-2,4,6-triformylphloroglucinol (DQTP) COF-nanosheet (NS) hybrid materials as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries (Fig. 15a). The discharge capacity of MnO2/DQTP-COF-NS-3 based Li–CO2 batteries can be as high as 42802 mA h g−1 with excellent cycling performance. Experiment results demonstrate that the overpotential was narrowed and the CORR/COER kinetics were enhanced owing to the synergistic effect between COF NSs containing quinone moieties and MnO2, enabling the cells to operate for longer periods and withstand higher current densities. The results of DFT calculations on the reaction mechanism showed that the quinone group played a key role in the activation of CO2 (Fig. 15b). The authors proposed the basic mechanism of cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries: the quinone group in DQTP-COF gains electrons and transforms into an intermediate reduced state. Subsequently, the reduced quinone group interacts with CO2 to form a variety of stable quinone-CO2 adducts. During the discharge process, CO2 with the presence of Li+ can be further reduced to small-sized solid products (such as Li2CO3 and C), which are uniformly distributed on the surface of ultrathin NSs. During the charging process, the generated Li2CO3 can be efficiently decomposed at the interface of quinone COF NSs and MnO2.
 Fig. 15  (a) The chemical exfoliation of DQTP-COF into NSs; (b) DFT calculations of the interaction between CO2 and the quinone moiety in MnO2/DQTP-COF-NSs. Reproduced with permission:136 copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Based on the above work on MOFs and COFs, a new door is opened for the future exploration and development of porous crystalline materials as cathode catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries.
4. Conclusion and outlook
In the context of carbon neutrality and carbon peak, considerable attention has been paid to developing new energy storage and conversion devices for the replacement of traditional fossil fuels.137–139 Owing to the high energy density and environmental friendliness, Li–CO2 batteries have been considered as one of the most promising electrochemical energy storage systems. Through ten years of research and improvement, significant progress on plentiful aspects, including battery configuration, electrocatalyst design, electrolyte optimization, etc., has been made; however, there are a series of issues that need to be urgently addressed as well as substantial developmental space. A comparison of metal-based catalyst materials in Li–CO2 batteries is provided in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of metal-based catalytic materials for Li–CO2 batteries and their performances




Cathode catalysts/Refa
Electrolytea
Current density (mA g−1)
Maximum capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycling rate (mA g−1)
Cycling life (cycles)





a LiTFSI = lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide; TEGDME = tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether; DMSO = dimethylsulfoxide; LiCF3SO3 = lithium triflate; LiNO3 = lithium nitrate; KNO3 = potassium nitrate; LiClO4 = lithium perchlorate; hexagonal nanoplates = HNPS; polypyrrole = PPy; CCA = cellulose carbon aerogel; NCNF = nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers.





Ru/CNTs61
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
4541
100
45


Ru/NS-G60
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
12448
100
100


Ru/Super P63
LiNO3 and KNO3
100
5500
100
70


Ru/NC65
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
10200
100
184


CNTs/RuO2 (ref. 66)
LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
50
2187
50
55


RuO2−x/CoSnO3 (ref. 68)
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
—
100
145


Ru–Cu-G69
LiTFSI in TEGDME
200
13590
200
100


Ru/RuO2-HPC71
LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
250
12398
250
303


RuRh NS/C72
LiTFSI in TEGDME
1000
6500
1000
180


IrO2–N/CNTs76
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
4634
100
316


Ir–Te77
LiNO3 in DMSO
1000
13247.1
1000
350


Ru(bpy)3Cl2 (ref. 73)
LiTFSI in TEGDME
200
22119
300
60


AuNPs/CNTs78
LiNO3 in DMSO
100
6399
200
46


Fe-ISA/N,S-HG84
LiTFSI in TEGDME containing LiNO3
100
23714
1000
200


VA-NCNTs85
LiTFSI in TEGDME
50
18652
50
63


RuCo/CNFs90
LiTFSI in DMSO
300
17270
500
90


PdCu/N–CNFs91
LiTFSI in DMSO
100
18550
400
250


CCGA92
LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
100
7860
100
100


RuO2–TiO2 NAs/CT166
LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
250
16727
250
238


KMO NWs/KB113
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
9043
100
64


Ti3C2–MnO2 (ref. 117)
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
5722
100
220


W2C-CNTs121
LiClO4 in DMSO
100
10632
100
—


MnTPzP-Mn129
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
14025
200
90


MnO2/DQTP-COF-NSs136
LiTFSI in TEGDME
200
42802
1000
120


Cu–Co4N/CC167
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
31000
200
131


MnOx–CeO2/Ppy168
LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME
100
13631
—
253


Ni/Ru HNPs169
LiTFSI in TEGDME
—
—
200
120


CuPPc-CNTs170
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
18652.7
200
160


Cu/NCNFs171
LiF3SO3 in DMSO
100
14084
—
133


Ruh-NC/rGO172
(LiTFSI in TEGDME
—
44700
1000
367


Ruh-NC/rGO172
(LiTFSI in TEGDME
—
44700
1000
367


Pt/CNT175
LiTFSI in TEGDME
—
—
100
110


Ni/Ru HNPs176
LiTFSI in TEGDME
200
1000
200
120


Fe–N–C174
LiTFSI in TEGDME
200
13238
200
140


IrOx/Ir SAC-loaded NCNT177
LiTFSI in TEGDME
—
—
200
120


SAC Ru (5 wt%)178
LiTFSI in TEGDME
100
44700
1000
367




As can be seen, the development of Li–CO2 batteries with high reversibility, high capacity, and low overpotential remains an ongoing challenge due to the slow CORR/COER kinetics involved. Innovative development of metal-related electrocatalysts is the critical way to solve the above bottlenecks. First, we summarize the possible response pathways of the complex CORR/COER process of Li–CO2 batteries. Next, we focus on applying metal-related electrocatalysts in Li–CO2 batteries reported by researchers recently. We found that the future development of Li–CO2 batteries is facing challenges and it is worthwhile devoting much effort to this.
We point out the crucial factors and promising research directions for the future design and development of metal-related electrocatalysts applied to Li–CO2 batteries.
First, the evolution of the active centres of metal-based catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries demands to be deeply explored. The structure of the catalyst is not fixed in various reaction processes, but is in the process of constant change. The dynamic evolution of the catalyst structure has been proposed and studied in reaction processes such as CO2 electroreduction and CO2 hydrogenation,140,141,181 but similar work has not been carried out in the field of Li–CO2 batteries. In essence, due to the high-intensity reactivity and energy of the active centre, the dynamic evolution of defect structures during catalytic Li–CO2 oxidation and reduction is crucial for catalytic activity and understanding the intrinsic reaction mechanism.
Second, driven by increased computing power, advances in algorithm development, and the availability of massive amounts of data, modern society has seen the application of machine learning expand into numerous research areas of materials.142–145 In traditional materials science research, researchers only rely on the experience of material testing and application in the experimental process to accumulate material properties. Obviously, the development of high-performance new materials by traditional methods has a long period of time, and low efficiency, and is limited by experimental conditions. Compared with traditional methods, machine learning can provide new ideas for efficient and accurate “bottom-up” material design. The researchers conduct data mining based on the collected material-related information to obtain key data information, then construct an artificial intelligence algorithm and import the material data, and finally train an artificial intelligence algorithm model with material design functions to assist researchers in developing new materials.146 At present, the research on lithium batteries with the aid of machine learning has achieved fruitful results.147–150 Based on the previous successful experience, the use of machine learning to develop advanced metal-based catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries is a new and bright road.
Third, the photoelectric effect and plasmonic interactions are expected to be intensively studied for their application in catalytic systems for Li–CO2 batteries. The photoelectric effect has been widely reported in photoelectric catalysis of water splitting to produce hydrogen fuel, and photoelectric catalysis of nitrogen fixation to ammonia because the formation of photogenerated electrons and holes can accelerate electrochemical reactions.151–155 The role of the photoelectric effect in the Li–CO2 battery system is reflected in the fact that photogenerated carriers can participate in the COER and CORR reaction processes of CO2, improving the performance of Li–CO2 batteries;105 Plasma is the fourth state of matter different from solids, liquids, and gases. When the catalyst interacts with the plasma, the physical and chemical properties of the catalyst change, so that the catalyst activity is improved;156–158 The plasma can change the valence of the active molecules on the surface of the catalyst, so that the surface modification of the catalyst is realized.159 At the same time, the photoelectric effect and the plasma interaction have synergistic effects, and the locally enhanced electric field has a strong promoting effect on the separation and transfer of photogenerated carriers, so the full utilization of carriers in the reduction and oxidation of CO2 is realized.79 In conclusion, the photoelectric effect and plasmonic interactions are expected to play crucial roles in Li–CO2 battery catalytic systems.
Fourth, the mechanism of action of metals in gas–solid systems has not yet been clarified, and one of the most troublesome problems for researchers is metal–CO2. As mentioned earlier, Li–CO2 batteries are complex systems involving multi-step reactions, and the discharge products (Li2CO3, C, Li2C2O4, CO, etc.) are affected by many factors such as the type of catalyst, environmental medium (electrolyte), and temperature. Therefore, advanced characterization techniques such as DEMS, EXAFS, XPS, XRD, etc., and related theoretical calculations are suggested for the study of the reaction mechanism of Li–CO2 batteries.
Finally, the ultimate goal of Li–CO2 batteries is not just to be kept at the level of theoretical research, but to be practically applied in people's real life. Therefore, flexible Li–CO2 batteries are considered as next-generation energy storage devices for wearable devices. The key problem to be solved in flexible Li–CO2 batteries lies in the fabrication technology of flexible cathodes, focusing on developing low-cost, high-efficiency, and environmentally friendly stand-alone catalysts.
In conclusion, Li–CO2 batteries are a crucial strategic means to achieve carbon neutrality and carbon peaking at an early date. It is believed that through the ongoing innovation and efforts of metal-based catalyst research and the gradual clarification of the reaction mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery system, it is expected to be widely used in the next generation of energy storage systems.
Author contributions
H. Lv wrote the manuscript. X. Huang and X. Zhu helped revise the manuscript. B. Wang conceived the idea, designed the structure of the review, revised the draft of the manuscript, supervised the work, and provided funding support.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52072352, U20A2072, and 21875226), the Foundation for the Youth S&T Innovation Team of Sichuan Province (2020JDTD0035), Tianfu Rencai Plan, the Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of Sichuan Province (2017JQ0036), and Chengdu Talent plan, Science and Technology Projects for Administration for Market Regulation of Sichuan Province (SCSJ2020016).
Notes and references

          IEA, Global Energy Review: CO2 Emissions in 2021, IEA, Paris,  2022, https://www.iea.org/reports/global-energy-review-CO%3csub%3e2%3c/sub%3e-emissions-in-2021-2 Search PubMed .
K. Zhao and X. Quan, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 2076–2097 CrossRef .
A. Saeed, W. Chen, A. H. Shah, Y. Zhang, I. Mehmood and Y. Liu, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 47, 101501 CrossRef .
S. A. Razzak, S. A. M. Ali, M. M. Hossain and H. deLasa, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 379–390 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, R. Wang, Y. Lyu, H. Li and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 677–681 RSC .
L. S. Martins, L. F. Guimaraes, A. B. Botelho Junior, J. A. Soares Tenorio and D. C. Romano Espinosa, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 295, 113091 CrossRef .
K. Laadjal and A. J. M. Cardoso, Electronics, 2021, 10, 1588 CrossRef .
B. E. Lebrouhi, Y. Khattari, B. Lamrani, M. Maaroufi, Y. Zeraouli and T. Kousksou, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 44, 103273 CrossRef .
M. Park, H. Sun, H. Lee, J. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 780–800 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhang, M. Li, X. Bi, T. Liu, T. He, J. Cheng, F. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Mu, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903852 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Qi, J. Zhang, L. Chen, B. Wang and J. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2112501 CrossRef .
S. Xu, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, W. Gan, B. Liu, E. M. Hitz, J. W. Connell, Y. Lin and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3231–3237 RSC .
X. Li, J. Zhang, G. Qi, J. Cheng and B. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 148–156 CrossRef .
A. D. Pathak and C. S. Sharma, Mater. Lett., 2021, 283, 128868 CrossRef .
S. Xu, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, W. Gan, B. Liu, E. M. Hitz, J. W. Connell, Y. Lin and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3231–3237 RSC .
J. Li, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, S. Li, X. Fu, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, C. Hu, Q. Dai, Y. Xiao, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, F. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804630 CrossRef .
W. Xing, S. Li, D. Du, D. Wang, Y. Liao, S. Ge, J. Xu, P. Bai, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Gao, M. Wu, Q. Xue and Z. Yan, Electroche. Acta, 2019, 311, 41–49 CrossRef .
L. Song, C. Hu, Y. Xiao, J. He, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104595 CrossRef .
J. Wang, T. Liao, Z. Wei, J. Sun, J. Guo and Z. Sun, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2000988 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, L. Xu, J. Qiu, X. Liu and S. Zhang, Sustain. Mater. Technol., 2020, 25, e00204 Search PubMed .
M. Perez, S. Elangovan, A. Spannenberg, K. Junge and M. Beller, Chemsuschem, 2017, 10, 83–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Farinelli, M. Minella, M. Pazzi, S. Giannakis, C. Pulgarin, D. Vione and A. Tiraferri, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 393, 122413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, C. Calvo-Tusell, A. Z. Zhou and K. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2021, 13, 1166–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gustini, C. Lavilla, W. W. T. J. Janssen, A. Martinez de Ilarduya, S. Munoz-Guerra and C. E. Koning, Chemsuschem, 2016, 9, 2250–2260 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xia, X. Zhong, Z. Li and Y. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 533, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, C. M. McGuirk, A. d'Aquino, J. A. Mason and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800202 CrossRef .
H. Wang, J.-Q. Liu, Y.-N. Zhang, Y.-Y. Wang, G.-L. Wen, C.-Y. Guo and Q.-Z. Shi, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2008, 11, 129–133 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Q. Shao, Q. Song, J. Cui, Y. Zhang, B. Wu, L. Ge, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Qin, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan, H. Wang, T. Xu and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lulinski, K. Durka, P. Pacholak and R. Kaminski, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 12688 CrossRef .
H. Xu, X. Chen, J. Gao, J. Lin, M. Addicoat, S. Irle and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1292–1294 RSC .
J. X. Koh, K. Geng and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 9418–9421 RSC .
G.-N. Liu, R.-D. Xu, M.-K. Li, Y. Sun, M.-J. Zhou, R.-Y. Cai, Z.-J. You, X.-M. Jiang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 2858–2861 RSC .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef .
S. R. Gowda, A. Brunet, G. M. Wallraff and B. D. McCloskey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 276–279 CrossRef .
L. J. Wang, W. R. Dai, L. P. Ma, L. L. Gong, Z. Y. Lyu, Y. Zhou, J. Liu, M. Lin, M. Lai, Z. Q. Peng and W. Chen, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 9280–9286 CrossRef PubMed .
H. K. Lim, H. D. Lim, K. Y. Park, D. H. Seo, H. Gwon, J. Hong, W. A. Goddard, H. Kim and K. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9733–9742 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, S. K. Das and L. A. Archer, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6656–6660 RSC .
Y. Xing, Y. Yang, D. Li, M. Luo, N. Chen, Y. Ye, J. Qian, L. Li, D. Yang, F. Wu, R. Chen and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803124 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhou, T. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Li, Y. Jia, J. Cheng, Q. Guan, E. Liu, H. Peng and B. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808117 CrossRef .
J. F. Xie, Q. Liu, Y. Y. Huang, M. X. Wu and Y. B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13952–13958 RSC .
J. Zhou, X. Li, C. Yang, Y. Li, K. Guo, J. Cheng, D. Yuan, C. Song, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804439 CrossRef .
Z. J. Liang, Q. L. Zou, J. Xie and Y. C. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2870–2877 RSC .
N. Feng, B. Wang, Z. Yu, Y. Gu, L. Xu, J. Ma, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7396–7404 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Li, J. W. Zhou, J. X. Zhang, M. Li, X. X. Bi, T. C. Liu, T. He, J. L. Cheng, F. Zhang, Y. P. Li, X. W. Mu, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903852 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4107–4114 RSC .
K. Nemeth and G. Srajer, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1879–1885 RSC .
W. Sesselmann, B. Woratschek, J. Kuppers, G. Ertl and H. Haberland, Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter., 1987, 35, 1547–1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pan, J. Yang, K. Liu, Z. Yin, T. Ma, S. Liu, L. Xu and S. Wang, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Jo, M. Wu, S. Nahm, Y. Kang and H.-K. Jung, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2015, 4, A115–A118 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, B. Li, K. Teng, X. Wang, R. Liu, M. Wu, L. Zhang, P. Ren, J. Zhang and M. Feng, J. Materiomics, 2022, 8, 454–474 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W. Liu, N. Wu, X. Wang, T. Zhang, L. Chen, R. Zeng, Y. Wang, J. Lu, L. Fu, L. Xiao and L. Zhuang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19800–19806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Buisson, S. Donegan, D. Wray, A. Parracho, J. Gamble, P. Caze, J. Jorda and C. Guermeur, Chemistry Today, 2009, 27, 12–16 CAS .
J. C. Lopes, M. J. Sampaio, B. Rosa, M. J. Lima, J. L. Faria and C. G. Silva, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 391, 112350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, W. Ji, N. Feng, L. Lan, Y. Li and Y. Ma, Materials, 2020, 13, 4026 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gallhof, L. Kell and M. Brasholz, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 1772–1775 CrossRef CAS .
A. Poater, M. Christian D'Alterio, G. Talarico and R. Chauvin, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 2020, 4743–4749 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Sousa, P. S. Meneses, P. D. S. Gois, E. A. Silva, V. P. C. Junior, B. S. Lima-Neto and J. L. Silva Sa, Lett. Org. Chem., 2020, 17, 596–602 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Chen, J. J. Yang, C. H. Chen, D. H. Wei, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8385–8396 RSC .
Y. Qiao, J. Wu, J. Zhao, Q. Li, P. Zhang, C. Hao, X. Liu, S. Yang and Y. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 133–139 CrossRef .
K. V. Savunthari, C. H. Chen, Y. R. Chen, Z. Tong, K. Iputera, F. M. Wang, C. C. Hsu, D. H. Wei, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 44266–44273 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thoka, C. M. Tsai, Z. Tong, A. Jena, F. M. Wang, C. C. Hsu, H. Chang, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 480–490 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4107–4114 RSC .
S. Yang, Y. Qiao, P. He, Y. Liu, Z. Cheng, J.-j. Zhu and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 972–978 RSC .
P.-F. Zhang, Y.-Q. Lu, Y.-J. Wu, Z.-W. Yin, J.-T. Li, Y. Zhou, Y.-H. Hong, Y.-Y. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 363, 224–233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bie, M. Du, W. He, H. Zhang, Z. Yu, J. Liu, M. Liu, W. Yan, L. Zhou and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5146–5151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, Y. Liu, S. Yang, C. Li, Z. Cheng, F. Qiu, P. He and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9581–9585 RSC .
G. Yue, X. Luo, Z. Hu, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Liu and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 11693–11696 RSC .
Z. Zhang, C. Yang, S. Wu, A. Wang, L. Zhao, D. Zhai, B. Ren, K. Cao and Z. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802805 CrossRef .
P.-F. Zhang, J.-Y. Zhang, T. Sheng, Y.-Q. Lu, Z.-W. Yin, Y.-Y. Li, X.-X. Peng, Y. Zhou, J.-T. Li, Y.-J. Wu, J.-X. Lin, B.-B. Xu, X.-M. Qu, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 1640–1651 CrossRef .
Z. Lian, Y. Pei, S. Ma, Y. Lu and Q. Liu, ChemistrySelect, 2022, 7, e202104549 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, K. Wang, N. Li, D. Su, W.-T. Wong, B. Huang and S. Guo, Matter, 2020, 2, 1494–1508 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, W. L. Bai, Z. P. Cai, J. H. Cheng, H. Y. Kuang, B. X. Dong, Y. B. Wang, K. X. Wang and J. S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 16404–16408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, C. Tang, Z. Tang, J. Xie, Z. Chen, J. Tu, G. Cao and X. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 405–413 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. G. Wang, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, Small, 2018, 14, e1800641 CrossRef .
G. Wu, X. Li, Z. Zhang, P. Dong, M. Xu, H. Peng, X. Zeng, Y. Zhang and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3763–3770 RSC .
Y. Zhai, H. Tong, J. Deng, G. Li, Y. Hou, R. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Lu, K. Liang, P. Chen, F. Dang and B. Kong, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 43, 391–401 CrossRef .
Y. Kong, H. Gong, L. Song, C. Jiang, T. Wang and J. He, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2021, 2021, 590–596 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, J. Li, W. Zhai, C. Li, Z. Zhu, X. Kang, M. Liao, L. Ye, T. Kong, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, P. Chen, Y. Gao, B. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201718 Search PubMed .
C. Yang, Q. Wu, W. Xie, X. Zhang, A. Brozena, J. Zheng, M. N. Garaga, B. H. Ko, Y. Mao, S. He, Y. Gao, P. Wang, M. Tyagi, F. Jiao, R. Briber, P. Albertus, C. Wang, S. Greenbaum, Y. Y. Hu, A. Isogai, M. Winter, K. Xu, Y. Qi and L. Hu, Nat, 2021, 598, 590–596 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X.-G. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y.-N. Chen, L. Ma, Z. Peng and Z. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700567 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Xie, K. Cao and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3218–3223 RSC .
L. Zhou, H. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Qi, C. Shen, T. Jin and K. Xie, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 2139–2147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Gong, Y. Xiao, Y. Yuan, N. M. Bedford, Z. Xia, L. Ma, T. Wu, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Lu, K. Amine and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1907436 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, J.-K. Yoo and W.-H. Ryu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 815–825 CrossRef .
L. Song, T. Wang, C. Wu, X. Fan and J. He, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12781–12784 RSC .
X. Li, J. Zhang, G. Qi, J. Cheng and B. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 148–156 CrossRef .
H. Liang, Y. Zhang, F. Chen, S. Jing, S. Yin and P. Tsiakaras, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 559–567 CrossRef .
T. Yang, H. Li, J. Chen, H. Ye, J. Yao, Y. Su, B. Guo, Z. Peng, T. Shen, Y. Tang, L. Zhang and J. Huang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23967–23974 RSC .
Y. C. Jin, F. Y. Chen and J. L. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2783–2792 CrossRef .
H. Gong, X. Yu, Y. Xu, B. Gao, H. Xue, X. Fan, H. Guo, T. Wang and J. He, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 1533–1540 RSC .
Q. Deng, Y. Yang, S. Qu, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Ma, W. Yan and Y. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 42, 484–492 CrossRef .
H. Dong, C. Jin, Y. Gao, X. Xiao, K. Li, P. Tang, X. Li and S. Yang, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 115616 CrossRef .
A. Jena, H. C. Hsieh, S. Thoka, S. F. Hu, H. Chang and R. S. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2719–2725 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lu, Y. Shang, S. Ma, Y. Lu, Q. C. Liu and Z. J. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 958–965 CrossRef .
R. Pipes, A. Bhargav and A. Manthiram, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37119–37124 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Lu, S. Lu, S. Ma, X. Zhu, Z. Li and Q. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2021, 495, 229782 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Li, X.-G. Wang, Y.-N. Chen, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2792–2796 RSC .
R. Zheng, C. Shu, J. Li, A. Hu, N. Chen, M. Li and J. Long, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 383, 138359 CrossRef .
A. Uzun, B. Bokor and D. Eryener, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 34654–34665 CrossRef .
Z. Zheng, T. Liu, Q. Liu, J. Lei and J. Fang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 19846–19860 CrossRef .
A. Mauger and C. M. Julien, Inorganics, 2022, 10, 5 CrossRef .
A. Purabgola, N. Mayilswamy and B. Kandasubramanian, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2022, 29, 32305–32325 CrossRef .
M. Szczepaniak, P. Otreba, P. Otreba and T. Sikora, Energies, 2022, 15, 26 CrossRef .
X. X. Wang, D. H. Guan, F. Li, M. L. Li, L. J. Zheng and J. J. Xu, Small, 2021, 17, 10 Search PubMed .
B. Ge, Y. Sun, J. Guo, X. Yan, C. Fernandez and Q. Peng, Small, 2019, 15, e1902220 CrossRef .
D. Lei, S. Ma, Y. Lu, Q. Liu and Z. Li, J. Electron. Mater., 2019, 48, 4653–4659 CrossRef .
S. Li, Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Wang and B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10354–10362 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, S. Hong, Y. Dong, J. Wang, X. Gao, P. Qi, Y. Han and B. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1046–1054 RSC .
L. Liu, L. Zhang, K. Wang, H. Wu, H. Mao, L. Li, Z. Sun, S. Lu, D. Zhang, W. Yu and S. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33846–33854 CrossRef .
W. Ma, S. Lu, X. Lei, X. Liu and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20829–20835 RSC .
Z. Zhuo, K. Dai, R. Qiao, R. Wang, J. Wu, Y. Liu, J. Peng, L. Chen, Y.-d. Chuang, F. Pan, Z.-x. Shen, G. Liu, H. Li, T. P. Devereaux and W. Yang, Joule, 2021, 5, 975–997 CrossRef .
Z. Tang, M. Yuan, H. Zhu, G. Zeng, J. Liu, J. Duan and Z. Chen, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 670612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ba, D. Liang and Y. Xie, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2021, 42, 1225–1240 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Huang, X. Yuan, X. Gan and N. Zhou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 544, 148861 CrossRef .
B. C. Wyatt and A. Rosenkranz, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007973 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, B. Ge, J. Guo, C. Fernandez and Q. Peng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 9961–9968 CrossRef .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12703–12706 CrossRef .
C. Yang, K. Guo, D. Yuan, J. Cheng and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6983–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, J. Y. Kim, H. Park, D. Y. Kim, K. M. Cho, E. Lim, O. B. Chae, S. Choi, Y. Kang, J. Kim and H. T. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32633–32641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Lu, J. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Diao, X. Wang and J. Yao, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3503–3510 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Gupta, J. Bae, S. Kim and K. S. Kim, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 8951–8962 RSC .
P. He, J. Zhou, A. Zhou, Y. Dou and J. Li, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2019, 40, 855–866 CAS .
M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali, A. Dhakshinamoorthy and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15188–15205 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Q. Xu, M. Wang and J. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 53454–53467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Wang, B. Yu, Y. Zhang, X. Kong, Y. Mi, J. Zhang, Z. Guo, W. Xu and X. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 13184–13189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Huang, S. Lu, P. Li, X. Xia, C. Li and F. Li, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 20308–20315 RSC .
D. Yang and B. C. Gates, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1779–1798 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Dong, Y. Zhang, Y. F. Lu, L. Zhang, X. Huang, J. H. Wang, J. Liu, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 8937–8940 RSC .
J. He, B. Luo, H. Zhang, Z. Li, N. Zhu, F. Lan and Y. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 606, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Zhang and P. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 571, 151355 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, G. Zhang and L. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 795–808 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M.-X. Wu, G. H. Zhou, X.-H. Wang and X. M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104996 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Tong, H. Cui, P. Hu and W. Huang, Prog. Chem., 2021, 33, 2024–2032 CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. L. Zhong, M. Lu, J. H. Wang, C. Jiang, G. K. Gao, L. Z. Dong, Y. Chen, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 175–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, Y. Zhang, M. Zhang, N.-N. Ma, G.-K. Gao, J.-H. Wang, M.-M. Zhang, Y. Chen, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100392 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, J. Wu, C. Zhao and P. Wang, PLoS One, 2021, 16, e0258691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 87 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, X. Ma, B. Chen, Y. Shang and M. Song, Resour. Conserv. Recycl., 2022, 176, 105959 CrossRef .
R. Pang, P. Tian, H. Jiang, M. Zhu, X. Su, Y. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, L. Song and C. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwaa187 CrossRef .
S. Zuo, Z.-P. Wu, H. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103383 CrossRef .
J. Cai, X. Chu, K. Xu, H. Li and J. Wei, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 3115–3130 RSC .
C.-T. Chen and G. X. Gu, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902607 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Guo, X. Zou, Y. Li and S. Shi, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 31, 434–450 CrossRef .
P. Xu, H. Chen, M. Li and W. Lu, Adv. Theory Simul., 2022, 5, 2100565 CrossRef .
J. Wei, X. Chu, X.-Y. Sun, K. Xu, H.-X. Deng, J. Chen, Z. Wei and M. Lei, Infomat, 2019, 1, 338–358 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Chen, H.-Y. Yang, J.-S. Wun, C.-H. Wang and L.-L. Li, Energy Explor. Exploit., 2020, 38, 1854–1878 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheng, W. Sha, L. Wang, S. Tang, A. Ma, Y. Chen, H. Wang, P. Lou, S. Lu and Y.-C. Cao, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 4671 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, F. Yang, F. Xu, X. Song and K.-L. Tsui, IEEE Access, 2019, 7, 93139–93149 Search PubMed .
P. Khumprom and N. Yodo, Energies, 2019, 12, 660 CrossRef .
M. Li, H. Huang, J. Low, C. Goo, R. Long and Y. Xiong, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800388 CrossRef .
Q.-Y. Liu, H.-D. Wang, R. Tang, Q. Cheng and Y.-J. Yuan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater, 2021, 4, 8674–8679 CrossRef .
V. Manh-Hiep, M. Sakar and D. Trong-On, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 621 CrossRef .
M. Ali, E. Pervaiz, U. Sikandar and Y. Khan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 18257–18283 CrossRef .
A. Kang, A. Alkhraije, S. McSweeney, A. Alfarsi, M. R. Ahmed, J. Kruse, C. O'Dwyer and D. Fitzpatrick, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2000–2009 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Geonmonond, J. Quiroz, G. F. S. R. Rocha, F. E. Oropeza, C. J. Rangel, T. S. Rodrigues, J. P. Hofmann, E. J. M. Hensen, R. A. Ando and P. H. C. Camargo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8560–8568 RSC .
M. Verkaaik, R. Grote, N. Meulendijks, F. Sastre, B. M. Weckhuysen and P. Buskens, Chemcatchem, 2019, 11, 4974–4980 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, S. Chen and H. Wang, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4067–4074 RSC .
X. Xu, Q. Yan, X. Gu and Y. Luo, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 8892–8902 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Z. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5785–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, X. Li, Z. Zhang, P. Dong, M. Xu, H. Peng, X. Zeng, Y. Zhang and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3763–3770 RSC .
M. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Liang, F. Wang, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Energy Technol., 2021, 9, 2100547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Wang and B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10354–10362 RSC .
X. Li, H. Wang, Z. Chen, H.-S. Xu, W. Yu, C. Liu, X. Wang, K. Zhang, K. Xie and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Hou, J. Z. Wang, L. L. Liu, Y. Q. Liu, S. L. Chou, D. Q. Shi, H. K. Liu, Y. P. Wu, W. M. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 8 Search PubMed .
C. Z. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. C. Lu, L. B. Qu, H. C. Yao, Z. J. Li and Q. C. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 475, 228703 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, W. Zhao, Q. Deng, X. Fu, L. Wu, W. Yan and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2022, 535, 231446 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, Y. Yang, C. Mao, T. Wang, Z. Fang, W. Yan, K. Yin and Y. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103667 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, H. Shen, D. Ji, Y. Xing, L. Tao, Q. Sun and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2204134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, C. Jiang, H. Gong, H. Xue, B. Gao, P. Li, K. Chang, X. Huang, T. Wang and J. He, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 4100–4107 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Gong, L. Song, Y. Kong, C. Jiang, H. Xue, P. Li, X. Huang, J. He and T. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 25, 100967 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, Y. Bai, Y. Lian, Y. Ma, Z. Yin, L. Wei, H. Sun, Y. Su, Y. Gu, P. Kuang, J. Zhong, Y. Peng, H. Wang and Z. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 18561–18569 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-C. Zhu, S.-M. Xu, Z.-P. Cai, M. M. Harris, K.-X. Wang and J.-S. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 209–215 CrossRef .
J. Ding, H. Xue, R. Xiao, Y. Xu, L. Song, H. Gong, X. Fan, K. Chang, X. Huang, T. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 4511–4518 RSC .
P.-F. Zhang, T. Sheng, Y. Zhou, Y.-J. Wu, C.-C. Xiang, J.-X. Lin, Y.-Y. Li, J.-T. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 448, 137541 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, H. Shen, D. Ji, Y. Xing, L. Tao, Q. Sun and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2204134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, Y. Bai, Y. Lian, Y. Ma, Z. Yin, L. Wei, H. Sun, Y. Su, Y. Gu, P. Kuang, J. Zhong, Y. Peng, H. Wang and Z. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 18561–18569 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Rho, B. Kim, K. Shin, G. Henkelman and W.-H. Ryu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 19710–19721 RSC .
Z. Lian, Y. Lu, C. Wang, X. Zhu, S. Ma, Z. Li, Q. Liu and S. Zang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2102550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, J. Ding, H. Wang, X. Yang, X. Zheng, Z. Huang, W. Song, J. Ding, X. Han and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Pei, X. Lu, D. Lian, X. Wang and X. Lou, Chem. Catal., 2022, 2, 1480–1493 CrossRef .
H. He, H. H. Wang, J. Liu, X. Liu, W. Li and Y. Wang, Molecules, 2021, 26, 6501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, L. Zhuang, S. Zhang, Q. Liu, L. Zhang and G. Hu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 2947–2962 CrossRef CAS .
B.-W. Zhang, Y. Jiao, D.-L. Chao, C. Ye, Y.-X. Wang, K. Davey, H.-K. Liu, S.-X. Dou and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, L. Wu, S. Zhou, T. Qiu, Z. Li, L. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Ma, M. Ling, S. Zhou and C. Liang, Small Methods, 2022, 6, 2101511 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li and D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103564 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. F. Lu, S. Xi, D. Luan, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202201491 CAS .
X. Wang, H. Niu, X. Wan, A. Wang, F. R. Wang and Y. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 7692–7701 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Feng, X. Liu and W. Sun, Nano Res., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s12274-022-4823-3 .
Y. Tao, H. Ou, Y. Lei and Y. Xiong, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2022, 43, 20220143 Search PubMed .
Q. Shen, H. Jin, P. Li, X. Yu, L. Zheng, W. Song and C. Cao, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 5024–5031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Gong, L. Song, Y. Kong, C. Jiang, H. Xue, P. Li, X. Huang, J. He and T. Wang, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 25, 100967 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Gawish, Q. A. Drmosh and S. A. Onaizi, Chem. Rec., 2022, 22, e202100328 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Huanzhu Lv	Huanzhu Lv is currently a master's student at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). His research focuses on design and functional synthesis of emerging energy materials for storage and catalysis.
Xiang Long Huang	Xiang Long Huang carries out research on rechargeable battery technologies under the joint supervision of Prof. Shi Xue Dou and Prof. Zhiming Wang and focusses on design of electrode materials with unique nanostructures and functional properties for sustainable energy conversion and storage, encompassing metal-ion batteries, metal–chalcogen batteries, hybrid ion capacitors, etc.
Xiaoqi Zhu	Xiaoqi Zhu is currently a doctoral student at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). Her research focuses on functional materials and flexible wearable energy storage and its application devices.
Bin Wang	Bin Wang is currently a professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). He was a postdoctoral scholar at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab (LBNL, USA) during 2009–2013. His research focuses on the development and applications of novel materials for flexible energy conversion and storage systems.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Number of publications containing Li–CO2 batteries according to Web of Science (as of April 2022). (b) Substance usage of noble metal-based catalysts in Li–CO2 batteries according to Web of Science statistics (as of April 2022). (c) Timeline of the development of Li–CO2 batteries in recent years. Reproduced with permission:16 copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons.41 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.42 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.79 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.105 copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.160 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of designing strategies toward metal-based catalysts for Li–CO2 batteries. Reproduced with permission:60 copyright 2020, Elsevier.67 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.79 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.85 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.121 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.136 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.161 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.162 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.163 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.164 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons.180 Copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  The working mechanism of the Li–CO2 battery.	 
2CO2 + O2 +4e− → 2Li2CO3	(1)
2Li2O2 + 2CO2 → 2Li2CO3 + O2	(2)

4O2 + 4e− → 4O2−	−61.0 × 4
O2− + CO2 → CO4−	−1.6
CO4− + O2− → CO42− + O2	−9.9
CO42− + CO2 → C2O62−	−17.4
C2O62− + Li+ → LiC2O6−	+0.9
LiC2O6− + O2− → LiC2O62− + O2	−16.1
LiC2O62− + O2− → LiC2O63− + O2	−27.3
LiC2O63− + Li+ → Li2C2O62−	−12.5
Li2C2O62− + Li+ → Li3C2O6−	−4.1
Li3C2O6− + Li+ → (Li2CO3)2	−6.3
Overall: O2 + 2CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → (Li2CO3)2	−351.22
4Li+ + 3CO2 + 4e− → 2Li2CO3 + C (Eo = 2.80 V vs. Li/Li+)	(3)
2CO2 + 2e− → C2O42−	(4)
C2O42− → CO22− + CO2	(5)
C2O42− + CO2 → 2CO32− + C	(6)
2Li+ + CO32− → Li2CO3	(7)
2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e− → CO + Li2CO3	(8)
2CO2 (sol) + 2e− → C2O42−	(9)
2Li+ + C2O42− → Li2C2O4	(10)
2Li2CO3 → 4Li+ + 2CO2 + O2− + 3e−	(11)
2Li2CO3 + C → 3CO2 + 4Li+ + 4e−	(12)
Li2C2O4 → 2Li+ + 2CO2 + 2e−	(13)
C2O42− → CO22− + CO2	(14)
CO22− + C2O42− → 2CO32− + C	(15)
2Li+ + CO32− → Li2CO3	(16)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Grazing incidence synchrotron XRD patterns of the Ru/CNT catalyst cathode at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and cut-off capacity of 2000 mA h g−1. (b) SEM image of the discharged and charged Ru/CNT cathode material. Cycling performance of (c) CNT and (d) Ru/CNT catalyst cathodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and a cut-off capacity of 100 mA h g−1. Suggested sources for deteriorating Li–CO2 batteries with Ru/CNT cathodes at (e) low (100 mA h g−1) and (f) high (500 mA h g−1) cut-off capacity. Reproduced with permission:59 copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of Ru/RuO2 nanoparticles anchored in a hierarchical porous carbon shell (Ru/RuO2-HPC). (b) SEM image of the discharged Ru/RuO2-HPC cathode. (c) Stability of Ru/RuO2-HPC anode cells at 250 mA g−1. (d and e) High angle angular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) representative images of RuRh nanosheets (d) tiled on the transmission electron microscope (TEM) grid, perpendicular to the TEM grid. (e) The inset shows the thickness distribution of RuRh nanosheets. (f) Local structural configurations of various initial reactants, intermediates, and final products. Ru, light blue; Rh, dark green; Li, pink; O, red; C, grey. Reproduced with permission:71 copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) HRTEM images of atomic Ir–Te NWs; (b) schematic representation of the synthesis process of Te NWs and atomic Ir–Te NWs; calculated energy diagrams of (c) path 1, (d) path 2 for CORR and COER on the Ir (111); (e) schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism for electrocatalytic reactions during the discharge process. Reproduced with permission:77 copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Finite difference time domain simulations and complementary schematics of the charge carrier migration inside the TNAs/AgNPs. E0 and E represent the intensities of the incident and localized electric field, respectively; (b) photoluminescence emission spectra and (c) electrochemical impedance spectra of TNAs and TNAs/AgNPs; (d) working mechanism of the dual-field assisted Li–CO2 battery; (e) mechanistic investigations of the product generation and decomposition at the TNAs/AgNP cathodes. Reproduced with permission:79 copyright 2022, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of Fe NPs@N-CNT catalyst synthesis derived from hemoglobin blood protein and the cycle process of discharge/charge reactions in Li–CO2 cells with Fe NPs@N-CNT electrodes; (b) STEM image of tadpole-shaped Fe NPs (inset shows related EDS mapping); (c) XPS spectra obtained from each stage of electrodes collected in the (c) O 1s, and (d) Fe 2p. Reproduced with permission:85 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of VA-NCNT arrays on the Ti wire via the FCCVD method; (b) scheme of the discharge−charge mechanism for the Li–CO2 battery with the bimetallic Ru82Co18/CNF cathode; (c) the proposed mechanism of Cu/N-CNFs and PdCu/N-CNFs in Li–CO2 batteries. Reproduced with permission:87 copyright 2021, Elsevier.90 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.91 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Electrochemical impedance spectra of Li–CO2 batteries with the TiO2/CC cathode with and without illumination and calculated Li+ diffusion coefficient; (b) schematic diagram of light absorption and its effect on the discharge process; (c) charge curves of Li–CO2 batteries with the TiO2/CC cathode with and without illumination; (d) schematic of energy diagrams for the reduced charge voltage of the Li–CO2 battery under illumination; (e) model illustrating the effect of illumination on deposition and decomposition of discharge products in Li–CO2 batteries; (f) illustration of the structure of the flexible Li–CO2 battery; (g) digital photographs of the prepared TiO2/CC cathode at different bending angles (0°, 90°, 180°, and 360°). Reproduced with permission:105 copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of Ti3C2–MnO2 films; schematic model for adsorption of lithium in (b) Ti3C2 (001), Ti3–xMnxC2 (001), Ti3C2O2 (001), and Ti3–xMnxC2O2 (001), respectively; (c) adsorption energy of lithium in Ti3C2 (001), Ti3–xMnxC2 (001), Ti3C2O2 (001), and Ti3–xMnxC2O2 (001), respectively; the DOS of (d) MnO2 and (e) Ti3C2–MnO2 films, respectively. Reproduced with permission:117 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Four configurations of C2O42− on the (100) surface of Mo2C. While model 1 and model 2 are initial configurations because they fail to converge, model 3 and model 4 are optimized configurations. Model 1: one oxygen atom of C2O42− is bound to one Mo atom in Mo2C. Model 2: two oxygen atoms of C2O42− are bound to two Mo atoms in Mo2C. Model 3: two pairs with two oxygen atoms of C2O42− are bound to one Mo atom in Mo2C. Model 4: four oxygen atoms of C2O42− are bound to four Mo atoms in Mo2C. (Green: molybdenum, red: oxygen, gray: carbon); (b) adsorption energy of C2O42− in each electrolyte (TEGDME and DMA), as calculated using model 4; (c) two possible configurations of Li2C2O4: cluster model 1 and cluster model 2; (d) distances of atoms calculated for TEGDME and DMA electrolytes using the Gaussian 09 code and cluster model 2; (e) schematic diagram of the W2C-CNT synthesis process; (f) Fourier transform EXAFS spectra and associated fitting curves of the pristine, discharge W2C-CNT cathodes, and the WO3 reference at the W L3-edge; (g) the wavelet transform EXAFS; (h) the decomposition barrier of Li2CO3 on CNT and W2C (101) surfaces. Inset: the decomposition process on CNT (top) and W2C (101) (bottom) substrate surfaces. The green, brown, red, and gray balls represent Li, C, O, and W, respectively. Reproduced with permission:120 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission:121 copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the synthesis process of SA Ru–Co3O4/CC; (b) Raman spectra of the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathode with different cycles; (c) adsorption energy of reaction intermediate Li2C2O4 on Co3O4 and SA Ru–Co3O4 active sites; (d) Bader charge distribution on Co3O4 and SA Ru–Co3O4; (e) schematic illustrations of the working mechanism for the SA Ru–Co3O4/CC cathodes. Reproduced with permission:179 copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the host–guest chemistry strategy to fabricate the MOF-derived Fe–N–C catalysts; (b) TEM and HRTEM images of Fe–N–C; (c) EIS spectra of Fe–N–C and N–C; (d) cycling performance of the Fe–N–C and N–C cathodes at 200 mA g−1 and a curtailed specific capacity of 500 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission:174 copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.91 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) The chemical exfoliation of DQTP-COF into NSs; (b) DFT calculations of the interaction between CO2 and the quinone moiety in MnO2/DQTP-COF-NSs. Reproduced with permission:136 copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 


Ru/CNTs61	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	4541	100	45
Ru/NS-G60	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	12448	100	100
Ru/Super P63	LiNO3 and KNO3	100	5500	100	70
Ru/NC65	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	10200	100	184
CNTs/RuO2 (ref. 66)	LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	50	2187	50	55
RuO2−x/CoSnO3 (ref. 68)	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	—	100	145
Ru–Cu-G69	LiTFSI in TEGDME	200	13590	200	100
Ru/RuO2-HPC71	LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	250	12398	250	303
RuRh NS/C72	LiTFSI in TEGDME	1000	6500	1000	180
IrO2–N/CNTs76	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	4634	100	316
Ir–Te77	LiNO3 in DMSO	1000	13247.1	1000	350
Ru(bpy)3Cl2 (ref. 73)	LiTFSI in TEGDME	200	22119	300	60
AuNPs/CNTs78	LiNO3 in DMSO	100	6399	200	46
Fe-ISA/N,S-HG84	LiTFSI in TEGDME containing LiNO3	100	23714	1000	200
VA-NCNTs85	LiTFSI in TEGDME	50	18652	50	63
RuCo/CNFs90	LiTFSI in DMSO	300	17270	500	90
PdCu/N–CNFs91	LiTFSI in DMSO	100	18550	400	250
CCGA92	LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	100	7860	100	100
RuO2–TiO2 NAs/CT166	LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	250	16727	250	238
KMO NWs/KB113	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	9043	100	64
Ti3C2–MnO2 (ref. 117)	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	5722	100	220
W2C-CNTs121	LiClO4 in DMSO	100	10632	100	—
MnTPzP-Mn129	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	14025	200	90
MnO2/DQTP-COF-NSs136	LiTFSI in TEGDME	200	42802	1000	120
Cu–Co4N/CC167	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	31000	200	131
MnOx–CeO2/Ppy168	LiCF3SO3 in TEGDME	100	13631	—	253
Ni/Ru HNPs169	LiTFSI in TEGDME	—	—	200	120
CuPPc-CNTs170	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	18652.7	200	160
Cu/NCNFs171	LiF3SO3 in DMSO	100	14084	—	133
Ruh-NC/rGO172	(LiTFSI in TEGDME	—	44700	1000	367
Ruh-NC/rGO172	(LiTFSI in TEGDME	—	44700	1000	367
Pt/CNT175	LiTFSI in TEGDME	—	—	100	110
Ni/Ru HNPs176	LiTFSI in TEGDME	200	1000	200	120
Fe–N–C174	LiTFSI in TEGDME	200	13238	200	140
IrOx/Ir SAC-loaded NCNT177	LiTFSI in TEGDME	—	—	200	120
SAC Ru (5 wt%)178	LiTFSI in TEGDME	100	44700	1000	367

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
