Electrochemically enabled polyelectrolyte multilayer devices: from fuel cells to sensors  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B701203A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B701203A
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 804-816Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrochemically enabled polyelectrolyte multilayer devices: from fuel cells to sensors

        
          
            Jodie L. 
            Lutkenhaus
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Paula T. 
            Hammond
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, 66-546 Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: hammond@mit.edu;  Fax: +1 617 258 5766;   Tel: +1 617 258 7577
Received 
      25th January 2007
    , Accepted 17th April 2007First published on 29th May 2007AbstractWith an ever-increasing need for thin, flexible and functional materials in electrochemical systems, the layer-by-layer (LbL) technique provides a simple and affordable route in creating new, active electrodes and electrolytes. The LbL technique, which is based upon the alternate adsorption of oppositely charged species from aqueous solution, possesses unprecedented control of materials selection (e.g. polyelectrolytes, clays, nanoparticles, proteins), materials properties (e.g. conductivity, glass-transition temperature) and architecture (e.g. blends, stratified-layers, pores). These advantages make LbL assemblies excellent candidates for use in proton-exchange membrane and direct methanol fuel-cells, batteries, electrochromic devices, solar cells, and sensors. This review addresses the design of LbL films for electrochemical systems and recent progress.Jodie L. LutkenhausJodie Lutkenhaus is a graduate student in Paula Hammond's laboratory in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Awards include an NSF Graduate Fellowship, MIT Presidential Fellowship and the Electrochemical Society Student Travel Grant. Research interests include electrochemistry at thin films and interfaces.Paula T. HammondProfessor Paula T. Hammond is the Bayer Chair Professor of Chemical Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and is a founding faculty member of the Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies (ISN) at MIT. Her research expertise includes self- and directed electrostatic polymer assembly for electrochemical and biomaterials applications.
Introduction
Functional thin-films created using chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition, Langmuir–Blodgett deposition, colloidal assembly and molecular beam epitaxy have been explored for decades as alternative materials for electrochemical systems, but few of these have been commercially realized – perhaps because the requirements of an electrochemically active material are many. In general, thinner is better. A thin film presents a short path-length for electron and ion transport; furthermore, precious and expensive materials such as platinum nanoparticles become more accessible to electrochemical reaction at the nanometre scale. Also, the materials must be carefully chosen to perform their desired task without compromising safety and stability. Even more so, the placement of these active components, determined by the film architecture, can greatly impact performance; for example well-dispersed platinum nanoparticles within a thin film will demonstrate different catalytic activity than aggregates. Of many nano-fabrication methods, the water-based layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly technique offers the finest control and tunability of materials properties and architecture at the nanometre scale, and is the simplest and easiest method to implement.
The LbL technique is based upon the alternate adsorption of cationic and anionic species,1–4 or hydrogen-bond donor and acceptor,5,6 (Fig. 1). This assembly procedure may be repeated for multiple cycles to give molecularly thin (Å to nm) multilayers adsorbed upon the substrate, whether that be glass, silicon, ITO, colloids7 or Teflon®.8,9 Usually constructed by dipping a substrate in aqueous solutions, the LbL technique has also been extended to alternate misting,10,11 spin-assisted assembly12 and electrophoretic deposition.13 What makes this method of self-assembly particularly versatile is that any multiply charged (or hydrogen-bonding) species can be incorporated, including sensitive materials such as proteins and DNA, as well as functional or structural materials such as clays, polyoxometalates, nanoparticles, dendrimers and quantum dots. In this manner, a multitude of electrochemically active materials can be placed within pre-selected layers to create ultra-thin electrodes, electrolytes and complete devices – all at the nano- to micrometre scale.
 Fig. 1  The layer-by-layer technique is the solution-based alternate adsorption of positively and negatively charged species. For example, a substrate is exposed to an aqueous solution of positively charged polymer, or polycation, that adsorbs to the substrate interface through electrostatic interactions, where charge reversal occurs. The substrate, now positively charged, is then exposed to an aqueous solution of negatively charged polymer, or polyanion, where adsorption and charge reversal render the interface negatively charged. 
Recent discoveries regarding the connection between internal architecture and function in LbL assemblies show great promise, particularly in the areas of electrochemical energy (e.g. batteries, fuel cells, solar cells) and electrochemical sensing. Because the method involves solution adsorption of charged (or hydrogen-bonding) species to a surface, multilayers conformally coat any substrate surface regardless of geometry or feature size; in other words, a rough surface such as a cathode may be fully coated by an LbL assembly in order to maximize the active interfacial area. Conversely, surfaces may be templated with polymer-on-polymer stamping to pattern multilayer adsorption,14,15 yielding features and potentially devices at the sub-micron scale. Also, the control of film architecture throughout its thickness leads to the ability to vary materials content in a continuous fashion or to generate discrete layers, allowing the construction of a range of devices. Hybrid composites of varying complexity can be fabricated using both inorganic and organic materials, so long as they are charged or hydrogen-bonding. Another advantage is that material adsorption and device performance are highly tunable with parameters such as pH, ionic strength and thickness (number of layers).16 Furthermore, mass transport and electrical conductivity within an LbL assembly can be selectively tuned through the creation of a homogeneous, blended matrix or a microporous network. These discoveries provide the basis for creating exciting new materials and interfaces for electrochemical systems.
With the advantages listed above and the flexibility of the technique, many technologies have been recently explored,17–21 (Fig. 2). Great advances have been made in the fields of drug delivery,22,23 antimicrobial coatings,24 anticorrosion coatings,25–27 super-hydrophobic coatings,28 light-emitting diodes,29–40 electronically conductive polymers,5,41–53 electrochemically reversible capsules,54,55 electrolytes, proton-exchange membranes and direct methanol fuel-cells, batteries, electrochromics, photovoltaics and biosensors.
 Fig. 2  With materials choice and control of assembly conditions, LbL assemblies can be designed for a specific application. 
In the last few years, rapid advances have been made in exploring electrochemically enabled LbL assemblies, with large strides towards creating functional devices optimally tuned for superior performance. This review covers the electrochemistry of layer-by-layer thin films; general approaches and recent progress in fuel cell and battery electrolytes and electrodes, electrochromics, photovoltaics and amperometric sensors (based on changes in electrical current) are highlighted. The performance of inorganic nano- to micron- size particles within the multilayer film is evaluated, the use of conjugated polymers for charge transport in multilayers is discussed, and the role of proteins for biomolecular recognition in sensors is addressed. In particular, the connection of materials choice and architecture to multilayer performance optimization is emphasized. This new and growing field will impact the way we perceive electrochemically active thin-films and interfaces.
LbL films as ion transport media: solid-state electrolytes
Every electrochemical system requires an electrolyte to transport ions from electrode to electrode. The first fundamental explorations56,57 of ion transport within multilayer thin-films indicated that film structure and materials choice greatly impacts ionic conductivity; these early studies formed the basis for thinking of LbL thin-films as solid-state electrolytes. Durstock and Rubner56 first investigated the dielectric properties of multilayers to understand the performance of their electroluminescent devices. Multilayers of positively charged poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) and negatively charged poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) exhibited a dry and hydrated (85 to 90% relative humidity) conductivity of 3 × 10−12 and 2 × 10−7 S cm−1 at 23 °C, respectively. The dramatic increase of conductivity with humidity was attributed to the absorption of water, which acts as a plasticizer. Still, these reported values were too low for use as a practical device electrolyte. Later, Farhat and Schlenoff57,58 studied ion transport in multilayers of negatively charged poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS) and positively charged poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDAC). The resulting film was highly cross-linked and behaved as a so-called reluctant ion-exchanger owing to the hydrophobic nature of the bulk composite. These early studies highlight how the hydrophilicity of an LbL thin-film affects ion mobility; hydrophilic materials provide a favorable environment for ion solvation and transport.
The role of water in an LbL assembly is an important one; hydrophilic films absorb water and in turn, ionic conductivity increases. Such attributes are essential for creating proton-exchange membranes (PEMs) for hydrogen and direct methanol fuel-cells, which operate in a humid environment. In LbL films saturated with water, proton conduction occurs via the Grotthus mechanism,59 where protons “hop” along water molecules. An LbL assembly with hydrophilic components absorbs more water, and ions travel more easily through the water clusters absorbed in the polymer matrix. By using hydrophilic weak polyelectrolytes assembled at, or near, their pKa's, DeLongchamp and Hammond60 were able to improve ion transport in LbL thin-films by decreasing the ionic cross-link density and increasing the thickness per layer pair to give a loose and loopy architecture. Fast ion-conduction was achieved with linear polyethylene imine (LPEI)–PAA and LPEI–poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS) multilayer thin-films, σ = 1.0 × 10−5 S cm−1 and σ = 1.5 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 100% relative humidity (RH) and 25 °C, respectively. These materials readily absorb water and produce robust, stable LbL films at high humidity. In contrast, the hydrated conductivity of Durstock and Rubner's56 PAH–PAA assemblies was 100 times lower than the LPEI–PAA system because of the character of PAH, which creates a hydrophobic multilayer interior that is inhospitable to ion transport. Of existing LbL systems, the current leader in proton conduction is the hydrogen-bonded assembly of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and PAA, where PAA is a hydrogen-bond donor and PEO is an acceptor. DeLongchamp and Hammond60 measured an ionic conductivity of 5.5 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 100% RH and room temperature. The high conductivity is attributed to the hydrophilic nature of PEO and PAA, and the inhibition of PEO crystallinity. This promising system was used to modify Nucleopore® membranes to make unique PEM composites for use in a hydrogen fuel-cell, discussed later.
In comparison, solid-state dry polymer electrolytes conduct ions very differently. Without absorbed water, ion transport in the dry state depends more upon the segmental motion of the polymer-electrolyte chain. For example, in PEO the cation of interest, such as Li+ for a lithium-ion battery, is solvated by polar moieties along the polymer chain, and the cation moves from the segmental motion of the polymer host. In this case, ion transport in a dry environment depends upon the polarity of the polymer, glass-transition temperature of the matrix and cross-link density. The ideal LbL solid-state electrolyte would have a low glass-transition temperature (Tg) to enhance segmental motion, a loopy lightly cross-linked architecture to allow ion and polymer motion, and polar functionality to solvate ions while avoiding excessive ion trapping. First measurements by Durstock and Rubner, mentioned above, indicated a low dry ionic conductivity in PAH–PAA multilayers (10−12 S cm−1), which was attributed to the high electrostatic cross-link density between PAH and PAA and the low segmental motion of individual polymer chains, typical of a material below its glass-transition temperature. However, with proper materials selection, the ionic conductivity can be significantly improved, as shown with dry PEO–PAA thin-films.
Hydrogen-bonded LbL assemblies of PEO and PAA are among the strongest candidates for dry LbL polymer electrolytes, because amorphous PEO can transport ions through segmental motion (Tg = −56 °C) and the polar ether group readily solvates lithium cations. Under dry conditions, DeLongchamp and Hammond60 demonstrated an ionic conductivity of 10−10 S cm−1 at 25 °C in PEO–PAA films assembled at pH 2.5 and exposed to lithium triflate during assembly, which is 100 times higher than the PAH–PAA system. DeLongchamp suggested that conductivity of the PEO–PAA thin-film was impeded because of hydrogen-bond cross-links, ion traps from the carboxylic acid group in PAA, and poor segmental motion (or high Tg). Unfortunately at that time, the glass-transition temperature of the PEO–PAA film could not be measured because a method of isolating substantial mass and area of the hydrogen-bonded film was unavailable. In order to probe the materials properties of these LbL films, Lutkenhaus and Hammond8 developed a new technique to create large areas (>4 in2) of free-standing LbL films, whether they are formed from electrostatic or hydrogen-bonding interactions. LbL assemblies of PEO–PAA were adsorbed on a low-energy surface such as PTFE, and then peeled away from the substrate. This breakthrough in LbL film isolation led to the measurement of thermal and mechanical properties via thermal gravimetric analysis, dynamic mechanical analysis, tensile testing and differential scanning calorimetry. Isolated assemblies behaved like an interdigitated blend of PEO and PAA, exhibiting a single glass-transition temperature. Thermal information obtained here partly explained DeLongchamp's low conductivity in the dry state: conductivity measurements (at 25 °C) were taken below the glass-transition temperature measured by Lutkenhaus (38 °C). In order to increase the conductivity of the PEO–PAA system, the glass-transition temperature must be lowered by changing the assembly conditions. The single glass-transition temperature of PEO–PAA is highly sensitive to pH, and in turn, the ionic conductivity may be tuned. New results61 indicate that the ionic conductivity of PEO–PAA assemblies responds dramatically to assembly pH, fostering the design of next-generation LbL electrolytes in the dry state.
Altering the morphology of an LbL thin-film to produce a porous matrix can further enhance ion transport. Empty pores act as reservoirs for liquid or gel electrolytes capable of fast ion-conduction; this porous structure yields the transport properties of a liquid and the mechanical properties of a solid. Porous phase transitions have recently been observed by Rubner and others,62,63 created by briefly immersing multilayers of PAH–PAA62 or LPEI–PAA63 in a transition bath of acidic pH. The change in pH protonates (or deprotonates) polyelectrolytes within the LbL film and induces morphological rearrangement realized by a porous structure. It has been recently shown that fast ion-conduction in porous LPEI–PAA assemblies can be achieved when polyethylene glycol (PEG) oligomers and LiI fill the pores (Fig. 3).63 While the ionic conductivity of the neat liquid-like PEG mixture was 10−3 S cm−1, the filled solid-state porous LPEI–PAA assembly conductivity reached 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature and 22% RH as ions migrated through the PEG-filled pores. Porous films of LPEI–PAA were later implemented in dye-sensitized solar cells, and are discussed later.
 Fig. 3  (a) AFM micrograph and (b) cross-sectional SEM micrograph of an LPEI–PAA thin-film treated in a transition bath of water at pH 2.0.63 The porous multilayer can absorb liquid electrolyte for fast ion-conduction or act as a template for porous titania. Published with permission of the American Chemical Society. 
Indeed, these studies laid the ground work for tuning LbL film structure and properties for applications requiring fast ion-conduction. Ultimately, the investigation of these systems as ion-transport media has led to the inclusion of LbL thin-films in fuel-cell proton-exchange membranes and electrodes.
Proton-exchange membrane and direct methanol fuel-cells
Layer-by-layer technology can make a large impact in the area of both proton-exchange membranes and direct methanol fuel-cell electrodes and electrolytes because the LbL technique produces ultra-thin electrodes with high catalytic activity and high performance electrolytes. Eventually, an LbL fuel-cell assembled entirely from alternating multilayers could be produced by sequentially depositing the cathode, PEM and anode; preliminary work64 has already been accomplished on prototypes of such systems, although they are far from optimization. Because the technique produces “fuzzy” (i.e. interdigitated) layers, the electrode–electrolyte interface can be tuned at the molecular level, allowing the ability to vary electronic and ionic conduction across this interface, ensuring complete electrical contact. Another interesting aspect of multilayer systems is the ability to generate ultra-thin, homogeneous membranes with perm-selectivity, a property highly desirable in the management of fuel cross-over in LbL systems.
In hydrogen fuel-cells, the electrolyte conducts protons from the hydrogen-oxidizing anode to the oxygen-reducing cathode. Direct methanol fuel-cells, where liquid methanol is used instead of gaseous hydrogen, share many key developmental challenges with hydrogen fuel-cells that can be addressed using LbL technology. A high proton conductance in the PEM is required to reduce internal resistance (iR) loss. In terms of ionic conductivity, chemical and thermal stability, and mechanical properties, DuPont's Nafion® serves as a benchmark for PEM developers. Because the LbL technique allows for the tuning of specific properties such as conductivity and stability, these ultra-thin coatings may one day compete with or surpass the current state-of-the-art. DeLongchamp and Hammond65 demonstrated the ability to achieve ionic conductivities of 10−5 and up to 10−4 S cm−1 at 100% RH and 25 °C in hydrophilic LPEI–PAA and LPEI–PAMPS LbL systems that were loosely ionically cross-linked, as described previously. Ironically, when this team constructed LbL assemblies of positively charged LPEI and negatively charged Nafion® in place of polyanions PAA or PAMPS,65 the observed conductivity was 2.9 × 10−9 S cm−1 at 100% RH and room temperature. Properly treated neat Nafion® exhibits a conductivity of ∼100 mS cm−1 at these conditions.66 This disparity can be explained by the nature of Nafion® and the nature of the LbL technique. Nafion®, a polymer with a perfluorinated backbone and sulfonic acid functional side groups, conducts protons through nano-pores lined with the negatively charged sulfonic acid groups. Coupling Nafion® anion with positively charged LPEI using the LbL technique creates an ionically cross-linked, non-porous medium and prevents formation of the ion-conducting porous structure. Since many functional sulfonic acid groups participate in electrostatic complexation with LPEI, ions are left to travel through a matrix that looks more like hydrophobic PTFE® than like a water-filled pore. However, using Nafion® membranes as a substrate rather than a polyanion for LbL deposition gives the best of both worlds: high proton conductivity and low fuel crossover, discussed later.
Of systems investigated, the most promising LbL PEM system thus far reported is the hydrogen-bonded assembly composed of PEO and PAA. Building upon DeLongchamp and Hammond’s work,60 Farhat and Hammond67 recently created a composite PEM structure of PEO–PAA on ion-track etched nucleopore membrane for use in a hydrogen fuel-cell. The PEO–PAA LbL film was deposited on a Nucleopore membrane with regular 100 nm diameter pores (Fig. 4) to give a total composite membrane thickness of 10 µm. At 100% RH, water fills the pores of the nucleopore membrane, enhancing ion conduction within the PEM, while the PEO–PAA multilayer blocks fuel cross-over. The resulting hydrogen–air fuel-cell, operating at 55% RH, yielded a power density of 17 mW cm−2 and PEM conductivity of 2.4 × 10−4 S cm−1.67 Though the reported PEO–PAA composite conductivity is five times less than that of Nafion® at similar conditions, the conductance of the LbL assembly can compete with Nafion® 112 (∼50 µm) because the LbL composite (∼10 µm) can be made proportionally thinner, while utilizing fewer and much cheaper materials and processes. In Farhat and Hammond’s work, a composite of PEO–PAA and Nucleopore membrane 1/5 of the thickness of Nafion® performed similarly to thicker Nafion® membranes at 55% RH. Of particular note is the range of humidity accessible with these LbL fuel-cell systems. Nafion® membranes must be operated at or above 80% RH to achieve reasonable conductivity and power efficiency because the ion-conducting pores within the film must remain hydrated. PEO–PAA LbL films seem to act as inherent humectants and contain large amounts of bound water throughout the LbL matrix, thus allowing operation at relative humidity much lower (50 to 60% RH) than currently accessible with traditional fuel-cells. Preliminary results68 suggest suitable humidity and thermal stability.
 Fig. 4  (a) Power density–current plots for a hydrogen fuel-cell using a LbL–nucleopore membrane–LbL PEM. Open circles are PEO–PAA, shaded triangles are PDAC–PAMPS, and open triangles are LPEI–PAA LbL films. (b) An LbL film adsorbed atop a nucleopore membrane, pore size 100 nm.67 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
Thinner Nafion® films may give a lower resistance, but they cannot be used in fuel cells because significant fuel cross-over would occur, lowering the power density and operating potential. In the case of direct methanol fuel-cell PEMs, the study of methanol permeation is critical. LbL-modified Nafion® membranes may block cross-over while maintaining a high proton conductance. Tian and co-workers characterized methanol cross-over and ionic conductivity in a direct methanol fuel-cell as a function of layer pair number.69 Adding multilayers of PDAC and PSS to a Nafion® membrane decreased cross-over, but conductivity decreased as well (Fig. 5). Optimal performance was achieved with four layer pairs of PDAC–PSS where the maximum power density (37 mW cm−2) increased by 42% relative to naked Nafion®, with only a 14% decrease in ionic conductivity. Though increasing the number of layer pairs beyond four further decreases cross-over, the maximum power density decreases because the PEM resistance increases. Others have also blocked fuel cross-over using LbL-modified Nafion®. Kang et al.70 demonstrated that assemblies of negatively charged saponite clay platelets and positively charged polyacetylene on Nafion® membrane reduced methanol permeability by half while maintaining in-plane (or lateral) conductivity. The clay platelets, which assemble in flat sheets parallel to the surface, produce a tortuous path that blocks fuel cross-over, but as suggested by Schmitt71 and Lutkenhaus,72cross-plane proton-conduction, a property desired in fuel-cell applications, may suffer. Earlier work by Blumstein et al. indicates that polymer choice can also affect permeability, where multilayers of polyacetylene and poly(styrene sulfonate) on Nafion® membrane increased permeation and permselectivity of oxygen,73 (typically one would want to decrease oxygen permeability of the PEM). These studies by Tian et al., Kang et al. and Blumstein et al. show that the PEMs created using the LbL technique have great promise in blocking fuel cross-over.
 Fig. 5  A Nafion® membrane coated with an LbL assembly of PDAC and PSS blocks methanol cross-over in a direct methanol fuel-cell. Optimal performance occurred at four layer pairs of PDAC–PSS; films thicker than four layer pairs blocked more methanol but at the cost of increasing iR losses.69 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
Electrode kinetics and charge-transfer polarization also account for a large part of the voltage loss in fuel cells. The LbL technique presents an ideal opportunity to create intimate organic–inorganic interfaces for efficient electrochemical devices, and the research area of fuel-cell electrodes is a natural extension of this thin-film approach. The kinetically limited reduction of oxygen at the platinum-containing cathode is often the largest source of voltage loss. One way to increase catalytic activity of the cathode is to use platinum nanoparticles embedded in an LbL matrix. Dong et al. produced multilayer films of negatively charged citrate-stabilized platinum nanoparticles and positively charged cobalt metalloporphyrins to reduce oxygen with high electrocatalytic activity and stability as a fuel-cell cathode, reporting a water-formation efficiency of 85%.74 Metalloporphyrins are effective catalysts for oxygen reduction, but alone, they are hard to process and are often unstable; however, Dong's use of the LbL assembly technique introduces stability by anchoring nanoparticles using electrostatic interactions. Another way to create cathodes is to introduce alternating nano-objects into LbL assemblies such as multi-walled carbon nanotubes75 and gold nanoparticles.76 The above-mentioned electrodes have yet to be incorporated into a functional fuel-cell, but they present interesting concepts that would prove valuable to this approach.
The LbL technique has also been used to fabricate membrane-electrode assemblies (MEAs) of controlled architecture. Recently, Farhat and Hammond64,77 extensively studied LbL assemblies and their function as cathodes and MEAs. Assemblies of positively charged polyaniline and negatively charged poly(acrylate-co-acrylamide) loaded with platinum nanoparticles exhibited an electrode potential similar to pure platinum, a relatively high and stable electronic conductivity of 2.3 S cm−1, and an ionic conductivity of ∼10−5 S cm−1 when examined as hydrogen fuel-cell electrodes.77 Because fuel-cell cathodes involve multiphase reaction phenomena (water, gaseous oxygen and solid matrix for catalytic reduction), ion and electron transport is an important detail. Farhat and Hammond’s work demonstrates that including an electronically conductive polymer such as polyaniline with electroactive nanoparticles (Pt) significantly improves performance because the electronically conductive polymer allows the nanoparticles to “talk” to each other even at low nanoparticle loadings. On the other hand, conductive polymers are not the most stable systems for incorporation into the harsh environment of a fuel cell, particularly if at high temperature.
Using Nafion® membrane as a substrate, an entire MEA can be constructed using the LbL technique. Farhat and Hammond also introduced a method of using LbL assembly to create carbon/Pt electrode composites.64 By the alternate adsorption of irregularly shaped micron- to nano-scale carbon and Pt particles, a microporous, cohesive, ultra-thin electrode film was created. When assembled atop Nafion®, the LbL–Nafion®–LbL MEA operated as well as commercial hot-pressed electrodes. The resulting LbL electrodes exhibited electronic conductivity of 2 to 4 S cm−1 and ionic conductivity of 10−4 to 10−3 S cm−1. A hydrogen–air fuel-cell comprised of the LbL electrodes and a standard Nafion® 112 PEM membrane demonstrated a maximum power density of 3 mW cm−2 at 0.7 V. Recently, Kotov and Thompson have created MEAs using single-walled carbon nanotubes in LbL electrodes.78 These MEA systems highlight the ability to tune interfaces, porosity, and gas and water diffusion characteristics across the entire MEA.
It should be noted that although many fuel-cell systems operate at higher temperatures, LbL assemblies are especially interesting for low temperature operation for low-cost power sources that are lightweight, portable, and operable at ambient conditions. This is especially relevant to methanol systems, that are generally run on liquid methanol at between 25 and 40 °C. Another advantage is the ability to run at much lower humidity than Nafion as well as promising performance at room temperatures and humidity.
In summary, the LbL technique can address many issues in today's hydrogen and methanol fuel-cells. Catalytic nanoparticles can be immobilized on electrode surfaces to enhance activity, PEMs can be designed with high conductance, and fuel can be blocked with layers of perm-selective polymers or inorganic platelets. Future strategies include designing complete ultra-thin MEAs using the LbL technique to create a “nanoblended” electrode–electrolyte interface. Of note, a number of these previously reported systems use off the shelf materials such as Nafion® polymer. More ideal materials properties would result from new polyions specifically designed and synthesized for the purpose of acting as fuel-cell electrode or electrolyte components.
Battery electrodes and electrolytes
Batteries are an ideal mode to store excess energy produced from alternative means (e.g. fuel cells, solar cells), and an everyday means of portable power. If made light-weight, ultra-thin and flexible (advantages inherent to the LbL technique), batteries can be integrated with unconventional materials such as fabric or flex-plastics. The most widely used rechargeable battery, Li-ion batteries work by electrochemical insertion and de-insertion of lithium ions in intercalation electrodes that are separated by an ion-conducting electrolyte. The LbL technique can be used to create electrodes and electrolytes for battery applications.
Ideally, LbL electrolytes for batteries must conduct ions (Li+) like a liquid, act as an insulator to electronic current, maintain the mechanical properties of a solid, and conformally coat the electrode to maximize the electrode–electrolyte interfacial area. For Li-ion batteries, the polymer electrolyte must operate in a dry environment for safety and stability concerns. In the dry state, an as-made LbL film exhibits excellent surface coverage and mechanical properties, but the ionic conductivity remains an important factor to overcome, as discussed previously. Though measured conductances in LbL films are generally lower than traditional electrolytes, the overall internal resistance is greatly decreased by producing ultra-thin films with nanometre scale thickness control. Thus, one or two orders of magnitude difference in overall conductance can be gained through the use of ultra-thin films.
Unlike battery electrolytes, battery electrodes must conduct electrons and ions to the active redox sites within the electrode matrix. This duplicity of function means that electrodes generally consist of multiple materials with multiple phase boundaries, where each phase boundary represents a transport barrier. Today's electrodes, particularly cathodes, are usually solvent cast from a slurry, in which the component materials, such as LiCoO2 and carbon, lack perfect contact. Using the right combination of materials, such as a polymer electrolyte and an active redox electrode material, the LbL technique improves the specific capacity and performance of battery electrodes by maximizing the reactive area. For example, Fendler and co-workers79,80 have demonstrated the importance of materials selection. Fendler and co-workers assembled LbL electrodes of PDAC and graphite oxide nanoplatelets to give a layered, intercalated structure,79 but with a low specific capacity of 182 mAh g−1.80 Though the film contained a high content of active electrode material (i.e. graphite), the lithium ions were unable to diffuse and migrate through the PDAC polymer, which is a poor ion-conductor because of its hydrophobic nature. When Fendler and co-workers constructed trilayer films of PDAC–Graphite–PEO, the specific capacity significantly improved to 1232 mAh g−1 and surpassed typical carbonaceous materials performance (500–700 mAh g−1). This enhancement is attributed to the addition of PEO, which conducts lithium cations and improves ion transport to the graphite nanoplatelet for electrochemical intercalation.
As demonstrated above, coupling two functional materials in an LbL film produces a synergistic effect from the intimate molecular contact between components. More recently, Oliveira et al. developed inorganic–organic LbL assemblies of V2O5 and polyaniline that function not only as battery cathodes, but also as electrochromic films.81,82 As a cathode, Li+ inserts into V2O5, reducing V+5 to V+4, during battery discharge. PANI serves to conduct electrons and, to a lesser extent, lithium cations. Oliveira et al. observed charge storage of 2.25 mC cm−2 for V2O5–PANI films, whereas the sum of isolated contributions from neat PANI and V2O5 was only 1.86 mC cm−2. Replacing electron-conducting PANI with ion-conducting PEO to give films of V2O5–PEO increases charge storage further to 8 mC cm−2, suggesting the important role of ion transport within an electrode.83,84
Recently, new anodes of high charge-storage capacity have been fabricated by Nam et al. using self-assembling viruses as templates for room temperature cobalt oxide nanoparticle formation.85 When deposited on top of LPEI–PAA multilayers, these viruses self-assemble as a result of polyelectrolyte interdiffusion and exchange phenomena, forming a highly ordered monolayer.86 Cobalt oxide nanoparticles were deposited along the virus shell via solution synthesis to create a dense nanowire anode, delivering 94% of its theoretical capacity (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Two-dimensional assembly of Co3O4 nanowires driven by liquid-crystalline ordering of the engineered M13 bacteriophage viruses. (a) Phase mode AFM image of macroscopically ordered monolayer of Co3O4 coated viruses. Z-range is 30°. (b) A lithium battery using Co3O4 nanowires assembled atop LPEI–PAA multilayers. The LbL film also acts as the polymer electrolyte.85 Published with permission of Science. 
LbL battery electrodes and electrolytes are a new and promising research direction because their tunable nature allows for the incorporation and manipulation of polymer electrolytes and electrochemically active nanoparticles. Future architectures will include LbL assemblies with “gradient interfaces” where the electrode and electrolyte are controllably deposited in one LbL assembly. This fuzzy interface with extensive interpenetration will provide the ultimate electrode–electrolyte interface where electrons and ions travel freely to produce power.
Electrochromism
An electrochromic material changes color at an applied potential through an oxidation–reduction process. Applications include dynamic windows, panel displays and smart paper. Whether the active material is a redox-polymer or an inorganic nanoparticle, the LbL technique can effectively immobilize the active species on the substrate (or electrode) while the species' main functions and properties remain unaltered and mass-transfer limitations are eliminated. These advantages yield stable, high-contrast, fast-switching and easy-to-process electrochromic thin films. Though often characterized in aqueous solution, the LbL film can be tuned to yield solid-state electrochromic devices,87–89 (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) The first LbL solid-state electrochromic device consisting of 40 layer pairs of PANI–PAMPS and 40 layer pairs of LPEI–PEDOT:SPS with a PAMPS gel electrolyte. (b) UV-vis adsorption spectra of the solid-state device, 40 and 20 bilayers thick, in its bleached and colored states.87 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
The first demonstration of electrochromism in LbL assemblies was presented by Schlenoff and co-workers using positively charged polyviologen (PV) and negatively charged PSS;90,91 this early work was a creative demonstration of detecting ion transport and polyelectrolyte interpenetration in multilayers. Using voltammetry, the polyviologen in the PV–PSS multilayer was fully electrochemically accessible, owing to a high degree of interdigitation.91 If the LbL film had been highly stratified, or not interpenetrated, the PSS layers would have acted as blocking layers, preventing redox of the PV at the outermost layers.
The first solid-state LbL-based electrochromic device was demonstrated by DeLongchamp and Hammond, utilizing poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) colloid and PANI,87 (Fig. 7). Besides acting as a hole-injection layer in OLEDs, PEDOT can also change from an oxidized, clear, conductive polymer to a reduced, blue, insulating polymer with applied potential. The LbL technique can harness the power of PEDOT in ultra-thin films quite effectively. DeLongchamp and Hammond demonstrated assemblies of stabilized PEDOT:PSS and PANI in the first solid-state electrochromic LbL device giving a maximum contrast of ΔT of 30% and a switching speed of ∼1 s.87 Replacing PANI with poly(hexylviologen) within the LbL assembly resulted in an unusually high transmittance change of 82.1%, the highest reported in any LbL film structure and among the highest reported in the literature for any polymeric electrochromic device.92 This high contrast was achieved by utilizing concepts of complementary coloration, and taking advantage of the synergistic effects of PEDOT's electrochromic and conducting capabilities with polyviologen's deep absorption at higher potentials. Fast-switching speeds of 0.5 to 0.6 seconds were also achieved in these assemblies owing to the conductive nature of PEDOT. Rather than using PEDOT as an aqueous colloidal dispersion, Reynolds et al. generated an LbL system that used a special functionalized water-soluble PEDOT and PAH to give a 45% change in transmissivity.93 Use of a water-soluble “pure” PEDOT is in theory more efficient than using a stabilized colloid of PEDOT and PSS, where the inactive PSS comprises half of the colloid composition. Of note, Reynolds et al. used the PEDOT–PAH film to definitively show the scan-rate dependence of the peak current-response of an LbL assembly. A linear dependence, observed in the work of Reynolds et al., is indicative of a surface-confined redox process,93 while a square-root dependence indicates slow ion-diffusion into the film.92 Films with linear scan-rate dependence suggest that all of the electroactive surface material is accessible. Similar to previous work with PEDOT, Sotzing et al. have developed multilayer assemblies of sulfonated poly(thienothiophene) and PEI, which appear transmissive green and then blue when reduced.94
Electrochromic LbL assemblies have also been constructed with active inorganic nanoparticles such as Prussian blue,95,96 polyoxometalates (POMs),97–100 and tungsten oxide WO3.101,102 DeLongchamp and Hammond first demonstrated the electrochromic activity of Prussian blue (PB) nanoparticles in LbL thin-films, where assemblies of negatively charged ferric hexacyanoferrate (PB) and positively charged LPEI yielded a contrast of 77% and switching speed of 5 seconds.96 Replacing the ion-conducting LPEI with the electron-conducting PANI decreased the switching speed to a mere 1.5 seconds,95 demonstrating that the counter-polymer in an inorganic–organic LbL film drastically affects performance. Prussian blue can also be oxidized to neutral Prussian brown, initiating controlled film deconstruction with applied potential.96
Another promising electrochromic nanoparticle incorporated in LbL assemblies is the europium(III) derivative of Preyssler-type heteropolytungstate (Eu–POM). These polyoxometalates are well-defined, discrete transition metal oxide clusters capable of reduction and oxidation.99 First demonstrated by Volkmer and co-workers,98 LbL assemblies of Eu–POM had a switching time of 4 seconds and all of the Eu–POM was electrochemically accessible. Li et al. later used molybdenum-based POMs with PEI, yielding LbL films with a ΔT of 72% and switching speed of 4 seconds.100
Tungsten oxide, an electrochromic nanoparticle currently used in devices such as smart windows, has recently been included in LbL assemblies. Oliveira and co-workers constructed films of anionic WO3 and cationic chitosan, harnessing the electrochromic properties of W(VI) and W(V), which changes from white to blue when reduced.102 The group also added TiO2 to the WO3 and chitosan films, which improved the absorption coefficient and electrochromic efficiency.101 Of note, the location of TiO2 within the film can alter performance. Oliveira showed that when a single layer of TiO2 lay atop the film, the titania nanoparticles hindered ion insertion and deinsertion, essentially blocking the electrode, whereas the TiO2 particles within the film improved operation.
In summary, the LbL technique can effectively immobilize electrochromically active polymers or nanoparticles on an electrode such that a minimum of active material may be accessed for a maximum response. This technique improves the processability of many difficult-to-handle materials such as inorganic powders or insoluble conductive polymers. Future directions include the use of unconventional substrates such as ITO-coated flexible PET or electronic textiles for applications such as smart displays or dynamic clothing. Remaining challenges include the creation of a fast-switching, solid-state electrochromic device.
Photovoltaics
Solar energy is a popular renewable energy resource, but remains an expensive alternative to conventional coal and natural gas-based energy. In efforts to create efficient and affordable energy, the LbL technique has also been extended to organic heterojunction photovoltaics and dye-sensitized solar cells. An organic heterojunction photovoltaic film commonly consists of two materials, an electron-donor and electron-acceptor, for which their interface is the heterojunction. As light is absorbed, an exciton, or electron–hole pair, is generated. At the heterojunction, the exciton separates into electrons and holes; the two species transport in opposite directions to collectors and electricity is generated. Though inorganic photovoltaics have power-conversion efficiencies near 25% (monocrystalline silicon), reported efficiencies for organic devices are much lower.103 In order for organic photovoltaic devices to compete with inorganic systems, a few issues must be addressed: (1) a strong driving force for charge separation should be present to prevent recombination of the exciton at the heterojunction, (2) charge-carrier mobilities must be improved to enable the separated electrons and holes to reach the collectors, and (3) the active materials ought to absorb light across a broad range of the solar spectrum.103 In this sense, the LbL technique can directly improve (1) the heterojunction interface by creating a designed donor–acceptor interface at the nanometre length scale critical to heterojunctions, (2) the carrier mobilities by selecting conductive elements in layer deposition, and (3) the light absorption by inclusion of specially designed moieties to capture the breadth of the solar spectrum.
Early studies by Kotov and Prato et al.104 and Rubner and Tripathy et al.105 demonstrated the incorporation of fullerenes, an electron acceptor, in photovoltaic LbL thin-films. Kotov and Prato et al. covalently bonded fullerenes to electron donating ruthenium(II)-polypyridyl to form a dyad. Separately, Rubner and Tripathy et al. formed a layered heterojunction by first depositing electron-donating layers poly(phenylene vinylene) (PPV) and PAA, and then a second multilayer of fullerenes and PAH. Kotov and Prato et al. reported a photon-to-current efficiency of 1% at 400 nm wavelength, while Rubner and Tripathy et al.'s device efficiency was 0.01%. Kotov et al. later expanded the dyad system to include ferrocene moieties instead of ruthenium.106
Since Rubner and Tripathy et al.'s initial work, many have expanded upon the PPV and fullerene system.107–112 Durstock and Chiang et al.111 engineered an interpenetrating heterojunction interface to increase the short-circuit current three times relative to a single, discrete heterojunction interface, an excellent example of how LbL architecture can be used to tune and tailor a device for optimal performance. In its simplest form, multilayers of PPV and PSS were first deposited on ITO, then multilayers of C60+ and C60− atop PPV–SPS to yield one heterojunction, or one interface of PPV and C60−. Additional interfacial layers sandwiched between PPV–PSS and C60+–C60− create a fuzzy heterojunction, which mediates and promotes charge transfer. As the size of the interfacial layer was increased, the performance peaked at six interfacial layer pairs, and then degraded as charge transport became limited.111 The maximum external quantum efficiency reported was 0.09% at 350 nm for an LbL assembly of 50 bilayers of C60+ and C60− adsorbed atop 20 bilayers of PPV–SPS.111 The idea of optimizing the photovoltaic performance with layer pair number was also demonstrated by Tripathy and co-workers113 with photoactive bacteriorhodopsin; photocurrent performance peaked, and then declined as thicker films (more layer pairs) increased the overall film resistance. Assemblies too thin may not include enough active material for optimal functionality, and if the films are too thick, the functional components of the LbL assembly are transport-limited, hindering communication with the outside environment.
To date, the highest reported photon-to-current efficiency in an LbL photovoltaic device is 5.5% from poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) (PPE) and a water-soluble fullerene,112 (Fig. 8); the overall power-conversion efficiency of this system was 0.04%. Here too, an optimal layer pair number gives peak performance; Reynolds et al.93 attributed this behavior to a trade-off between thin films that quickly transport excitons and thick films that enhance light absorption.
 Fig. 8  (a) Multilayers of water-soluble fullerenes and poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) form a controlled heterojunction to give a conversion efficiency of 5.5%, one of the highest reported for an LbL film. (b) Photon to current efficiency vs. wavelength of light.112 Published with permission of the American Chemical Society. 
Another high-impact area of photovoltaic thin films is dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Grätzel and O'Regan114 first demonstrated highly efficient cells, 7 to 11% efficiency, using a photosensitive dye that injects electrons into nanometre-sized TiO2, a semiconductor. The dye is then regenerated with a redox species such as I−–I3− in acetonitrile. Replacing the redox electrolyte with solid-state (or gel) media gives improved mechanical stability, but conversion efficiency falls to 2 to 6%.115–117 Tokuhisa and Hammond,118 and later Lowman and Hammond,119 extended the DSSC to LbL architectures, utilizing the ability to build solid-state LbL electrolytes. Using polymer-on-polymer stamping,15 Tokuhisa and Hammond118 formed a template to pattern TiO2 from solution synthesis at the micron scale, Fig. 9. Atop the dye-sensitized patterned titania, an LbL electrolyte of LPEI–PAA with PEG oligomers and LiI was deposited, to yield a device with a conversion efficiency of 0.66%.118 Optimal performance was observed at a titania pattern size of 1 micron, where light is internally reflected. Using porous titania can improve solar cell performance even further. Shiratori et al. created nano-porous TiO2 using an LbL framework of porous PAH–PAA as the sacrificial template; the reported conversion efficiency was 0.7%.120 Lowman and Hammond119 improved upon this idea by fabricating porous titania by using porous LPEI–PAA as the sacrificial template. The large surface-area generated by the porous titania allowed for intimate dye and titania contact; conversion efficiency reached 1.1%.119 Recent work by Graetzel et al. described a nanostructured composite DSSC created using LbL assembly; the reported efficiency was 5.12%.121
 Fig. 9  a) Voltage–current characteristics of photovoltaic devices consisting of dye, TiO2 and LPEI–PAA with PEG oligomer. b) SEM image of patterned TiO2 electrode.118 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons. 
In the case of DSSCs, porosity with an ionically conductive electrolyte enhances performance by encouraging diffusion of the redox couple I−–I3− to regenerate the dye at the titania-electrolyte interface. For example, continuous LPEI–PAA electrolyte (σ = 10−9 S cm−1) gave a short-circuit current of 0.08 mA cm−2, whereas the porous LPEI–PAA electrolyte (σ = 10−5 S cm−1) gave a short-circuit current of 0.14 mA cm−2.63,118
Whether for organic photovoltaics or dye-sensitized solar cells, the LbL technique can create devices with engineered interfaces and structures for renewable energy production. Controlled heterojunctions or patterned titania bring an unsurpassed level of control to photovoltaics at the nanometre to micron scale. These breakthroughs form the basis for creating ultra-thin and robust “all-polymer” or “all-LbL” solar cells. Improving the efficiency of both types of solar cells so that they may compete with inorganic, silicon-based devices remains an important research area.
Amperometric sensors
Using the electrochemistry of active redox elements in a thin film, amperometric sensors (based upon changes in electrical current) lead the field in developing quantitative routes to detect specific pathogens or molecules without interference from competing species. Amperometric sensors are of great importance for perceiving biological pathogens as a means to safely analyze small aliquots of material while minimizing human exposure. Oftentimes, to sense a specific component with high selectivity, a protein or enzyme is needed, but manipulating these delicate biomolecules is cumbersome since they can easily denature.
The layer-by-layer technique has been shown to create highly selective and sensitive amperometric sensors of tunable response while using a minimum of active material. Here, sensors that measure glucose levels and DNA damage are discussed in finer detail. A few years ago, Lvov and Kunitake et al.122 incorporated proteins such as glucose oxidase (GOx) and glucoseamylase in LbL assemblies, ultimately demonstrating that proteins could be immobilized on surfaces while still maintaining their biological activity. In parallel, Hoshi and Osa et al.123 characterized LbL sensors of biotinylated GOx and avidin to detect glucose.
Glucose sensors are the most widely studied and characterized LbL systems for amperometric sensors.123–136 With GOx immobilized on the electrode in an LbL film, glucose reacts with oxidized GOx to form gluconolactone and reduced GOx. Regenerating the GOx with an electron mediator such as polypyrrole127 (PPy) generates electrons, the amperometric sensor current. Without an electron mediator, the sensor relies on response from the electrolysis of hydrogen peroxide, a byproduct of glucose reaction in the presence of oxygen and GOx.126
These sensors must not only identify glucose sensitively, they must also detect selectively, especially with respect to ascorbic acid, which competes or interferes, with glucose for reaction at the sensor electrode. Osa and Hoshi et al. eliminated interference from ascorbic acid by including capping layers of ascorbate oxidase (AOD) above the GOx multilayer.126 More recently, Oliveria and co-workers130 demonstrated the elimination of ascorbic acid, uric acid and acetaminophen interference by operating at low potential (0 V) with the aid of Prussian-blue nanoparticles. Similar to photovoltaic LbL assemblies, an optimal thickness or layer pair number exists where reaction and diffusion are maximized.131
The detection range of glucose sensors is also of importance. Many amperometric biosensors exhibit Michaelis–Menten enzyme–substrate kinetics, where low concentrations of glucose exhibit linear current response, and higher concentrations saturate the electrode to give a constant current. The linear portion of the calibration plot, an Eadie–Hofstee plot, is taken as the detection range. All sensors listed in Table 1 are capable of sensing glucose at normal blood levels, but the work of Osa and Hoshi et al. shows the greatest range.123,126
Table 1 Detection ranges of various LbL amperometric glucose sensors




LBL system
Detection range/mM




Avidin and biotinylated GOx and AOD126
0.1–30


GOx with poly(4-vinylpyridine)–Os128
1–10


Prussian blue–GOx–PAH130
0.2–6


Carbon nanotubes–GOx131
0.5–15


Avidin and biotinylated GOx123
0.001–30


PPy–(PEI–GOx)127
2–50


GOx–PVP derivative133
2–20




Other than sensing glucose, another active area of amperometric LbL sensors is that of measuring chemical damage to DNA.137–146 In this manner, toxic and mutagenic agents are quickly and safely analyzed. Using styrene oxide as a model agent, Rusling and Zhou have extensively studied the oxidation of guanine in LbL assemblies of negatively charged DNA and positively charged PDAC.142 Rather than working with toxic styrene oxide in the lab, Rusling and Zhou’s assemblies convert styrene to styrene oxide in situ with the help of immobilized enzymes myoglobin and cytochrome P450cam within the multilayer film.138 These systems were optimized according to layer pair number and pH conditions, demonstrating superior control introduced by using the LbL assembly technique.140 Recently shown, the response signal of DNA damage may be amplified with the incorporation of carbon nanotubes.144,146
Besides sensing DNA damage or glucose, LbL assemblies have also been shown to electrochemically sense dopamine,147,148 carbon monoxide,149 taste,150,151 iodate and oxalate,152
				β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide,153 ascorbic acid,154 nitric oxide,155 pesticides,156,157 and hydrogen peroxide.158–163
The LbL assembly technique can have a great impact upon the field of amperometric sensors because the sensing material, often a delicate protein, is gently immobilized upon the electrode surface while still maintaining its biological activity. This thin film can be optimized to sensitively and selectively detect pathogens or agents while minimizing interference from competing species.
Conclusions
The layer-by-layer assembly technique is a fast-growing field with many promising electrochemical applications such as batteries, fuel cells, electrochromic devices, solar cells and amperometric sensors. In a broad sense, the LbL technique can be used to create ultra-thin, flexible, all-polymer devices. We are able to selectively choose the architecture of an LbL assembly and use that architecture to our advantage to create novel electrochemical systems.
Many ideas addressed here can be applied universally to other realms of study within the layer-by-layer field such as biomaterials and drug delivery. For example, the idea of a tunable functional film is desirable for any field, and the LbL technique allows for exceptional materials-property control through layer pair or thickness control, materials selection, and assembly parameters such as pH and ionic strength. For many applications there exists an optimum number of layer pairs or film thickness where device performance excels. Also, materials selection can introduce the functionality of commonly difficult-to-process species (e.g. PEDOT, Prussian blue, DNA, proteins), and, the control introduced by varying assembly parameters is unparalleled.
In conclusion, the electrochemical study of LbL films has grown from theory to functional devices64,67,69,77–85,87–102,104–113,123–163 in less than 15 years since the introduction of the technique. These thin, active films continue to make great strides in producing functional architectures for 21st century applications.
Acknowledgements
We thank the National Science Foundation, the DuPont–MIT Alliance, the Institute for Soldier Nanotechnology at MIT, and the Bayer Chair at MIT. J. Lutkenhaus thanks the National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship.
References
R. K. Iler, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 569–594 CAS .
G. Decher, J. D. Hong and J. Schmitt, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 210-211, 831–835 CrossRef .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, M. Eckle, J. Schmitt and B. Struth, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 1998, 3, 32–39 CAS .
W. B. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2717–2725 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sukhishvili and S. Granick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9550–9551 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, Aust. J. Chem., 2001, 54, 349–353 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, K. D. Hrabak, K. McEnnis and P. T. Hammond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17228–17234 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaber and J. B. Schlenoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2940–2947 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Schlenoff, S. T. Dubas and T. R. Farhat, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9968–9969 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Krogman, N. S. Zacharia and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2007, 23(6), 3137–3141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, K. Char, J.-D. Hong and K.-B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1076 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Ngankam and P. R. Van Tassel, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5865–5871 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Clark and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1515–1519 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8501–8509 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shiratori and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4213 CrossRef CAS .

          N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzan, in Nanoscale Materials, ed. L. M. Liz-Marzan and P. V. Kamat, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA,  2003, pp. 273-301 Search PubMed .
P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1271–1293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campas and C. O'Sullivan, Anal. Lett., 2003, 36, 2551–2569 CrossRef CAS .

Multilayer Thin Films, ed. G. Decher and J. B. Schlenoff, Wiley, Weinheim, Germany,  2003 Search PubMed .
P. T. Hammond, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2000, 4, 430–442 .
K. Wood, J. Boedicker, D. M. Lynn and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 1603–1609 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shenoy, A. Antipov and G. B. Sukhorukov, Polym. Gene Delivery, 2005 Search PubMed .
P. Podsiadlo, S. Paternel, J.-M. Rouillard, Z. Zhang, J. Lee, J.-W. Lee, E. Gulari and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11915–11921 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kachurina, E. Knobbe, T. L. Metroke, J. W. Ostrander and N. A. Kotov, Int. J. Nanotechnol., 2004, 1, 347–365 Search PubMed .
D. G. Shchukin, M. Zheludkevich, K. Yasakau, S. Lamaka, M. G. S. Ferreira and H. Mohwald, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1672–1678 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheludkevich, D. G. Shchukin, K. Yasakau, H. Mohwald and M. G. S. Ferreira, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 402–411 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhai, F. Cebeci, R. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1349–1353 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fou, O. Onitsuka, M. Ferreira, M. F. Rubner and B. R. Hsieh, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7501–7509 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hong, D. Davidov, Y. Avany, H. Chayet, E. Z. Farggi and R. Neumann, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 846–849 CAS .
J. Kim, H.-C. Wang, J. Kumar and S. K. Tripathy, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2250–2256 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kim, A. Blumstein, J. Kumar and S. K. Tripathy, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 243–246 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Pinto, B. M. Kristal and K. S. Schanze, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 6523–6533 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kato and C. Pac, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19932–19939 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11538–11539 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Khillan, Y. Su, Y. M. Lvov and K. Varahramyan, IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., Part A, 2005, 28, 748–753 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, J. Jackiw, E. Robinson, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 964–974 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. H. Ho, M. Granstrom, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 769–774 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. H. Ho, J.-S. Kim, J. H. Burroughes, H. Becker, S. F. Y. Li, T. M. Brown, F. Cacialli and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2000, 404, 481–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ramey, J. A. Hiller, M. F. Rubner, C. Tan, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 234–243 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Cheung, A. C. Fou and M. F. Rubner, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 244, 985–999 .
M. Ferreira, J. H. Cheung and M. F. Rubner, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 244 .
M. Ferreira and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 7107–7114 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fou and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 7115–7120 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Cheung, W. B. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2712–2716 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Ram, M. Salerno, M. Adami, P. Faraci and C. Nicolini, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 1252–1259 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lukkari, M. Salomaki, A. Viinikanoja, T. Aaritalo, J. Paukkunen, N. Kocharova and J. Kankare, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zotti, G. Schiavon, S. Zecchin, A. Berlin and G. Giro, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1381–1382 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, B. H. Sohn, W. Lee, J.-K. Lee, S. J. Choi and S. J. Kwon, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 419, 173–177 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Park, K. Onishi, J. Locklin, F. Caruso and R. C. Advincula, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8550–9554 CrossRef CAS .
F. Trivinho-Strixino, E. C. Pereira, S. V. Mello and O. N. Oliveria, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3740–3745 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, O. M. Cabarcos, D. L. Allaara and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 823–827 CrossRef CAS .
F. Trivinho-Strixino, E. C. Pereira, S. V. Mello and O. N. Oliveria, Synth. Met., 2005, 155, 648–651 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, W.-F. Dong, M. A. Hempenius, H. Mohwald and G. J. Vancso, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 724–729 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, K. Kohler and H. Mohwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4560–4561 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Durstock and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7865–7872 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and J. B. Schlenoff, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and J. B. Schlenoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4627–4636 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Hertz, B. M. Braun, K. J. Muller and R. Maurer, J. Chem. Educ., 1987, 64, 777–784 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5403–5411 CrossRef CAS .

          J. L. Lutkenhaus, K. McEnnis and P. T. Hammond, in preparation .
J. D. Mendelsohn, C. J. Barret, A. J. P. Chan, A. M. Mayes and M. F. Rubner, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5017–5023 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Lowman, H. Tokuhisa, J. L. Lutkenhaus and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9791–9795 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 433–444 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Slade, S. A. Campbell, T. R. Ralph and F. C. Walsh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1556–A1564 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 945–954 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Smith, J. N. Ashcraft and P. T. Hammond, Thermochim. Acta, 2006, 450, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang, Z. Liu and Z. Q. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kim, H.-S. Choi, C. Lee, A. Blumstein and Y. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 659–662 CrossRef CAS .
B. Struth, M. Eckle, G. Decher, R. Oeser, P. Simon, D. W. Schubert and J. Schmitt, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2001, 6, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, E. A. Olivetti, E. A. Verploegen, B. M. Cord, D. R. Sadoway and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir Search PubMed  , submitted.
P. Zhou, L. Samuelson, K. S. Alva, C.-C. Chen, R. B. Blumstein and A. Blumstein, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 1577–1581 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, Y. Shao, X. Sun, H. Chen, B. Liu and S. Dong, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 323–329 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Yan, K. Gong, L. Mao, Z. Guo and Y. Chen, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8781–8785 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Abdelrahman, A. M. Mohammad, T. Okajima and T. Ohsaka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2798–2803 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .

          A. D. Taylor, M. Michel, R. Sekol, J. Kizuka, N. Kotov and L. T. Thompson, Electrochemical Society 2006 Joint International Meeting, Cancun, Mexico,  2006 .
T. Cassagneau, F. Guerin and J. H. Fendler, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7318–7324 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cassagneau and J. H. Fendler, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 877–881 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferreira, F. Huguenin, V. Zucolotto, J. E. Pereira da Silva, S. I. Cordoba de Torresi, M. L. A. Temperini, R. M. Torresi and O. N. Oliveria, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8351–8354 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huguenin, M. Ferreira, V. Zucolotto, F. C. Nart, R. M. Torresi and O. N. Oliveria, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2293–2299 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huguenin, F. C. Nart, E. R. Gonzalez and O. N. Oliveria, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 189191–118924 .
F. Huguenin, D. S. dos Santos, A. Bassi, F. C. Nart and O. N. Oliveria, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 985–991 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Nam, D.-W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Chiang, N. Meethong, P. T. Hammond, Y.-M. Chiang and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2006, 312, 885–888 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Yoo, K. T. Nam, J. Qi, S.-K. Lee, J. Park, A. M. Belcher and P. T. Hammond, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1455–1459 CrossRef .
E. Kim and S. Jung, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6381–6387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung, H. Kim, M. Han, Y. Kang and E. Kim, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2004, C24, 57–60 CrossRef CAS .
D. Laurent and J. B. Schlenoff, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 1552–1557 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stepp and J. B. Schlenoff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L155–L157 CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp, M. Kastantin and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1575–1586 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Cutler, M. Bouguettaya and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 684–688 CrossRef .
B. Lee, V. Seshadri, H. Palko and G. A. Sotzing, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1792–1795 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4799–4805 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moriguchi and J. H. Fendler, Chem.
Mater., 1998, 10, 2205–2211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. G. Kurth, H. Mohwald and D. Volkmer, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 225–228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. Volkmer and D. G. Kurth, J. Cluster Sci., 2003, 14, 405–419 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xue, J. Peng, Z. Xin, Y. Kong, L. Li and B. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4793–4798 RSC .
F. Huguenin, V. Zucolotto, A. J. F. Carvalho, E. R. Gonzalez and O. N. J. Oliveria, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6739–6745 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huguenin, E. R. Gonzalez and O. N. Oliveria, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12837–12844 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, Mater. Today, 2002, 5, 20–27 Search PubMed .
C. Luo, D. M. Guldi, M. Maggini, E. Menna, S. Mondini, N. A. Kotov and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3905–3909 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mattoussi, M. F. Rubner, F. Zhou, J. Kumar, S. K. Tripathy and L. Y. Chiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1540–1542 CrossRef .
D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, D. Koktysh, N. A. Kotov, T. Da Ros, S. Bosi and M. Prato, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 775–780 CrossRef CAS .
T. Piok, C. Brands, P. J. Neyman, A. Erlacher, C. Soman, M. A. Murray, R. Schroeder, W. Graupner, J. R. Heflin, D. Marciu, A. Drake, M. B. Miller, H. Wang, H. Gibson, H. C. Dorn, G. Leising, M. Guzy and R. M. Davis, Synth. Met., 2001, 116, 343–347 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Durstock, B. Taylor, R. J. Spry, L. Chiang, S. Reulbach, K. Heitfeld and J. W. Baur, Synth. Met., 2001, 116, 373–377 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kuo, J. Kumar, S. K. Tripathy and L. Y. Chiang, J. Macromol. Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, A38, 1481–1498 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhai, G. Cui, H. Liu, S. Xiao, Y. Liu, F. Lu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 6031–6038 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Durstock, R. J. Spry, J. W. Baur, B. Taylor and L. Y. Chiang, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 3253–3259 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Mwaura, M. R. Pinto, D. Witker, N. Ananthakrishnan, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10119–10126 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. He, L. Samuelson, L. Li, J. Kumar and S. K. Tripathy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7067–7072 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Graetzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mohmeyer, D. Kuang, P. Wang, H.-W. Schmidt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2978–2983 RSC .
D. Kuang, C. Klein, H. J. Snaith, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Kroeze, N. Hirata, S. Koops, M. K. Nazeeruddin, L. Schmidt-Mende, M. Graetzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16376–16383 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tokuhisa and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 831–839 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Lowman and P. T. Hammond, Small, 2005, 1, 1070–1073 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takenaka, Y. Maehara, H. Imai, M. Yoshikawa and S. Shiratori, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 438-439, 346–351 CrossRef .
A. G. Agrios, I. Cesar, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5395–5397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lvov, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6117–6123 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hoshi, J.-i. Anzai and T. Osa, Anal. Chem., 1995, 67, 770–774 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onda, Y. M. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1996, 51, 163–167 CrossRef .
M. Onda, Y. M. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1996, 82, 502–506 Search PubMed .
J.-i. Anzai, H. Takeshita, Y. Kobayashi, T. Osa and T. Hoshi, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 811–817 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Ram, M. Adami, S. Paddeu and C. Nicolini, Nanotechnology, 2000, 11, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Y. Sun, Z. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Wang, X. Zhang and J. Shen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2001, 202, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
I. Galeska, T. Hickey, F. Moussy, D. Kreutzer and F. Papadimitrakopoulos, Biomacromolecules, 2001, 2, 1249–1255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferreira, P. A. Fiorito and O. N. Oliveria, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2004, 19, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Yu, H. Shi, Z. Song, Z. Zhao, J.-i. Anzai, T. Osa and Q. Chen, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2006, 26, 113–117 CrossRef CAS .
D. Trau and R. Renneberg, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 18, 1491–1499 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sirkar, A. Revzin and M. V. Pishko, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 2930–2936 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Pishko, A. Revzin and A. L. Simonian, Sensors, 2002, 2, 79–90 Search PubMed .
E. J. Calvo, F. Battaglini, C. Danilowicz, A. Wolosiuk and M. Otero, Faraday Discuss., 2000, 116, 47–65 RSC .
A. Revzin, K. Sirkar, A. L. Simonian and M. V. Pishko, Sens. Actuators, B, 2002, 81, 359–368 CrossRef .
Y. Lvov, G. Decher and G. Sukhorukov, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 5396–5399 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lvov, Z. Lu, J. B. Schenkman, X. Zu and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 4073–4080 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mugweru and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 4044–4049 CrossRef CAS .
B. Munge, C. Estavillo, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, ChemBioChem, 2003, 4, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 4229–4235 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 4780–4786 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, J. Yang, C. Estavillo, J. D. Stuart, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1431–1436 CrossRef CAS .
P. He and M. Bayachou, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 6086–6092 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Pacey, S. D. Puckett, L. Cheng, S. Khatib-Shahdi and J. A. Cox, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 533, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
B. Munge, G. Liu, G. Collins and J. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 4662–4666 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, K. Gong, H. Zhang and L. Mao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 20, 1270–1276 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zucolotto, M. Ferreira, M. R. Cordeiro, C. J. L. Constantino, W. C. Moreira and O. N. Oliveria, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 113, 809–815 CrossRef .
M. K. Ram, O. Yavuz, V. Lahsangah and M. Aldissi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 106, 750–757 CrossRef .
D. S. dos Santos, A. J. Riul, R. R. Malmegrim, F. J. Fonseca, O. N. Oliveria and L. H. C. Mattoso, Macromol. Biosci., 2003, 3, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
A. Riul, H. C. de Sousa, R. R. Malmegrim, D. S. dos Santos, A. C. P. L. F. Carvalho, F. J. Fonseca, O. N. Oliveria and L. H. C. Mattoso, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, B98, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bi, H. Wang, Y. Shen, E. Wang and S. Dong, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 913–918 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, A. Baba, J. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Knoll, M.-K. Park and R. Advincula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 473–479 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Q. Gao, Y. Song, Z. Li and X. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, B107, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yu, Z. Liang, J. Cho and F. Caruso, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1203–1207 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Crespilho, V. Zucolotto, J. R. J. Siqueira, C. J. L. Constantino, F. C. Nart and O. N. Oliveria, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 5385–5389 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zucolotto, A. P. A. Pinto, T. Tumolo, M. L. Moraes, M. S. Baptista, A. Riul, A. P. U. Araujo and O. N. Oliveria, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1320–1326 CrossRef CAS .
I. Del Villar, I. R. Matias, F. J. Arregui, J. Echeverria and R. O. Claus, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 108, 751–757 CrossRef .
I. Del Villar, I. R. Matias, F. J. Arregui and R. O. Claus, IEEE Sens. J., 2005, 5, 365–371 Search PubMed .
P. A. Fiorito, V. R. Goncales, E. A. Ponzio and S. I. Cordoba de Torresi, Chem. Commun., 2005, 366–368 Search PubMed .
W. Li, Z. Wang, C. Sun, M. Xian and M. Zhao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 418, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. Narvaez, G. Suarez, I. C. Popescu, I. Katakis and E. Dominguez, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2000, 15, 43–52 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hoshi, H. Saiki, S. Kuwazawa, C. Tsuchiya, Q. Chen and J.-i. Anzai, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 5310–5315 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
Jodie L. Lutkenhaus	Jodie Lutkenhaus is a graduate student in Paula Hammond's laboratory in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Awards include an NSF Graduate Fellowship, MIT Presidential Fellowship and the Electrochemical Society Student Travel Grant. Research interests include electrochemistry at thin films and interfaces.
Paula T. Hammond	Professor Paula T. Hammond is the Bayer Chair Professor of Chemical Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and is a founding faculty member of the Institute for Soldier Nanotechnologies (ISN) at MIT. Her research expertise includes self- and directed electrostatic polymer assembly for electrochemical and biomaterials applications.

 	Fig. 1  The layer-by-layer technique is the solution-based alternate adsorption of positively and negatively charged species. For example, a substrate is exposed to an aqueous solution of positively charged polymer, or polycation, that adsorbs to the substrate interface through electrostatic interactions, where charge reversal occurs. The substrate, now positively charged, is then exposed to an aqueous solution of negatively charged polymer, or polyanion, where adsorption and charge reversal render the interface negatively charged.	 

 	Fig. 2  With materials choice and control of assembly conditions, LbL assemblies can be designed for a specific application.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) AFM micrograph and (b) cross-sectional SEM micrograph of an LPEI–PAA thin-film treated in a transition bath of water at pH 2.0.63 The porous multilayer can absorb liquid electrolyte for fast ion-conduction or act as a template for porous titania. Published with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Power density–current plots for a hydrogen fuel-cell using a LbL–nucleopore membrane–LbL PEM. Open circles are PEO–PAA, shaded triangles are PDAC–PAMPS, and open triangles are LPEI–PAA LbL films. (b) An LbL film adsorbed atop a nucleopore membrane, pore size 100 nm.67 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  A Nafion® membrane coated with an LbL assembly of PDAC and PSS blocks methanol cross-over in a direct methanol fuel-cell. Optimal performance occurred at four layer pairs of PDAC–PSS; films thicker than four layer pairs blocked more methanol but at the cost of increasing iR losses.69 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Two-dimensional assembly of Co3O4 nanowires driven by liquid-crystalline ordering of the engineered M13 bacteriophage viruses. (a) Phase mode AFM image of macroscopically ordered monolayer of Co3O4 coated viruses. Z-range is 30°. (b) A lithium battery using Co3O4 nanowires assembled atop LPEI–PAA multilayers. The LbL film also acts as the polymer electrolyte.85 Published with permission of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The first LbL solid-state electrochromic device consisting of 40 layer pairs of PANI–PAMPS and 40 layer pairs of LPEI–PEDOT:SPS with a PAMPS gel electrolyte. (b) UV-vis adsorption spectra of the solid-state device, 40 and 20 bilayers thick, in its bleached and colored states.87 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Multilayers of water-soluble fullerenes and poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) form a controlled heterojunction to give a conversion efficiency of 5.5%, one of the highest reported for an LbL film. (b) Photon to current efficiency vs. wavelength of light.112 Published with permission of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  a) Voltage–current characteristics of photovoltaic devices consisting of dye, TiO2 and LPEI–PAA with PEG oligomer. b) SEM image of patterned TiO2 electrode.118 Published with permission of John Wiley and Sons.	 

Avidin and biotinylated GOx and AOD126	0.1–30
GOx with poly(4-vinylpyridine)–Os128	1–10
Prussian blue–GOx–PAH130	0.2–6
Carbon nanotubes–GOx131	0.5–15
Avidin and biotinylated GOx123	0.001–30
PPy–(PEI–GOx)127	2–50
GOx–PVP derivative133	2–20

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
