Co( iii ) 2-ethylhexanoate, a hydrophobic and highly soluble Co( iii ) precursor for thin coatings for water electrolysis   - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM01629F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM01629F
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 1344-1357Co(III) 2-ethylhexanoate, a hydrophobic and highly soluble Co(III) precursor for thin coatings for water electrolysis†

        
          
            Gabriele 
            Capilli
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Szkopek
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Marta 
            Cerruti
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0C5, Canada. E-mail: gabriele.capilli@mcgill.ca; marta.cerruti@mcgill.ca
bDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada
Received 
      19th December 2021
    , Accepted 25th April 2022First published on 25th April 2022AbstractWe propose here Co(III) 2-ethylhexanoate (Co(III)eh) as a versatile precursor to make uniform and stable cobalt-containing coatings. Unlike other available salts and complexes of Co(III) that are soluble only in water, polar, or moderately apolar environments, Co(III)eh dissolves easily in a wide spectrum of solvents with dielectric permittivity (ε) ranging from 37.7 (ethanolamine, markedly polar) to 1.9 (hexane, extremely apolar). The high viscosity at room temperature of Co(III)eh can be used to prepare films on a wide variety of substrates. Thin Co(III)eh films can be converted to cobalt oxides at modest temperatures and in a short time (5 min at 250 °C) in an oven, or by laser irradiation (λ = 445 nm). The resulting cobalt oxide films and patterns show state-of-the-art efficiency as electrocatalysts for water electrolysis. These properties make Co(III)eh an ideal precursor for the deposition of cobalt-based coatings for catalysis, energy storage, sensing, and electrochromic applications.
Introduction
The entire spectrum of readily available Co(III) compounds is insoluble in extremely apolar media such as alkanes.1–5 Inorganic Co(III) salts are soluble in water and polar solvents only,1,2 while Co(III) carboxylates and several metal–organic complexes, such as the frequently used Co(III) acetylacetonate, are soluble in many common organic solvents but are only moderately soluble or insoluble in strongly apolar solvents.3–5 This is due to the particularly hard character of the Co3+ center, i.e. the high positive charge concentrated in a small ionic radius.1,2
The lack of such a Co(III) precursor showing high affinity for markedly apolar environments hinders the development of easy and direct synthetic protocols for Co(III)-based metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),6,7 hydrophobic nanoparticles,8 and solvogels,9–11 which frequently require anhydrous, non-reactive, apolar conditions. A precursor soluble in highly apolar (hence highly volatile) solvents is also one of the most desirable features to prepare Co(III)-based coatings in environmental conditions via chemical solution deposition (CSD) processes.12 These films would be of great interest in catalysis, as cobalt oxides are excellent (photo)electro-catalysts for water oxidation,13 energy storage,14 sensing,15 and as electrochromic layers in smart glasses.16
CSD includes all the liquid-based methods for the preparation of oxide ceramic thin films, where one or more inorganic and/or metal–organic precursors are decomposed by heat or light.17,18 CSD methods are highly flexible and the most scalable techniques to fabricate oxide thin films. They do not require vacuum, which is a significant advantage over more sophisticated techniques such as atomic layer deposition (ALD) and chemical vapor deposition (CVD),17,18 they are characterized by low equipment costs and low energy consumption, and they are compatible with well-established industrial processes such as roll-to-roll printing.18,19
Co(III) oxide coatings prepared through CSD usually require additives to increase the viscosity of the precursor solution and to prevent the crystallization and precipitation of the precursor to obtain uniform films. Alternatively, these coatings can be prepared without additives through spin coating deposition; the resulting films appear macroscopically uniform but are composed of layers of individual nanometric crystals.4,20
An ideal precursor for thin film production by CSD should be stable in environmental conditions and soluble in a wide range of solvents (including the highly volatile ones, as mentioned before) to be compatible with a large variety of deposition substrates and protocols. It should also have good film-forming properties, i.e. have a low tendency to crystallize and form viscous solutions, to generate uniform and homogeneous coatings without the need for additives. Finally, this compound should not contain long hydrocarbon chains, to decompose completely at mild temperatures and to avoid film cracking during thermal/photo-treatment caused by the significant volume reduction.21
Metal 2-ethylhexanoates fulfill all these requirements. They are medium-chain metal alkanoates insoluble in water and highly soluble in organic solvents including alkanes,17 in which they arrange in small micelles of various shapes.22 They are air- and water-stable,17 usually photoactive,8,17,23 and easily decomposed in mild conditions, i.e. at relatively low temperatures.17,18,24 As such, these compounds have recently emerged as competitive precursors for the synthesis of nanoparticles, the preparation of ceramic materials, and the deposition of coatings.8,17,18,24 Native metal, metal oxide, halide, and sulfide thin films can be prepared by CSD of these precursors followed by thermal or (photo)chemical conversion,17,18,20 including exposure to near-infrared (NIR) radiation.18,25
The 2-ethylhexanoates of alkaline, alkaline earth, and several transition metals are inexpensive and usually available as solids or diluted in 2-ethylhexanoic acid or mineral spirit (Fig. 1).17,26 Co(II) 2-ethylhexanoate (Co(II)eh) is the only oxidation state commercially available for cobalt, found in mineral spirit (65 wt% solution).8,24,26
 Fig. 1  Schematic of 2-ethylhexanoates of monovalent, divalent, and trivalent metal ions commercially available. 
Here we show the preparation of Co(III) 2-ethylhexanoate (Co(III)eh) and its use to make Co(III)eh thin films through CSD directly, without any additive, starting from highly apolar and volatile solvents. The films can be quickly converted to Co(III) oxide films either in an oven, at low temperature, or under the focalized beam of a scanning laser engraver mounted on a computer numerical control (CNC) machine. The films or patterns obtained are competitive catalysts for the electro-oxidization of water to O2.
Results and discussion
Synthesis and characterization of Co(III)eh
To synthesize Co(III)eh, we started from either a commercial Co(II)eh solution in mineral spirit or from Co(II)eh prepared from 2-ethylhexanoic acid (2-eh) and CoCl2. The synthesized Co(II)eh can be easily dissolved in multiple solvents including hexane, ethanol (EtOH), and acetone (Fig. S1, ESI,† top row) and oxidized to Co(III)eh using strong oxidants, such as H2O2 (Fig. S1, bottom row, and S2, ESI†) or ammonium peroxydisulfate (APS) (Fig. S2, ESI†). The colour change observed during oxidation, from blue, pink, or purple to dark green is typical of the oxidation of Co(II) complexes to their Co(III) equivalents (e.g. Co(III) tartrate and Co(III) acetylacetonate).4
Similar to its precursor Co(II)eh, Co(III)eh is readily soluble in hexane (Fig. 2a and Fig. S2, ESI†). This is an unusual feature for a species containing Co3+. The rare behavior of Co(III)eh arises from the significant van der Waals interactions between the 5-carbon-atom-long alkyl tail of its ligand, 2-eh, and any markedly apolar solvent, including hydrocarbons.22 Even Co(III) acetylacetonate (Co(III)acac), a frequently used Co(III) metalorganic compound with affinity for a large spectrum of organic solvents and considered highly hydrophobic, is insoluble in hydrocarbons (see Fig. S3, ESI†).3,5
 Fig. 2  (a) Photographs showing Co(III)eh dissolved at a concentration of 0.01 M in a wide spectrum of solvents with different ε. In each photo, a laser points at the solution and no Tyndall effect is observed, showing complete dissolution. (b) IR spectra of 2-eh, Co(II)eh, and Co(III)eh (commercial) reported between 3900 and 700 cm−1, and (c) zoom-in in the carboxyl/carboxylate stretching region. (d) Thermogravimetric analysis performed in N2 for the free ligand 2-eh, the precursor Co(II)eh, and Co(III)eh. 
Due to the surfactant nature of the 2-eh ligand, Co(III)eh can be dissolved at high concentration (up to ∼2 M) in a wide series of media with dielectric permittivity (ε) spanning from 1.9 (hexane) to 37.7 (ethanolamine) (Fig. 2a and Fig. S4, ESI†). This series includes highly apolar solvents such as hydrocarbons, ethers, chlorinated hydrocarbons, carboxylic acids, and pyridine, as well as moderately to highly polar solvents, such as acetone, EtOH, methanol (MeOH), N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and ethanolamine (NH2EtOH). For comparison, the reported solubility of Co(III)acac is just 4 × 10−2 M in EtOH, the alcohol giving the highest solubility to date.3
The presence of a hydroxyl or carboxyl group in the solvent (EtOH, MeOH, NH2EtOH, 2-eh, acetic acid (AcOH)) is effective at solvating Co(III)eh. We interpret this as the formation of H-bonds with the carboxyl heads of the 2-eh ligands in Co(III)eh and, possibly, the direct chelation of the Co3+ center. The lack of a carboxyl –OH in ethyl acetate (EtOAc) also explains why Co(III)eh forms clear solutions in AcOH and turbid suspensions in EtOAc (ε = 6.0, Fig. S4, ESI†), even though the two solvents have both similar structure and ε. As an additional example, even though Co(III)eh is insoluble in fluorinated solvents like perfluorodecalin (PFD, ε = 1.8), the presence of a –OH moiety in 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE, ε = 8.6) is responsible for a significant increase in the suspendability of Co(III)eh in the form of small particles (Fig. S4, ESI†).
Not all of the protic solvents show a high solvation power toward Co(III)eh. The turbid suspensions of Co(III)eh in amines such as triethylamine (TEA, ε = 2.4, see Fig. S4, ESI†) are caused by a reaction of the complex with the amino groups of the solvent, which probably displace the 2-eh ligands, because of their extremely high affinity for the cobalt ion (Fig. S5, ESI†). Finally, Co(III)eh is poorly suspendable or insoluble in highly polar aprotic solvents, such as acetonitrile (MeCN, ε = 37.5) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, ε = 46.7), and in H2O (ε = 79.8), due to the insolubility of the ligand, 2-eh, in these media. The difference in Co(III)eh solubility in NH2EtOH vs. MeCN (Fig. S4, ESI†), two highly polar solvents with almost identical ε, highlights the crucial role of protic functional groups (specifically –OH or –COOH) for effective solvation of Co(III)eh.
After evaporation of the solvent, Co(III)eh solutions leave a dark green-brown viscous residue, as expected because the asymmetric branched 2-ethylhexanoate chains favor disorder and prevent the formation of crystalline phases.17 The absence of crystallization is also shown by the differential scanning calorimetry results (Fig. S6, ESI†).
As it is usually impossible to characterize metal 2-ethylhexanoates by X-ray diffraction, the unambiguous identification of their structures is difficult, and IR spectroscopy is considered one of the most useful diagnostic methods.17,27 In Fig. 2b and c, we compare the IR spectra of Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh with that of the ligand 2-eh. The IR spectra of Co(III)eh samples obtained from both commercial and synthesized Co(II)eh are almost identical and are reported in Fig. S7 (ESI†). The peak assignments are listed in Table S1 (ESI†). The absence of hydroxyl absorptions between 3500 and 3000 cm−1 indicates that the two cobalt complexes are anhydrous and mostly free from residual 2-eh. The bands in the 2850–2960 cm−1 frequency range are due to the methyl and methylene group symmetric (νsCH3, νsCH2) and asymmetric (νasCH3, νasCH2) stretching vibrations of the ligand.28,29
The Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh spectra are dominated by strong absorptions in the carboxyl region (Fig. 2c). The carbonyl (CO) stretching vibration at ∼1700 cm−1 observed in 2-eh acid is replaced by two bands, the symmetric (νsCOO) and asymmetric (νasCOO) stretching vibrations of the carboxylate ion. These bands arise from a complete COO resonance after coordination with the cobalt center and fall between 1420 and 1378 cm−1 and between 1617 and 1548 cm−1, respectively, in excellent agreement with published literature.27–29 The νsCOO peak of Co(III)eh has a maximum at 1414 cm−1 and a shoulder peak at ∼1378 cm−1; these are found at 1420 and 1378 cm−1 in the case of Co(II)eh. The bending vibration of the ligand methylene groups δCH2 falls in the same region, at 1450–1470 cm−1.28,29 The broad νasCOO of Co(III)eh consists of 2 or 3 main components centered at 1617, 1587, and 1571 cm−1 (Fig. S7, ESI†). The presence of multiple sub-peaks in this band implies that the substance referred to in this work as Co(III)eh most likely consists of different isomers, with Co3+ engaged in a mixed coordination sphere, instead of a single structure.22 The same considerations are valid for Co(II)eh, whose νasCOO band shows two main components at 1585 and 1548 cm−1.
The νsCOO and νasCOO vibrations have an exceptional structural sensitivity, and several authors have used their frequency difference, Δν = νas − νs, to accurately deduce the metal–carboxylate coordination and symmetry (see also Fig. S8 (ESI†) and related explanation).30,31 Here we found Δν(COO) values of 157, 173, and 203 cm−1 for Co(III)eh, and 130 and 166 cm−1 for Co(II)eh. Δν values falling in the 130–170 cm−1 range support a bridging bidentate carboxylate coordination.28,29 These values could also be compatible with ionic coordination, but the compound solubility and previous literature suggest that these cobalt complexes do not exhibit any strong ionic character.27,28 The one Δν value > 200 cm−1 also implies the presence of chelating monodentate binding in Co(III)eh. However, this must be a rather rare coordination, as the similar intensities of the νsCOO and νasCOO absorptions indicate that most of the C–O bonds coordinated to cobalt are equivalent, i.e. the carboxylate group arrangement around the cobalt centers is symmetric.28,29
In summary, IR spectroscopy suggests that Co(III)eh is mostly composed of different poly-nuclear structures and frameworks instead of single, isolated molecules, with the Co3+ centers connected by carboxylate bridges. Other 2-ethylhexanoates have also been reported as mixtures of several metal ion clusters of different sizes,17,26,32 and many metal soaps, including cobalt, exhibit various types of isomerism and form polynuclear complexes.22,26,33,34
We performed thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in an anoxic atmosphere to investigate the thermal stability of Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh compounds and to identify the temperature range of their thermal decomposition (Fig. 2d). The free ligand, 2-eh, appears remarkably less stable against thermal degradation than when it is involved in either the Co(II)eh or Co(III)eh complexes, showing a 95% weight loss at 180 °C, while Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh convert to metallic cobalt at 350 °C. In agreement with what was reported for other metal 2-ethylhexanoates,17,22,34,35 both Co(III)eh and Co(III)eh decompose in two stages: a first partial degradation step occurs between 150 and 220 °C (see also Fig. S6a, ESI†), followed by quick and complete decomposition between 300 and 350 °C. This last major thermal conversion happens at the same temperature for both Co(III)eh and Co(II)eh, implying that the first decomposition step leads to the same intermediate product for the two compounds.
Neither Co(III)eh nor Co(II)eh exhibit any additional weight loss at temperatures >350 °C, even after the transition from N2 to air atmosphere at 500 °C, implying that the cobalt residue is free of any carbon content at temperatures as low as 350 °C (in N2). This result suggests that Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh can be used for low-temperature depositions of cobalt-based coatings. This is a great advantage over other alkanoates soluble in extremely apolar media, such as oleates and stearates, whose long hydrocarbon chains can be fully degraded only at significantly higher temperatures (>450 °C).21
Co(III)eh does not show any phase transition before its degradation onset at 130–150 °C (Fig. S6a, ESI†). This is an excellent feature for a material to be used as a film precursor, as it prevents major changes in film morphology during thermal treatment.
The cobalt content obtained after completion of the thermal conversion process is higher for Co(II)eh (15% of the initial weight) than that for Co(III)eh (11% of the initial weight). These values imply cobalt:ligand stoichiometric ratios of 1:2, in the case of Co(II)eh, and 1:3 for Co(III)eh, as they match the calculated mass ratios of cobalt in pure Co(II)eh2 (58.9 Da/345.3 Da = 17%) and Co(III)eh3 (58.9 Da/488.5 Da = 12%).
Co(III)eh coatings and their photo-electrochemical stability
Co(III)eh does not form crystalline phases and has a viscous texture at room temperature, thus it is an ideal candidate for homogeneous film formation by liquid deposition techniques. When Co(III)eh is dissolved in hexane, its coatings take seconds to dry, as the solvent evaporates rapidly at room temperature. Fig. 3a shows uniform Co(III)eh coatings on different substrates such as glass, plastic, aluminum, and paper. Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra of these films recorded 1 month after being exposed to environmental conditions appear unchanged (see the spectra of the compound as synthesized in Fig. 2b for comparison), showing their chemical inertness in the humid air. In the case of paper substrates, no Co(III)eh absorption peaks are visible because the Co(III)eh solution is absorbed by the paper fibers.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photographs of Co(III)eh coatings (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2) on different materials and their IR spectra recorded 1 month after storage in environmental conditions. (b) Photographs and optical micrographs (zoomed-in pictures) of Co(III)eh (commercial) and Co(III)acac coatings deposited on glass from 0.1 M solutions in hexane and acetone, respectively (coverage: 6 μmol cm−2), and elemental composition of the coatings quantified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The areas below the dashed line have been immersed in water and gently shaken for 10 s. Scale bar of the optical micrographs: 500 μm. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of Co(III)eh and Co(III)acac deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2, photographs of the electrodes are shown as inset), in aqueous KNO3 0.05 M solution, pH = 7. Onset potentials of water oxidation are indicated by the arrows in the inset. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of Co(III)eh and Co(II)eh deposited on FTO (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2, photographs of the electrodes are shown as inset), in MeCN solution of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) 0.05 M. Onset potentials of Co(II)eh and MeCN oxidation are indicated by, respectively, blue and black arrows in the inset. (e) Photographs of Co(III)eh coating (same parameters as in panel b) before and after irradiation under intense UVA-visible and UVC light. (f and g) Representative high-resolution XPS spectra for Co2p (f) and O1s (g) collected on the films before and after irradiation. Experimental data are shown as grey dots, individual component fits are in colour, and the overall fit is in black solid line. 

Fig. 3b compares two films of Co(III)eh and Co(III)acac cast from solutions of hexane and acetone, respectively. The Co(III)acac coverage is irregular, due to the intrinsic tendency of Co(III)acac to form small crystalline domains during the drying process, independent of the solvent used (Fig. S9a and b, ESI†). Conversely, the Co(III)eh film on glass appears homogeneous and uniform (Fig. 3b), with few microscopic defects due to drying in environmental conditions (Fig. S9d, ESI†), which are likely to be suppressed by operating in a clean room and on a surface free of microscopic surface defects (Fig. S9e, ESI†). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS) analysis also confirms that the Co(III)eh coating is homogeneous, showing only Co, C, and O on this sample, whereas Si and Na due to the glass substrate are found on Co(III)acac film. Inhomogeneous coatings are formed also with inorganic Co(III) precursors (Fig. S9c, ESI†). The Co(III)eh films are water-resistant, while those created from Co(III)acac and inorganic precursors completely dissolve in water after immersion and gentle shaking (see optical images in Fig. 3b and Fig. S9a, b, ESI,† areas below dashed blue line). XPS results in Fig. 3b confirm that the elemental composition for the Co(III)eh film does not change after immersion in water, while the elemental composition of Co(III)acac matches that of bare glass.
We investigated the electrochemical stability of both films in water in a wide potential spectrum (–0.4 to +1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl) (Fig. 3c). Both Co(III)eh and Co(III)acac coatings are stable in the electrochemical window of water. The slight reduction with onset at –0.3 V and the oxidation with onset at +1.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl (indicated by arrows in Fig. 3c, inset) correspond to the electroreduction and electrooxidation of the electrolyte (H+ and H2O), respectively. However, the cyclic voltammetry (CV) of Co(III)acac almost matches that of the bare conducting fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate, again indicating that this coating is not uniform. On the contrary, the uniform, insulating Co(III)eh layer hinders charge exchange between FTO and the electrolyte.
To further assess the stability toward oxidation of Co(III)eh films, we carried out CV measurements in a MeCN-based electrolyte with an electrochemical window extended up to +3 V vs. Ag(0) pseudo-reference, using Co(II)eh coatings as a comparison (Fig. 3d). Both compounds appear inert up to while Co(III)eh remains almost inert until +3 V, as its CV +1.5 V. Co(II)eh begins oxidizing (blue arrow in Fig. 3d, inset) resembles that of bare FTO. The observed oxidation peaks with onset at +2.3 V (black arrows in Fig. 3d, inset) correspond to MeCN oxidation. Overall, these results highlight the remarkable resistance of Co(III)eh coatings to extreme oxidizing potentials.
Co(III)eh coatings are also resistant to photochemical degradation in air; when exposed to UVC and strong UVA-Vis irradiation there is no visible change (Fig. 3e). XPS survey spectra show a moderate decrease in carbon content (Table S2, ESI†), and high-resolution (HR) Co2p XPS spectra do not change before and after irradiation (Fig. 3f). The spectra show two main peaks (red in Fig. 3f), corresponding to 2p1/2 and 2p3/2 states, and 2 main satellites for each of the 2p levels, arising from the shake-up processes (green and yellow in Fig. 3f).36 The Co2p1/2–Co2p3/2 spin–orbit splitting (ΔE) in all spectra is 15.1–15.2 eV.36 These values, together with the low relative intensities of the satellites (ΣIsat/ICo2p3/2 = 0.8), suggest that the films are composed of a low-spin Co(III) complex since a spin–orbit splitting ΔE of approximately 16 eV and higher intensity shake-up peaks are expected for high-spin Co(II) complexes.36
The HR O1s XPS spectra of Co(III)eh films (Fig. 3g) show one main peak (red), corresponding to the organic carboxylic group of the ligand. The strong light irradiation generates a shoulder peak (green) that indicates a minimal conversion of Co(III)eh to cobalt oxide under these conditions.
Co(II)eh is not as stable as Co(III)eh under the same irradiation conditions, as shown by the film colour change in Fig. S10a (ESI†) after exposure to UVA-Vis and UVC light. In the HR Co2p XPS spectrum of Co(II)eh (Fig. S10b, ESI†), the intense satellite peaks (ΣIsat/ICo2p3/2 = 1.4) and the high ΔE value of 15.8 eV clearly indicate the presence of high-spin Co(II). After both UVA-Vis and UVC exposure, the satellites in the Co2p spectrum are drastically attenuated and ΔE reduces from 15.8 to 15.0 eV, indicating a transition to a Co(III) state. The HR O1s XPS spectra of Co(II)eh films (Fig. S10c, ESI†) show the same results and trend observed with Co(III)eh films, meaning that the irradiation conditions chosen are able to convert Co(II) centers to Co(III) but cannot degrade the carboxylic ligand. In other words, there is almost no formation of cobalt oxide phases, as also confirmed by the elemental composition values reported in Table S2 (ESI†).
Thermal conversion of Co(III)eh thin films
After confirming that Co(III)eh coatings can be deposited and are stable on many different substrates, we subjected Co(III)eh thin films deposited on glass to a thermal treatment in air, in a range of temperatures T between 150 and 400 °C, for a duration of 5 minutes to 1 hour. Fig. 4a shows the evolution of a Co(III)eh film after annealing at 250 °C for 5 min, and then at 400 °C for 1 h. During the treatment, the surface topography of the homogeneous coating remains unaltered on the macroscopic scale, even though microscopic cracks form at surface defects (see Fig. 4a, optical microscopy pictures, and scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrographs in Fig. S11, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Digital photographs and optical microscopy images of Co(III)eh (commercial) films on glass (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2), before and after thermal treatment at 250 °C for 5 min and at 400 °C for 1 h; scale bar of the optical micrographs: 500 μm. (b) Elemental composition of thin films produced after thermal treatment of Co(III)eh at different T and for a different time, quantified by XPS. Representative HR (c) Co2p and (c) O1s XPS spectra of Co(III)eh films after heating at 250 °C (5 min) and 400 °C (1 h). Experimental data are shown as transparent grey dots, individual component fits are in colour, and the overall fit is in black solid line. 
Thermally treated Co(III)eh thin films show excellent adherence to the substrate (Fig. S12, ESI†). Films produced with Co(II)eh cannot be thermally converted, as they melt when heated at around 60 °C (Fig. S3a, ESI†), and gather in macroscopic islands, which then convert to black cobalt oxide domains that easily detach from the substrate (Fig. S13, ESI†).
XPS surveys (Fig. 4b) show that Co(III)eh films undergo a partial degradation when treated at 150 °C. Their carbon content decreases by an average of 23%, even though C remains the most abundant element in the coating. The films fully convert to cobalt oxide when heated at T ≥ 200 °C for 1 hour, or at T ≥ 250 °C for at least 5 min. The C content in the cobalt oxide coatings appears drastically reduced. It consists mostly of adventitious carbon and some surface carbonates, as shown in Fig. S14 (ESI†) and related discussion.
Co and O are the main components of the films treated at or above 200 °C, found with an average stoichiometric ratio of 1:2.3. The small (<6%) amount of Na detected on the coatings is Na that has diffused from the glass support during thermal treatment, and its concentration increases with treatment duration. The surface composition of the cobalt oxide films obtained upon heating Co(III)eh in the 250–400 °C range is similar to that of a layer of Co3O4 powder (see rightmost sample in Fig. 4b), except for the presence of more C and some Na, which are due to the thermal degradation of the metal–organic precursor on a glass substrate.
The HR Co2p and O1s XPS spectra of Co(III)eh films treated for 5 minutes at 250 °C and 1 hour at 400 °C (Fig. 4c and d, respectively), give further insights into the nature of the cobalt oxide layers formed. The main component of the Co2p3/2 and Co2p1/2 peaks (red peaks in Fig. 4c) corresponds to Co3+ ions in octahedral sites,37 and were also present on the non-thermally treated films (Fig. 3f). However, two new components are now visible, which correspond to high-spin Co2+ ions in tetrahedral sites (green peaks in Fig. 4c),37 and the relative satellite peaks (dark blue). These spectra are in excellent agreement with the HR Co2p XPS spectra reported in the literature for Co3O437–41 and with that of the bulk Co3O4 powder that we tested as a reference (Fig. S15 and Table S3, ESI†).
While the Co2p spectra of the cobalt oxide films prepared at T = 250 °C and 400 °C are very similar, their HR O1s XPS spectra are significantly different. They are both characterized by two main components; one at a lower binding energy (Eb) (red in Fig. 4d) is assigned to the stoichiometric oxygen in the Co3O4 lattice (Co–O–Co), and one at a higher Eb (green in Fig. 4d) represents non-stoichiometric oxygen mostly at the surface and within the Co3O4 lattice (Co–O–X),37 which could be related to the presence of cobalt hydroxide, hydrated or defective oxide, and surface carbonates.37–39 This component remarkably decreases in Co(III)eh films heated above 300 °C (see also Fig. S15b, ESI†) indicating that a purer and more crystalline Co3O4 layer forms at higher T. A third, very weak, component is present in the O1s spectrum of cobalt oxide formed at 250 °C (yellow in Fig. 4d) and is assigned to carboxylate residues arising from a partially incomplete precursor decomposition. X-ray diffraction analysis shows that the cobalt oxide thin films produced in the 250–400 °C range are amorphous (Fig. S16, ESI†).
Based on this evidences, we deduce that cobalt oxide films generated by heating Co(III)eh between 200 and 300 °C (see also Fig. S15, ESI†) contain some amorphous and defective Co3O4 phases (which we will refer to as “CoOx” further on in this article), whereas the films formed between 300 and 400 °C can be identified as Co3O4. Even though a pure Co(III) oxide phase (Co2O3) is expected from a Co(III) precursor, a mixture of Co(III) and Co(II) in a 2:1 ratio (Co3O4) is in general always found, due to its higher thermodynamic stability.37,38
Laser-induced formation of patterned Co3O4 on Co(III)eh thin films
Metal 2-ethylhexanoates convert to their respective metal oxide phases when exposed to NIR irradiation in air, whether it is generated from a furnace or a light source.18,25 We demonstrate spatially resolved control over the photon-induced transformation process using a focused laser engraver (Fig. S17a, ESI†), producing cobalt oxide patterns on CoI(III)eh thin films supported on glass (Fig. 5a). The spatial resolution of the laser spot allowed us to generate uniform cobalt oxide tracks of width ranging from 0.2 to 1 mm, depending on the laser focus, at a rate of 10 mm min−1, operating at room T and in environmental conditions.
 Fig. 5  (a) Co3O4 pattern drawn by exposing a Co(III)eh (commercial, coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2) film deposited on glass to a laser engraver mounted on a CNC machine. (b) Optical microscopy picture of a Co3O4 track; scale bar: 250 μm. (c) Representative HR XPS Co2p spectrum of a Co3O4 track and (d) its elemental composition quantified by XPS. 
At optimal laser beam intensity and scanning speed (details in the Experimental Section), we obtained a microscopically homogeneous cobalt oxide line, as shown in the optical microscopy image in Fig. 5b. Fig. S17b (ESI†) shows how a slight deviation from the optimized conditions leads to inhomogeneous conversion. The cobalt oxide tracks consist of Co3O4, as shown by their HR Co2p XPS spectrum (Fig. 5c) and elemental distribution (Fig. 5d). As previously observed with thermal annealing, it is not possible to draw cobalt oxide tracks starting from Co(II)eh films, because Co(II)eh melts at a T lower than that necessary to start its conversion to its oxide and migrates away from the hot laser spot (Fig. S17c, ESI†).
Electrocatalytic water oxidation by Co(III)eh-derived cobalt oxide thin films
Cobalt oxides are highly active catalysts for multistep electrochemical oxidations, such as water to O2 in alkaline media.13,42–44 As the nature of their surface states depends on the concentration of H+/OH− ions,45 the FTO/Co3O4 system can also work as a sensor for pH and reduced analytes (i.e. CO, glucose).17,24 We assessed the water electrooxidation efficiency of the cobalt oxide films obtained by annealing Co(III)eh on FTO at 250 °C for 5 min (FTO/CoOx) and 400 °C for 1 hour (FTO/Co3O4), and that of laser-generated Co3O4 patterns (FTO/Co3O4(P)).
The electrochemical features of all the cobalt oxide films produced are similar. Anodic sweeps in 1 M KOH (linear sweep voltammetry in Fig. 6a) generate a narrow current peak at E = +0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl (see also Fig. S18a, ESI†) before the water oxidation onset at 0.45–0.5 V. This current is ascribed to the CoOOH/CoO2 redox couple, i.e to the formation of Co(IV) centers that are considered to be crucial intermediates during catalytic water oxidation to O2.46
 Fig. 6  Electrocatalytic water oxidation on cobalt oxide films and patterns prepared through thermal annealing or laser beam patterning of Co(III)eh films deposited on conducting FTO-coated glass substrates. Measurements are performed in 1 M KOH(aq) electrolyte, in N2 atmosphere, with Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. The thermodynamic requirement for water oxidation under these conditions is +200 mV versus Ag/AgCl. (a) Linear sweep voltammetry scans of FTO/CoOx (light blue), FTO/Co3O4 (light green), FTO/Co3O4(P) (green), and bare FTO (blue) electrodes; scan rate = 10 mV s−1. Inset: Tafel plots (Tafel slopes are indicated) for CoOx (light blue) and Co3O4 (light green), η = Vappl − E0. (b) Digital photographs showing the evolution of O2 bubbles on the surface of a FTO/CoOx electrode and on a Co3O4 line of a FTO/Co3O4(P) electrode during bulk water electrolysis. In the case of Co3O4(P), small O2 bubbles selectively evolve just from the cobalt oxide lines drawn on the Co(III)eh thin film. (c) Oxygen evolution currents from water by bulk electrolysis (chronoamperometry) at a constant applied potential of +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, using the same samples of panel (a) as the catalysts. (d) Molecular oxygen catalytically generated by FTO/CoOx (light blue) and FTO/Co3O4 (light green) during bulk electrolysis shown in panel b, measured through gas chromatography. Error bars indicate the SD values based on results from 3 electrodes. The graph also shows the calculated faradaic efficiency for the two catalysts (values on the right y-axis). 
If the anodic sweep is followed by a cathodic sweep, corresponding reduction peaks of similar charge (integrated current) values appear (Fig. S18b, ESI†), showing that these are reversible Co(II)–Co(III)–Co(IV) conversions. The abrupt rise in current at +0.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl indicates catalytic O2 evolution, as shown by the copious evolution of O2 bubbles on the surface of an FTO/CoOx electrode and from the cobalt oxide lines on FTO/Co3O4(P) (Fig. 6b). The onset for water electrooxidation on bare FTO is shifted toward more positive potentials, i.e. +0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
We compared the Tafel plots of the cobalt oxide films (Fig. 6a, inset), to understand the kinetics of electrocatalytic activity. In a Tafel plot, the logarithm of the current density due to O2 evolution (log10j) is evaluated as a function of the overpotential (η) for water oxidation (the thermodynamic onset for water oxidation at pH 14 is +200 mV vs. Ag/AgCl). We focused on 3 kinetic parameters to compare catalytic performances of the different coatings that we synthesized and similar materials in the literature: (1) the onset η of linearity, i.e. the η value where the linear Tafel region begins and j is limited by electron-transfer kinetics at the electrode surface; (2) the Tafel slope, expressed in mV dec−1; and (3) the critical η value where the catalyst electrogenerates j = 10 mA cm−2 (η10Acm−2 is a common literature benchmark as similar current densities characterize integrated solar water splitting devices with 10% solar-to-fuel efficiency).
The onset η is an intrinsic property of the catalyst, independent of data normalization. Both the CoOx and Co3O4 films show very low onset η, 0.17 and 0.20 V, respectively, in line with the most active cobalt oxide phases reported in the literature.13,43,44,47–52 Tafel slopes of 49 and 44 mV dec−1 for CoOx and Co3O4, respectively, were observed which are as low as many of the best cobalt oxide phases reported in the literature.13,43,44,47–52 These high catalytic activities result in η10Acm−2 equal to 0.37 and 0.39 V, respectively for CoOx and Co3O4. The electrocatalytic activity of the CoOx phase is always slightly higher than the more crystalline Co3O4 and matches the performance of state-of-the-art cobalt oxide phases toward water electrooxidation.13,43,44,47–52
We assessed the structural stability and catalytic durability of the films through bulk electrolysis measurements (Fig. 6c), i.e. by applying a constant potential of +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl (η = 0.4 V), in 1 M KOH(aq). All the cobalt oxide phases exhibit faradaic current densities around 10 mA cm−2 during the entire duration of the tests (8 hours) and do not show deactivation. Both materials are highly active water electrocatalysts and stable. We have evaluated the cobalt leakage from the thin coatings after 8 h of continuous electrolysis in the same potential conditions and after 100 voltammetric cycles in the 0.0–1.5 V versus Ag/AgCl potential range (Table S4, ESI†). In all cases the cobalt leakage can be considered negligible. After 8 h of electrolysis at +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, it corresponds to 15 and <7 nmol of cobalt per cm2 of electrode area in the case of CoOx and Co3O4 thin films, respectively.
The O2 evolved from the surface of the cobalt oxide electrodes was periodically quantified by means of gas chromatography (Fig. 6d), and the faradaic efficiencies of the catalysts were calculated by dividing the moles of O2 measured by the total moles of electrons that flowed through the cell. After 8 hours of activity, 1 cm2 of the CoOx and Co3O4 thin coating generate respectively, on average, 897 and 733 μmol (200 and 164 ml) of O2. Both CoOx and Co3O4 show faradaic efficiencies between 90% and 100% throughout the entirety of electrolysis tests.
Lastly, both the CoOx and Co3O4 thin films also show a marked electrochromic behavior when subjected to a potential higher than +0.45 V vs. Ag/AgCl: their absorption in the visible range increases, instantaneously and on demand, upon application of a small voltage (Fig. S19 and Video S1, ESI†). This property enables their potential application in electrochromic devices such as smart windows and smart mirrors.16
Experimental
Chemicals and materials
Co(II)eh solution (65 wt% in mineral spirits), Co(III)acac 98%, Co(NO3)2·6H2O 98%, CoCl2 97%, Co3O4 nanopowder (<50 nm particle size) 99.5%, cyclohexane 99.5%, DMSO >99%, NH2EtOH 98%, EtOAc 99.8%, NMP 99.5%, DMF 99.8%, PFD 95%, pyridine 99.8%, TEA 99.5%, TBAPF6 >99%, APS 98%, NH4OH 30% v/v solution in water, NaHCO3 99.7%, and KNO3 99.99% were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Acetone 99%, MeCN HPLC grade, chloroform 99% (CHCl3), diethyl ether 99.9%, glacial acetic acid, MeOH HPLC grade, n-hexane HPLC grade, and toluene 99.9% were purchased from Fisher Scientific. Dichloromethane >99.8% (DCM) and dioxane >99% were purchased from Alfa Aesar, TFE 99% from Merck, H2O2 30% w/w from VWR, 2-eh >99% from TCI America, tetrahydrofuran 99% (THF) from ACP Chemicals, EtOH anhydrous from Commercial Alcohols. Nitrogen (Alphagaz-1 grade 99.999%) and argon (Alphagaz-1 grade 99.999%) were purchased from Air Liquide. All chemicals were used without further purification. Water was purified with a MilliQ plus apparatus (TOC = 2 ppb, conductivity 18.2 MΩ cm).
Synthesis of Co(III)eh
We obtained Co(III)eh through oxidation of two different Co(II)eh precursors: a commercial solution of Co(II)eh 65 wt% in mineral spirit, and pure Co(II)eh prepared through a simple ligand exchange process. To synthesize Co(II)eh, we added 10 ml of pure 2-eh to 20 ml of a 3 M water solution of KOH, drop by drop, under vigorous stirring in an ice bath, until forming a homogenous solution of potassium 2-ethylhexanoate (Keh) at pH = 8. We progressively added 4 g of CoCl2 to the just-formed solution of Keh, under stirring, and waited until a bright fuchsia precipitate formed (Co(II)eh). We extracted this precipitate by mixing the solution with 10 ml of hexane, where it is largely soluble. Finally, we recovered this deep purple phase which, after hexane evaporation, resulted in a waxy Co(II)eh solid.
To carry out the oxidation step, we first diluted Co(II)eh (either commercial or synthesized) in hexane at 3 different concentrations: 3.2, 32, and 600 g l−1 (0.01 M, 0.1 M, and 1.9 M), and we added an excess of 2-eh, respectively 1.26, 12.6, and 252 g l−1. We finally oxidized the Co2+ centers to Co3+ by adding drop by drop, under vigorous stirring, a large molar excess of concentrated H2O2, respectively 1, 10, and 20% v/v. The oxidation reaction at the interface between the two immiscible media (hexane and H2O) took place within seconds and converted the deep blue Co(II)eh solution to an emerald green Co(III)eh solution. We recovered the green hexane phase, washed it 2 times with an aqueous solution of NaHCO3 (pH = 8) to remove excess free 2-eh, and centrifuged for 5 min at 4000 rpm to eliminate residual H2O2, H2O, and macroscopic oxidized cobalt particles. We stored the dark green supernatant solution in closed vials, in air.
Preparation of Co(III)eh coatings and control coatings
We prepared Co(III)eh coatings on different substrates including glass microscope slides (Globe Scientific), FTO-coated glass (Sigma Aldrich, surface resistivity 7 Ω sq−1), commercial aluminum foil, commercial printing paper, and plastic foil (polyester, Grafix Dura-Lar®). On the substrates, we drop cast a layer of Co(III)eh starting from a 0.1 M solution in hexane, achieving an average coverage of 60 μl cm−2 or 15 μl cm−2, which corresponds to 6 μmol cm−2 and 1.5 μmol cm−2, respectively. The layer dried spontaneously at room temperature within a few seconds.
We prepared control samples by coating glass microscope slides with a layer of Co(II)eh (0.1 M in hexane), Co(III)acac (0.1 M in acetone), or [Co(NH3)5H2O](NO3)3 (0.1 M in water), following the same drop casting procedure described for the Co(III)eh coatings (coverage: 6 μmol cm−2). We prepared the [Co(NH3)5H2O](NO3)3 aqueous solution by mixing 3 g of Co(NO3)2 with 80 ml of water containing 1 ml of H2O2 30% w/w under stirring, followed by the addition of 1.2 ml of NH4OH 30%, and then water to reach a final volume of 100 ml. The solution colour instantly turned deep red-brown indicating the formation of [Co(NH3)6]3+ ions. During the drying process in ambient conditions, the [Co(NH3)6](NO3)3 solution converted into pink crystals, indicating ligand exchange and formation of [Co(NH3)5H2O](NO3)3 crystals.
Preparation of cobalt oxide coatings and patterns
We prepared cobalt oxide coatings by thermal treatment in air of Co(III)eh films deposited on glass or FTO-coated glass (1.5 μmol cm−2). We carried out the treatment in a furnace (Lindberg/Blue M, Thermo Scientific) at temperatures ranging from 150 to 400 °C and for a duration ranging from 5 to 60 minutes.
We drew patterns of cobalt oxide (0.4 mm wide) on the same Co(III)eh thin films (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2) supported on glass or FTO-coated glass, by exploiting the heat of a SainSmart 445 nm laser engraver (output power = 5.5 W) installed on a Genmitsu 3018-PROVer CNC machine. In optimized conditions (laser beam focused to an elliptic spot with axes 0.4 and 0.1 mm, power = 45% PMAX) the machine drew Co3O4 tracks at a rate of 10 mm min−1. We pre-dried the Co(III)eh layers at 80–100 °C for at least 10 minutes before exposing them to the laser, to obtain more homogeneous oxide patterns.
Physicochemical and structural characterization
We prepared solid Co(III)eh and Co(II)eh samples for physicochemical characterization by drying the 0.1 M Co(III)eh solution and the commercial Co(II)eh concentrated solution in air at room temperature. To estimate the solubility of Co(III)eh in different media, we added 32 mg of dry Co(III)eh to 10 ml of solvent and promoted its dissolution through manual shaking for 10 s.
We performed TGA of the ligand 2-eh, Co(II)eh, and Co(III)eh with a TGA5500 analyzer (TA Instruments) using platinum-HT pans and working at a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. We kept the 2-eh sample in N2 atmosphere between 25 and 250 °C, and then in air from 250 to 450 °C. We kept the Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh samples in N2 atmosphere between 25 and 500 °C, and then in air from 500 to 800 °C.
We analyzed Co(II)eh, Co(III)eh, and their coatings on the different substrates by means of ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. We took the spectra with a JASCO FTIR-6100 (Japan) instrument, in the 700–4000 cm−1 range, using a DTGS detector with a resolution of 1 cm−1.
We characterized the surface elemental composition of Co(II)eh, Co(III)eh, and their coatings on glass by XPS on a Thermo Scientific Kα spectrometer, using Al Kα radiation (1486 eV) and a spot size of 400 μm. To prevent surface charging, the samples were flooded with low-energy electrons (14 eV) during measurement. Survey scans were recorded using an energy step of 1.0 eV and a pass energy of 200 eV, while high-resolution scans were acquired with a 0.1 eV resolution and 50 eV pass energy. The Eb of the C1s peak was set at 284 eV for BE calibration. We performed the curve fitting analysis using the Avantage Software (version 4.60), Gaussian–Voigt curve functions, and Smart method for background removal. The reported XPS results are the average ± std dev of data collected on 3 independent samples for each material, with 2 different spots analyzed for each sample.
We investigated the morphology of Co(II)eh, Co(III)eh, and their coatings using both an optical microscope (Leica DM500) and an Inspect-F50 field emission SEM (FEI, Japan). We coated the samples for SEM analysis with a 5 nm Pt layer, using a LEICA EM ACE600 sputtering machine.
Photochemical and electrochemical characterization of Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh films
We characterized Co(II)eh, Co(III)eh, and cobalt oxide coatings using a computer-controlled potentiostat (Interface 1000E, Gamry) and a conventional three-electrode cell, in both aqueous and organic electrolytes. As working electrodes (WEs) we deposited the cobalt-based films (coverage: 6 μmol cm−2) on FTO-coated glass conducting supports, according to the procedure reported above. To assess the sample behavior in an outdoor-like environment, we performed the measurements in aqueous KNO3 0.05 M (pH = 7), in air, using a Pt wire as the counter electrode (CE) and Ag/AgCl/KCl 3.5 M as the reference electrode (RE). To evaluate sample inertness in oxidating conditions we carried out the measurements in a MeCN solution of TBAPF6 0.05 M in air, using a Pt sheet as the CE and an Ag wire as the pseudo-reference electrode. We performed CVs at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1.
In order to assess the photochemical stability of Co(II)eh and Co(III)eh coatings, we irradiated them in two different conditions: (1) Philips PL-S 9W/2P TUV germicidal light bulb (Netherlands) with 2.3 W UVC emission (λ = 254 nm) and the distance between the lamp and the coated glass equal to 3 cm, (2) cermax 300 W Xenon Parabolic Lamp (mod. PE300BFA, USA) with broad spectral range (colour temperature = 5900 K, radiant output: 50 W with 2.6 W at λ < 390 nm and 29 W at λ >770 nm). After beam collimation with lenses and adjustment of the lamp-sample distance, the incident light irradiance of the second lamp on the coatings was equivalent to 1.5 × 104 W m−2 (15 suns).
Electrocatalytic water oxidation by Co(III)eh-derived cobalt oxide thin films
We performed the electrocatalytic water oxidation measurements using a computer-controlled potentiostat (Interface 1000E, Gamry) and a cell composed of 3 separated compartments sealed on top by airtight silicone caps and connected to each other through 2 microporous glass frit filters. In the central compartment we placed the WE (bare FTO or FTO/cobalt oxide films, coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2), in the lateral compartments the Pt wire CE and the Ag/AgCl/KCl 3.5 M RE. We completely immersed all electrodes in aqueous KOH 1 M electrolyte (pH = 14) and purged each compartment with N2 for 5 min before starting the measurements. We performed CVs and linear sweep voltammetry at scan rates of 50 and 10 mV s−1, respectively, and equilibrated the WE at the potential initially applied for 30 s before starting the measurements.
Chronoamperometric measurements were performed with WE at a constant potential of +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl and continuous purging of the WE compartment with a flux of N2 (30 ml min−1). To quantify the O2 evolution on the WE surface, we withdrew 1 ml of gas sample from the headspace of the WE compartment every 30 min, using a glass syringe with a metal luer lock tip. We analyzed the gas samples with a GC-8A gas chromatograph (Shimadzu) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector and an Alltech 5A molecular sieve column (10 ft., 80/100 mesh, washed). The injector temperature and column temperature were set respectively at 100 and 70 °C, the Ar carrier flow rate was set at 5 ml min−1. O2 and N2 were eluted after 3.33 min and 4.83 min, respectively.
Conclusions
We show the synthesis and characterization of Co(III)eh, the first Co(III) species largely soluble in strong apolar media as well as in a wide spectrum of solvents with ε between 2 and 38, and stable in environmental conditions. Co(III)eh branched ligands intrinsically hinder its crystallization and are responsible for its viscous nature. As a consequence, Co(III)eh exhibits superior film-forming properties compared to any inorganic and metal–organic Co(III) precursors currently employed for thin film deposition through liquid-based methods, which require additives to produce microscopically homogeneous coatings. Our results show that this is not necessary for Co(III)eh, which forms microscopically uniform films without any additional agent by simple drop casting.
We show that Co(III)eh films can be easily and quickly formed from Co(III)eh dissolved in highly volatile solvents like hexane, by drop casting on a variety of substrates. This, in addition to its simple and scalable synthesis, makes Co(III)eh an ideal precursor for industrial coatings produced by spray coating and liquid-based CSD techniques.53 Co(III)eh wide solubility properties also ensure compatibility with a large assortment of deposition protocols. Like Co(II)eh, Co(III)eh coatings can be expected to have catalytic, antimicrobial, and fungicidal applications,22 especially in outdoor environments where resistance to photodegradation and water is required.
Co(III)eh is also likely to have practical implications for organic catalysis33 and the synthesis of MOFs and cobalt-based nanoparticles in apolar solvents without requiring the addition of surfactants.8,17,24,54 Due to its inertness to highly oxidizing conditions, Co(III)eh can be employed as a source of cobalt in the synthesis of composite materials that involve a strong oxidizing agent or a compound sensitive to reduction, such as graphene oxide, which Co(II)eh would instead instantly react with. Finally, its non-crystalline nature, strong absorption in the visible spectrum, and resistance to photodecomposition make Co(III)eh a promising compound for hole donor layers in organic photovoltaics55 and dye-sensitized solar cells.56
We showed that Co(III)eh thin films quickly convert to cobalt oxide at mild annealing T (200–250 °C), because of the lability of the short-chain alkanoate ligands. This feature makes Co(III)eh superior to other Co(III) metal–organic precursors such as Co(III) stearate and oleate that may also be soluble in markedly apolar environments, but require much higher T to completely decompose their long hydrocarbon chains.
The Co3O4 thin films produced from Co(III)eh exhibit state-of-the-art efficiency as electrocatalysts for water oxidation, as well as a marked electro-chromic effect under small applied potential. They could find extensive applications in other environmental and energy-related reactions such as remediation of environmental pollutants in wastewaters,57 lithiation/de-lithiation processes in batteries,14 and sensing.17,24,45
In all these fields, there is a constant push to miniaturize any working device. We showed the Co(III)eh potential also in this direction by drawing sub-millimeter Co3O4 patterns with a laser engraver, at room T, in environmental conditions. These patterns have the same water electrooxidation capability as large continuous films. The same process could be applied to draw laser-induced patterns of cobalt-based phases other than oxides by simply selecting the proper reaction atmosphere, as already achieved for other metal 2-ethyhexanoates.18 These Co(III)-based thin patterns could find application in sensing17,24,45 or could be integrated into photo-electrochemical devices for solar-to-electrical energy conversion and water splitting.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support from the Canada Research Chair Foundation and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
References
N. A. Bogachev, A. O. Gorbunov, A. A. Tikhomirova, O. S. Pushikhina, M. Y. Skripkin and A. B. Nikolskii, Solubility of d-elements salts in organic and aqueous-organic solvents: I. Copper, cobalt, and cadmium sulfates, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2015, 85, 2509–2512 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Gorbunov, N. A. Tsyrul’nikov, A. A. Tikhomirova, N. A. Bogachev, M. Y. Skripkin, A. B. Nikolskii and O. N. Pestova, Solubility of d-element salts in organic and aqueous–organic solvents: II. Effect of halocomplex formation on solubility of cobalt bromide and chloride and nickel chloride, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2016, 86, 771–777 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tominaga, S. Muraoka, T. Ishii and Y. Yamamoto, Solubility of tris(acetylacetonato)cobalt(III) in micelles. Comparative study of sodium alkylsulfates and alkyltrimethylammonium bromides, J. Solution Chem., 1987, 16, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Kouotou, Z.-Y. Tian, U. Mundloch, N. Bahlawane and K. Kohse-Höinghaus, Controlled synthesis of Co3O4 spinel with Co(acac)3 as precursor, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10809–10812 RSC .
M. H. Abraham, W. E. Acree, A. F. Fucaloro and A. W. Zanella, Determination of molar refractions and Abraham descriptors for tris(acetylacetonato)chromium(III), tris(acetylacetonato)iron(III) and tris(acetylacetonato)cobalt(III), New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 14259–14265 RSC .
C. Li, K. Wang, J. Li and Q. Zhang, Recent Progress in Stimulus-Responsive Two-Dimensional Metal–Organic Frameworks, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 779–797 CrossRef CAS .
W. Han, M. Li, Y. Ma and J. Yang, Cobalt-based metal-organic frameworks and their derivatives for hydrogen evolution reaction, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 592915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. de Oliveira, P. Brown, G. B. Correia, S. E. Rogers, R. Heenan, I. Grillo, A. Galembeck and J. Eastoe, Photoreactive surfactants: a facile and clean route to oxide and metal nanoparticles in reverse micelles, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9277–9284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Schubert, N. Huesing and A. Lorenz, Hybrid Inorganic-Organic Materials by Sol-Gel Processing of Organofunctional Metal Alkoxides, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 2010–2027 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Y. Turova, E. P. Turevskaya, V. G. Kessler and M. I. Yanovskaya, The Chemistry of Metal Alkoxides, Springer, Boston, MA, USA,  2002 Search PubMed .
L. Predoana, A. Jitianu, B. Malic, M. Zaharescu and R. Cutler, Study of the Gelling Process in the La-Co-Citric Acid System, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 1068–1076 CAS .
R. W. Schwartz, T. Schneller and R. Waser, Chemical solution deposition of electronic oxide films, C. R. Chim, 2004, 7, 433–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng and H. Tüysüz, Cobalt-Oxide-Based Materials as Water Oxidation Catalyst: Recent Progress and Challenges, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3701–3714 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Qiu, L. Liu, Y.-P. Mu, H.-J. Zhang and Y. Wang, Designed synthesis of cobalt-oxide-based nanomaterials for superior electrochemical energy storage devices, Nano Res., 2014, 8, 321–339 CrossRef .
A. E. Kaloyeros, Y. Pan, J. Goff and B. Arkles, Review-Cobalt Thin Films: Trends in Processing Technologies and Emerging Applications, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2019, 8, 119–152 CrossRef .

          P. Ashrit, in Transition Metal Oxide Thin Film based Chromogenics and Devices, ed. P. Ashrit, Elsevier,  2017, ch. 3 Search PubMed .
S. Mishra, S. Daniele and L. G. Hubert-Pfalzgraf, Metal 2-ethylhexanoates and related compounds as useful precursors in materials science, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1770–1787 RSC .
D. A. Salvatore, K. E. Dettelbach, J. R. Hudkins and C. P. Berlinguette, Near-infrared–driven decomposition of metal precursors yields amorphous electrocatalytic films, Sci.
Adv., 2015, 1, e1400215 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Wördenweber, in Comprehensive Semiconductor Science and Technology, ed. P. Bhattacharya, R. Fornari, H. Kamimura, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2011, ch. 4.06 Search PubMed .
J. He, D. M. Weekes, W. Cheng, K. E. Dettelbach, A. Huang, T. Li and C. P. Berlinguette, Photodecomposition of Metal Nitrate and Chloride Compounds Yields Amorphous Metal Oxide Films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18174–18177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Palchoudhury, W. An, Y. Xu, Y. Qin, Z. Zhang, N. Chopra, R. A. Holler, C. H. Turner and Y. Bao, Synthesis and Growth Mechanism of Iron Oxide Nanowhiskers, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1141–1146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Nelson and R. A. Taylor, Theories and experimental investigations of the structural and thermotropic mesomorphic phase behaviors of metal carboxylates, Appl. Petrochem. Res., 2014, 4, 253–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tradel, G. Li, X. Zhang and R. H. Hill, Positive and Negative Lithography by Photochemical Metalorganic Deposition from Metal 2-ethylhexanoates, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2006, 19, 467–475 CrossRef .
M. Epifani, P.-Y. Tang, A. Genç, J. R. Morante, J. Arbiol, R. Díaz and S. Wicker, The Ethylhexanoate Route to Metal Oxide Nanocrystals: Synthesis of CoO Nanooctahedra from CoII 2-Ethylhexanoate, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 3963–3968 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Dettelbach, D. A. Salvatore, A. Bottomley and C. P. Berlinguette, Tracking precursor degradation during the photo-induced formation of amorphous metal oxide films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4544–4549 RSC .
R. Hage, J. de Boer and K. Maaijen, Manganese and Iron Catalysts in Alkyd Paints and Coatings, Inorganics, 2016, 4, 11 CrossRef .
H. A. Ellis, N. A. S. White, R. A. Taylor and P. T. Maragh, Infrared, X-ray and microscopic studies on the room temperature structure of anhydrous lead(II) n-alkanoates, J. Mol. Struct., 2005, 738, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Simon-Kutscher, A. Gericke and H. Hühnerfuss, Effect of Bivalent Ba, Cu, Ni, and Zn Cations on the Structure of Octadecanoic Acid Monolayers at the Air–Water Interface As Determined by External Infrared Reflection−Absorption Spectroscopy, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Nelson, H. A. Ellis and N. A. S. White, Solid state 13C-NMR, infrared, X-ray powder diffraction and differential thermal studies of the homologous series of some mono-valent metal (Li, Na, K, Ag) n-alkanoates: a comparative study, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 145, 440–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Nakamoto, Infrared Spectra of Inorganic and Coordination Compounds, Wiley, New York, USA,  1963, p. 198 et seq Search PubMed .

          K. Nakamoto and P. J. Mc Carty, Spectroscopy and Structure of Metal Chelate Compounds, Wiley, New York, USA,  1968, p. 268 et seq Search PubMed .
F. Miccichè, M. A. van Straten, W. Ming, E. Oostveen, J. van Haveren, R. van der Linde and J. Reedijk, Identification of mixed-valence metal clusters in drier solutions for alkyd-based paints by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 246, 80–83 CrossRef .
N. Z. Shiraz, B. Letafat, E. S. Sharifzadeh and A. Rabii, Synthesis and Improvement of Activity of Cobalt Organic Salts as Drier, ISRN Inorg. Chem., 2013, 167206 Search PubMed .
H. Kambe, T. Ozawa, M. Onoue and S. Igarashi, Physicochemical Studies on Cobalt Salts of Higher Fatty Acids. VI. Some Observations on Thermal Transitions of Cobalt Soaps, by Differential Thermal Analysis, Thermogravimetry, and Magnetic Measurement, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1962, 35, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Morlens, L. Ortega, B. Rousseau, S. Phok, J. L. Deschanvre, P. Chaudouet and P. Odier, Use of cerium ethylhexanoate solutions for preparation of CeO2 buffer layers by spin coating, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2003, 104, 185–191 CrossRef .
T. Ivanova, A. Naumkin, A. Sidorov, I. Eremenko and M. Kiskin, X-ray photoelectron spectra and electron structure of polynuclear cobalt complexes, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2007, 156-158, 200–203 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Chuang, C. R. Brundle and D. W. Rice, Interpretation of the X-ray photoemission spectra of cobalt oxides and cobalt oxide surfaces, Surf. Sci., 1976, 59, 413–429 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Tan, K. J. Klabunde and P. M. A. Sherwood, XPS studies of solvated metal atom dispersed catalysts. Evidence for layered cobalt-manganese particles on alumina and silica, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 855–861 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Biesinger, B. P. Payne, A. P. Grosvenor, L. W. M. Lau, A. R. Gerson and R. S. C. Smart, Resolving surface chemical states in XPS analysis of first row transition metals, oxides and hydroxides: Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2717–2730 CrossRef CAS .
A. Younis, D. Chu, X. Lin, J. Lee and S. Li, Bipolar resistive switching in p-type Co3O4 nanosheets prepared by electrochemical deposition, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Christoskova, M. Stoyanova, M. Georgieva and D. Mehandjiev, Preparation and characterization of a higher cobalt oxide, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 60, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Recent Progress in Cobalt-Based Heterogeneous Catalysts for Electrochemical Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Bonke, M. Wiechen, R. K. Hocking, X. Y. Fang, D. W. Lupton, D. R. MacFarlane and L. Spiccia, Electrosynthesis of highly transparent cobalt oxide water oxidation catalyst films from cobalt aminopolycarboxylate complexes, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1394–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Han, H. Wu, Z. Sun, H. Jia and P. Du, Facile deposition of nanostructured cobalt oxide catalysts from molecular cobaloximes for efficient water oxidation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12534–12538 RSC .
L. Qingwen, L. Guoan and S. Youqin, Response of nanosized cobalt oxide electrodes as pH sensors, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 409, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hamdani, R. N. Singh and P. Chartier, Co3O4 and Co- Based Spinel Oxides Bifunctional Oxygen Electrodes, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2010, 5, 556–577 CAS .
R. D. Smith, M. S. Prevot, R. D. Fagan, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Water oxidation catalysis: electrocatalytic response to metal stoichiometry in amorphous metal oxide films containing iron, cobalt, and nickel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11580–11586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Smith, M. S. Prevot, R. D. Fagan, Z. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Photochemical route for accessing amorphous metal oxide materials for water oxidation catalysis, Science, 2013, 340, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Co3O4 nanocrystals on graphene as a synergistic catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, In situ cobalt-cobalt oxide/N-doped carbon hybrids as superior bifunctional electrocatalysts for hydrogen and oxygen evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Chen, B. Sun, D. Su, X. Huang, H. Liu, Y. Yan, K. Sun and G. Wang, Graphene-Co3O4 nanocomposite as electrocatalyst with high performance for oxygen evolution reaction, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, Benchmarking heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Schneller, R. Waser, M. Kosec and D. Payne, Chemical Solution Deposition of Functional Oxide Thin Films, Springer-Verlag, Wien, Austria,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. Salavati-Niasari, F. Davar, M. Mazaheri and M. Shaterian, Preparation of cobalt nanoparticles from [bis(salicylidene)cobalt(II)–oleylamine complex by thermal decomposition, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2008, 320, 575–578 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao and J. Xue, Recent progress in organic photovoltaics: device architecture and optical design, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2123–2144 RSC .
N. Mariotti, M. Bonomo, L. Fagiolari, N. Barbero, C. Gerbaldi, F. Bella and C. Barolo, Recent advances in eco-friendly and cost-effective materials towards sustainable dye-sensitized solar cells, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 7168–7218 RSC .
A. Khalil, N. Ali, A. Khan, A. M. Asiri and T. Kamal, Catalytic potential of cobalt oxide and agar nanocomposite hydrogel for the chemical reduction of organic pollutants, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 164, 2922–2930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d1qm01629fThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of 2-ethylhexanoates of monovalent, divalent, and trivalent metal ions commercially available.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photographs showing Co(III)eh dissolved at a concentration of 0.01 M in a wide spectrum of solvents with different ε. In each photo, a laser points at the solution and no Tyndall effect is observed, showing complete dissolution. (b) IR spectra of 2-eh, Co(II)eh, and Co(III)eh (commercial) reported between 3900 and 700 cm−1, and (c) zoom-in in the carboxyl/carboxylate stretching region. (d) Thermogravimetric analysis performed in N2 for the free ligand 2-eh, the precursor Co(II)eh, and Co(III)eh.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photographs of Co(III)eh coatings (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2) on different materials and their IR spectra recorded 1 month after storage in environmental conditions. (b) Photographs and optical micrographs (zoomed-in pictures) of Co(III)eh (commercial) and Co(III)acac coatings deposited on glass from 0.1 M solutions in hexane and acetone, respectively (coverage: 6 μmol cm−2), and elemental composition of the coatings quantified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The areas below the dashed line have been immersed in water and gently shaken for 10 s. Scale bar of the optical micrographs: 500 μm. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of Co(III)eh and Co(III)acac deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2, photographs of the electrodes are shown as inset), in aqueous KNO3 0.05 M solution, pH = 7. Onset potentials of water oxidation are indicated by the arrows in the inset. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of Co(III)eh and Co(II)eh deposited on FTO (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2, photographs of the electrodes are shown as inset), in MeCN solution of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) 0.05 M. Onset potentials of Co(II)eh and MeCN oxidation are indicated by, respectively, blue and black arrows in the inset. (e) Photographs of Co(III)eh coating (same parameters as in panel b) before and after irradiation under intense UVA-visible and UVC light. (f and g) Representative high-resolution XPS spectra for Co2p (f) and O1s (g) collected on the films before and after irradiation. Experimental data are shown as grey dots, individual component fits are in colour, and the overall fit is in black solid line.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Digital photographs and optical microscopy images of Co(III)eh (commercial) films on glass (coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2), before and after thermal treatment at 250 °C for 5 min and at 400 °C for 1 h; scale bar of the optical micrographs: 500 μm. (b) Elemental composition of thin films produced after thermal treatment of Co(III)eh at different T and for a different time, quantified by XPS. Representative HR (c) Co2p and (c) O1s XPS spectra of Co(III)eh films after heating at 250 °C (5 min) and 400 °C (1 h). Experimental data are shown as transparent grey dots, individual component fits are in colour, and the overall fit is in black solid line.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Co3O4 pattern drawn by exposing a Co(III)eh (commercial, coverage: 1.5 μmol cm−2) film deposited on glass to a laser engraver mounted on a CNC machine. (b) Optical microscopy picture of a Co3O4 track; scale bar: 250 μm. (c) Representative HR XPS Co2p spectrum of a Co3O4 track and (d) its elemental composition quantified by XPS.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrocatalytic water oxidation on cobalt oxide films and patterns prepared through thermal annealing or laser beam patterning of Co(III)eh films deposited on conducting FTO-coated glass substrates. Measurements are performed in 1 M KOH(aq) electrolyte, in N2 atmosphere, with Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. The thermodynamic requirement for water oxidation under these conditions is +200 mV versus Ag/AgCl. (a) Linear sweep voltammetry scans of FTO/CoOx (light blue), FTO/Co3O4 (light green), FTO/Co3O4(P) (green), and bare FTO (blue) electrodes; scan rate = 10 mV s−1. Inset: Tafel plots (Tafel slopes are indicated) for CoOx (light blue) and Co3O4 (light green), η = Vappl − E0. (b) Digital photographs showing the evolution of O2 bubbles on the surface of a FTO/CoOx electrode and on a Co3O4 line of a FTO/Co3O4(P) electrode during bulk water electrolysis. In the case of Co3O4(P), small O2 bubbles selectively evolve just from the cobalt oxide lines drawn on the Co(III)eh thin film. (c) Oxygen evolution currents from water by bulk electrolysis (chronoamperometry) at a constant applied potential of +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, using the same samples of panel (a) as the catalysts. (d) Molecular oxygen catalytically generated by FTO/CoOx (light blue) and FTO/Co3O4 (light green) during bulk electrolysis shown in panel b, measured through gas chromatography. Error bars indicate the SD values based on results from 3 electrodes. The graph also shows the calculated faradaic efficiency for the two catalysts (values on the right y-axis).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d1qm01629f

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2022
