Extracting large photovoltages from a-SiC photocathodes with an amorphous TiO 2 front surface field layer for solar hydrogen evolution   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE00769K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE00769K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1585-1593Extracting large photovoltages from a-SiC photocathodes with an amorphous TiO2 front surface field layer for solar hydrogen evolution†

        
          
            Ibadillah A. 
            Digdaya
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lihao 
            Han
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Thom W. F. 
            Buijs
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Miro 
            Zeman
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bernard 
            Dam
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Arno H. M. 
            Smets
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wilson A. 
            Smith
          
        
      *a
aMaterials for Energy Conversion and Storage (MECS), Department of Chemical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5045, Delft 2600 GA, The Netherlands. E-mail: w.a.smith@tudelft.nl
bPhotovoltaic Materials and Devices (PVMD), Department of Electrical Sustainable Energy, Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5031, Delft 2600 GA, The Netherlands
Received 
      9th March 2015
    , Accepted 2nd April 2015First published on 8th April 2015AbstractA thin film heterojunction photocathode is fabricated by depositing an n-type amorphous titanium dioxide (TiO2) onto a p-type/intrinsic hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbide (a-SiC). Using this configuration, the photovoltage of the photocathode increases from 0.5 V to 0.8 V under open circuit conditions, indicating the change in band-edge energetics from the semiconductor–liquid junction to the isolated solid p–i–n junction. The p–i–n structure produces an internal electric field that increases the operating photovoltage, and subsequently improves the drift mechanism of photogenerated charge carriers across the intrinsic layer. The enhancement of the photovoltage leads to a very positive photocurrent onset potential of +0.8 V vs. RHE and exhibits a photocurrent density of 8.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE with only a 100 nm absorber layer. The a-SiC photocathode with a front surface field amorphous TiO2 layer shows a high stability for 12 hours of operation under photocatalytic conditions. This high performance, very thin, and earth-abundant photocathode is very promising for integration with smaller band gap solar absorbers to form a multijunction system for highly efficient bias-free solar water splitting devices.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has the potential to be a large-scale, sustainable, and efficient route to produce solar fuels (e.g., hydrogen) by harnessing and storing the power of the sun. One of the most attractive features of this technology is that the light absorbing materials can be directly integrated with catalysts to produce a monolithic device, thereby making it more simple and cost-effective than using separate photovoltaic (PV) cells and electrolyzers.1,2 In order to make this approach competitive with conventional hydrogen production from fossil fuels, i.e., steam-methane reforming, the materials for PEC water splitting need to be made from cheap earth-abundant elements using a low-cost and scalable processing technique.
In recent years, major efforts have focused on single-crystalline silicon (c-Si) based photocathodes,3–10 due to the natural abundance of Si, its excellent light absorbing and electronic properties and its low-cost and high throughput processing. While these photocathodes show a notably high photocurrent density, a practical device realization with c-Si remains a challenge due to the inability of the narrow band gap of c-Si (i.e., 1.1 eV) to meet the thermodynamic requirements to split water (1.23 V),11 plus the necessary overpotentials to drive the reaction12 (>0.8 V). A more attractive and realistic approach to overcome these large potentials is to create a tandem device that contains more than one light absorbing material, which has several benefits such as increased spectral utilization, higher operating voltage, and more flexibility with respect to the band edge positions relative to the water splitting redox potentials.13–16 Thin film fabrication techniques such as plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) have the necessary versatility to control the optoelectronic properties of Si and allow for multi-junction devices to be deposited in succession to form homo- and heterojunction films. Therefore, developing thin-film-silicon-based tandem structures with an operating voltage of at least 1.9 V is one of the most attractive and promising approaches to achieve a low-cost bias-free solar water-splitting device.
Hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbide (a-SiC) photocathodes have received a growing interest due to their earth abundant composition, their simple and scalable thin film deposition technique, and their relative high stability in a mildly acidic environment under cathodic bias conditions.17–22 Moreover, a-SiC has a tunable band gap energy between 1.8–2.1 eV,23 which allows the integration of multi-junction PV cells with smaller band gaps (i.e., 1.1–1.8 eV) to form tandem light absorbers for maximum spectral utilization. In our previous work, we have integrated a-SiC photocathodes with thin-film silicon PV junctions (e.g., a-SiC/a-Si/nc-Si) to provide an additional photovoltage (Vph), resulting in a significant anodic shift of the photocurrent onset potential (Vonset).24 However, low charge carrier collection and slow reaction kinetics at the a-SiC/electrolyte interface limits the overall performance of such triple-junction systems to well below their theoretical limit. The former problem is mainly associated with the a-SiC band edge pinning at the semiconductor–liquid junction (SLJ) and the latter is primarily due to the poor catalytic activity of the photoelectrode for hydrogen evolution.
We herein demonstrate the use of a thin (25 nm) n-type (n) amorphous titanium dioxide (TiO2) layer grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) on a p-type/intrinsic (p/i) a-SiC photocathode (110 nm), to create a hetero p–i–n junction. This buried junction significantly increases the Vph under photocatalytic conditions which leads to an efficient carrier collection for the water-reduction reaction. This p–i–n configuration also produces the largest reported Vph for a-SiC photocathodes, which is mainly due to the improved interfacial electron energetics at the solid/liquid interface. Finally, we place an earth abundant (Ni–Mo) hydrogen evolution catalyst (HEC) on the p–i–n heterojunction photocathode, and report a significant shift in the Vonset while obtaining 8.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE under AM1.5 illumination.
Experimental section
Fabrication of a-SiC photocathodes
The a-SiC photocathodes were deposited onto Asahi VU-type substrates using a radio frequency plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (RF-PECVD) multi-chamber tool. The substrate was kept at 170 °C during the deposition. The ultrathin boron doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon carbide (a-SiC(B)) was used as the p-type layer (10 nm), decomposed from SiH4, CH4 and B2H6 diluted H2 gas flow under controlled pressure. The thin intrinsic layer (100 nm) was deposited in a separate chamber to avoid cross-contamination. A H2 treatment in a low RF power density is followed in the same chamber in order to passivate the p/i interface. After the (p/i) a-SiC thin films were synthesized, a stripe of 300 nm Al was coated on the pre-covered region of the sample as the metal contact using a Provac electron beam evaporator in rotation mode. As the final step, electrical contact was made using a silver wire and graphite paste.
Atomic layer deposition of TiO2
Ultrathin amorphous TiO2 layers (25 nm) were deposited onto the a-SiC film using a homemade thermal atomic layer deposition (ALD) system. No special treatment was done to pre-clean the a-SiC surface before the TiO2 deposition. The TiO2 ALD was carried out at a substrate temperature of 150 °C using tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium, TDMAT and H2O (TH2O = 25 °C) as the Ti and O precursors, respectively. The pulsing times are 5 s and 10 ms for Ti and O precursors, respectively. Each precursor was purged for 30 seconds after pulse. The growth rate per cycles measured by ellipsometry was 0.8 Å per cycle. In selected experiments, TiO2 films were deposited at different temperatures of 120, 150, 170 and 200 °C.
Co-catalyst depositions
The Ni–Mo catalyst was deposited by electrodeposition as described previously in other report,10 only nickel sulfate was used instead of nickel sulfamate. The electrodeposition bath consisted of 1.3 M Ni2SO4, 0.5 M H3BO3, and Na2MoO4. No pH adjustment was carried out. The electrodeposition of Ni–Mo catalyst on the photocathodes were performed potentiostatically at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl for the (p/i) a-SiC and at −1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl for the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 until 500 mC cm−2 of charge has passed. During the deposition, the electrodes were shone with the standard AM1.5 illumination (100 mA cm−2) using a Newport Sol3A Class AAA solar simulator (type 94023A-SR3) with 450 Watt xenon short arc lamp. Finally, the electrodes were rinsed with milli-Q water before the photoelectrochemical measurements. Pt catalysts were sputter deposited in a PREVAC sputter machine using radio frequency (RF) power at 100 W from a pure Pt target for 18 s, resulting in approximately 1 nm thick Pt islands.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
The a-SiC photocathodes were photoelectrochemically tested using a potentiostat (EG&G PAR 283) in a three-electrode system, where the a-SiC photocathode with an exposed surface area of 0.283 cm2 acts as the working electrode, a coiled platinum wire sealed by a fritted-glass tube as the counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode (XR300, saturated KCl and AgCl solution, Radiometer Analytical) as the reference electrode. The electrolyte used was an aqueous 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) solution (pH 4). Linear sweep voltammetry measurements were done at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 with 25 mV incremental steps. Photocurrent measurements were performed under simulated AM1.5 solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2) using a Newport Sol3A Class AAA solar simulator (type 94023A-SR3) with a 450 Watt xenon short arc lamp. During the measurements, the electrolyte was continuously stirred using a magnetic stirrer and was constantly purged with a mixture of Ar/H2 (95/5) to remove oxygen from the solution and to fix the H+/H2 Nernst potential. All current–potential curves were presented as measured without correction. Monochromatic photocurrent measurements were performed with a 200 W quartz tungsten-halogen lamp coupled with a grating monochromator (Acton SpectraPro 150i). The illumination intensities of the tungsten-halogen lamp were measured using a calibrated photodiode (Ophir PD300-UV). An electronic shutter (Uniblitz LS6) was used, and a long-pass glass filter (Schott) was placed between the monochromator and the sample to remove the second-order diffracted light. The shutter was actuated every 10 seconds, and the photocurrent was taken as the difference between the current when the shutter opened and closed (3 seconds integration time).
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were separately performed on the (p/i) a-SiC electrodes and the amorphous (n) TiO2 film in the same electrolyte solutions as for the photoelectrochemical testing using potentiostat PARSTAT 4000. The frequency measurement range for all samples was 10 kHz to 1 Hz at a DC potential amplitude of 10 mV. The Mott–Schottky measurements were performed at a fixed frequency of 5 kHz for (p/i) a-SiC and 500 Hz for (n) TiO2. The potential was scanned anodically from 0.75 to 0.9 V vs. RHE for a-SiC and cathodically from 0.5 to 0 V vs. RHE for TiO2.
Results and discussion
a-SiC photocathodes
The (p/i) a-SiC liquid junction photocathode consists of a p-type layer and an intrinsic layer. The diffusion length of the minority carriers in the p-type a-SiC is very short, due to the fact that the defect density in the doped layer is up to three orders of magnitude higher than in the intrinsic layer.25 Therefore, for our a-SiC photocathode, the p-type layer is designed to be very thin (∼10 nm). The main absorber layer of the a-SiC photocathode is the intrinsic (undoped) layer (∼100 nm) that is deposited on top of the p-type layer. The p-type layer and the electrolyte set up an internal electric field across the intrinsic layer. Upon illumination, this built-in electric field separates the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and the electrons drift towards the liquid while the holes drift towards the p-type layer. A p–i–n heterojunction photocathode is fabricated by depositing a thin n-type TiO2 layer (25 nm) onto the (p/i) a-SiC. In this configuration, the electric field across the intrinsic layer is established by the opposing doped layers, i.e., the (p) a-SiC and the (n) TiO2. Under illumination, the photogenerated holes drift to the p-type layer and are collected by the back contact (Fluorine-doped tin oxide or FTO), and the photogenerated electrons drift to the n-type layer and are transferred to the electrolyte. A schematic representation and the cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode are shown in Fig. 1a and b, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic structure of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode and (b) the cross-sectional SEM image. 
Open-circuit voltage measurements
The PEC performance of a-SiC photocathodes is often limited by the relatively low Vph of the p–i–liquid junction. The low Vph of the (p/i) a-SiC originates from the non-ideal band edge positions that are not sufficiently positive relative to the Fermi level pinning at the solid/liquid interface. To eliminate the dependence of the built-in Vph on the semiconductor–liquid junctions, we introduce a front surface field layer, i.e., an n-type layer, which forms a solid rectifying junction with the (p/i) a-SiC. The p-type and the n-type layer confines the internal electric field across the intrinsic layer that results in a constant Vph that is independent of the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of the semiconductor–liquid junction. This is an almost identical concept as that of the p–n junction photocathodes which have been described previously in many reports.26,27 TiO2 is a well-known n-type material for PEC water splitting that has a high resistance against photo-induced corrosion in aqueous solutions. For this reason, it has been widely used as a protecting layer for unstable photoelectrodes.28–35 TiO2 has also been used in conjunction with p-type photocathodes, such as c-Si,36 Cu2O37,38 and GaP,39 to form a heterojunction and provide a sufficient internal electric field for photogenerated charge separation. Inspired by this concept, we introduce a thin n-type TiO2 layer to our (p/i) a-SiC to establish a p–i–n heterojunction photocathode.

Fig. 2 shows the change in open-circuit voltage (OCV) in the dark and under illumination conditions, i.e., the Vph of the (p/i) a-SiC and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes. In the dark, both configurations show an OCV of ∼+0.5 V vs. RHE, indicating the same equilibrium potential of both photocathodes in the electrolyte solution. Upon illumination, the OCV of the (p/i) a-SiC and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 drop to ∼+1 V and ∼+1.3 V vs. RHE, respectively. These changes in OCV in the dark and under illumination demonstrate the Vph of the photocathodes under open-circuit conditions.
 Fig. 2  The change in OCV of (p/i) a-SiC photocathodes with (green) and without the (n) TiO2 layer (blue). The change in OCV in the dark and under illumination represents the Vph. 
To illustrate the interfacial band-edge energetics of the (p/i) a-SiC and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 under open-circuit conditions, the energy band diagrams of the corresponding photocathodes are shown in Fig. 3. Before equilibrium in the dark, the conduction and valence bands of the p-type and the intrinsic a-SiC are flat (not shown in the figure) and the valence band edge is positioned at +1 V vs. RHE, corresponding to its flat band potential (Vfb), as estimated using a Mott–Schottky relationship (ESI,† Fig. S1). When equilibrium is reached, the Fermi level of the p-type and the intrinsic layers align with the surface electronic state of a-SiC. The existence of surface states originates from the hydroxyl group termination on the oxidized a-SiC surface, that forms an electronic state that is typically situated within the band gap.40–44 The Fermi level alignment between the p-type layer and the surface state causes a potential difference, i.e., a built-in potential (Vbi), across the intrinsic layer, as shown in Fig. 3a. In the semiconductor–liquid junction system (e.g., p–i–liquid junction), the Vbi is essentially determined by the difference between the valence band edge and the surface state energy level, and sets an upper limit of the maximum achievable Vph. The Fermi level pinning at the surface state is positioned at +0.5 V vs. RHE, as observed by the OCV measurement in the dark. Upon illumination, the quasi-Fermi levels of the photogenerated electrons and holes split across the intrinsic layer, giving rise to a Vph, as illustrated in Fig. 3b. For the (p/i) a-SiC photocathode, the OCV drops down to +1 V vs. RHE under illumination, which translates to a Vph of 0.5 V. Assuming that the band edges are pinned at the interface, this reduces the degree of the band bending of a-SiC, which in turn lead to a nearly flat band condition.
 Fig. 3  The energy band diagram of the (p/i) a-SiC photocathode under open circuit condition: (a) in the dark, (b) under illumination, and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode: (c) in the dark, (d) under illumination. The band edges are assumed to be pinned at the solid/liquid interface and are estimated using the Mott–Schottky analysis. 
When a thin (n) TiO2 film is added onto the (p/i) a-SiC, an isolated solid p–i–n junction is created and a new equilibrium is established. The Fermi level of the p-type layer comes into thermal equilibrium with the n-type layer and an internal electric field arises across the intrinsic layer, as shown in Fig. 3c. In this solid-state configuration, the Vbi no longer depends on the surface state potential, but primarily on the dopant level of the p-type and the n-type layers. The dopant level of the (p) a-SiC can be varied by controlling the boron concentration during the deposition, and the dopant level of the (n) TiO2 layer can be tuned during deposition by vacuum in situ annealing, or post-deposition annealing.29,45 At the solid/liquid interface, the Fermi level of the (n) TiO2 equilibrates with the surface state at +0.5 V vs. RHE, which is coincidentally the same surface state energy found previously for the (i) a-SiC. This value is consistent with a study that has been reported previously on TiO2 grown by ALD.46 The conduction band edge of TiO2 at −0.1 V vs. RHE is estimated from the Vfb using the Mott–Schottky analysis with an assumption that the band edges are pinned at the solid/liquid interface. Under illumination, the OCV decreases from +0.5 V to +1.3 V vs. RHE and a Vph of 0.8 V arises. The change of Vph from 0.5 V (for the (p/i) a-SiC) to 0.8 V (for the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2) clearly indicates the change in band-edge energetics from a p–i–liquid junction to an isolated p–i–n junction.
Photoelectrochemical characterization
To evaluate the PEC performance of each photocathode configuration, the current–potential (j–V) measurements were performed under simulated Air Mass (AM) 1.5 illumination in a three-electrode system using a potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte at pH 4. As shown in Fig. 4, the bare (p/i) a-SiC photocathode demonstrates a very poor Vonset at +0.2 V vs. RHE with a negligible photocurrent density (0.15 mA cm−2) at the standard H+/H2 reduction potential of 0 V vs. RHE. The photocurrent does not increase immediately at the Vonset, indicating the slow reaction kinetics on the semiconductor surface of the uncatalyzed photocathode. When a nickel molybdenum (Ni–Mo) hydrogen evolution co-catalyst is added, the Vonset anodically shifts to +0.3 V vs. RHE and the photocurrent density increases to 2.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE (shown in the green curve). Assuming a negligible overpotential of Ni–Mo for the hydrogen evolution reaction, the potential difference between the Vfb of a-SiC and the Vonset reflects the minimum thermodynamic potential requirement of the (p/i) a-SiC photocathode to effectively separate photogenerated electrons and holes from each other and therefore to produce photocurrent.
 Fig. 4  The j–V characteristics of the (p/i) a-SiC (black line) and the isolated (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes without catalyst (purple line) and with Ni–Mo catalyst (blue line) under simulated AM1.5 illumination using 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte solution at pH 4. For comparison, the Pt catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 is also shown (red dash line). 
The influence of (n) TiO2 on the PEC performance of the (p/i) a-SiC photocathode can be clearly seen in the j–V curves in Fig. 4. While having sufficiently larger Vph, the Vonset of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 remains at +0.2 V vs. RHE as that the standard (p/i) a-SiC photocathode. The constant Vonset of the photocathode with and without TiO2 can be attributed to the poor catalytic activity of TiO2 surface for the hydrogen evolution reaction in an acidic environment. By adding a Ni–Mo co-catalyst onto the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode, the Vonset significantly shifts to +0.8 V vs. RHE and the photocurrent density drastically increases to 8.3 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE. Alternatively, when Pt is used as the co-catalyst, the photocurrent density is slightly higher (8.7 mA cm−2) at 0 V vs. RHE without any notable shift of Vonset, thus suggesting a comparable catalytic activity of the earth-abundant Ni–Mo catalyst to the precious metal Pt for the hydrogen evolution reaction.
Mott–Schottky analysis
The flat band potential of TiO2 is estimated from the Mott–Schottky plot in Fig. 5 using EIS. The intersection between the extrapolated linear line and the x-axis represents the Vfb, which is approximately −0.11 V vs. RHE. The donor density (ND) of TiO2 can be determined using Mott–Schottky relationship in eqn (1):47 (1)where C is the capacitance density, e is the elementary charge, ε0 is the permittivity in vacuum, εr is the relative permittivity of TiO2 (75),48k is Boltzmann's constant and T the temperature (298 K). The exposed area of the photocathode in this experiment was 0.28 cm2. The donor density of ALD TiO2 deposited at 150 °C is 1.56 × 1020 cm−3. The position of the Fermi level (EF) relative to the conduction band (ECB) is approximated using the relationship in eqn (2) and (3): (2) (3)where h is Plank's constant, me* is the effective mass of the electron, and NC is the effective density of states in the conduction band. In this equation, NC is calculated using the assumption that the me* of amorphous TiO2 is the same as that the anatase TiO2 (10 m0).49 These relationships suggest that the Fermi level is positioned 41.44 mV below the conduction band.
 Fig. 5  Mott–Schottky plot of TiO2 film deposited on FTO at 150 °C measured using the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at a frequency of 500 Hz. The intersection of the extrapolated linear line with the x-axis represents the Vfb. The measurement was performed using the same electrolyte as that for photoelectrochemical measurement (0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate at pH 4). 
To further understand the origin of the Vonset, energy band diagrams of the illuminated (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes are illustrated in more detail in Fig. 6. It is important to note that the Ni–Mo co-catalyst we deposited on the photocathode surface is in the form of nanoparticle (ESI,† Fig. S11) and the 1 nm thick Pt catalyst is in the form of metal island.50 Thus the front TiO2 layer is still in contact with water and forming a semiconductor–liquid junction, which is represented by the band bending of TiO2 near the interface. As shown previously in Fig. 4, the Vonset of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode with either Ni–Mo or the Pt co-catalyst is +0.8 V vs. RHE, which is more negative than the OCV under illumination (+1.3 V vs. RHE). The absence of Vonset under open circuit conditions and illumination can be explained by the interfacial energetics of electrons relative to the H+/H2 redox energy level as shown in Fig. 6a. At an applied potential of +1.3 V vs. RHE, the Vph sets the conduction band of the (n) TiO2 slightly more negative than the quasi-Fermi level of the photogenerated electrons (+0.5 V vs. RHE). Due to the large difference of energy levels between the conduction band of the (n) TiO2 and the H+/H2 reduction potential, the electrons do not have sufficient energy to overcome the high energy barrier, and as a result they recombine before getting injected to the electrolyte. It is worth emphasizing that isolating the solid-state junction from the electrolyte leads to an internal electric field confinement that is independent on the applied external bias.26,27 This implies that the Vph of our p–i–n junction photocathode remains constant at any applied potential. When the potential is cathodically increased to +0.8 V vs. RHE, the Vph sets the conduction band of the (n) TiO2 more negative than the H+/H2 reduction potential, thereby allowing the electrons to transfer, or tunnel through the depletion layer barrier to the electrolyte (Fig. 6b). This reasoning clearly explains the Vonset of +0.8 V vs. RHE for these experimental conditions.
 Fig. 6  Energy band diagram of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode (a) at an applied potential +1.3 V vs. RHE, corresponding to the OCV under illumination, and (b) under bias at +0.8 V vs. RHE, corresponding to the Vonset. The catalyst (Ni–Mo or Pt) is not shown in the figure since TiO2 is still in contact with the electrolyte, and therefore does not influence the band-edge energetics. 
To understand the electron transfer mechanism from the conduction band to the electrolyte, it is vitally important to approximate the depletion layer width (WD) of TiO2. This can be calculated using the data obtained from the Mott–Schottky results using eqn (4): (4) From eqn (4), it is clear that the width of the depletion region is a function of the applied potential (V). Therefore, increasing the potential towards the Vfb will shorten the depletion layer width. Although a potential barrier still exists due to conduction band-edge pinning at −0.1 V vs. RHE, electrons are still likely to be able to transfer from the conduction band to the electrolyte. This is due to the fact that when the electron quasi-Fermi level of TiO2 is positioned at 0 V vs. RHE, the depletion region width of the amorphous TiO2 becomes sufficiently small (2 nm) so that the electrons can still tunnel through this small barrier. Seger et al. reported that TiO2 with a depletion layer width of a few nanometers and sufficiently negative Vfb still allowed electrons to tunnel at oxidative potentials.45 This likely means that the width of the depletion layer barrier plays a more crucial role than the height of the potential barrier in determining electron tunnelling.
Photoresponse characterization
The photoelectrochemical performance of the a-SiC photocathodes were further characterized by measuring the incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) at an applied potential of 0 V vs. RHE, as shown in Fig. 7. The low IPCE in the ultraviolet (UV) region accounts for the parasitic absorption by the FTO and the p-type layer that does not contribute to photocurrent generation, while the decline of IPCE in the near-infrared (NIR) region corresponds to the band gap limitation of the a-SiC. It is important to note that the band gap of a-SiC used in this study is ∼2.0 eV (ESI,† Fig. S3), corresponding to an absorption edge at 620 nm. The extended spectral response up to 700 nm is ascribed to absorption due to transitions between band tail states whose energy distributions are increased with carbon incorporation.51 In addition, light scattering by the rough surface of the textured FTO substrate (Asahi VU-type) increases the optical path length and hence enhances the light absorption, particularly the weakly absorbed light at long wavelengths. The predicted solar photocurrent using the American Society for Testing and Materials AM1.5 global (ASTM AM1.5G) spectrum52 of the Ni–Mo catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC photocathode reveals a value of 2.9 mA cm−2 (details are provided in ESI,† Fig. S4), which is almost consistent to the photocurrent previously shown in Fig. 4 (i.e., 2.8 mA cm−2). This minor deviation is primarily due to the mismatch of spectral irradiance between our solar simulator and the ASTM AM1.5G (ESI,† Fig. S5). Throughout the entire spectrum, the Ni–Mo catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode demonstrates a much higher IPCE than the standard (p/i) a-SiC photocathode and yields a quantum efficiency peak of 63% at 460 nm. Using the ASTM AM1.5 G spectrum, the predicted solar photocurrent shows nearly absolute agreement of 8.5 mA cm−2 with the photocurrent measured by our solar simulator (i.e., 8.3 mA cm−2).
 Fig. 7  The IPCE of the standard (p/i) a-SiC and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes with Ni–Mo catalysts measured at 0 V vs. RHE. The shaded areas under the curves shown in the inset are the converted photon fluxes and are derived from the multiplication of IPCE of each photocathode and the photon flux of the ASTM AM1.5G spectrum. The predicted solar photocurrents shown in the inset are calculated by integrating the product of IPCE and the spectral irradiance of the ASTM AM1.5G over the spectrum. 
Stability measurement
The stability of both Ni–Mo catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes were evaluated for 12 hours of operation at an applied potential of 0 V vs. RHE, and are shown in Fig. 8. Without TiO2 the photocurrent of the (p/i) a-SiC photocathode drastically dropped to only 20% of its initial value. The decay of photocurrent is most likely associated with the detachment of the Ni–Mo catalyst due to its poor adhesion on the a-SiC surface that causes a decrease of catalytic activity. When the Ni–Mo was redeposited, the photocurrent could be restored to its initial value without any change in the Vonset (ESI,† Fig. S6).
 Fig. 8  The chronoamperometry measurement of the Ni–Mo coated (p/i) a-SiC and (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes for 12 hours of operation under simulated AM1.5 illumination. During the measurement, the potential was held at 0 V vs. RHE. All samples were measured in 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte solution at pH 4. 
The Ni–Mo coated (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 shows a high stability without noticeable degradation of photocurrent during a 12 hour measurement at an applied potential of 0 V vs. RHE, as shown in Fig. 8. The increase of the photocurrent within the first two hours may be ascribed to TiO2 surface etching under cathodic conditions. It is worth to mention that applying a potential bias at 0 V vs. RHE will pin the conduction band of TiO2 approximately 0.8 V more negative than the Vfb, which subsequently leads to a strong band bending of TiO2 near the interface. Several studies have shown that the application of a bias at potentials more reductive than the Vfb can lead to electron accumulation at the TiO2 surface that can promote the proton-assisted reduction process of Ti4+ to Ti3+, which is usually accompanied with an insignificant rate of hydrogen evolution.28,53 Thus the observed photocurrent may predominantly correspond to the reduction of titania film rather than water. However, it can be argued that a fast electron transfer from the semiconductor to electrolyte by the application of an efficient hydrogen evolution co-catalyst will prevent the detrimental effect of electron trapping at the TiO2 surface.54 The Ni–Mo catalyst exhibits a similar catalytic activity to Pt with no substantial difference in the photocurrent density and the Vonset, as previously evidenced by the j–V curves of the catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes in Fig. 4. Hence, the observed photocurrent within the 12 hour measurement can be assigned to hydrogen generation with faradaic efficiency of nearly 100%. Although the experiment was not continued further, the 12 hour stability measurement demonstrates the beneficial properties of TiO2, not only as an n-type front surface field layer, but also as an adhesive layer for co-catalysts and an interfacial protecting layer against corrosion in aqueous solutions under cathodic conditions. Many reports have shown that TiO2 and Ni–Mo catalysts are highly stable in acidic and alkaline media within the course of days and even months.28–39
While showing a notable photocurrent density of 8.3 mA cm−2 at the H+/H2 reduction potential, the Vonset of +0.8 V vs. RHE, however, still does not satisfy the thermodynamic potential requirement for water splitting. Nevertheless, considering the absorption edge of 700 nm and the total thickness of our (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2/Ni–Mo photocathode which is approximately only 150 nm, this opens up the possibility to use a second (or third) absorber material for the utilization of longer wavelength light in a tandem photocathode configuration or in a dual photoelectrode system (e.g., photocathode and photoanode) to provide additional Vph. To give an illustration, assuming there is no limitation on the photocurrent due to light shading and series connection of multi-junction system, the integration with a micromorph (a-Si/nc-Si) PV will give an extra ∼+1.2 V to the initial Vonset.24 Additionally, by using an efficient oxygen evolution catalyst as the counter electrode, a benchmark of 10% solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency PEC water-splitting device can be achieved using thin film Si-based photoelectrodes.
Conclusion
In summary we have investigated the change in the interfacial energetics of the semiconductor–liquid junction belonging to a (p/i) a-SiC photocathode by adding a thin (n) TiO2 layer to form a hetero p–i–n junction. The Vonset of the catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode anodically shifts from +0.3 V to +0.8 V vs. RHE. The (p/i) a-SiC/TiO2 shows a photocurrent density of 8.3 mA cm−2 with a Ni–Mo catalyst and 8.7 mA cm−2 with a Pt catalyst, which is markedly higher than the initial (p/i) a-SiC (0.15 mA cm−2) at the standard H+/H2 reduction potential. Using Mott–Schottky analysis, the conduction band edge position and the electronic properties of the (n) TiO2 can be estimated, which helps to verify the electron transfer mechanism through the conduction band. The spectral response reveals a dramatic increase throughout the spectrum upon the addition of the (n) TiO2 onto the (p/i) a-SiC, indicating a higher conversion of light to photocurrent within the same spectral range. We finally showed that the 25 nm thick ALD TiO2 coupled with a Ni–Mo catalyst was stable and able to maintain the durability of the a-SiC photocathode, as suggested by the 12 hours stability measurement under PEC operating conditions. This experimental study also suggests that TiO2 can be used as the n-type layer for heterojunction thin-film-Si-based photoelectrodes.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Joost Middelkoop from MECS group at TU Delft for the assistance with atomic layer depositions, Ming Ma from MECS group at TU Delft for the assistance with the Pt sputter deposition and Carel Heerkens from Charged Particle Optics group at TU Delft for the assistance with SEM images. This work is part of the research programme of the Foundation for Fundamental Research on Matter (FOM), which is part of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) and is financed in part by the BioSolar Cells open innovation consortium (W. A. Smith and I. A. Digdaya), supported by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation. Financial support from the VIDI project (granted to A. H. M. Smets and L. Han) by NWO-STW is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264–3278 CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjällström, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2056–2070 CAS .
D. V Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690–1694 CAS .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Sim, H.-Y. Jeong, T.-Y. Yang and K. T. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5414 CAS .
U. Sim, T.-Y. Yang, J. Moon, J. An, J. Hwang, J.-H. Seo, J. Lee, K. Y. Kim, J. Lee, S. Han, B. H. Hong and K. T. Nam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3658–3664 CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, H. A. Atwater, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9653–9661 CAS .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573–3583 CAS .

          R. van de Krol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer, US, Boston, MA,  2012, vol. 102 Search PubMed .
M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 660, 254–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brillet, J. H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Graetzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 CAS .
H. Döscher, J. F. Geisz, T. G. Deutsch and J. A. Turner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2951–2956 Search PubMed .

          J. Hu, F. Zhu, I. Matulionis, K. Augusto, T. Deutsch, E. Miller and A. Madan, 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition,  2008, pp. 69–72 Search PubMed .
F. Zhu, J. Hu, I. Matulionis, T. Deutsch, N. Gaillard, A. Kunrath, E. Miller and A. Madan, Philos. Mag., 2009, 89, 2723–2739 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Zhu, J. Hu, I. Matulionis, T. Deutsch, N. Gaillard, E. Miller and A. Madan, in Solar Power, ed. R. D. Rugescu, InTech,  2012 Search PubMed .

          I. Matulionis, F. Zhu, J. Hu, T. Deutsch, A. Kunrath, E. Miller, B. Marsen and A. Madan, in Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology II, Proc. of SPIE, ed. G. Westin,  2008, vol. 7044, p. 70440D Search PubMed .

          F. Zhu, J. Hu, A. Kunrath, I. Matulionis, B. Marsen, B. Cole, E. Miller and A. Madan, in Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology II, Proc. of SPIE, ed. J. Guo,  2007, vol. 6650, p. 66500S Search PubMed .

          I. Matulionis, J. Hu, F. Zhu, J. Gallon, N. Gaillard, T. Deutsch, E. Miller and A. Madan, in Solar Hydrogen and Nanotechnology II, Proc. of SPIE, ed. H. Idriss and H. Wang,  2010, vol. 7770, p. 77700Z Search PubMed .

          A. Madan and M. Shaw, The physics and applications of amorphous semiconductors,  1988 Search PubMed .
L. Han, I. A. Digdaya, T. W. F. Buijs, F. F. Abdi, Z. Huang, R. Liu, B. Dam, M. Zeman, W. A. Smith and A. H. M. Smets, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4155–4162 CAS .

          M. Zeman, in Thin Film Solar Cells Fabrication, Characterization and Applications, ed. J. Poortmans and V. Arkhipov, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester,  2006, pp. 173–236 Search PubMed .
E. L. Warren, S. W. Boettcher, M. G. Walter, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 594–598 CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Dühnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Hu, I. D. Sharp, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19618–19624 CAS .
M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, M. T. McDowell, S. Hu, H. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig and N. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3334–3337 CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2008, 3, 1–6 CrossRef .
W. Siripala, A. Ivanovskaya, T. F. Jaramillo, S. Baeck and E. W. McFarland, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Sun, Z. Lin, J. Cai, K. Xie and C. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1211–1220 CAS .
M. Malizia, B. Seger, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6847–6853 CAS .
S. Dhar, O. Seitz, M. D. Halls, S. Choi, Y. J. Chabal and L. C. Feldman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16808–16813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Ayers, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 6911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Chan and T. S. Jayadevaiah, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1973, 12, 314–320 CrossRef CAS .

          J. N. Chazalviel, Porous Silicon Science and Technology,  1995, vol. 1, pp. 17–32 Search PubMed.
S. Z. Weisz, J. Avalos, M. Gomez, A. Many, Y. Goldstein and E. Savir, Surf. Sci., 1995, 338, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, S. D. Tilley, T. Pedersen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, M. Grätzel and I. Chorkendorff, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 3, 25902–25907 CAS .
C. Du, M. Zhang, J.-W. Jang, Y. Liu, G.-Y. Liu and D. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17054–17059 CAS .
K. Gelderman, L. Lee and S. W. Donne, J. Chem. Educ., 2007, 84, 685 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. King, X. Du, A. S. Cavanagh and A. W. Weimer, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445401 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Enright and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1027–1035 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyauchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6258–6265 RSC .
P. A. Bayley and J. M. Marshall, Philos. Mag. B, 1996, 73, 429–444 CrossRef CAS .
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/.
H. Pelouchova, P. Janda, J. Weber and L. Kavan, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 566, 73–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee00769kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic structure of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode and (b) the cross-sectional SEM image.	 

 	Fig. 2  The change in OCV of (p/i) a-SiC photocathodes with (green) and without the (n) TiO2 layer (blue). The change in OCV in the dark and under illumination represents the Vph.	 

 	Fig. 3  The energy band diagram of the (p/i) a-SiC photocathode under open circuit condition: (a) in the dark, (b) under illumination, and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode: (c) in the dark, (d) under illumination. The band edges are assumed to be pinned at the solid/liquid interface and are estimated using the Mott–Schottky analysis.	 

 	Fig. 4  The j–V characteristics of the (p/i) a-SiC (black line) and the isolated (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes without catalyst (purple line) and with Ni–Mo catalyst (blue line) under simulated AM1.5 illumination using 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte solution at pH 4. For comparison, the Pt catalyzed (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 is also shown (red dash line).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 5  Mott–Schottky plot of TiO2 film deposited on FTO at 150 °C measured using the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at a frequency of 500 Hz. The intersection of the extrapolated linear line with the x-axis represents the Vfb. The measurement was performed using the same electrolyte as that for photoelectrochemical measurement (0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate at pH 4).	 

 	Fig. 6  Energy band diagram of the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathode (a) at an applied potential +1.3 V vs. RHE, corresponding to the OCV under illumination, and (b) under bias at +0.8 V vs. RHE, corresponding to the Vonset. The catalyst (Ni–Mo or Pt) is not shown in the figure since TiO2 is still in contact with the electrolyte, and therefore does not influence the band-edge energetics.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 7  The IPCE of the standard (p/i) a-SiC and the (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes with Ni–Mo catalysts measured at 0 V vs. RHE. The shaded areas under the curves shown in the inset are the converted photon fluxes and are derived from the multiplication of IPCE of each photocathode and the photon flux of the ASTM AM1.5G spectrum. The predicted solar photocurrents shown in the inset are calculated by integrating the product of IPCE and the spectral irradiance of the ASTM AM1.5G over the spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 8  The chronoamperometry measurement of the Ni–Mo coated (p/i) a-SiC and (p/i) a-SiC/(n) TiO2 photocathodes for 12 hours of operation under simulated AM1.5 illumination. During the measurement, the potential was held at 0 V vs. RHE. All samples were measured in 0.5 M potassium hydrogen phthalate electrolyte solution at pH 4.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee00769k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
