A sustainable light-chargeable two-electrode energy storage system based on aqueous sodium-ion photo-intercalation   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00628A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00628A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4789-4799A sustainable light-chargeable two-electrode energy storage system based on aqueous sodium-ion photo-intercalation†

        
          
            Zhuoran 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hsien-Chieh 
            Chiu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrea 
            Paolella
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Raynald 
            Gauvin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Karim 
            Zaghib
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            George P. 
            Demopoulos
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Engineering, McGill University, 3610 University Street, Montreal, QC H3A 0C5, Canada. E-mail: george.demopoulos@mcgill.ca
bCentre d'excellence-ETSE, Hydro-Québec, 1806 Boulevard Lionel Boulet, Varennes, QC J3X 1S1, Canada
Received 
      23rd April 2020
    , Accepted 19th July 2020First published on 20th July 2020AbstractDirect photo-to-chemical energy conversion realized through photocatalysis could provide the ultimate solution to the intermittency problem of solar energy. Among different designs of photocatalytic solar energy storage systems, the two-electrode system offers the simplest configuration for enabling highly integrated solar energy conversion and storage in one electrode and on-demand electrocatalytic discharge in the other. In this study, a novel type of visible light chargeable two-electrode Na-ion energy storage system has been developed, to the best of our knowledge, for the first time. It consists of a WO3–(TiO2)–CdS photo absorbing, energy storing bi-functional electrode, a Pt foil counter electrode, and a sacrificial hole scavenging electrolyte. This device delivered a discharge capacity of 12.3 μA h cm−2 (or 18.1 mA h g−1) after 10 min light charging without exhibiting signs of photo/chemical corrosion on the chalcogenide sensitizer. Further by controlling the working voltage window, structure distortion due to overcharging was avoided, thereby leading to an improvement of cyclability (discharge capacity retention after 5 working cycles) from 36% to 64%, and this was eventually elevated to ∼90% upon optimizing the discharging rate. A stable overall solar-to-electrical energy efficiency of ∼0.3% has been achieved for the system. Moreover, a modified photo-rechargeable two-electrode system was developed by replacing the sacrificial hole scavenger and Pt with polysulfide aqueous electrolyte and Cu2S electrocatalytic electrode, respectively. In this way the issue of non-regenerable hole scavenger consumption and instability of Pt in sulfide electrolyte was resolved, establishing a new design, highly promising towards the development of an all-sustainable photo-rechargeable system.
Introduction
Coupling photovoltaic modules with energy storage components is one of the current mainstream strategies to address the intermittency of solar energy.1 However, the state-of-the-art solar cells and batteries are fabricated as two isolated sub-units in a whole energy conversion/storage system, which hence complicates the circuit designs and raises the challenges in meeting the increasing demands of portable electronic applications.2 Moreover, from solar power harvesting to the final step of electricity storage, the system consisting of isolated sub-units usually involves the photo energy conversion into electricity (photovoltaic module), then the electricity into a chemical potential reservoir via electrochemical reactions (battery). The solar-electrical-chemical multiple energy conversion process has increased the number of channels for efficiency loss.3 As a more elegant alternative, highly integrated, solar energy storage systems with one step energy conversion route (direct solar-chemical energy conversion) attract increasing interest in recent years.4
Photocatalytic systems were proven to be effective in realizing direct solar energy storage and on-demand electricity supply.4a,5 Among their different types, the three-electrode configuration is the most common design which typically consists of a photoelectrode where the photocatalytic redox reaction occurs, an energy storage electrode which can be either a solid cation intercalating material or a liquid electrolyte containing redox couples, and a third electrocatalytic electrode to complete the current circulation during discharge.3,6 Study on the three-electrode photo-chargeable system started in 1976, when CdSe was used as photoelectrode and Ag2S/Ag as storage electrode in a polysulfide electrolyte demonstrating feasible but low storage efficiency.7 Later in 1987 the n-CdSe0.65Te0.35/Cs2Sx/SnS photo-rechargeable system with over 10% efficiency was developed featuring n-CdSe0.65Te0.35 as the photoelectrode.8 However the system suffered from instability that limited its further development.3 Till very recently, electrolyte systems containing different redox species such as sulfur-,9 iodine-,10 bromine-,5etc. have been applied to realize efficient solar energy storage, demonstrating good proof-of-concept performance e.g. high discharge capacity ranging from ∼40 to ∼792 mA h g−1,9 over 1% solar-to-output energy conversion efficiency, and satisfactory capacity retention (cyclability) up to 5 or 20 cycles.5 These performance metrics were improved further by building four electrode systems, where two photoelectrodes were employed to boost the intrinsically low light charging voltage, achieving thereby a higher efficiency (∼3%), this however associated with an increased level of complexity in photoelectrode fabrication.5,11
Although satisfactory performance has been achieved by the aforementioned photocatalytic solar energy storage systems, increasing the number of electrodes has in return complicated the system. Such complexity will inevitably introduce tremendous difficulties in device assembly/encapsulation when considering the feasibility of practical applications. By contrast, the two-electrode system is the most simplified design which holds the potential for the highest degree of integration, especially promising for portable and all solid-state device applications. More importantly, it is expected to ideally possess high efficiency since external wiring/isolated units coupling is completely avoided. Currently, an effective strategy of the two-electrode system design is to use a bi-functional electrode which can simultaneously absorb light and store energy electrochemically.10,12 Based on this design, intrinsic photocatalytic materials like WO3 (ref. 12c) and MoO3 (ref. 12b) have been proven to be capable of harvesting and storing solar energy simultaneously via alkali metal cation intercalation. The extremely slow light charging process due to their limited visible light absorption, however, has drastically compromised their device performance. Therefore, tailoring an extrinsic composite consisting of high-efficiency light absorbers or sensitizers, and intercalating compounds becomes a prominent solution. For example, in one of our earlier works, N719 dye-sensitized LiFePO4 was found having the capability to successfully store solar energy with however very low overall energy efficiency of 0.06–0.08%.13 Later, Lv et al. realized better conversion and storage from solar energy to electrochemical energy in a covalent organic framework cathode.14 Very recently, other battery cathode materials like Cu2S has been incorporated along N719 dye in a sensitized photoelectrode structure was proposed as means of realizing bifunctional energy conversion/storage and relatively decent capacity. However, the issue of instability and/or low photoelectric efficiency were identified for the abovementioned work, which has to be addressed further.15 Another successful attempt was made by using WO3–TiO2-dye photo(storage)electrode to farbricate photobattery/photoelectrochromic devices.12a,16 Recently we employed an inorganic sensitizer, CdS to replace dye in the same (TiO2)–WO3 architecture demonstrating the potential for solar energy storing – on-demand electricity releasing with discharge capacity of 13.3 μA h cm−2 for 1 μm thick energy storage film (WO3) after 5 h of light charging, as well as photoelectrochromic device functionality.12d However, the latter system proved to suffer from photocorrosion of the chalcogenide sensitizer in the iodide electrolyte, having resulted in a sharp decline of nearly 40% of its initial capacity after only one cycle and very low overall system efficiency (∼0.01%). Apart from Li ions, photoelectrochemical energy storage by intercalation of Na and Al ions have also been demonstrated as alternative sustainable solutions in this regard.12b,17 Herein, in the present study, aqueous electrolytes with either sacrificial hole scavengers or polysulfide species were sequentially investigated to solve the issue of photo(chemical) corrosion of CdS. Further by controlling the state of charge of NaxWO3 (i.e. fraction of sodium intercalation into WO3), a simple two-electrode, sunlight-driven photo-rechargeable system was realized with encouraging efficiency and good cyclability characteristics.
Results and discussion
Two-electrode photo charging system with sacrificial hole scavenger
The first light-chargeable cell investigated consisted of a WO3–(TiO2)–CdS working electrode (WE), a platinum foil counter electrode (CE), and 2 M Na2SO3 + 0.2 M Na2S aqueous electrolyte. The fabrication of WE followed the procedure reported in our previous work.12d Briefly, 1 μm thin WO3 porous layer was at first deposited by multiple cycles of WCl6 solution spin coating on FTO glass and then subjected to annealing at 500 °C in air. After that the film was treated in TiCl4 solution to induce a nanoscale TiO2 coating as means to facilitate charge transfer. More specifically by inserting this TiO2 between WO3 and CdS, the band alignment at the interface is improved as the conduction band minimum (CBM) in TiO2 lies between those of CdS and WO3. Hence the photoelectrons from CdS can be efficiently injected into WO3 through TiO2 while recombination in the reverse direction is reduced.12d The film was finally coated with CdS using the chemical bath deposition (CBD) method. Experimental details can be found in the ESI.†
A schematic of the photo-electrochemical energy storage cell is illustrated in Fig. 1a. When the light illuminates on the WE (open circuit condition), CdS generates and passes its photoelectrons to WO3 through the TiO2 interface. The maximum potential of this photoelectrode is limited by the conduction band minimum (CBM) of TiO2 given by eqn (3) that is derived from eqn (1) (potential conversion to NHE scale) and the Nernst equation (eqn (2)): ETiO2vs. AgCl/Ag (maximum photoelectrode potential) = ETiO2vs. NHE − E0AgCl/Ag(1) (2) (3)where  is the standard potential of TiO2 CBM vs. NHE given as ∼−0.3 V,18 pH of the system was measured to be ∼12, and E0AgCl/Ag is the standard potential of the AgCl/Ag reference electrode, 0.1976 V. Via this calculation, the maximum potential of the photoelectrode is estimated to be ∼−1.2 V. An error of ±0.2 V should be considered for this estimation due to the possible variation of TiO2 CBM position given in different reports.19
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a sunlight rechargeable system with WO3–(TiO2)–CdS as working electrode (WE), platinum foil as counter electrode (CE), and 2 M Na2SO3 and 0.2 M Na2S aqueous solution as electrolyte, solid lines represent the light charging process under open circuit condition while dash lines represent the dark discharge process; (b) voltage profiles of WE being light charged for 10 min and then discharged in dark at a constant current of 10 μA to −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; (c) cyclic voltammograms of WE with range of −0.3 V to −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 0.2 mV s−1; (d) voltage profiles of WE being light charged to −0.85 V and then discharged in dark at a constant current of 10 μA to −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; (e) cyclic voltammograms of WE with range of −0.6 V to −0.85 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 0.2 mV s−1; (f) areal discharge capacity and solar-to-output energy efficiency of the device; square-line symbols represent capacity and dot-lines represent energy efficiency. 
As the reduction potential of W6+/W5+ lies below the conduction band minimum (CBM) of CdS and TiO2, simultaneous intercalation of sodium ions from the electrolyte into the WO3 crystal structure is induced to maintain the system charge balance,12d as described by the following reaction:12cWO3 + xNa+ + xe−(CdS) → NaxWO3
Photo-generated holes from chalcogenide materials, which fail to be removed in time are generally considered the main reason for adverse photocorrosion attack (i.e. oxidation and dissolution of CdS).12d In addition as we have shown in our previous work the presence of iodide species in the electrolyte tend to attack/degrade CdS, making the CdS–LiI system unstable after certain operating time.12d Instead in the present study we apply a reducing agent, Na2SO3 together with Na2S as an efficient sacrificial hole scavenger system thereby avoiding the photocorrosion of CdS according to the reactions suggested in previous reports:20SO32− + H2O + 2h+(CdS) → SO42− + 2H+2S2− + 2h+(CdS) → S22−SO32− + S2− + 2h+(CdS) → S2O32−
EDS and XPS were also performed to confirm the effectiveness of hole scavengers and will be discussed in the following context. During discharge, electrons generated from the oxidation of NaxWO3 WE pass through the external circuit to CE, while Na+ ions are released back into the electrolyte.
Photoelectrochemical tests were performed to confirm the working of the new device. All tests were performed with fresh electrodes unless otherwise specified. Fig. 1b shows the voltage profiles of WE, which was light charged (AM 1.5) for 10 min at open circuit and then dark discharged with an applied constant current of 10 μA. For all tests, Ag/AgCl (in saturated KCl) was used as reference electrode to monitor the voltage change of WE. A discharge voltage cutoff of −0.6 V was applied here given that the main de-sodiation (oxidation) process was found to complete at around this voltage as per the cyclic voltammograms in Fig. 1c. When the system was being light charged for the first time (1st), the potential of WE showed a sudden rise to −0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) which then gradually increased to ∼−0.9 V after 10 min (refer to Fig. 1d). In this two stage charging process, the first fast potential rise corresponds to the lifted quasi-Fermi energy as result of photoelectron injection into the conduction band of WO3 before the onset of sodiation; the following slow rise corresponds to photo-induced sodiation which causes the Fermi level to be further elevated as result of the conversion of WO3 into NaxWO3.21 Therefore, in the first stage, EWO3vs. Ag/AgCl (CBM of WO3) determines the upper limit of the electrode potential under light (before sodiation), which can be conveniently calculated to be ∼−0.8 V using the same approach as in eqn (1)–(3) by taking .18 The sodium intercalation (or W6+/W5+ reduction) was found to occur at below −0.8 V (Fig. 1c), which means that this reaction can be favorably triggered by light; hence in the second stage the continuously increasing potential indicates an increased fraction of sodium intercalating into the WO3 electrode. Thereafter the discharge process was triggered by switching off the solar simulator and setting a constant discharge current of 10 μA. It is seen on Fig. 1d that the first cycle (1st) discharge voltage profile showed a quick drop initially which then started to plateau at ∼−0.7 V, agreeing with the oxidation part of the CV curve in Fig. 1c, where the main sodium de-intercalation (or W5+/W6+ oxidation) event happened. In addition, different sweeping rates were applied from −0.2 mV s−1 to 50 mV s−1 as seen in Fig. S1a.† It is known that the current at a particular potential, i(V), obeys a power-law relationship with sweep rate v:22i(V) = avbwhere a and b are adjustable parameters. For the reduction peak at ∼−0.8 V, b was calculated in Fig. S1b† to be 0.673 which is close to 0.5, characteristic of sodium ion diffusion dominated charge storage kinetics.22 Upon further charge–discharge cycling, however, the voltage profiles changed significantly (Fig. 1b). The WE voltage increased (vs. Ag/AgCl) to over −0.95 V after 2nd 10 min light charging and later to over −1 V after the 5th cycle which matches the estimated electrode maximum potential of ∼−1.2 ± 0.2 V; the discharging time increased from ∼50 min to 70 min for the 2nd cycle but then significantly reduced to ∼25 min for the 5th cycle. The slightly enhanced discharge capacity for the 2nd cycle (represented by the longer discharging time at constant rate in Fig. 1b) could be due to the increased fraction of sodiation (represented by its higher potential during photocharging) compared to the 1st cycle. However, the significant capacity/performance decline observed in the 5th cycle (represented by its much shorter discharging time in Fig. 1b) can be well explained by the CV characteristics in Fig. 1c, notably the gradual disappearance of the initial redox peak at ∼−0.75 V upon repeated scanning up to −1 V (overcharging). In fact, the missing of an oxidation (de-sodiation) peak that corresponds to the reduction (sodiation) at high potential (∼1 V) suggests that an irreversible sodiation process occurs by apparent overcharging, this being deemed to be the main reason for the observed capacity fade. Further characterization and discussion are provided in the next section. Therefore, to ensure the cyclability of the system, a fixed voltage window of −0.85 V to −0.6 V was applied instead. As seen in Fig. 1d, the discharge profiles from 1st to 5th cycles this time are almost identical (despite the different charging profile which is discussed later), indicating that avoiding over-charging is critical in maintaining cyclic stability. CV curves at the fixed voltage window are plotted in Fig. 1e, confirming the reversible (de-)sodiation reaction. Another noticeable phenomenon is the dramatically declined light charging time for the 2nd cycle compared to 1st cycle, as evident by the difference of 1st and 2nd CV curves in Fig. 1e. It is known that incorporating alkali metal ions into WO3 lattice can greatly improve its conductivity hence facilitate the diffusion process.23 Therefore, the first charge–discharge cycle can be considered as an activating step that facilitates the charge transfer process in the subsequent cycles by hosting Na ions and turning insulating WO3 into conductive NaxWO3 tungsten bronze.

Fig. 1f compares the areal discharge capacities and overall energy efficiencies of two different working modes of the device: fixed charging time (10 min) or fixed voltage window (−0.85 V to −0.6 V). The highest discharge capacity of 12.3 μA h cm−2 (or 18.1 mA h g−1) was achieved at the 2nd cycle by 10 min light charging thereafter declining to only 36% of the original value at the 5th cycle. This initial value was comparable to or higher than the other WO3 based systems (12.2 μA h cm−2 by Zhao et al.10 and 3.3 μA h cm−2 by Hauch et al.12a when normalized to 1 μm thick WO3). Also when compared to our previous work, the discharge capacity has been improved by over 40% for the devices being light charged for 10 min.12d
By contrast, the initial discharge capacity was rather low when the voltage window was fixed (7.0 μA h cm−2 or 10.3 mA h g−1), but exhibited less fading with 64% of the initial value preserved after 5 cycles. More importantly, for the case of energy efficiency (which was calculated by taking the overall light energy as input and discharge electrical energy as output), the fixed voltage window mode proved to be much more efficient in charging the system from the 2nd cycle and give nearly 0.3% overall energy efficiency as opposed to less than 0.05% when light charging time was fixed to 10 min. The sudden increase of efficiency during the initial 3 cycles of the system operating at fixed voltage window results from the quick drop of light charging time (or energy input) while the released energy remains relatively independent on the cycle number (Fig. S2†). This is explained by the aforementioned activating step (the fractional transition of insulating WO3 into conductive NaxWO3 tungsten bronze) that results in improved charge transfer dynamics, as evidently seen in Fig. 1d and e (particularly as moving from the 1st to 2nd cycle). The eventual stabilization of its efficiency after 3 cycles is possibly due to attainment of equilibrium in the electrode upon certain fraction of tungsten bronze formed. By contrast, the efficiency of the system operating at fixed charging time (10 min) remained consistently low, which is deemed to be due to ineffective de-sodiation (discharging) with most of the input energy from illumination being wasted.
Characterization of the photoelectrodes
To study the impact of sodium intercalation on the electrode materials, SEM cross-sectional images of pristine, fixed-charging time cycled, and fixed-voltage window cycled electrodes are shown in Fig. 2 (left, middle, and right column, respectively). It is clearly seen that the electrode tested with fixed light charging time (middle column) presents the highest degree of porosity, indicating that the deep sodium intercalation caused by overcharging has resulted in material loss, which is possibly due to the distortion of crystal structure of WO3 and the consequent mechanical instability of the electrode. In contrast, by fixing the voltage window it can be cycled without noticeable morphology change. In addition, XPS were performed to investigate the compositional information on the surface (Fig. S4†). In both cases, Cd and S were well preserved after testing, indicating the avoidance of photocorrosion using the present hole scavenger electrolyte that was a problem in our previous work based on iodide/triiodide electrolyte.12d In addition, O 1s peak showed a significant decline after the electrode was cycled with simultaneous rise of the S 2p sulfide peaks (∼262 eV) reflecting the dissolution of the sulfate species (i.e. CdSO4 that tends to superficially form on the surface due to oxidation during fabrication/storage) in the aqueous electrolyte and hence the exposion of pure CdS. Na 1s spectra are shown in the inset of Fig. 2d–f, where it is seen that significant amount of sodium was trapped in the electrode cycled with unfixed charging voltage (Fig. 2e) while much less sodium residual was found in Fig. 2f, indicating the improved reversibility of sodium intercalation when fixing the voltage window. Additional evidence can be found in the EDS Na maps in Fig. S5.† W EDS maps are shown in Fig. 2g–i; there the highly discontinuous green pattern seen in Fig. 2h reconfirms our earlier observation that repeated overcharging by light will cause irreversible damage to the energy storage material e.g. WO3 in the electrode. XRD spectra given in the ESI as Fig. S6† present further evidence of Na-ion intercalation. At the beginning, the crystal structure of pristine WO3 has monoclinic symmetry. Upon cycling under fixed light charging time of 10 min, a fraction of monoclinic WO3 transformed into tetragonal Na0.1WO3 and further into orthorhombic phase as a result of deep/irreversible Na-ion intercalation. On the contrary, mainly tetragonal Na0.1WO3 was detected along with the pristine monoclinic WO3 after cycling under controlled voltage window, indicating a rather reversible reaction as reported by Ng, et al.,12c and as consequence associated with better cyclability.
 Fig. 2  SEM cross-sectional images of (a) pristine WO3–(TiO2)–CdS layer on FTO glass, (b) 5 time light charge–dark discharge cycled electrode with fixed light charging time, and (c) 5 time light charge–dark discharge cycled electrode with fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V vs. Ag/AgCl); (d–f) the corresponding high magnification SEM images and their Na 1s XPS spectra of the three samples as insets; (g–i) EDS maps of W of the three electrodes. 
Rate-dependent light charge–dark discharge process
Therefore, it was confirmed that a controlled charging process is essential in preserving the microstructure and functionality of the photo-rechargeable electrode. To perform a more delicate control of the charging process, we further reduced the light illumination intensity from 1 Sun (100 mW cm−2) to 0.5 Sun (50 mW cm−2) for the subsequent tests. A comparison of the system being charged under different light power is presented in Fig. S7.† Charging rate is defined as the ratio of photo-charged energy Ephoto-charging (the converted/stored chemical energy in electrode to reach −0.85 V which is assumed to be a constant for each cycle) to the charging time (illumination time). On this basis, a normalized charging rate is calculated that proves to be nearly proportional to the light intensity (except for the first cycle where the activating step took place) as it can be seen in Fig. S7.† Although the discharged capacity and energy efficiency remained unchanged, the prolonged charging time and slowed-down charging rate improved the control of experiment as the light shutter was switched on/off manually.
In the next step, the impact of successively varied discharging current was evaluated on a single electrode during cycling. In Fig. 3a it is seen that the discharge capacity keeps decreasing with the increase of current from 10 μA to 100 μA. When the current was set back from 100 μA to 20 μA after 8 working cycles, the discharge capacity was recovered to the same value achieved for 3nd and 4rd cycles when 20 μA was previously applied, indicating the good reversibility and stability of the photo-rechargeable system. The sudden drop of capacity after the 10th cycle, however, indicates the possible damage caused by the long exposure of Pt to sulfide electrolyte (poisoning of Pt).24 The energy efficiency despite some fluctuations showed an increase from the 2nd cycle stabilizing at ∼0.3%, which agrees with the aforementioned results. It is also worth noting that the abrupt efficiency gain after the 9th cycle may have been caused by the sudden switch from the high rate of 100 μA at the 8th cycle to low rate of 20 μA at the 9th cycle. It is reasonable to conclude that the rate of 100 μA was too high for the system which leads to incomplete discharge at the 8th cycle. Therefore, due to the reduced light charging time of ∼39 s at the 9th cycle compared to ∼68 s at the 4th cycle and ∼59 s at the 10th (considered as normal 20 μA cycles, Fig. S8†), the calculated energy efficiency (∼0.4%) was higher than its actual value (∼0.3% for the other cycles). To further demonstrate the cyclability of this photo-rechargeable electrode, 10 cycles of light charging with 0.5 Sun, fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V), and constant current discharge were performed. Since it is known that long time exposing Pt to sulfide containing environment will affect its catalytic activity (i.e. the discharge behavior),24 high current of 50 μA was selected instead of 10 μA to reduce the experimental time and hence to suppress the adverse issue of Pt poisoning. In addition, this helped to validate the obtained performance in Fig. 3a where the influence of continuously varied rate was inconclusive. It is seen in Fig. 3b that the system attained reasonably stable discharge capacity, registering in the end 4.5 μA h cm−2 which corresponds to ∼90% of its initial value. Similar to Fig. 1f, its solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency increased gradually and reached over 0.3% after the 9th cycle. The average efficiency and capacity compares well with the values shown in Fig. 3a (at the rate of 50 μA), hence indicating reliable measurements. Similar data obtained with 10 μA and 20 μA charging rates are also given in Fig. S9† for comparison. It is seen that the capacity decay is more significant with smaller rate, which possibly indicates that the initially lower capacity yields better cyclability for the electrodes. More importantly, the reduced discharging time (39.6 min, 16.5 min, 6 min for 10 μA, 20 μA, 50 μA, respectively) is very likely to have reduced the corrosion/poisoning of Pt by sulfide electrolyte.24b The stability of Pt was probed by aging it in 2 M Na2SO3 + 0.2 M Na2S aqueous electrolyte and monitoring its potential (Fig. S10†). It showed significant variation during the first 5 h, which proved the suspected corrosion/poisoning issue.
 Fig. 3  (a) Discharge current (or rate) dependent areal capacity and energy efficiency with 0.5 Sun (50 mW cm−2) light charging and fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V); (b) discharge capacity and energy efficiency change during 10 light charge–dark discharge cycles with 0.5 Sun (50 mW cm−2) light charging, fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V), and 50 μA dark discharge current; (c) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum calculated from the short circuit current of the system and light absorption spectrum; (d) light wavelength dependent open circuit profile (Voc) of the system. 
Spectral response of the photo-charging system
Up to this point, we have shown to be feasible the idea of using light to charge an aqueous electrolyte based energy storage system by reversible sodium (de)intercalation. However, to which range of the solar spectrum the system responds is yet to be determined. To answer this question, the device was short-circuited to measure its maximum photocurrent that could be provided for photo charging under monochromic light illumination. Fig. S11† shows the applied light power intensity and the obtained photocurrent under different wavelength of illumination, from which the spectral external quantum efficiency (EQE) was calculated and shown in Fig. 3c along with the measured absorption. It shows that the range of 350–550 nm has contributed to its photo charging process with the peak EQE value of ∼30%, which makes it a visible light (sunlight) chargeable energy storage system. The bandgap estimated from the absorption edge of ∼550 nm is ∼2.25 eV which agrees with the optical property of CdS absorber layer (red curve).25 In addition, open circuit photovoltage (Vocvs. Ag/AgCl) profiles at different light charging wavelength were measured and shown in Fig. 3d. The monochromatic light of 420 nm was found to charge the most efficiently the photo-electrode, which resulted in the highest WE potential, agreeing with the trend in EQE results.
Modified two-electrode photo-charging system consisting of aqueous polysulfide electrolyte and Cu2S counter electrode
So far we have demonstrated the novel sunlight charging energy system to achieve charge balance via utilization of the generated photoelectrons in promoting Na-ion intercalation into WO3 and uptaking of the holes by the electrolyte. However, a design as such involving the continuous consumption of sacrificial hole scavengers (Na2SO3 + Na2S), in addition to the instability of Pt in sulfide electrolyte (Pt poisoning) have severely compromised its lifetime24 and thus limited the potential for practical application. Facing this problem, we opted to modify the electrolyte by employing only 0.2 M Na2S aqueous solution and replacing Pt with new Cu2S/brass counter electrode that is based on the non-sacrificial S2−/Sn2− redox couple (Fig. 4a) – a real two-electrode light rechargeable system. When replacing Pt with Cu2S, much higher current was achieved in CV characteristics, which indicates its higher catalytic activity in the polysulfide electrolyte (Fig. 4b). More importantly, Cu2S that has been widely used in chalcogenide quantum dot sensitized solar cells is known to have improved stability by avoiding the catalyst degradation issue.24b,26 The working principle of this photo-rechargeable photocatalytic cell is:
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of a regenerable light charging system with Cu2S as CE; (b) cyclic voltammograms of Pt and Cu2S-brass in 0.2 M Na2S aqueous electrolyte; (c) cyclic voltammograms of WO3–(TiO2)–CdS electrode in 0.2 M Na2S aqueous electrolyte at 0.2 mV s−1 sweep rate (d) voltage profile of the two-electrode system (WE vs. CE) being light charged to −0.175 V (vs. CE) under 0.5 Sun illumination and then discharged in dark at a constant current of 50 μA to 0 V vs. CE; (e) areal discharge capacity and energy efficiency of the new two-electrode system; (f) absorption spectra of electrolyte before and after 10 charge–discharge cycles. 
Light chargingWO3 + xNa+ + xe−(CdS) → NaxWO3nS2− + xh+(CdS) → Sn2−
Dark dischargeNaxWO3 → WO3 + xNa+ + xe−Sn2− → nS2− + xh+
The sodium (de)intercalation reaction in Na2S electrolyte system was probed again by cyclic voltammetry as shown in Fig. 4c, where clearly distinguishable redox peaks can be seen with good reversibility. A reduction peak and an oxidation peak were identified at ∼−0.75 V and ∼−0.65 V, respectively, agreeing with those in Fig. 1e, revealing the sodiation/desodiation process. To further confirm its functionality as a two-electrode system, the WO3–(TiO2)–CdS photo-electrode was charged to −0.175 V vs. the Cu2S CE (−0.85 V vs. Ag/AgCl) under 0.5 Sun illumination and then discharged in dark to 0 V vs. CE (−0.675 V vs. Ag/AgCl) at 50 μA current. Here we should clarify that in Fig. 4d the voltage reported is vs. CE (Cu2S), i.e. the true 2-electrode system voltage and not V vs. Ag/AgCl as in the case of the first system the CE (Pt) was unstable (Fig. S10†). The initial discharge capacity was ∼3.5 μA h cm−2 (∼5.1 mA h g−1) in Fig. 4e which is lower than the value obtained in Fig. 3a due to a narrower voltage window being used here (0.175 V against 0.25 V used previously). Nevertheless, the light-charge/dark discharge test proved successful as it achieved spontaneous discharge (from −0.175 to 0 V vs. CE) that is characteristic of a real two-electrode system.3 The overall energy efficiency was ∼0.25% after the 2nd cycle which is similar to that of the previous hole scavenger electrolyte system described above. However, a gradual capacity fade is seen with the increase of cycle number. To investigate the cause, light absorption spectra of the pristine and cycled electrolyte were collected and shown in Fig. 4f. The newly emerged absorption peaks centered at around 300 nm and 400 nm of the cycled electrolyte represent the existence of polysulfide species S22− and S42−, respectively.9 These spectra serve to prove that effective photo-oxidation of S2− to Sn2− occurs during charging as we proposed above, but apparently the incomplete recovery of oxidized polysulfide species during discharge is responsible for the observed capacity fading. As possible causes for this inefficient electrode kinetics for polysulfide reduction are: (1) relatively low catalytic activity of Cu2S/brass compared to other highly efficient systems (e.g. Pt-triiodide in dye-sensitized solar cells18) and/or (2) slow mass transport of the oxidized species Sn2− towards the CE, resulting in accumulation near the photoelectrode that gives rise to increased charge recombination. Therefore, system optimization should move toward catalyst screening for a better counter electrode, and toward better device design, e.g., adding mechanical agitation, to minimize/eliminate the diffusion-linked polarization, etc., which however is beyond the scope of present study and hence proposed as directions for future research.
Lastly, the photo-chemical stability of absorber layer in electrolyte was systematically investigated by depositing thin layers of CdS on TiO2 films (without WO3) and immersing them into 0.2 M Na2SO4 or 0.2 M Na2S solutions and soaking under illumination for 24 h. Here the purpose of using 0.2 M Na2SO4 instead of pure water was to create environment of similar Na+ concentration for fair comparison. Based on the XPS results in Fig. S12,† we see CdS to have suffered significant photocorrosion in Na2SO4 (without reducing environment) resulting in its complete decomposition while no signs of photocorrosion were observed (both Cd and S signals were well persevered) in Na2S. Further evidence can be seen in the transmittance spectra in Fig. S13† where the CdS–TiO2 film that was light soaked in Na2S electrolyte showed identical spectrum to the pristine sample while that light-soaked in Na2SO4 showed much increased transmittance in the range of 300–550 nm, indicating the loss of CdS.
Conclusion
In this work, a promising sustainable two-electrode aqueous system was developed to enable direct solar energy conversion and storage. WO3–(TiO2)–CdS photo-electrode was employed to accommodate sodium ion intercalation stimulated by visible light illumination. Within this system, the influence of either hole scavengers that were simply used for removing holes from light absorbers, or electroactive redox species that played the role in completing charge carrier circulation were evaluated. In the first cell configuration, Pt was used as counter electrode and 2 M Na2SO3 + 0.2 M Na2S as sacrificial hole scavenging electrolyte, the photo/chemical corrosion problem of CdS identified in our previous work12d was eliminated, and relatively high discharge capacity of 12.3 μA h cm−2 (or 18.1 mA h g−1) was achieved with this system by fixing the light charging time to 10 min and discharging with 10 μA constant current. However, with this system an irreversible structure distortion/phase transformation was found to occur due to the light overcharging. This issue was solved by controlling the operating voltage window, and the cyclability was greatly improved but this was achieved at the expense of reduced (about 43%) material utilization, yielding a discharge capacity of 7.0 μA h cm−2 (10.3 mA h g−1) within the voltage window of ∼0.25 V. The overall output-to-solar energy conversion-storage efficiency reached ∼0.3%. Cyclabilty was improved by using moderate illumination at 0.5 Sun for light charging and high discharging current of 50 μA achieving ∼90% capacity retention after 10 cycles. Facing the issue of continuous consumption of non-regenerable hole scavengers and instability of the Pt CE in sulfide electrolyte, a modified cell architecture was successfully advanced by using simply 0.2 M Na2S polysulfide aqueous electrolyte and replacing Pt with a more stable Cu2S/brass catalytic counter electrode. Such all-sustainable photo-rechargeable two-electrode system holds a lot of promise but further work is required to address the issue of gradual capacity fade due to polysulfide redox reaction polarization and finding a more efficient catalytic counter electrode.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Natural Sciences & Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through a strategic project grant sponsored by Hydro-Quebec. Additional support through the McGill Sustainability Systems Initiative (MSSI) is acknowledged. Nicolas Brodusch and Stéphanie Bessette are thanked for performing SEM and EDS characterization.
References

  (a) T. L. Gibson and N. A. Kelly, Solar photovoltaic charging of lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195(12), 3928–3932 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Xu, Y. Chen and L. Dai, Efficiently photo-charging lithium-ion battery by perovskite solar cell, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vega-Garita, L. Ramirez-Elizondo, N. Narayan and P. Bauer, Integrating a photovoltaic storage system in one device: a critical review, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2019, 27, 346–370 CrossRef .
B. Luo, D. Ye and L. Wang, Recent progress on integrated energy conversion and storage systems, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700104 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) M. Yu, W. D. McCulloch, Z. Huang, B. B. Trang, J. Lu, K. Amine and Y. Wu, Solar-powered electrochemical energy storage: an alternative to solar fuels, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2766–2782 RSC ; 
  (b) Q. Li, Y. Liu, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Solar energy storage in the rechargeable batteries, Nano Today, 2017, 16, 46–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Ding, L. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Efficient solar energy harvesting and storage through a robust photocatalyst driving reversible redox reactions, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802294 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sharon, P. Veluchamy, C. Natarajan and D. Kumar, Solar rechargeable battery—principle and materials, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 1107–1126 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, Photoelectrochemical energy conversion and storage using polycrystalline chalcogenide electrodes, Nature, 1976, 261, 403–404 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, G. Hodes, R. Tenne and J. Manassen, A light-variation insensitive high efficiency solar cell, Nature, 1987, 326, 863 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Wang, D. Tang and H. Zhou, Integrating a photocatalyst into a hybrid lithium–sulfur battery for direct storage of solar energy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9271–9274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, X.-F. Wang, E. Zheng, Y. Wei, Y. Sanehira and G. Chen, High capacity WO3 film as efficient charge collection electrode for solar rechargeable batteries, J. Power Sources, 2017, 350, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, W. Fan, Y. He, P. Ma, S. Vanka, S. Fan, Z. Mi and D. Wang, Photorechargeable high voltage redox battery enabled by Ta3N5 and GaN/Si dual-photoelectrode, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700312 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) A. Hauch, A. Georg, U. O. Krašovec and B. Orel, Photovoltaically self-charging battery, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1208–A1211 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. N. Lou, N. Sharma, D. Goonetilleke, W. H. Saputera, T. M. Leoni, P. Brockbank, S. Lim, D.-W. Wang, J. Scott, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, An operando mechanistic evaluation of a solar-rechargeable sodium-ion intercalation battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700545 CrossRef ; 
  (c) C. Ng, Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase and R. Amal, Visible light-induced charge storage, on-demand release and self-photorechargeability of WO3 film, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13421–13426 RSC ; 
  (d) Z. Wang, H.-C. Chiu, A. Paolella, K. Zaghib and G. Demopoulos, Lithium photo-intercalation of CdS-Sensitized WO3 anode for energy storage and photoelectrochromic applications, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2220–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paolella, C. Faure, G. Bertoni, S. Marras, A. Guerfi, A. Darwiche, P. Hovington, B. Commarieu, Z. Wang, M. Prato, M. Colombo, S. Monaco, W. Zhu, Z. Feng, A. Vijh, C. George, G. P. Demopoulos, M. Armand and K. Zaghib, Light-assisted delithiation of lithium iron phosphate nanocrystals towards photo-rechargeable lithium ion batteries, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, Y.-X. Tan, J. Xie, R. Yang, M. Yu, S. Sun, M.-D. Li, D. Yuan and Y. Wang, Direct solar-to-electrochemical energy storage in a functionalized covalent organic framework, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12716–12720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, X. Zhang, L. Duan, X. Zhang, X. Li and W. Lü, A photo-assisted rechargeable battery: synergy, compatibility, and stability of a TiO2/dye/Cu2S bifunctional composite electrode, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 530–537 RSC .
F. Bella, G. Leftheriotis, G. Griffini, G. Syrrokostas, S. Turri, M. Grätzel and C. Gerbaldi, A New design paradigm for smart windows: photocurable polymers for quasi-solid photoelectrochromic devices with excellent long-term stability under real outdoor operating conditions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1127–1137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Y. Bai, B. Luo, S. Wang, H. Hu, P. Chen, M. Lyu, J. Shapter, A. Rowan and L. Wang, A portable and efficient solar-rechargeable battery with ultrafast photo-charge/discharge rate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900872 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Band alignment of rutile and anatase TiO2, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. Gomathisankar, K. Hachisuka, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki, K. Funasaka and S. Kaneco, Photocatalytic hydrogen production from aqueous Na2S + Na2SO3 solution with B-doped ZnO, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 982–988 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Tsuji, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Visible-light-induced H2 evolution from an aqueous solution containing sulfide and sulfite over a ZnS–CuInS2–AgInS2 solid-solution photocatalyst, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 3631–3634 CrossRef .
L. Wang, J. Zhan, W. Fan, G. Cui, H. Sun, L. Zhuo, X. Zhao and B. Tang, Microcrystalline sodium tungsten bronze nanowire bundles as efficient visible light-responsive photocatalysts, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8833–8835 RSC .

  (a) J. B. Mitchell, W. C. Lo, A. Genc, J. LeBeau and V. Augustyn, Transition from battery to pseudocapacitor behavior via structural water in tungsten oxide, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3928–3937 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin?, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. D. Ellerbeck, H. R. Shanks, P. H. Sidles and G. C. Danielson, Electrical resistivity of cubic sodium tungsten bronze, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 35, 298–302 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Molenda and A. Kubik, Transport properties and reactivity of tungsten trioxide, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 117, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. A. Rodriguez and J. Hrbek, Interaction of sulfur with well-defined metal and oxide surfaces: unraveling the mysteries behind catalyst poisoning and sesulfurization, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 719–728 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Hwang and K. Yong, Counter electrodes for quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 634–653 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Yang, J. Gao, H. Tian, J. Zhao, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Highly efficient CdS quantum dot-sensitized solar cells based on a modified polysulfide electrolyte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8458–8460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao, Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, E. Cánovas, H. Wang, Y. Song, X. Gong, J. Wang, M. Bonn, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Boosting power conversion efficiencies of quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells beyond 8% by recombination control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5602–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00628aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
ETiO2vs. AgCl/Ag (maximum photoelectrode potential) = ETiO2vs. NHE − E0AgCl/Ag	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a sunlight rechargeable system with WO3–(TiO2)–CdS as working electrode (WE), platinum foil as counter electrode (CE), and 2 M Na2SO3 and 0.2 M Na2S aqueous solution as electrolyte, solid lines represent the light charging process under open circuit condition while dash lines represent the dark discharge process; (b) voltage profiles of WE being light charged for 10 min and then discharged in dark at a constant current of 10 μA to −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; (c) cyclic voltammograms of WE with range of −0.3 V to −1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 0.2 mV s−1; (d) voltage profiles of WE being light charged to −0.85 V and then discharged in dark at a constant current of 10 μA to −0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl; (e) cyclic voltammograms of WE with range of −0.6 V to −0.85 V vs. Ag/AgCl at 0.2 mV s−1; (f) areal discharge capacity and solar-to-output energy efficiency of the device; square-line symbols represent capacity and dot-lines represent energy efficiency.	 
WO3 + xNa+ + xe−(CdS) → NaxWO3
SO32− + H2O + 2h+(CdS) → SO42− + 2H+
2S2− + 2h+(CdS) → S22−
SO32− + S2− + 2h+(CdS) → S2O32−
i(V) = avb

 	Fig. 2  SEM cross-sectional images of (a) pristine WO3–(TiO2)–CdS layer on FTO glass, (b) 5 time light charge–dark discharge cycled electrode with fixed light charging time, and (c) 5 time light charge–dark discharge cycled electrode with fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V vs. Ag/AgCl); (d–f) the corresponding high magnification SEM images and their Na 1s XPS spectra of the three samples as insets; (g–i) EDS maps of W of the three electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Discharge current (or rate) dependent areal capacity and energy efficiency with 0.5 Sun (50 mW cm−2) light charging and fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V); (b) discharge capacity and energy efficiency change during 10 light charge–dark discharge cycles with 0.5 Sun (50 mW cm−2) light charging, fixed voltage window (−0.6 V to −0.85 V), and 50 μA dark discharge current; (c) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum calculated from the short circuit current of the system and light absorption spectrum; (d) light wavelength dependent open circuit profile (Voc) of the system.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of a regenerable light charging system with Cu2S as CE; (b) cyclic voltammograms of Pt and Cu2S-brass in 0.2 M Na2S aqueous electrolyte; (c) cyclic voltammograms of WO3–(TiO2)–CdS electrode in 0.2 M Na2S aqueous electrolyte at 0.2 mV s−1 sweep rate (d) voltage profile of the two-electrode system (WE vs. CE) being light charged to −0.175 V (vs. CE) under 0.5 Sun illumination and then discharged in dark at a constant current of 50 μA to 0 V vs. CE; (e) areal discharge capacity and energy efficiency of the new two-electrode system; (f) absorption spectra of electrolyte before and after 10 charge–discharge cycles.	 
WO3 + xNa+ + xe−(CdS) → NaxWO3
nS2− + xh+(CdS) → Sn2−
NaxWO3 → WO3 + xNa+ + xe−
Sn2− → nS2− + xh+
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00628a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
