General discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD90054D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD90054D
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 103-114General discussionFirst published on 12th December 2011

Dr Dutton opened the first discussion for this meeting with reference to the paper by Devens Gust: Considering your current synthetic photochemical designs, which display charge separation lifetimes in the nanosecond time range, how will you achieve the millisecond time-domain required for chemical catalysis?

Professor Gust responded: We have reported many different artificial reaction center designs over the years. In some cases, the lifetimes of the charge-separated states are close to 1 millisecond. Other researchers have also reported such lifetimes. On the other hand, shorter lifetimes are consistent with photocatalysis of multi-electron reactions, even in normal sunlight, if antenna systems or concentrators are used.

Professor Graetzel commented: One of your porphyrin antenna molecules featured a boron containing group which would be expected to act as an electron acceptor. As this may direct the electron flow in the wrong direction, I wonder what is the rationale for this molecular design?

Professor Gust answered: It is true that the BODIPY antenna group can quench the porphyrin first-excited singlet state, but this molecule was designed so that electron transfer to the fullerene is much faster, hence there is no interference from the boron-containing group.

Professor Fukuzumi said: Each unit of artificial photosynthesis (light-harvesting, charge-separation, water oxidation and reduction) has now been well developed. The most difficult challenge to realize artificial photosynthesis as an overall system to convert solar energy to chemical fuels is how to combine light-harvesting, charge-separation and catalytic units for water oxidation and reduction without backward flow of electrons. What will be the best strategy to accomplish this difficult task?

Professor Gust responded: I agree that, although there are still many questions to be answered concerning the best catalysts for water oxidation and fuel production etc., the field is at the point where it is important to start considering the problem of system integration. For example, powering a water oxidation catalyst from an artificial reaction center or solar photovoltaic cell that is also linked to a fuel production catalyst is a very different problem from driving a catalyst or photocatalyst using a sacrificial electron acceptor. Although using sacrificial agents may be a good way to carry out initial catalyst development, using the same catalyst in a solar conversion device both introduces new problems and eliminates some of those inherent in sacrificial agents. The two types of experiment differ greatly in both thermodyanmics and kinetics. Also, systems engineering will be very important in the evolution of any practical device.

Dr Hull asked: The so-called “back electron transfer” problem may be reduced by applying an overpotential to accelerate the kinetics of the forward reaction. One therefore might argue that an overpotential, even though it is energetically inefficient, has utility. Do you think that one might be able to develop general guidelines for benefiting from an overpotential, or should it always be minimized?

Professor Gust replied: In general, I think it is safe to say that when evaluating or comparing catalysts, the lower the overpotential the better, other things being equal. On the other hand, for any practical application, the main considerations will be the overall efficiency for conversion of solar energy to energy stored in a fuel, the cost and stability of the system, and similar factors. Thus, a useful practical system might well require an overpotential, which could be supplied by a solar cell.

Professor Harriman commented: Natural enzymes seem to possess an internal electron-transfer pathway that connects the redox site with a bound substrate. Do you think there is a benefit in trying to attach hydrogenase to your molecular arrays via a specific part of the surface or is this too sophisticated at the moment?

Professor Gust responded: Certainly. There needs to be an effective mechanism for delivering electrons to the hydrogenase active site, and making use of the internal pathways within the enzyme is a very logical way to achieve this. For example, in one of the systems I described in which hydrogenase is linked to a gold electrode via an alkanethiol monolayer, some of the thiols are terminated with carboxylic acid groups. Under the conditions of the experiment, these are ionized. The idea is that the enzyme attaches to the electrode surface via the interaction between these carboxylate groups and a positive patch on the enzyme surface. This patch provides ready access to the chain of iron–sulfur clusters which presumably transport electrons to the active site from the enzyme's natural redox partner. Thus, there is a natural “wire” leading electrons from the gold/monolayer surface to the enzyme active site.

Professor Faunce opened the discussion of the paper by Graham Fleming: How far up the hierarchy of structures involved in a robust artificial photosynthesis system do we need to take account of quantum coherence mechanisms? If quantum coherence mechanisms are fully developed in a practical artificial photosynthetic system, what increase in energy transfer efficiency is likely to be achieved? Do you think quantum coherence has anything to do with the cubane structure at the center of the natural water oxidation process?

Professor Fleming answered: Electronic coherence appears to be significant in light harvesting, but not in electron transfer. The intrinsic timescale of the process is important here: if the process is much slower than the timescale for decoherence then coherence cannot make a difference, in my view.

Professor Ghiggino asked: You have described the importance of quantum coherence processes in contributing to natural light-harvesting processes. Is there a ‘recipe’ you could suggest for a molecular structure or a molecular environment that could be usefully followed to optimise quantum coherence processes in artificial light-harvesting systems?

Professor Fleming responded: The condition for long-lived electronic coherence in natural photosynthesis is that the electronic coupling, the electronic energy gap between donor and acceptor, the reorganization energy, and the inverse of the environmental relaxation time all have similar magnitude. While obviously not impossible to achieve, I think that these requirements will be very difficult to meet in synthetic systems.

Professor Fukuzumi enquired: Does electron transfer play a role in the quenching mechanism in addition to energy transfer?

Professor Fleming responded: There are currently two (non-exclusive) molecular mechanisms proposed for the quenching mechanism involved in the portion of light harvesting regulation called qE (the major component). One mechanism proposed by Kris Niyogi, Roberto Bassi, and myself involved carotenoid-to-chlorophyll electron transfer. The second mechanism proposed by Peter Horton, Sasha Ruban, and Rienk van Grondelle involves chlorophyll-to-carotenoid energy transfer.

Professor Campagna then asked: Your paper focuses on the problem of self-protection of photochemical activity. As natural systems, artificial antennae should decrease their efficiency when too much light is present, to avoid damage. In your system, this is made by a change in pH. This seems to imply the presence of switchable units, and a possible coupling with the field of (photoactive) molecular logic gates. What do you think about this?

Professor Fleming replied: I think the suggestion you make of connections with molecular logic is spot on. I think this is a field that could develop substantially by drawing lessons from natural systems.

Dr Benniston asked: In artificial systems do you think it will be necessary to build-in self protection? We seem to have heard two views. What is your opinion?

Professor Fleming answered: If artificial systems made of organic molecules are coupled to a reaction center whose rate can be exceeded at high solar intensities, and molecular oxygen is present, then I believe regulation and perhaps even repair will be necessary.

Professor Rumbles enquired: In the light-harvesting complex, is coherent energy transport essential to make the system function, an inadvertent addition due to the high chromophore order, or a subtle embellishment that allowed the system to evolve as dominant?

Professor Fleming responded: The latter, in my opinion.

Professor Cogdell added: Even a small selective advantage can be important if the selection pressure is strong. It does not take very many generations for even a small selective advantage to be fixed, so an improvement of a few percent can quickly be important.

Dr Moser asked: You have suggested that coherence phenomena are likely to emerge whenever multiple chromophores are packed closely enough together and that this leads to advanced properties of the chromophore collection. If such chromophores are packed together with no special care in their orientation, are advanced properties likely to be an advantage or disadvantage?

Professor Fleming replied: If no special care is taken over orientation, then electronic couplings will vary over a substantial range making it difficult to achieve the enhanced functionality that long-lived electronic coherence enables in natural systems.

Professor Graetzel stated: Although antenna systems play a key role in the light harvesting by natural photosynthetic systems, they could complicate the realization of artificial solar conversion systems. For example, in the dye sensitized solar cell a sensitizer that collects 50–100 photons from an array of antenna molecules would have to tolerate 50–100 times higher turnover frequencies and turnover numbers than if the sensitizer alone acts as a light absorber. By using mesoscopic films to support the sensitizer the absorption of sunlight by a molecular layer is rendered very efficient, even in the absence of a light-harvesting complex.

Professor Mallouk followed up Professor Graetzel's comment: In a good dye cell, one typically has about 200 nanomoles of dye generating about 20 mA of current. The quantum yield is close to one, so that means that each dye molecule is processing about one photon per second. The dye molecules could turn over much faster, because they inject electrons very rapidly from the excited state and accept an electron from iodide very rapidly. The problem with using concentrated light in a dye cell is the other components of the system (the electrolyte, the cathode catalyst, the transparent conductor). Losses from those components increase at higher current density.

Professor Graetzel responded: I agree with Professor Mallouk's comment, his point is well taken. Indeed we also find that the turnover frequency of a dye molecule in full sunshine is about 1 s−1 while the cycle of redox reactions it goes through following light excitation comprising electron injection and regeneration is about 1000 times faster. Thus the sensitizer could readily “digest” concentrated solar light. However, the other components of the dye cell may not be able to maintain high performance under concentrated light conditions. For example, the photocurrent could be restricted by mass transfer limitations of the movement of the redox mediator across the mesoscopic oxide film to the counter electrode.
At this juncture, Professor Graetzel proceeded to widened the discussion by including the paper by David N. Beratan: You reported high electron hopping rates in your pili. Can you please tell us more about the molecular redox couples that are involved in the hopping reaction and carry the electric current?

Professor Beratan replied: Unfortunately, the identity of the charge carrying units in the pili is unknown. Some think that the redox units are hemes, while others believe that they may be aromatic amino acids. Our analysis indicates separation distances between the hopping sites that would be consistent with the measured currents (assuming that they are electric and not ionic currents), but reveals little information about the possible structure of these sites.

Ms Bai then asked: Would the mechanism of electron transfer observed between the molecular array differ when the conditions of the arrangement and the environment change? If so, how can the intramolecular and intermolecular array transfer be complementary? Is any electronic energy transfer observed? Some examples from the literature use electron spin polarization on thin films to study the surface: could the technique apply to this type of microbial nanoscale system?

Professor Beratan replied: Protein structure and folding are well understood to influence electron transfer kinetics very strongly [see Beratan et al., Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1669–1678]. In addition, issues surrounding intramolecular vs. intramolecular effects on electron transfer kinetics are the subject of intensive current interest. For example, we find that an intriguing role may be played by structured water at protein–protein interfaces [J. Lin, I. A. Balabin, and D. N. Beratan, Science, 2005, 310, 1311–1313]. Charge transfer in the pili is a ground-state process and, as such, does not involve electronic energy harvesting or transfer. Regarding spectroscopic probes of structure and function in the pili, it seems likely that a wide battery of techniques can be applies to the pili when they are collected and isolated in greater quantity.

Dr Szalai addressed Professor Beratan and Mr Polizzi: How certain are you of the current/conductance measurements carried out on the bacterial nanowires? Has anyone else performed the measurement? What is the error/uncertainty on the measurement?

Professor Beratan responded: The current–voltage measurements of El-Naggar et al. [Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2010, 107, 18127–18131] were performed on several different pili, yielding reproducible results from both nanofabricated electrodes and conductive probe atomic force microscopy experiments. We note that the cpAFM two-probe experiments account for contact resistance through the length dependence of the pilus’ current–voltage characteristics (see Fig. 3 in my article). Furthermore, contact resistance could only make the pili seem less conductive; since the observed currents through the pili are sizeable, one may be inclined to assume contact resistance plays a minimal role, even without the experimental corroboration from the distance dependence of the resistance. To our knowledge, the measurements of El-Naggar et al. are the first and only published studies that characterize charge flow along the length of single pili. Previous cpAFM and STM work [see Reguera et al., Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1011; Gorby et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2006, 103, 11358–11363; and El-Naggar et al., Biophys. J., 2008, 95, L10–L12] had established that pili of certain Shewanella and Geobacter bacteria were indeed conductive, but measurements along the length of individual pili were not reported. Recently, Lovley et al. [Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 573–579] reported two and four probe in vivo conductivity measurements of networks of the conductive pili of Geobacter sulfurreducens. They found the conductivities of these networks to be much less than those reported by El-Naggar et al. for single pili conductivities of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. However, these numbers are not directly comparable, as one experiment characterizes many, wet pili of one bacterium, and the other single, dry, fixed pili of another bacterium.

Professor Gust posed a question: Do you know of any proven examples in biology where electron transfer does not occur either by diffusion of redox species or by a hopping mechanism?

Professor Beratan replied: There are two kinds of biological electron transfer that are worth examining in response to your question. The first is ultrafast electron transfer, on the picosecond time scale, which can occur from an ensemble of states that is not thermally equilibrated. As such, the process will not follow the predictions of standard thermally activated hopping formalisms (due to Marcus and others) that assume a thermally equilibrated initial state ensemble. This may be significant in the primary charge separation reactions that occur in photosynthesis and in some flavoproteins. The other case of interest involves strong delocalization of photoexcited states over multiple chromophores. This certainly arises in the bacteriochlorophyll “special pair” of the photosynthetic reaction center, where delocalization among two stacked bacteriochlorophylls is found. The so-called bridging bacterial chlorophyll in this same primary charge separation reaction may form a coherent state with the photoexcited primary donor state. Finally, the issue of carrier delocalization in ground and excited states of DNA remains a significant one of ongoing debate; most would accept that holes are delocalized over (at least) several neighboring base pairs.

Professor Mallouk posed a question: Can you please elaborate a bit more on how you eliminated other possible conduction models, such as band conduction or bipolaron transport?

Professor Beratan responded: Recently, D. R. Lovley et al. [Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 573–579] suggested that transport through pili could involve novel stacked aromatic assemblies, so this question is of great relevance. Very long-range weakly distance dependent transport through alanine oligomers (up to 64-mers, 0.1 nm in length) is also well documented [S. Kimura et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1800–1804], although the charge-transport rates are very slow. In the pili, we do not yet know what chemical units support charge flow, and these units, whatever they may be, may have some extent of delocalization among them, and the stronger the coupling interactions, the more the mechanism could be pushed toward band-like mechanisms. However, we do not believe that these charge localizing units are likely to establish fully delocalized coherent charge flow on the length scale of the pili because structural and dynamical disorder seems likely to overwhelm the delocalizing interactions among charge-localizing units, thus disabling coherent transport. Indeed, we used arguments familiar in the conducting polymer literature (e.g., eqn (3.2)–(3.5) in our paper) to rule out band conduction. Other conductivity mechanisms are accessible as well, including polaronic transport, which we refer to as hopping transport in our paper. The conductivity associated with polaronic transport (arising in the limit where dynamic disorder is large compared to the coupling interaction among charge localizing sites) produces multi-step activated hopping, with steps governed by nonadiabatic electron transfer theory as described by eqn (2.3) [see M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals and Polymers, 2nd edn, Oxford Scientific Publishers, 1999). More detailed experimental studies, especially measurements of temperature-dependent mobilities, can help to distinguish between coherent and incoherent mechanisms. Bipolaron mechanisms, while possible as well, seem unlikely to play a role in transport through pili, in the absence of extended conjugation pathways. In addition, contributions of bipolaronic mechanisms seem unlikely to cause order-of-magnitude changes in the currents.

Professor Harriman said: Have you compared the conductivity of these remarkable nanowires with that of DNA and, if not, why not?

Professor Beratan responded: Please keep in mind that the pili discussed here are not single molecules, but rather are complex protein assemblies that may also include redox cofactors. As such, direct comparisons with single molecule experiments are difficult to make. In the case of DNA charge transfer, dry and moist single molecule studies as well as solution phase ensemble studies have quite a diversity of kinetics, suggesting a great sensitivity of mechanism to the specifics of the experiment (donor/acceptor structure, energetics, access to dynamical fluctuations, solvation, etc.) [see R. G. Endres, D. L. Cox, and R. R. P. Singh, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2004, 76, 195–214]. As such, it is seems difficult to begin to draw close analogies with nucleic acid electron transport at this early stage.

Professor Styring stated: I have my doubts that we really need an antenna of the large type we see in plants in artificial systems. There is abundant light and in fact most plants discard most of the energy they see. In water, where natural photosynthesis evolved the situation is different.
Thus I conclude that it is more interesting to work with different colors than with extensive antennas.

Professor Ghiggino answered: One key advantage of an antenna is to increase the absorption cross-section of the redox active site. This site may be synthetically complex, weakly light absorbing or contain rare or expensive materials. By using inexpensive but well-designed molecular antenna arrangements to absorb light and deliver the excitation, one can minimise the amount of active site required.

Professor Campagna added: I agree with Professor Ghiggino's comment. Indeed, Nature itself appears to have applied a sort of “chemical economy” in making antenna and reaction centers. Reaction centers are more synthetically complex than antennae, which in their essence are composed of multiple almost-identical units. The presence of antenna subunits, also in artificial systems, could be convenient in terms of synthetic effort.

Professor Gust noted: In some approaches to artificial photosynthesis, antennas will certainly be important. Oxidation of water to oxygen and hydrogen ions requires 4 electrons. Even in bright sunlight, a porphyrin or similar chromophore only absorbs a few photons a second, and each photon generally produces only one “hole” for water oxidation. Under these conditions, a molecular catalyst will be forced to remain in a highly oxidized state for several seconds in order to function. This is difficult to achieve, and potentially can lead to recombination or deleterious reactions. An antenna system can drive the catalyst at a much faster rate, so that it can turn over in a reasonable time.

Professor Hammarström contributed to this point: I think we need to think about what we mean by an antenna. In, e.g., photosystem II, there is a large number of light-absorbing pigments that funnel energy to a single charge separation center (focusing), which in turn is coupled to a single catalyst for water oxidation. On the other hand, the reducing equivalents are spread out in the thylakoid membrane (defocusing) where equivalents from several centers are used collectively to make NADPH and eventually produce a fuel (carbohydrates). In an artificial system one could conceive of a large number of charge separation centers with single chromophores, that then focus their outputs on catalysts (i.e. a “charge separation antenna” instead of a light-harvesting one). Catalysts coupled to dye-sensitized semiconductors would work according to that principle. But still, the comment from Professor Gust is quite valid, the important point then being the number of light absorbers per catalyst.

Professor Harriman noted: My own view is that some kind of artificial light-harvesting unit is absolutely essential for a working prototype of a molecular artificial photosynthetic device. I say this for two main reasons: Firstly, the chances of finding a strong chromophore absorbing over a suitable wavelength range that is also an ideal redox agent is extremely remote. By focusing on the chromophore, we exclude lots of potential redox agents. These become available once equipped with a separate photon collector. You have only to look at the photolyase enzyme that repairs UV-damaged DNA to see the power of this approach. Secondly, there is an obvious problem of charge accumulation and this might be solved by feeding a sufficient density of photons to the redox centre. You can't do this with a single chromophore. I understand that other approaches, notably photoelectrochemistry, might be different but I can't see how the availability of a universal light harvester could be a bad thing.

Professor Graetzel added: I agree with Professor Styring that an antenna may not be required in artificial photosynthesis. Light harvesting and charge separation by a single chromophore is made very efficient by placing it on a mesoscopic support acting as an electron acceptor and conductor. If an antenna of say 500 light harvesting molecules is employed, the charge generating photosystem is subjected to an intense photon flux which may exceed the rate capacity of the conversion system as a whole.

Professor Inoue replied: I fully agree with Professor Gust’s earlier comment. I have termed the subject as the “photon-flux-density-problem” in a paper [H. Inoue et al., The water oxidation bottleneck in artificial photosynthesis: How can we get through it? An alternative route involving a two-electron process, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 173–179]. I encourage you to read the article.

Dr Dutton asked: What in the natural situation is the redox potential difference between one end of the pili and the other. Are these known?

Professor Beratan replied: The symmetry of El-Naggar's current–voltage measurements on fixed, dried pili suggest that there is little electrochemical asymmetry in the pili. Fundamentally, the source of electrons to the pili is NADPH and menaquinone, although the charge may flow through multiple redox cofactors at various potentials before reaching the pili. Shewanella have been shown to reduce iron citrate and hematite. The overall driving force for electron transfer from the entry point of the pili to the terminal acceptor(s) is difficult to estimate.

Professor Faunce opened the discussion of the paper by Shunichi Fukuzumi: Please extrapolate on the linkage of photocatalytic water oxidation to production of hydrogen peroxide and how that compares to liquid hydrogen and use of hydrogen fuel cells as a marketable downstream output of a robust artificial photosynthesis system.

Professor Fukuzumi responded: We have now a number of excellent photosynthetic reaction center models, which are capable of fast charge separation but slow charge recombination. The oxidizing and reducing ability of the charge-separated state is strong enough to oxidize and reduce water to produce oxygen and hydrogen. We also have efficient hydrogen evolution catalysts without using precious metals. Efficient water oxidation catalysts are now also available. Nevertheless, the combination of the photosynthetic reaction center model molecules with water oxidation and reduction catalysts has yet to be achieved. In contrast, the combination of charge-separation molecules with a water oxidation catalyst and an oxygen reduction catalyst to produce hydrogen peroxide seems to be much easier than the water splitting to produce hydrogen and oxygen. We have been developing hydrogen peroxide fuel cells without membranes (single compartment); see our recent paper [Y. Yamada, S. Yoshida, T. Honda and S. Fukuzumi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2822–2825]. Thus, the photocatalytic water oxidation by oxygen to produce hydrogen peroxide and its use as a fuel in hydrogen peroxide fuel cells constitutes a promising sustainable energy cycle.

Professor Burrows commented: In your discussion of the photoreduction of the QuPh+–NA by 1-benzyl-1,4-nicotinamide dimer, (BNA)2, you will produce both BNA+ and the BNA pyridinyl radical. It is well known that such pyridinyl radicals rapidly undergo dimerization in solution to reform the dimer.1 How do you avoid this under your reaction conditions?
1. E. M. Kosower, A. Teuerstein, H. D. Burrows and A. J. Swallow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 5185–5190.

Professor Fukuzumi responded: Electron transfer from BNA˙ to QuPh+–NA to produce BNA+ and QuPh˙–NA is diffusion limited, being much faster than the dimerization of BNA˙. In fact we can cleanly produce two equivalents of QuPh˙–NA with (BNA)2. Another example of (BNA)2 acting as a clean two-electron oxidant is reported in the following paper: S. Fukuzumi, T. Suenobu, M. Patz, T. Hirasaka, S. Itoh, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 8060–8068.

Dr Fielden asked: (a) Looking at the different dyes you present I notice there are some significant differences in reduction potentials, and also some structures that will have significantly twisted π-systems. Could you make any comment on the relationships between structure and properties in these molecules? (b) In my experience quaternized organic molecules are not always stable in basic conditions. How stable are your dyes in the pH 10 conditions you use?

Professor Fukuzumi responded: (a) It is very important to have twisted π-systems in order to attain long lifetimes of the electron-transfer states. In the case of the 9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium ion (Acr+–Mes) and 2-phenyl-4-(1-naphthyl)quinolinium ion (QuPh+–NA), the donor and acceptor moieties are completely orthogonal. In such a case, the HOMO and LIMO are localized on the donor and acceptor moieties, respectively. (b) As you pointed out, acridinium and quinolinium ions are not stable under strongly basic conditions because OH− readily attacks the 9- and 4-positions of acridinium and quinolinium cations, respectively. However, both Acr+–Mes and QuPh+–NA are quite stable under slightly basic conditions because of the bulky donor groups, which block attack of OH−.

Professor Durrant asked: A key challenge for your approach to solar driven hydrogen generation is that you need to use one-photon absorption, yielding single electron–hole pairs, to drive multi-electron chemistry. I understand the metal nanoparticle helps you to do this by accumulating electrons. Could you discuss how you are addressing this issue for the 2-electron oxidation of NADH? Related to this, given that you are driving multi-electron chemistry, you might expect a non-linear dependence of yield of hydrogen generation upon light intensity. Could you comment on the light intensity used in your measurements, and how the hydrogen generation rate changed with light intensity?

Professor Fukuzumi responded: The photoexcitation of 2-phenyl-4-(1-naphthyl)quinolinium cation (QuPh+–NA) results in formation of the electron-transfer state (QuPh˙–NA˙+). Electron transfer from NADH to the NA˙+ moiety affords NADH˙+ and QuPh˙–NA. Because NADH˙+ deprotonates to produce NAD˙, which is a strong reductant, electron transfer from NAD˙ to QuPh+–NA occurs to yield NAD+ and QuPh˙–NA. Thus, one photon can produce two equivalents of QuPh˙–NA, which can reduce two protons to produce hydrogen with metal nanoparticles. In such a case, the hydrogen generation rate is proportional to the light intensity and thereby the quantum yield is constant, as it is independent of the light intensity.

Professor Rumbles opened the discussion of the paper by Kenneth Ghiggino: What is the intrinsic charge-generating mechanism in the conjugated polymer chain? Is it an intra-chain effect, or does it result from chain–chain interactions of folded chains?

Professor Ghiggino answered: The paper discusses single molecule measurements of the conjugated polymer alt-co-MEH-PPV dispersed in a poly(methyl methacylate)(PMMA) matrix. The long timescale fluorescence blinking behaviour is attributed to charge ejection from the photo-excited alt-co-MEH-PPV into the surrounding PMMA matrix to form non-fluorescent polymer cations and matrix trapped electrons. Charge recombination, involving electron diffusion through the matrix, traps states occurring over a broad time range, subsequently reforms the fluorescent polymer. The charge-generation mechanism can thus be photoionization to the PMMA matrix as discussed by others [e.g. F. Cichos et al., Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 12, 272] and does not necessarily involve intra-chain effects or folded chain-chain interactions. However, I agree that the exact mechanism for charge separation remains unclear – multi-photon ionization (via conjugated polymer triplet states) is a possibility and should be identifiable from laser intensity dependence studies. These experiments remain to be carried out.

Professor Smith asked: We have found the absorption and fluorescence spectra of some aromatic vinylene compounds exhibit a non-mirror image relationship in some solvents [G. J. Smith, et al., Opt. Mater., 2010, 32, 1237–1243] similar to the spectra you presented in Fig. 2 for alt-co-MEH-PPV oligimers in chloroform. We found the spectral distribution of the absorption band of the aromatic vinylene compounds studied depends on solvent polarity. The observed change of the absorption band from mirror-image symmetry to a non-mirror-image relationship with respect to the fluorescence band was attributed to vibronic coupling between the two lowest energy excited singlet states when, depending on the polarity/polarizability of the molecular environment, the states are nearly degenerate. This phenomenon has been referred to as a ‘proximity effect’ consequent of pseudo-Jahn–Teller interactions via out-of-plane vibrations when the two excited states are sufficiently close in energy [E. C. Lim, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 6770–6777]. The geometric distortions of the excited state are attended by changes in the Franck–Condon factors of the vibronic transitions from the ground to excited states and hence an altered spectral distribution of the absorption band.
Can you dissolve the oligomers you studied in a substantially more polar solvent than chloroform to test whether a similar ‘proximity effect’ occurs in such a solvent? Also, in order for a molecule to experience pseudo-Jahn–Teller interactions that alter the vibronic structure of the absorption band, the medium must be sufficiently fluid to permit the requisite mixing vibrational/twisting modes. Therefore, in a rigid, low temperature matrix, the absorption and fluorescence spectra of the alt-co-MEH-PPV oligimers would be expected to exhibit the usual mirror-image symmetry. Have you studied alt-co-MEH-PPV oligomers in a rigid matrix?

Professor Ghiggino replied: There are solubility issues which limit changing the solvent polarity for the alt-co-MEH-PPV polymer. Changing the solvent can also alter the polymer conformation, and thus interchromophore interactions, so care is always needed to interpret any spectral changes observed. We have studied a sulphonated derivative of alt-co-MEH-PPV in water [D. Gomez et al., Aust. J. Chem., 2009, 62, 1577] and for this polymer in polar water a similar non-mirror image relationship between absorption and fluorescence spectra is observed. We have recently reported the absorption and fluorescence behaviour of short oligomers of MEH-PPV as a function of temperature [A. J. Tilley et al., J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 3372]. The mirror image relationship between absorption and fluorescence spectra is restored in low temperature glasses. It is demonstrated in that paper, using X-ray structure analysis and calculation, that the most likely explanation for the non-mirror image relationship at room temperature is that absorption of light occurs by a range of rotamer and “twistomer” configurations of the MEH-PPV oligomers leading to the broad stuctureless absorption spectrum observed, whereas fluorescence arises from a restricted set of more planar configurations in the excited state.

Dr Lages Vilela commented: Currently, in the field of organic electronics the main focal point when developing new conjugated building-blocks has been controlling their electronic states. In detail, most of the work focuses on controlling/predicting the HOMO and LUMO positions of the different materials and the relationship between the different components that make up devices such as bulk heterojunction solar cells and organic field effect transistors, etc. My question is more related to the morphological aspects of these materials. I would like to know what recent efforts have been made to control surface area, pore size and volume, pore connectivity and percolation within the mentioned materials, and in particular in conjugated polymers.

Professor Ghiggino replied: The paper describes energy transfer and other excited state processes in the conjugated polymer, alt-co-MEH-PPV, and does not directly address material morphology issues, that are indeed important for efficient operation of bulk heterojunction photovoltaic devices. I am aware that there have been a number of attempts to control blend-morphology by using block copolymers to modify nanoscale organisation in organic photovoltaic materials [e.g. K. Sivula et al., Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 206; Y. Tao et al., Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4219). However, in my view, much remains to be done in this area to fully understand and optimise material morphology for organic electronics.
Here Professor Perutz returned to the paper by Shunichi Fukuzumi: The commonest target for solar fuels is the splitting of water to form hydrogen and oxygen. You mentioned hydrogen peroxide as an alternative to hydrogen. However, I would like to ask you what you consider to be good alternatives to oxygen considering that we have no need of oxygen.

Professor Fukuzumi answered: The splitting of water is an ideal system to obtain clean energy. However, it is difficult to store the produced hydrogen unless hydrogen is immediately used for a hydrogen fuel cell. In contrast to the case of hydrogen, hydrogen peroxide is storable in water and it can be used for a hydrogen peroxide fuel cell whenever needed. Therefore the photocatalytic water oxidation to produce hydrogen peroxide, which can be used as a fuel for a hydrogen peroxide fuel cell, provides a promising way to provide renewable energy. The theoretical voltage of a hydrogen peroxide fuel cell is similar to that of a hydrogen fuel cell, although a more efficient electrode has yet to be developed for practical applications.

Professor Styring remarked: This question follows the discussion of what is a suitable target for a solar fuels triggered by Professor Pertutz’s question above. A different twist is that the choice of hydrogen was not made by our field, which can produce renewable hydrogen, but by the energy system that consumes natural gas. In my eyes, the main driver behind much of what is done in science and politics for the hydrogen economy is that natural gas will come in for oil – and in large quantities. This is problematic and one way to handle this is to take out the carbon early and use the energy in the form of hydrogen. For this approach to handle the CO2 release to be successful, there is need for a whole lot of technology and political/society changes that must be dealt with (successes or not), long before we can possibly deliver solar hydrogen in any quantities of relevance. I think the debate inside our field of pros and cons with hydrogen is rather redundant – this is much better handled by scientists and engineers far outside our field with competence in this. We should just keep an eye on their progress and learn to handle erratic statements about, for example, hydrogen transfer and storage.

Professor Fukuzumi said: Hydrogen has been regarded as the most promising clean chemical fuel, which can be combined with hydrogen fuel cells. Hydrogen peroxide should also be considered as a good candidate as a clean chemical fuel, which can be used in hydrogen peroxide fuel cells. Because hydrogen peroxide fuel cells do not require a membrane, the cost performance may be more promising than hydrogen fuel cells.

Professor Cogdell adressed Kenneth Ghiggino: The main difference between artificial and natural systems is the protein matrix – this restricts conformational flexibility. Is there a way to achieve the same control in bulk solvents so that there is not so much microheterogeneity?

Professor Ghiggino answered: It is certainly correct that the protein matrix plays a crucial role in natural photosynthetic systems to maintain the spatial separation and orientation of the pigments involved and likely mediate electronic interactions. It will be very challenging in artificial systems to achieve this level of control on the microenvironment of chromophores. However advances in controlled polymer synthesis (e.g. dendrimer synthesis, living free radical polymerization) and judicious choice of solvents and substrates can impose an element of control on the chromophore environment and thus on electron and energy transfer processes with other components. Another future possibility to reduce microheterogeneity could be to use bioengineering to incorporate the appropriate chromophores required for artificial photosynthesis in conformationally specific biomolecules.

Professor Burrows continued: You suggest that triplet–singlet annihilation may be involved in fluorescence quenching and blinking. However, the quantum yield for triplet state formation in these polymers is small.1 As your conjugated polymers have rather low molecular weights (ca. 12000 Da), have you any idea of the probability that you will have both excited singlet and triplet states on the same chain, and of the feasibility of this mechanism in your systems?
1. H. D. Burrows, J. Seixas de Melo, C. Serpa, L. G. Arnaut, A. P. Monkman, I. Hamblett and S. Navaratnam, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 9601.

Professor Ghiggino replied: It is correct that the triplet yield in phenylene vinylene type polymers is reported to be low (1% or less). Under the experimental conditions of our single-molecule experiments there is a photon absorbed by the polymer molecule every few microseconds and, even for a low triplet yield, this will still lead to many triplet state population events during a typical single molecule fluorescence intensity–time trajectory. The lifetime of the polymer triplet state from our experiments is approximately 100–200 microseconds. Thus there can be up to 100 excitation events occurring in a single polymer chain during the triplet lifetime. The observation that the polymer molecule fluorescence remains “switched-off” implies an efficient fluorescence quenching process is occurring while the triplet state of the polymer is populated. Triplet–singlet annihilation would seem to be the most likely process that could explain our observations.

Dr Benniston concluded this part of the discussion by addressing Shunichi Fukuzumi: When you incorporate an electron donor into a system which is hard to oxidise the electrochemistry becomes irreversible. This is the case in your system. Does this not add in an extra problem? In particular, if you have a high energy species that is relatively long-lived it will surely have plenty of time to decompose.

Professor Fukuzumi replied: As you pointed out, the photoirradiation of our photocatalysts with oxygen in the absence of an external electron donor leads to oxidation of the donor moiety at prolonged irradiation time. In the presence of an electron donor (e.g., NADH), however, electron transfer from NADH to QuPh˙–NA˙+ is diffusion limited and thereby much faster than the decomposition. In fact QuPh+–NA can act as a robust photocatalyst for the catalytic hydrogen evolution with NADH [see our recent paper: Y. Yamada, T. Miyahigashi, H. Kotani, K. Ohkubo and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16136–16145]. The same is true for other photocatalysts such as the 9-mesityl-10-methylacridinium cation.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
