Hybrid solar cells: basic principles and the role of ligands  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM14829J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM14829J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2351-2368Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHybrid solar cells: basic principles and the role of ligands

        
          
            Adam J. 
            Moulé
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Lilian 
            Chang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chandru 
            Thambidurai
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ruxandra 
            Vidu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Pieter 
            Stroeve
          
          
        
      
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
Received 
      27th September 2011
    , Accepted 10th November 2011First published on 9th December 2011AbstractFor the last decade, researchers have attempted to construct photovoltaic (PV) devices using a mixture of inorganic nanoparticles and conjugated polymers. The goal is to construct layers that use the best properties of each material e.g., flexibility from the polymer and high charge mobility from the nanoparticles or blue absorbance from the polymer complementing red absorbance from the nanoparticles. This critical review discusses the main obstacles to efficient hybrid organic/inorganic PV device design in terms of contributions to the external and internal quantum efficiencies. We discuss in particular the role that ligands on the nanoparticles play for mutual solubility and electronic processes at the nanoscale. After a decade of work to control the separation distance between unlike domains and the connectivity between like domains at the nanoscale, hybrid PV device layers are gaining in efficiency, but the goal of using the best properties of two mixed materials is still elusive.Adam J. MouléAdam Moulé is an assistant professor in Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the University of California, Davis and the technical director of the California Solar Energy Center (CSEC). He studied physical chemistry at UC Berkeley and was an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow at the University of Cologne under Klaus Meerholz. His research group studies solution-processed photovoltaic materials and devices with emphasis on electrical, optical, and morphology studies at interfaces. Through CSEC Moulé interacts with utilities, lawmakers, and solar contractors to increase the penetration of PV in California and to facilitate development of new solar products and technologies.Lilian ChangIn 2004, Lilian Chang graduated from the Science University of Malaysia with a BS in Chemical Engineering. She completed her MS in Chemical Engineering at San José State University, CA in 2008. For her MS dissertation, she worked at IBM Almaden Research Center, carrying out research on self-assembly of functionalized star-polymers for multiple applications including self-assembled biomimetic energy cascade arrays. She is currently completing her doctoral research studies under the guidance of Prof. Adam Moulé at the University of California, Davis. Her research includes the realization of solution-processable and efficient multi-junction polymer devices, and plasmonic enhancement in the photoactive layers.Chandru ThambiduraiChandru Thambidurai received his BTech degree in Chemical and Electrochemical Engineering from Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI), India in 2004. He then received his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Georgia in 2009 under the guidance of Prof. John L. Stickney. During his PhD, he focused on Electrochemical Atomic Layer Deposition for various metal and semiconductor thin films. He then carried out his post-doctoral research at the University of California, Davis under the supervision of Prof. Pieter Stroeve. He is currently a process development engineer at Copper Interconnect Group, Applied Materials. His research interest includes electrochemistry, electroplating and solar cells.Ruxandra ViduDr Ruxandra Vidu is the Associate Director of the California Solar Energy Collaborative at UC Davis. She is a published research scientist and university lecturer with 20 years of experience in Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, with extensive expertise in thin-films and nanostructure fabrication and characterization for solar materials. Dr Vidu's research emphasizes the use of nanoscience and nanotechnology in the development of new materials and processes. Her areas of interest include electrochemistry, surface modification and characterization, electrochemical alloying and doping, ultra-thin film systems and template synthesis of nano-structured materials for thermoelectric, battery technology, fuel cells and solar energy related applications.Pieter StroevePieter Stroeve is a Distinguished Professor of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the University of California, Davis. He was born in The Netherlands and immigrated to the USA with his family when he was 14 years old. Professor Stroeve conducts fundamental research in colloid and surface science, self-assembled monolayers, Langmuir–Blodgett films, supramolecular structures on surfaces, supported lipid bilayers, mass transport in colloids and tissues, nanotechnology, bionanotechnology, electrochemistry, solar energy and nanoporous membrane separations.
Introduction
There is a serious concern that the global temperature will increase by 1 to 6 °C and the CO2 concentration will exceed the range from 570 to 970 parts per million during the 21st century.1 These numbers create tremendous awareness towards the increasing need for renewable energy resources. Approximately 80% of the world energy supply still comes from fossil fuels.2 Unfortunately, photovoltaic (PV) energy only contributes 0.04% of the total energy production,3 although the earth receives enough energy in an hour to fulfil the yearly demand. The main reason for low penetration of PV into the energy market is the high cost of providing power from PV. We review here hybrid organic/inorganic PV devices that, due to ease of fabrication, have the chance to greatly reduce the cost of PV energy.
The current PV industry is dominated by silicon-based photovoltaics. There are other types of PVs such as single and multi-junction thin films that have also captured a significant part of the PV market because of their high power conversion efficiency (PCE). Hybrid solar cells have a low PCE of about 3%,4 but they are a potentially strong candidate in the PV market because of high optical absorption, low production cost, easy fabrication and major pay back.5 This device type is called hybrid because the active layer consists of a blend of electron donor polymer and electron acceptor inorganic nanostructures (CdSe,4,6–15CdTe,13,16 CdS,17,18CuInS2,19PbSe,20–22 PbS,23,24TiO2,25–29ZnO30–39). These inorganic semiconductor nanostructures have different structures: nanorods, nanoparticles (NPs), branched structures (e.g., hyperbranched and tetrapods), etc. They have been widely studied in the literature for better optical absorption and improved pathways for electron transport in the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) architecture.40,41 The BHJ concept employs a mixed electron donor and electron acceptor active layer with charge-separating heterojunctions dispersed throughout the layer. The ideal BHJ morphology contains domains that are smaller than the typical exciton dissociation length.
In this review paper, we focus in detail on hybrid BHJ solar cells, especially on its basic principles, the synthesis of inorganic NP, and the effect of ligands. Several reviews on a broader subject of organic solar cells have been already published elsewhere.42–47
Mechanism of operation of hybrid solar cells
The mechanism of operation for inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells is quite complex. The mechanism can be broken up into a number of steps, as shown in Fig. 1, for which the efficiency (η) is represented by a number ranging from 0 to 1. Successful operation of an organic PV (OPV) device requires that most or all of the steps have η close to 1. The overall efficiency to convert incident photons to current, known as the external quantum efficiency (EQE), can be written as EQE(λ, V) = ηA(λ) × ηdiff × ηdiss(V) × ηtr(V) × ηcc(V)(1)where λ is the wavelength of the incident light and V is the voltage across the cell. ηA(λ) is the photon absorption yield or fraction of incident photons absorbed in the active layer as a function of λ as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Factors such as absorption spectra of the hybrid organic/inorganic layer, the active layer thickness, and device architecture determine the photon absorption yield.48,49 In general, increased absorbance or increased thickness of the active layer also increases ηA(λ).
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the consecutive steps, from (a) to (e), for photocurrent generation in inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells, beginning from the absorption of a photon. Excitons can be generated in either the donor (polymer) or acceptor (NP) phase. (LUMO = lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, HOMO = highest occupied molecular orbital, CB = conduction band, VB = valence band). 

η
diff (Fig. 1(b)) is the exciton diffusion yield, which is the ratio of excitons that diffuse to a heterojunction without recombination to the total number of generated excitons. This efficiency can be increased by either increasing the exciton diffusion length or reducing the average donor/acceptor distance within the active layer.50

η
diss(V), as shown in Fig. 1(c), is the exciton dissociation yield, which is the ratio of the number excitons that dissociate to free charges at a donor/acceptor interface to the total number of excitons at donor/acceptor interfaces. Dissociation is dependent on an internal electric field generated by differences between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the donor and the electron affinity of the acceptor. If dissociated charges remain weakly bound at the interface they are referred to as charge transfer (CT) states.51–53 If mobile dissociated charges are generated, they are referred to as charge separated (CS) states.54ηdiss measures both the direct formation of CS and CT states that separate to CS states. The energy required to dissociate the electron–hole pair in the interface for organic solar cell is higher than its binding energy, 400 meV, when compared to a few meV in inorganic semiconductors. This is because of enhanced coulombic attraction between holes and electrons due to the low electric permittivity and localized electron and hole wave functions in organic semiconductors. The dissociation efficiency can be increased by increasing the potential difference between the donor LUMO and acceptor electron affinity. This can occur due to a high total electric field across the device or by designing morphological features that increase the distance between the electron and hole. Field enhancement increases the efficiency of the CT → CS process, but since excitons are uncharged particles, the exciton separation probability is not field dependent. In many studies ηdiss and ηdiff are treated as one term since measurement of the formation of polaron states using transient absorption is typically used to determine dissociation efficiency.55

η
tr(V), shown in Fig. 1(d), is the charge transport yield, which is the ratio of the number of free charge carriers transported to the collecting electrode to the number of excitons dissociated at the heterojunction. Structural defects and impurities in the active layer can cause the charge carriers to become trapped and to recombine, which reduces the transport efficiency. ηtr can be increased by increasing the domain size and crystallinity of both the donor and acceptor components.56ηtr is also increased by reducing energetic barriers between like domains in the active layer. Finally, ηtr is increased by applying a reverse bias on the device.

η
cc(V) is the charge collection yield, as illustrated in Fig. 1(e), which is the ratio of the number of charge carriers collected externally to the number of the charge carriers transported to the electrode. With Ohmic electrodes, ηcc(V) is typically 1.
The power conversion efficiency (PCE) is defined as the ratio of the electrical power output to the absorbed sunlight energy (2)where Voc is the open circuit voltage, FF is the filling factor, Jsc is the short circuit current density, and Pin is the incident optical power on the device assuming an AM1.5G solar spectrum. Because the Jsc is maximized by increasing the EQE across the absorbance spectrum of the active layer, eqn (1) and (2) are explicitly related. The PCE takes into account not only the quantum efficiency at zero bias, but also the energetic efficiency of converting a spectrum of photon energies to photocurrent at all potentials. In this article we will discuss how morphology and fabrication of hybrid organic/inorganic devices affect the various efficiency terms in eqn (1) and ultimately the PCE. For the scope of this article we will focus primarily on the role that ligands on the surface of the inorganic phase play on device efficiency in a BHJ configuration.
State-of-the-art in hybrid organic/inorganic PV devices
Intensified research on hybrid organic/inorganic PV devices began with the publication of a Science article by Huynh et al. that demonstrated a PCE of over 2% using a mixture of CdSe nanoparticles (NPs) and P3HT as the active layer in a BHJ architecture.57 Since then, a number of articles and review articles have been published that attempted to increase the PCE by designing improved morphology for the active layer.11,14,58,59Fig. 2 shows an energy level diagram that summarizes the operation of a CdSe-NP/P3HT PV device. Excitation occurs at either the NP or polymer phase. The resulting excitons then diffuse to an NP/polymer interface for dissociation into free charges. Indium tin oxide (ITO) is the most widely used transparent conducting oxide (TCO) in low-temperature deposition processes because it has relatively high optical transmission for a given specific sheet resistance. In this configuration, ITO serves as the hole-collecting electrode while electrons are extracted at the aluminium (Al) back electrode. PEDOT:PSS is a transparent, conductive polymer which functions as a hole transport layer (HTL). A flow diagram of the processes involved in the fabrication of a typical hybrid BHJ device is shown in Fig. 3. The versatility offered by a solution-processable route makes it an attractive technology for producing low-cost printable PV devices. The major advantages and disadvantages of this device type are:
 Fig. 2  Energy diagram and schematic of a CdSe/P3HT device. Reprinted with permission from reference 11. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Science. 
 Fig. 3  Flow diagram of the processes in the fabrication of a typical hybrid BHJ solar cell. 
(a) Advantage—both electron donor (P3HT) and acceptor (CdSe) components contribute to light absorption, which increases ηA.
(b) Advantage—the identity of the inorganic component can be altered to increase Voc.
(c) Advantage—the shape of the NPs can be altered to increase the surface area, which can increase ηdiff, ηdiss, and ηtr.
(d) Advantage—fabrication is simple with both components spin-coated from a common solution and morphology is self-assembled.
(e) Disadvantage—the phase separation in self-assembled morphologies is usually too large.
(f) Disadvantage—the solubility of NPs is limited, even with larger ligands.
(g) Disadvantage—the ligands that provide solubility for the NPs are usually insulating, which reduces ηdiss by increasing the D/A distance, reduces ηtr by creating insulating barriers between electron conducting domains, and reduces ηcc by creating insulating barriers between the NPs and the electron collecting electrode. The presence of this last barrier is often observed as an S-kink in the IV characteristics.60
A second well-studied device type involves the creation of a porous or high surface area contiguous inorganic phase that is filled with an organic hole conductor. This device architecture has been discussed elsewhere.61–65
Although the general operation of hybrid PV is simple, their mechanism of converting light into energy is complicated. There are many factors that affect device performance which may explain why the maximum efficiency attained is only 3%. Therefore, a better understanding of the charge separation mechanism in hybrid PV devices becomes very important. The focus of discussion in this review is mainly on EQE since it offers a more universal comparison across devices made in various laboratories. It makes little sense to compare Jsc between devices with differing band gaps and with differing lamp spectra. As described in the Introduction, EQE can be broken into at least five consecutive steps and the product of all defines the external quantum efficiency.59,66
Light-absorbing nanostructures
One of the most popular methods for the preparation of inorganic crystals is chemical synthesis. The formation of various nanocrystals such as CdSe,4,12,57,67PbSe,68 PbS,69 CuS,70CuInSe219 using solution phase synthesis has been reported for use in BHJ solar cells. The main advantage of solution phase over gas phase71 and solid state synthesis is the ability to isolate the materials, which facilitates incorporation of materials into the BHJ layer in post-synthetic steps. Semiconductor nanocrystals can be prepared by thermal decomposition of hot organometallic precursors in a hot mixture of trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), tributyl- or trioctylphosphine (TOP) or hexylphosphonic acid (HPA) and small amounts of various phosphonic acids as strong ligands.72–74 The growth kinetics and shape of the nanocrystals are mainly determined by the Gibbs–Thompson law, i.e., the solubility of crystals increases as the size of the crystals decreases. It was demonstrated that the monomer concentration controls the formation of CdSe nanocrystals with various shapes: rod, arrow, teardrop, and tetrapod (Fig. 4). That is, at higher monomer concentration, smaller particles grow faster than larger particles which can lead to anisotropic shapes.72,75 On the other hand, at lower concentration, smaller particles dissolve to support the growth of larger ones which leads to a spherical shape. The other crucial factor that influences shape control is the ratio of surfactants to injection volume.
 Fig. 4  
          CdSe
          nanocrystals with 7 × 7 nm (a), 7 × 30 nm (b), 7 × 60 nm dimensions (c) and its respective EQE (d). Reprinted with permission from reference 57. Copyright 2002 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). 
Effect of shape on polymer/nanocrystal photovoltaics
Shape control of the NPs in hybrid BHJ devices has proven to be critical in improving efficiency.75 It was found that EQE was much lower in films with spherical particles than with elongated particles.6 The presumed reasons for the higher EQE with elongated particles are:
(a) Increased electron mobility with larger domain sizes for elongated particles (increased ηtr)
(b) Reduced geminate recombination of electrons and holes (increased ηdiss)
(c) Reduced number of junctions between particles (increased ηtr).
In several studies of NP polymer mixtures, it was found that the number density of NP acceptors needed to effectively quench the exciton emission from polymers is much lower than the percolation threshold for electron transport though the NPs.26,76 In fact once mixtures of NPs and polymers were prepared into optimized devices, the NP volume ratio is always quite high.19,31,32,34,77–79 Finally, it was found that increased particle length leads to a higher EQE in PV devices made up of a mixture of CdSe NPs and P3HT.40 The combination of these results showed that the device PCE was limited most by a poor connection between NPs across the device since they demonstrate efficient charge separation (increased ηdiff and ηdiss) but poor charge transport (decreased ηtr).80
One method to improve charge transport and to cause elongated NPs to align in a vertical configuration is to synthesize branched particles8 and tetrapods.13,67Tetrapod-shaped nanostructures with core and arms of different materials are synthesized with the seeded growth method.81,82 The tetrapod shape gives direct pathways for electrons to be transported across the active layer to a carrier-selective electrode. The tetrapods align with three arms touching the cathode material and the fourth arm pointed upwards through the active layer thickness. The core seed is the nucleation of cubic spheralites72,74 and with the injection of precursors and hot mixture of surfactants, it extends along the hexagonal phase, where the wurtzite starts to dominate four out of eight (111) facets, forming the tetrapod structure (Fig. 5). These structures are developed with different core and arm materials which is an improvement over single materials83 because it permits us to finely tune the material properties. The alkyl chain phosphonic acids selectively stabilize the non-polar lateral facets of CdSe and CdTe wurzite structures. The materials used for core and arm are listed in Fig. 5(a).
 Fig. 5  Sketch represents the formation of tetrapod shaped nanocrystals from the seeded growth approach. (a) Reprinted with permission from reference 81. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from Macmillan Pulishers Ltd., reference 83, copyright 2003. 

          PV devices prepared from a mixture of polymer and branched inorganic NPs showed a clear increase in the EQE when compared to devices prepared with inorganic rods.13 The three dimensional shape is much more effective at transporting charges across the BHJ layer. Gur et al. showed that although hyperbranched CdSe improves the percolation network (increased ηtr), the donor polymer is unable to penetrate the branches (decreased ηdiss),8 which emphasizes the need for optimization of the blend morphology, and not just the morphology of either the acceptor or the donor. In some cases with the tetrapods, it was necessary to prepare a hole-transport only layer between the anode and the BHJ layer as the tetrapods are large enough to short-circuit the device between the two electrodes without the hole only layer to force rectification.67 Ultimately, the solubility of tetrapods in conjugated polymers is quite low, leading to phase separation on a length scale larger than the exciton diffusion length. For this reason, the EQE of solution cast mixtures of NPs and polymers generally remains less than 50%.34,67 In 2010, however, a hybrid solar cell employing the use of pyridine-capped CdSe tetrapods with a low band gap polymer, PCPDTBT, achieved a PCE of 3.19% with a maximum EQE of 55% in the range of 630–720 nm.4 The use of a low band gap polymer allows efficient harvesting of the red and near-IR regions of the solar spectrum, increasing ηA, while tetrapod-CdSe increases ηtr. One study showed vertical phase-separation in an OC1C10-PPV/tetrapod-CdSe blend with the tetrapod-rich layer near the cathode and the polymer-rich layer near the anode, hence increasing ηcc.15 Ternary tetrapod nanocrystals, such as CdSexTe1−x, have also been explored,13 providing another parameter besides nanocrystal size to tune the energy levels of the acceptor by changing the Se or Te content.
Effect of ligands on polymer/nanocrystal photovoltaics
Inorganic semiconductor NPs are typically in the range of 1–100 nm. The tunability of the semiconductor's optical band gap by controlling the nanostructure diameter is valuable for nanoscale photonic, light emitting diode (LED) and photovoltaics.7,10,57,84–98 Changing the diameter of the inorganic nanostructures modifies the semiconductor absorption range and also the effective ionization energy and electron affinity of the particles. This is made possible by precise tuning of the energy of discrete electronic states and optical transitions99–101 using the quantum confinement effect. Brabec et al. has shown a direct correlation of Voc to the electron affinity of a series of fullerene derivatives in polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cells.102 According to this study, the maximum achievable Voc for a polymer/fullerene BHJ solar cell can be approximated based on the energy difference between the HOMO of the donor and the LUMO of the acceptor.102 Band gap tunability allows for optimization of the relative LUMO/VB gap between the polymer and NP and can be used to increase the Voc of a device. The disadvantage is that an NP sample must have a narrow size range or larger particles will act as charge traps due to a locally lower band gap. Fig. 6 shows how the absorbance of CdSe103 and PbSe69 can be changed by altering the NP diameter.
 Fig. 6  
Absorption spectra of (a) CdSe semiconductor nanocrystals ranging from 1.8 nm to 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from reference 104. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) PbSe quantum dots spanning a range of tunable sizes from smallest (most blue-shifted) to largest (most red-shifted), showing quantum confinement and size tenability. Copyright 2003 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from reference 69. 
NPs are typically formed in solution and their size is determined by controlling the ratio of inorganic precursors to ligands and the temperature of formation.72,75 Capping ligands cover the surface of the nanoparticle and control the solubility of nanocrystals in solution. Ideally, ligands should possess head groups that have high affinity to nanocrystals and end groups that provide for solubility. In an NP/polymer solution, ligands are used to solvate the NP in a good solvent for the polymer and also to provide solubility in the polymer matrix. Photoexcited NPs will form an exciton, with the hole on trap sites at the NP surface, or a charge separated complex is formed that removes the hole completely from the NP.105
Besides the solubility of NP in solution, the choice of ligands strongly affects the degree of phase separation and ultimately the film morphology of NP/polymer solution cast films. The polymer–NP morphology strongly influences ηdiff, ηdiss, ηtr, and ηcc:
• ηdiff, since the ligand group determines the distance and medium through which charge separation occurs;
• ηdiss, since the ligand can change the donor and acceptor distance and tunneling is exponentially dependent on distance;
• ηtr, since the ligand size will determine the probability of charge hopping between particles; and
• ηcc, since the ligand size will determine the probability of charge hopping between a particle and the electrode.
To a much smaller extent, ηA is also affected by the morphology. The absorbance spectrum in the polymer depends on the degree of stacking and the polymer domain size. Addition of NPs can reduce the degree of order in the polymer, changing the shape of the absorbance spectrum and hence ηA. We discuss here how the ligand type affects the various efficiencies, separating morphological effects from other effects due directly to the structure of ligand.
The list of frequently used organic capping ligands includes alkyl thiols,106–109amines,110phosphines, phosphine oxides,111 and carboxylic acids (Fig. 7). Ligands have a big impact on the electrical performance of the NPs. Ligands that act as electrical insulators with large band gaps can severely reduce device efficiency by impeding charge transport between nanocrystals (reduced ηtr) and reducing charge separation at semiconducting polymer–NP interfaces (reduced ηdiss). Some examples of insulating ligands are long alkyl chain ligands (commonly oleic acid (OA) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO)), which are typically used during NP synthesis to provide controlled growth conditions with dispersed nanocrystals. Poor device performance is seen in TOPO-capped CuInSe2 NPs blended with P3HT in a BHJ architecture.19 The devices suffer from low Jsc due to the presence of the insulating ligand, although the Voc and FF delivered by the devices were adequate. As further evidence, the I–V results also show a systematic increase in series resistance of the diode with increased loading of TOPO-capped CuInSe2. Researchers have also looked into replacing insulating ligands on NPs with ligands that favor electron transport or are less insulating. Wang et al. found that when hexadecylamine (HDA) ligands on CdS nanorods were replaced with pyridine, the Jsc of MEH-PPV/CdS solar cells improved.18 This is likely because of increased ηdiss and ηtr due to more intimate contact with the donor polymer and between nanorods.
 Fig. 7  Ligands commonly used to cap NPs in a hybrid solar cell. 
This realization spurred research into nano-crystal surfaces that are free of surfactant, which can be obtained using weak binding ligands that can be removed through solvent evaporation either by thermal treatment (because of its high volatile character),9 grafting,112–114 or aging.105 Complete removal of the surfactant ligands would provide direct contact between the nanocrystals and the polymer.59
Besides ligands listed in Fig. 7, novel ligands that have been explored are conjugated organic molecules such as oligo (phenylene vinylene), shown in Fig. 8, which allows charge transport while preventing NP aggregation. In the same vein, other innovations include the modification of conjugated polymer (donor component) to have end groups that interact with the NPs and effectively disperse the NPs while maintaining intimate contact between donor and acceptor10 or using the donor polymer itself as a ligand on the NPs.23 In the former, a PCE of 1.5% was obtained for P3HT/CdSe solar cells using P3HT modified with amino acid end groups.10Amino acid-terminated P3HT partially replaces the pyridine ligand on the CdSe nanorods, enhancing miscibility of the two components and increasing ηdiss. In the latter, the lack of a percolation pathway for electrons was blamed for low Jsc since the NPs were surrounded by the donor polymer, decreasing ηtr.23
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of 4 nm CdSe dots covered with a monolayer of ligand (oligo (phenylene vinylene)) attached to the particle surface. Reprinted with permission from reference 122. Copyright 2007 Springer. 
As previously discussed, the ligand group dictates the NP solvation properties and their miscibility in a particular medium. When long chain alkyl ligands are injected into a hot reaction of metal–organic precursors, homogeneous nucleation and a narrow size distribution of hydrophobic nanocrystals115 occur, along with the formation of surface defects due to dangling bonds that are believed to be the origin of charge carrier trap sites. Traps density can be reduced by using the aforementioned weak binding organic ligands (commonly pyridine106,115,116 and butylamine11) which can be introduced via surface ligand exchange reactions. Alternatively, surface traps can be passivated using core/shell NP systems by growing additional layers of higher band gap shell material over the core nanocrystals (CdSe/ZnS, CdSe/CdS).108,110,117–121 The large band gap shell passivates the cationic and anionic dangling bonds on the nanocrystals. Since the focus of this review is on the effects of organic ligands on nanocrystals with regards to hybrid PV devices, the effect of inorganic surface modification is beyond the scope of this review and will not be addressed.
Aldakov et al. and Olson et al. studied the effect of various ligands on CdSe NPs on the morphology and IV characteristics of P3HT/CdSe11,58 and MDMO-PPV/CdSe58BHJ PV devices. The goal was to mimic the improved performance and electron transport achieved using branched CdSe particles by forming well ordered CdSe NP domains. Both groups noted an intimate correlation between the choice of ligands, the degree of phase separation, and device performance. Parameters important for affecting the morphology between P3HT and CdSe are the nanocrystal/polymer ratio, processing time, and ligand exchange efficiency. CdSe particles were synthesized using TOPO ligands that were later replaced by stirring the nanocrystals in an excess of a different capping ligand under reflux for 24–48 h. Both groups agreed that nanorod-based devices display better PCE due to better charge transport, and that a higher NP content within the active layer increases PCE likely due to the formation of a percolation pathway for electrons to the cathode (increased ηtr).
Olson et al.11 found that butyl amine-capped CdSe particles with a w/w mixing ratio of 12:1 (CdSe:P3HT) and post heated at 110 °C produced the device with the highest PCE. Their devices, displayed in Fig. 9, show a large range in PCE that is matched by widely varying domain sizes. The smallest domains result in the highest efficiency. This correlation shows that by far the largest effect of ligands on the CdSe particles is the control of NP solubility and the formation of domains with a size scale approaching the exciton diffusion length. This means that ηdiff is the efficiency parameter being adjusted. Reduction of the domain size and thereby the diffusion distance increases ηdiff. Further decreases in the domain size of P3HT/CdSe could be gained by alteration of the solvent. When a solvent that is equally good/poor for the polymer and NPs is used, the domain size is reduced.9 For the mixture of P3HT/CdSe, it was found that a mixture of pyridine and chloroform, both non-ideal solvents for the polymer reduced the polymer solubility to the level of the CdSe particles. The solubility of the CdSe particles can be improved by adding excess ligand to the solvent, which in this case was pyridine. A strong enhancement of the photocurrent was achieved after heating, due to removal of both interfacial and excess pyridine, which acts as a non-radiative recombination site for excitons in the polymer.
 Fig. 9  
            AFM images and J–V characteristics of CdSe nanocrystal/P3HT films using different capping ligands: (a) butyl amine, (b) stearic acid, (c) pyridine, (d) oleic acid and (e) tributylamine. Reprinted with permission from reference 11. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Science. 
Another method for controlling the morphology of polymer/NP is the use of thermally cleavable solubilizing ligands. Seo et al. replaced the typical TOPO ligand on CdSe nanocrystals with tert-butylN-(2-mercaptoethyl) carbamate ligands123 (Fig. 10). Again CdSe particles with the new capping group were prepared using a solvent exchange reaction. Then the mixture of end-capped particles and polymer was coated onto the substrate. Before heating, there was little electrical contact between CdSe particles and no photocurrent could be measured. After heating to above 200 °C, the ligand was thermally cleaved with isobutene and carbon dioxide evaporating from the film. The remaining 2-mercaptoethylamine ligands were considerably smaller than the original ligand and the electrical characteristics of the device improved considerably due to improved contact between CdSe particles and also between CdSe and the polymer. They show an increase in PCE from 0.21% to 0.44% by increasing the heat-treatment temperature from 150 °C to 250 °C, largely due to increase in Jsc and FF. Practically, this concept is less successful than replacement of TOPO with pyridine because the thermal cleaving of the carbamate ligands occurred at a higher temperature compared to the temperature required for the removal of pyridine. The choice of treatment temperature is critical because the Tg of P3HT is well below 200 °C.124–126 Hence even if the carbamate ligand greatly reduces phase separation, the high heat-treatment temperature is likely to reintroduce large scale phase separation due to the high mobility of P3HT, which is why PCE is still low in their best devices.
 Fig. 10  (a) Absorption and PL spectra for tBOC covered CdSe nanocrystals and TEM images of CdSe nanocrystals. (b) Schematic illustration of the thermal deprotection processing. Reprinted with permission from reference 123. Copyright 2009 The American Institute of Physics. 
Alternatively, the capping ligand can be removed completely by using ligands with a low boiling point and weak attachment to the NP.9 The main expected advantage in removing the capping ligand completely is that the NPs will come into closer physical contact, reducing the barrier for charge transport between particles and thereby increasing ηtr. ηdiss should also increase due to better contact with the donor. Fig. 11 shows a cartoon of how solvent removal reduces the distance between NPs. As a case in point, an increase in EQE maximum to 59% was obtained for P3HT/CdSe solar cells after heat treatment at 120 °C to remove interfacial pyridine.9
 Fig. 11  Removal of interfacial pyridine between nanorods (top) and excess pyridine from P3HT (bottom) after heating. Adapted from reference 9. Copyright 2003 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
As a testament of the importance of morphology control in polymer/nanoparticle hybrid devices, a group demonstrated that P3HT/CdSe solar cells can achieve a maximum EQE of 70% by using a high boiling point solvent, 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TClB) for P3HT, and pyridine-capped CdSe nanorods.12TClB allows P3HT to self-organize into ordered structures in the presence of pyridine and CdSe nanorods. The active layer comprises P3HT nanofibers and CdSe nanorods that provide percolation pathways for both electron and holes, enhancing ηtr. Potentially, some combination of increasing electron transport, through perhaps the tetrapod structure, and increasing hole transport through improved ordering of the polymer domain can propel us forward in the race for record efficiencies.
A chemical method for removing ligand from CdSe particles post-synthesis for use in PV devices was demonstrated by Zhou et al. This group reports the highest PCE of 2% for CdSe/P3HT PV devices.14 The CdSe particles were prepared using a HDA ligand and were then treated in hexanoic acid to remove the HDA. The resulting ligand salt was removed using centrifugation. Ligand-free CdSe particles were then dispersed into a dichlorobenzene solution with P3HT and spin-coated. Fig. 12(a) shows a TEM image of HDA-coated CdSe particles and Fig. 12(b) shows an image of CdSe after the HDA was removed. Clearly the distance between particles is greatly reduced which should increase electron mobility and ηtr. Intriguing elements of the article include a statement that NMR shows that the ligands remained on the CdSe particles after HDA treatment and another observation that CdSe particles remain well dispersed after removal of HDA. On the other hand, the excellent device results suggest that the HDA treatment did decrease the interparticle distance and improves PCE. The authors proposed that the insulating ligand sphere around the CdSe particles is reduced using hexanoic acid, hence improving charge transfer between P3HT and CdSe particles (increased ηdiss), and electron transport between CdSe particles (increased ηtr), as illustrated in Fig. 12(c). More work to understand this chemical mechanism is necessary.
 Fig. 12  
TEM of (a) well-dispersed CdSe quantum dots due to the presence of HDA ligand sphere (b) aggregation of CdSe NPs after the acid treatment leads to efficient percolation pathways. (c) Schematic illustration of a proposed reduced ligand sphere model. Reprinted with permission from reference 14. Copyright 2010 The American Institute of Physics. 
Several groups have attempted to use PbS and PbSe nanocrystals as electron acceptors in polymer/nanocrystal PV devices20,21,23,24,127–131 because these materials have low band gaps of 0.37 and 0.26 eV, respectively, in the bulk. Although PbS and PbSe absorb across the full near infrared radiation spectrum, PV devices fabricated from mixtures of PbS and PbSe nanocrystals with polymers result in lower PCE than polymer/CdSe devices. The ultra low band gap materials suffer from three problems: first, the Voc of all devices is below 0.4 eV; second, the nanoparticles have a much lower absorbance than P3HT so very little of the incident light from 650 nm to 2000 nm is actually absorbed; and finally, the nanoparticles suffer from the same connectivity problems as CdSe particles due to the presence of ligands.
Some groups use a chemical pre-treatment step on PbS nanoparticles to remove the ligand group.21,131 As with the CdSe particles, removal of the ligand group led to better packing of the PbS particles and a smoother surface topology. However, the resulting devices still had a PCE of less than 0.1%.21,131 A “surfactant-free” PbS synthesis approach has also been introduced, affording a PCE of 0.7% in MEH-PPV/PbS solar cells.24 Poor device performance was reported for oleate-capped PbSe particles employed in a P3HT/PbSe hybrid solar cell, most likely because of the large ligands surrounding the PbSe particles.22 Hanrath et al. performed a study of PbSe nanocrystals that were synthesized with oleate ligands and subsequently replaced with pyridine (as discussed for CdSe above). They showed that even after ligand replacement, larger PbSe particles tended to maintain individual nanocrystal character, while smaller particles bound together to form networks of PbSe (Fig. 13).132 They also performed photoluminescence quenching experiments with both ligands and both particle sizes in mixed nanoparticle/P3HT layers. These experiments led to the conclusion that photoexcitation of PbSe results in energy transfer to P3HT—not charge transfer. This conclusion is derived from the fact that both size and ligand type did not change the photoluminescence yield.
 Fig. 13  
TEM image of 4 nm PbSe nanocrystals before (A) and after (B) ligand displacement with pyridine. The insets on the upper right show high resolution images of isolated and aggregated nanocrystals respectively. The insets on the lower right provide schematic representations of the nanocrystal and the surrounding zone shielded by the surface ligand. Reprinted with permission from reference 132. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Transparent nanostructures
Other types of inorganic semiconductors used in the hybrid nanoparticle/polymer BHJs are metal oxides such as ZnO NPs,31–36ZnO nanorods,34TiO2 NPs,29,31,32,34,78,133 and TiO2 nanorods.25,28 These materials have the advantages of ultrafast photoinduced charge transfer occurring between the conjugated polymers and the metal oxide structures and their high electron mobility (e.g., ZnO, 100 cm2 V−1 s−1 (ref. 134)). Considerable research was invested in mixing these metal oxides with conjugated polymers in the BHJ architecture. Both of these oxide NPs have band gaps in the UV and so do not contribute significantly to the generation of photocurrent. It was found that charge transfer to ZnO is more efficient than to TiO2 particles/rods135 and that the small ZnO particles build a more percolating network of electron acceptor material than TiO2. Problems with charge transport between ZnO particles were considerably smaller than with CdSe particles because of minor or non-existent ligand groups.
Besides conventional chemical synthetic methods, a sol–gel processing route for the fabrication of ZnO and TiO2 NPs has been widely explored. This chemical solution method typically uses alkoxide precursors that undergo primary reactions like hydrolysis and condensations with the addition of reactants and solvents. The interaction of precursors and reagents highly depends on the chemical reactivity of the compounds and reflux temperature. The other factors that determine the particle size are initial concentration of the precursor and the reaction time.136 The sol–gel process for the synthesis of TiO2 NPs is typically based on the hydrolysis of titanium precursors under acidic conditions which promotes the formation of the Ti–O–Ti bond.137 Since metal alkoxides easily hydrolyse in ambient atmosphere, and are thus expensive, one way to synthesize ZnO NPs is using the method of Pacholski et al.,138 which involves the hydrolysis and condensation of a simple salt, zinc acetate dihydrate, by potassium hydroxide in methanol.
Application in hybrid devices
Since the band gap of these transparent semiconducting nanoparticles lies in the UV, these particles make very little contribution to light absorption. The ηA as a function of layer thickness for a layer with these particles is reduced because only the polymer contributes to light absorption. On the other hand, as a balance to this negative attribute, TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles are synthesized using a hydrolysis and condensation approach and thus, they do not need ligands for stabilization.138 Unlike CdSe nanocrystals, these oxides have direct contact with the polymer, which increases ηdiss due to reduced distance between donor and acceptor sites. Also the lack of ligands allows formation of pathways for electron transport, increasing ηtr.
Hybrid devices formed from the polymer, MDMO-PPV, with ZnO particles were fabricated to form PV devices with a PCE of 1.6%.31 This PCE compares well with that of the MDMO-PPV/fullerene devices. The same group also made P3HT/ZnO PV devices but obtained a lower PCE of 0.9%, although P3HT absorbs a much larger portion of the solar spectrum.33 The explanation for this reduced efficiency is that the P3HT and ZnO formed a much larger domain structure. This large domain structure separates the donor and acceptor components too much, resulting in a large drop in the exciton diffusion efficiency (ηdiff). An electrical modeling analysis of the ZnO nanoparticle based devices showed that the electron mobility is sufficient to obtain a higher device efficiency than was measured, but that unlike the fullerene, ZnO nanoparticles do not cause the MDMO-PPV coils to uncoil, resulting in reduced hole mobility.35 It was suggested in this article that the combination of ZnO nanoparticles with another polymer may yield significantly better results if the morphology is improved.35 In another study, n-propylamine was added as a ligand to improve solubility of ZnO-nanorods.34 However, the presence of the ligands caused a decrease in Jsc, likely due to decrease in ηtr.
An interesting application of ZnO NP hybrid solar cells is demonstrated by Krebs et al. where the ZnO NP is blended with poly-(3-(2-methylhexan-2-yl)-oxy-carbonyldithiophene) (P3MHOCT) in an inverted architecture, i.e., electron is collected at the ITO while holes are collected at the back metal electrode. P3MHOCT thermocleaves to P3CT at 210 °C which is insoluble, affording a PCE of 0.18%. The inverted architecture avoids the use of a reactive metal electrode (stable ηcc over time) and leaves ZnO NPs dispersed in an insoluble matrix, providing a stable device.139
Hybrid devices employing TiO2 NP generally show PCEs that are lower than when ZnO NP is used as the electron acceptor. Kwong et al. studied P3HT/TiO2–NP hybrid devices using various casting solvents and determined that devices cast from xylene afforded the highest PCE mainly due to higher Jsc, which likely means a more efficient percolated pathway for charge transport (increased ηtr), although interestingly, AFM reveals almost similar domain sizes between films cast from chlorobenzene and xylene.29 Ligand effects in TiO2 hybrid devices were also examined.25 Interestingly, PCE improved when thiophenol was added as a ligand, likely due to low solubility of pristine TiO2 nanorods in toluene. The low FF probably indicates low ηdiss because the presence of ligands prevents intimate contact with MEH-PPV. A PCE of 0.83% was achieved in a P3HT/pyridine-capped TiO2–nanorod system, where the active layer was cast from trichlorobenzene, which resulted in more ordered P3HT domains (increased ηtr).28 A layer of pure TiO2 nanorod was deposited on top of the active layer which improves ηcc.
As an alternative to the method that involves first preparing the metal oxide NPs then mixing it with the donor material, solar cells can also be fabricated via the precursor route, where zinc and titanium precursor is mixed with the donor material before undergoing hydrolysis to form ZnO30,37–39 and TiO2.26,140,141 In order to attain compatibility between the hydrophobic donor and the precursor solution, a less polar solvent such as tetrahydrofuran (THF) can be used to replace the polar sol–gel solvents. Fabrication of hybrid solar cellsvia the precursor route is feasible given that the devices offer a PCE of 1.1%30 with MDMO-PPV which is only slightly less than when ZnO NPs were used with MDMO-PPV (PCE = 1.6%). The precursor route has also been explored for P3HT:ZnO37 and MDMO-PPV:TiO226 hybrid BHJ solar cells. The P3HT:ZnO-precursor BHJ devices37 outperform P3HT:nc-ZnO devices.31 Data by Moet et al. suggested partial degradation of dialkoxy-substituted PPV polymer when mixed with precursor ZnO, resulting in low device performance.37 Since then, precursor-ZnO:P3HT devices have achieved a PCE of 2% by simply making the active layer thicker.39 The thicker ZnO:P3HT BHJ layer resulted in finer phase-separated domains,39 increasing ηdiff, although the device may have to endure lower ηtr, since the path length for charge carrier to travel for collection at the electrode is longer. Conversely, thinner devices suffer from low ZnO content and extensive phase separation, as shown in Fig. 14(a) and (c), lowering ηcc, ηdiff and ηtr. The same research group introduced an ester-functionalized side chain of P3HT (P3HT-E) to mix more intimately with ZnO (finer phase-separation),38 resulting in an increase in Jsc (increase in ηdiff). Limitations to the ZnO:P3HT-E BHJ devices include a lower degree of crystallinity in P3HT-E, due to better dispersion of ZnO in the polymer matrix, and reduction in ZnO connectivity. Both effects lower ηtr. This highlights the delicate balance between connectivity (affecting ηtr) and consideration for the typical exciton diffusion length (affecting ηdiff). The former requires larger domains, and the latter requires smaller domains. BHJ devices fabricated from the TiO2 precursor do not perform as well as from the ZnO precursor. This is likely due to the conversion of the TiO2 precursor (titanium(IV)isopropoxide is commonly used) to amorphous TiO2 at room temperature, which reduces charge mobility (low ηtr).26
 Fig. 14  (Top) TEM images of (a) Zn:P3HT BHJ layer and (b) ZnO:P3HT-E BHJ layer. (Bottom) Reconstructed volumes from electron tomography for (c) ZnO:P3HT BHJ layer and (d) ZnO:P3HT-E BHJ layer. Reprinted with permission from reference 38. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh. 
The BHJ concept contends with disordered nanostructures in exchange for the ease of all-solution fabrication using donor and acceptor mixtures. Other ordered configurations136142–145 have been explored to improve upon the morphology of inorganic-oxide NPs and polymers in the active layer but will not be examined in this paper.

        Growth of semiconducting networks—a promising approach
The focus of this review has been on how various fabrication steps lead to increases in quantum efficiency in hybrid inorganic/organic devices. A summary of the performances of some notable hybrid BHJ devices is presented in Table 1. As shown in Table 1, a combination of the presence of ligands, poor connection between semiconducting domains, and/or overly large phase separation leads to reduced ηdiss or ηtr in most of the device types. Great creativity has been used to reduce these problems, but the fact remains that device efficiency in hybrid devices is limited by ineffective self-assembly of the polymer and semiconductor domains and by poor electrical contact between NPs due to low temperature sintering.
Table 1 Summary of notable hybrid BHJ PV devices




Donor
Acceptor
Loadinga (D:A)
Ligand

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2
FF
PCE (%)

                  EQE max (%)
Affected η
Ref.





a Unless otherwise stated.
b Values estimated from graph.
c Presumed based on author's other papers.






                  P3HT
                

                  CuInSe2
1:6

                  TOPO
                
1.0
0.3
0.5
 
 
Low Jsc likely linked to low ηtr because of the presence of large insulating ligand molecules.

19




                  P3HT
                

                  nc-CdSe
                
87 wt% CdSe

                  HDA
                
0.6323
5.8
0.56
2
 

Hexanoic acid wash reduced insulating ligand sphere around QD, both ηtr and ηdiss are expected to increase. Device data without acid wash not provided.

14




                  P3HT
                

                  nc-CdSe
                
1:12

Butylamine

0.55
6.9
0.47
1.8
 
Balance between NP aggregation and phase separation required through choice of ligand and annealing conditions, increasing ηtr and ηdiss.

11




                  P3HT
                

                  nr-CdSe
                
90 wt% CdSe

Pyridine

0.4
0.018b
0.5
 
59
Removal of interfacial pyridine, enhancing ηtr and ηdiss.

9




                  P3HT
                

                  nr-CdSe
                
90 wt% CdSe

Pyridine

0.62
8.79
0.5
2.9
70
Use of high bp solvent allows self-ordering of P3HT in the presence of pyridine and nr-CdSe, increasing ηtr.

12




                  P3HT-amino acid
                

                  nr-CdSe
                
3:2

Pyridine

 
 
 
1.5b
 

                  P3HT-amino acid partially replaces pyridine surfactant, enhancing miscibility with NCs, hence increasing ηdiss.

10




                  PCPDTBT
                

                  tp-CdSe
                
1:9

Pyridine

0.678
10.1
0.51
3.19
55
Use of low band gap polymer increases ηA, while tetrapod CdSe increases ηtr.

4




                  OC1C10-PPV
                

                  tp-CdSe
                
1:6

Pyridine

0.76
6.42
0.44
2.4
52
Vertical phase separation with tetrapod-rich layer near cathode and polymer-rich layer near anode, increasing ηcc.

15




                  P3HT
                
hb-CdSe
78 vol% CdSe

Pyridine
c
0.6
3.5b
0.55b
1.1b
23b
Hyperbranched CdSe improves the percolation network, increasing ηtr. Polymer unable to penetrate branches, decreasing ηdiss.

8




                  MEH-PPV
                

                  tp-CdSe
                
1:9

Pyridine

0.69
2.86
0.46
1.13
47

                  Tetrapod
                  CdSe increases ηtr.

13




                  tp-CdTe
                
1:9

Pyridine

0.33
0.024
0.33
0.003
too low
Energy transfer of excitons favored, while charge transfer from polymer to CdTe is forbidden, hence very low ηdiss.
 


tp-CdSe0.78Te0.22
1:9

Pyridine

0.69
1.57
0.36
0.49
48b
Reduced HOMO and LUMO energy difference with MEH-PPV compared to CdSe, decreasing ηdiss. Light absorption mainly in the ternary NP (EQE max at 400nm), reducing ηA.
 



                  MEH-PPV
                

                  nc-CdTe
                
1:3

Pyridine

0.37
0.49
0.27
0.052
 
Islands of nc-CdTe observed indicating the inefficient percolation network, i.e., low ηtr.

16




                  MEH-PPV
                
nr-CdS
1:6

Pyridine

0.85
2.28
0.462
0.89
 
Replacement of HDA with pyridine increases Jsc, likely due to more intimate contact with polymer, increasing ηdiss. Annealing removes interfacial pyridine, increasing ηtr.

18




                  P3HT
                
nc-CdS
1:4.7
None
0.611
3.54
0.333
0.72
36.5

In situ
                  growth of the nc-CdS network increases ηtr but CdS and P3HT vertically segregate, reducing ηdiss.

146




                  MEH-PPV
                
PbS
50–60 wt% PbS
“Surfactant-free”
1.0
0.13
0.28
0.7
21

Surfactant-free synthesis improves PbS contact between polymer and with one another, increasing both ηdiss and ηtr.

24




                  MDMO-PPV
                
PbS
1:2

                  MDMO-PPV
                
0.78
0.0025
0.56
0.0013
 
Low Jsc likely indicates lack of percolation pathway for electrons since PbS NPs are surrounded by MDMO-PPV, decreasing ηtr. High series resistance was reported.

23




                  P3HT
                
PbS
1:1

Acetic acid

0.35
0.08
0.36
0.01
 
Exchanged to a smaller ligand improves Jsc, i.e., increase in ηtr.

21




                  P3HT
                

                  PbSe
                
80 wt% PbSe

                  Oleate
                
0.28
0.9
0.39
0.1
 
PCE increased to 0.19% when the P3HT layer is introduced at anode (remove shunt contact between PbSe and anode), increasing ηcc. Overall poor device performance likely due to large ligands surrounding PbSe—decreased ηtr and ηdiss.

22




                  MDMO-PPV
                

                  nc-ZnO
                
67 wt% ZnO
None
0.814
2.4
0.59
1.6
40
Non-existent ligand ensures intimate mixing between polymer and ZnO, increasing ηdiss. Also intimate contact between ZnO NPs increases ηtr.

31




                  P3HT
                

                  nc-ZnO
                
26 vol% ZnO
None
0.69
2.19
0.55
0.92
27

                  P3HT:ZnO forms larger domains compared to MDMO-PPV:ZnO, decreasing ηdiff.

33




                  P3MHOCT (thermocleaves to P3CT)

                  np-ZnO
                
1:2
None
0.516
1.00
0.35
0.18
20
Inverted structure with a layer of ZnO on ITO as ETL, avoiding the use of reactive metal electrode, stable ηcc overtime. ZnO NPs dispersed in an insoluble rigid polymer matrix, giving stable morphology, ηdiff and ηdiss should not change.

36




                  MDMO-PPV
                

                  nr-ZnO
                
26 vol%
4 vol% n-propylamine
0.52
1.1
0.62
 
 

MPP lower than without ligand. Ligand added to improve solubility of nr-ZnO but the presence of ligands likely caused the decrease in Jsc probably due to decrease in ηtr. Voc also decreases probably because of decrease in ηcc.

34




                  nc-ZnO
                
26 vol%
2 vol% n-propylamine
0.6–0.7
1.5–1.6
0.59
 
 
The presence of surfactant caused a big decrease in Jsc while Voc slightly decreased and FF remained unchanged, indicating a drop in ηtr.



                  MDMO-PPV
                

                  ZnO precursor
15 vol% ZnO
None
1.14
2.0
0.42
1.1
27
Almost comparable to nc-ZnO devices, except for lower FF. The highly reactive ZnO precursor degrades MDMO-PPV, which likely reduces the FF, decreasing ηdiss. No explanation offered on higher Voc compared to devices using nc-ZnO.

30




                  P3HT
                

                  ZnO precursor
15 vol% ZnO
None
0.83
3.5
0.50
1.4
26

                  P3HT more stable to diethylzinc than MDMO-PPV. Homogeneous blend increases ηdiff and ηdiss.

37




                  P3HT
                

                  ZnO precursor
20 vol% ZnO
None
0.75
5.2
0.52
2.0
44
Thin P3HT:ZnO devices suffer low performance due to electrode-quenching effect, low ZnO content and extensive phase separation, leading to low ηcc, ηdiss and ηtr. Thicker P3HT:ZnO layers increases Jsc because of finer phase-separated domains but likely suffer from traps in the longer charge carrier pathway (low ηtr).

39




                  P3HT-E
                

                  ZnO precursor
17 vol% ZnO
None
1.02
2.1
0.40
0.83
25

                  ZnO disperses better in P3HT-E than P3HT. P3HT-E gives higher Voc due to larger optical band gap and higher Jsc due to more intimate mixing (higher ηdiss and ηdiff). Jsc of P3HT-E devices decrease with increasing active layer thickness indicating limitations in ηcc. Intimate mixing also means a lower degree of crystallinity for P3HT-E (decreased ηtr).

38




                  P3HT
                
NP–TiO2
60 vol% TiO2
None
0.44
2.759
0.356
0.424
15b
Devices spin-coated from xylene gave the best performance mainly due to higher Jsc which likely means a more efficient percolated pathway (higher ηtr). AFM reveal almost similar domain sizes between ClB and xylene films.

29




                  PPV
                
NP–TiO2
40 wt% TiO2
None
0.46
0.1397
0.26
0.018
 
Lower degree of TiO2 crystallization likely decreases ηtr and ηdiss.

27




                  MEH-PPV
                

                  nr-TiO2
70 wt% TiO2

Thiophenol

0.70
0.456
0.34
0.157
 
Devices using thiophenol ligand perform better than pristine TiO2 due to low solubility of the latter in toluene. Low FF likely indicates low ηdiss due to the presence of ligand.

25




                  P3HT
                

                  nr-TiO2
53 wt% TiO2

Pyridine

0.52
2.97
0.54
0.83
28
Layer of pure nr-TiO2 on top of active layer improves ηcc. Devices cast from TClB perform better due to more ordered P3HT domains even in the presence of nr-TiO2 and increase in ηtr.

28




                  MDMO-PPV
                

                  TiO2 precursor
20 vol% TiO2
None
0.52
0.6
0.42
 
11
Poor conversion of precursor into TiO2 resulting in lower ηtr and lower ηdiss.

26





Last year a new approach to morphology control in semiconductor/polymer devices was introduced. Leventis et al. introduced a method to deposit precursors for CdS in solution with P3HT.146 As summarized in Fig. 15, the precursor Cd(S2COEt)2 and excess pyridine reacts with mild heating (50–150 °C) to form CdS and the side products, COS, C2H4, and H2S, which are all gasses. The resulting device is composed of CdS and P3HT domains with no ligands. The CdS forms extended networks rather than particles, which should greatly increase ηtr, but the materials also vertically segregate, which reduces ηdiss. This is the first report of an in situ formation of semiconductor nanoparticles, so very little has been done to optimize the fabrication process or morphology. However this route to a hybrid PV layer formation shows great promise to increase EQE and PCE beyond the current records.
 Fig. 15  Chemical precursors for CdS react with mild heating to form a network of CdS with P3HT in the pores. The resulting mixed layer forms a PV device that shows an initial PCE of 1.5% under low light conditions to 0.7% under one sun. Reprinted with permission from reference 146. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Conclusions and outlook
This article discusses the effects that the fabrication method and the presence of ligands can have on inorganic nanostructures used for hybrid inorganic/polymer solar cells. Even small changes in the synthesis or fabrication method can have colossal impacts on the resulting layer morphology and device efficiency. This article addresses the likely impact that various synthesis and fabrication choices have on the quantum efficiencies of light absorption, exciton migration, charge dissociation, charge transport, and charge collection, respectively. The internal quantum efficiency is limited by a large exciton diffusion distance, by poor charge separation at heterojunction interfaces caused by the presence of ligands, and by poor charge transport due to non-continuous domains and the presence of insulating ligands between the nanoparticles.
In the area of synthesis, a lot of research attention has been focused on the creation of nanoparticles with a higher aspect ratio such as rods or branched structures so that pathways for electrons are created through the mixed layer. Low band gap nanoparticles such as PbS, PbSe, and CuInS2 are particularly desirable because they have the capability to greatly enhance the absorption range of the active PV layer. However, thus far, CdSe and ZnO nanoparticles with a band gap of 1.9 eV or above have generated devices with the highest efficiency. More work needs to be focused on synthesis of low band gap nanoparticles for use in hybrid PV devices and more understanding of the photophysics to these particles is also necessary. In many cases, even a simple study such as understanding the electronic effect of particle size has not been performed, but must done be in order to advance this field.
In order to attain high efficiency, there is a significant need for better understanding of the role that ligands play in charge transport and charge transfer across heterojunction interfaces. These ligands can enhance the dispersion of semiconductor nanoparticles in solution and in the polymer to create morphological features of the correct dimension, but at the same time can also create electronic problems. A number of groups have experimented with removing or replacing ligands before or after deposition of the mixed nanoparticle/polymer solution. In general PV devices that were fabricated with smaller or no ligands showed higher power conversion efficiency. But the fundamental effect of ligands is still not well understood. Studies focused on the use of conjugated or polar ligands designed to actively participate in the device electronics have not yet been explored. It is well known from studies of dye-sensitized solar cells that the organic dye passivates the inorganic surface and helps to control both charge transport and recombination rate. A similar level of understanding on the effect of ligands for solution-processed nanoparticles in photovoltaics is lacking.
Finally, we feature a new technique to grow networks of semiconducting domains using in situ chemistry rather than simple mixing of materials. This new technique shows promise to increase the quantum efficiency of hybrid inorganic/organic PV devices by increasing transport efficiency via the formation of extended semiconducting domains without ligands. This technique also promises to allow a large degree of control of the mixed morphology by changing the reaction speed (temperature), heating method, precursor, and polymer morphology viasolvent selection. New ideas such as this should be aggressively explored.
Abbreviations

HOMOhighest occupied molecular orbital
LUMOlowest unoccupied molecular orbital

            CB
          conduction band

            VB
          valence band
nc
nanocrystals

qd
quantum dots

tptetrapods
hphyperbranched
nr
nanorod


            TClB
          
1,2,4-trichlorobenzene


            P3HT
          poly(3-hexylthiophene)

            P3HT-E
          
ester-functionalized side chain P3HT derivative

            OC1C10-PPV
          poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene]

            PCPDTBT
          poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethyhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b; 3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]

            APFO-3
          poly(2,7-(9,9-dioctyl-fluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole))

            MEH-PPV
          poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene)

            TOPO
          
trioctylphosphine oxide


            TOP
          
trioctylphosphine


            HDA
          
hexadecylamine


MPP
maximum power point

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the California Solar Energy Collaborative (CSEC) through a contract funded by the California Energy Commission (CEC). Lilian Chang was supported through NSF-CBET award number 0933435.
References
T. M. L. Wigley and S. C. B. Raper, Science, 2001, 293, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .

          IEA, in Key World Energy Statistics, International Energy Agency,  2006 Search PubMed .

          N. S. Lewis, G. W. Crabtree, A. J. Nozik, M. R. Wasielewski and A. P. Alivisatos, in Basic Energy Sciences Report on Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization, Science, U.S. Department of Energy,  2005 Search PubMed .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239–242 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, X. G. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 923–927 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Greenham, X. G. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Synth. Met., 1997, 84, 545–546 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, C. P. Chen, A. G. Kanaras and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 409–414 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, W. C. Libby, G. L. Whiting and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Liu, T. Tanaka, K. Sivula, A. P. Alivisatos and J. M. J. Frechet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6550–6551 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Olson, G. P. Gray and S. A. Carter, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 519–523 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557–3560 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Y. C. Li, H. Z. Zhong, J. H. Hou, Y. Q. Ding, C. H. Yang and Y. F. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4041–4047 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H. F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Kruger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef .
B. Q. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 014914 CrossRef .
S. Kumar and T. Nann, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1990–1994 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Cong, M. Dieng, C. Sene and P. Chartier, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 23–35 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Jiang, D. Qin and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9538–9542 CAS .
E. Arici, H. Hoppe, F. Schaffler, D. Meissner, M. A. Malik and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2004, 79, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cui, J. Xu, T. Zhu, G. Paradee, S. Ashok and M. Gerhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183111 CrossRef .
J. Seo, S. J. Kim, W. J. Kim, R. Singh, M. Samoc, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 095202 CrossRef .
Z. N. Tan, T. Zhu, M. Thein, S. A. Gao, A. Cheng, F. Zhang, C. F. Zhang, H. P. Su, J. K. Wang, R. Henderson, J. I. Hahm, Y. P. Yang and J. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063510 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, S. Qu, X. Zeng, C. Zhang, M. Shi, F. Tan, Z. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Hou, F. Teng and Z. Feng, Polymer, 2008, 49, 4647–4651 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. R. Watt, D. Blake, J. H. Warner, E. A. Thomsen, E. L. Tavenner, H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop and P. Meredith, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, 2006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, W. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Wu, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1403–1409 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. van Hal, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, L. H. Slooff, W. J. H. van Gennip, P. Jonkheijm and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang and X. Wang, Polymer, 2008, 49, 1587–1593 CrossRef CAS .
T.-W. Zeng, H.-H. Lo, C.-H. Chang, Y.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Chen and W.-F. Su, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 952–957 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Kwong, W. C. H. Choy, A. B. Djurisic, P. C. Chui, K. W. Cheng and W. K. Chan, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1156 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1009–1013 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2985–2988 RSC .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112–1116 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. N. Yang and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505–9516 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, W. J. van Strien, W. J. E. Beek and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1297–1302 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 715–726 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. D. Moet, L. J. A. Koster, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5856–5861 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, L. J. A. Koster, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos, O. Stenzel, R. Thiedmann, V. Schmidt, B. Campo, T. J. Cleij, L. Lutzen, D. Vanderzande, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. Jan Anton Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hindson, Z. Saghi, J. C. Hernandez-Garrido, P. A. Midgley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, F. Gao, N. C. Greenham and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 21, 1419–1431 CrossRef .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kroon, M. Lenes, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and B. De Boer, Polym. Rev., 2008, 48, 531–582 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954–985 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J. L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .
P. W. M. Blom, V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster and D. E. Markov, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1551–1566 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2007, 86, 771–777 Search PubMed .
L. A. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganas, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Hwang, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4350–4354 CAS .
S. De, T. Pascher, M. Maiti, K. G. Jespersen, T. Kesti, F. L. Zhang, O. Inganas, A. Yartsev and V. Sundstrom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8466–8472 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, L. J. A. Koster, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 216601 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bredas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Nogueira, I. Montanari, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, C. Winder and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1567–1573 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aldakov, F. Chandezon, R. De Bettignies, M. Firon, P. Reiss and A. Pron, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2006, 36, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Saunders and M. L. Turner, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 138, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, S. Sista and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 094512 CrossRef .
G. P. Bartholomew and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 677–682 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Moulé, H. J. Snaith, M. Kaiser, H. Klesper, D. M. Huang, M. Grätzel and K. Meerholz, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 073111 CrossRef .
H. J. Snaith, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Chen, I. Cesar, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nanotechnology, 2008, 424003 CrossRef .
K. M. Coakley, Y. X. Liu, M. D. McGehee, K. L. Frindell and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380–3382 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sicot, B. Geffroy, A. Lorin, P. Raimond, C. Sentein and J. M. Nunzi, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 1047–1054 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961–963 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller, D. Werder, M. H. Stewart, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11752–11753 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302–263303 CrossRef .
C. Kaito, Y. Saito and K. Fujita, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 26, L1973–L1975 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700–12706 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1389–1395 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shik, G. Konstantatos, E. H. Sargent and H. E. Ruda, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 4066–4069 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Choudhury, M. Samoc, A. Patra and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 1556–1562 CrossRef .
W. J. E. Beek and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2795–2800 RSC .
E. Arici, H. Hoppe, F. Schaffler, D. Meissner, M. A. Malik and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–52, 612–618 CrossRef .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, N. Teclemariam, D. J. Milliron, A. P. Alivisatos and K. W. J. Barnham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2003, 67, 115326 CrossRef .
A. Fiore, R. Mastria, M. G. Lupo, G. Lanzani, C. Giannini, E. Carlino, G. Morello, M. De Giorgi, Y. Li, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2274–2282 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS .
L. Manna, D. J. Milliron, A. Meisel, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 382–385 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462–465 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2393 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 290, 314–317 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Eisler, V. C. Sundar, M. G. Bawendi, M. Walsh, H. I. Smith and V. Klimov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4614–4616 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Sundar, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 739–743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chan, J. S. Steckel, P. T. Snee, J. M. Caruge, J. M. Hodgkiss, D. G. Nocera and M. G. Bawendi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 073102 CrossRef .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, O. Onitsuka and M. F. Rubner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1316–1318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, V. C. Sundar, J. R. Heine, M. G. Bawendi and K. F. Jensen, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1102–1105 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W. K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nature, 2002, 420, 800–803 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tessler, V. Medvedev, M. Kazes, S. H. Kan and U. Banin, Science, 2002, 295, 1506–1508 CrossRef .
A. H. Mueller, M. A. Petruska, M. Achermann, D. J. Werder, E. A. Akhadov, D. D. Koleske, M. A. Hoffbauer and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1039–1044 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zhao, J. A. Bardecker, A. M. Munro, M. S. Liu, Y. H. Niu, I. K. Ding, J. D. Luo, B. Q. Chen, A. K. Y. Jen and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 463–467 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Steckel, P. Snee, S. Coe-Sullivan, J. R. Zimmer, J. E. Halpert, P. Anikeeva, L. A. Kim, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5796–5799 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald and L. E. Brus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 477–496 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226–13239 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374–380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vossmeyer, L. Katsikas, M. Giersig, I. G. Popovic, K. Diesner, A. Chemseddine, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7665–7673 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. M. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kalyuzhny and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7012–7021 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuno, J. K. Lee, B. O. Dabbousi, F. V. Mikulec and M. G. Bawendi, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 9869–9882 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aldana, Y. A. Wang and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8844–8850 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, T. E. Wilson, A. P. Alivisatos and P. G. Schultz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 145–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Wang, J. J. Li, H. Y. Chen and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2293–2298 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
H. Skaff and T. Emrick, Chem. Commun., 2003, 52–53 RSC .
D. Aldakov, C. Querner, Y. Kervella, B. Jousselme, R. Demadrille, E. Rossitto, P. Reiss and A. Pron, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 160, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, M. Zagorska, O. Renault, R. Payerne, F. Genoud, P. Rannou and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 554–563 RSC .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, S. Sadki, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3204–3209 RSC .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
H. Skaff, M. F. Ilker, E. B. Coughlin and T. Emrick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 5729–5733 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019–7029 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kortan, R. Hull, R. L. Opila, M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald, P. J. Carroll and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1327–1332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Tian, T. Newton, N. A. Kotov, D. M. Guldi and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 8927–8939 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mekis, D. V. Talapin, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7454–7462 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Hammer, T. Emrick and M. D. Barnes, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2007, 2, 282–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, W. J. Kim, S. J. Kim, K. S. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 133302 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, G. Yuan, P. Roche and M. Leclerc, Polymer, 1995, 36, 2211–2214 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Swinnen, G. Van Assche, J. Manca, D. Vanderzande and B. Van Mele, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1587–1591 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley, S. Cook and J. R. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063502 CrossRef .
T. Zhu, A. Berger, Z. A. Tan, D. H. Cui, J. Xu, P. Khanchaitit and Q. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 044306 CrossRef .
S. Gunes, K. P. Fritz, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, S. Kumar and G. D. Scholes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 420–423 CrossRef .
X. M. Jiang, R. D. Schaller, S. B. Lee, J. M. Pietryga, V. I. Klimov and A. A. Zakhidov, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 2204–2210 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Noone, N. C. Anderson, N. E. Horwitz, A. M. Munro, A. P. Kulkarni and D. S. Ginger, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1345–1352 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Fritz, S. Guenes, J. Luther, S. Kumar, N. S. Saricifitci and G. D. Scholes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 195, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hanrath, D. Veldman, J. J. Choi, C. G. Christova, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 244–250 CAS .
A. Petrella, M. Tamborra, P. D. Cozzoli, M. L. Curri, M. Striccoli, P. Cosma, G. M. Farinola, F. Babudri, F. Naso and A. Agostiano, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
R. Konenkamp, L. Dloczik, K. Ernst and C. Olesch, Phys. E., 2002, 14, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 609–618 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, J. Piris, R. T. Collins, S. E. Shaheen and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 496, 26–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arango, L. R. Johnson, V. N. Bliznyuk, Z. Schlesinger, S. A. Carter and H. H. Horhold, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1689–1692 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188–1191 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Y. Thomann, R. Thomann and J. Andreasen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424013 CrossRef .
L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk and J. M. Kroon, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 634–638 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Slooff, J. M. Kroon, J. Loos, M. M. Koetse and J. Sweelssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 689–694 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Gao, W.-T. Sun, Z.-D. Hu, G. Ai, Y.-L. Zhang, S. Feng, F. Li and L.-M. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20481–20485 CAS .
B. T. Holland, C. F. Blanford, T. Do and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 795–805 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Kuo, W. C. Tang, C. Gau, T. F. Guo and D. Z. Jeng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 033307–033303 CrossRef .
H. C. Leventis, S. P. King, A. Sudlow, M. S. Hill, K. C. Molloy and S. A. Haque, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1253–1258 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Adam J. Moulé	Adam Moulé is an assistant professor in Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the University of California, Davis and the technical director of the California Solar Energy Center (CSEC). He studied physical chemistry at UC Berkeley and was an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow at the University of Cologne under Klaus Meerholz. His research group studies solution-processed photovoltaic materials and devices with emphasis on electrical, optical, and morphology studies at interfaces. Through CSEC Moulé interacts with utilities, lawmakers, and solar contractors to increase the penetration of PV in California and to facilitate development of new solar products and technologies.
Lilian Chang	In 2004, Lilian Chang graduated from the Science University of Malaysia with a BS in Chemical Engineering. She completed her MS in Chemical Engineering at San José State University, CA in 2008. For her MS dissertation, she worked at IBM Almaden Research Center, carrying out research on self-assembly of functionalized star-polymers for multiple applications including self-assembled biomimetic energy cascade arrays. She is currently completing her doctoral research studies under the guidance of Prof. Adam Moulé at the University of California, Davis. Her research includes the realization of solution-processable and efficient multi-junction polymer devices, and plasmonic enhancement in the photoactive layers.
Chandru Thambidurai	Chandru Thambidurai received his BTech degree in Chemical and Electrochemical Engineering from Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CECRI), India in 2004. He then received his PhD in Chemistry from the University of Georgia in 2009 under the guidance of Prof. John L. Stickney. During his PhD, he focused on Electrochemical Atomic Layer Deposition for various metal and semiconductor thin films. He then carried out his post-doctoral research at the University of California, Davis under the supervision of Prof. Pieter Stroeve. He is currently a process development engineer at Copper Interconnect Group, Applied Materials. His research interest includes electrochemistry, electroplating and solar cells.
Ruxandra Vidu	Dr Ruxandra Vidu is the Associate Director of the California Solar Energy Collaborative at UC Davis. She is a published research scientist and university lecturer with 20 years of experience in Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, with extensive expertise in thin-films and nanostructure fabrication and characterization for solar materials. Dr Vidu's research emphasizes the use of nanoscience and nanotechnology in the development of new materials and processes. Her areas of interest include electrochemistry, surface modification and characterization, electrochemical alloying and doping, ultra-thin film systems and template synthesis of nano-structured materials for thermoelectric, battery technology, fuel cells and solar energy related applications.
Pieter Stroeve	Pieter Stroeve is a Distinguished Professor of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science at the University of California, Davis. He was born in The Netherlands and immigrated to the USA with his family when he was 14 years old. Professor Stroeve conducts fundamental research in colloid and surface science, self-assembled monolayers, Langmuir–Blodgett films, supramolecular structures on surfaces, supported lipid bilayers, mass transport in colloids and tissues, nanotechnology, bionanotechnology, electrochemistry, solar energy and nanoporous membrane separations.
EQE(λ, V) = ηA(λ) × ηdiff × ηdiss(V) × ηtr(V) × ηcc(V)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the consecutive steps, from (a) to (e), for photocurrent generation in inorganic/organic hybrid solar cells, beginning from the absorption of a photon. Excitons can be generated in either the donor (polymer) or acceptor (NP) phase. (LUMO = lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, HOMO = highest occupied molecular orbital, CB = conduction band, VB = valence band).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Energy diagram and schematic of a CdSe/P3HT device. Reprinted with permission from reference 11. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Science.	 

 	Fig. 3  Flow diagram of the processes in the fabrication of a typical hybrid BHJ solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 4  
          CdSe
          nanocrystals with 7 × 7 nm (a), 7 × 30 nm (b), 7 × 60 nm dimensions (c) and its respective EQE (d). Reprinted with permission from reference 57. Copyright 2002 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 5  Sketch represents the formation of tetrapod shaped nanocrystals from the seeded growth approach. (a) Reprinted with permission from reference 81. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced with permission from Macmillan Pulishers Ltd., reference 83, copyright 2003.	 

 	Fig. 6  
Absorption spectra of (a) CdSe semiconductor nanocrystals ranging from 1.8 nm to 20 nm. Reprinted with permission from reference 104. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) PbSe quantum dots spanning a range of tunable sizes from smallest (most blue-shifted) to largest (most red-shifted), showing quantum confinement and size tenability. Copyright 2003 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from reference 69.	 

 	Fig. 7  Ligands commonly used to cap NPs in a hybrid solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of 4 nm CdSe dots covered with a monolayer of ligand (oligo (phenylene vinylene)) attached to the particle surface. Reprinted with permission from reference 122. Copyright 2007 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 9  
            AFM images and J–V characteristics of CdSe nanocrystal/P3HT films using different capping ligands: (a) butyl amine, (b) stearic acid, (c) pyridine, (d) oleic acid and (e) tributylamine. Reprinted with permission from reference 11. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Absorption and PL spectra for tBOC covered CdSe nanocrystals and TEM images of CdSe nanocrystals. (b) Schematic illustration of the thermal deprotection processing. Reprinted with permission from reference 123. Copyright 2009 The American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  Removal of interfacial pyridine between nanorods (top) and excess pyridine from P3HT (bottom) after heating. Adapted from reference 9. Copyright 2003 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 12  
TEM of (a) well-dispersed CdSe quantum dots due to the presence of HDA ligand sphere (b) aggregation of CdSe NPs after the acid treatment leads to efficient percolation pathways. (c) Schematic illustration of a proposed reduced ligand sphere model. Reprinted with permission from reference 14. Copyright 2010 The American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 13  
TEM image of 4 nm PbSe nanocrystals before (A) and after (B) ligand displacement with pyridine. The insets on the upper right show high resolution images of isolated and aggregated nanocrystals respectively. The insets on the lower right provide schematic representations of the nanocrystal and the surrounding zone shielded by the surface ligand. Reprinted with permission from reference 132. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (Top) TEM images of (a) Zn:P3HT BHJ layer and (b) ZnO:P3HT-E BHJ layer. (Bottom) Reconstructed volumes from electron tomography for (c) ZnO:P3HT BHJ layer and (d) ZnO:P3HT-E BHJ layer. Reprinted with permission from reference 38. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag Gmbh.	 



                  P3HT
                	
                  CuInSe2	1:6	
                  TOPO
                	1.0	0.3	0.5	 	 	Low Jsc likely linked to low ηtr because of the presence of large insulating ligand molecules.	
19


                  P3HT
                	
                  nc-CdSe
                	87 wt% CdSe	
                  HDA
                	0.6323	5.8	0.56	2	 	
Hexanoic acid wash reduced insulating ligand sphere around QD, both ηtr and ηdiss are expected to increase. Device data without acid wash not provided.	
14


                  P3HT
                	
                  nc-CdSe
                	1:12	
Butylamine
	0.55	6.9	0.47	1.8	 	Balance between NP aggregation and phase separation required through choice of ligand and annealing conditions, increasing ηtr and ηdiss.	
11


                  P3HT
                	
                  nr-CdSe
                	90 wt% CdSe	
Pyridine
	0.4	0.018b	0.5	 	59	Removal of interfacial pyridine, enhancing ηtr and ηdiss.	
9


                  P3HT
                	
                  nr-CdSe
                	90 wt% CdSe	
Pyridine
	0.62	8.79	0.5	2.9	70	Use of high bp solvent allows self-ordering of P3HT in the presence of pyridine and nr-CdSe, increasing ηtr.	
12


                  P3HT-amino acid
                	
                  nr-CdSe
                	3:2	
Pyridine
	 	 	 	1.5b	 	
                  P3HT-amino acid partially replaces pyridine surfactant, enhancing miscibility with NCs, hence increasing ηdiss.	
10


                  PCPDTBT
                	
                  tp-CdSe
                	1:9	
Pyridine
	0.678	10.1	0.51	3.19	55	Use of low band gap polymer increases ηA, while tetrapod CdSe increases ηtr.	
4


                  OC1C10-PPV
                	
                  tp-CdSe
                	1:6	
Pyridine
	0.76	6.42	0.44	2.4	52	Vertical phase separation with tetrapod-rich layer near cathode and polymer-rich layer near anode, increasing ηcc.	
15


                  P3HT
                	hb-CdSe	78 vol% CdSe	
Pyridine
c	0.6	3.5b	0.55b	1.1b	23b	Hyperbranched CdSe improves the percolation network, increasing ηtr. Polymer unable to penetrate branches, decreasing ηdiss.	
8


                  MEH-PPV
                	
                  tp-CdSe
                	1:9	
Pyridine
	0.69	2.86	0.46	1.13	47	
                  Tetrapod
                  CdSe increases ηtr.	
13


                  tp-CdTe
                	1:9	
Pyridine
	0.33	0.024	0.33	0.003	too low	Energy transfer of excitons favored, while charge transfer from polymer to CdTe is forbidden, hence very low ηdiss.	 
tp-CdSe0.78Te0.22	1:9	
Pyridine
	0.69	1.57	0.36	0.49	48b	Reduced HOMO and LUMO energy difference with MEH-PPV compared to CdSe, decreasing ηdiss. Light absorption mainly in the ternary NP (EQE max at 400nm), reducing ηA.	 

                  MEH-PPV
                	
                  nc-CdTe
                	1:3	
Pyridine
	0.37	0.49	0.27	0.052	 	Islands of nc-CdTe observed indicating the inefficient percolation network, i.e., low ηtr.	
16


                  MEH-PPV
                	nr-CdS	1:6	
Pyridine
	0.85	2.28	0.462	0.89	 	Replacement of HDA with pyridine increases Jsc, likely due to more intimate contact with polymer, increasing ηdiss. Annealing removes interfacial pyridine, increasing ηtr.	
18


                  P3HT
                	nc-CdS	1:4.7	None	0.611	3.54	0.333	0.72	36.5	
In situ
                  growth of the nc-CdS network increases ηtr but CdS and P3HT vertically segregate, reducing ηdiss.	
146


                  MEH-PPV
                	PbS	50–60 wt% PbS	“Surfactant-free”	1.0	0.13	0.28	0.7	21	
Surfactant-free synthesis improves PbS contact between polymer and with one another, increasing both ηdiss and ηtr.	
24


                  MDMO-PPV
                	PbS	1:2	
                  MDMO-PPV
                	0.78	0.0025	0.56	0.0013	 	Low Jsc likely indicates lack of percolation pathway for electrons since PbS NPs are surrounded by MDMO-PPV, decreasing ηtr. High series resistance was reported.	
23


                  P3HT
                	PbS	1:1	
Acetic acid
	0.35	0.08	0.36	0.01	 	Exchanged to a smaller ligand improves Jsc, i.e., increase in ηtr.	
21


                  P3HT
                	
                  PbSe
                	80 wt% PbSe	
                  Oleate
                	0.28	0.9	0.39	0.1	 	PCE increased to 0.19% when the P3HT layer is introduced at anode (remove shunt contact between PbSe and anode), increasing ηcc. Overall poor device performance likely due to large ligands surrounding PbSe—decreased ηtr and ηdiss.	
22


                  MDMO-PPV
                	
                  nc-ZnO
                	67 wt% ZnO	None	0.814	2.4	0.59	1.6	40	Non-existent ligand ensures intimate mixing between polymer and ZnO, increasing ηdiss. Also intimate contact between ZnO NPs increases ηtr.	
31


                  P3HT
                	
                  nc-ZnO
                	26 vol% ZnO	None	0.69	2.19	0.55	0.92	27	
                  P3HT:ZnO forms larger domains compared to MDMO-PPV:ZnO, decreasing ηdiff.	
33


                  P3MHOCT (thermocleaves to P3CT)	
                  np-ZnO
                	1:2	None	0.516	1.00	0.35	0.18	20	Inverted structure with a layer of ZnO on ITO as ETL, avoiding the use of reactive metal electrode, stable ηcc overtime. ZnO NPs dispersed in an insoluble rigid polymer matrix, giving stable morphology, ηdiff and ηdiss should not change.	
36


                  MDMO-PPV
                	
                  nr-ZnO
                	26 vol%	4 vol% n-propylamine	0.52	1.1	0.62	 	 	
MPP lower than without ligand. Ligand added to improve solubility of nr-ZnO but the presence of ligands likely caused the decrease in Jsc probably due to decrease in ηtr. Voc also decreases probably because of decrease in ηcc.	
34


                  nc-ZnO
                	26 vol%	2 vol% n-propylamine	0.6–0.7	1.5–1.6	0.59	 	 	The presence of surfactant caused a big decrease in Jsc while Voc slightly decreased and FF remained unchanged, indicating a drop in ηtr.

                  MDMO-PPV
                	
                  ZnO precursor	15 vol% ZnO	None	1.14	2.0	0.42	1.1	27	Almost comparable to nc-ZnO devices, except for lower FF. The highly reactive ZnO precursor degrades MDMO-PPV, which likely reduces the FF, decreasing ηdiss. No explanation offered on higher Voc compared to devices using nc-ZnO.	
30


                  P3HT
                	
                  ZnO precursor	15 vol% ZnO	None	0.83	3.5	0.50	1.4	26	
                  P3HT more stable to diethylzinc than MDMO-PPV. Homogeneous blend increases ηdiff and ηdiss.	
37


                  P3HT
                	
                  ZnO precursor	20 vol% ZnO	None	0.75	5.2	0.52	2.0	44	Thin P3HT:ZnO devices suffer low performance due to electrode-quenching effect, low ZnO content and extensive phase separation, leading to low ηcc, ηdiss and ηtr. Thicker P3HT:ZnO layers increases Jsc because of finer phase-separated domains but likely suffer from traps in the longer charge carrier pathway (low ηtr).	
39


                  P3HT-E
                	
                  ZnO precursor	17 vol% ZnO	None	1.02	2.1	0.40	0.83	25	
                  ZnO disperses better in P3HT-E than P3HT. P3HT-E gives higher Voc due to larger optical band gap and higher Jsc due to more intimate mixing (higher ηdiss and ηdiff). Jsc of P3HT-E devices decrease with increasing active layer thickness indicating limitations in ηcc. Intimate mixing also means a lower degree of crystallinity for P3HT-E (decreased ηtr).	
38


                  P3HT
                	NP–TiO2	60 vol% TiO2	None	0.44	2.759	0.356	0.424	15b	Devices spin-coated from xylene gave the best performance mainly due to higher Jsc which likely means a more efficient percolated pathway (higher ηtr). AFM reveal almost similar domain sizes between ClB and xylene films.	
29


                  PPV
                	NP–TiO2	40 wt% TiO2	None	0.46	0.1397	0.26	0.018	 	Lower degree of TiO2 crystallization likely decreases ηtr and ηdiss.	
27


                  MEH-PPV
                	
                  nr-TiO2	70 wt% TiO2	
Thiophenol
	0.70	0.456	0.34	0.157	 	Devices using thiophenol ligand perform better than pristine TiO2 due to low solubility of the latter in toluene. Low FF likely indicates low ηdiss due to the presence of ligand.	
25


                  P3HT
                	
                  nr-TiO2	53 wt% TiO2	
Pyridine
	0.52	2.97	0.54	0.83	28	Layer of pure nr-TiO2 on top of active layer improves ηcc. Devices cast from TClB perform better due to more ordered P3HT domains even in the presence of nr-TiO2 and increase in ηtr.	
28


                  MDMO-PPV
                	
                  TiO2 precursor	20 vol% TiO2	None	0.52	0.6	0.42	 	11	Poor conversion of precursor into TiO2 resulting in lower ηtr and lower ηdiss.	
26


 	Fig. 15  Chemical precursors for CdS react with mild heating to form a network of CdS with P3HT in the pores. The resulting mixed layer forms a PV device that shows an initial PCE of 1.5% under low light conditions to 0.7% under one sun. Reprinted with permission from reference 146. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 
HOMO	highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO	lowest unoccupied molecular orbital

            CB
          	conduction band

            VB
          	valence band
nc	
nanocrystals

qd	
quantum dots

tp	tetrapods
hp	hyperbranched
nr	
nanorod


            TClB
          	
1,2,4-trichlorobenzene


            P3HT
          	poly(3-hexylthiophene)

            P3HT-E
          	
ester-functionalized side chain P3HT derivative

            OC1C10-PPV
          	poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-p-phenylenevinylene]

            PCPDTBT
          	poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethyhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b; 3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]

            APFO-3
          	poly(2,7-(9,9-dioctyl-fluorene)-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole))

            MEH-PPV
          	poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene)

            TOPO
          	
trioctylphosphine oxide


            TOP
          	
trioctylphosphine


            HDA
          	
hexadecylamine


MPP
	maximum power point

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
