Synthesis, design and sensing applications of nanostructured ceria-based materials  - Analyst (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8AN01268G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8AN01268G
(Minireview)
Analyst, 2018, 143, 5610-5628Synthesis, design and sensing applications of nanostructured ceria-based materials

        
          
            Sayed Tayyab 
            Raza Naqvi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bahareh 
            Shirinfar
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Saadat 
            Majeed
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Najam-ul-Haq
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dilshad 
            Hussain
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Tanyia 
            Iqbal
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Nisar 
            Ahmed
          
          
        
      *bcd
aDivision of Analytical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan 60800, Pakistan. E-mail: saadat.majeed@bzu.edu.pk
bSchool of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TS, UK. E-mail: AhmedN14@cardiff.ac.uk
cInternational Centre for Chemical and Biological Sciences, HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry, University of Karachi, Karachi 75270, Pakistan
dSchool of Chemistry, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK
Received 
      11th July 2018
    , Accepted 22nd October 2018First published on 25th October 2018AbstractCerium-based materials possess redox properties due to the presence of dual valence states of Ce3+ and Ce4+. In the last few years, the scientific community has paid much attention to designing and synthesizing cerium-based materials through advantageous routes for widespread catalytic and sensing applications in many fields. Cerium materials have been synthesized in many different forms, shapes and sizes. The catalytic and sensing capabilities of cerium nanostructures are highly dependent on their morphologies and can be improved significantly by modifying the sizes and shapes of the nanostructures to develop sensing scaffolds with improved sensing performance. These nanostructures provide a basis for applications in many fields. From a literature survey (2010 to 2015), it can be concluded that the fundamental morphologies, ratios, and capping of cerium nanostructures (CeNSs) constructively affect their properties and applications. Designed sensors utilizing CeNSs exhibit outstanding stability, high selectivity and eminent reproducibility in relation to time and temperature. This review will provide a perspective insight on the future trends in the design of different morphologies of CeNSs and their promising applications.Sayed Tayyab Raza NaqviSyed Tayyab Raza Naqvi completed his Masters in Philosophy in Analytical Chemistry in 2014 and is now working as a PhD Scholar at the Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan. His areas of research are the design and application of metals, metal oxides and composite materials in sensing of biomolecules, environmental samples and neurotransmitters. He has expertise in materials design under controlled conditions to impart specific features to nanomaterials. He has significant experience in the preparation of novel chromatographic affinity materials and multidimensional separation technology, especially for glycoproteins.Bahareh ShirinfarBahareh Shirinfar is originally from Iran, where she obtained her BSc and MSc. She then moved to Korea to undertake PhD studies at Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). After obtaining her PhD, she moved to Switzerland to continue her career as a post-doctoral researcher at the University of Zurich. She arrived in Bristol in January 2015 to take up a Royal Society Newton Fellowship. After two years at this position at the university, she is continuing her research as senior research associate at the University of Bristol. Her research focuses on carbohydrate recognition.Saadat MajeedSaadat Majeed received her Ph.D from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Changchun, China. She joined the Division of Analytical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan as an Assistant Professor in 2016. Her research focuses on the synthesis and electrochemical applications of nanomaterials, optical materials and applications, and biosensors. She participated in the Faculty Development Program, Prime Minster Directive (100 Foreign Scholarships) (No. PF/Cont./2-50/Admin/5398).Dilshad HussainDilshad Hussain received his PhD in Chemistry from Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan. He is now working at the HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS), University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan. His fields of interest are the synthesis of functional nanomaterials and their applications in biological analysis. The main focus of his research is mass spectrometry-based proteomics, metabolomics and sensing of biomolecules for biomarker discovery. He has also demonstrated skill in designing nanomaterials for health, energy and environmental applications.Tanyia IqbalTaniya Iqbal received a M.Phil degree from Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, in 2017. Currently, she is a PhD student under the guidance of Dr Saadat Majeed at the Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan. Her research interests focus on bio-sorption, biosensing, MIPS, synthesis and fabrication of polymers, MOFs, and method development.Nisar AhmedNisar Ahmed obtained his doctorate in organic chemistry in 2012 working in the group of Prof. Kwang S. Kim (POSTECH, Korea). Subsequently, he moved to the University of Zurich, Switzerland, to perform postdoctoral work under a Novartis Fellowship. In 2015, he moved to the University of Bristol, UK. Nisar started his independent research career in 2017 at Cardiff University, United Kingdom, funded by the Welsh government and the European Commission (Marie Curie COFUND). He also holds positions as adjunct faculty at HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry and as a visiting scientist at the University of Bristol. Research in his group is focused on the electrosynthesis of organic compounds through batch/flow processes; supramolecular chemistry; and molecular recognition of biomolecules through fluorescent probes.
1. Introduction
Cerium is a lanthanide or rare-earth element; it is the most abundant of the rare earths, comprising around 0.0046% of the Earth's crust by weight. Cerium has attracted much attention from researchers in physics, chemistry, biology and materials science.1 Cerium exhibits a variable electronic structure; thus, it is different from other lanthanide elements. The energy of the inner 4f level is nearly equal to the energy of the outer or valence electrons. Because a small amount of energy is necessary to change the relative vacancy of these electronic levels, Ce mostly exists in dual oxidation states, Ce4+ and Ce3+.2 Ce4+ is considered to be the more stable state and coexists with the other oxidation state (Ce3+). A sudden change in the oxidation state of Ce is associated with the capability to store and release O2; this is called oxygen storage capacity (OSC). CeO2 has a fluorite-like shape; however, phase diagrams show that it releases O2 under reduction conditions. However, this is a reversible process, and Ce is re-oxidized to CeO2 under oxidation conditions (Fig. 1).3 Due to its unique relative stability in the tetravalent state compared to other lanthanides, which are only stable in the trivalent state, Ce is a promising material. The motility of oxygen ions in CeO2 nanostructures is another vital feature for photocatalysis and electro-chemical applications.4 The chemical and physical properties of nanocerium and bulk cerium are quite similar.
 Fig. 1  Fluorite-like crystal of CeO2 and O2 vacancies.3 Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2010. 
However, nanostructures (NSs) containing Ce3+ provide enhanced redox activity with respect to larger particles due to the abundance of defects and oxygen vacancies at their surfaces. Cerium in its oxide form was first reported in 1803 and was given the name “ceria” by Jons Jacob Berzelius in Sweden after the dwarf planet Ceres (goddess of agriculture).5 The two naturally occurring forms of cerium, carbonates (e.g., bastnasite) and phosphates (e.g., monazite), have major roles in commercial use. The oxide form, CeO2, adopts a fluorite crystalline structure; thus, it has emerged as a fascinating nanostructured material for researchers. Cerium nanostructures (CeNSs) exist in different morphologies, such as nanoparticles, nanorods, and nanowires.6,7 Ceria is a transition metal oxide; these have unique properties, are two dimensional (2D) in nature, and have a variety of applications in different fields.8 Nanocerium-based analytical tools are known to be lower in cost and very sensitive due to their special and unique properties of high surface-to-volume ratios, outstanding selectivities, non-toxicity, high IEPs (isoelectric points), high biocompatibility, good thermal and chemical stabilities, and optical and electrical activities emerging from phonon and electrical captivity.9 CeNSs modified with a large number of nano-scaled materials, such as nanocarbon structures, conducting nanopolymers and different nano-metal oxides, have been widely used for biomolecule sensing and catalytic enzyme mimetic activities.10 Cerium nanostructure-based materials have been synthesized and designed with various morphologies and sizes in order to immobilize proteins, enzymes and antigens for electrochemical luminescence detection of various biomolecules for diagnosis, prognosis and biomarker studies. In 2012, Chunwen Sun et al. highlighted the controlled synthesis, oxygen defect-related properties and utilization of as-synthesized cerium-based nanomaterials in energy and environmental applications.11,12 In 2013, ceria nanoparticles were explored in research as promising therapeutic materials for the treatment of cancer and diabetes.13 Meanwhile, evaluative results concerning the clearance, uptake and retention of these nanoparticles are incomplete, and contradictory reports exist regarding their in vitro toxicity.14 In 2015, Tiziana Montini et al. published a review on the catalytic behavior of cerium-based nanostructures.10 CeO2 has been vastly investigated in various types of catalysis in various forms, from simple nanoparticles to a variety of nanostructures and composites. CeO2-doped lanthanide nanostructures have been specially synthesized and deployed as catalysts in water–gas shift reactions (WGSR),15 photocatalysis,16 electro-catalysis17 and in the photo-degradation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs).18 The catalytic performance of CeO2 solely depends on the exposed surfaces of the nanostructures.19 The results of computer modeling studies have revealed that nanostructures with 100/110 planes execute excellent catalytic activities because of their high surface energies.20 Their prominent physio-chemical attributes are sensitively associated with the morphology of the exposed surface of the nanostructures. Therefore, it has become essential to control the design of nanostructures to offer various morphologies to account for structure–activity relationships. In the past few years, many schemes for controlled synthesis have been employed to design a variety of CeO2 nanostructures, from simple monodispersed nanoparticles to nanotubes, nanorods, nanocubes, nanoplates, bricks and polygons.21–23 This review provides the fundamental characteristics and a wide view of the catalytic aspects of cerium-based nanostructures, which promise to have significant influences on human life; this includes basic knowledge of CeO2 and its properties, characterization tools, emerging traits, theoretical investigations and catalytic applications. In the last several years, the design of cerium-based materials has received much attention due to their applications in energy, industry, the environment, and the pharmaceutical industry.24 In the present review, we briefly summarize the synthetic methods, design routes and various sensing and analytical applications of cerium-based nanostructure materials (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Cerium-based nanostructured materials designed for various applications. 
2. Synthesis, design and characterization
The controlled synthesis of CeNSs-based materials is an imperative issue for environmental and energy-related applications. However, one major advantage of using nanomaterials, including CeNSs, is that their properties can be controlled and tailored in a conventional manner to address the needs of specific desired applications. Numerous techniques, such as electrochemical,25 hydrothermal and solvothermal,26 aqueous precipitation,27 reversed micelles,28 sol–gel,29 thermal decomposition and microwave-assisted protocols30 have been adopted to synthesize CeNSs while maintaining control of their sizes and properties. Moreover, various hydrophilic and hydrophobic coatings of protective substances, such as polyethylene glycol,31 dextran,32 polyacrylic acid, polyvinyl pyrrolidone,33 cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)34 and glucose, have been used to enhance the physical and chemical properties of individual bare CeNSs. Synthetic methods and design routes are important because they determine the overall physico-chemical and optoelectronic properties of nanoparticles, including solubility, size, surface conditions, charge, structural arrangement and morphology (Table 1).35
Table 1 Morphologies, methodologies and sizes of CeNSs




CeNS/morphology
Method of preparation
Reaction parameters
Size (nm)
Ref.




Nanorods
Hydrothermal process
Annealing at 350 °C to 800 °C
Diameter = 5 to 20

36



Length ≥ 200


Nanoparticles (octahedral)
Surfactant-assisted method
Add HMT (surfactant)
Smallest particle = 2

33



Lamellar shape
Surfactant-assisted method
Ce/HEA/H2O/EG 180 °C, 30 min, pH 7
Width = 10

37



Length = 50 to 200


Array particles
Surfactant-assisted method
Ce/HEA/H2O/EG 180 °C, 24 h, pH 7
2 to 4

37



Platelet rods
Surfactant-assisted method
Ce/HEA/EG (30 ml) 180 °C, 24 h, pH 7
180 to 200

37



Rice shape
Surfactant-assisted method
Ce/HEA/H2O 20 ml/EG 10 ml 180 °C, 24 h, pH 14
6 to 10

37



Cube shape
Surfactant-assisted method
Ce/HEA/H2O 30 ml 180 °C, 3 d, pH 14
40

37



CeO2 crystalline powder (cubic fluorite structure)
Electrochemical synthesis
At 29 °C
10

10



At 80 °C
14


Sintered at 1300 °C
350


CeO2 microcrystallites
Solvothermal method
At high temp. and high pressure
≈50

24



Nano-sheets
Facile aqueous phase precipitation
At reaction temp. 0 °C
Thickness = 20 to 50

38



Petal shape


Nano-sheets
Facile aqueous phase precipitation
At reaction temp. 25 °C
Length = 5 to 10 μm

38



Belt shape
Width = 0.5 to 1.2 μm


Ultrafine uniform nanoparticles
Reverse micelle method
Mixing of microemulsions containing Ce(NO3) and NH4OH
2 to 6

39



Nanospheres
Microwave-assisted hydrothermal method
At 80 °C
About 5

40



Nanospheres/rods
At 120 °C
5 to 7


Nanorods
At 160 °C
Diameter = 10 length = 70


Nano-octahedra
Surfactant-free hydrothermal method
Addition of urea as a mineralizer
200

41



Vertically aligned nanorods and flower-like shapes
Phosphate-assisted hydrothermal method
Na3PO4(soln) in 0.1 M [Ce3+] and 0.25 M [Ce3+], respectively
Width = 20 to 40

42



Length = up to several micrometers




2.1 Hydrothermal synthesis
The hydrothermal process followed by annealing at 325 °C to 800 °C provides single-crystalline ceria nanorods 5 to 20 nm in diameter. The as-synthesized CeO2 nanorods contain high concentrations of defects from oxygen vacancies and high lattice strains. The additional annealing process results in improved lattice crystalline quality along with the evolution of novel cavity-shaped defects in the nanorods. The nanorods show polyhedral morphologies bound by (111) and (100) surfaces. Defects usually evolve via agglomeration of vacancies within the as-synthesized nanorods. This systematic annealing creates true internal cavities by diffusion of internal atoms and vacancies instead of small, unequally distributed surface pores as reported earlier. A hydrothermally synthesized cubic CeO2 nanomaterial offered high crystallinity and a well-exposed surface with (200) facets.43 Systematic annealing offers a new surface activity tuning route in addition to the previously suggested tuning by shape tuning, doping and irradiation; also, it can be integrated with previously suggested routes.44
2.2 Supercritical synthesis
In supercritical synthesis, high pressure pumps are used to pump distilled water, which is heated to a pre-determined temperature with the aid of a heat exchanger and pre-heater. High pressure pumps are also utilized to mix cerium nitrate (Ce(NO3)3) solution and ammonia (NH3) solution as a pH regulator with supercritical water in a mixing chamber located before the reactor. After mixing, the final solution is maintained in the reactor for a sufficient time period under supercritical conditions in order to synthesize cerium oxide nanoparticles. These cerium oxide nanoparticles are collected and spray dried. XRD and SEM were used to characterize the nanoparticles; the results revealed that the nanoparticles were heterosized, ranging from 15 nm to 45 nm, with heteromorphological crystalline structures.45
2.3 Surfactant-assisted synthesis
Nanosized CeNSs show better performance than micron-size powders due to their larger surface-to-volume ratios. The small nanoparticles (up to 2 nm) synthesized by mixing aqueous solutions of cerium nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine at room temperature for thirty minutes are single crystals that have either octahedral shapes with eight (111) surfaces or additional (200) surface-truncated octahedral shapes. Both types of obtained CeNSs have narrow size distributions, with standard deviations less than ±15%.46,47 Studies on the exposed reactive facet-dependent catalysis of CeO2 nanocrystals predicted that the surface reactivity on the (100) facets is considerably higher than that on either the (110) or (111) facets. These properties lead to the synthesis of high exposed percentages of (100) facets of the ceria nanocrystals, producing a more active catalytic support. The reaction mixture of cerium nitrate/hexamethylenediamine/water–ethylene glycol has produced a large number of lamellar, particle-aggregated array, platelet, rice, cube, and quasi-sphere shapes of CeNSs. Studies on the shape-dependent catalysis of bare ceria samples toward sensing of CO indicated that cube-shaped ceria nanoparticles show better catalytic activity than nanospheres and commercial micropowders. The shapes of CeNSs can be controlled by tuning their reaction parameters. The surfactant-assisted synthesis of cerium nanomaterials, using the bis-amine linker hexamethylenediamine, offers intermediated sites to hybridized secondary species in order to synthesize hybridized nanomaterials with high oxygen carrying capacities.48
2.4 Capping agent-assisted synthesis
The sizes of nanoparticles during their synthesis and the procedures adopted to synthesize them play significant roles in their sensing and catalytic activities. A slight change in the synthesis composition and conditions can lead to totally different nanostructures. The initial type of precursor, capping agent and precursor ratio determine the overall properties of CeNSs. CeO2 nanostructures synthesized using hexamethylene-tetraamine (HMTA) and fructose as capping agents show rhombohedral/cubic particles and spherical shapes, respectively. The average diameters of the NPs were found to be 6.4 nm and 5.8 nm, respectively. CeO2-HMTA, due to its higher exposure of the active (200) and (220) planes relative to the (111) plane, exhibits superior electrocatalytic activity.49 Moreover, on the other hand, the use of oleic acid and negatively charged oleate ion as capping agents forms nanocubes whose morphologies can be altered by varying the initial concentration of cerium. The number of surface oxygen vacancies highly affects the catalytic properties of CeNSs. Higher oxygen and electron vacancies are directly related to the higher ratio of Ce3+/Ce4+ in prepared nanoparticles; thus, they alter the properties of the as-synthesized materials. The role of capping agents in the synthesis of ceria nanoparticles is to control the size uniformly; however, capping agent synthesis requires high concentration of cerium salts.50,51
2.5 Microwave-assisted synthesis
The microwave-assisted method with varied temperature conditions proved to be highly efficient for the synthesis of CeO2 nanoparticles with a large number of structural defects. The samples synthesized at 80 °C consisted of spherical particles of about 5 nm, while those synthesized at 120 °C presented a mix of spherical and rod-like nanoparticles and the sample synthesized at 160 °C consisted of nanorods with an average diameter of 10 nm and lengths of 70 nm. The presence of structural defects is attributed to an associated reduction in the valence of Ce4+ ions to Ce3+ ions caused by the increasing molar fraction of oxygen vacancies at various temperatures. In this type of synthesis, microwave irradiation enhances the generation rate of anisotropic CeNSs with a variety of morphologies, regulated by the oriented attachment (OA) growth mechanism.30
2.6 Precursor and activator-assisted synthesis
During synthesis, the type of initial precursor controls the morphologies and catalytic characteristics of CeNSs, acting as both capping agent and oxidizer. The anionic composition or the type of counter ion of Cen+, such as chloride, nitrate and phosphate, in solution before further treatment controls the shapes of the CeNSs.52 These anions exhibit selective interactions with specific facets of CeO2, leading to the growth of CeNSs with varying morphologies consisting of nanospheres, nanowires, and nanorods. Usually, phosphate and chloride ions are shown to play critical roles in obtaining CeNSs with high aspect ratios. Using CeCl3 as the cerium precursor produces pure nanorods using a wide range of synthesis compositions and conditions. It was suggested that halide anions can absorb onto the surfaces of the initial Ce(OH)3 nuclei and stabilize their shapes. In contrast, the presence of oxidizing anions such as NO3− and SO42− as a precursor source gradually converts one nanostructure into another, making it unstable for further use.52–55,56 The presence of phosphate ions in a concentration-dependent manner is an important key in most cases when preparing CeO2 nanorods. PO43− produces pure nanorods up to a concentration of 1 × 10−3 M. However, when the phosphate ion concentration is increased above 1 × 10−2 M, cerium phosphate impurities often appear in the final CeNS products and limit their applications. The fascinating precursor and activator-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of CeNSs is inexpensive and simple; thus, this scheme is promising for other faceted nanomaterials.57
2.7 Template-free hydrothermal synthesis
In template and surfactant-free hydrothermal synthesis, cerium nanomaterials are synthesized by stirring a solution of 12.5 mL 28% ammonia solution and 0.5 M cerium nitrate or cerium chloride for 30 min; after stirring, the precipitates are washed with ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) or ammonium carbonate ((NH4)2CO3) before undergoing hydrothermal treatment. Unlike techniques and procedures that require the use of organic and inorganic additives or templates, surfactant- and template-free solution precipitation along with hydrothermal treatment represents a simple yet effective means to fabricate CeO2 nanowires or nanoparticles. These nanostructures possess the potential to be further tuned to provide a morphologically controllable route for tailoring and designing CeO2 nanomaterials for a wide variety of applications.53 It is well known that the use of chemical additives and the successive removal process may contaminate CeNSs and influence their potential applications or biological responses; therefore, these additives should be avoided. The most commonly used strategy to prepare Ce nanostructures in a template-free system is to mix Ce3+ salt with a high concentration of alkaline solution without any additives, leading to the formation of CeNSs with nanorod nuclei. These rod-like Ce(OH)3 nanocrystals can be further converted to CeO2 without any shape changes.54,58
2.8 Phosphate-assisted synthesis
In contrast to template-free synthesis, Xing and co-workers59,60 established a procedure for the synthesis of CeNSs under acidic conditions using a very small amount of sodium phosphate (Na3PO4·6H2O2) as a mineralizer (Fig. 3). The as-synthesized nanostructures provide better dispersion and narrower size distributions than those obtained under alkaline conditions. Additionally, in the presence of phosphate, morphologies of hierarchical architectures can be selectively produced by adjusting the Ce3+ ion concentration.
 Fig. 3  Template-free hydrothermal synthesis of CeO2 nano-octahedrons and nanorods.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2008. 
Flower-like and vertically aligned nanorod morphologies could be obtained at Ce3+ ion concentrations of 0.25 M and 0.1 M, respectively. Generally, the phosphate ions in the reaction controlled the overall morphologies of the CeO2 nanostructures by controlling the electrostatic potentials and surface energies of the CeO2 nanorods (Scheme 1).
 Scheme 1  Schematic of the formation of ordered hierarchical architectures of CeO2 nanorods.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2008. 
Because different morphologies affect the overall properties of CeNS materials, they can be obtained by carefully adjusting the synthesis conditions, such as precursor concentration, temperature and synthesis time. CeO2 nanowires show higher catalytic activity for CO oxidation and oxygen storage capacity than nanorods and nanoparticles. Si and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos observed a strong shape/crystal plane effect of CeO2 on gold–ceria activity for the water–gas shift reaction. Rod-like ceria enclosed by (110) and (100) planes offered the most active surfaces for gold stabilization and activation. In this synthesis, the addition of phosphate can help regulate the shapes of CeNSs by regulating the surface energy and electrostatic potential of cerium oxide nanorods.61
2.9 Co-Precipitation method for synthesis
Co-Precipitation synthesis combines the advantages of simplicity and low solubility coefficients; it can be utilized as a commercial method for synthesis. CeO2 nanoparticles in the range of 2 to 8 nm were synthesized via a co-precipitation method using NaOH,62 urea63 and ammonia64 as precipitating agents. The size and shape of nanoparticles can be tailored by varying the reaction parameters; rod-like particles and spherical particles were synthesized by oxidization by H2O2 at pH 8 and below pH 7, respectively. This method of synthesis is a propitious route to regulate the sizes and morphologies of nanomaterials.
2.10 Electrodeposition method of synthesis
Eu-Doped CeO2 nanosheets are synthesized by preparing a solution of nitrates of europium, cerium and ammonium in concentrations of 0.01 M, 0.001 M and 0.1 M, respectively. This solution is maintained at −0.2 mA for 60 min at 70 °C. Different concentration ranges (1% to 8%) of dopant are doped with this method. In order to remove impurities, the product is washed with distilled water and dried for 24 h. The as-prepared nanorods are annealed at 550 °C for 60 min. The resulting Eu-doped CeO2 nanosheets (Fig. 4) can be readily tailored by varying the percentage of Eu in Ce.65
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the (a) 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, (b) CeO2 nanosheets, (c) 1% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, (d) 2% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, (e) 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, and (f) 8% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets. (g) TEM image and SAED pattern of the 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets. (h) HRTEM image of the 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Elsevier, 2016. 
CeO2 nano-octahedrons (Fig. 5) were synthesized by galvanostatic electrodeposition comprising F-decorated-SnO2-glass as the working electrode, a graphite rod as the auxiliary electrode and Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. All electrodes were dipped in a solution of cerium nitrate and dimethyl sulfoxide in water.66
 Fig. 5  SEM images of CeO2 nano-octahedrons. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2010. 
Spherical and needle-shaped core shell nanostructures were electrochemically synthesized by electrophoretic deposition (EPD). To synthesize the ceria-based nanostructures, a polystyrene-based scaffold (working electrode) was dipped in two different concentrations of Ce(NO3)3 solution (10 and 1 mM). As the concentration of Ce(NO3)3 was changed from 10 mM to 1 mM, the shapes changed from spherical core–shell to needle-like porous core–shell (as shown in Fig. 6).67
 Fig. 6  SEM images of spherical and needle-like ceria-based core shells.67 Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2009. 
The sensing activities of ceria-based nanostructures can be further enhanced, specifically at low temperatures, by regulating their sizes and morphologies.68 Electrochemical synthesis of nanostructures can be readily executed at ambient temperature, which offers excellent control of the sizes and morphologies of the as-synthesized nanostructures.
3. Structure–activity relationships of ceria
CO2 generation from the oxidation of CO is based on the energy required for oxygen extraction from nano-ceria catalysts.69 The lower the energy required for extraction, the greater the catalytic activity towards oxidation. Undoubtedly, energy required to generate oxygen positions on nano-ceria catalysts is a simple but promising tool to predict the catalytic behavior of ceria-based nanostructures.70 It was determined that it is facile to obtain oxygen from ceria nano-catalysts possessing {310}, {110} and bipolar {100} facets relative to those containing {111} facets. However, these active facets show less thermal stability compared to the {111} facets. Synthesis of ceria-based structures at the nanoscale offers more active ceria facets compared to bulk ceria; particularly, ceria nanostructures possess high weight percentages of {110} and {100} facets relative to {111} facets. Additionally, ceria nanocubes comprising six {100} active facets have been engineered by regulating the synthetic protocols and parameters.71 Specifically, the energy required to extricate oxygen from ceria-based nanomaterials was estimated to be the highest for bulk ceria (+623 kJ per mole) and the lowest for ceria with active {100} facets (+51 kJ per mole). Consequently, the catalytic activity of ceria-based nanostructures can be modified, controlled and enhanced by generating oxygen defects.10 It was also revealed from further investigations that the activity with respect to oxidation was minimal for ceria-based mesoporous nanocubes and maximal for small ceria nanoparticles. This indicates that small nanoparticles possessing {100} facets require lower amounts of energy to extract oxygen compared to other nanostructures. Moreover, it was disclosed that oxygen was depleted by up to 10% as oxidation proceeded; this was the maximum depletion reached. However, this was not true in the case of the smallest nanoparticles of 3.5 nm; these did not exhibit the maximum oxygen depletion of 10% but rather showed facile oxygen extraction at 2%.72 This oxygen deficiency was restored via reduction of NO2 to NO. All these structure–activity relationship studies were supported by molecular dynamic simulations (MD simulations). MD simulations were employed to develop atomic models of various ceria-based nanomaterials possessing various structures. These atomic models were deployed to estimate the energy required for ceria nanostructures to catalyze the oxidation (CO to CO2) and reduction (NO2 to NO) processes. Particularly, the energy required for the creation of oxygen defects was estimated; this has been found to be a simple but promising tool to predict the catalytic activities of ceria nanostructures. These calculated activity results were used to control the experiments because the sizes, numbers of defects and engineering of various shapes play key parts in driving their catalytic activities. Conclusively, defect generation on ceria-based nanostructures can be readily and finely regulated during the synthesis reaction by exposure of the ceria nanostructures to oxidizing or reducing conditions.73
4. Sensing applications of ceria
The formation of aqueous cerium complexes and solubility products involves binding of a metal center (Ce3+ or Ce4+) to other ligands and organic molecules to form a coordination complex. These complexes can be utilized for screening, sensing and investigating various sensing applications in many fields. In the following sections, we review a wide range of electrochemical, luminescent, fluorescent, biomedical and gas sensors.74–76
4.1. Nano-enriched electrochemical and ECL sensing
Novel analytical devices based on cerium nanostructured metal oxides are known to be cost-effective and highly sensitive due to their large surface-to-volume ratios and excellent selectivities. Due to their electrical conductivity, good catalytic activity, large surface area, chemical stability, adsorption, nontoxicity, and biocompatibility, CeNSs are promising materials to fabricate electrochemical biosensors. The microenvironments and adopted synthesis methods also play important roles in determining the activity of CeNSs. For example, CeO2 nanowires show higher catalytic activity for CO oxidation and higher oxygen storage capacity than nanorods and nanoparticles. CeNS sensors possess unique regenerative properties due to their low reduction potentials and the co-existence of Ce3+/Ce4+ on their surfaces. The surfaces of the sensors are influenced by the Ce3+/Ce4+ ratio and the microenvironment. Defects in the crystal lattice due to the presence of Ce3+ play an important role in tuning the redox activities of CeNSs.77,78 Cerium oxide can act as a redox couple; thus, it is a promising material to act as a matrix for the fabrication of mediator-less amperometric biosensors. Further, due to its high isoelectric point (IEP) of ∼9.0, CeO2 is suitable for adsorption of enzymes with low IEPs, such as glucose oxidase (GOx) with an IEP of 4.2,79 without any harsh chemical treatment.
In 1967, the first GOx enzyme-based glucose biosensor was prepared by Hicks and Updicks. Since then, continuous research has been performed to develop GOx enzyme-based biosensors for impedimetric, conductometric, potentiometric, and amperometric sensing of glucose.64,80,81 A successful attempt was made towards the fabrication of a mediator-less amperometric glucose biosensor by immobilization of GOx enzyme on the nanoporous surfaces of CeO2 thin films. These films were deposited on platinum-coated glass slides using pulsed laser deposition. Response studies carried out on the bio-electrodes using differential pulsed voltammetry and optical measurements showed linearity of glucose detection in the range of 25 to 300 mg dL−1. The linear increase in the oxidation current at 0.33 V with increasing glucose concentration up to 300 mg dL−1 indicated the potential of the CeO2 matrix for realization of a mediator-less biosensor. The relatively low Michaelis–Menten constant (∼1.01 mM) and longer shelf life of up to 10 weeks showed the enhanced enzymatic activity and stability of glucose oxidase on the CeO2/Pt surface.82 Similarly, a nanostructured-cerium oxide film covered by co-immobilized urease and glutamate dehydrogenase functioned as a bio-electrode for detection of urea in analytical samples. The particle size of the nano-CeO2 film was about 23 nm. The film was deposited onto an indium–tin–oxide coated glass substrate by dip-coating via a sol–gel process. The electrochemical response of the bioelectrode was found to be sensitive in the range of 10 to 80 mg dL−1, and it could detect urea concentrations to a 0.1 mg dL−1 level.83
Nano-CeO2 particles provide increased electro-active surface areas for the loading of analytes with desired orientations, resulting in enhanced electron communication between the analyte and electrode. Rabbit-immunoglobulin antibodies and bovine serum albumin immobilized onto a sol–gel-derived nanostructured cerium oxide film fabricated on an indium–tin–oxide (ITO)-coated glass plate provided an electrochemical response for the detection of ochratoxin-A. The nano CeO2/ITO immune electrode exhibits improved characteristics for linear range (0.5 to 6 ng dL−1), a low detection limit (0.25 ng dL−1), fast response time (30 s) and high sensitivity (1.27 μA ng−1 dL−1 cm−2).84 Due to their excellent electronic conductivity, CeNSs are an attractive matrix for biosensor applications. However, CeO2 sometimes suffers from low electron conductivity, which seriously affects its electrocatalytic efficiency. To overcome this shortcoming, cerium oxide-coated multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CeO2@MWCNTs) and nonporous CeO2 thin films have been constructed to improve the conductivity and surface-to-volume ratio to detect biologically important molecules.82,85,86 GO/MWCNTs-COOH/Au@CeO2 can serve as a highly sensitive label-free ECL immunosensor for detection of carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA), where CeO2 nanoparticles were exploited as an ECL luminescent material. The proposed ECL immunosensors provide antigen–antibody specific recognition. The electron transfer was hindered by the proteins, and the ECL response in turn decreased with increasing concentration of CEA (Fig. 7).87
 Fig. 7  Fabrication of a label-free ECL immunosensor.87 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2015. 
Due to the catalytic activity of ceria mesoporous spheres in aqueous media, they are a powerful tool for a wide range of potential applications in bioassay and biological areas. The large surface area of CeNSs can provide a better matrix for the immobilization of desired analytes, leading to increased loading per unit mass of nanoparticles. A three-dimensional (3D) architecture was fabricated by combining multiwall carbon nanotubes and CeO2 mesoporous spheres using the layer-by-layer method, and an electrochemical immunoassay was used for sensitive detection of prostate-specific antigen (PSA). The CeO2 mesoporous spheres and the excellent conductivity of MWCNTs combined to impart a highly suitable microenvironment for effective antibody immobilization, high stability and bioactivity.88 CeNS-decorated graphite felt (GF) composites have been applied as high-performance electrode materials for vanadium redox flow batteries. Decoration of the electrode with CeNSs significantly improved the electrochemical activity of pristine graphite felt. SEM and X-ray diffraction studies showed homogeneous dispersion of nano-ceria on the GF. CeO2/GFs exhibited higher activity and better reversibility towards the VO2+/VO2+ redox reaction (Fig. 8) compared with pristine graphite felt. Single cell analysis of the vanadium redox flow batteries indicated that CeO2/GF (0.2 wt%) showed the highest energy efficiency of 64.7% at a current density of 200 mA cm2, which is significantly higher than that of pristine GF (53.9%). Furthermore, cycle lifetime tests demonstrated outstanding stability of the CeO2/GFs electrode.89
 Fig. 8  The anticipated redox mechanism on the CeO2/GF electrode regarding VO2+/VO2+. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2014. 
CeO2 showed attractive sensitizing effects in a ruthenium bipyridine-tramadol {Ru (bpy)32+-tramadol} electrochemiluminescence system. Under optimal conditions for the Ru(bpy)32+-tramadol system, a linear relationship between the ECL intensity and the concentration of tramadol in the range of 1.0 × 10−10 to 2.5 × 10−8 mol L−1 was observed, with a detection limit of 9.0 × 10−11 mol L−1 and a relative standard deviation of 2.9% (S/N = 3). The higher charging currents at the CeO2–Ru (bpy)32+-carbon paste electrode were attributed to the increase in the electrode surface area due to the presence of CeO2 nanoparticles. The CeNPs increased the surface area and enhanced the electrocatalytic activity by the redox behavior of Ce4+/Ce3+. The redox behavior significantly catalyzed the oxidation of Ru(bpy)32+ to Ru(bpy)33+.90 Electrochemical studies of uric acid have become an active area of research in recent years.91 Uric acid is the final metabolic product of purine nucleotide catabolism in humans, and abnormal levels of uric acid are symptoms of several diseases, such as gout and hyperuricaemia. CeNSs as electro-active substrate materials, such as nanoceria, have been used to modify glassy carbon electrodes, made distinctive by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electric cell–substrate impedance sensing (ECIS), for sensitive and selective determination of uric acid in analytical samples. In mildly acidic buffer at pH 6.0, a CeNS-modified electrode showed outstanding electro-catalytic activity for the oxidation of uric acid (UA). The catalytic current produced at the electrode surface has a good linear relationship to uric acid in the range of 2.0 × 10−7 to 5.0 × 10−4 mol L−1 with a detection limit of 1.0 × 10−7 mol L−1 and a correlation coefficient of 0.9986.92 Cerium doping grants a higher electro-catalytic response and shelf life. Increasing the atomic proportion of cerium in nano-composite electrodes increases the electro-active properties of Ce-doped electrodes. Ce-Doped PbO2 electrodes retain increased oxygen evolution overpotential (1.98 V) compared to PbO2 electrodes (1.51 V) and Ce-doped PbO2 electrodes, with a storage life of 135 hours.93 As-Synthesized CeO2 nanocubes dispersed on exfoliate graphene offered outstanding electrochemical sensing of UA. The prepared electrode exhibited 30 times more sensitive electrochemical sensing than a pristine CeO2-modified electrode.43
4.2. Nano-enriched sensing for bioanalytical applications
CeNSs are well-known as catalysts and possess attractive potential pharmacological, biological and medical applications due to their antioxidant properties.94,95 These nanoparticles are well known to exhibit free radical scavenging properties by reversible binding and shifting between their reduced (Ce3+) and oxidized (Ce4+) forms at the particle surfaces. Ce° is present in the Ce4+ valence state; it shows great efficiency to absorb oxygen and co-exist with the reduced form (Ce3+).96,97 Due to this shifting between the two states, CeNSs are a promising and attractive biocompatible platform for biological systems and applications. They have been tested and widely used in both animal and cell culture models to determine their ability to protect against oxidative stress.98–100
CeNSs have been reported to exhibit activity to protect cells from many reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. They have been reported to show significant superoxide dismutase (SOD)–mimetic activity101 and catalase–mimetic activity77 in cells.71 SOD catalyzes the disproportionation of superoxide to H2O2 and O2 in two steps, as follows:Mn+1-SOD + O2˙− → Mn+-SOD + O2Mn+-SOD + O2˙− → Mn+1-SOD + H2O2.
Due to the valence switching ability of CeNSs, these materials can be used as SOD mimics.102 Normally, oxidative stress is a condition where the concentrations of free radicals and reactive molecular species increase above certain levels in living systems. This condition not only perturbs the normal physiology of systems but also has been implicated in many diseases in humans and other animals. Hydrogen peroxide is known to be involved in the induction of oxidative stress and has also been linked to a variety of ailments in humans, such as inflammation, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, and cancer. CeNSs were synthesized using different capping agents, namely hexamethylenetetraamine and fructose. Both the NPs showed excellent amperometric responses to hydrogen peroxide, with sensitivities as low as 21.13 and 9.6 μA cm−2 mM−1 for hexamethylene-tetra-amine and fructose-based materials, respectively.
CeNSs function as chromogenic indicators in colorimetric probes in response to analytes based on changes in the physicochemical properties of the ceria nanoparticles. Ceria nanoparticles co-immobilized with glucose oxidase onto filter paper using a silanization procedure efficiently detected enzymatic hydrogen peroxide production in a concentration-dependent manner. The assay (Fig. 9) is fully reversible and can be reused for consecutive measurements without significant loss of activity.103 Similarly, CeO2 NPs exhibited intrinsic peroxidase-like activity, which can catalyze the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine in the presence of H2O2 to produce a blue color (Fig. 10).104
 Fig. 9  Paper bioassay based on ceria nanoparticles as colorimetric probes.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2011. 
 Fig. 10  (A) Images of a solution of CeO2 NPs redispersed in water; (a) a mixture of TMB@2HCl and H2O2 after catalytic reaction with the CeO2 NPs; (b) the mixture of TMB@2HCl and H2O2 after adding H2SO4 to quench the catalytic reaction with the CeO2 NPs (c). (B) Schematic of the colorimetric detection of glucose using glucose oxidase (GOx) and CeO2 NPs-catalyzed reactions.104 Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2012. 
Ce3+ self-doped ceria-based CeO2:Tb3+,Ce3+ nanoparticles offer a tunable luminescence platform for many analytes. The excess Ce3+ ions give rise to energy transfer from Ce3+ to Tb3+ in the nanoparticles and show tunable green luminescence, a long lifetime and low photobleaching in water. The luminescence intensity of the CeO2:Tb3+,Ce3+ nanoparticles is sensitive to H2O2 concentration due to the high ratio of Ce3+/Ce4+ in ceria. The gradual quenching of the emission intensity of the nanoparticles can be recovered by treatment with ascorbic acid. This on–off luminescence cycling reveals the good anti-fatigue properties of the CeO2:Tb3+,Ce3+ nanoparticles (Fig. 11).105
 Fig. 11  A self-doped Ce3+-enhanced CeO2 host matrix for energy transfer from Ce3+ to Tb3+.105 Reproduced from ref 105 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2013. 
CeNSs are potential antioxidant agents in vivo and in vitro because of their very attractive features, such as high biocompatibility and the possibility to regenerate the initial oxidation state through redox cycling reactions.49,106 CeNSs protect cells from oxidative damage, radiation damage, oxidative stress and inflammation.99 In a study, nanoceria was injected into transgenic mice expressing monocyte chemo-attractant protein-1 in their cardiac tissue. These mice develop myocardial inflammation, leading to fatal ischemic cardiomyopathy.107 Nanoceria injection relieved many clinical symptoms of the transgenic mice, possibly due to its radical scavenging properties, which decrease inflammation.102,108 Moreover, nanoceria decreased ROS production and apoptosis induced on H9c2 cardio-myoblasts cultured in high glucose levels to mimic diabetes conditions.98
The oxidase-like activity of nanoceria can be tuned by changing the pH of the solution, facilitating mild oxidation of a substrate to yield a product with enhanced fluorescence properties. CeNSs oxidized ampliflu at pH 7 to a fluorescent product, resorufin, without further oxidizing the substrate to the non-fluorescent product resazurin (Fig. 12). This unique capability of nanoceria is due to its mild oxidizing activity at neutral pH, which prevents further oxidation of the substrate to resazurin in the absence of hydrogen peroxide. In order to detect cancer biomarkers, on the basis of the above results, CeNSs surface-immobilized antibodies were conjugated with protein G to identify the expression of epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and folate receptor in patients suffering from breast carcinoma and lung carcinoma, respectively. The conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) had a higher display time of 15 hours, a higher detection limit and multiple washing steps; meanwhile, the CeNSs detected the expression of folate and EpCAM within 3 hours. In light of these results and the capability of the CeNSs to oxidize ampliflu to a stable fluorescent product at pH 7.0, utilization of antibody-immobilized CeNSs in the lab and in molecular diagnosis is predicted. The selective nanoceria-mediated oxidation of ampliflu may be used to develop a sensitive cell-based ELISA, offering various advantages over the conventional HRP/H2O2 ELISA.103,109
 Fig. 12  The capability of CeNSs to oxidize ampliflu at various pH values. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2011. 
Reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation mechanisms in living cells are involved in the regulation of gene expression and protein synthesis, which controls cell growth, division and differentiation.110–112 CeNSs has been reported to show high efficiency in phosphopeptide enrichment as well as in dephosphorylation. These nanostructures provide true compatibility and enhanced overall working efficiency in composites with Fe2O3 and SnO2. The enrichment/de-phosphorylation effects of ceria-nanocomposites provide a route to identify protein phosphorylation as well as lower detection limits for biomarker detection.113 CeNSs demonstrate a range of activities in human cells as well. Unlike other microorganisms, effective uptake of CeO2 by human cells has been investigated frequently. These nanomaterials modulate brain-derived neurotrophic factor pathways in human Alzheimer's disease models in order to trigger neuronal survival.114
Cerium oxide nanoparticles play important roles in antimicrobial resistance detection by shifts in their absorbance. Madero-Visbal et al.115 recently suggested that CeO2NPs decrease dermatitis and skin hyperpigmentation in cells exposed to ionizing radiation. Moreover, these NPs protected the gastrointestinal epithelium from radiation-induced damage through reduction of reactive oxygen species and by upregulation of superoxide dismutase.116 Ischemic stroke is a leading cause of adult disability and is one of the leading causes of death worldwide. Optimal doses of CeNPs in living animals were found to decrease ischemic brain damage. The nanoparticles target the damaged area by disrupting the blood–brain barrier after ischemia; thus, these CeNPs are chemically potent and biologically compatible materials.117
4.3 Nano-enriched sensing for environmental and industrial applications
CeNSs offer promising nanostructure scaffolds for carbonic anhydrase inhibitors118,119 and oxygen sensing101 due to their oxygen storage capability, adequate sensitivity and inexpensive synthesis. CeNSs are potent candidates in free radical scavenging, sensing and quantification of peroxide levels, and real-time monitoring of dissolved oxygen120 because of their unique redox properties.
Ce-Doped PbO2 electrodes possess higher oxygen evolution overpotentials (1.98 V) than PbO2 electrodes (1.51 V) and Ce-doped PbO2 electrodes. The shelf life of the nanocomposite electrodes is 135 hours. Increasing the atomic percentage of cerium in the nanocomposite electrodes increases their electrocatalytic behavior.121 The malachite green (MG) and chemical oxygen demand (COD) elimination efficiencies of cerium-doped PbO2 reached 95.4% and 69.3%, respectively, with 30 mA cm−2 current density at pH 5.0. Ce-Doped PbO2 showed the highest COD elimination efficiency and decreased energy dissipation with the degradation of MG. A Pd-CeO2 nano-catalyst showed excellent catalytic activity for the degradation of lignite, humic acid and water humic acid, which are health hazards.122 3D-CeO2 nanocubes were compared with 1D-CeO2 nanorods for the catalytic degradation of aryl alcohols and alkanes; the nanocubes proved to be excellent catalysts under green conditions because they possess efficient uniform {100} facets.123 Over several years, CeO2, CeO2-based nanostructures and their rare earth metal oxides have attracted great attention as catalysts and as electronic and morphological stimulators in heterogeneous catalytic processes.124 Therefore, CeO2-based nanomaterials are being studied as sensors for gases such as NOx,125 COx,126 H2,127,128 O2129 and SOx.130
Monitoring and detection of gases is of utmost importance for emissions, toxic gas detection, and process control. The development of high temperature gas sensors for industrial applications such as combustion processes is essential to improve the energy efficiency of these processes and reduce toxic emissions.131,132 Gas sensors operating at high temperatures up to 1000 °C typically encounter many challenging issues, such as poor thermal stability. A composite material of Ce, ceria-zirconia, has been investigated for use as temperature-compensating materials for resistive oxygen sensors in lean-burn engines. The composite showed superior function as a long-term thermally stable material which provides higher sensitivity, reproducibility and selectivity and is suitable for application in harsh environments.133 Similarly, gas sensors which can operate at low temperatures are required for portable and low power consumption sensors. CeNSs as NO2 gas sensors effectively detect low concentrations of NO2 at low temperatures with high sensitivity for environmental monitoring. Nanorod array films of Ce-doped ZnO on Al2O3 substrates with Pt spiral electrodes provide low operation temperature NO2 sensors by undergoing rapid and repeatable redox cycles. Ce doping not only improves the sensor response to NO2, but also decreases the operating temperature.134 Screen-printed potentiometric electrodes based on CeO2 oxides have been constructed to monitor the pH of Callovo–Oxfordian formation (COx), a candidate for nuclear waste storage. The electrochemical behavior of CeO2-based screen-printed electrodes (CeO2-based SPEs) was determined by cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The electrochemical behavior of the CeO2-based electrode showed superior electrochemical sensing; it can be effectively used without the need for high-input impedance equipment.135 CeNSs have also emerged as attractive redox active materials for solar thermo-chemical cycles; they can split CO2 and H2O to produce a mixture of CO and H2 (syngas). The H2O/CO2-splitting in the solar thermochemical cycle based on oxygen-deficient ceria occurs in two steps.136,137 During the high-temperature endothermic step, ceria is thermally reduced to a non-stoichiometric state using concentrated solar energy. In the subsequent, lower temperature exothermic step, ceria is re-oxidized with H2O and/or CO2 to produce H2 and/or CO, respectively. The effective efficiency for CO2 and H2O splitting of the solvothermal chemical cycles increases due to the unique property of CeNSs where they exist in dual states.138
In order to obtain synergistic effects of ceria and cerium nitride, a ceria nanorod hybrid with cerium nitride was synthesized by providing an ammonia environment and high temperature treatment. The interfacial junctions between ceria and cerium nitride offer elevated electron transfer, by which the catalytic activity is enhanced.139 As a result, hybrid ceria rods demonstrated high photo-thermocatalysis of MB and phenol degradation and outstanding stability.140 In the last decade, many ceria-based nanocomposites with noble metals have been synthesized to degrade hazardous formaldehyde. Recent research has revealed that noble metal such as Au and Pt-based microporous nanocomposites with ceria offer 100% efficiency in formaldehyde photo-degradation at low temperature. Due to the preciousness of noble metals, 1D ceria and titania nanowires have been designed. In comparison to large volume nanomaterials, the nanowires provides larger active surface areas and lower diffusivity paths for charge transfer, hence, they possess extremely high potential for catalysis. As-synthesized CeO2/TiO2 nanowires showed 60.2% conversion at 60 °C. The nanowires had superb long-term cycle stability and showed no catalytic activity loss after 100 hours; they also exhibited good photo-conversion of toluene.141
The oxygen storage capacity (OSC) of CeO2 also plays a vital role in its photocatalytic activity. The OSC can be increased by defect chemistry. In order to increase defects, CeO2 nanosheets doped with Eu were prepared for photo-degradation of formaldehyde. As a result, the as-synthesized 4% Eu-doped CeO2 nanosheets exhibited outstanding performance in the photo-degradation of HCHO at a low temperature of 120 °C as well as remarkably enhanced photo-catalysis for HCHO gas degradation under ultra-violet exposure. Moreover, they offered high cycle stability for catalytic oxidation and photo-degradation.65 BiOI-supported CeO2 nanosheets were prepared and analyzed for photocatalytic activity and O2 gas evolution. These nanosheets offered an enhanced surface area for the deposition of BiOI, which provided large numbers of defects on their surfaces. Among varying percentages of BiOI, 40% by weight-supported CeO2 nanosheets exhibited 89% elimination of rhodamine blue (Rh B) dye (Fig. 13) and generated 323 × 10−3 mM O2 in 2 hours.142
 Fig. 13  Mechanism of the catalytic degradation of RhB. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2017. 
5. Conclusion and future perspectives
Ceria nanomaterials have attracted attraction in the past decade due to their promising applications in the energy, biomedical, pharmaceutical, and environmental fields as well as in industry. Ceria nanostructures have gained this attention due to their unique sizes and shapes and their crystallographic, optical, electrical and redox-active behaviors. To improve the properties of ceria nanostructures in terms of their applications, an enormous number of reaction mechanisms and synthetic procedures have been designed. Various experimental conditions for the growth of CeO2 nanocrystals, including time, temperature, additives, pH value and concentration, have been investigated; consistent annealing in hydrothermal synthesis has been found to produce nanorods of cerium oxide with high oxygen defects. In surfactant and capping agent-assisted synthesis, the shapes and morphologies of the obtained nanostructures change with changing concentration of the surfactant or capping agent. Microwave-assisted synthesis can enable control of the shape conversion by varying the temperature. The concentration and type of the initial precursor also play vital roles in the generation of variety in the morphologies and sizes of nanomaterials via adopting precursor and activator-assisted synthesis. The methods we described earlier utilize organic or inorganic additives to generate various CeNSs with a variety of morphologies, shapes, sizes and facet features. In order to avoid contamination caused by the addition and sequential elimination of these additives, we commonly follow the template-free hydrothermal method. The high potential of cerium aqueous solution to form coordination complexes has been utilized in screening, sensing and studying different applications in many areas. Due to their improved structural, mechanical, and electrical properties with high biocompatibility and non-toxicity, CeNSs are suitable materials for fabricating bio-electrodes. These bio-electrodes have been used to screen, sense and study various biomolecules, including glucose, enzymes, amino acids, proteins, nucleotides, DNA and RNA, with high selectivity, specificity and sensitivity. Due to the dual oxidation states of CeNSs, they demonstrate free radical and reactive oxygen scavenging activities. Therefore, CeNSs and their composites have been applied to detect cancer biomarkers and in the treatment of disorders caused by ROSs and radiation damage. Furthermore, due to the redox activeness, oxygen scavenging capacity and high thermal stability of cerium nanomaterials, they have played vital roles in environmental, industrial and energy applications, such as removal of hydrogen peroxide, MG and COD from water, sensing of toxic gases, increased solvothermal reactions and energy storage devices. Therefore, the overview in this article provides a comprehensive understanding of the design of new ceria-based nanostructures with desired properties for widespread applications.
Monitoring of cerium oxide nanoparticles in precise time in the course of a desired cellular framework in vitro provides the predominant understanding required to use these systems as possible remedies for maladies involving unmediated ROS generation. Upconversion luminescence of CeNSs is expected to be possible in aqueous media by encapsulation or through synthesizing cerium oxide as a shell surrounding a strongly upconverting luminescent center. Cerium oxide nanoparticle treatment is likely to be achievable via cellular systems in vivo. The advancement of in vivo studies requires progress in targeting and additional studies of the prolonged-time period effects of containing these nanomaterials within cellular systems.
Numerous efforts have been made to devise ultrasensitive biosensors for studying bio-molecules such as proteins, amino acids, enzymes, DNA and glucose without interference from other redox-active species. With the aid of nanotechnology, it has become possible to develop highly sensitive devices to study biomolecules at the molecular level to some degree. Because CeNSs have large surface-to-volume ratios, high IEP values and offer better surfaces for enzyme immobilization, scientists have paid much consideration to these electrode materials in anticipation of highly stable, highly sensitive materials excluding less interfering free bio-molecules study. The use of nanostructures for the treatment of diseases is an exciting domain of biomedical research; its promising potential has yet to be discerned. Current in vitro and in vivo studies have revealed that CeO2 nanoparticles may enable the remediation of disorders related to enhanced tissue oxidative stress due to ROS and inflammation. In the coming years, CeNSs may be promising therapeutic materials for disorders arising from oxidative stress and inflammation. In the future, CeNSs will deliver more significant contributions to energy transformation and storage devices (e.g. fuel cells and renewable fuels from solar energy, lithium-air batteries) and green protection and remediation (e.g. treatment of harmful pollutants) as well as the newly emerging domain of biomedical applications (e.g. antioxidant agents, free radical scavenging and immune assays).
Abbreviations

CeNSsCerium nanostructures
IEPIsoelectric point
CTABCetyltrimethylammonium bromide
HMTAHexamethylenetetramine
ECLElectrochemical luminescence
GOxGlucose oxidase
MWCNTMultiwalled carbon nanotubes
ECISElectric cell impedance sensing
CEACarcino-embrynic antigen
PSAProstate specific antigen
CODChemical oxygen demand
MGMalachite green

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
A Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions COFUND Fellowship to Dr Nisar Ahmed is gratefully acknowledged. We are also thankful to the Higher Education Commission (HEC) of Pakistan for financial support and cooperation.
References
M. Pawar, S. T. Sendoǧdular and P. Gouma, J. Nanomater., 2018, 2018, 13 CrossRef .
C. Xu and X. Qu, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e90 CrossRef CAS .
L. Malavasi, C. A. J. Fisher and M. S. Islam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4370–4387 RSC .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 219–270 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Dahle and Y. Arai, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2015, 12, 1253–1278 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Pirmohamed, J. M. Dowding, S. Singh, B. Wasserman, E. Heckert, A. S. Karakoti, J. E. S. King, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2736–2738 RSC .
E. G. Heckert, A. S. Karakoti, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 2705–2709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
V. Baldim, F. Bedioui, N. Mignet, I. Margaill and J. F. Berret, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6971–6980 RSC .
T. Montini, M. Melchionna, M. Monai and P. Fornasiero, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5987–6041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Walkey, S. Das, S. Seal, J. Erlichman, K. Heckman, L. Ghibelli, E. Traversa, J. F. McGinnis and W. T. Self, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2015, 2, 33–53 RSC .
W.-X. Tang and P.-X. Gao, MRS Commun., 2016, 6, 311–329 CrossRef CAS .
F. Corsi, F. Caputo, E. Traversa and L. Ghibelli, Front Oncol., 2018, 8, 309 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dhall and W. Self, Antioxidants, 2018, 7, 97 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Carta, T. Montini, M. F. Casula, M. Monai, S. Bullita, P. Fornasiero and A. Corrias, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20024–20034 RSC .
L. Yue and X.-M. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 475, 702–705 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Sardesai, D. Andreescu and S. Andreescu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16770–16773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mao, H. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Yang, M. Zeng, N. Li and X. Zhao, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 418–427 CrossRef .
J. M. López, A. L. Gilbank, T. García, B. Solsona, S. Agouram and L. Torrente-Murciano, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174, 403–412 CrossRef .
R. Wang and M. Fang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1770–1773 RSC .
H. Pang and C. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 14872–14878 RSC .
X. Xia, Q. Hao, W. Lei, W. Wang, D. Sun and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16844–16850 RSC .
I. Vladimirov, M. Kellermeier, T. Geßner, Z. Molla, S. Grigorian, U. Pietsch, L. S. Schaffroth, M. Kühn, F. May and R. T. Weitz, Nano Lett., 2017, 18, 9–14 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, Y. Lin, J. Wang, L. Wu, W. Wei, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 1591–1599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zhou, R. J. Phillips and J. A. Switzer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1995, 78, 981–985 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verdon, M. Devalette and G. Demazeau, Mater. Lett., 1995, 25, 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
Q. G. Dai, S. X. Bai, H. Li, W. Liu, X. Y. Wang and G. Z. Lu, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9817–9827 RSC .
T. Masui, K. Fujiwara, K. Machida, G. Adachi, T. Sakata and H. Mori, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2197–2204 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Ansari, P. R. Solanki and B. D. Malhotra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263901 CrossRef .
V. D. Araujo, W. Avansi, H. B. de Carvalho, M. L. Moreira, E. Longo, C. Ribeiro and M. I. B. Bernardi, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1150–1154 RSC .
D. S. Zhang, H. X. Fu, L. Y. Shi, C. S. Pan, Q. Li, Y. L. Chu and W. J. Yu, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Perez, A. Asati, S. Nath and C. Kaittanis, Small, 2008, 4, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Phoka, P. Laokul, E. Swatsitang, V. Promarak, S. Seraphin and S. Maensiri, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 115, 423–428 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Q. Mu, T. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 493, 202–207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Zhao, W. Wang, Y. Zhao, G. Zhang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5582–5588 RSC .
J. M. Perez, A. Asati, S. Nath and C. Kaittanis, Small, 2008, 4, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Q. Mu, T. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 493, 202–207 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ujjain, A. Das, G. Srivastava, P. Ahuja, M. Roy, A. Arya, K. Bhargava, N. Sethy, S. K. Singh and R. K. Sharma, Biointerphases, 2014, 9, 031011 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Verdon, M. Devalette and G. Demazeau, Mater. Lett., 1995, 25, 127–131 CrossRef CAS .
T. Masui, K. Fujiwara, K.-I. Machida, G.-Y. Adachi, T. Sakata and H. Mori, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2197–2204 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Y. Howe, Y. Li, X. Qiu, D. C. Joy, M. P. Paranthaman, M. J. Doktycz and B. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7776–7781 RSC .
Q. Wu, F. Zhang, P. Xiao, H. Tao, X. Wang, Z. Hu and Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17076–17080 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Wang, G.-R. Li, Y.-N. Ou, Z.-P. Feng, D.-L. Qu and Y.-X. Tong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Sakthivel, D. L. Reid, U. M. Bhatta, G. Mobus, D. C. Sayle and S. Seal, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5169–5177 RSC .
E.-J. Park, J. Choi, Y.-K. Park and K. Park, Toxicology, 2008, 245, 90–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Q. Jin and S. W. Chan, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 4319–4326 CrossRef CAS .
O. Polezhaeva, N. Yaroshinskaya and V. Ivanov, Inorg. Mater., 2008, 44, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nguyen, C. T. Dinh, D. Mrabet, M. N. Tran-Thi and T. O. Do, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 394, 100–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Ujjain, A. Das, G. Srivastava, P. Ahuja, M. Roy, A. Arya, K. Bhargava, N. Sethy, S. K. Singh, R. K. Sharma and M. Das, Biointerphases, 2014, 9, 031011 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Deshpande, S. Patil, S. V. N. T. Kuchibhatla and S. Seal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 133113 CrossRef .
J. Y. Ying and A. Tschope, Chem. Eng. J., 1996, 64, 225–237 CAS .
Q. Wu, F. Zhang, P. Xiao, H. S. Tao, X. Z. Wang, Z. Hu and Y. N. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17076–17080 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Y. Howe, Y. A. Li, X. F. Qiu, D. C. Joy, M. P. Paranthaman, M. J. Doktycz and B. H. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7776–7781 RSC .
C. S. Pan, D. S. Zhang, L. Y. Shi and J. H. Fang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 2429–2436,  DOI:10.1002/ejic.200800047 .
H. L. Lin, C. Y. Wu and R. K. Chiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 341, 12–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-X. Mai, L.-D. Sun, Y.-W. Zhang, R. Si, W. Feng, H.-P. Zhang, H.-C. Liu and C.-H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24380–24385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ji, X. Wang, H. Zhang, S. Lin, H. Meng, B. Sun, S. George, T. Xia, A. E. Nel and J. I. Zink, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5366–5380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Mai, L. D. Sun, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, W. Feng, H. P. Zhang, H. C. Liu and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24380–24385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, L. Yan, P. Zheng, J. Chen and X. R. Xing, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19896–19900 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, R. B. Yu, J. Chen and X. R. Xing, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 1474–1477 CrossRef CAS .
R. Si and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2884–2887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamashita, K. Kameyama, S. Yabe, S. Yoshida, Y. Fujishiro, T. Kawai and T. Sato, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 683–687 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Tsai, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2004, 110, 132–134 CrossRef .
X.-D. Zhou, W. Huebner and H. Anderson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3814 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, B. Long, M. Tang, Z. Rui, M.-S. Balogun, Y. Tong and H. Ji, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 779–787 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Lu, X. Huang, S.-L. Xie, D.-Z. Zheng, Z.-Q. Liu, C.-L. Liang and Y.-X. Tong, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 7569–7573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yamaguchi, M. Watanabe, T. Shinagawa, M. Chigane, M. Inaba, A. Tasaka and M. Izaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1070–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Hammond, K. J. Edler, D. T. Bowron and L. Torrente-Murciano, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Reed, A. Cormack, A. Kulkarni, M. Mayton, D. Sayle, F. Klaessig and B. Stadler, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2014, 1, 390–405 RSC .
M. Aryanpour, A. Khetan and H. Pitsch, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1253–1262 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Mullins, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2015, 70, 42–85 CrossRef CAS .
A. Migani, G. N. Vayssilov, S. T. Bromley, F. Illas and K. M. Neyman, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5936–5938 RSC .
T. X. T. Sayle, F. Caddeo, X. Zhang, T. Sakthivel, S. Das, S. Seal, S. Ptasinska and D. C. Sayle, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7287–7295 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Park, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, Nature, 2000, 404, 265–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hibino, A. Hashimoto, T. Inoue, J. Tokuno, S. Yoshida and M. Sano, Science, 2000, 288, 2031–2033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kaushik, P. R. Solanki, M. K. Pandey, S. Ahmad and B. D. Malhotra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 173703 CrossRef .
O. Estevez-Hernadndez, J. L. H. H. de Cisneros, E. Reguera and I. Naranjo-Rodriguez, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 120, 766–772 CrossRef .
A. Wei, X. W. Sun, J. X. Wang, Y. Lei, X. P. Cai, C. M. Li, Z. L. Dong and W. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123902 CrossRef .
R. K. Shervedani, A. H. Mehrjardi and N. Zamiri, Bioelectrochemistry, 2006, 69, 201–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Heller and B. Feldman, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2482–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saha, S. K. Arya, S. P. Singh, K. Sreenivas, B. D. Malhotra and V. Gupta, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2040–2045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. A. Ansari, M. Azahar and B. D. Malhotra, India-Japan Workshop on Biomolecular Electronics and Organic Nanotechnology for Environment Preservation,  2012, vol. 358, p. 011001 .
A. Kaushik, P. R. Solanki, A. A. Ansari, S. Ahmad and B. D. Malhotra, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 055105 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Y. Chu, Z. B. Wang, Z. Z. Jiang, D. M. Gu and G. P. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3100–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Qiu, S. G. Cui and R. P. Liang, Microchim. Acta, 2010, 171, 333–339 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Pang, J. X. Li, Y. B. Zhao, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, B. Du, H. M. Ma and Q. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19260–19267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, Y. D. Zhu, X. H. Li, L. P. Jiang, E. S. Abdel-Halim and J. J. Zhu, Microchim. Acta, 2014, 181, 1505–1512 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Zhou, J. Y. Xi, Z. H. Li, Z. Y. Zhang, L. H. Yu, L. Liu, X. P. Qiu and L. Q. Chen, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 61912–61918 RSC .
M. Hosseini, M. R. K. Pur, P. Norouzi, M. R. Moghaddam, F. Faridbod, M. R. Ganjali and J. Shamsi, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 1936–1942 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Wang, L. Pan, Y. Shi, W. Cheng, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1146–1151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, M. G. Li and B. Fang, Chin. J. Chem., 2007, 25, 1622–1626 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Yao, L. M. Jiao, L. H. Cui, N. C. Yu, F. Wei and Z. M. Lu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H693–H698 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Lee, W. Song, M. Cho, H. L. Puppala, P. Nguyen, H. Zhu, L. Segatori and V. L. Colvin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9693–9703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Rico, J. Hong, M. I. Morales, L. Zhao, A. C. Barrios, J.-Y. Zhang, J. R. Peralta-Videa and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 5635–5642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Celardo, J. Z. Pedersen, E. Traversa and L. Ghibelli, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1411–1420 RSC .
S. M. Hirst, A. Karakoti, S. Singh, W. Self, R. Tyler, S. Seal and C. M. Reilly, Environ. Toxicol., 2013, 28, 107–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Niu, A. Azfer, L. M. Rogers, X. H. Wang and P. E. Kolattukudy, Cardiovasc. Res., 2007, 73, 549–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schubert, R. Dargusch, J. Raitano and S. W. Chan, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2006, 342, 86–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Tarnuzzer, J. Colon, S. Patil and S. Seal, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2573–2577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Korsvik, S. Patil, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1056–1058,  10.1039/b615134e .
C. Xu and X. G. Qu, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e90 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ornatska, E. Sharpe, D. Andreescu and S. Andreescu, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 4273–4280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiao, H. J. Song, H. H. Zhao, W. Bai, L. C. Zhang and Y. Lv, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4, 3261–3267 RSC .
X. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Tang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liu and Q. Huo, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3623–3630 RSC .
A. Karakoti, S. Singh, J. M. Dowding, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4422–4432 RSC .
P. E. Kolattukudy, T. Quach, S. Bergese, S. Breckenridge, J. Hensley, R. Altschuld, G. Gordillo, S. Klenotic, C. Orosz and J. Parker-Thornburg, Am. J. Pathol., 1998, 152, 101–111 CAS .
C. W. Younce, K. K. Wang and P. E. Kolattukudy, Cardiovasc. Res., 2010, 87, 665–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Asati, C. Kaittanis, S. Santra and J. M. Perez, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 2547–2553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. X. Zhao, Y. Zhao, X. F. Guo, H. Wang and H. S. Zhang, J. Chromatogr. A, 2011, 1218, 2528–2539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-T. Zhu, X.-M. He, X. Chen, D. Hussain, J. Ding and Y.-Q. Feng, J. Chromatogr., A, 2016, 1437, 137–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hussain, S. G. Musharraf and M. Najam-ul-Haq, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 1633–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fatima, M. Najam-ul-Haq, F. Jabeen, S. Majeed, M. N. Ashiq, S. G. Musharraf, B. A. Shad and G. B. Xu, Analyst, 2013, 138, 5059–5067 RSC .
B. D'Angelo, S. Santucci, E. Benedetti, S. Di Loreto, R. A. Phani, S. Falone, F. Amicarelli, M. P. Ceru and A. Cimini, Curr. Nanosci., 2009, 5, 167–176 CrossRef .
R. A. Madero-Visbal, B. E. Alvarado, J. F. Colon, C. H. Baker, M. S. Wason, B. Isley, S. Seal, C. M. Lee, S. Das and R. Manon, Nanomedicine, 2012, 8, 1223–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Colon, N. Hsieh, A. Ferguson, P. Kupelian, S. Seal, D. W. Jenkins and C. H. Baker, Nanomedicine, 2010, 6, 698–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Kim, T. Kim, I. Y. Choi, M. Soh, D. Kim, Y. J. Kim, H. Jang, H. S. Yang, J. Y. Kim, H. K. Park, S. P. Park, S. Park, T. Yu, B. W. Yoon, S. H. Lee and T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11039–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nikolaou, Sci. Total Environ., 1999, 235, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. T. Sayle, S. C. Parker and D. C. Sayle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 2936–2941 RSC .
N. Shehata, M. Azab, I. Kandas and K. Meehan, Sensors, 2015, 15, 20193–20203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, L. Jiao, L. Cui, N. Yu, F. Wei and Z. Lu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H693–H698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Y. Yang, D. Cheng, B. Gao, Y. Wan and Y. C. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10099–10110 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deori, C. Kalita and S. Deka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6909–6920 RSC .
A. Trovarelli, Catal. Rev., 1996, 38, 439–520 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Zou, Y. Su, M. Li, X. Ye, B. Cai, E. S.-W. Kong, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 270, 119–129 CrossRef CAS .
E. Laubender, N. Tanvir, G. Urban and O. Yurchenko, Mater. Today Proc., 2016, 3, 429–433 CrossRef .
D. E. Motaung, G. H. Mhlongo, P. R. Makgwane, B. P. Dhonge, F. R. Cummings, H. C. Swart and S. S. Ray, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 254, 984–995 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katoch, J.-H. Kim, Y. J. Kwon, H. W. Kim and S. S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11351–11358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Q. Fang, Y. Huang, K. Xu, P. K. Chu and F. Ma, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9821–9829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Dai, T. Wang, P. Sun, X. Liang, G. Lu, K. Shimanoe and N. Yamazoe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6669–6677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kašpar, P. Fornasiero and N. Hickey, Catal. Today, 2003, 77, 419–449 CrossRef .
M. Shelef and R. W. McCabe, Catal. Today, 2000, 62, 35–50 CrossRef CAS .
R. Moos, N. Izu, F. Rettig, S. Reiss, W. Shin and I. Matsubara, Sensors, 2011, 11, 3439–3465 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Chang, C. Y. Lin, J. K. Chen and M. H. Hsu, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 10867–10875 CrossRef CAS .
S. Betelu, K. Polychronopoulou, C. Rebholz and I. Ignatiadis, Talanta, 2011, 87, 126–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Scheffe, M. Welte and A. Steinfeld, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 2175–2182 CrossRef CAS .
P. Furler, J. Scheffe, M. Gorbar, L. Moes, U. Vogt and A. Steinfeld, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 7051–7059 CrossRef CAS .
P. Furler, J. R. Scheffe and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6098–6103 RSC .
C. T. Campbell and C. H. F. Peden, Science, 2005, 309, 713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Lu, Y. Lin, Y. Mao, G. Ouyang, H. Liu, S. Zhang and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018 10.1039/C8TA06565A .
Y. Huang, H. Li, M.-S. Balogun, H. Yang, Y. Tong, X. Lu and H. Ji, RSC Adv., 2014, 5, 7729–7733 RSC .
S. Sultana, S. Mansingh and K. Parida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 122, 808–819 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Sayed Tayyab Raza Naqvi	Syed Tayyab Raza Naqvi completed his Masters in Philosophy in Analytical Chemistry in 2014 and is now working as a PhD Scholar at the Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan. His areas of research are the design and application of metals, metal oxides and composite materials in sensing of biomolecules, environmental samples and neurotransmitters. He has expertise in materials design under controlled conditions to impart specific features to nanomaterials. He has significant experience in the preparation of novel chromatographic affinity materials and multidimensional separation technology, especially for glycoproteins.
Bahareh Shirinfar	Bahareh Shirinfar is originally from Iran, where she obtained her BSc and MSc. She then moved to Korea to undertake PhD studies at Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH). After obtaining her PhD, she moved to Switzerland to continue her career as a post-doctoral researcher at the University of Zurich. She arrived in Bristol in January 2015 to take up a Royal Society Newton Fellowship. After two years at this position at the university, she is continuing her research as senior research associate at the University of Bristol. Her research focuses on carbohydrate recognition.
Saadat Majeed	Saadat Majeed received her Ph.D from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Changchun, China. She joined the Division of Analytical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan as an Assistant Professor in 2016. Her research focuses on the synthesis and electrochemical applications of nanomaterials, optical materials and applications, and biosensors. She participated in the Faculty Development Program, Prime Minster Directive (100 Foreign Scholarships) (No. PF/Cont./2-50/Admin/5398).
Dilshad Hussain	Dilshad Hussain received his PhD in Chemistry from Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan. He is now working at the HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS), University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan. His fields of interest are the synthesis of functional nanomaterials and their applications in biological analysis. The main focus of his research is mass spectrometry-based proteomics, metabolomics and sensing of biomolecules for biomarker discovery. He has also demonstrated skill in designing nanomaterials for health, energy and environmental applications.
Tanyia Iqbal	Taniya Iqbal received a M.Phil degree from Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, in 2017. Currently, she is a PhD student under the guidance of Dr Saadat Majeed at the Institute of Chemical Sciences, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan. Her research interests focus on bio-sorption, biosensing, MIPS, synthesis and fabrication of polymers, MOFs, and method development.
Nisar Ahmed	Nisar Ahmed obtained his doctorate in organic chemistry in 2012 working in the group of Prof. Kwang S. Kim (POSTECH, Korea). Subsequently, he moved to the University of Zurich, Switzerland, to perform postdoctoral work under a Novartis Fellowship. In 2015, he moved to the University of Bristol, UK. Nisar started his independent research career in 2017 at Cardiff University, United Kingdom, funded by the Welsh government and the European Commission (Marie Curie COFUND). He also holds positions as adjunct faculty at HEJ Research Institute of Chemistry and as a visiting scientist at the University of Bristol. Research in his group is focused on the electrosynthesis of organic compounds through batch/flow processes; supramolecular chemistry; and molecular recognition of biomolecules through fluorescent probes.

 	Fig. 1  Fluorite-like crystal of CeO2 and O2 vacancies.3 Reproduced from ref. 3 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2010.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cerium-based nanostructured materials designed for various applications.	 

Nanorods	Hydrothermal process	Annealing at 350 °C to 800 °C	Diameter = 5 to 20	
36

Length ≥ 200
Nanoparticles (octahedral)	Surfactant-assisted method	Add HMT (surfactant)	Smallest particle = 2	
33

Lamellar shape	Surfactant-assisted method	Ce/HEA/H2O/EG 180 °C, 30 min, pH 7	Width = 10	
37

Length = 50 to 200
Array particles	Surfactant-assisted method	Ce/HEA/H2O/EG 180 °C, 24 h, pH 7	2 to 4	
37

Platelet rods	Surfactant-assisted method	Ce/HEA/EG (30 ml) 180 °C, 24 h, pH 7	180 to 200	
37

Rice shape	Surfactant-assisted method	Ce/HEA/H2O 20 ml/EG 10 ml 180 °C, 24 h, pH 14	6 to 10	
37

Cube shape	Surfactant-assisted method	Ce/HEA/H2O 30 ml 180 °C, 3 d, pH 14	40	
37

CeO2 crystalline powder (cubic fluorite structure)	Electrochemical synthesis	At 29 °C	10	
10

At 80 °C	14
Sintered at 1300 °C	350
CeO2 microcrystallites	Solvothermal method	At high temp. and high pressure	≈50	
24

Nano-sheets	Facile aqueous phase precipitation	At reaction temp. 0 °C	Thickness = 20 to 50	
38

Petal shape
Nano-sheets	Facile aqueous phase precipitation	At reaction temp. 25 °C	Length = 5 to 10 μm	
38

Belt shape	Width = 0.5 to 1.2 μm
Ultrafine uniform nanoparticles	Reverse micelle method	Mixing of microemulsions containing Ce(NO3) and NH4OH	2 to 6	
39

Nanospheres	Microwave-assisted hydrothermal method	At 80 °C	About 5	
40

Nanospheres/rods	At 120 °C	5 to 7
Nanorods	At 160 °C	Diameter = 10 length = 70
Nano-octahedra	Surfactant-free hydrothermal method	Addition of urea as a mineralizer	200	
41

Vertically aligned nanorods and flower-like shapes	Phosphate-assisted hydrothermal method	Na3PO4(soln) in 0.1 M [Ce3+] and 0.25 M [Ce3+], respectively	Width = 20 to 40	
42

Length = up to several micrometers

 	Fig. 3  Template-free hydrothermal synthesis of CeO2 nano-octahedrons and nanorods.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2008.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of the formation of ordered hierarchical architectures of CeO2 nanorods.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2008.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the (a) 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, (b) CeO2 nanosheets, (c) 1% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, (d) 2% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, (e) 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets, and (f) 8% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets. (g) TEM image and SAED pattern of the 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets. (h) HRTEM image of the 4% Eu/CeO2 nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Elsevier, 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of CeO2 nano-octahedrons. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2010.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of spherical and needle-like ceria-based core shells.67 Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2009.	 

 	Fig. 7  Fabrication of a label-free ECL immunosensor.87 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2015.	 

 	Fig. 8  The anticipated redox mechanism on the CeO2/GF electrode regarding VO2+/VO2+. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2014.	 
Mn+1-SOD + O2˙− → Mn+-SOD + O2
Mn+-SOD + O2˙− → Mn+1-SOD + H2O2.

 	Fig. 9  Paper bioassay based on ceria nanoparticles as colorimetric probes.103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2011.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Images of a solution of CeO2 NPs redispersed in water; (a) a mixture of TMB@2HCl and H2O2 after catalytic reaction with the CeO2 NPs; (b) the mixture of TMB@2HCl and H2O2 after adding H2SO4 to quench the catalytic reaction with the CeO2 NPs (c). (B) Schematic of the colorimetric detection of glucose using glucose oxidase (GOx) and CeO2 NPs-catalyzed reactions.104 Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2012.	 

 	Fig. 11  A self-doped Ce3+-enhanced CeO2 host matrix for energy transfer from Ce3+ to Tb3+.105 Reproduced from ref 105 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, 2013.	 

 	Fig. 12  The capability of CeNSs to oxidize ampliflu at various pH values. Reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2011.	 

 	Fig. 13  Mechanism of the catalytic degradation of RhB. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from American Chemical Society, 2017.	 
CeNSs	Cerium nanostructures
IEP	Isoelectric point
CTAB	Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
HMTA	Hexamethylenetetramine
ECL	Electrochemical luminescence
GOx	Glucose oxidase
MWCNT	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes
ECIS	Electric cell impedance sensing
CEA	Carcino-embrynic antigen
PSA	Prostate specific antigen
COD	Chemical oxygen demand
MG	Malachite green

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
