Photophysical aspects of molecular probes near nanostructured gold surfaces  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B817373G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B817373G
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3831-3844Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotophysical aspects of molecular probes near nanostructured gold surfaces

        
          
            Sujit Kumar 
            Ghosh
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tarasankar 
            Pal
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Raidighi College, South 24-Parganas, Raidighi, 743383, India
bDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 721302, India. E-mail: tpal@chem.iitkgp.ernet.in
Received 
      3rd October 2008
    , Accepted 5th February 2009First published on 5th March 2009AbstractHighly ordered, self-organized assemblies of organic molecules at surfaces of metal particles with sizes in the nanometer regime have been a subject of immense interest in recent years. Amongst the metal nanoparticles, considering the nobility of gold, organic fluoroprobes have often been attached to the surfaces of gold nanoparticles to form an extended network for potential technological applications. These organic–inorganic hybrid nanoassemblies offer an efficient route for the patterning of surfaces with functional nanometer-scale architectures utilizing several non-covalent intermolecular bonding interactions, e.g., hydrogen bonding, coordination bonding, etc. There is a growing recognition of fluorescence spectroscopy to achieve a molecular level understanding of the physical and chemical aspects of the molecule–surface interactions. The fluorophore-bound gold nanoparticles provide a convenient way to examine the mechanistic details of various deactivation pathways of the photoexcited fluoroprobes, such as energy and electron transfer to the particles as well as different types of intermolecular interactions involved in producing the bottom-up assembly of tailored nanostructures with a wide variety of structures and properties. The understanding of electronic absorption and dynamics in nanoparticulate systems is essential before assembling them into devices, which is essentially the future goal of the use of nanostructured systems. It is, therefore, important to elucidate the particle size and distance dependence on the interaction between excited molecular probes and the gold nanoparticles. The potential impact of the derived nanopatterned surfaces ranges from applications in molecular electronics to selective sensors to diagnostic devices. The greatest promise of these systems lies in the potential to tune functional aspects of the supramolecular assemblies at surfaces by manipulation of the interactions governing the derivation of supramolecular function that has merged the fundamental ideas of nanoscience with biology and medicine in the form of nanobiotechnology.Sujit Kumar GhoshDr Sujit Kumar Ghosh, having graduated from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, was appointed Lecturer in Chemistry at Raidighi College, India. He subsequently was a Postdoctoral Associate with Prof. Naoki Toshima at Tokyo University of Science in Yamaguchi, Japan. Presently, he is working as Alexander-von-Humboldt Fellow with Prof. Alexander Böker at the University of Bayreuth, Germany. His current research interests are the optical properties of nanoscale assemblies and the photophysical aspects of molecular probes on the surface of nanoscale materials.Tarasankar PalProfessor Tarasankar Pal obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry from Burdwan University and a DSc degree in Chemistry in 2006 from Visva-Bharati University. He has been working as a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur since 1984. Dr Pal is a fellow of the National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. His current research interest lies in the size and shape selective syntheses, catalytic and spectroscopic applications including fluorescence and surface-enhanced Raman scattering spectroscopy of metal and semiconductor nanomaterials.
1. Introduction
During the past few decades, the unique physical and chemical properties of the surfaces of solids have attracted increasing attention in both basic science and technology.1 Basic surface science has traditionally been concerned with the structural aspects of surfaces and adsorbates and the mechanistic aspects of surface reactions while technological use of surface processes are from the industrial catalytic application to the fabrication of the revolutionary new generation of microelectronic devices. As the dimensions of the solids shrink into the nanometer regime, there are significant changes in the optical and electronic properties due to both quantum size effects and the increasingly important role of the surface in controlling the overall energy of the particles.2 Noble metal particles in the nanometer size regime display widely interesting size-dependent optical, electronic and chemical properties. These interesting physicochemical properties have gained increasing scientific interest from photochemists and photobiologists for the organic functionalization of different sizes of metal nanoparticles and their role has been exploited in a number of photophysical studies. Since fluorescence spectroscopy is a very sensitive technique, surface plasmon fluorescence spectroscopy has facilitated the measurement of molecular level interactions on/at the surfaces. The intensification of the incoming electric field at the surface plasmon resonance is due to the increase of the radiative decay rate of the fluorophore at the metal surface.3 The study of surface plasmon coupling of radiative molecules to metallic surfaces dates back to the beginning of the 20th century with the theoretical work by Zenneck and Sommerfeld, among others.4,5 Since the propagating electromagnetic fields for surface plasmons at interfaces propagate with a preferred direction and polarization, it was realized that the emission of fluorescent species close to metal surfaces would lead to directional and polarized emission. Consequently, the inherent isotropic fluorescence emission from a population of randomly oriented fluorophores above surfaces would directionally emit by coupling to the surface plasmons of the metal surfaces.6
Significant efforts have been undertaken to investigate the photophysical and photochemical behavior of multicomponent nanostructured assemblies consisting of molecular probes and metallic nanoparticles.7 Engineering of nanocluster surfaces, with electro- or photoactive molecules, can provide 3-D molecular arrangements around the nanoparticles. Such organic–inorganic nanoscale assemblies have also been model systems for understanding of the effect of adsorbate–surface interactions on colloidal properties as well as the nature of these interactions. For these studies, gold nanoparticles have been of great interest because of their high extinction coefficient and a broad absorption spectrum in the visible region that overlaps with the emission wavelength of usual energy donors. Moreover, gold is noble enough to survive as a nanoparticle under atmospheric conditions and the versatile chemistry available for surface functionization of gold nanoparticles makes the materials especially suitable for possible ligand tethering. This serendipitous combination of properties has encouraged its application in a diverse range of niche applications.8 Modification of gold nanoparticles with fluorophores is important for the development of biological traces, optoelectronic devices, efficient light-energy conversion systems, data storage and sensors.9 Researchers have often used functional groups, such as thiols, amines, or silanes to attach electroactive or photoactive molecules to the gold surface. In these systems, adsorbate excited states are often involved in surface photochemical processes, photon- and electron-stimulated desorption, resonance photoemission, and surface enhanced Raman scattering.8 In this perspective, we aim to highlight the recent investigations of the physical processes, in a substantial way, the modification of the spectroscopic properties of molecules located nearby the nanostructured metallic surfaces. The theoretical and experimental aspects of the hybrid metal-probe assemblies have been elegantly explored. The possibility of real-time application of these physical processes has also been elucidated. We have made an effort to present all these topics from a unifying point of view and to survey the experiments relevant to the concepts presented.
2. Theoretical background
2.1 Photophysical processes
Metallic particles in the nanometer length scale exhibit anomalous electromagnetic properties originating from the resonant interaction between light and collective oscillations of the conduction electrons, so-called surface plasmons. The surface plasmon resonances generate an electromagnetic field which has absorbing, scattering and near-field components which determine the intensity of the local electromagnetic field that is enhanced as compared to the incident radiation leading to enhancement of several optical phenomena for molecules in close proximity to the particle surface.8 The molecular emission on the solid surfaces can be modified in several ways. If the emitting dipole couple to the electromagnetic resonances of the solid (e.g., surface plasmons, polaritons, excitons etc.) and these are rapidly damped (e.g., by coupling to phonons or electron–hole pairs) or incapable of radiating, the emission lifetime is shortened (in relaxation experiments) and the emission efficiency is decreased (in steady state experiments). The coupling to the electromagnetic resonance can have different effects if the resonance is radiative. This is due to the fact that the electric field caused by an oscillating dipole is the sum of two kinds of terms: far field (carries energy away from the dipole) and near field (very large in the region around the dipole) components.10 When a solid surface is placed very close to the emitting dipole, the solid interacts with the large near field and as a consequence, the electromagnetic resonances (the radiative as well as the nonradiative ones) of the surface are excited. If the excitation of a radiative resonance is very effective, energy is transferred from the molecular near field to the radiative resonance and then emitted to the detector. This increases the amount of energy radiated per unit time. In a steady-state experiment, this must result in increased absorption in order to conserve energy. In a relaxation experiment, the balance of energy becomes more complicated: in some cases, further enhancement can be obtained if the shape of the surface is designed (e.g., gratings) to concentrate most of the radiated energy in a preferred direction, while in other cases both these phenomena could be effective together. The near field of the molecular dipole excites both the radiative and the nonradiative resonances of the surface. As a consequence, the enhancement or quenching of the emission depends on the competition between the excitation of various surface modes, the nature of the material, the kind of spectroscopic measurement performed, the shape of the surface, and the molecule–surface distance.11 Therefore, explicitly, the main critical parameters12 that modify the spontaneous rate of emission of organic dyes near metal nanoparticles are the location of the dye around the particle, its separation from the metal surface, and the molecular dipole orientation with respect to the particle surface as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Factors that modify the spontaneous rate of emission of organic dyes near metal nanoparticles are shown with lissamine dye molecules attached to gold nanoparticlesvia a thioether group. Modified with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2002 American Physical Society. 
2.2 Summary of general theories
A great deal of theoretical studies (this list is far from complete) have been performed over the last few decades in understanding the behavior of a probe molecule in which the molecular dipole is damped by the response of a nearby metal surface. These theories of surface spectroscopy account for three elements into consideration: the local electromagnetic field acting on each molecule, the molecular response to this field, and the emission by the polarized molecule. All steps of a surface chemical reaction—sticking, reaction and desorption—involve energy exchange between the adsorbate and substrate states. The excited states (vibrational, rotational, and electronic) of adsorbates or of excited species in the vicinity of the surface are intimately involved in most dynamic surface processes and therefore their nature and mode of radiative and non-radiative relaxation are subjects of strong interest.
Chance, Prock, and Silbey13 described a classical treatment of energy transfer in metal insulator systems. The approach involves the calculation of the radiation field of an emitting molecule near a partially reflecting surface which, in turn, produces a correction to the calculated lifetime of the molecule as a function of the distance from the surface. The model proposed by Ruppin14 gives an account of calculating the lifetime considering the decay of an excited molecule near a small metal sphere as the viewpoint of electromagnetic theory. The total decay rate of the emitting dipole is obtained by considering the two mechanisms through which energy is dissipated: the radiative decay rate is obtained from the energy flow (Poynting vector) at large distances, while the nonradiative contribution is derived by computing directly the Ohmic losses inside the metallic sphere. It was found that the lifetime of an emitting molecule near a small metal sphere decreases as the molecule approaches the sphere, which is due to nonradiative transfer of energy into the sphere. This model also investigated the frequency dependence of the rate of nonradiative energy transfer into the sphere and found it to exhibit peaks at the frequencies of the surface plasmon of the sphere. The model of Persson and Lang15 presents a calculation of the nonradiative damping using a realistic surface potential of the metal conduction electrons and concerns itself primarily with momentum and energy conservation in the dipole-induced formation of electron–hole pairs. The basic premise of the Persson theory16 is that the excited state dipole must be at much lower frequency than the plasma frequency of the metal to allow fast response of the conduction electrons on the timescale of the donor frequency. According to this model, the rate of energy transfer is calculated by performing a Fermi golden rule calculation for an excited-state molecule depopulating with the simultaneous scattering of an electron in the nearby metal above the Fermi level. The Golden Rule approximation relates the energy transfer rate (kEnT) to a product of the interaction elements of the donor (FD) and acceptor (FA), kEnT≈FDFA. These interaction elements can be simplified such that their separation distance (d) dependencies are sole functions of their geometric arrangement. For single dipoles, F≈ 1/d3, for a 2D dipole array, F≈ 1/d, and for a 3D dipole array, F = constant such that the power of the distance factor decreases as the dimensions increase. Weitz et al.17 proposed a model that presents a unified picture of the surface-induced enhancement effects and the comparison of all the forms of optical scattering that leads to a complete determination of the role of plasma resonances in the various portions of the scattering process. The excitation of the electronic plasma resonance results in an increased local field at the molecules leading to an increased excitation or absorption rate. Similarly, the excitation of the plasma resonance by the molecular emission dipole results in an increase in the radiative decay rate. However, the electromagnetic coupling of the molecule to the plasma resonance also adds an additional damping channel which can result in a reduction of the absorption or excitation rate as well as the emission yield. The resultant balance of these processes leads to the hierarchy in the measured enhancements which have important spectroscopic consequences. The Gersten–Nitzan model18 has studied the spectroscopic properties of molecules interacting with small dielectric particles. They have calculated the absorption line shapes, the radiative and nonradiative lifetimes and the corresponding emission yields associated with small spherical particles and with molecules located outside and inside of such particles. With this model, it is possible, analytically, to calculate the role of size and shape of the nanoparticle as well as molecule–nanoparticle separation in the Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between the molecular excited states and the electronic states in a metal that determines the resonance fluorescence quantum efficiencies. Chew19 calculated the transition rates of atoms inside and outside dielectric spheres. The transition rate for the two polarizations (parallel and perpendicular) of an oscillator atom outside a perfectly conducting sphere of radius r placed at a distance dr from the center of the sphere were analyzed in detail. As dr approaches r, the emission rate increases for perpendicular polarization and decreases for parallel polarization. The results showed that the resonances have important effects on the transition rates and that enhancement factors of hundreds are possible under suitable conditions. These theories of surface spectroscopy, thus, present a general overview of the spectroscopy and relaxation dynamics of vibrational and electronic excitations of molecules and atoms adsorbed on metal surfaces.
3. Results and discussion
The manipulation of the surface of a particle to alter its physical properties, either through chemical modification of the surface functionalities or by surface adsorption of a variety of molecules, has emerged as a powerful strategy in colloid science. It has been seen that the emission properties of the fluorescent molecules under the influence of an enhanced field arising from the particles are changed dramatically. In spectroscopic measurements, we detect the light emitted by the surface and by the dipoles induced in each molecule. The surface plasmons are electromagnetic surface waves propagating along the interface of two materials with dielectric functions of the opposite sign, e.g., a metal and a dielectric. Fluorescing molecules have often been used as local probes to measure the surface plasmon fields. Surface plasmon fields have a maximum intensity at the interface and decay exponentially in the directions perpendicular to the interface (Fig. 2). In the vicinity of a metal, the fluorescence rate of molecules becomes a function of the distance between the molecule and the metal surface.20 The fluorescence of molecules in direct contact with the metal is completely quenched. In the presence of electromagnetic field of aggregated metal clusters, the radiative decay rates and quantum yields of weakly fluorescent species can increase significantly. In these experiments, it is necessary that the adsorbed molecule minimizes the surface damage by the laser and there is no photochemical decomposition of the molecules on the metal surface. There are two ways in which emission experiments can be performed. In steady state experiments the excitation source is kept on and the emission is monitored continuously and the main quantity measured is the emission yield, i.e., the ratio of emitted vs. incident intensity. On the other hand, in relaxation experiments, the excitation source is turned off and the decay of emission intensity is monitored and the measured quantities are the emission lifetime and the magnitude of the intensity. Possible deactivation pathways21 of the photoexcited fluorophore could be summarized as the intermolecular interactions, electron transfer, energy transfer and the emission from the molecular probes near the metal surface. Direct experimental measurements of these concepts are needed to validate theoretical predictions and to develop systems with improved fluorescence properties.
 Fig. 2  Enhancement of the electromagnetic field as a function of the distance from the metal nanoparticle surface. 
3.1 Fluorescence quenching

3.1.1 Experiments. 
There have been several literature reports on fluorescence quenching of molecular probes with the metallic nanoparticles.22 Murray and co-workers23,24 have described the quenching of fluorescein and dansyl fluorophores by monolayer-protected gold clusters. Dulkeith et al.12 measured the radiative and nonradiative decay rates of lissamine dye molecules chemically attached to differently sized gold nanoparticles by means of time-resolved fluorescence experiments. Dubertret et al.3 have elegantly used gold nanoparticles as an effective proximal quencher in DNA molecular beacons. Fan and colleagues25 have described conjugated polymer–gold nanoparticle pairs which exhibit an extraordinary quenching efficiency. Kamat and group studied the fluorescence of the chromophores of pyrene derivatives on the surface of gold nanoparticles.7 Shang et al.26 presented a quasi-reversible nanoparticles/photoactive molecules binding equilibrium in understanding the adsorption behavior of neutral red on mercaptoethane sulfonate-protected gold clusters. Chen and Chang27 found a highly fluorescent product forming from the assembly of nile red onto citrate-stabilized gold nanoparticles. Makarova et al.28 described the co-adsorption of fluorescein isothiocyanate dye molecules onto the surface of gold nanoparticles with 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane. Crovetto et al.29 have explored the photophysics of xanthene derivative by using absorption, steady-state, and time-resolved fluorescence measurements. Tsai et al.30 have demonstrated that dsDNA fragments containing a mammalian reporter gene expression cassette encoding the enhanced green fluorescent protein can be conjugated to gold nanocrystals and the resulting nanoconjugates bearing discrete numbers of double stranded DNA fragments display normal functions of the DNA fragment, including site-specific digestion by restriction endonuclease and protein expression in mammalian cells. Gannet et al.31 have attached CYP2C9 to gold substrates such that the resulting construct maintains the ability to bind and metabolize substrates in the presence of NADPH and cytochrome P450 reductase.

Fluorescent probes are molecules which possess a number of well-characterized photophysical and photochemical properties that have enabled several researchers to study their emission behavior in a variety of microenvironments with exquisite sensitivity and selectivity.21Fig. 3 shows the emission behavior of 1-methylaminopyrene (MAP) covalently attached to the surfaces of ten different sizes of gold nanoparticles (described elsewhere).32 It is seen that methylaminopyrene molecules show distinctly different emission profile in the presence of different sets of gold colloids. The salient feature of physical significance is that the emission spectrum increases significantly in intensity in progressing from smaller to larger gold particles. Inset shows the plot of quenching efficiency (θ) (θ = I0−I/I0, where I0 and I are the intensities of the probe molecules in the absence and presence of metal nanoparticles, respectively) as a function of the diameter of the gold particles. The profile shows two different slopes for the two different size regimes, i.e., the rate of quenching efficiency with particle size (dθ/dr) is different for the two different size regimes of the particles. The smaller particles of gold (<16 nm) greatly quench the MAP fluorescence while the larger particles to a lesser extent. In these measurements, all spectra were corrected for the absorption of excitation light and reabsorption of molecular fluorescence light due to the presence of the gold nanoparticles as well as the near field effects on the absorption cross section (called “trivial effects”). We have seen that the quenching effect of the molecular probes residing near the surface of very small metallic particulates is surface-induced, which has been authenticated by the reversible formation and destruction of the particle surface.33 The decrease in fluorescence intensity indicates that a large fraction of excited MAP molecules are quenched by the gold nanocores. This phenomenon could be ascribed to the electromagnetic coupling between the metal and the fluorescent molecules and could be treated within the framework of the model proposed by Weitz et al.17 According to this theory, the scattering intensity ratio for fluorescence of adsorbed molecules to that of the free ones is given by (1)where, EL is local electric field at the molecule due to the laser. The amplification factor A(ωL) is increased local field intensity through the excitation of electronic plasmon resonances governed by the morphology and dielectric properties of the nanoparticles. The parameter Γ0 denotes the radiation and non-radiation transition rate from the excited state to the ground state for free molecules while Γs0 is taken to represent an average value of the surface-induced decay rate for molecules on the gold nanoparticles. The radius dependent fluorescence decay rate Rfluo(r) can be expressed as12: Rfluo(r) = Rrad(r) + Rnonrad (r)(2)and the fluorescence quantum efficiency Q(r) as: Q(r) = Rrad(r)/Rfluo(r)(3)At small distances (1–2 nm), the large fluorescence quenching efficiency is due to two effects: (i) gold nanoparticles increase the nonradiative rate Rnonrad of the molecules due to energy transfer, and (ii) the radiative rate Rrad of the molecules is decreased because the molecular dipole and the dipole induced on the gold nanoparticles radiate out of phase if the molecules are oriented tangentially to the gold nanoparticle’s surface. At a larger distance, the distance dependent quantum efficiency is almost exclusively governed by the radiative rate.
 Fig. 3  The emission spectra of MAP (1 μM) in the (a*) absence and (a–j) presence of gold nanoparticles (25 μM) with sizes (a) 8, (b) 10, (c) 13, (d) 16, (e) 20, (f) 25, (g) 32, (h) 41, (i) 55 and (j) 73 nm, respectively. Inset shows the efficiency of quenching as a function of the particle size. The dashed line represents the point of inflexion in the titration. Modified with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2004 Elsevier. 
The size regime dependence of the gold particles on the fluorescence quenching process can be rationalized by correlation of the structures of the nanoparticles in terms of the size and surface chemistry.32 By changing the size of the nanoparticles using the same capping molecule, we can realize the interplay of size and surface effect on the particles’ structure. The MAP molecules, added to the gold sol, are in thermodynamic equilibrium between the surface and the aqueous phase and the only fluorescing component is the free MAP in the solution. Therefore, the signal contribution in the emission spectra is due to unbound probe molecules in the system. The adsorption of the probe molecules from solution onto the nanoparticle surface is a function of the chemical composition and structure of the metal particles, as well as the nature of the solution.34 For a fixed set of solution parameters, the adsorption process is only influenced by the particle size of the gold colloids of the same chemical composition. As the size of the particles decreases, there is the increasing contribution of the surface atoms. The increased surface area with progressive decrease in particle size can accommodate a large number of probe molecules around the gold particles. Therefore, smaller particles become more efficient quenchers of molecular fluorescence than larger metallic particles.


3.1.2 Mechanism of fluorescence quenching. 
Now, let us focus our attention on the mechanism of quenching of the excited fluoroprobe bound to the metallic surfaces. Both energy-transfer and electron-transfer processes are considered to be the major deactivation pathways which are discussed in detail below.
3.1.2.1 
              Electron transfer
            . 
While noble metals in the bulk are photoactive only to a small extent, the nanoparticles of noble metals exhibit increased photochemical activity because of their high surface/volume ratio and unusual electronic properties. Binding of photoactive molecules to metal nanoparticles renders such organic–inorganic hybrid nanoassemblies to exhibit enhanced photoactivity. Since metals in the nanoparticle dimensions are more electronegative than the bulk material, they can participate in an electron-transfer process. However, the electron transfer mechanism is predominant for particle sizes <5 nm as in this size regime the particles do not exhibit any surface plasmon band in the visible region.8 For particles of larger sizes, the free electron absorption develops a coherent character and partly transforms into the surface plasmon resonance absorption band. The nature of charge-transfer interaction of fluorophore with a gold surface dictates the pathways with which the excited-state deactivates. For example, in case of MAP binding to the gold nanoparticle surfaces, the surface plasmon band of gold shifts towards higher wavelengths and its intensity decreases, i.e., a damping of the plasmon band is observed. The gold atoms on the surface possess unoccupied orbitals for nucleophiles to donate electrons. Strong electron donors like MAP contain amine functionality as an end group and displace the stabilizing ligand shell from the gold surface without any alteration to the morphology of the particles.32 It has also been noted that, in addition to electron transfer from the probe molecules to the metal surface, the efficient internal electron transfer within the probe might also be responsible for the “superquenching” of the molecular fluorescence over the metal surface.25 In addition, due to the high surface-to-volume ratio of small clusters and sizes much smaller than the mean free electronic path (41 nm in Au), the conduction electrons are very likely to be found near the surface such that these small clusters more could accurately be described as fragments of metal surfaces, rather than fragments of bulk metal crystals. Due to this strong surface-like character of the nanosized metallic particles, the luminescence of the probe molecules could be employed to measure the distance of the probe molecules above an interface.35,36
It is now realized that the appeal of fluorescence is due to the fact that it is a highly sensitive method of detection. Unlike many phenomena in chemistry, molecular fluorescence can be easily eliminated or enhanced by ca hemical command giving rise to the ON-OFF state. Employing a fluorophore–spacer–receptor combination, we have shown the use of nanoparticles of coinage (Cu, Ag, Au) and platinum (Ni, Pt, Pd) metals in developing molecular photonic switches.37 The operation of many fluorescent sensors is based on the photoinduced electron transfer (PET) mechanism and employs the fluorophore-receptor design. The fluorophore is the site of all photochemical transitions and the receptor is site tailored specifically for the metal of interest. If PET is to control the sensory action, the molecule employed does not fluoresce in the absence of the metal due to an efficient PET process by an electron-donating group in the molecule. When this electron donation is hindered due to interaction of the group with the guest molecule, PET is quenched and fluorescence is turned on (Scheme 1). This is the peculiarity of the PET mechanism; given the appropriate conditions, almost any receptor synthetically available for a given metal can be employed as a sensor. This is equivalent to the OFF operation of a switch. However, beyond a critical concentration that varies from metal to metal, the quenching effect of the metal overrules their fluorescence enhancement effect and thus the fluorescence of the probe decreases. Maintaining the critical concentration as a borderline, such systems can efficiently function as OR logic gates. Thus, digital instruments operating with the 1 (ON) or 0 (OFF) principle can employ such metal nanoparticle–probe combinations as efficient molecular photonic switches.
 Scheme 1  Frontier molecular orbital diagram illustrating the photoinduced electron transfer phenomenon. 
3.1.2.2 Energy transfer. 
In biophysics, biochemistry as well as in molecular biology, FRET has been found to be a useful tool for quantifying molecular dynamics with fluorescence spectroscopy. It has been widely used to determine the nature of binding, the distances between the nanoparticle and the fluorescent probe and the dynamic interaction even at the single-molecule level.38 There is a great deal of interest in understanding the interactions between molecular probes and metal nanoclusters and the effect of excited-state quenching of the surface-bound fluorophores. Often excited-state quenching of the probe molecules on metal surfaces is attributed to the energy transfer process. Several examples of excited-state quenching by metal nanoparticles have also been reported. The degree of quenching depends on the structural details that control the proximity between the fluorophore and metal nanoparticle core. When a donor molecule is placed in the vicinity of a conductive metal surface, resonant energy transfer between the donor–acceptor takes place.22 Under certain conditions, internal excitation transfer takes place where the light-harvesting chromophore and the emitter are situated in the same system.25,38,39 To understand the mechanism of fluorescence quenching, it is important to first consider whether gold nanoparticles should be treated as a conventional quencher and whether the standard Förster formula could be used to calculate the energy transfer efficiencies. In the case of resonant surface-plasmon excitation, a small dipole in the excited fluorophore induces a large dipole in the particle, leading to an enhancement in the energy-transfer efficiencies. Whereas electron transfer is essentially a contact process (because of its exponential distance dependence), resonance energy transfer efficiency is high until quencher–fluorophore pair separation approaches the Förster radius (typically <10 nm). Förster resonance energy transfer, which consists of two single dipoles, is easily derived from this rule such that kFRET≈FDFA≈ (1/d3)(1/d3) ≈ 1/d6, where d is the surface-to-surface distance between the metallic nanoparticle and the probe molecule. In fact, FRET is commonly written as kFRET≈ (1/τD) (R0/R),6 where τD is the lifetime of the donor. Strouse et al.40 have recently demonstrated the applicability of a long-range molecular ruler consisting of an organic dye donating energy to a small (∼1.5 nm diameter) gold nanoparticle, termed as nanosurface energy transfer (NSET). The NSET is similar to FRET in which the measurable distances are extended nearly 2-fold for optical molecular rulers by following a1/d4 distance dependence consistent with the predictions of Persson and Lang in an NSET model.15 Thus, the rate of energy transfer from a dipole to the metal’s conduction electrons can be expressed as kNSET≈FDFA≈ (1/d3)(1/d) ≈ 1/d4. The exact form of dipole-surface energy transfer is kNSET≈ (1/τD)(d0/d)4, where d0 is the characteristic distance length of the metal-probe system at which the probe molecule will display equal probabilities for energy transfer and spontaneous emission, i.e., radius for NSET. Therefore, energy transfer to a surface follows a very different distance trend and magnitude of interaction. The characteristic distance length is a function of the donor quantum efficiency, the frequency of the donor electronic transition, the Fermi frequency and Fermi wavevector of the metal. The interaction of fluorophores with metal surfaces is different depending on the distance regime. At very close distances (<10 Å), radiative rate enhancement is observed; at intermediate distances (20–300 Å), energy transfer is the dominant process; and at very large distances (>500 Å), fluorescence oscillations due to dipole-mirror effects take precedence. In general, the quantum efficiency of energy transfer can be written as (4)In the case of dipole–dipole energy transfer, n = 6 and r0 = R0, while for dipole-surface energy transfer, n = 4 and r0 = d0. This allows for the identification of the nature of the energy transfer mechanism from interrogation of the slope of a plot of energy transfer efficiency vs. separation distance of the donor and acceptor. The reason for the breakdown of Förster expression when either of the donor–acceptor system is an extended molecule arises from the breakdown of the point dipole approximation that plays a crucial role in the derivation of the famous Förster expression. The situation for the nanoparticle-dye system is no different because point dipole approximation also breaks down when the dye is not far from the nanoparticles and, in addition, several new features appear in the energy transfer dynamics involving nanometallic particles. The probability of Förster resonance energy transfer depends on the overlap of the emission band of the probe molecules with the absorption spectrum of the nanoparticles.12 In the resonant energy transfer theory, the energy transfer rate is directly related to the overlap integral that expresses the degree of spectral overlap as J(λ) = ∫fD(λ)εA(λ)λ4 dλ(5)where J(λ) is the overlap integral (M−1 cm−1 nm4), fD(λ) is the normalized emission spectrum of the donor, εA(λ) is the extinction coefficient (M−1 cm−1) of the acceptor at wavelength λ (in nm). The Förster radius R0, defined as the distance between the donor and acceptor that yields 50% energy-transfer efficiency can be calculated as R60 = 8.8 × 1023κ2pnD−4QDJ(6)where QD is the quantum yield of the donor in the absence of an acceptor, nD is the refractive index of the medium, and κ2p is an orientation factor, depending on the relative orientation of the donor and acceptor dipoles. Fig. 4 displays the optical spectra of six different sets of gold nanoparticles and the emission spectra of free methylaminopyrene molecules. It is seen that the absorptions of the gold nanoparticles overlap significantly with the MAP emission, guaranteeing efficient energy transfer. Metal nanoparticles also have a continuum (more or less) of electronic states and exhibit energy transfer behavior as excited state quenchers. The distance of closest approach of the probe molecules to the nanoparticle core will change with the particle size. Thus, the origin of the nanoparticle size dependence on the quenching process also lies in the core-size related differences in the density of the electronic states of the gold nanoparticles.23 In highly efficient quenching processes, the energy transfer from molecules to the gold nanoparticles could increase the surface energy of gold, one part of which could be released in the form of Joule heat.25 Due to the chemisorption of the probe molecules to the gold surface, the molecular orbitals of the probe molecules are mixed with the metallic band states. Certain orbitals of the probe molecules interact strongly with the gold particles and are responsible for the chemisorption bond, while others are little affected by adsorption. Thus, the energy transfer quenching is very sensitive to the density of electronic state changes of the metal particles.
 Fig. 4  Overlap between the emission of MAP (1 μM) and the absorbance of six sets of gold nanoparticles (25 μM) with sizes (a) 8, (c) 13, (d) 16, (f) 25, (h) 41, and (i) 55 nm implying energy transfer as a significant quenching mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2004 Elsevier. 


3.1.3 Nature of quenching: static vs. dynamic. 
The next issue to be addressed is the nature of quenching, which is usually classified as static quenching (contact quenching) and dynamic quenching (collision quenching).41 The former involves the formation of a non-fluorescent complex between the fluorophore and quencher in their ground states, whereas the latter requires diffusive encounters between fluorophore and quencher during the lifetime of the excited state of the fluorophore. The Stern–Volmer equation accounting for both static and dynamic quenching is generally written as I0/I = 1 + (KS + KD)[Q] + KSKD[Q]2(7)Ignoring the second-order (right-hand) term reduces the equation to I0/I = τ0/τ = 1 + KSV[Q](8)where I0 and I are the emission intensities of the probe molecule in absence and presence of quencher, respectively, τ0 and τ are the lifetimes of the fluorophore in absence and presence of quencher, respectively, KSV = KS + KD is the Stern–Volmer quenching constant, where KS and KD are the static and dynamic quenching constants, respectively, and [Q] is the concentration of the quencher. For both static and dynamic quenching, Stern–Volmer plots (I0/I vs. [Q]) are linear. In static quenching, the quenching constant KSV is the association constant, while in the dynamic quenching, KSV represents the product of bimolecular quenching rate constant, kq, and fluorescence lifetime, τ0, of the fluorophore in the absence of quencher, that is, KSV = kqτ0. The value of kq may be calculated using the Smoluchowski equation9 as: (9)where NA is Avogadro number, Rf and Rq are the molecular radii of the fluorophore and quencher, and Df and Dq are the diffusion coefficients of the fluorophore and quencher, respectively. In solution, where both fluorophore and quencher can move freely, the value of kq approaches that of a diffusion-controlled rate constant kD, (kD = 8 RT/3000η) for a bimolecular process, where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, and η is the viscosity of the solvent. The diffusion-controlled rate constant kD, depending upon the viscosity of solvent, has a value in the range of 109–1010 M−1 s−1.42 The binding of fluorophores to the gold surface depends on the nature of the molecular probe and the surface composition of the metallic nanoparticles. In case of methylaminopyrene binding to gold nanoparticles, the probe molecules can be considered as a co-ion to the citrate-capped gold particles and therefore, there is no possibility of formation of static quenching complexes via attractive electrostatic attraction between fluorophore–quencher pairs and the effectiveness of collisional quenching is substantial.32 A plot of I0/I vs.gold concentration (Fig. 5) at constant MAP concentration gives KSV = 2.2 × 108 M−1 in the linear concentration range (inset). On the other hand, in case of binding of 1-aminonaphthalene to Triton-X 100-stabilized silver sol,37 it was seen that quenching occurs by a static quenching mechanism (KSV = 6.7 × 103 M−1). Shang et al.26 have found that the mercaptoethane sulfonate protected clusters exert energy transfer quenching of neutral red fluorescence by both static and dynamic quenching (with KSV∼ 104) while static quenching seems to be the dominating quenching mechanism. A similar result was also observed for the quenching of Chla by gold nanoparticles.42 Fan et al.25 observed that a plot of photoluminescence quantum efficiencies in the absence and presence of the quencher vs.nanoparticle concentration demonstrates the highly efficient “superquenching” produced by this fluorophore–quencher pair with KSV∼ 8.3 × 1010 M−1. The surface characteristics of the metal particle thus play a determining role in binding the incoming molecular probe and their nature of quenching to the surface of the nanoscale particles.
 Fig. 5  Stern–Volmer plot of I0/I of MAP (1 μM) vs. concentration of gold. Inset shows linear range in the low quencher concentration regime. Inset shows a linear range in the low quencher concentration regime. The linear approximation gives I0/I = 1.01 + 0.022 [quencher]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2004 Elsevier. 

3.2 Fluorescence enhancement
Metallic nanoparticles may also lead to enhancement of molecular fluorescence when a fluorophore is placed near a metal surface.11 The emission of vicinal fluorophores could be drastically changed in several ways: by enhancing the optical intensity incident on the molecule through near field enhancement, by modifying the radiative decay rate of the molecule, and by increasing the coupling efficiency of the fluorescence emission to the far field through nanoparticle scattering. All these processes can be controlled by molecule nanoparticle separation, nanoparticle size, and geometry. The excitation of a localized resonance, by photon absorption, packs the photon energy in a small spatial region and thus increases the local electromagnetic field. A molecule positioned in such a region is polarized by an electric field E which is enhanced with respect to the incident laser field. The enhancement of the quantity E.E, which is of importance in most spectroscopic measurements, can be as much as ten thousand which results in a dramatic increase of the desired spectroscopic signal. When a lumophore is placed near metal, there is a very strong net absorption effect as a result of the coupling of the molecular dipoles with the localized electromagnetic field of the metallic particle’s surface plasmon resonance. In essence, conducting metallic particles can modify the free space absorption condition in ways that increase the photonic mode density and incident electric field felt by a lumophore. These enhanced absorption phenomena can lead to surface enhanced luminescence phenomena, such as, metal-enhanced fluorescence and metal-enhanced phosphorescence. When a fluorescent probe is placed at an appropriate distance from metallic nanoparticles, there is an effective enhancement of the fluorescence by transferring the free electrons of the fluorophore to the strong surface plasmon polariton field of the metallic particle. At the plasmon resonance wavelength of a metallic nanoparticle, the light intensity in the near field of the nanoparticle (also known as the fringing field) is enhanced strongly relative to the incident optical wave. Studies have shown that when a fluorophore is placed too close to the metallic nanoparticle, the particle extracts all electrons in the excited state from the fluorophore, including the ones for radiative emission; if it is too far from the metal particle, the surface plasmon polariton field may not reach the fluorophore and there will be no effect on the resulting fluorescence intensity; when an appropriate distance (at a distance of a few nanometers) is maintained between these two entities by some means, e.g., a self-assembled monolayer on the nanoparticle surface, fluorescence may be enhanced due to an effective transfer of the electrons.3 All these plausible phenomena are shown schematically in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Schematic presentation showing the effect of the distance between a metallic nanoparticle and a fluorophore on the fluorescence emission. 
The enhanced absorption of dye molecules near to metallic surfaces was first reported by Glass et al.43 in 1980 and later confirmed by other groups.44,45 Recently, there have been several literature reports on the enhancement of molecular fluorescence of pyrene moieties on the surfaces of gold nanoparticles. George Thomas et al.46 has shown that the surface binding of amine groups of 1-aminomethylpyrene chromophores on gold nanoparticles suppressed the intramolecular charge-transfer interactions between the amine group and the pyrene chromophore, thereby enhancing the fluorescence yield. The report due to Boal et al.47 is about the multivalent receptors based on nanoparticle scaffolds in which the migration of alkanethioate ligands with pyrene units has been suggested upon the addition of guest molecules. Zhang and group48 have described the unusual fluorescence enhancement behavior of two different sets of gold nanoparticles protected by pyrenyl moieties upon aging, which was attributed to the folding of the alkyl chains and the generation of face-to-face arrangement of pyrene units from neighboring gold nanoparticles through chain interdigitation. Hong et al.49 have found that some organic solvents can also enhance fluorescence significantly and maximized the fluorescence enhancement by combining gold nanoparticles and a proper choice of biocompatible solvents. Enderlein50,51 presented the electrodynamics of a fluorescing molecule in a metallic nanocavity and showed that for a favorable cavity size, the fluorescence emission rate is strongly enhanced which could be attributed to the enhancement of the electromagnetic field within the cavity and the dramatic reduction of the fluorescence lifetime due to the strong near-field interaction between the dye and the cavity. Halas and colleagues52,53 demonstrated how incorporating metallic nanoshells transforms a thermoresponsive polymer into a photothermally responsive nanoshell-polymer composites dictated by the large extinction cross-section of the particles in the shell layer. We have seen that in the presence of surfactant-mediated gold colloids, the emission intensity of MAP is significantly enhanced (Fig. 6).54 The stabilizing ligand plays a role in controlling the proximity between the metal particles and the probe molecules on the nanometer scale. The longer chain surfactant molecules electrostatically bound to the particles render the probe molecules to donate electrons from a particular distance to the gold surface. However, Zhao et al.55 have observed simultaneous quenching and enhancement in a system of C60/C70-pyridine-gold hydrosol. The energy transfers between C60 molecules and gold nanoparticles leading to the quenching of fluorescence bands centered at 450 nm while the fluorescence bands at 700 nm of C70 are enhanced arising from the increased local field intensity through the excitation of surface plasmon resonance of gold nanoparticles. Molecular emission is also influenced by modification of the molecular radiative decay rate by the nearby metallic nanoparticle which alters the quantum yield of the molecule in a manner similar to the effect of a nearby macroscopic metallic surface. Coupling of the fluorescent emission to the far field is also influenced by the scattering efficiency of the metallic nanoparticle. Therefore, under suitable conditions, the luminescence properties of the fluorophores are dominated especially by the highly localized near-field interactions, leading to fluorescence enhancement of the probe molecules on the surface of metallic nanostructures.
 Fig. 6  
Emission spectra of MAP (1 μM) in the (a) absence and (b) presence of C18TAC-stabilized gold nanoparticles (10 μM) in THF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Lifetime of fluorescence
A fluorophore which is excited by a photon will drop to the ground state with a certain probability based on the decay rates through a number of different (radiative and/or nonradiative) decay pathways. In the ensemble description, the fluorescence emitted will decay with time according to the eqn: F(t) = F0e−t/τ(10)where t is the time, τ is the fluorescence lifetime, F0 is the initial fluorescence at t = 0. It is now well-known41 that excited-state lifetimes and, consequently, fluorescence intensities are abbreviated by proximity of fluorophores to metal surfaces. The efficiency, E of a FRET process can, for example, be derived from the quenching of the donor fluorescence intensity according to (11)where FD and FDA are the fluorescence intensities of the donor in the absence and presence of an acceptor, τD–A and τD are the fluorescent lifetimes of the donor in the absence and presence of an acceptor, and krad, knonrad, and ktransfer are the radiative and nonradiative recombination rates and the transfer rate of the donor, respectively. The relationship between photoluminescence intensity and lifetimes is easily shown by considering that (12)and the emission quantum yield as (13)where eqn (13) states that the observed lifetime, τobs, is the inverse of all rates of decay, kobs; where kobs is the sum of the radiative rate, krad, the nonradiative rate, knonrad, and the rate of energy transfer, ktransfer. The radiative and nonradiative rates are normally considered constants for a dye under defined conditions, leaving ktransfer as the major contributor to the shortening of an observed lifetime. The rate of energy transfer may be calculated, therefore, from the difference in rates of excited-state de-excitation in the presence and absence of gold quencher: (14)where τ′obs is the quenched lifetime of the fluorophore. Therefore, it is evident that the quantum yield (eqn (14)) is a convenient measurement relating PL intensity to krad and the observed lifetime, τ′obs. The fluorescence quantum yield is determined by the radiative rate constant, krad, and its nonradiative counterpart, knonrad: τ = (krad + knonrad)−1. In case of τnonrad∼τrad, the quantum yield is primarily governed by the nonradiative lifetime and can be approximated as Q(r) ≈τnonrad/τrad, where τnonrad and τrad can be calculated using the framework of the Gersten and Nitzan model.18 The fluorescence lifetimes of the probe molecules have been measured using the time-correlated single photon counting technique and intensity decays were analyzed in terms of the multi-exponential model. For example, it has been seen that the lifetime of 1-aminonaphthalene (20.3 ns) in the presence of metal nanoparticles (19.2 ns) slightly decreases, indicating the attachment of the probe molecules on the particle surface.41 Similar results have also been observed by other workers.13,35,36 However, Hernández et al.56 have reported the first experimental evidence showing a fluorescence lifetime enhancement of an organic dye chemically attached to the surface of spherical nanoparticles although the fluorescence quantum yield of the probe remains constant upon attachment to the surface of the nanoparticle as a result of weak energy transfer between them. The exception in this system arises from the fact that a molecular dipole oriented parallel to a noble metal surface tends to be reduced by the coupling with its image, and the dipole–dipole coupling enhances the fluorescence lifetime of the organic chromophore in the close vicinity of metal nanoparticles.
3.4 Intermolecular interactions on nanoparticle surfaces: dye aggregation

3.4.1 Experiments. 
The autonomous ordering and assembly of different molecules on well-defined surfaces is an important technique for evolving applications in organic and molecular electronics. The resulting supramolecular architecture can be tailored by modification of the functionality and the structure of the molecular building blocks. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the nanostructure and physical properties of the interface as a basis for improving the functions of the devices. Association of the electroactive dye molecules onto the surface of metallic nanoparticles very often leads to aggregation effects.57 Such organic–inorganic hybrid moieties have numerous possible applications in developing efficient light energy conversion systems, biomolecule sensing and imaging applications. Fundamental understanding of such events becomes an invaluable guidance for practical applications. Theoretical studies have shown that the nature of the molecular orientation of the dye molecules in the aggregate determines the spectral shift in the absorption band. The nature of orientation of the dye molecules governs the type of dye aggregates which exhibit either a blue shift (H-type) or a red shift (J-type) in the extinction spectra.58 Since the formation of aggregates alters the absorption spectrum and the photophysical properties of dyes, the resulting aggregates could emit at a wavelength different from their monomer or show new photosensitizing properties. In addition to their use as photographic sensitizers, the large oscillator strength and fast electronic response of the aggregates are of interest for modeling energy transfer in a photosynthetic reaction center antenna, non-linear optics related to superfluorescence, and solar photochemical energy conversion.
Significant research interest has been devoted in recent years to the aggregation of organic dyes on the surface of metal colloids. Kamat et al.57 reported efficient capping of colloidal gold with H-aggregates of rhodamine 6G and explained the dye aggregation in terms of intermolecular interactions. Kerker59 reported that for silver particles coated with Rhodamine 6G, a blue-shift was observed for both silver surface plasmon band and visible absorption band of the dye. The J-aggregation of cyanine dyes on the surface of noble metal colloids has been reported by Kometani et al.60 Wiederrecht et al.61 showed that photoexcitation of the plasmon in silver nanoparticles coated with J-aggregates of a cyanine derivative leads to exciton dynamics that are much different than for J-aggregate monolayers on bulk metal surfaces. Metal nanoclusters (copper, silver, and gold) embedded in a copper phthalocyanine matrix have been shown to enhance non-linear optical processes.62 Templeton et al.63 modified the surfaces of gold nanoparticles with fluorescein isothiocyanate and showed that dye molecules chemisorbed on the gold surface do not induce any aggregation. Ding et al.64 have studied the aggregation of thionine on gold nanoparticle surfaces by means of various analytical techniques.

Fig. 7 shows the spectral characteristics of the xanthene dye, eosin in the presence of Triton X-100 stabilized gold nanoparticles of variable sizes (described elsewhere).65 Interestingly, it is observed that the absorption characteristics of eosin show two distinct features for the two different size regimes. For gold particles (<12 nm), a red shift (∼20 nm) in the absorption spectra of the dye is seen with a maximum at 538 nm. As the size of the gold particles becomes larger than 12 nm, the absorption maxima of eosin appears at 518 nm and the absorbance value slightly decreases. The optical properties of the dye molecules changes upon adsorption onto metal particles because the local field at the molecule increases by the dipole field of the resonant plasma sphere. The strong electron coupling between the dye and metallic particles results in the decrease in the intensity of the eosin absorption peak upon adsorption onto gold particles. The appearance of red-shifted band at 538 nm in the extinction spectra can be attributed to the dimeric structure of the dye.58 It has been seen that organic dyes will dimerize through hydrogen bond, hydrophobic interaction, dispersion force and electrostatic interaction of zwitterions.66 Absorption and emission spectroscopy are the techniques most widely used and yield the most important information about the aggregation of dye molecules in solution. The red shift in the absorption maximum indicates that the eosin aggregates formed in colloidal suspensions are J-type. Employing selenium nanoparticles, we have observed that eosin experiences H-aggregation on the surface of the selenium particles.67 In fact, the J- and H-aggregates are characterized by a red-shifted or blue-shifted absorption band relative to the monomer band as a result of exciton delocalization over the molecular building blocks of the aggregate. The formation of dye aggregates only in the presence of smaller particles indicates that there is a dramatic increase in surface energy of the smaller particles compared to that of the larger particles.
 Fig. 7  
Absorption spectra of eosin (7.5 μM) in the absence and presence of gold particles of variable sizes (10 μM) designated as smaller (<12 nm) and larger (>12 nm) particles respectively. Modified with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2005 Elsevier. 


3.4.2 Nature of dye aggregation: molecular exciton theory. 
The location of electronic energy levels in molecules and the probability and polarization of radiative transitions between ground and excited state can be accurately predicted by quantum mechanical theory. For most molecules, no excited singlet states (S2, S3…) have been observed to emit light upon excitation, the same being true for triplet states (T2, T3…). This is summarized in Kasha’s rule: The emitting electronic level of a given multiplicity is the lowest excited level of that multiplicity.68 The molecular exciton theory was proposed by McRae and Kasha to afford the most satisfactory treatment of the electronic transitions in the dimeric form of the dye.58 This theory predicts that the excitonic singlet state of the dimer splits into two levels as a consequence of the two possible arrangements (in-phase and out-of-phase oscillation) of the transition dipoles of the chromophores in the dimer. Since the exciton splitting depends on the oscillator strength of the transition, only the singlet excited state splits and the triplet excited state remains nearly degenerate. As a result of splitting, one level is now lower and the other is higher in energy than the corresponding monomer singlet excited state. Transitions from the ground state to either excited state are possible and the number of bands actually observed depends on the geometry of the dimer. For parallel dimers (H-type aggregates), the transition to the lower energy excited state is forbidden and a single blue-shifted band is observed with respect to the monomer. On the other hand, in case of head-to-tail dimers (J-type aggregates), the transition to the higher energy excited state is forbidden and the spectrum shows a single red-shifted band with respect to the monomer. A schematic presentation of the H- and J-type aggregates and representative energy levels that control the excited state dynamics is shown in Scheme 3. The red shift in the absorption spectra of eosin in the presence of gold nanoparticles indicates that the dye aggregation is J-type. Kamat et al.57 observed a blue shift in the absorption maximum upon addition of Rhodamine 6G to the gold colloids and concluded that the dimeric aggregates are of H-type. Ding et al.64 also pointed out that the appearance of an absorption band in the shorter wavelength in case of neutral red adsorption onto the gold surface arises from the formation of H-aggregation. However, azulene has been the first authentic example of a molecule which violates Kasha’s rule. Beer and Longuet-Higgins69 discovered the second excited level emits light upon excitation, producing the anomalous (S2–S0) fluorescence of azulene, whereas the normal S1–S0 fluorescence and T1–T0 phosphorescence were much too weak to be observed. The absence of S1–S0 fluorescence suggests that S1–S0 internal conversion is a very rapid process in azulene and this makes the molecules a system of interest violating Kasha’s rule.
 Scheme 3  Representation of energy levels (S, singlet; T, triplet) of the monomer and dimmer of the dye that control the excited state dynamics. 

4. Applications of metal-probe hybrid nanoassemblies
When the dimensions of nanoparticles become smaller than the wavelength of the exciting light, energy can be confined in small spatial regions through the local excitation of surface plasmon resonances. The wavelength-dependent characteristics of surface plasmon modes on metal nanoparticles could be utilized for novel optical and electronic properties.70 Utilizing these novel properties, nanoscience and nanotechnology are having an impact in biophotonics as well as in material science through radiative decay engineering of organic molecules in the close vicinity of conducting metal surfaces.9 These have the increased detectability and photostability of fluorophores and chemiluminescent species, improved DNA detection, the release of self-quenched fluorescence of the molecular probe over labeled proteins, enhanced wavelength-ratiometric sensing, and the application of metallic surfaces to amplified (ultrafast and sensitive) assay detection and diagnostic technology.71 Many unique properties of gold nanoparticles, such as colorimetric, conductivity, and nonlinear optical properties have been explored for potential applications in biomolecular detection. The development of surface-based bioanalytical-sensor concepts has enabled selective detection of biorecognition reactions. Conjugates of gold nanoparticles with oligonucleotides are of great current interest because of the potential use of the programmability of DNA base pairing to organize nanocrystals in space and the multiple ways of providing a signature for the detection of precise DNA sequences.72,73 This biological strategy for fabrication of Au/DNA conjugates may be applied to molecular imaging, nanomedicine, and nanobiosensor technology.30 Exploiting the strategy of surface-functionalization of gold nanoparticles, optical-based distance measurements have been carried out which are essential for tracking biomolecular conformational changes, drug discovery, and cell biology. Significantly extending the range of optical based methods in molecular rulers is an important step toward biophysics.49 Of particular interest are certain donor–acceptor systems whose luminescence properties have been thoroughly studied and exploited for purposes ranging over energy harvesting, trace analysis, and microscopy. The combination of conjugated polymers with gold nanoparticles can be used as donor–acceptor pairs in biophysical FRET experiments in vitro as well as in vivo.25 Fluorophores have also been used as effective signal mediators for detecting biomarkers in biosamples. The enhancement of the fluorescence can, therefore, improve the sensitivity of fluorophore-mediated biosensors which are expected to be effective for fluorophore-mediated bioimaging as well as biosensing.8 Taking advantage of these beneficial roles of gold nanoparticles in accepting and shuttling the photogenerated electrons in Chla to the collecting electrode, a superior photoelectrochemical cell based on gold nanoparticles and Chla could be constructed which leads to enhancement in the charge separation efficiency.42 It has been found that the gold nanoparticles play an active role in the oxidation of NADH to NAD+ (an important coenzyme involved in the production of ATP) where the oxygen molecules are adsorbed on the surface of the particles due to the high surface-to-volume ratio of the gold nanoparticles.74 The composites of dye aggregate and metal nanoclusters have been extensively used in color photography and light energy harvesting systems.21 Mirkin and coworkers75 developed an ultrasensitive method for detecting protein analytes which relies on magnetic microparticle probes with antibodies that specifically bind a target of interest and nanoparticle probes that are encoded with DNA which is unique to the protein target of interest and antibodies that can sandwich the target captured by the microparticle probes. Therefore, the convergence of nanoscale science with modern biology (Scheme 4) is serving multidisciplinary needs in developing organic–inorganic hybrid nanoassemblies for applications in material science, chemical sciences, biological science and medicinal applications.
 Scheme 4  The preconceived architecture of biomolecule-nanomaterial hybrid assembly for the generation of functional nanodevices. 
5. Conclusion and perspectives
The synthesis of nanostructured materials with useful and tunable properties is central to the development in nanoscale science and technology. In this perspective, we have presented an illustrative detail that allows us to understand surface interactions at the molecular level which is essential to develop strategies of refining properties of nanoparticle superstructures and to design principles for assembling them into devices from theoretical perspectives. The wavelength-dependent characteristics of surface plasmon modes on metal nanoparticles have been found to be essential for utilizing them as novel optical and electronic materials and also for constructing molecular systems for nanophotonic applications as well. A straightforward experimental verification of the size effect of nanoscale materials on the physical processes, viz.electron transfer, energy transfer, intermolecular interaction governing the metal-probe interaction, has been highlighted. The distance dependence of excitation energy transfer rate from a donor to an acceptor moiety forms the underlying principle of most commonly employed experimental techniques of fluorescence resonance energy transfer, which is widely used as a diagnostic tool to investigate the structure and dynamics of macromolecules. Finally, the reactivity of the gold cores in gold nanoparticles, especially when those are assembled into well-defined architectures, have been found to be useful in excellent sensory and environmental devices applications and catalysis by tuning the electrochemical characteristics of gold nanoparticles with those of substrates, including proteins, enzyme, DNA, RNA and other biological molecules or systems with fluorescence spectroscopy.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge DST & CSIR, New Delhi for financial support. We are thankful to A. Pal, S. De, T. K. Sau, S. Nath, S. Praharaj and S. Basu for contribution to this work.
References
P. Avouris and B. N. J. Persson, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 837–848 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Waldeck, A. P. Alivisatos and C. B. Harris, Surf. Sci., 1985, 158, 103–125 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dubertret, M. Calame and A. J. Libchaber, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zenneck, Ann. Phys., 1907, 328, 846–866 CrossRef .
A. Sommerfeld, Ann. Phys., 1909, 28, 665–736 CrossRef .
H. Morawitz and M. R. Philpott, Phys. Rev. B, 1974, 10, 4863–4868 CrossRef .
K. George Thomas and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 888–898 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS .

          C. D. Geddes, K. Aslan, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka and J. R. Lakowicz, Radiative decay engineering, in Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  2005 Search PubMed .

          J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley, New York, 2nd edn,  1975 Search PubMed .
P. K. Aravind, A. Nitzan and H. Metiu, Surf. Sci., 1981, 110, 189–204 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dulkeith, A. C. Morteani, T. Niedereichholz, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, S. A. Levi, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, D. N. Reinhoudt, M. Moller and D. I. Gittins, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 2030021–4 .

          R. R. Chance, A. Prock and R. Silbey, in Adv. Chem. Phys., Wiley, New York,  1978, p. 1 Search PubMed .
R. Ruppin, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 76, 1681–1684 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. J. Persson and N. Lang, Phys. Rev. B, 1982, 26, 5409–5415 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avouris and B. N. J. Persson, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 837–848 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Weitz, S. Garoff, J. I. Gersten and A. Nitzan, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 78, 5324–5338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gersten and A. Nitzan, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 75, 1139–1152 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chew, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 1355–1360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ditlbacher, J. R. Krenn, N. Felidj, B. Lamprecht, G. Schider, M. Salerno, A. Leitner and F. R. Aussenegg, App. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 404–406 Search PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729–7744 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster and K. Kasper, Z. Phys. Chem., 1954, 1, 275–277 .
A. Aguila and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5949–5954 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Templeton, D. E. Cliffel and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7081–7089 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fan, S. Wang, J. W. Hong, G. C. Bazan, K. W. Plaxco and A. J. Heeger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 6297–6301 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shang, X. Zou, X. Jiang, G. Yang and S. Dong, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 187, 152–159 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Chen and H.-T. Chang, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 3727–3734 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Makarova, A. E. Ostafin, H. Miyoshi, Jr, J. R. Norris and D. Meisel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9080–9084 CrossRef CAS .
L. Crovetto, J. M. Paredes, R. Rios, E. M. Talavera and J. M. Alvarez-Pez, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 13311–13320 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Tsai, A.-L. Shiau, P.-C. Cheng, D.-B. Shieh, D.-H. Chen, C.-H. Chou, C.-S. Yeh and C.-L. Wu, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1209–1212 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Gannett, J. Kabulski, F. A. Perez, Z. Liu, D. Lederman, C. W. Locuson, R. R. Ayscue, N. M. Thomsen and T. S. Tracy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8374–8375 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, A. Pal, S. Kundu, S. Nath and T. Pal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 395, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pal, N. R. Jana and T. Sau, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 127–130 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, R. L. Penn, R. J. Hamers and J. F. Banfield, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4656–4662 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aslan, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka, E. Matveeva, J. R. Lakowicz and C. D. Geddes, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2005, 16, 55–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Drexhage, H. Kuhn and F. P. Shafer, Ber. Bunsen-Ges., 1968, 72, 329 .
S. De, A. Pal and T. Pal, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 6855–6861 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vogelsang, S. Doose, M. Sauer and P. Tinnefeld, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 7367–7375 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Kim, R. R. Kalluru, J. P. Singh, A. Fortner, J. Griffin, G. K. Darbha and P. C. Ray, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3085–3093 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Yun, A. Javier, T. Jennings, M. Fisher, S. Hira, S. Peterson, B. Hopkins, N. O. Reich and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3115–3119 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, A. Pal, N. R. Jana and T. Pal, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 131, 111–123 .
S. Barazzouk, P. V. Kamat and S. Hotchandani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 716–723 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Glass, P. F. Liao, J. G. Bergman and D. H. Olson, Opt. Lett., 1980, 5, 368–370 CAS .

          C. D. Geddes, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka and J. R. Lakowicz, Noble metal nanostructure for metal-enhanced fluorescence, in Review Chapter for Annual Reviews in Fluorescence, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  2004, p. 365 Search PubMed .
J. R. Krenn, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 210–211 CrossRef CAS .
K. George Thomas and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 2655–2656 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Boal and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 734–735 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, D. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Yang, R. Han and D. Zhu, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1840–1848 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hong and K. A. Kang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2006, 21, 1333–1338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Enderlein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 315–317 CrossRef CAS .
J. Enderlein, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 2780–2786 RSC .
S. R. Sershen, S. L. Westcott, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2000, 51, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sershen, S. L. Westcott, J. L. West and N. J. Halas, Appl. Phys. B, 2001, 73, 379–381 CrossRef CAS .
S. Praharaj, S. K. Ghosh, S. Nath, S. Kundu, S. Panigrahi, S. Basu and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13166–13174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Jiang and Y. Fang, Chem. Phys., 2006, 323, 169–172 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Hernández, S. Yu, M. García and A. D. Campiglia, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9499–9504 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekharan, P. V. Kamat, J. Hu and G. Jones II, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11103–11109 CrossRef CAS .

          E. G. McRae and M. Kasha, in Physical Processes in Radiation Biology, ed. L. Augenstein, R. Mason and B. Rosenberg, Academic Press, New York,  1964, p. 23 Search PubMed .
M. Kerker, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1985, 105, 297–314 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kometani, M. Tsubonishi, T. Fujita, K. Asami and Y. Yonezawa, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 578–580 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hranisavljevic, N. M. Dimitrijevic, G. A. Wurtz and G. P. Wiederrecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 4536–4537 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stenzel, A. Stendal, K. Voigtsberger and C. von Borczyskowski, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1995, 37, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Templeton, W. P. Wuelfing and R. W. Murray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, X. Zhang, X. Liu and R. Guo, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2292–2298 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh, A. Pal, S. Nath, S. Kundu, S. Panigrahi and T. Pal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 412, 5–11 CrossRef CAS .
I. López Arbeloa, Faraday Trans., 1981, 2, 1725–1733 Search PubMed .
S. Nath, A. Pal, S. K. Ghosh, S. Praharaj, S. Panigrahi, S. Kundu, T. Thundat and T. Pal, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 1832–1839 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasha, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1950, 9, 14–19 RSC .
M. Beer and H. C. Longuet-Higgins, J. Chem. Phys., 1955, 23, 1390–1391 CAS .
P. Johansson, H. Xu and M. Käll, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 03542701–03542717 .
Y. Zhang, K. Aslan, M. J. R. Previte and C. D. Geddes, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 432, 528–532 CrossRef CAS .
S. Basu, S. Jana, S. Pande and T. Pal, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 321, 288–293 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. R. Lytton-Jean, H. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 6037–6041 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, X. Yi and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2005, 81, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Nam, C. Shad Thaxton and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2003, 301, 1884–1886 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
Table Content:
Sujit Kumar Ghosh	Dr Sujit Kumar Ghosh, having graduated from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, was appointed Lecturer in Chemistry at Raidighi College, India. He subsequently was a Postdoctoral Associate with Prof. Naoki Toshima at Tokyo University of Science in Yamaguchi, Japan. Presently, he is working as Alexander-von-Humboldt Fellow with Prof. Alexander Böker at the University of Bayreuth, Germany. His current research interests are the optical properties of nanoscale assemblies and the photophysical aspects of molecular probes on the surface of nanoscale materials.
Tarasankar Pal	Professor Tarasankar Pal obtained his PhD degree in Chemistry from Burdwan University and a DSc degree in Chemistry in 2006 from Visva-Bharati University. He has been working as a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur since 1984. Dr Pal is a fellow of the National Academy of Sciences, Allahabad. His current research interest lies in the size and shape selective syntheses, catalytic and spectroscopic applications including fluorescence and surface-enhanced Raman scattering spectroscopy of metal and semiconductor nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  Factors that modify the spontaneous rate of emission of organic dyes near metal nanoparticles are shown with lissamine dye molecules attached to gold nanoparticlesvia a thioether group. Modified with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2002 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Enhancement of the electromagnetic field as a function of the distance from the metal nanoparticle surface.	 
	(1)
Rfluo(r) = Rrad(r) + Rnonrad (r)	(2)
Q(r) = Rrad(r)/Rfluo(r)	(3)

 	Fig. 3  The emission spectra of MAP (1 μM) in the (a*) absence and (a–j) presence of gold nanoparticles (25 μM) with sizes (a) 8, (b) 10, (c) 13, (d) 16, (e) 20, (f) 25, (g) 32, (h) 41, (i) 55 and (j) 73 nm, respectively. Inset shows the efficiency of quenching as a function of the particle size. The dashed line represents the point of inflexion in the titration. Modified with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2004 Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 1  Frontier molecular orbital diagram illustrating the photoinduced electron transfer phenomenon.	 
	(4)
J(λ) = ∫fD(λ)εA(λ)λ4 dλ	(5)
R60 = 8.8 × 1023κ2pnD−4QDJ	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Overlap between the emission of MAP (1 μM) and the absorbance of six sets of gold nanoparticles (25 μM) with sizes (a) 8, (c) 13, (d) 16, (f) 25, (h) 41, and (i) 55 nm implying energy transfer as a significant quenching mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2004 Elsevier.	 
I0/I = 1 + (KS + KD)[Q] + KSKD[Q]2	(7)
I0/I = τ0/τ = 1 + KSV[Q]	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 5  Stern–Volmer plot of I0/I of MAP (1 μM) vs. concentration of gold. Inset shows linear range in the low quencher concentration regime. Inset shows a linear range in the low quencher concentration regime. The linear approximation gives I0/I = 1.01 + 0.022 [quencher]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2004 Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic presentation showing the effect of the distance between a metallic nanoparticle and a fluorophore on the fluorescence emission.	 

 	Fig. 6  
Emission spectra of MAP (1 μM) in the (a) absence and (b) presence of C18TAC-stabilized gold nanoparticles (10 μM) in THF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 
F(t) = F0e−t/τ	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 7  
Absorption spectra of eosin (7.5 μM) in the absence and presence of gold particles of variable sizes (10 μM) designated as smaller (<12 nm) and larger (>12 nm) particles respectively. Modified with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2005 Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 3  Representation of energy levels (S, singlet; T, triplet) of the monomer and dimmer of the dye that control the excited state dynamics.	 

 	Scheme 4  The preconceived architecture of biomolecule-nanomaterial hybrid assembly for the generation of functional nanodevices.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
