Graphene and its derivatives as versatile templates for materials synthesis and functional applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR09439B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR09439B
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2398-2416Graphene and its derivatives as versatile templates for materials synthesis and functional applications

        
          
            Quan 
            Quan
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Lin
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Yi-Jun 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350002, P. R. China
bCollege of Chemistry, New Campus, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, 350108, P. R. China. E-mail: yjxu@fzu.edu.cn
Received 
      6th December 2016
    , Accepted 12th January 2017First published on 12th January 2017AbstractThe obvious incongruity between the increasing depletion of fossil fuel and the finite amount of resources has motivated us to seek means to maintain sustainability in our society. Developing renewable and highly efficient energy conversion and storage systems represents one of the most promising and viable methods. Although the efficiency of energy conversion and storage devices depends on various factors, their overall performances strongly rely on the structure and functional properties of materials. Graphene and its derivatives as versatile templates for materials synthesis have garnered widespread interest because of their flexible capability to tune the morphology and structure of functional materials. Herein, we have demonstrated recent progress on graphene and its derivatives as versatile templates for materials synthesis, particularly highlighting the basic fundamental roles of graphene in the materials preparation process. Then, a concise overview of the functional applications of materials obtained from graphene-templated approaches has been presented with a few selected examples to show the wide scope of potential in energy storage and conversion. Finally, a brief perspective and potential future challenges in this burgeoning research area have been discussed.Quan QuanQuan Quan is now pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. Her current research interests include composite materials synthesis and their applications in energy conversion and storage such as photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical redox processes.Xin LinXin Lin is now pursuing his Master degree under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. His current research interests include composite materials synthesis and their applications in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.Nan ZhangNan Zhang received her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. Her main research interests include the fabrication of core–shell and carbon-based composites for potential target applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.Yi-Jun XuYi-Jun Xu is a full professor working at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and his current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of composite materials, such as graphene-based semiconductor composites, core–shell composites and metal-based nanostructured materials, in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
1. Introduction
The growing depletion of fossil fuel reserves, coupled with the ever-increasing energy demand, has led us to seek strategies to alleviate the present dilemma.1–3 Consequently, the research and development of sustainable energy conversion and storage technologies have garnered a great deal of attention. Although the efficiency of energy conversion and storage devices relies on a diverse range of collective factors, their overall performance strongly depends on the structure and functional properties of component materials. In this context, various emerging nanostructured functional materials hold great potential for improving the efficiency of energy conversion and storage.
The past two decades have witnessed considerable interest devoted to the development of synthetic methods for nanostructured materials with well-defined size, shape and morphology. Structure and morphology optimization on nanostructured materials is of crucial importance to create diverse classifications of nanomaterials and is beneficial for tuning their optical and mechanical properties as well as other physicochemical properties. In this respect, the template-assisted synthetic strategy is one of the most prospective techniques to achieve desirable nanostructured materials.4–7 A template can be defined as a “gauge, pattern or mould used as a guide to the form of a piece being made,”5 which displays general advantages in structure and morphology control of the templated synthetic strategy. The general method for templated synthesis of nanostructured materials involves the following steps: (1) template preparation, (2) directed synthesis of target materials using the template, and (3) template removal (if necessary).5 So far, two types of templates, including soft template and hard template, have been extensively employed for the preparation of targeted nanostructured materials.8 In a hard templating pathway, the precursor adheres to the surface or fills void spaces of the template and finally the precursor can be transformed into the targeted material with a replica structure of the template. The soft template (e.g., amphiphilic molecules) is a useful route for directing the precursor to self-assemble into a targeted structure. In theory, many materials with nanostructured features can be used as templates for nanoscale synthesis, such as metal–organic frames (MOFs),9 polystyrene spheres (PS),10–12 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),13–16 molecular sieves,17,18 metal oxide,19–21 and surfactants.22
Graphene, as a rapidly rising star in the field of materials science, has garnered considerable interest both in fundamental science and potential applications, due to its unique structure and remarkable properties, including the two-dimensional (2D) morphology, excellent electrical and mechanical properties and its diverse derivatives with intriguing surface properties.23–25 Such exceptional structure and properties of graphene make it and its derivatives able to be a kind of versatile templates for the synthesis and patterning of nanomaterials. In comparison with traditional hard or soft templates, graphene and its derivatives have demonstrated some exclusive properties. Graphene with a flexible 2D structure can provide a platform on which the nucleation and growth of nanomaterials can occur, especially beneficial for forming 2D nanomaterials which traditional templates rarely afford. Graphene oxide (GO), an important class of graphene derivatives, can not only act as a sacrificial template to induce the formation of specific morphology, but also as a surfactant to direct the growth of other materials. Furthermore, GO can serve as a building block for the construction of three dimensional (3D) graphene with various structures that can combine with other functional materials to produce new 3D-based hierarchical materials. It is worth noting that the graphene template can be easily removed by incineration in air, which avoids the use of corrosive acids/bases and lowers the production cost. Besides, in many cases, the graphene template can directly serve as an efficient active component without being removed by extra processes, which not only takes full advantage of the template, but also avoids the addition of impurities. In the light of the simplicity and versatility of the graphene-templated synthesis, a wealth of materials fabricated by graphene-templated synthesis have been extensively reported, including metal particles,26,27 metal oxides,28,29 metal sulfides,30,31 organic semiconductors,32,33 and so on.34 These nanostructured materials with a well-controlled size, shape and configuration hold great potential for a myriad of practical applications in energy conversion and storage, such as photocatalysis, lithium ion batteries, supercapacitors and solar cells (Fig. 1). Therefore, graphene template-assisted materials are of great interest from both theoretical and practical perspectives.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the fundamental roles of graphene and its derivatives as templates for materials synthesis and functional applications. 
In this review, we intend to afford a short overview regarding graphene-templated synthesis and highlight its merits as a facile, flexible, and promising approach to design different multifunctional materials. Meanwhile, the basic fundamental roles of graphene in templated synthesis will be elaborated in detail. Furthermore, some typical developments of graphene-templated materials for functional applications in energy storage and conversion have been concisely demonstrated based on the selected pioneering works without bias in this direction. Finally, a brief perspective and potential future challenges on the promising research direction of graphene-template synthesis have been discussed.
2. Fundamental roles of graphene in the graphene-templated synthesis
2.1 Growth template
Featuring excellent electronic properties, large specific surface area and good thermal and mechanical stability, graphene and its derivatives are ideal templating materials to facilitate the nucleation and growth of nanocrystals for producing functional hybrid nanostructures via diversified methods.35–37 In this section, we will select some typical examples to discuss the role of graphene as a template in orientation and non-orientation growth in graphene-templated synthesis.

2.1.1 Orientation growth. 
Assembling organic or inorganic nanomaterials onto the graphene surface is a promising approach to obtain hybrid nanomaterials for satisfying the practical demand of many applications requiring mechanical, electrical and optical properties. However, it is rather challenging to precisely assemble nanomaterials onto pristine graphene to form desirable targeted materials which avert random orientation or poorly aligned structures. Towards this end, numerous efforts have been devoted to improving the strategies on how to assemble nanomaterials on the graphene surface in the well-organized growth, which opens up a novel avenue to induce tunable hybrid structured nanomaterials. Thus far, various organic nanomaterials, like pentacene,33 copper phthalocyanines,38 and polar phthalocyanines,39 have successfully been integrated with graphene-based sheets to achieve well-controlled nanomaterials by orientation growth. For example, Wang et al. have reported the self-assembly of molecular perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) on epitaxial graphene grown on the SiC (0001) surface at room temperature.40 The obtained PTCDA monolayers possess a long-range order with a herringbone arrangement, which is unaffected by the interface layer and the defects of the graphene surface. The herringbone structure is stabilized by hydrogen bonding and quadrupolar interactions between adjacent molecules, and π–π* interactions bind the molecules to the graphene surface. This study demonstrates that robust, uniform, self-assembled organic monolayers can be formed on epitaxial graphene.
Besides, combining inorganic nanomaterials on the graphene surface is also expected to expand the possible applications of the hybrids. As shown in Fig. 2A, the self-assembly of inorganic materials on pristine graphene to fabricate the nanowires of gold cyanide has been demonstrated, in which the gold nanowires can spontaneously bind to pristine graphene and align themselves with the zigzag lattice directions of graphene.41 The unique π–π interaction plays a crucial role in spontaneously binding between the gold nanowires and graphene, which is different from the relatively weak physisorption (either electrostatic or van der Waals interaction) that is commonly observed at interfaces between inorganic crystals and graphene. The graphene can also have a synergetic templating effect on cooperating inorganic with organic materials to obtain a desirable structure. Zhang et al. have photosynthesized red-emission Au nanodots (AuNDs) that in situ self-assemble into ordered structures on RGO surfaces, on which 1-octadecanethiol (ODT) is preabsorbed.42 As specifically shown in Fig. 2B, the ODT molecules first self-assemble into an ordered herringbone structure on the RGO surface (Step 1). Under light exposure, Au3+ is progressively reduced to Au+ and Au0. Owing to the strong Au–S covalent bonding, most of the AuNDs are anchored on the thiol groups of the ODT molecules and self-assembled on RGO (Step 2). Therefore, the RGO sheet first serves as a template to direct the self-assembly of the ODT molecules into ordered structures, which then are used as a secondary template for the in situ synthesis and assembly of AuNDs.
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the growth of inorganic nanowires on graphene. An aqueous-phase reaction at room temperature results in nanowires whose axes are parallel to the zigzag lattice directions of pristine graphene. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.) (B) Schematic illustration of the in situ synthesis and assembly of AuNDs on RGO. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
The layer structure of graphene sheets can provide reaction nanospace for the orientated growth of other components, especially for formation of 2D materials. As shown in Fig. 3A–H, Zhu et al. have reported a novel approach to fabricate ZnS–nanoframe (NF)@GO composites by the evolution of ZnS–ethylenediamine (ZnS(EN)0.5) nanosheets confined within the interlayer space of graphene oxide (GO) sheets, one of the widely used precursors of graphene in wet chemistry materials synthesis.43 The ZnS(EN)0.5 nanosheets are firstly wrapped with GO, which induces special enveloped-like morphology. Simultaneously, when GO is reduced to RGO by ethylenediamine, the evolution of the sheets is confined within the quasi-2D space, where the movements of the Zn2+ and S2− ions are confined along the GO-sheet planes and towards the side edges of the nanosheets, facilitating the Ostwald ripening mechanism. This confinement can effectively protect the side edges of ZnS(EN)0.5 nanosheets to avoid collapse and simultaneously facilitate the transfer of Zn2+ and S2− ions from the sheets interior to the side edges.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of the top views of a (A) ZnS(EN)0.5 NS and (B) GO sheets. (C) Schematic illustration and (D) SEM image of a ZnS(EN)0.5 NS wrapped in GO sheets, before the synthesis of ZnS-NF@RGO. (E–G) Schematic images of the process to create ZnS-NF@RGO, where the color change of the GO sheets denotes that GO is gradually reduced to RGO. (H) TEM image of the as-synthesized ZnS-NF@RGO. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
Our group has reported planting CdS-sensitized 1D ZnO nanorod arrays on the 2D graphene (GR) sheet to obtain the ternary hierarchical nanostructures during which GO as the precursor of GR acts as a growth template for the formation of ZnO nanorods (Fig. 4A).44 As displayed in Fig. 4B and C, the CdS dot decorated ZnO nanorods (CdS–ZnO) have a star-like morphology in the absence of GO. When GO sheets are used as the substrate, the CdS dot decorated ZnO nanorods are planted on the RGO substrate forming a novel 3D material (Fig. 4D and E). The unique features of 2D GO sheets with abundant oxygen-containing functional groups make GO an alternative structure-directing platform for anchoring ZnO seeds and the subsequent heteroepitaxial growth of ZnO nanorod arrays.
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of controllable synthesis of the hybrids of binary ZnO nanostars–CdS and ternary RGO–ZnO nanorods arrays–CdS. SEM images of (B, C) ZnO–CdS sample and (D, E) RGO–ZnO–CdS sample. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 


2.1.2 Non-orientation growth. 
Various inorganic/graphene hybrids have been fabricated by direct nucleation and growth of the precursors on graphene, in which the precursors can be adsorbed and dispersed on the graphene surface. This strategy often affords strong chemical interactions and electrical coupling between the nanoparticles and graphene. However, it is difficult to enable the nanoparticles to be grown on graphene in the orientation manner.
Recently, graphene integrated with metal nanoparticles (e.g., Au,45–47 Pt,26,48,49 Ag,50,51 Pd52,53) to achieve metal nanoparticles/graphene hybrids has been intensively investigated. As displayed in Fig. 5A, Zhang and co-workers have presented a facile method to in situ synthesize Ag nanoparticles (Ag NPs) on single-layer GO and RGO without any surfactants and reducing agents.51 In particular, this approach involves the combination of Ag NPs with the negatively charged graphene surface on the basis of electrostatic interactions, where graphene sheets are beneficial for the formation and dispersion of Ag NPs by the virtue of its high surface area and abundant oxygenated functional groups. Different Ag NP growth behaviors have been observed on the low-oxidation degree RGO and highly oxidized degree GO. A much higher density of Ag NPs with smaller sizes is formed on the GO surface compared to the lower-density and bigger Ag particles formed on RGO (Fig. 5B and C). Besides, graphene concentration is another crucial factor for achieving the stability and the size of metal NPs. At a low graphene concentration and in the absence of graphene, the metal NPs aggregate partially and even slowly settle to the bottom.54 Thus, the oxidation degree and concentration of graphene can influence the size and morphology of materials.
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of the proposed formation of Ag NPs grown on the graphene template. SEM images of Ag NPs grown on (B) GO and (C) RGO surface. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.) 
In addition, many metal oxides (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, MnO2, Co3O4) and metal chalcogenides (e.g., CdS, MoS2, ZnS) have been grown on graphene-based sheets in a non-orientation manner.55–57 For example, Liu et al. have reported the synthesis of TiO2/graphene composites by using hydroxyl titanium oxalate (HTO) as the intermediate in the GO solution containing sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) as the surfactant under mild reaction conditions, in which amorphous HTO can condense as a flower-like nanostructure and randomly distribute onto the GO sheets.58 By calcination, the HTO/graphene can be converted to TiO2/graphene composites with preserved flower-like nanostructures and TiO2 nanoparticles strongly attach onto conductive graphene sheets without losing aggregation. In another case, the MoS2/RGO hybrid synthesized by one-step solvothermal reaction has been demonstrated by Dai et al., in which MoS2 nanoparticles can be integrated with GO sheets, as illustrated in Fig. 6A and B.59 GO sheets are used as a substrate for the nucleation and subsequent growth of MoS2, which can effectively avoid the aggregation of MoS2. Strikingly, in the absence of GO nanosheets, the controllable morphology of MoS2 cannot be obtained and MoS2 nanoparticles easily aggregate (Fig. 6C and D). Such a morphological difference highlights the important role of GO in mediating the growth of nanomaterials.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic solvothermal synthesis with GO sheets to afford the MoS2/RGO hybrid. (B) SEM image of the MoS2/RGO hybrid (the inset is the corresponding TEM image). (C) Schematic solvothermal synthesis without any GO sheets, resulting in large, free MoS2 particles. (D) SEM image of the free particles (the inset is the corresponding TEM image). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.) 
Three-dimensional graphene networks (3DGNs) synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can also be used as 3D templates for the growth of various nanomaterials, such as oxides and sulfides.60,61 Zhang et al. have developed metal–oxide-coated 3D graphene composites by using metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as the precursors of the metal oxides on the 3DGNs.62 As displayed in Fig. 7A, the MOFs first grow on the 3DGNs and are successively annealed under argon and in air to obtain the metal oxide/3DGN composites. Fig. 7B shows that ZIF-8 nanocrystals with a polygonal shape and a size of approximately 500 nm are coated on the surface of the 3DGN and the porous ZnO/3DGN composites are obtained, as revealed in Fig. 7C. A Fe2O3/3DGN composite is also obtained after two-step annealing of MIL-88-Fe/3DGN (Fig. 7D and E).
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the process used for the synthesis of metal oxide/3DGN composites. (B) High-magnification SEM image of the ZIF-8/3DGN composite. (C) SEM image of the ZnO/3DGN composite (the inset is a low-magnification SEM image of the ZnO/3DGN composite). (D) SEM image of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite (the inset is a low-magnification SEM image of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite). (E) SEM image of the Fe2O3/3DGN composite (the inset is a high-magnification SEM image of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
The above discussion demonstrates that graphene and its derivatives can be directly used as a template to realize the synthesis of nanomaterials by either an orientation growth or a non-orientation growth manner. The parameters, such as the size, functional groups of graphene and its derivatives and the precursor concentration, are able to play important roles in the template synthesis process, which in turn provides a flexible technique to control the structure and morphology of the as-obtained materials by changing these factors.

2.2 Sacrificial template
Apart from the growth template, the sacrificial template plays another important and fundamental role in graphene-templated synthesis. Generally, the method to remove graphene as a sacrificial template is thermal annealing. Wu's group has explored two different thermal annealing methods for removing the template (graphene sheets) to fabricate monolithic macroporous gold (MPG).63 As displayed in Fig. 8A, the specific thermal annealing procedures are: (i) to anneal graphene/Au hybrid papers at 600–800 °C in air for 1 h to directly remove the template; (ii) to heat graphene/Au hybrid papers to 600–800 °C in a N2 atmosphere (20 °C min−1) first and then expose the hybrid papers immediately in air to remove the template. By direct annealing in air, the uniform and compact graphene/Au multilayer films can transform into MPG films with completely interconnected networks (Fig. 8B), while by a two-step treatment openly bicontinuous MPG films with recognizable ligaments and pores can be obtained (Fig. 8C). Because of the existence of a preaggregation process of AuNPs assisted by graphene sheets in N2, the two-step treatment has a more significant templating effect than direct thermal annealing to fabricate MPG films. Therefore, the sacrificial templating effect of graphene can be tuned by different annealing treatment methods, which in turn indicates that an appropriate annealing approach could be further explored to fully develop the advantage of graphene as a sacrificial template and thus obtain more desirable materials.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of monolithic macroporous gold (MPG) films using graphene sheets as a sacrificial template by two thermal procedures. SEM images of the exterior of MPG films upon (B) direct thermal annealing in air and (C) a two-step thermal treatment (annealing temperature = 600 °C) produced from initial graphene/Au hybrid papers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.) 
In addition, differing from the pure graphene, functionalized graphene with the abundant functional groups can provide more nucleation sites which adsorb and disperse the precursor more easily, resulting in the formation of targeted materials followed by the removal of graphene template. Thus, functionalized graphene acting as a sacrificial template can be applied for bottom-up production of nanomaterials with a controllable structure and morphology, especially in the fabrication of porous and hierarchically structured materials.64,65 For example, Hall et al. have fabricated the complex oxide, YBa2Cu3O7-δ (YBCO), when the GO as a sacrificial template is used to create foams and layered paper-like structures that retain the superconducting properties of YBCO.66 As reported by Liu et al., 2D porous metal oxides have been successfully prepared based on the graphene-templated method. During the preparation process, GO as a typical sacrificial template directs the growth and fusion of metal oxide nanoparticles (NiO, Fe2O3, Co3O4, Mn2O3, and NiFe2O4) on its surface.67 It is worth noting that when metal particles without mixing with GO is merely annealed in air, the porous metal oxides cannot be obtained, thus indicating the important role of GO in the synthesis of porous metal oxides. The formed unique architecture endows metal oxides with a high specific capacity and an excellent rate capability and cycling stability when they are used as anode materials in lithium-ion batteries.
In our early work, we have developed a GR-template method for bottom-up growth of TiO2 2D nanostructures from molecular precursors, in which benzyl-alcohol-functionalized GR 2D sheets are utilized as structure-directing agents to confine the stacking and growth of TiO2 onto the surface of GR nanosheets.68 It is clearly seen in Fig. 9A that the resultant TiO2 nanosheets (TiO2-NS) well maintain the 2D sheet-like structure of GR while the irregular TiO2 nanoparticles in Fig. 9B are obtained without addition of the GR template, confirming the key role of GR as a 2D template. Notably, the average lateral size of the as-obtained TiO2 nanosheets is much larger than that of the original GO sheets. As demonstrated in Fig. 9C, the benzyl alcohol functionalized onto the GR surface through π–π interactions provides a large number of hydroxyl groups, which would provide bonding force for cross-linking the individual GR sheets through hydrogen bond. With the addition of tetrabutyl-orthotitanate, the Ti4+ ions favorably interact with the hydroxyl groups of benzyl-alcohol-functionalized GR and subsequently hydrolyze in the presence of water. As a result, the individual GR nanosheet is self-assembled by cross-linking interaction and simultaneously TiO2 is coated onto their surface to form a unique GR-based TiO2 2D structure with a much larger lateral size than that of the individual GR nanosheet. After the thermal treatment, the GR template is removed and ultralarge TiO2 nanosheets are fabricated. The uniform morphology of the 2D TiO2 nanosheets makes it as an ideal substrate to further construct 2D TiO2-based nanostructures. Our work indicates that the benzyl alcohol functionalization of GR provides a promising approach to break through the size limitation of the original GR template for fabrication of ultralarge TiO2 nanosheets. As a consequence, surface modification of graphene can be utilized as a desirable method to achieve functionalized graphene as sacrificial templates for diverse functional materials synthesis.
 Fig. 9  (A) TEM image of TiO2 nanosheets. (B) SEM image of TiO2 nanostructures prepared using the same procedure for TiO2-NS without the addition of a GR template. (C) Schematic illustration of the cross-link of the GR nanosheets and the formation of the ultralarge TiO2 nanosheets. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
Not only fabricating planar films or porous structure, graphene can also act as a sacrificial template for creating complex textured surface topographies in metal oxide films. Chen et al. have demonstrated a general synthetic route for transcribing complex wrinkled and crumpled topographies in GO films into textured metal oxides.69 As presented in Fig. 10A, multigenerational GO films are fabricated by one-time uniaxial contraction (G1-1D-GO), one-time isotropic contraction (G1-2D-GO), and repeated isotropic–isotropic contractions (G2-2D2D-GO). The as-fabricated textured GO films are then utilized as intercalation templates for hydrated metal cations (e.g., Zn2+, Al3+, Mn2+, Cu2+). After immersion in aqueous precursor salt solutions, the metal ion-intercalated GO films are dehydrated, annealed, and calcined at high temperature to oxidatively remove the carbon-based template and create textured metal oxide films (ZnO, Al2O3, Mn2O3, CuO) with high-fidelity replication of the original graphene wrinkled, crumpled, and hierarchical topographies (Fig. 10B).
 Fig. 10  (A) Creation of hierarchical metal oxide topographies using highly textured GO as versatile ion intercalation templates. (B) Multiple textured metal oxides (ZnO, Al2O3, Mn2O3) are achieved with replicated wrinkled, crumpled, and hierarchical structures. The radius of each SEM is 20 μm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) 
2.3 Surfactants
Surfactants are amphiphilic substances that can adhere to interfaces and lower the surface or interfacial energy, and they can be applied in various technologies, such as detergents, emulsifiers, foaming agents and dispersing agents. Graphene oxide (GO) is typically fabricated via chemical oxidation and exfoliation of bulk graphite powders, during which graphene sheets are derivatized with oxygenated functional groups.24 GO has been known to disperse well in water, which is mainly attributed to the ionizable edge –COOH groups. However, its graphitic domains in the basal plane are hydrophobic segments. Therefore, GO can be regarded as an amphiphile with a unique edge-to-center distribution of hydrophilic and hydrophobic components.70
Based on these properties, GO acting as a surfactant for producing desirable nanostructure materials has been extensively reported.71–74 Herein, ZnO semiconductor is taken as an example to concretely demonstrate the advantages of GO as a surfactant.75 Because of the amphiphilic molecule structure, GO can form micelle-like particles to induce more obviously flower-like and porous ZnO particles than those traditional surfactants do, such as cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and dodecyl dimethyl betaine (BS-12), as shown in Fig. 11A. Our group has also reported that the versatility of the 2D GO as a solution-processable macromolecular surfactant to fabricate RGO–ZnO nanocomposites.76 By varying the amount of GO added during the synthesis process, the morphology of ZnO gradually evolves from one-dimensional prismatic rod to a hexagonal tube-like architecture while GO is converted into RGO (Fig. 11B–E). Interestingly, when using RGO with fewer oxygenated functional groups as a surfactant in the same synthesis procedures, we found that RGO cannot play the “structure-directing” 2D surfactant role in effectively tuning the morphology of ZnO, suggesting that the morphology control of ZnO nanocrystals is mainly ascribed to the unique properties of the functional groups on the GO surface. Moreover, GO can induce oxygen vacancy formation in the lattice of ZnO nanocrystals. Owing to the introduction of oxygen vacancies and the intimate interfacial interaction between ZnO and RGO, the RGO–ZnO nanocomposites exhibit significantly enhanced visible light photoactivity whereas the bare ZnO nanorod is only UV light photoactive. Therefore, our work highlights that GO as a surfactant can be readily employed to fabricate RGO–semiconductor nanocomposites with a tunable morphology, defect structure and photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation process of flower like Zn4(CO3)(OH)6 and ZnO microstructures using graphene oxide as a surfactant. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) The RGO–ZnO nanocomposites: (B) 1 wt% RGO–ZnO, (C) 3 wt% RGO–ZnO, (D) 5 wt% RGO–ZnO, (E) 10 wt% RGO–ZnO (the insets are the SEM images of RGO–ZnO at higher magnification). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (F) Comparison of the synthesis method of bimetallic Au–Pd alloyed nanoparticles on the GR sheet with the well-established colloidal synthesis method of bimetallic Au–Pd alloyed nanoparticles in an aqueous phase. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) 
In addition, we have also found that GO can play a dual role of a macromolecular surfactant and a growth platform for in situ synthesis of bimetallic Au–Pd nanoalloys,77 which is further confirmed by a direct comparison with traditional methods for synthesis of alloyed colloidal bimetallic nanoparticles in the presence of surfactants, polymers, dendrimers, or ligands as protecting or capping agents (Fig. 11F). On one hand, the oxygenated group domains attached onto the nanographitic patches of GO make GO behave like a “solution processable macromolecular” surfactant to promote the generation of stable alloyed Au–Pd nanoparticles in an aqueous phase. On the other hand, GO provides a 2D surface platform, allowing effective anchoring of alloyed Au–Pd nanoparticles on it. The as-formed Au–Pd/GR exhibits higher photocatalytic activity than both monometallic Au/GR and Pd/GR, prepared by the same approach toward degradation of the dye, Rhodamine B, under visible light illumination. Therefore, our work demonstrates the promise of harnessing the versatile wet-chemistry features of GO in solution to synthesize other bimetallic catalysts.
In another typical example, the GO sheets can serve as surfactants to create microemulsions and be used as growth templates for preparation of 2D nanomaterials. Xie et al. have synthesized 2D silica-based nanomaterials by using GO sheets forming water-in-oil microemulsions (water/benzyl alcohol; H2O/BnOH) based on their amphiphilic characteristics (Fig. 12A).78 As illustrated in Fig. 12B, the silica precursor, tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) or tetramethylorthosilicate (TMOS), undergoes hydrolysis with water and becomes silicic acid which condensed with the protic functional groups (e.g., –OH, –COOH) on the surface of GO, yielding GO-supported hetero-nucleated silica. The hydrolysis process cannot proceed in the oil phase because the catalysts and BnOH are immiscible. Finally, silica particles cover the surface of GO sheets evenly and densely, thereby leading to the formation of a large uniform silica film on the GO surface. With the EtOH/water co-solvent system as a contrast, the silica layers grow on the GO surface and the free silica particles form simultaneously (Fig. 12C). The free silica particles are able to condense with the silica layers of GO resulting in non-uniform SiO2 particles covering the GO surface. In this regard, the most valuable feature of a water/BnOH biphase system created by using GO sheets as a surfactant is that the architecture of the obtained nanomaterials can be precisely controlled without creating any free particles, which opens a new avenue for the synthesis of 2D high-quality nanomaterials in an effective and facile manner. The above selected examples suggest that GO with abundant functional groups can serve as a 2D surfactant to provide nucleation sites that govern the assembly of other components on its surface, while tuning their morphology and structure, to achieve new functional materials.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the process adopted for synthesis of silica nano-flake and silica-covered RGO. Sequence of a growing silica film on the GO surface in (B) a water/BnOH biphase system and (C) an EtOH/water co-solvent. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
2.4 Self-assembly template
The development of macroscopic graphene architectures with 3D structures has attracted considerable attention due to their unique properties, such as low weight, high porosity and high electrical conductivity. The construction of 3D structured graphene assembled from the 2D graphene sheet as a building block is a highly feasible and efficient strategy to obtain the aforementioned excellent properties. Recently, enormous efforts have been devoted to the preparation of 3D graphene through self-assembly of graphene.79,80 For instance, Shi et al. have demonstrated a facile method to fabricate 3D graphene hydrogel via self-assembly of 2D graphene sheets, as is displayed in Fig. 13A and B.81 The graphene hydrogel with a well-controlled and interconnected 3D porous structure was formed under the interactions of the increased hydrophobicity, the enhanced π–π stacking, and the cross-links between the remaining oxygenated groups on the graphene sheets. In another typical example, a nitrogen (N) doped, 3D graphene framework (GF) prepared by a one-step hydrothermal method using GO aqueous suspension mixing with pyrrole as reactive agents was manifested, in which the pyrrole can not only provide N resources, but also contribute to the formation of large volume GF.82 It is worth noting that the formed GF has an ultralow density (2.1 ± 0.3 mg cm−3), which is attributed to the abundant open-pore structures interpenetrating the graphene skeleton (Fig. 13C and D). A 2.4 cm3 ultralight GF sample is able to stand stably on the top of a dandelion (Fig. 13E). The as-formed GF, used as electrode materials of supercapacitors, demonstrates a high specific capacitance, which is superior to other carbon-based electrodes.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of formation of self-assembled graphene hydrogel, (B) photograph of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (C, D) SEM images of the GF. (E) A piece of GF size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm stands on a dandelion. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
In addition, the macroscopic 3D graphene can also be used as an ideal template for the integration of functional materials to produce novel self-assembly composite materials for a wide range of applications.83–85 Liu et al. have prepared 2D nickel–iron layered double hydroxide (Ni–Fe LDH) hybrids coupling with self-assembly templating graphene into a 3D aerogel by a facile one-step hydrothermal process assisted by freeze-drying treatment (Fig. 14A).86 As reported by Han et al., 3D AgX/graphene aerogels (GAs) (X = Br, Cl) have been fabricated via the incorporation of semiconductor AgX NPs into the surface of the 3D GA's hierarchically porous structure (Fig. 14B).87 The as-formed 3D AgX/GAs is easily recycled by directly clipping out using tweezers, without any centrifugation, sonication and drying processes. The hierarchically porous morphology makes AgX/GAs have an enhanced adsorption capacity and effective contact toward reactive agents. Furthermore, the presence of GAs also promotes the separation of photogenerated charge carriers over the AgX/GAs composite photocatalyst. As a result, the 3D AgX/GAs composite exhibits much higher photoactivity and stability toward the degradation of contaminants than pristine AgX.
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis route of 3D porous Ni–Fe LDH/graphene aerogel. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (B) Schematic illustration of fabrication of the AgBr/GAs 3D photocatalytic composite materials. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) 
3. Potential applications of the graphene templated materials
A variety of nanostructured materials fabricated by the graphene template-assisted method hold a well-defined morphology and structure that is intimately associated with the diverse physiochemical properties. This in turn results in their wide potential applications in many technological areas.88–94 Considering the main focus of this review is on the graphene-templated synthesis of functional materials and many existing reviews in the application of graphene-based materials in energy storage and conversion fields have been published,23,24,92,95–98 we in this section will choose some selected examples without bias to concisely highlight the wide applications of graphene-templated materials in photocatalysis, solar cells, lithium ion batteries, and supercapacitors.
3.1 Photocatalysis
Over the past few decades, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the production of GR-based semiconductor composites for photocatalytic applications.23,24,97,99–102 It has been well recognized that generally a single semiconductor catalyst might not be able to simultaneously meet the requirement for high-performance photocatalysis (such as broad visible light adsorption, large specific surface area, effective electron–hole pair separation).103,104 Coupling semiconductor with other proper co-catalysts is able to improve photocatalytic performance by integration of the respective fascinating properties of individual component in the composite materials.105,106 In this regard, the graphene-templated method is one of the most promising strategies to achieve GR-semiconductor composite photocatalysts with enhanced performance.23,24,28,55,77,107–109
For example, the uniform nanostructured LaFeO3 was prepared via using RGO as a growth template for controllable growth and stabilization of LaFeO3.108 Strikingly, the LaFeO3–RGO NP composites have significantly higher photocatalytic activity towards the degradation of organic dye pollutants at room temperature under visible-light irradiation than bare LaFeO3 or LaFeO3 NPs deposited on amorphous carbon. The presence of RGO with good electrical conductivity was determined to play a pivotal role in facilitating photogenerated electron–hole separation and transfer. In addition, Yin's group has reported the 3D free-standing ZnO nanorod arrays/RGO foams with a hierarchical micro-nano structure.110Fig. 15A shows that most of the ZnO nanorods are perpendicular to the ZnO/RGO foam scaffold and the diameter of the ZnO nanorods is around 100 nm. The ZnO/RGO foam based on this hybrid structure exhibits the dramatic improvement in photocatalytic activity toward the degradation of contaminants under simulated solar light as compared to the bare ZnO nanorod arrays (Fig. 15B). The 3D graphene foam not only acts as a substrate for template-synthesis of the ZnO nanorod arrays, but also as an electron storage reservoir that contributes to efficient charge carrier separation and improved photocatalytic performance (Fig. 15C).
 Fig. 15  (A) SEM image of ZnO nanorods on the ZnO/RGO foam (the inset is the magnified SEM image of ZnO nanorods). (B) Photocatalytic performance of RhB over pure RhB, RGO foam, ZnO nanorods, and RGO/ZnO foam upon visible-light irradiation. (C) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of the ZnO/RGO foam. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.) 
Our group has recently synthesized metal-free 3D macroscopic graphene-organic aerogels in which the organic dyes as photosensitizers are spatially confined and distributed in the self-assembly graphene template (Fig. 16A).111 As shown in Fig. 16B, under visible light irradiation of 30 min, the photoactivities of graphene-Eosin Y aerogel with 2 mg Eosin Y (denoted as graphene-2EY aerogel) for hydrogenation of 4-nitroaniline (4-NA) and reduction of Cr(VI) are ca. 1.4 and 1.8 times as high as those of P25-2EY, respectively. In addition, within visible light irradiation of 30 min, the photoactivities of graphene-2EY aerogel are also remarkably higher (about 5.8 and 7.4 times for 4-NA hydrogenation and Cr(VI) reduction reactions, respectively) than that of the powdered graphene-2EY (Fig. 16C). As presented in Fig. 16D and E, the six successive recycling tests reveal that the graphene-EY aerogel is able to continuously hydrogenate nitro compounds and reduce Cr(VI) with only a slight photoactivity decrease, with the P25-2EY and graphene-2EY powder both displaying a very fast photoactivity decrease. The results indicate that the macroporous 3D graphene-dye structure is more beneficial for promoting the separation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers from dye sensitization, enhancing the adsorption of reactants and promoting the charge carriers to interact with the surface adsorbed reactants than the powdered graphene-organic dye and semiconductor-organic dye counterparts as well. These consequently lead to significantly improved visible-light photoactivity toward the probing reactions regarding organic synthesis and sewage treatment.
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic (top) and appearance (down) illustrations of the preparation of 3D metal-free and robust macroscopic graphene-organic aerogels. Visible-light-driven (λ > 420 nm) photocatalytic (B) hydrogenation of 4-NA to 4-phenylenediamine (4-PDA) and (C) reduction of Cr(VI) over the graphene-EY aerogels, graphene-EY powder and semiconductor P25-EY powder. The recycling test of graphene-EY aerogel, graphene-EY powder and P25-EY powder for photocatalytic (D) hydrogenation of 4-NA and (E) reduction of Cr(VI). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.) 
In addition to environmental contamination, the energy crisis depending on fossil fuels is another serious issue that significantly threatens the sustainable development of human society. To seek renewable and clean energy, photocatalytic water splitting to generate hydrogen (H2) is regarded as one attractive solution to meet the demand for energy.112,113 Over the past few years, a large number of graphene-templated materials with improved activity for H2 generation have been developed. For instance, Eslava et al. have demonstrated the calcination of Ti16O16(OEt)32 polyoxotitanium clusters together with graphene oxide flakes as a sacrificial support to obtain pure titania nanoflakes of <10 nm titania nanoparticles in a two-dimensional arrangement.109 When applied for photocatalytic H2 evolution from water under simulated solar light irradiation, the resultant TiO2 prepared by using Ti16O16(OEt)32 and GO obtains H2 production reaching 223.8 μmol h−1 g−1, which is five times and forty times than that of benchmark P25 titania and TiO2 prepared from only Ti16O16(OEt)32 clusters, respectively. The significantly enhanced photoactivity is mainly ascribed to its unique structure and properties (e.g., higher surface area, smaller aggregate size and better dispersibility) induced by GO template-assisted method. In another report, graphene hydrogel incorporated into TiO2 nanorods (TiO2–NGH) was developed for photocatalytic H2 production.114 The H2 evolution rate over TiO2-NGH is observed to be ∼167–242 μmol h−1 g−1 under UV-visible irradiation, which is higher than that of blank TiO2 nanorods (∼156 μmol h−1 g−1) and 2D RGO–TiO2 (∼51 μmol h−1 g−1). The NGH with well-defined nano-mesopores, a large surface area, and highly conductive properties provides more reactive sites and promotes charge carrier separation, thus significantly improving the photocatalytic activity of H2 production.
3.2 Solar cells
Solar cells are solar energy-harvesting devices that convert the energy of light directly into electricity by the photovoltaic effect, which has been considered as one of the techniques with the most potential to address the ever-growing energy demand. However, the inferior conversion efficiency of solar cells is a great obstacle for its practical development and applications. Recently, graphene ignites a great deal of research attention in solar cell application due to its exceptional electrical, optical and mechanical properties.115–117 A wide absorption range enables graphene to remarkably enhance the power conversion efficiency of solar cells and, furthermore, its unusual electrical performance can promote charge carrier transfer. Therefore, GR-based materials are a promising type of candidates for advanced applications in energy-harvesting devices.118–120
For example, the advantage of the porous film structure for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) was demonstrated by Zhao et al. using a porous TiO2/GO film, for which the photoelectric conversion properties of the as-prepared DSSC was significantly improved by adjusting the GO content.121 The preparation progress of the film photoelectrode in Fig. 17A reveals that the GO acts as a sacrificial template and a pore-forming agent as well. The porous TiO2–GO (0.75 wt%) film can achieve higher conversion efficiencies (4.65%) than the nonporous TiO2 film (4.01%), which are obtained from the characteristic J–V curves (Fig. 17B). Furthermore, the formation of a porous structure induced by graphene sheets can facilitate a more effective charge transfer and thus significantly contribute to the enhanced conversion efficiency. Besides, Chen and co-workers have employed GO as the template to fabricate the Au NPs, during which the GO sheets effectively avoided the aggregation of Au NPs.122 To improve the solubility, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) bis(amine) is introduced to modify GO, which enables the resulting nanocomposites to disperse well in water and in several organic solvents. Consequently, when incorporated into both the buffer layer and photoactive layer of organic photovoltaic devices, the resultant PEGylated Au NP/GO hybrids exhibit apparent enhancement in the photocurrents and the conversion efficiency of organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs) owing to the dual plasmonic effects and the enhanced light-harvesting ability induced by the metal nanoparticle-decorated PEGylated graphene oxides.
 Fig. 17  (A) Schematic illustration of preparation progress of porous TiO2/GO film photoelectrode with GO nanosheets as a sacrificial template. (B) Comparison of the J–V characteristics of DSSCs based on TiO2 film electrodes: (a) TiO2, (b) TiO2–GO (0.50 wt%), (c) TiO2–GO (0.75 wt%), and (d) TiO2–GO (1 wt%). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.) 
3.3 Lithium ion batteries
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are currently one of the most attractive rechargeable battery systems, particularly important for powering electronic devices used in our daily life. Due to their large surface area, splendid conductivity and specific planar sp2 hybridized carbon framework, graphene and its derivatives have been employed as supporting materials for preparation of graphene-based hybrid electrodes for LIBs.123 Of particular note is that graphene itself possesses a much higher capacity, with initial discharge and charge capacities of 1059 mAh g−1 and 732 mAh g−1 at 50 mA g−1, respectively.124 In recent years, graphene-templated composites materials have extensively been investigated for lithium ion storage, which demonstrates much improved capacities in lithium ion batteries.125–127
For example, Dai and co-workers have reported two-step solution-phase reactions to form Mn3O4/RGO composites for lithium ion batteries, in which Mn3O4 are selectively grown on GO sheets, as presented in Fig. 18A.128 The specific capacity and the cycling performance of hybrid Mn3O4/RGO show dramatic improvement as compared with the pure Mn3O4 electrode (Fig. 18B and C). It has been disclosed that the intimate interactions between the graphene substrate and Mn3O4 nanoparticles facilitate electron transfer, which is an essential factor for superior performance. In another case, a 3D hierarchical porous graphene@NiO@carbon composite has been prepared by one-pot solvothermal method based on a graphene template, in which the graphene sheets are uniformly wrapped by using porous NiO@carbon (Fig. 18D).129 The resultant graphene@NiO@carbon composites have a high surface area of 196.0 m2 g−1 and a large pore volume of 0.46 cm3 g−1. When applied as the anode for LIBs, the composites exhibit a fascinating circle and excellent rate performances with a reversible specific capacity. It is suggested that the significantly enhanced performance is ascribed to the excellent conductivity of graphene and the large interfacial interaction, which promotes efficient transport of charge, hinders the aggregation of NiO@carbon nanoflakes and offers the buffer layer to retain electrical contact with NiO during the lithiation–delithiation process.
 Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for Mn3O4/RGO. Capacity of the (B) Mn3O4/RGO and (C) free Mn3O4 at various current rates with the variation of cycle number. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) (D) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of graphene@NiO@carbon composites and NiO@carbon nanoflowers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
Mai et al. have reported the use of graphene oxide as a sacrificial template for synthesis of hierarchical Co2V2O7 sheets as a promising anode material for LIBs (Fig. 19A).130 The hierarchical Co2V2O7 sheets demonstrated significantly high reversible capacity (962 mAh g−1 at 0.5 A g−1), excellent rate capacity, and long cycle life (441 mAh g−1 after 900 cycles at 5.0 A g−1) (Fig. 19B and C). The superior electrochemical properties are attributed to special hierarchical Co2V2O7 nanosheet structures consisting of interconnected nanoparticles. This unique architecture possesses a short pathway for the diffusion of Li+ ions and a large electrode–electrolyte contact area for the flux of Li+ ions across the interface. In addition, the sufficient voids between nanosheets and matrix materials can accommodate the volume change and protect the active material from pulverization during the discharge and charge process.
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the experimental technique for growing hierarchical Co2V2O7 nanosheets. (B) The detailed cycling performance of the Co2V2O7 at different current densities. (C) Electrochemical properties of Co2V2O7 at high rate of 5.0 A g−1 for 900 cycles. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.) 
3.4 Supercapacitors
As a promising alternative to batteries, supercapacitors have been generally considered as one of the most ideal candidates for green energy storage, owing to the advantages of ultrahigh power density, long cycling life, low cost of maintenance and safe operation.131 Thus, supercapacitors are widely used in a diverse range of energy capture and storage applications, such as hybrid electric vehicles, consumer electronics, aviation and medical applications. The materials with a large surface area and good conductivity can be taken into consideration for electrode materials of supercapacitors, such as carbonaceous materials (activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, carbon fibers and graphene), transition metal oxides, and conducting polymers. The graphene-based materials are advantageous in terms of the chemically active surface with a large specific area, good conductivity, low cost, and mass production.131,132 The integration of metal oxides with graphene is a viable and attractive strategy to address poor electrical conductivity and low specific surface area that seriously limits the practical application of supercapacitors.133 As shown in Fig. 20A, the needle-like Co3O4/graphene nanosheet (GNS) composites synthesized by a graphene template-assisted route have been utilized for supercapacitors.134 When used as electrode materials of aqueous supercapacitors, the composites of the needle-like Co3O4/GNS (the mass ratio of GO and Co(NO3)2·6H2O is 1:5) deliver a discharge capacitance of 157.7 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 in a 2 mol L−1 KOH aqueous solution, which is remarkably enhanced compared with that of pure Co3O4 (77.2 F g−1) (Fig. 20B). The specific capacitance of needle-like Co3O4/GNS composites can maintain 70% of the initial value after 4000 cycles at 0.2 A g−1, while pure Co3O4 only retains 30% after 4000 cycles at 0.2 A g−1 (Fig. 20C). Moreover, the graphene template can not only obviously influence the electrochemical properties of supercapacitors but also facilitate the formation of needle-like Co3O4, preventing cobalt precursor aggregation into urchin-like spheres.
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the needle-like Co3O4/GNS composites. (B) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the Co3O4/GNS composite electrodes (rG/rCo = 1:5) in 2 mol L−1 KOH solution at 0.1 A g−1 at different current densities (the inset is galvanostatic discharge curves of the pure Co3O4 and Co3O4/GNS composite electrodes (rG/rCo = 1:5) in 2 mol L−1 KOH solution at 0.1 A g−1). (C) Average specific capacitance versus the cycle number of the pure Co3O4 and the needle-like Co3O4/GNS composites at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.) 
Besides, in order to develop high power and energy densities of supercapacitors, the construction of 3D macroscopic graphene incorporated into metal oxides is another promising approach to fabricate electrode materials for efficient ionic and electronic transport.135,136 As a typical example, Huh and co-workers have prepared 3D macroporous MnO2/embossed-chemically modified graphene (e-CMG) films and used them as composite electrodes for supercapacitors,137 in which an e-CMG film acts as a negative electrode and a MnO2/e-CMG film acts as a positive electrode (Fig. 21A). The porous graphene structure with a large surface area facilitates fast ionic transport within the electrode and thus endows MnO2/e-CMG composite electrodes with excellent electrochemical properties such as a specific capacitance of 389 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 97.7% capacitance retention upon a current increase to 35 A g−1. Moreover, when the MnO2/e-CMG composite electrode is asymmetrically assembled with an e-CMG electrode, the assembled full cell shows remarkable cell performance: an energy density of 44 Wh kg−1, power density of 25 kW kg−1, and excellent lifecycle (Fig. 21B).
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic diagram of e-CMG//MnO2/e-CMG-based asymmetric supercapacitor device. (B) Ragone plot of the asymmetric CMG//MnO2/CMG and e-CMG//MnO2/e-CMG supercapacitors (the inset presents 3D ionic and electronic transport pathways in the MnO2/e-CMG electrode). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.) 
4. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we have highlighted the recent progress in developing graphene and its derivatives used as templates for materials synthesis and functional applications with selected examples in the field of photocatalysis, solar cells, lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors. Predominant attention has been paid to elucidate the multifarious role of graphene on how to achieve the rational construction of various functional materials with well-defined architectures and tailored structures via graphene and its derivative-templated method. The large surface area and unique physiochemical properties make graphene and its derivatives an attractive substrate or template for nanomaterial growth and assembly into the formation of targeted materials. It is clear that graphene-templated synthesis represents a facile, efficient, and highly versatile strategy for fabricating a wide diversity of materials with tunable morphology, structure and controllable functions. In addition to playing its versatile roles in materials synthesis, in many cases, graphene template can serve as a key functional component to improve electrical conductivity and mechanical and optical properties, which opens up an unprecedented template strategy for material preparation and functional applications.
Although numerous advanced developments have been made in previous studies, there is still much space for us to take full advantage of graphene-templated methods for controllable preparation of functionalized materials which would possess great potential for practical applications. Firstly, because structural parameters (e.g., size, defects, and edge structure) greatly influence the roles of graphene as templates in material preparation, the precise control of graphene functionalization, such as doping non-metal N, B, and S elements, introducing new functional groups, cooperating functional guests into 3D macroscopic graphene, should be further explored to tune the template effect for versatile use in materials design and optimizing functional performances of as-synthesized materials. Secondly, the exquisite reaction mechanism of graphene template-directed nanostructures remains veiled from the perspective of both thermodynamics and kinetics. Therefore, deeper systematic studies from both theoretical and experimental aspects are highly needed. Thirdly, graphene-templated synthesis is a facile and versatile strategy for fabricating materials with tunable morphology and controllable functions. But the specific preparation methods still face some issues that remain unresolved effectively, such as large-scale production of high-quality graphene materials, resistance for graphene-based material aggregation, and prevention for the partial collapse of the pore structure after eliminating the template. These problems deserve ongoing efforts to be effectively resolved for continuous advancement of graphene-templated synthesis. Fourthly, as discussed in section 2, the role of graphene and its derivatives is multifarious during the materials synthesis, which includes growth templates, sacrificial templates, macromolecular surfactants, or self-assembly templates. Thus, there is still a wide scope to simultaneously utilize such multiple roles of graphene and its derivatives toward synthesis of desirable target materials for functional applications. Finally, the tunable structures of graphene, such as zero-dimensional graphene quantum dots, one-dimensional graphene nanoribbons and three-dimensional graphene frameworks show a variety of fascinating structural features. Therefore, appropriate utilization of the traits of different graphene structures could provide further wide flexibility of using graphene as a template for functional materials synthesis.
Acknowledgements
The support from the Key Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1463204), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20903023 and 21173045), the Award Program for MinJiang Scholar Professorship, the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province for Distinguished Young Investigator Grant (2012J06003), the Independent Research Project of the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment (no. 2014A05), the first Program of Fujian Province for Top Creative Young Talents, and the Program for Returned High-Level Overseas Chinese Scholars of Fujian province is kindly acknowledged.
References
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Grätzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
S.-H. Li, S. Liu, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 594–607 RSC .
J. Hulteen, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
Z. Zhang and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5444–5455 RSC .
V. Malgras, Q. Ji, Y. Kamachi, T. Mori, F.-K. Shieh, K. C. W. Wu, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 1171–1200 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Petkovich and A. Stein, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3721–3739 RSC .
R. Das, P. Pachfule, R. Banerjee and P. Poddar, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 591–599 RSC .
G. Zhu, S. Qiu, O. Terasaki and Y. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7723–7724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C.-S. Ha and I. Kim, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10552–10556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Gao, T. Liu, L. Wang, S. Bian and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21695–21703 RSC .
B. Satishkumar, A. Govindaraj, E. M. Vogl, L. Basumallick and C. Rao, J. Mater. Res., 1997, 12, 604–606 CrossRef CAS .
B. Satishkumar, A. Govindaraj, M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2115–2119 RSC .
M. A. Correa-Duarte, J. Pérez-Juste, A. Sánchez-Iglesias, M. Giersig and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4375–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Correa-Duarte and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 22–25 RSC .
C. O. Ania, V. Khomenko, E. Raymundo-Piñero, J. B. Parra and F. Béguin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1828–1836 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, L. Wang and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8067–8069 RSC .
S. Zhao, H. Roberge, A. Yelon and T. Veres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12352–12353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, R. Che, C. Liang, J. Zhang and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3960–3965 RSC .
L. Yuan, S. Meng, Y. Zhou and Z. Yue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2552–2557 CAS .
J. L. Blin, A. Léonard, Z. Y. Yuan, L. Gigot, A. Vantomme, A. K. Cheetham and B. L. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 115, 2978–2981 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8195–8300 RSC .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gerber, J. Knudsen, P. J. Feibelman, E. Granas, P. Stratmann, K. Schulte, J. N. Andersen and T. Michely, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2020–2031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, J. Li, X. Ren, J. Hu, W. Hu and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 12909 RSC .
Y. J. Kim, H. Yoo, C. H. Lee, J. B. Park, H. Baek, M. Kim and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5565–5569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, W. Zhou, A.-Y. Lu, W. Fang, Y.-H. Lee, A. L. Hsu, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim, H. Y. Yang, L.-J. Li, J.-C. Idrobo and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2784–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kim, P. Lee, Y. Kim, J. S. Kim, Y. Kim, D. Y. Noh, S. U. Yu, J. Chung and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1154–1160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nguyen Ngan, S. B. Jo, S. K. Lee, D. H. Sin, B. Kang, H. H. Kim, H. Lee and K. Cho, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2474–2484 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, E. J. Santos, T. H. Lee, Y. Nishi and Z. Bao, Small, 2015, 11, 2037–2043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Park, D. A. Siegel, K. F. McCarty, K. W. Clark, W. Deng, L. Basile, J. C. Idrobo, A.-P. Li and G. Gu, Science, 2014, 343, 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hong, J. W. Yang, W. H. Lee, R. S. Ruoff, K. S. Kim and T. Fukui, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6847–6853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Shen, D. Sun, H. Zhang, D. Tian, J. Zhang and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11733–11735 RSC .
J. M. Mativetsky, H. Wang, S. S. Lee, L. Whittaker-Brooks and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5319–5321 RSC .
K. Xiao, W. Deng, J. K. Keum, M. Yoon, I. V. Vlassiouk, K. W. Clark, A.-P. Li, I. I. Kravchenko, G. Gu and E. A. Payzant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3680–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ogawa, T. Niu, S. L. Wong, M. Tsuji, A. T. S. Wee, W. Chen and H. Ago, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21849–21855 CAS .
Q. H. Wang and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Lee, K. Kim, J. Park, J. Koo, H. Y. Jeong, H. Lee, D. A. Weitz, A. Zettl and S. Takeuchi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 423–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Zhou, S. Wu, Y. Wei, X. Qi, J. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 513–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Sun, L. M. Liu, R. Zong, H. Cao, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Luo and J. Zhu, Small, 2015, 11, 1512–1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Li, S. Wu, Y. Huang, F. Boey, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 979–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fu, Y. Kuang, Z. Huang, X. Wang, N. Du, J. Chen and H. Zhou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 499, 250–253 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, H. Li, C. Liusman, Z. Yin, S. Wu and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1817–1821 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Li, E. Zhu, T. McLouth, C.-Y. Chiu, X. Huang and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12326–12329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, P. Wang, L. Wang, L. Han and S. Dong, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4376–4382 RSC .
L. Lu, J. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Zhang and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1270–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Qi, S. Wu, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey, Q. Yan, P. Chen and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10842–10846 CAS .
J. L. Johnson, A. Behnam, S. J. Pearton and A. Ural, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4877–4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Hu, M. Aizawa, Z.-M. Wang, N. Yoshizawa and H. Hatori, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6681–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Muszynski, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5263–5266 CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xin, X. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Yao and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11035–11043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 1428–1433 CrossRef .
S. Sun and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3481–3486 CAS .
C. C. Ji, H. Q. Ren and S. C. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21978–21987 RSC .
Y. Saito, X. Luo, C. Zhao, W. Pan, C. Chen, J. Gong, H. Matsumoto, J. Yao and H. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5683–5690 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boston, A. Bell, V. P. Ting, A. T. Rhead, T. Nakayama, C. F. J. Faul and S. R. Hall, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 6094–6097 RSC .
H. Cao, X. Zhou, C. Zheng and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11984–11990 CAS .
X. Pan and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7184–7194 CAS .
P.-Y. Chen, M. Liu, T. M. Valentin, Z. Wang, R. Spitz Steinberg, J. Sodhi, I. Y. Wong and R. H. Hurt, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10869–10879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Cote, J. Kim, V. C. Tung, J. Luo, F. Kim and J. Huang, Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 83, 95–110 CrossRef .
L. J. Cote, J. Kim, Z. Zhang, C. Sun and J. Huang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 6096–6101 RSC .
S. H. C. Man, D. Ly, M. R. Whittaker, S. C. Thickett and P. B. Zetterlund, Polymer, 2014, 55, 3490–3497 CrossRef .
S. N. Kazi, A. Badarudin, M. N. M. Zubir, H. N. Ming, M. Misran, E. Sadeghinezhad, M. Mehrali and N. I. Syuhada, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 212 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhu, F. Shen, J. Wan, X. Han, J. Dai, H. Dai and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7366–7372 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yao, A. Xie, Y. Shen, W. Zhu and J. Zhu, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2014, 49, 982–989 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5589–5599 RSC .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5299–5308 CAS .
Y. Xue, Y. S. Ye, F. Y. Chen, H. Wang, C. Chen, Z. G. Xue, X. P. Zhou, X. L. Xie and Y. W. Mai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 575–578 RSC .
S. Yin, Z. Niu and X. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 2458–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295–7325 RSC .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 124, 11533–11537 CrossRef .
J. Li, C.-y. Liu and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8426–8430 RSC .
D. Shao, J. Gao, G. Xin, Y. Wang, L. Li, J. Shi, J. Lian, N. Koratkar and S. Sawyer, Small, 2015, 11, 4785–4792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Lv, Z. Li, Q. Xu, H. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 107278–107285 RSC .
Y. Fan, W. Ma, D. Han, S. Gan, X. Dong and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3767–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, G. Liu, Y. Li, D. Y. W. Yu and W. Y. Teoh, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8082–8118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
D. Chen, L. Tang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 242–251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, C. Wang, M. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13103–13107 CAS .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
C. Tan, X. Huang and H. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 24–37 RSC .
C. Mattevi, H. Kim and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3324–3334 RSC .
S. Xie, Q. Zhang, G. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
C. Han, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 351–372 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 185–200 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5792–5813 RSC .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
C. Peng, B. Jiang, Q. Liu, Z. Guo, Z. Xu, Q. Huang, H. Xu, R. Tai and C. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2035–2040 CAS .
X. Ren, H. Yang, S. Gen, J. Zhou, T. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Cheng and S. Sun, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 752–756 RSC .
S. Eslava, A. Reynal, V. G. Rocha, S. Barg and E. Saiz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7200–7206 CAS .
X. Men, H. Chen, K. Chang, X. Fang, C. Wu, W. Qin and S. Yin, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 367–374 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, Y. Wang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Catal., 2017, 346, 21–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13169 RSC .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, P. Sudhagar, Y. S. Kang and W. Choi, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 299–319 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, J. Zhu, Q. He, X. Cao, C. Tan, H. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300574 CrossRef .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362–1387 CAS .
P. K. Mohseni, A. Behnam, J. D. Wood, X. Zhao, K. J. Yu, N. C. Wang, A. Rockett, J. A. Rogers, J. W. Lyding, E. Pop and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3755–3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, J. Jung, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24254–24264 RSC .
P. Wang, F. He, J. Wang, H. Yu and L. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 175–180 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Chuang and F.-C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7397–7405 CAS .
G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, R. Xu, M. Lu, R. Ge, J. Iocozzia, C. Han, B. Jiang and Z. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500400 CrossRef .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Rui, J. Chen, D. Sim, W. Shi, H. H. Hng, T. M. Lim and Q. Yan, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 147–153 RSC .
S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3575–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, A. Yu and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3893–3899 RSC .
Y. Luo, X. Xu, Y. Zhang, C.-Y. Chen, L. Zhou, M. Yan, Q. Wei, X. Tian and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2812–2818 CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, B. D. Phebus, L. Li and S. Chen, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 1916–1944 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xie, Y. Chen, M. Yu, T. Sun, L. Lu, T. Xie, Y. Zhang and Y. Wu, Carbon, 2016, 99, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guan, J. Cheng, B. Wang, W. Ni, G. Gu, X. Li, L. Huang, G. Yang and F. Nie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7626–7632 CAS .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Quan Quan	Quan Quan is now pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. Her current research interests include composite materials synthesis and their applications in energy conversion and storage such as photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical redox processes.
Xin Lin	Xin Lin is now pursuing his Master degree under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. His current research interests include composite materials synthesis and their applications in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Nan Zhang	Nan Zhang received her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Yi-Jun Xu at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. Her main research interests include the fabrication of core–shell and carbon-based composites for potential target applications in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Yi-Jun Xu	Yi-Jun Xu is a full professor working at the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, P.R. China. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and his current research interests primarily focus on the assembly and applications of composite materials, such as graphene-based semiconductor composites, core–shell composites and metal-based nanostructured materials, in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the fundamental roles of graphene and its derivatives as templates for materials synthesis and functional applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the growth of inorganic nanowires on graphene. An aqueous-phase reaction at room temperature results in nanowires whose axes are parallel to the zigzag lattice directions of pristine graphene. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.) (B) Schematic illustration of the in situ synthesis and assembly of AuNDs on RGO. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of the top views of a (A) ZnS(EN)0.5 NS and (B) GO sheets. (C) Schematic illustration and (D) SEM image of a ZnS(EN)0.5 NS wrapped in GO sheets, before the synthesis of ZnS-NF@RGO. (E–G) Schematic images of the process to create ZnS-NF@RGO, where the color change of the GO sheets denotes that GO is gradually reduced to RGO. (H) TEM image of the as-synthesized ZnS-NF@RGO. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic illustration of controllable synthesis of the hybrids of binary ZnO nanostars–CdS and ternary RGO–ZnO nanorods arrays–CdS. SEM images of (B, C) ZnO–CdS sample and (D, E) RGO–ZnO–CdS sample. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of the proposed formation of Ag NPs grown on the graphene template. SEM images of Ag NPs grown on (B) GO and (C) RGO surface. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic solvothermal synthesis with GO sheets to afford the MoS2/RGO hybrid. (B) SEM image of the MoS2/RGO hybrid (the inset is the corresponding TEM image). (C) Schematic solvothermal synthesis without any GO sheets, resulting in large, free MoS2 particles. (D) SEM image of the free particles (the inset is the corresponding TEM image). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the process used for the synthesis of metal oxide/3DGN composites. (B) High-magnification SEM image of the ZIF-8/3DGN composite. (C) SEM image of the ZnO/3DGN composite (the inset is a low-magnification SEM image of the ZnO/3DGN composite). (D) SEM image of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite (the inset is a low-magnification SEM image of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite). (E) SEM image of the Fe2O3/3DGN composite (the inset is a high-magnification SEM image of the MIL-88-Fe/3DGN composite). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of monolithic macroporous gold (MPG) films using graphene sheets as a sacrificial template by two thermal procedures. SEM images of the exterior of MPG films upon (B) direct thermal annealing in air and (C) a two-step thermal treatment (annealing temperature = 600 °C) produced from initial graphene/Au hybrid papers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) TEM image of TiO2 nanosheets. (B) SEM image of TiO2 nanostructures prepared using the same procedure for TiO2-NS without the addition of a GR template. (C) Schematic illustration of the cross-link of the GR nanosheets and the formation of the ultralarge TiO2 nanosheets. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Creation of hierarchical metal oxide topographies using highly textured GO as versatile ion intercalation templates. (B) Multiple textured metal oxides (ZnO, Al2O3, Mn2O3) are achieved with replicated wrinkled, crumpled, and hierarchical structures. The radius of each SEM is 20 μm. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of the formation process of flower like Zn4(CO3)(OH)6 and ZnO microstructures using graphene oxide as a surfactant. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.) The RGO–ZnO nanocomposites: (B) 1 wt% RGO–ZnO, (C) 3 wt% RGO–ZnO, (D) 5 wt% RGO–ZnO, (E) 10 wt% RGO–ZnO (the insets are the SEM images of RGO–ZnO at higher magnification). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (F) Comparison of the synthesis method of bimetallic Au–Pd alloyed nanoparticles on the GR sheet with the well-established colloidal synthesis method of bimetallic Au–Pd alloyed nanoparticles in an aqueous phase. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the process adopted for synthesis of silica nano-flake and silica-covered RGO. Sequence of a growing silica film on the GO surface in (B) a water/BnOH biphase system and (C) an EtOH/water co-solvent. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of formation of self-assembled graphene hydrogel, (B) photograph of a 2 mg mL−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.) (C, D) SEM images of the GF. (E) A piece of GF size of 1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm stands on a dandelion. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis route of 3D porous Ni–Fe LDH/graphene aerogel. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (B) Schematic illustration of fabrication of the AgBr/GAs 3D photocatalytic composite materials. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) SEM image of ZnO nanorods on the ZnO/RGO foam (the inset is the magnified SEM image of ZnO nanorods). (B) Photocatalytic performance of RhB over pure RhB, RGO foam, ZnO nanorods, and RGO/ZnO foam upon visible-light irradiation. (C) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of the ZnO/RGO foam. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic (top) and appearance (down) illustrations of the preparation of 3D metal-free and robust macroscopic graphene-organic aerogels. Visible-light-driven (λ > 420 nm) photocatalytic (B) hydrogenation of 4-NA to 4-phenylenediamine (4-PDA) and (C) reduction of Cr(VI) over the graphene-EY aerogels, graphene-EY powder and semiconductor P25-EY powder. The recycling test of graphene-EY aerogel, graphene-EY powder and P25-EY powder for photocatalytic (D) hydrogenation of 4-NA and (E) reduction of Cr(VI). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Schematic illustration of preparation progress of porous TiO2/GO film photoelectrode with GO nanosheets as a sacrificial template. (B) Comparison of the J–V characteristics of DSSCs based on TiO2 film electrodes: (a) TiO2, (b) TiO2–GO (0.50 wt%), (c) TiO2–GO (0.75 wt%), and (d) TiO2–GO (1 wt%). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for Mn3O4/RGO. Capacity of the (B) Mn3O4/RGO and (C) free Mn3O4 at various current rates with the variation of cycle number. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.) (D) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of graphene@NiO@carbon composites and NiO@carbon nanoflowers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the experimental technique for growing hierarchical Co2V2O7 nanosheets. (B) The detailed cycling performance of the Co2V2O7 at different current densities. (C) Electrochemical properties of Co2V2O7 at high rate of 5.0 A g−1 for 900 cycles. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the needle-like Co3O4/GNS composites. (B) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the Co3O4/GNS composite electrodes (rG/rCo = 1:5) in 2 mol L−1 KOH solution at 0.1 A g−1 at different current densities (the inset is galvanostatic discharge curves of the pure Co3O4 and Co3O4/GNS composite electrodes (rG/rCo = 1:5) in 2 mol L−1 KOH solution at 0.1 A g−1). (C) Average specific capacitance versus the cycle number of the pure Co3O4 and the needle-like Co3O4/GNS composites at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic diagram of e-CMG//MnO2/e-CMG-based asymmetric supercapacitor device. (B) Ragone plot of the asymmetric CMG//MnO2/CMG and e-CMG//MnO2/e-CMG supercapacitors (the inset presents 3D ionic and electronic transport pathways in the MnO2/e-CMG electrode). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
