Graphene based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites: synthesis, properties and their applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA02240A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02240A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18753-18808Graphene based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites: synthesis, properties and their applications

        
          
            Mujeeb 
            Khan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Nawaz 
            Tahir
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Syed Farooq 
            Adil
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hadayat Ullah 
            Khan
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            M. Rafiq H. 
            Siddiqui
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abdulrahman A. 
            Al-warthan
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Tremel
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: awarthan@ksu.edu.sa
bInstitute of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany. E-mail: tremel@uni-mainz.de; tahir@uni-mainz.de
cMaterials Science and Engineering Program, Division of Physical Science and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia
dThin Film Electronics AB, Westmansgatan 27B, 58216 Linköping, Sweden
Received 
      27th March 2015
    , Accepted 10th June 2015First published on 11th June 2015AbstractGraphene, an atomically thin two-dimensional carbonaceous material, has attracted tremendous attention in the scientific community, due to its exceptional electronic, electrical, and mechanical properties. Indeed, with the recent explosion of methods for a large-scale synthesis of graphene, the number of publications related to graphene and other graphene based materials has increased exponentially. Particularly the development of easy preparation methods for graphene like materials, such as highly reduced graphene oxide (HRG) via reduction of graphite oxide (GO), offers a wide range of possibilities for the preparation of graphene based inorganic nanocomposites by the incorporation of various functional nanomaterials for a variety of applications. In this review, we discuss the current development of graphene based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites, with a detailed account of their synthesis and properties. Specifically, much attention has been given to their wide range of applications in various fields, including electronics, electrochemical and electrical fields. Overall, by the inclusion of various references, this review covers in detail the aspects of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites.Mujeeb KhanMujeeb Khan is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at King Saud University, Riyadh, KSA. He received his MSc degree in materials chemistry and PhD (2008) from Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz in Germany. Later he worked as a post-doctoral fellow at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research Mainz, Germany. His research interests are in the areas of synthesis and in-depth structural, physical characterization as well as to explore potential applications of graphene/inorganic nanocomposites, especially in the field of catalysis. He is an editorial board member of the Arabian Journal of Chemistry.Muhammad Nawaz TahirDr. Muhammad Nawaz Tahir received his M.Phil. degree from Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2001 and then joined Prof. Wolfgang Tremel’s group at the Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Germany. He was awarded his PhD in 2006 from Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz with distinction “Summa Cum Laude”. Later he undertook many research projects funded by DFG, MWFZ and the Max Planck Society. Since 2010, he has been working as a senior scientist and group leader for nanomaterials synthesis at Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz. His research interests involve the synthesis of innovative nanomaterials, characterization and surface functionalization, for biomedical and energy storage applications.Syed Farooq AdilS. F. Adil was born in Hyderabad, Telangana, and obtained his Bachelor’s and Master’s degree from Osmania University. He carried out his doctoral research work at the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, and his PhD degree was awarded by the Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad. He later joined the chemistry department at the King Saud University, KSA as an assistant professor in the year 2008. His research is focused on Nanomaterials, Material Sciences and their applications. He worked as a visiting associate at CALTECH, Pasadena, CA. He is also an editorial assistant with the Journal of Saudi Chemical Society.M. Rafiq H. SiddiquiProf. M. Rafiq H. Siddiqui was awarded his PhD in 1986 from Aligarh Muslim University. He worked for over four years as a scientist in a national laboratory in India. He then moved to the UK in 1992 where he worked for nearly fourteen years as a senior scientist in the Leverhulme Centre for Innovative Catalysis, Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool. In 2004 he joined the Department of Chemistry, King Saud University in 2004, where he is a full professor. His main research interests are catalysis, nanotechnology and materials chemistry. He has over 100 publications and translated two books.Wolfgang TremelWolfgang Tremel is an inorganic materials chemist. He earned a PhD in chemistry in 1984 from the University of Münster with B. Krebs. Subsequently he joined the group of R. Hoffman at Cornell University (1984-1986) and spent one summer at Ames Laboratory with H. F. Franzen after having returned to Münster in 1987. In 1991 he was appointed associate professor and, in 1996, full professor at the Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz. His research focuses on the synthesis and structural and physical characterization as well as the design and potential applications of new materials, in particular the chemistry of organized matter.
1 Introduction
Graphene is a carbon allotrope comprising a densely packed atomically thin layer of sp2hybridized carbon atoms in a honeycomb crystal lattice.1–3 This precisely two-dimensional material exhibits unique high crystal and electronic quality4,5 and has emerged as a promising new nanomaterial for a variety of exciting applications despite its short history.6–8 For nearly three decades, carbonaceous materials such as fullerenes and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have drawn considerable attention due to their exceptional electronic and mechanical properties.9 Specifically, after the discoveries of zero-dimensional (0D) buckminsterfullerene10 and shortly later one-dimensional 1D CNTs,11 enthusiasm in the research of carbon based nanomaterials has increased further.12 Both fullerenes and CNTs have been proposed to be derived from 2D graphene sheets that are viewed as key building blocks of all other graphitic carbon allotropes (cf.Fig. 1), such as “graphite” made up of graphene sheets stacked on top of each other (separated by an interlayer distance of 3.37 Å),13 “fullerenes” and “CNTs” can be virtually made by wrapping and rolling a section of a graphene sheet.14 In reality, however, they are not synthesized from graphene.
 Fig. 1  Graphene is a two-dimensional building block for carbonaceous materials of all other dimensions. It can be wrapped up into 0-D buckyballs, rolled into 1-D nanotubes or stacked into 3-D graphite.1 
Although graphite is a naturally occurring material and has been in use for centuries,15 the first reported method for producing graphene can only be traced back to 197016 and rather, the free standing single-layer of graphene was first obtained in 2004 by the isolation of graphene from graphite via micromechanical cleavage.17 The delay in the discovery of free standing graphene sheets can be partially attributed to their single-atom-thick nature, which was initially believed to be thermodynamically unstable.18 However, graphene is not only stable but also exhibits excellent electronic and mechanical properties such as a charge-carrier mobility of 250000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature,19 a thermal conductivity of 5000 W m−1 K−1,20 an electrical conductivity of up to 6000 S cm−1,21 and a large theoretical specific surface area of 2630 m2 g−1.22,23 In addition, graphene is highly transparent, with absorption of <2.3% towards visible light24 and indeed, with a Young's modulus of 1 TPa and an ultimate strength of 130 GPa, single-layer graphene is the strongest material ever measured.25
Despite the fact that graphene has been used as a theoretical model to describe the electronic structure of graphitic species for over half a century,26 researchers have had difficulty in obtaining experimentally relevant amounts of this material until very recent development of mechanical17 and chemical methods for graphene production.27,28 Therefore, due to the great interest generated by the unique structural characteristics and exceptional properties of graphene, and also with the advent of facile production methods,29,30 graphene has attracted enormous research interest in both scientific and engineering communities all over the world.
The novel catalytic, magnetic and optoelectronic properties of graphene nanocomposites based on the hybridization with nanoparticles (NPs) have attracted significant attention.31 Particularly, due to the unique sp2 hybridization of carbon bonds present in graphene, which facilitates the delocalization of electrons, graphene possesses excellent electronic conduction.17 This electronic conduction of graphene can be enhanced by incorporating various inorganic nanoparticles, including different metal and metal oxide NPs. Due to the enhanced electrical and electronic properties and the synergistic effect between graphene and inorganic nanoparticles, graphene/nanoparticle nanocomposites offer great potential for various applications including energy storage and energy conversion devices.32 Therefore, the interest in graphene based materials has been ever-growing, due to their peculiarities in combining desirable properties of building blocks for a given application. To date, great efforts have been made to uniformly combine different varieties of nanomaterials with graphene and explore their application in fields like electronics, chemical and biological sensors, electrochemical, energy conversion and storage, solar energy harvesting, etc.33–35 In order to further enhance the properties and to broaden the applications of graphene, various metal and metal oxide NPs have been decorated on graphene.5 Apart from enhancing the properties of graphene, the NPs act as a stabilizer against the aggregation of individual graphene sheets, which is caused by strong van der Waals interactions between graphene layers. Therefore, more efforts and new strategies to synthesize graphene-based nanocomposites are indispensable.
In this review, we highlight the latest literature with a clear focus on graphene-based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites. In the beginning we review different methods for the synthesis of graphene or highly reduced graphene oxide sheets (HRG) with a particular emphasis on the latest scalable methods (top-down approaches) for the production of graphene using graphite oxide (GO) as a precursor, suitable for the preparation of graphene-based nanocomposites. Simultaneously, we discuss some of the most recently developed methods for the large-scale synthesis of graphene-based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites, with a particular focus on solution based in situ processes. This is followed by an extensive review of the literature about the properties and morphologies of a variety of HRG-metal and HRG–metal oxide nanocomposites and their applications in various fields, such as catalysis or energy storage. Finally, we conclude with challenges for the future growth of the class of nanocomposites. Readers interested in the electronic properties of pristine graphene, various methods for the preparation and characterization of graphene and graphene-based materials and the corresponding background can consult excellent reviews by Neto et al., Zhang et al., Geim et al., Müllen et al., and Singh et al.36–39
2 Synthesis of graphene and graphene based nanocomposites
The interactions in graphite between adjacent 2D layers of graphene by their overlapping pz orbitals40 inhibit the complete delamination of bulk graphite into individual graphene under typical mechanical actions. Although single sheets of graphene can be obtained from bulk graphite by mechanical exfoliation using Scotch tape,17,41 attempts to mechanically exfoliate graphite result only in stacks of sheets, or a few isolated sheets in low yield.7 Chemical exfoliation strategies such as sequential oxidation–reduction of graphite often result in a class of graphene-like materials best described as highly reduced graphene oxide (HRG), with graphene domains, defects and residual oxygen containing groups on the surface of the sheets.27,42,43 Indeed, none of the currently available methods for graphene production yields bulk quantities of defect free sheets.7 Apart from the difficulty of producing bulk quantities of defect free graphene, most of the currently available synthetic methods also suffer from limited control over size, shape, edge and layers of graphene due to random exfoliation, growth or assembly processes.44
Nevertheless, some important advances have already been made and efforts are ongoing to obtain bulk quantities of controlled and defect free graphene. Several methods have been reported for the synthesis of graphene that can be mainly classified into two different approaches (cf.Fig. 2): the bottom-up and top-down approach.29 The bottom-up growth of graphene sheets is an alternative to the mechanical exfoliation of bulk graphite. In bottom-up processes, graphene is synthesized by a variety of methods such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),45,46 arc discharge,47 epitaxial growth on SiC,48 chemical conversion,49 reduction of CO,50 unzipping carbon nanotubes51,52 and self-assembly of surfactants.53 The CVD approach to produce graphene relies on dissolving carbon in metal surfaces, such as Ni and Cu that act as catalysts54,55 and then forcing it to separate by cooling the metal. The thickness and crystalline ordering of the precipitated carbon are controlled by the cooling rate and by the concentration of carbon dissolved in the metal.56 This direct CVD synthesis provides high quality layers of graphene without intensive mechanical or chemical treatments. The epitaxial growth of graphene is achieved via high temperature thermal annealing of carbon containing substrates such as SiC.57
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the methods used for the synthesis of graphene, which are classified into top-down and bottom-up approaches. The top-down approach is widely used for the scalable synthesis of graphene that produces a relatively low quality of a graphene-like material commonly known as Highly Reduced Graphene Oxide (HRG) or graphene in large quantity required for the preparation of graphene-based nanocomposites. 
Notably, CVD and epitaxial growth usually produce large-sized, defect free graphene in small quantity suitable for fundamental studies and electronic applications and they are more attractive than the mechanical cleavage method. However, these and other methods mentioned before are not suitable for the synthesis of graphene needed for the preparation of graphene-based nanocomposites that usually require large amounts of graphene sheets preferably with a modified surface structure.5,9,58,59 While mechanical exfoliation using Scotch-tape is a laborious procedure and rarely leads to good quality individual graphene sheets, epitaxial growth requires high-vacuum conditions and a specialized, expensive fabrication system to generate films on small areas. Still, the production of graphene monolayers with large surface areas has been attainable due to the more recent advances in CVD techniques, the uniform growth of single layers of graphene is still a challenge and indeed suitable methods have yet to be fully developed.56 Similarly, bulk quantities of graphene nanoribbons can be potentially produced via longitudinal unzipping of CNTs, however, the width of the nanoribbons depends on the CNT diameter.
Therefore, for the manufacturing of graphene-based nanocomposites, which generally requires bulk quantities of homogeneously distributed graphene sheets, the top-down approach (i.e.) chemical and/or thermal reduction of graphite derivatives such as graphite oxide (GO)60 and graphite fluoride61 appears to be the most suitable and efficient strategy (cf.Fig. 2). These techniques yield low-cost bulk amounts of graphene-like sheets that albeit not defect free, and they are highly processable and can be fabricated into a variety of materials. Additionally, graphite is a commodity material and easily available with a current annual global production of over 1.1 million tons at $897 per ton in 2009.62 Hence, the application of graphite or graphite derivatives for the synthesis of graphene offers considerable economic advantages over bottom-up methods.29 Therefore, currently the primary interest in the synthesis of graphene based nanocomposites focuses on the oxidation and exfoliation of graphite oxide (GO), followed by chemical reduction63 that produces graphene as highly reduced graphene oxide (HRG)64,65 or chemically modified graphene (CMG).66,67
2.1 Graphene via direct exfoliation of graphite
The exfoliation of graphite into single layers of graphene sheets has attracted considerable attention because of the unusual electronic properties of monolayers of the graphite lattice.1,36,68 Among the many exfoliation techniques including micromechanical and liquid exfoliation methods, the micromechanical cleavage of graphite is the most reliable method that renders large-sized, high-quality graphene sheets but in very limited quantities, which makes it only suitable for fundamental studies or electronic applications.17,69,70 However, recently graphite has also been directly exfoliated into single- and multi-layer graphene via sonication in the presence of polyvinylpyrrolidone71 or diazaperopyrenium dications,72 electrochemical functionalization of graphite assisted with ionic liquids,73 and through dissolution in superacids74 and solvents (liquid phase exfoliation).75 For the dissolution of graphite certain solvents such as N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), dimethylformamide (DMF), and o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB)76,77 are particularly interesting, as graphite could be directly exfoliated into monolayer sheets, while preserving its intrinsic electrical properties.78 Alternatively, surfactant molecules, in aqueous solutions, have also been used to directly exfoliate graphite flakes with concentrations up to 1 mg mL−1.79 Recently, the direct exfoliation of graphite has been achieved by surface functionalization of graphene sheets with aromatic carboxylic acids in aqueous solutions.80,81 The aqueous dispersions of graphene sheets in these cases originate from the non-covalent functionalization of graphene with hydrophilic carboxylic acids through aromatic interactions between graphene surfaces and fused aromatic units. The carboxylic acid groups positioned at the out of plane graphene surface stabilize aqueous dispersions of graphene flakes. Moreover, it has also been speculated that selective dispersions of the 2D graphene sheet, out of all graphite allotropes, in aqueous solutions can also be achieved by an elaborate molecular design of amphiphilic molecules.82 Indeed, more recently an aromatic amphiphile consisting of a hydrophilic dendron and an aromatic segment with planar conformation has been reported which selectively exfoliates graphite powder into single and double layer graphene sheets in aqueous solutions through hydrophilic functionalization of graphene surfaces.83
In another example, graphite powder was exfoliated directly in an aqueous solution of pyrene derivatives, which acts as a dispersion agent, a healing agent and an electric glue during the thermal annealing process to produce high-quality single layer graphene sheets.84 Furthermore, ionic liquids have also been used to exfoliate graphite in a recent example, where a solution-phase technique has been applied for the production of large-area, bilayer or trilayer graphene from graphite.85 Interhalogen compounds like iodine chloride (ICl) or iodine bromide have been used, which intercalate the graphite starting material at every second or third layer creating second- or third stage controlled graphite intercalation compounds. More recently, the exfoliation of graphite has been carried out under ambient conditions by an electrochemical method (cf.Fig. 3) using an environmentally friendly glycine–bisulfate ionic complex.86 The ionic complex plays a key role in the anodic graphite exfoliation via electrochemical-potential-induced intercalation, leading to an efficient expansion of graphite sheets via the insertion of oxygen functional groups. Similarly, in a more recent study, an industrially scalable method has been developed for the commercial production of large quantities of defect free graphene.87 During this study, large-scale exfoliation of graphite was carried out in stabilizing liquids, such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone and by a high-shear mixing method (cf.Fig. 4). In this way, the exfoliation of high quality graphene could be achieved in liquid volumes from hundreds of milliliters up to hundreds of liters and even beyond.
 Fig. 3  Preparation process of graphene. (a) A simple solution-process approach for Gly·HSO4 ionic complex preparation in aqueous solution. (b) Diagram of the electrochemical experimental setup. (c) Photographs of graphene directly in electrolyte (left) and re-dispersed in NMP after purification (right). (d) Exfoliation yields versus weight ratios of Gly·HSO4 ionic complex to water used in exfoliation experiments. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley and Sons.86 
 Fig. 4  Production of graphene by shear exfoliation. (a) Silverson model L5M high-shear mixer with a mixing head in a 5 L beaker of graphene dispersion. (b and c) Close-up view of the mixing heads. (d) Graphene dispersed in NMP. (e–h) TEM images of graphene nanosheets. (i) XPS and (j) Raman spectra of exfoliated graphene. (k and l) Rotor and stator for large-scale trials. (m) Shear exfoliation of graphite in 100 L water-surfactant solution. Copyright reserved to the Nature Publishing Group.87 
Therefore, direct sonication and dissolution methods (liquid phase exfoliation methods) have great potential to be scaled up to produce large quantities of single and multiple layer graphene or functionalized graphene that can be used for the fabrication of composites. Furthermore, gram-scale production of high quality graphene can be achieved using these methods by utilizing custom made molecules or polymers as stabilizing agents, which not only help in increasing the yield, but also inhibit the re-aggregation of graphene. The interaction of these functional molecules with graphene enhances the properties of the 2D material. However, the separation of exfoliated graphene sheets from bulk graphite could still be a challenge.29 Therefore, further improvement in liquid phase exfoliation methods is required,77 and more efforts are needed to design and synthesize new molecules with enhanced affinity to the basal plane, reducing the yield of by-products and enhancing the solubility of the produced graphene in other organic solvents, etc.
2.2 Graphite oxide (GO)
Although graphene has only emerged as a potential material very recently,1 the history of GO extends over many decades, even back to the earliest studies involving the chemistry of graphite.88,89 GO has been mainly produced by different variations of Brodie,90,91 Staudenmaier,92 and Hummers93 methods that involve the oxidation of graphite in the presence of strong acids (nitric acid or its mixture with sulfuric acid) and oxidants (KMnO4, KClO3, NaNO3). Since then many other slightly modified versions have also been developed. However, to date mainly these three methods comprise the primary routes for the synthesis of GO.27,65 Notably, it has been demonstrated that the product obtained from these reactions shows strong variance in the level of oxidation depending on the type of oxidant, reaction conditions and the graphite precursor used.27 Currently, the naturally occurring flake graphite is the most common source of graphite used for the preparation of GO that is purified to remove heteroatomic contaminants. Although the localized defects in the p-structure of the flake graphite may serve as seed points for the oxidation process, unfortunately they also inhibit the continuation of precise oxidation.94
The structure and properties of GO mainly depend on three parameters: the particular synthesis methods, the degree of oxidation and the source of graphite used.95,96 Although over many decades the precise chemical structure of GO has been the subject of considerable debate, the detailed structure of GO and its oxidation mechanism are still not completely understood due to its complex structure (with strong disorder, irregular packing of the layers, nonstoichiometric atomic composition and lack of consistent and reproducible samples).97–100 Significant efforts are still underway to understand the exact chemical structure of GO, despite the great success that has already been achieved over the years.101–104
Typically, the oxidation of graphite (producing GO) results in its functionalization by epoxy, hydroxyl and other functional groups. The oxidation methods, the variety of oxygen species, and the reaction conditions are well known.27 However, little work has been done to understand the connection between the oxidation chemistry and morphology of GO sheets. In this context, during their work on the effect of oxidation on the morphology of GO, Li and co-workers have observed cracks in GO that were directly related to the oxidation process. The cracks occurred due to the strain from the cooperative alignment of epoxy groups.105 Moreover, they also suggested that during the oxidation process graphene oxide sheets undergo an unzipping resulting in size reduction compared to the parent graphite flake size. Typically, slight variations in the degree of oxidation can cause substantial changes in the structure and properties of the materials. Furthermore it is difficult to achieve complete oxidation as well as reduction of GO (down to the level of pure graphene) because of the large number of defects present in its structure.106 This has also been supported by density functional calculations of GO which predicted that partial oxidation is thermodynamically favored over complete oxidation.107
2.3 Modified graphite oxide (GO)
The oxygen functionalities in the basal plane of GO alter the van der Waals interactions between the layers and render them hydrophilic, thus greatly facilitating the hydration and exfoliation of GO in aqueous media.108 Moreover, in a recent study of the surface charge (zeta potential) of the as-prepared GO sheets, it has been shown that GO sheets (or graphene oxide sheets) acquire negative charges when dispersed in water, apparently because of the dissociation of carboxylic acid and phenolic hydroxyl groups.63,103 As a result, GO readily forms stable colloidal dispersions in water, which is attributed to both the electrostatic repulsion and hydrophilicity of GO sheets. Thus, complete exfoliation of GO can be achieved by sonication108 and by stirring the water–GO mixture for a sufficient time, to produce aqueous suspensions of graphene oxide sheets (cf.Fig. 5).42,109
 Fig. 5  Aqueous dispersion of GO (i-a) aqueous colloidal suspension from left: graphene oxide, KOH-modified graphene oxide (KMG), hydrazine-reduced KMG (hKMG), (i-b) AFM image of hKMG sheets on a mica substrate. (i-c) TEM image of hKMG sheets, inset, selected area diffraction pattern of what were found to be two overlapping hKMG sheets. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.42 (ii) Aqueous suspension of GO in congo red solutions of various concentrations. (ii-a–d) samples without sonication. (ii-e–h) samples after 1 h sonication. Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.109 
In particular, GO would serve as an excellent precursor for a variety of graphene-based composite materials if it could be completely exfoliated in a wide range of media including water and other organic solvents. However, the hydrophilic nature of GO precludes its direct exfoliation in non-aqueous solvents due to the strong interlayer hydrogen bonding interactions between the adjacent graphene oxide layers.110 Nevertheless, significant efforts have been made to prepare homogeneous suspensions of GRO sheets in water as well as in various non-aqueous solvents by chemical functionalization of GO.68,111–113 Usually, chemical functionalization would decrease the density of hydrogen bonding donor groups such as the hydroxyl groups in GO and thus undermine the strength of the hydrogen bonding, thereby rendering less hydrophilic GRO sheets.110 The oxygen containing groups (such as carboxyl and hydroxyl groups) that exist in GO facilitate the functionalization by providing reactive sites for chemical modification.
Chemical functionalization also prevents the agglomeration of individually separated graphene oxide sheets in dispersion, which is the most important and challenging part in any synthetic route of graphene.68,70 Thus bulk graphene or GRO sheets spontaneously agglomerate and even restack to form graphite or GO when left unprotected.108 Several protocols have been reported regarding the homogeneous dispersion, chemical functionalization, and applications of modified graphite oxides (GO) or graphene oxides, such as synthesis of graphene oxide paper like materials114 and thin films,115 the ability of modified GO to recognize aromatic molecules116 for controlling the aggregation state and orientation of organic dyes as well as their application as anode materials for lithium batteries.117 Other than these, modified GO was also used for water purification in a recent example. For this purpose the hydrophilic character of GO is retained by covalently attaching thiol groups to GO.118 This particular modification is achieved via carbon–carbon attachment of benzene–thiol groups to the sp2 lattice within the nanosheets. In this regard, the preparation of several functionalized graphite oxides, by treatment of organic isocyanates, has been reported by Stankovich et al.110 They dispersed isocyanate modified graphite oxides (GO) in polar aprotic solvents to form a stable dispersion. The synthesis of modified GO was facilitated by the functionalization of carboxyl and hydroxyl groups such as amides and carbamate esters. In another study, Paredes et al. reported the direct dispersion of GO in polar solvents like ethylene glycol, DMF, NMP and THF at about 0.5 mg mL−1.112
2.4 Synthesis of highly reduced graphene oxide (HRG)
The reduction of GO or GRO can be performed by various methods including chemical,119 thermal,120 electrochemical121 and photochemical methods122,123 to obtain graphene-like materials which are generally referred to in the literature as highly reduced graphene oxide (HRG), reduced graphene oxide (rGO), chemically reduced graphene oxide (CReGO), chemically converted graphene (CCG), etc.94 Throughout the article, we will use the term graphene or HRG to refer to the product obtained from the reduction of GO or GRO whereas a distinction will be made with pristine graphene (defect free graphene) when necessary. Despite the significant structural differences between pristine graphene and HRG, the striking similarities between them, particularly in terms of their electrical, thermal and mechanical properties render the reduction process as one of the most important reactions of GO or GRO. Indeed, for large scale applications such as for the preparation of graphene based composite materials, the reduction of GRO by chemical and thermal methods is the most benign and desirable route to obtain graphene or HRG. Therefore, we focus in this review mainly on chemical and thermal methods (top-down approaches), which are more suitable for the reduction of GRO and the in situ preparation of highly reduced graphene oxide (HRG) based nanocomposites. The properties of HRG obtained via top-down methods by the reduction of GO strongly depend on reduction processes. Therefore, in order to customize the properties of devices and enhance the performance of materials made up of HRG, more efforts needs to be directed towards the development of reduction processes.

2.4.1 Chemical methods. 
Graphene oxide (GRO or single layers of graphite oxide) can be reduced chemically to graphene or HRG by applying a variety of reducing agents such as hydrazine monohydrate,124 sodium borohydride,125 hydrogen spillover126 and various other chemicals.127 Among all reductants hydrazine monohydrate is the most important and certainly the most common and widely used reductant due to its strong reactivity and stability in aqueous media. The reduction of graphene oxide via hydrazine restores the π-electron conjugation within the aromatic system of graphite resulting in an enhancement of electrical conductivity. Hitherto the highest conductivity of 99.6 S cm−1 combined with a C/O ratio of around 12.5 has been reported for HRG films solely obtained from hydrazine reduction, and an electronic conductivity of up to 300 S cm−1 was observed after replacing hydrazine with less toxic hydroiodic acid and acetic acid.128,129 Although hydrazine effectively removes oxide functional groups, it also introduces heteroatom impurities such as nitrogen that remains covalently bound to the surface of graphene sheets in the form of amines, hydrazones or other similar functional groups.125 Although it has been reported that high quality graphene can be obtained by reducing GO with H2, the requirement of high temperature and inert conditions limits its applications.119,130 Similarly, the long reaction time (several hours or even a few days) required for the reduction of GRO using chemical reductants such as hydrazine poses a hindrance for the wide scale applications of such methods.
Hence, several other reducing agents have been explored in the literature that may allow the reduction at low temperature and in less time, are more environmentally friendly and also produce homogeneous suspensions of graphene unlike hydrazine and other chemical reductants. For this purpose, Feng et al. demonstrated a less toxic method for the mass production of high quality HRG with low oxygen content.131 A sodium–ammonia solution was used as a reducing agent (cf.Fig. 6), where the solvated electrons facilitated the reduction of GRO and the restoration of the conjugated network of HRG with an oxygen content of 5.6 wt%. In the following paragraphs we only provide some of the most recent examples of such reductants, for more details about the structure, properties and reduction of GRO we refer the reader to recent reviews by Pei and Dreyer et al.65,94,132,133
 Fig. 6  Experimental procedures of the reduction of GO in the Na–NH3 system. (a) The generation of solvated electrons by dissolution of sodium in liquid ammonia. (b) Several lumps of sodium metal were then dissolved in anhydrous liquid ammonia. The deep blue color is the color of the solvated electrons. (c) Liquid ammonia was kept in a dry ice-acetone bath. (d) GO powder was dispersed in liquid ammonia to show a brown color. (e) Black HRG solution was obtained after the reduction of GO with solvated electrons. Copyrights reserved to the Nature Publishing Group.131 
Esfandiar et al. in their recent work have applied melatonin for the reduction of a GO suspension as a replacement for hydrazine. Melatonin is a biocompatible antioxidant that has led to results comparable with those for hydrazine under similar conditions. Furthermore, due to the π–π adsorption of MLT molecules on the reduced sheets, the MLT-reduced GRO suspension is more stable compared to a hydrazine-reduced suspension, where more aggregation is observed.134 More recently, metal-mediated reduction of graphene oxide has been reported that is environmentally friendly and leads to faster reduction.135 In a recent report Fan et al. described an efficient route for the synthesis of graphene via reduction of GRO with aluminum powder.136 The reaction was carried out in acidic medium (HCl solution) and completed in a short time (∼30 min). The resulting graphene sheets have a high bulk electrical conductivity of 2.1 × 103 S m−1 (cf.Fig. 7). Similarly, Mei and Ouyang replaced aluminum with Zn, to carry out reduction under mild acidic conditions under ultrasonication at room temperature.137 The reaction is fast and completed within one minute, i.e. much less time than reported for the reduction of graphene oxide with iron138 and aluminum powder.136 The low reduction potential of Zn2+/Zn and the ultrasonication facilitated fast and efficient reduction of GRO. In addition the HRG sheets obtained by this method show good electrical conductivity and thermal stability (cf.Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Metal assisted reduction of GO. (i-a–d) Digital photographs of the reduction process. (i-e) TEM image of GO (i-f) SEM images of GO/aluminum particles (i-g and h) SEM images of HRG. Copyright reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.136 (ii-a) Photographs of a GO solution (A) before and (B) after the reduction with Zn powder. (ii-b) Photographs of Zn/HRG dispersed in various solutions. (ii-c) Photographs of hydrazine reduced HRG dispersed in water. (iii-a) SEM image of GO. (iii-b) SEM images of Zn/HRG. (iii-c) AFM image of GO. (iii-d) AFM image of Zn/HRG. (iii-e) TEM image of a free standing Zn/HRG sheet suspended on a lacey carbon TEM grid. (iii-f) Selected area electron diffraction (SEAD) pattern of the Zn/HRG sheet in iii-e. Figures (ii) and (iii) Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.137 
More recently, the trend of applying plant extracts as both reducing and stabilizing agents during the preparation of nanomaterials has attracted considerable attention in the scientific community.139,140 The plant extracts (PE) are relatively easy to handle, readily available, low cost, and have been greatly exploited due to their biocompatibility in the field of nanotechnology. Although a number of different metallic nanoparticles have been synthesized successfully using plant extracts as bioreductants,141,142 their reducing abilities have only recently been tested for the reduction of GO. Khan et al. demonstrated an efficient route for the synthesis of highly reduced graphene oxide via green reduction of GRO using Pulicaria glutinosa (P. glutinosa) plant extract (PE). The phytomolecules present in the P. glutinosa PE were not only responsible for the reduction of GRO but also functionalize the surface of HRG nanosheets to stabilize them in various solvents, thereby limiting the use of any other external and harmful chemical reductants and surfactants (cf.Fig. 8).143 Similarly, Li et al. described a method that employs gallic acid, which acted both as a reductant and stabilizer for the reduction of GRO.144
 Fig. 8  Green reduction of graphene oxide (GRO) using an aqueous extract of the Pulicaria glutinosa plant. Copyrights reserved to the Royal Society of Chemistry.143 
Apart from this, a new trend of microbial reduction of GRO has been reported in several studies.145,146 In one such example, Kuila et al. used carrot root as a biocatalyst and reducing agent. Here the endophytic microorganisms present in the carrot root reduce the exfoliated GO to HRG at room temperature.147 In another example, Wang et al. demonstrated the reduction of graphene oxide mediated by microbial respiration of Shewanella cells in a normal aerobic setup under ambient conditions.148Shewanella, a metal-reducing bacterium, is known to transfer metabolically generated electrons from the interior part of the cell to external electron acceptors such as solid metal oxides. For the reduction of graphene oxide, extracellular electron transfer is mediated by both self-secreted electrons and outer membrane c-type cytochromes (Mtr/Ornc). It has also been reported that the microbially reduced HRG exhibits excellent electrochemical properties that are comparable to those prepared by chemical methods.


2.4.2 Thermal methods. 
HRG can be prepared by thermal exfoliation and reduction of GO by rapid heating (>200 °C min−1) of dry GO under inert gas and high temperature (1050 °C).149 The rapid heating led to the decomposition of oxygen containing functional groups attached on the carbon plane of GO, releasing gaseous CO and CO2 gas. The released gas gradually evolves into the space between graphene oxide sheets and creates a local pressure between stacked layers, which ultimately leads to the exfoliation of GO. Such thermal treatment not only exfoliates but also reduces the GO to graphene simultaneously by eliminating oxygen containing functional groups also referred to as TRG (thermally reduced graphene), thus making it an attractive strategy to produce a bulk quantity of graphene.150
However, the release of gases (CO and CO2) during the thermal exfoliation process causes significant structural damage to the platelets. The decomposition of oxygen containing groups also removes carbon atoms from the basal plane, thereby fragmenting the graphene sheets (TRG).106 About ∼30% of the mass of GO is lost during the exfoliation process due to the decomposition of oxygen containing groups and evaporation of water. Therefore, these methods only produce small sized and wrinkled graphene sheets with severe topological defects and etch holes throughout the plane of TRG sheets.151 These defects significantly decrease the ballistic transport path length and also introduce several scattering sites in TRG sheets which have adverse effects on their electronic properties. Such high temperature processing is unlikely to be compatible with fabrication techniques used for most electronic applications but is useful for producing a bulk quantity of HRG sheets required for the synthesis of graphene based composites.94,133
Thermal treatment at such a high temperature with a fast heating rate involves huge energy consumption and difficulties in operation. Thus significant efforts have been invested to develop methods for thermal exfoliation of GO at reduced temperatures.152 Recently, few-layered graphene sheets by thermally exfoliating GO under high vacuum at a significantly low temperature of 200 °C were prepared, which is far below the proposed critical exfoliation temperature of 550 °C.149 However, the surface area of the TRG sheets produced by this method is much lower (368 m2 g−1) than that of conventional thermally exfoliated graphene (around 600–900 m2 g−1).153 In a similar approach Zhang et al. prepared HRG sheets with an average thickness of 0.9 nm and a high specific surface area of 758 m2 g−1 under vacuum at lower temperature (135 °C). The surface area obtained is comparable to that of conventional graphene (700 m2 g−1) generated at 1050 °C at atmospheric pressure. Here GO was thermally exfoliated and reduced in situ to few layered graphene sheets.154 Furthermore, a high yield, hydrazine-free method has been reported that produces single-layer high quality HRG sheets at considerably lower temperature and at atmospheric pressure. The reduction of GO by this method was carried out in deionized water at pH ≈3 at 95 °C. It has been speculated that the oxygen reduction and simultaneous transformation of carbon sp3 into sp2 bonds by this method resulted from the dehydration of HRG in DI water.155
However, in certain cases the special atmosphere (i.e., ultra-high vacuum and/or rapid heating) greatly hinders the preparation of graphene-based composite materials that necessarily require an oxidizing atmosphere; thus the need to thermally reduce GO under mild conditions is ever-increasing.156 Recently, Wang et al. have demonstrated a facile and efficient method for the scalable synthesis of high quality TRG sheets by thermal reduction of GO in air. The reduction was carried out at 300 °C in 5 min. The low temperature facilitated the preparation of a vanadium pentoxide/graphene composite wherein the oxidizing atmosphere played a critical role.157 Although thermal reduction methods are highly effective, more work needs to be done to further lower the annealing temperatures of GO, in order to achieve high quality large scale synthesis of HRG. In essence, high annealing temperatures not only require a higher energy consumption, but also need critical treatment conditions, which call for sophisticated and expensive instruments. Additionally, the preparation of HRG films on organic substrates which are required for certain electronic devices is also difficult using thermal reduction methods at high annealing temperatures.


2.4.3 Microwave assisted reduction methods. 
Although the reduction of GO by high temperature annealing is highly efficient and widely applied, it poses some obvious drawbacks.133 Thermal annealing is usually carried out by thermal irradiation; however some unconventional heating resources have been examined for thermal reduction, such as microwave irradiation (MWI).158,159 In this process, microwave energy is transformed into heat through a microwave absorbent. Other conventional heating methods lead to heating of the reaction mixture uniformly and rapidly. In addition, due to the different dielectric constants of reactants and solvent, selective dielectric heating can also be carried out using MWI. Such a kind of heating provides a significant enhancement in the transfer of energy directly to the reactants, which causes an instantaneous increase of the internal temperature.
Recently, MWI has demonstrated excellent ability to produce graphene from GO. The interaction of microwaves with GO and graphene is not fully understood. Hu et al. reported that for carbon based materials the microwave absorption capacity is highly dependent on their chemical composition and structure.160 During their study, by varying the oxygen content in GO and/or graphene based materials, the microwave absorption capacity of GO decreased remarkably with increase of oxygen content due to the decrease of sp2 domains. Therefore, pristine graphene is an excellent microwave absorbent compared to GO, which has a relatively poor microwave absorption capacity. The non-oxidized graphitic regions act as “impurities” and absorbents to initiate microwave-induced reduction. Moreover, it has been speculated that the reduction process of GO can be greatly enhanced by addition of small amounts of pristine graphene. MWI has been used to prepare exfoliated graphite (EG) from a wide range of graphite intercalation compounds (GICs).161 EG has also been prepared by MWI quickly (4 min); the mixture of natural graphite with nitric acid and potassium permanganate was directly heated in a microwave oven.162 The preparation of reduced graphene oxide has also been reported by simultaneous exfoliation and reduction of GO under dry conditions (without using any chemicals or solvents) by rapid MWI in ∼1 min.163


2.4.4 Hydrothermal and solvothermal methods. 
Hydrothermal processing is another powerful and emerging chemical reduction method for the green synthesis of graphene and its composites.133 This single-pot process produces highly crystalline homogeneous nanostructures without the need for post-synthetic annealing or calcination.164 Hydrothermal reduction of GO is carried out in a closed system in the presence of water or solvent (solvothermal processing) at a temperature close to or above its boiling point to generate high pressure.165 Supercritical (SC) water can also act as a reducing agent, thereby providing an environmentally friendly alternative to hazardous chemical reductants. For instance, during the reduction of GO via a “water-only” route by hydrothermal treatment of a GO solution, the SC water not only partly removed the oxygen containing functional groups, but also restored the aromatic structure.166 During this process, water acts as a source of H+ ions for the protonation of hydroxyl groups. This leads to a dehydration of HRG, thereby facilitating the reduction process. Moreover, the true pH may be different in such reduction processes. The nominal pH of the solution plays a critical role, i.e., a basic solution (pH = 11) yields a stable HRG solution while the HRG sheets aggregate in an acidic solution (pH = 3).
Deoxygenation of GO has been studied by solvothermal reduction.167 In a procedure described by Wang et al. the reduction of GO was carried out in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) at 180 °C using hydrazine monohydrate as a reductant.165 HRG sheets were dispersed in DMF, and the C/O ratio of the HRG sheets reached 14.3 (which is much higher than that obtained by hydrazine reduction at normal pressure). However, the resulting HRG sheets exhibited poor conductivity due to the nitrogen-doping caused by the hydrazine reductant. In another study, Dubin et al. considered the solvothermal reduction using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) as a solvent.168 Here the reduction was not performed in a sealed container, and the reaction temperature was below (200 °C) the boiling point of NMP (202 °C at 1 atm). It has been proposed that the oxygen-scavenging properties of NMP at elevated temperature and the moderate thermal annealing facilitated the reduction of GO. Although a homogeneous dispersion of HRG sheets could be obtained solvothermally in DMF, graphene sheets usually suffer from limited dispersibility and irreversible agglomeration due to increased hydrophobicity and π–π stacking during such a process. To avoid the aggregation of graphene sheets, covalent or non-covalent modifications of HRG sheets must be introduced. This introduces extra stabilizers into the reducing system that may hinder the necessary functionalization of HRG and its further applications. In this regard, Zhou et al. have demonstrated a simple surfactant-free approach to prepare a homogeneous dispersion of HRG sheets in DMF by solvothermal reduction of GO.169 The high temperature and the autogenous high pressure promote the reduction of GO, wherein DMF acts as a weak reducing agent and stabilizer which keeps the dispersion homogeneous and stable. The resulting HRG sheets could be re-dispersed in solvents such as N-methylpyrrolidone, N,N-dimethylacetamide and acetonitrile.

2.5 Chemical and thermal reduction mechanisms
To make progress in optimization and design of reduction processes that meet the increasing demand for tailored graphene-based composite materials, GO needs to be well characterized and the mechanism of its thermal deoxygenation to be well understood.170 Insight into how the oxygen containing functional groups of graphene oxide evolve during the thermal reduction is particularly important.171 Several studies have been conducted to this end. For instance, an X-ray diffraction and a Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) study of the thermal stability of GO during heat treatment under an argon atmosphere could identify the removal of water, hydroxyl, epoxide and carboxyl groups.172 It has also been suggested that the interlayer distance between the GO adjacent layers decreases gradually with annealing time. In a theoretical study Gao et al. have identified three possible mechanisms for the elimination of epoxide groups of GO with hydrazine.173 This detailed theoretical study also provided an elucidation for reduction of GO, and also suggested details of the product structures and of the ways to optimize the reaction conditions.
Ganguly et al. proposed a mechanism for the thermal decomposition of GO using a combination of high-resolution temperature-dependent in situ spectroscopies (X-ray photoemission and X-ray absorption).174 They suggested that the edge plane carboxyl groups are highly unstable, whereas carbonyl groups (CO) are more difficult to remove. However, the formation of phenol groups was facilitated through the reaction of basal plane epoxide groups with adjacent hydroxyl groups at moderate temperature (∼400 °C). The phenol groups are predominant over carbonyl groups (CO) and survive even at temperatures as high as 1000 °C (cf.Fig. 9). Moreover, they observed for the first time a drastic increase in the density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level at 600 °C suggesting a progressive restoration of the aromatic structure in TRG. In another report, Acik and co-workers described a systematic study of the chemical and thermal reduction mechanism and characterized the structural composition of GO.175 They performed in situ transmission IR measurements of GO films upon thermal annealing at 60 to 850 °C in vacuo (10−3 to 10−4 Torr) to study the complex mechanism of oxygen removal in reduced GO. Apart from a detailed illustration of interactions between randomly arranged oxygen species, they have suggested that thermal annealing fosters the formation of free radicals containing oxygen in the presence of trapped water in GO, which further attach carboxyls, hydroxyls and carbonyls, preferentially at the edges rather than on basal plane defects.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of GO reduction mechanisms. Copyright reserved to the American Chemical Society.174 
Liao et al. demonstrated that the reduction and transformation of C–C bonds from sp3 to sp2 in GO are mainly facilitated by dehydration.155 In an acidic environment the neighboring hydroxyl groups and hydrogen atoms attached to carbon atoms are eliminated as water. This results in the formation of HRG sheets with sp2 bonded carbon atoms. The reduction of epoxy groups is a two-step process: in the first step, the transformation of two neighboring epoxy (–O–) to hydroxyl groups occurs via hydration in an acidic environment followed by a dehydration step, where water and HRG sheets are formed. They further explained that for the reduction of GO in water a low pH environment and moderately high temperatures are needed. The reduction is initiated by protonation while the reaction kinetics is governed by temperature. Notably, OH− anions can act as a catalyst when reduction is carried out in a basic environment.176 In both cases, the extent of oxygen reduction is dependent on the number of hydrogen atoms bonded to carbon atoms carrying hydroxyl groups.
2.6 Synthesis of HRG/nanoparticle nanocomposites
The binding or loading of metal and metal oxide NPs on graphene for the preparation of graphene-based nanocomposites is generally realized in two different ways (cf.Fig. 10): post immobilization (ex situ hybridization) or in situ binding (in situ crystallization). Post immobilization involves mixing of separate solutions of graphene nanosheets and pre-synthesized NPs. Before mixing, the NPs and/or graphene sheets are surface functionalized to enhance the processability of the resulting products. The conjugated graphene sheets can readily be functionalized by non-covalent π–π stacking or covalent C–C coupling reactions. The functionalization of graphene and/or NPs significantly enhances their solubility and hence broadens the opportunities for the preparation of graphene-based composites. However, post immobilization may suffer from low density and non-uniform coverage of nanostructures by graphene sheets. In this review the in situ methods for the preparation of metal and metal oxide decorated graphene-based nanocomposites will be discussed in some detail. In the following paragraphs we describe the most recent methods for the synthesis of graphene-based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites by in situ methods, i.e. by the simultaneous reduction of graphite oxide (GO) or graphene oxide (GRO) and the respective metal salts. Readers interested in details of the post immobilization methods (e.g. materials used for the functionalization and the preparation of functionalized graphene based metal nanocomposites) can consult excellent reviews by Yang or Shi and co-workers.177–181
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the binding mechanisms of nanoparticles (NPs) onto HRG sheets. The NPs can be loaded onto HRG sheets in two different ways by in situ or ex situ binding. A high density of NPs can be achieved via in situ binding. Both HRG sheets and NPs can be functionalized either via non-covalent π–π stacking or covalent C–C coupling reactions. 
Methods for the preparation of graphene based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites by in situ chemical reduction of metal precursors such as HAuCl4, AgNO3, K2PtCl4, and H2PdCl6 with reductants like hydrazine hydrate, amines, and NaBH4 are more common and widely applied.182 For instance, HRG/Au nanocomposites were prepared by reduction of HAuCl4 with NaBH4183 and graphene-based bimetallic HRG/Pt/Pd nanocomposites were synthesized by in situ reduction of H2PdCl4 and K2PtCl4 with HCOOH and ascorbic acid.184 In another example, Ji et al., in their recent work, have described a facile method for the preparation of HRG/Co nanocomposites and also demonstrated their magnetic properties.185 Cobalt (Co) NPs with a size of ca. 3 nm were densely and homogeneously deposited onto graphene sheets by in situ hydrazine hydrate reduction in ethylene glycol. Nanocomposites of HRG/Ag were synthesized by a green, cost-effective single-pot method, where the in situ reduction of AgNO3 and GO was carried out in aqueous solution using tannic acid (water-soluble polyphenol) as a reducing agent.186 The resulting material exhibited excellent SERS (Surface Enhance Raman Scattering) activity as a SERS substrate, and notable catalytic performance for the reduction of H2O2.
Apart from metallic and bimetallic NPs, the composites of metal oxides with graphene have been synthesized by in situ chemical reduction.187,188 Kim et al. prepared HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites as anode materials, by the reduction of GO and cobalt acetate ((C2H3O2)2Co·4H2O) in deionized water (DI) with NH4OH and hydrazine as reductants.189 The homogeneous HRG dispersion provides nucleation sites for Co3O4 NPs, resulting in a uniform growth of small (∼5 nm) Co3O4 NPs on the conductive surface of HRG sheets. In addition, the HRG layers act as a mechanical buffer that accommodates a large volume change of Co3O4 NPs and inhibits their isolation. Similarly, HRG/SnO2 and ternary HRG/SnO2–Au nanocomposites were prepared by in situ chemical reduction, and they could find applications as anode materials in lithium-ion batteries as well.190 HRG/SnO2/Au hybrid materials were prepared from an aqueous dispersion of GO and SnCl2. The key step of the synthesis is that SnCl2 acts as a source of tin and as a reducing agent for both GO and HAuCl4 in a sonication-assisted process, which also has the potential for preparing other multicomponent nanocomposites starting from different metal salts.
Apart from this, MWI is also widely applied for the synthesis of graphene-based nanocomposites.191,192 Particularly, the preparation of HRG/metal nanoparticle (NP) composites by simultaneous (in situ) reduction of various metal salts and GO is highly effective. Hassan et al. demonstrated that HRG/NP composites can be obtained by a scalable microwave-assisted chemical reduction.193 This method allows a rapid chemical reduction of GO with a variety of reducing agents in aqueous and organic media; the simultaneous reduction of GO and metal salts leads to the formation of metallic and bimetallic NPs supported on graphene sheets. HRG/NP composites of Cu, Pd, Au, and Ag have been prepared by in situ reduction of GO and appropriate metal salts (HAuCl4, Pd nitrate) with reducing agents like hydrazine hydrate, ammonium hydroxide, or ethylenediamine by MWI. Such in situ reductions have produced homogeneous dispersions of NPs on HRG sheets due to the specific interaction between the NPs and graphene sheets, different from the aggregates of the NPs with poor dispersion on HRG sheets obtained by physical mixing.
Additionally, in situ MWI has been used to prepare HRG/metal oxide and metal sulfide nanocomposites such as HRG/MnO2, HRG/ZnO and HRG/ZnS.194 In the latter case, the reaction was carried out in aqueous medium assisted by MWI. The HRG sheets act not only as a precursor of graphene but also as a template for the growth of ZnS nanospheres.160 Recently, MWI combined with an ionic liquid (IL) assisted dispersion of NPs on HRG sheets, e.g. in the synthesis of HRG/PdPt NPs composites, has been reported.195 MWI has attracted attention due to its ease of processing and scalable production. Moreover, due to the rapid and uniform heating, MWI prevents the aggregation of graphene layers. A major drawback is the difficulty in controlling the size, uniformity and surface distribution of NPs on HRG surfaces.
Hydrothermal and solvothermal reduction processes have been applied for the synthesis of graphene-based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites.196–198 Previously, HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites were prepared in an ethanol–water mixture under hydrothermal conditions. In a recent report Shen et al. used glucose as an eco-friendly reductant.199 It has been speculated that under hydrothermal conditions the reducing ability of glucose may be enhanced as it was found to yield highly reduced suspensions of graphene (HRG) in a way comparable to those obtained with hydrazine. The reduction process was accompanied by the formation of HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites, where the photocatalytic ability of TiO2 was enhanced by the interaction between HRG and TiO2. The preparation of magnetic HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites by an in situ hydrothermal reduction was reported.209 Li et al. prepared nanocomposites by simultaneous formation of Fe3O4 NPs and reduction of GO in ethylene glycol.200 Ferric acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) was used as a precursor for the preparation of Fe3O4 nanoparticles, which were uniformly assembled in a 3D pattern on HRG sheets while their loading could be controlled by altering the Fe3+ starting concentration. In order to have better control over the morphology of NPs on the surface of HRG sheets during the reduction process, ionic liquids (ILs) were applied that are commonly used as solvents, reactants, and templates for the synthesis of inorganic nanomaterials with novel morphologies and improved properties.201 In their recent work Shen et al. described a one-pot hydrothermal method to prepare HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites using GO, tetrabutyl titanate and [BMIM][PF6] ionic liquid as starting materials.201 Here, GO was reduced in situ with ascorbic acid in the presence of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ([BMIM][PF6]) under pressure. The hydrothermal conditions not only favored the reduction of GO but also facilitated the generation of TiO2 NPs in the presence of ILs.
From the results discussed above, it becomes clear that graphene and graphene-based materials can be prepared on a large scale with very satisfactory structure and properties by top-down methods. There are several advantages of these methods. Inexpensive graphite is used as a raw material for the production of graphene like materials (HRG) in high yield, which makes them very cost effective. Graphene or HRG obtained from these methods is highly processable, and can be used for the production of macroscopic structures and devices on a large scale by simple and cheap solution processes. Therefore, these approaches have gained significant attention in the scientific community, and extensive research is still going on in this field. Still, several challenges and questions remain to be answered. It is a challenge to completely remove the functional groups from the surface of HRG, and the restoration of the defects formed during the oxidation process is very difficult. Apart from this, it is difficult to keep the long-range conjugated structure of HRG intact, which is needed to enhance the electrical conductivity. Although the functional groups are relatively easy to remove by reduction, it is a challenge to restore the defects.
Extensive research is required to prepare HRG on an industrial scale, which is similar or close to the structure of single layer graphene obtained by the Scotch tape method. A two-step strategy for the reduction of GO proved to be efficient compared to single-step processes. A combination of chemical reactions and thermal annealing was used here for the effective deoxygenation of GO: the chemical reactions maintained the structure of the carbon plane, while thermal annealing facilitated the desorption of functional groups.202 In order to fully exploit these methods for the large scale synthesis of HRG, a mechanistic understanding of the reduction is needed. So far, much research has been performed using computer simulations at the molecular level. Experimental research is required to fully understand the mechanism of GO reduction. Additionally, most of the defects in HRG are formed during the oxidation process; therefore, controlling the oxidation of graphite is also a key step in obtaining non-defective HRG.
3 Properties and applications
In the last few decades, huge efforts have been made to synthesize composites of graphene with inorganic NPs, mostly based on transition metal and metal oxide NPs.31,32 A lack of knowledge in graphene chemistry prevented a significant advancement of this field for a long time. However, the advent of methods for the preparation of stable and homogeneous dispersions of graphene on a large scale has changed the scenario. In particular, tremendous interest has been generated in making graphene-based nanocomposites and exploring them for different applications.203 The majority of graphene-based nanocomposites are comprised of only two components, but multicomponent composites have been prepared for special applications as well.32 Although a variety of second components have been involved, the architectures of graphene based composites can be classified into three types:31 (i) composites, graphene sheets form a continuous phase and act as a substrate for supporting a second component, which adheres to graphene sheets. (ii) These second components are typically an inorganic nanoparticle (e.g. metals, metal oxide, or and CNTs); occasionally polymeric nanostructures have been applied.29,204 (iii) Graphene sheets act as nano-fillers, incorporated into the continuous matrix of the second component.205 In type II composites, both HRG sheets and the second component act as continuous phases. An example could be graphene-based composite films fabricated via layer-by-layer self-assembly of individual components.206,207
The following sections are organized in such a way that the most common applications of graphene/metallic NP based nanocomposites, such as energy storage, sensing, catalysis, are discussed. For each individual application the discussion, which is focused mostly on type I composites, follows the sequence from group 4 to group 12 of the periodic table (cf.Table 1).
Table 1 Typical synthetic method and the type of precursor used for the preparation of graphene supported nanocomposites based on metal and metal oxide NPs belonging to group 4 to 12 of the periodic table, and their related applications




Materials
Synthetic routes
Precursors
Applications
References




TiO2/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–NH4TiF6
Photocatalytic activity

437




Ex situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–TiCl4
Photocatalytic activity

599




In situ preparation: thermal hydrolysis
GO–titania peroxo complex (ethyl glycol)
Photocatalytic activity

600




In situ preparation: sol–gel method
GO–tetra butyl titanate (sodium borohydrate)
Photocatalytic activity

601




In situ preparation: sonochemical synthesis
GO–TiCl4
Photocatalytic activity

602




In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis



Photocatalytic activity

603




In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis
GO–tetra butyl titanate
Photocatalytic activity

604




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–titanium isopropoxide (hydrazine hydrate)
Electrochemical sensor and biosensor

379



Self-assembly method (template free)
GO–TiSO4
Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity

220




In- situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis


Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity

605




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (ionic liquid-assisted)
GO–tetrabutyl titanate [BMIM][PF6] (ascorbic acid)



606



ZrO2/HRG

Ex situ: electrochemical deposition
GO–ZrOCl2 (sodium borohydrate)
Electrochemical sensing

477




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis

GO–ZrO(NO3)2·3H2O
Supercapacitors

315



V2O5/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–V2O5
Cathode material in LIBs

225




Ex situ mixing: electrochemical synthesis
GO–V2O5·nH2O (H2O2)
Cathode material in LIBs

227




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis
GO–(NH4)2V6O16
Cathode material in LIBs

157




In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis
GO–vanadium oxy triisopropoxide
Supercapacitors

316



Nb2O5/HRG




Photocatalytic activity

444



InNbO4/HRG

Ex situ mixing: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–In(NO)3·5H2O–NbCl5
Photocatalytic activity

446



Sr2Ta2O7−xNx/HRG

Ex situ mixing: photo-induced synthesis
GO–Sr2Ta2O7 (sodium borohydride)
Photocatalytic hydrogen production

447



Ta/HRG/MgO

Ex situ deposition: electrochemical deposition


Biosensor

607



MoO3/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Na2MoO4·2H2O



228



WO3/HRG

In situ preparation: photo-irradiation (UV-assisted)
GO–SrWO4
Gas sensing

483




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis



Photochemical conversion

608



MnO2/HRG

In situ preparation: microwave irradiation
GO–KmNO4
Supercapacitors

321




In situ deposition: electrodeposition
GO–Mn(CH3COO)2
Supercapacitors

322




Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis

GO–KxMnO2
Supercapacitors

609




Ex situ deposition: electrostatic co-precipitation method
GO–Mn(NO3)2 (hydrazine hydrate)
Supercapacitors

610



MnO2/HRG/CNT

Ex situ deposition: electrodeposition
GO–Mn(NO3)2–SWCNT
Supercapacitors

611



MnO2/HRG

Ex situ deposition: ultrafiltration method
GO–KMNO4
Anode material in LIBs

238




In situ preparation: redox-like method
GO–KMNO4
Water purification

543



Mn3O4/HRG

Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis
GO–MnO2 organosol
Supercapacitors

242




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–MnAc2·4H2O
Supercapacitors

327




In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis
GO–MnAc2·4H2O
Supercapacitors

612




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Mn(CH3COO)2
Anode material in LIBs

613




In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis

Mn(COOH)2·4H2O
Catalyst

544



Fe/HRG

In situ preparation: thermal synthesis
GO–FeCl3·6H2O
Anode material in LIBs

246



Fe3O4/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–FeCl3·6H2O (hydrazine hydrate)
Anode material in LIBs

252




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Fe powder
Anode material in LIBs

614




In situ preparation: sol–gel synthesis (microwave-assisted)
GO–Fe(acac)3(benzyl alcohol)
Anode material in LIBs

615




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–ferric citrate
Anode material in LIBs

616




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O
Supercapacitors

329




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–Cu catalyzed
Adsorber material

546




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–FeCl3, FeCl2
Adsorber material

548




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–FeCl3
Cellular magnetic resonance imaging

585




In situ preparation: chemical precipitation
GO–FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O
Targeted drug delivery

617




In situ preparation: chemical precipitation
GO–FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O
Sensors

590



Fe3O4/HRG/CNT

In situ preparation



Targeted drug delivery

618



Fe2O3/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–FeCl3·6H2O
Anode material in LIBs

619




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (microwave-assisted)
GO–FeCl3 and NH4H2PO4
Anode material in LIBs

259




In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis
GO–FeCl3 (hydrazine hydrate)
Anode material in LIBs

260




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Fe(NO3)3
Supercapacitors

620




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis
GO–Fe(CO)5
Adsorber material

550




In situ preparation: chemical hydrolysis
GO–FeCl3·6H2O
Tribological activities

591



LiFePO4/HRG

Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis (spray-drying and annealing)
GO–H3PO4 and LiOH (H2O2)
Cathode material in LIBs

263



RuO2/HRG

In situ preparation: sol–gel method (annealing assisted)
GO–RuCl3
Supercapacitors

337




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–RuCl3
Supercapacitors

338



Co3O4/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis


ORR Catalysts in lithium–air batteries

267




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis
GO–CoCl2·6H2O (NaBH4)
Anode material in LIBs

266




In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis
GO–CoSO4·7H2O
Anode material in LIBs

270




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–(C2H3O2)2Co·4H2O (NH2NH2)
Anode material in LIBs

189




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis
GO–CoC2O4
Supercapacitors

341




In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis
GO–Co(NO3)2·6H2O
Supercapacitors

340




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Co(C2H3O2)2
Catalyst (ORR & OER)

393



CoO/HRG

In situ preparation: ultrasonic synthesis
GO–Co4(CO)12
Anode material in LIBs

276




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis
GO–Co(acac)3
Anode material in LIBs

275



Co@graphite/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical Vapor deposition
GO–Co(NO3)2·6H2O



621



Co/HRG

In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (pyrolysis)
GO–cobalt phthalocyanine (NH2NH2)
Anode material in LIBs

268




In situ preparation: mechanical ball milling
GO-
Hydrogen storage

281



Co–Al LDH/HRG

Ex situ mixing: self-assembly
GO–CoCl2·6H2O, AlCl3·6H2O
Supercapacitor

344




Ex situ mixing: layer-by-layer assembly
GO–CoCl2·6H2O, AlCl3·6H2O
Supercapacitor

345



CoFe2O4/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O, FeCl3·6H2O
Adsorbent material

622



Rh/HRG

In situ preparation: sonochemical synthesis
GO–RhCl3·xH2O (NaBH4)
Catalytic activity

461



NiO/HRG

In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (multi-step process)
GO–Ni(NO3)2
Supercapacitor

352




Ex situ deposition: electrochemical deposition
HRG–Ni(OH)2
Supercapacitor

353




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (self-assembly)
GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O
Supercapacitor

354




In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (liquid-phase deposition)
GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O
Anode material in LIBs

289




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O
Anode material in LIBs

287




Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis (Doctor blade method)
GO–NiCl2
Solar cells

382



Ni(OH)2/HRG

In situ preparation: solid-state synthesis (mechanically assisted)
GO–Ni(C2O4)·H2O
Supercapacitor

360




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O
Pseudocapacitor

356




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Ni foam
Supercapacitor

623




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis (deposition)
GO–Ni(NO3)2 (NaBH4)
Anode material in LIBs

290



Ni(OH)2/HRG

Ex situ deposition: electrochemical deposition

HRG–Ni2SO4
Sensors

624



Ni-AL LDH/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Al(NO3)2·9H2O (glucose)
Supercapacitor

363



NiCo2O4/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (microwave-assisted)
GO-
Sensing application

625



Pd/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–H2PdCl4
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs

397




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–H2PdCl4
Electrocatalyst in DFAFCs

398




In situ preparation: electrochemical synthesis

GO
Electrocatalyst in DEFCs

401




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (microwave-assisted)

GO–PdNO3 (hydrazine)
Catalytic activity for C–C coupling

468






In situ preparation: electrochemical synthesis

GO–Pd(CH3COO)2 (hydrazine)
Biosensor

506



PdPt/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–Na2PtCl6 and Na2PdCl4 (ethylene glycol)
Electrocatalyst for ORR

626



Pt/HRG

In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition
GO–H2PtCl6 + 10 mM KH2PO4
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs

411




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 (NaBH4)
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs

412




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6·H2O (hydrazine hydrate)
Electrocatalyst for ORR

425




In situ preparation: layer-by-layer self-assembly
GO–H2PtCl6
Counter electrode in solar cells

384




In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 (ethylene glycol)
Biosensor for H2O2

508




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6·6H2O (NaBH4)
Biosensor for cholesterol

511



Pt–Ru/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6·H2O + RuCl3
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs

415



Pt–Ru/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 + RuCl3
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs and DEFCs

416




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 + RuCl3
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs

414



Pt–Au/HRG

Ex situ preparation: electrodeposition
GO–H2PtCl6·6H2O (hydrazine hydrate)
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs and ORR

418




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 + HAuCl4 (NaBH4)
Electrocatalyst in DFAFCs

421




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 + HAuCl4 (ethylene glycol)
Electrocatalyst in DFAFCs

422



Pt–Pd/HRG

In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition
GO–PdCl2 + H2PtCl6 (hydrazine hydrate)
Electrocatalyst in DEFCs

417



Pt–Ni/HRG

In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition
GO–NiSO4·6H2O + H2PtCl6·6H2O (hydrazine hydrate)
Biosensor for glucose

512



Pt3Co/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–H2PtCl6 + CoCl2 (ethylene glycol)
Electrocatalyst for ORR

627



Pt/TiO2/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–TiCl3 + H2PtCl6·6H2O (NaBH4)
Catalyst for NB hydrogenation

471



Cu/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–CuSO4·5H2O (KBH4)
Biosensor for carbohydrates

515




Ex situ preparation: potentiostatic deposition
GO–CuSO4 (hydrazine monohydrate)
Biosensor for glucose

516



Cu2O/HRG

Ex situ preparation: physical adsorption
HRG–Cu2O NPs
Biosensor for H2O2

517




In situ preparation: ultrasound-assisted synthesis
GO–Cu(CH3COO)2 (glucose)
Anode material in LIBs

299




In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition
GO–CuSO4
Solar cells

386




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–CuSO4 (ascorbic acid)
Photocatalytic activity

628




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–Cu(OH)2 (glucose)
Adsorbent material

629



CuO/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–Cu(NO3)2·H2O (ethylene glycol)
Biosensor for glucose

518




In situ preparation: microwave assisted synthesis
GO–(Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O)
Anode material in LIBs

630




In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
GO–Cu(CH3COO)2 (hydrazine hydrate)
Anode material in LIBs

293




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–Cu(OAc)2·H2O
Catalyst for NH4ClO4 decomposition

631



Ag/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–AgNO3 (GO functional groups)
SERS substrate

186




In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis
GO–AgNO3
Anti-bacterial activity

632




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–AgNO3 (tannic acid)
Biosensor for glucose and H2O2

520




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–CH3COOAg (NaBH4)
Electrocatalyst in DMFCs

633




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
GO–AgNO3 (hydrazine hydrate)
Supercapacitor

634




In situ preparation: photochemical synthesis
GO–AgNO3
Catalyst for 2-nitroaniline preparation

451



Ag/graphene oxide

Ex situ preparation: self assembly
GO–AgNO3
Anti-bacterial activity

597



Ag/AgX/graphene oxide

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis (surfactant-assisted assembly)
GO–AgNO3
Photocatalyst for pollutant degradation

450



Ag/TiO2/SiO2/HRG

In situ preparation: biomimetic synthesis
GO (lysozome)
Photocatalyst

635



Au/HRG

In situ preparation: electrochemical synthesis

GO–AuCl4
Biosensor

529




Ex situ preparation: layer-by-layer self-assembly

HRG–HAuCl4 (hydrazine)
Electrochemical sensor for dopamine

533



Au/HRG

In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–HAuCl4 (sodium citrate)
Electrochemical sensor for epinephrine

538




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–HAuCl4 (sodium citrate)
Electrochemical sensor for levofloxacin

491




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–HAuCl4·3H2O (hexamethylenetetramine)
Electrocatalytic application

493



ZnO/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis

GO
Photocatalytic activity

636




In situ preparation: atomic layer deposition

GO
Anode material in LIBs

637




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO–ZnCl2 (NaOH)
Photocatalytic activity

458




In situ preparation: ultrasonication-assisted synthesis

GO–Zn
Photocurrent generation

496




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

HRG–zinc benzoate dihydra–zinate complex
Antibacterial activity

540




In situ preparation: microwave assisted synthesis

GO–ZnSO4·7H2O (NaOH)
Supercapacitor

368



ZnFe2O4/HRG

In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis

GO
Photocatalytic activity

559



CdS/HRG

Ex situ preparation: layer-by-layer self-assembly

HRG–CdS quantum dots
Photocatalytic activity

638




In situ preparation: chemical synthesis

GO
Photochemical sensor

639





3.1 Energy storage and conversion
The development of alternative strategies for the production of clean energy is one of the biggest challenges for the scientific community. Due to the increasing global warming, air pollution and growing environmental concerns, the efforts directed towards the development of energy storage and energy conversion devices with high energy densities and power densities have increased tremendously.208 Graphene-based metallic nanocomposites have gained immense popularity in the field of electrochemical energy storage.209 Because of their physico-chemical properties such as high thermal and chemical stability, large surface area, excellent electrical conductivity and superior thermal and mechanical properties, graphene-based materials have been exploited as electrode materials in electrical energy storage devices.210 Additionally, their broad potential range and rich surface chemistry have allowed customizing the properties of storage devices.211 Therefore, graphene-based metallic, bimetallic and metal oxide nanocomposites have found wide applications in energy storage and energy conversion devices, such as lithium ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors, fuel and solar cells.212

3.1.1 Lithium ion batteries (LIBs). 
The performance of LIBs is largely dependent on the physical and chemical properties of cathode and anode materials.213 Due to its large theoretical lithium storage capacity of 372 mA h g−1, graphite is commercially used as an anode material. However, such storage capacity is not sufficient for the requirement of high energy capacity, which sparked the search for other alternative anode materials. Although the theoretical lithium storage capacity (744 mA h g−1) of a single graphene layer is much higher than that of graphite its practical applications in LIBs face severe limitations due its natural tendency for stacking. The incorporation of metal and metal oxide NPs with high specific capacity into graphene not only inhibits the aggregation of graphene layers but also enhances its lithium storage capacity.214
TiO2 has long been targeted in high-performance lithium ion batteries (LIBs). In particular, mesoporous anatase NPs and carbon-coated TiO2 nanoparticles facilitate rapid ion diffusion and increase the conductivity of bulk materials.215–217 Several HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites with enhanced lithium storage capabilities compared to pure TiO2 have been reported.218,219 Recently, Li et al. described a simple one-pot, template-free self-assembly route to prepare well-dispersed mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanospheres on graphene sheets.220 The uniform TiO2 nanospheres with a size of ca. 100 nm act as pillars and effectively separate graphene sheets from each other. Unlike the conventional mesoporous anatase particles which are polycrystalline, these mesoporous anatase nanospheres on graphene sheets are single crystalline, with each nanosphere containing wormhole-like pores with a relatively uniform size of ca. 4 nm. Compared to reference TiO2, the composite shows a substantial improvement of the lithium specific capacity of 97 mA h g−1 at a rate of 50 C, which is 6 times higher than that of TiO2. Apart from TiO2, the other group 4 elements (Zr, Hf) did not show applications in LIBs.
Moving further in the periodic table, vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) has found prominent applications as a cathode material in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) due to its layered structure, wide occurrence in nature and its high energy densities.221 However, the diffusion coefficient of lithium ions and moderate electrical conductivity of V2O5 hampered its intercalation capacity and rate capacity in practical applications. The diffusion capabilities can be enhanced by the nano-scaled formulation of V2O5 (nanobelts, nanowires, nanoscrolls and nanorods), whereas improving the electrical conductivity of V2O5 requires the support of conductive carbon materials such as CNTs and graphene.222 To this end, a number of graphene-supported V2O5 nanocomposites have been reported.223–225 A HRG/V2O5 nanocomposite prepared under hydrothermal conditions by Liu et al. exhibited excellent electrochemical properties.226 The simultaneous assembly of ultralong 1D V2O5 nanowires on the surface of 2D HRG sheets during the in situ reaction inhibited the restacking of HRG sheets. The as-prepared HRG/V2O5 nanocomposites have shown a high performance for lithium ion storage, providing a high discharge capacity and improved rate capability, when applied as a cathode material. The nanocomposite exhibited an initial specific discharge capacity of 412 mA h g−1 at a lower current density of 50 mA g−1. When the current density was increased to 1600 mA g−1, the composite still delivered a capacity of 316 mA h g−1. This excellent performance of the HRG/V2O5 nanocomposite is attributed to the unique morphology of V2O5 nanowires with a short diffusion pathway for lithium ions and a higher electrical conductivity of HRG sheets.
Apart from 1D nanowires thin 2D graphene-like nanoribbons of V2O5 have been incorporated into graphene sheets, as the layer-structured vanadium pentoxide is an excellent host for lithium ion intercalation.227 Among the V2O5 phases the amorphous hydrated form of V2O5 (V2O5·nH2O) has a higher intercalation capacity than the crystalline one. The nanocomposites of HRG/V2O5·nH2O with different ratios of 2D V2O5·nH2O xerogel ribbons and graphene sheets were prepared by stacking two components. The amount of graphene in the composites played an important role in their structure and morphology and the resulting electrochemical properties. Increasing the graphene content in the composites resulted in better cycling stability when the composites were tested as cathodes in different voltage ranges for LIBs. Furthermore, the phase transformation of HRG/V2O5·nH2O nanocomposites moved towards higher temperature compared to pristine V2O5·nH2O, as the thermal stability of the sample is enhanced by the presence of graphene.
For group 6 metals, molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) is one of the most important layered materials and n-type metal oxide semiconductor that has attracted attention for photochromic and eletrochromic devices and energy storage.228 Very recently, it has been found that HRG/MoO3 nanocomposites synthesized by self-assembly (graphene encapsulated α-MoO3 nanoribbons) exhibit an excellent high specific capacitance and enhanced discharge capacity.229 Yang et al. have reported the hydrothermal synthesis of high-quality HRG/MoO3 nanocomposites using inexpensive inorganic salts (NaCl) as capping agents.228 The composite exhibits a combination of stacked HRG sheets and uniform MoO3 nanobelts. MoO3 belts with a diameter of 200–300 nm were obtained by the controlled use of NaCl as a capping agent. In addition, nanocomposites of HRG with other Mo derivatives such as MoS2 (molybdenum sulfide), MoN (molybdenum nitride) and GO-based MoO2 nanocomposites find application in LIBs or for hydrogen evolution.230–236
Moreover, due to the high theoretical capacity (1232 mA h g−1) of MnO2 (based on heterogeneous Li2O and Mn metal conversion reactions) HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites have attracted attention for application in LIBs as anode materials.203,237 Yu et al. have prepared free-standing layer-by-layer assembled hybrid HRG/MnO2 films by ultra-filtration and studied their use as anodes for LIBs.238 The hybrid material was comprised of ∼1 μm long single crystalline MnO2 nanotubes grown on HRG sheets with an average thickness of 1–2 nm. The adequate contact of graphene sheets with MnO2 nanotubes provides a fast electron pathway with 2-D electron conducting behavior between MnO2 nanotubes. In addition, the nanostructured thin film (∼10 μm) shortens the diffusion path length for fast lithium ion transport into the electrode to enhance directly the power rating of the external circuit. HRG/MnO2 composite films as an anode material exhibited excellent cycle and rate capabilities with a reversible specific capacity based on an electrode composite mass of 495 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 40 cycles with current rates from 100 to 1600 mA g−1.
Among the manganese oxides Mn3O4 has been studied as an anode material for LIBs aimed at achieving higher specific capacities than graphite.239 The capacity of Mn3O4 has been significantly enhanced by the support of conducting substrates such as CNTs and graphene.240,241 In their effort to enhance the capacity of Mn3O4 Wang et al. have prepared HRG/Mn3O4 hybrid materials in a two-step solution phase process.242 The HRG/Mn3O4 nanocomposite is comprised of ∼10–20 nm large and well-crystallized Mn3O4 NPs uniformly distributed on HRG sheets. The hybrid material showed an unprecedented high capacity of ∼900 mA h g−1 based on the mass (∼810 mA h g−1 based on the total mass of the hybrid) with good rate capability and cycling stability, which is attributed to the intimate interaction between graphene substrates and Mn3O4 NPs. In addition, mixed metal oxides of manganese have been tested as anode materials in LIBs. For instance, in the HRG/Mn2Mo3O8 nanocomposite reported by Sun et al. the nanohybrids are composed of HRG-wrapped secondary microspheres of ∼3–5 μm in diameter that are built from many Mn2Mo3O8 nanosheets with a thickness of 10–15 nm and width of 80–120 nm.243
In group 8 ferromagnetic Fe and magnetic iron oxide NPs have potential applications in energy storage devices including LIBs.244 The most important studies have been conducted on graphene-based nanocomposites of iron oxides (e.g. Fe2O3 and Fe3O4). However, studies on HRG/Fe composites are rare.245 In a recent study, graphene-encapsulated iron microspheres (GEIMs) have been synthesized by heating graphene oxide nanosheets and FeCl3.246 They contain 68.32% of carbon and 28.32% of Fe with no traces of oxygen, confirming the unoxidized state of the Fe core due to graphene coating.
In addition to Fe, magnetic iron oxide NPs like Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 have been exploited as anode materials for LIBs due to their high theoretical capacities (∼1005 mA h g−1 and 926 mA h g−1, respectively).247,248 However, the ability of Fe3O4 NPs as electrode materials has been affected greatly due to the large volume change and severe particle aggregation during the electrochemical cycling process, which ultimately leads to a high irreversible capacity loss and poor cycling stability.249 Nevertheless, the electrochemical properties of Fe3O4 NPs have been improved considerably over the last couple of years by using the support of graphene.250,251 For instance, the HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites recently developed by Su et al. exhibit high reversible capacity, improved cyclic performance and excellent rate capability compared to pristine Fe3O4 NPs.252 The as-prepared HRG/Fe3O4 electrode maintains a reversible capacity of 1102 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, whereas that of the Fe3O4 electrode rapidly drops from 1011 to 193 mA h g−1. Furthermore, the reversible capacity of the hybrid electrode is still as high as 474 mA h g−1, even at a higher current density of 1600 mA g−1, which is in sharp contrast to that of an electrode from pure Fe3O4 NPs that decays to nearly zero under similar conditions. In other studies, specific capacities of more than 1200 mA h g−1 have been achieved for HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites prepared via different methods, including the hydrothermal method. HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites prepared by ultrasonically assisted co-precipitation have a specific capacity of 1280 mA h g−1 at 0.1 C cycling and 860 mA h g−1 at a 4 C rate, compared to a specific capacity of 1257 mA h g−1 of hybrids synthesized under hydrothermal conditions.253,254
Although some achievements have been made for HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites, the aggregation of Fe3O4 NPs and graphene sheets during the synthesis process remains a challenge for the development of high capacity electrodes based on HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites.249,254 The electrochemical properties of HRG/Fe3O4 electrodes are affected by the inaccessibility of the active material to the surface of HRG because of their zero-dimensional (0D) nature. Recently, three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical nanocomposites have been synthesized, where flowerlike Fe3O4 NPs are homogeneously encapsulated in graphene sheets.255 Such a dimensional confinement of Fe3O4 nanoflowers by the surrounding graphene nanosheets limits the effect of volume expansion upon lithium insertion. In addition, the 3D nature of Fe3O4 NPs allows better contact with graphene sheets in the HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposite, which serve as a diluting agent to prevent the aggregation of Fe3O4 NPs. Graphene nanosheets also provide a highly conductive network for electron transfer from the anchored nanoflowers within the whole electrode. This enhances the electrical conductivity of the HRG/Fe3O4 electrodes. The hybrid material (60 wt% of Fe3O4 in the composites) exhibits a stable capacity of ∼605 mA h g−1 with a stability of up to 50 cycles in the voltage range of 0.001–3.0 V. In another approach to solve the problem of volume change in HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites, Chen et al. prepared graphene-encapsulated ordered aggregates of Fe3O4 NPs with a spherical geometry and hollow interior by self-assembly.249 The composite exhibited an excellent and stable specific capacity of 900 mA h g−1 for up to 50 cycles. Even after 90 cycles of charge and discharge at different current densities, a specific capacity of 832 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 was achieved, indicating a recoverability of about 92% of the initial capacity.
The electrochemical properties of Fe2O3 have been affected by similar problems, which were improved by the incorporation of graphene.256,257 In addition, Fe2O3 electrodes are inclined to lose electrical contact and structural integrity during repetitive cycling at high charge and discharge rates. In an effort to enhance the electrical contact and to maintain the structural integrity of Fe2O3 electrodes Zhou et al. prepared HRG/Fe2O3 core–shell nanocomposites by complete coating of Fe2O3 NPs with a graphene shell.258 The graphene-wrapped rose-like porous Fe2O3 NPs showed a high reversible capacity, enhanced rate capability and improved cycling stability with respect to pristine α-Fe2O3 when tested as an anode material in LIBs. The specific capacity of the HRG/Fe2O3 core–shell nanocomposite at a rate of 5 C and 10 C was 269 mA h g−1 and 143 mA h g−1, respectively, which is 34 times higher than that of bare α-Fe2O3 NPs (8 mA h g−1 at a rate of 5 C. Pristine α-Fe2O3 cannot store charges at a rate of 10 C).
Zou et al. prepared HRG/Fe2O3 nanocomposites that also showed suitability as an anode material in LIBs.259 The nanocomposite is comprised of uniformly distributed 150–200 nm long Fe2O3 rice-like NPs, which were obtained with phosphate anions as an additive. The tailored nanocomposite exhibited a high reversible capacity of 1184 mA h g−1 upon cycling and excellent rate capabilities at large currents: at a large current of 1000 mA g−1 it showed an initial reversible capacity of 825 mA h g−1. A high capacity of 582 mA h g−1 could be retained even after 100 cycles. The synergetic effect due to better contact between the two components of HRG/Fe2O3 rice-on-sheet nanocomposites led to an improvement of their electrochemical properties. In another study HRG/Fe2O3 nanocomposites exhibited first discharge and charge capacities of 1693 and 1227 mA h g−1, respectively, at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and also showed a good capacity retention with 1027 mA h g−1 after the 50th discharge.260
In addition to graphene-based nanocomposites of Fe3O4 and Fe2O3 NPs hybrids of graphene and other iron-based materials such as LiFePO4 have been applied in LIBs.261,262 Zhou et al. applied HRG/LiFePO4 nanocomposites as a cathode material in LIBs, which showed excellent high rate capability and cycling stability, delivering a capacity of 70 mA h g−1 at 60 C discharge rate and showed a capacity decay rate of <15% when cycled under 10 C charging and 20 C discharging 1000 times.263 The composite was prepared with LiFePO4 NPs and graphene nanosheets by spray-drying and annealing; the NPs were embedded in micro-sized spherical secondary particles and wrapped homogeneously and loosely with a graphene 3D network.
Among the group 9 elements only graphene-based nanocomposites of cobalt oxides have been reported. They are applied as electrode materials in energy storage systems including LIBs and supercapacitors due to their excellent electrochemical properties such as high specific capacity (890 mA h g−1), good cycling and high rate performance.264,265 However, the large volume change (expansion/contraction) during the cycling process due to the pulverization and aggregation of cobalt oxide NPs leads to a deterioration of the electric contact between the particles. The support of highly conductive graphene reduces the aggregation of cobalt oxide NPs, whereas the highly active surface area of graphene significantly enhances the lithium storage capacity and cycling performance of the hybrid graphene-/cobalt oxide materials.
HRG/cobalt oxide nanocomposites can utilize the combinative merits of nanosized cobalt oxide and graphene to produce LIBs with superior performance.266,267 Yang et al. prepared HRG/Co3O4 hybrids via co-assembly between negatively charged GRO and positively charged cobalt oxide NPs in a process driven by the mutual electrostatic interactions of the two species.268 The as-prepared nanocomposites were comprised of electrochemically active Co3O4 NPs encapsulated with highly conductive graphene sheets. They exhibited a reversible capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 during the first 10 cycles and over 1000 mA h g−1 after 130 cycles with excellent cycle performance. Similarly, Co3O4 NPs (ξ ≈ 10–30 nm) were anchored homogeneously on graphene sheets.269 These composites effectively utilized the properties of both the components including conductivity, high surface area, mechanical flexibility as well as large electrode/electrolyte contact area and short path length for Li+ transport to deliver an electrochemical performance with a reversible capacity of 935 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles, cyclic performance, high columbic efficiency (above 98%) and good rate capability. In another instance, extremely small Co3O4 (∼5 nm) NPs were uniformly grown on highly conductive graphene nanosheets in an in situ reduction process.189 In this case, the electrochemical performance delivered by the as-prepared nanocomposites is attributed to their unique nanostructure with a reversible capacity of 778 mA h g−1 with a Coulumbic efficiency of 97% after 42 cycles, where graphene sheets act as a buffer to mitigate the large volume change of Co3O4 NPs in the charge–discharge process.
Although HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites exhibit good electrochemical performance compared to their pristine components, it is more likely that Co3O4 NPs tend to aggregate more easily into larger particles during the charge–discharge process, which will limit the ion/electron transportation and further affect the reversible lithium storage capacity. The multi-dimensional nature of the NPs enhances the gap between graphene layers more due to their larger aspect ratio, compared to simply spherical NPs. To this end, the synthesis of HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites containing Co3O4 nano/microrods is intriguing because the unique structure of Co3O4 NPs prevents particle aggregation and therefore leads to an excellent electrochemical performance of the nanocomposites.270 The as-prepared nanocomposite exhibits improved cycling stability, remarkably high reversible lithium storage capacity and superior rate capability compared to the previously reported HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites (∼1310 mA h g−1 and 1090 mA h g−1 of capacity are retained even after 40 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and 1000 mA g−1 respectively). Similarly, a HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposite, containing Co3O4 nanorods (around 20–40 nm in diameter), showed a reversible capacity of 975 mA h g−1 with an irreversible capacity loss of <3% after 100 cycles.271
Apart from Co3O4 NPs and nanorods, 2D Co3O4 nanosheets, which may show better compatibility and good coverage with 2D graphene nanosheets, have been utilized in the preparation of HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites. For instance, a microwave-assisted synthesis of sheet-on-sheet HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites has been reported by Chen et al. where graphene nanosheets were tightly stacked with 2D porous Co3O4 NPs.272 Each graphene nanosheet in the composite was separated by a few Co3O4 nanosheets with porous Co3O4 nanosheets having a micrometer size and ∼100 nm thickness. Notably, the 2D and porous structure of Co3O4 sheets promoted the fast diffusion of ions, electrons, and electrolytes in the composite that exhibits a very large capacity of 1235 mA h g−1 and superior rate capabilities. Moreover, in order to achieve enhanced electrochemical performances in HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites, the grain size porosity and morphology of Co3O4 nanostructures were optimized.
Zhu et al. tailored the porosity of HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites and the grain size of Co3O4 nanosheets by varying the annealing temperature and gas environment, which directly affected their performance in Li-ion battery electrodes.273 HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites consisting of ultrathin Co3O4 nanowall arrays on graphene sheets were synthesized via pyrolysis of as-prepared α-Co(OH)2/HRG composites. The pores were generated in Co3O4 nanowalls by annealing, where pores with larger diameters were obtained at higher temperatures. Furthermore, under optimized conditions HRG/Co3O4 nanocomposites obtained at 350 °C showed better Li storage performance than hybrids obtained at other temperatures. Among several HRG/Co3O4 electrodes, the one prepared at 350 °C (HRG/Co3O4-350) showed excellent charge–discharge capacities and cycling stabilities with a discharge capacity of 884 mA h g−1 during the second cycle, and a high specific capacity of 673 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a discharge current density of 180 mA g−1.
Cobalt monoxide (CoO) with higher theoretical Li-ion storage capacities (716 mA h g−1) due to its completely reversible electrochemical reaction has attracted special attention for use in lithium ion batteries (LIBs).274,275 Zhu et al. synthesized HRG/CoO nanocomposites under identical conditions except replacing air with argon.273 The as-prepared HRG/CoO-350 electrode comprised ultrathin CoO nanowalls synthesized under controlled conditions and exhibited an optimum electrochemical performance with a capacity of 732 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a discharge current density of 150 mA g−1. Some other examples in this regard with excellent electrochemical performance of CoO hybrids with graphene include the synthesis of HRG/CoO nanocomposites by facile ultrasonic action.276 In these hybrids CoO particles are dispersed uniformly as quantum dots (QDs) with an average diameter of ∼5 nm, where the strong interaction between graphene nanosheets and QDs inhibits aggregation and volume change of CoO during the cycling process. This leads to a short pathway for Li diffusion. Furthermore, the small size of CoO QDs and their high mass loading (60%), which afforded abundant active sites, greatly enhanced the lithium storage capacity. The as-prepared HRG/CoO nanocomposites showed extraordinary performance as an anode material for LIBs, including a high reversible lithium storage capacity of 1592 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, high coulombic efficiency (>95%), excellent cycling stability, and a high rate capability of 1008 mA h g−1 with a total retention of 77.6% after 50 cycles at a current density of 1000 mA g−1.
In addition to cobalt oxides, layered cobalt hydroxides such as Co(OH)2 are also attractive in the field of LIBs because of their large interlayer spacings and their well-defined electrochemical redox activity.277 However, due to an anxiety about “hydrogen” of the hydroxides, Co(OH)2 has attracted limited attention in energy storage systems compared to other cobalt oxides. So far, only a few reports are available on graphene-based Co(OH)2 nanocomposites including a synthesis via chimie douce using Na2S in a water–isopropanol system.278,279 The as-prepared material delivered remarkable electrochemical performance and improved specific capacitance compared to the individual counterparts.277 Apart from cobalt-based materials, some studies were carried out on the incorporation of pristine cobalt NPs into graphene sheets in order to improve the performance of LIBs and other applications.280–282 The high reactivity and strong sensitivity of Co NPs to oxygen greatly inhibit their wider applications.283
In addition to cobalt oxide and cobalt hydroxides, cobalt sulfide is also an excellent electrode material for LIBs. The performance of this material can be further enhanced by incorporating graphene, which not only provides improved conductivity, but also facilitates the mobility of electrons and ions. For this purpose various attempts have been undertaken to synthesize HRG/cobalt sulfide nanocomposites. In a recent study, Co3S4 nanotubes have been successfully grown on the surface of graphene by a facile hydrothermal process.284 Due the enhanced conductivity of the composite by the incorporation of graphene, it has demonstrated an excellent electrochemical performance compared to pristine Co3S4 nanotubes. The nanocomposite showed good cycling stability and a high discharge capacity of 720 mA h g−1 up to 100 cycles with 99.9% coulombic efficiency (cf.Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  (a) PXRD patterns of Co(CO)0.35Cl0.20(OH)1.10, Co3S4, and Co3S4/HRG composites. TEM images of (b) Co(CO)0.35Cl0.20(OH)1.10 wires (the inset is a high-resolution TEM image of Co(CO)0.35Cl0.20(OH)1.10), (c) Co3S4, and (d) Co3S4/HRG composites. (e) HRTEM image (the area enclosed by the dashed lines in the inset shows the location of the HRTEM image) and (f) SAED pattern of Co3S4/HRG composites. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley and Sons.284 
For group 10 metals, nickel oxides including NiO and Ni(OH)2 have been applied as anode materials in LIBs because of their outstanding theoretical capacity.285,286 However, they usually suffer from various problems such as poor cyclic stability, energy density loss, and large voltage hysteresis (when the discharge potential is lower than the charge potential), which have been effectively addressed by the support of graphene in the form of nanocomposites, (HRG/Ni(OH)2 and HRG/NiO).287,288 For instance, Mai et al. demonstrated an improved cycling stability and rate capability of a HRG/NiO hybrid applied as an anode material in LIBs.289 It delivered a capacity of 646.1 mA h g−1 after 35 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, corresponding to an 86.3% capacity retention. In addition, the incorporation of graphene sheets partly reduces the voltage hysteresis due to their lithium storage mechanism, where Li+ ions are intercalated into graphene sheets which are different from bare NiO, where lithium is stored by Li insertion. Graphene incorporation into Ni(OH)2 was reported where the HRG/Ni(OH)2 electrode delivered a high performance with a specific discharge capacity of 507 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles in LIBs.290 This hybrid with a sandwich-like structure facilitated the diffusion, oxidation/reduction and also effectively prevented the aggregation of NPs, which is essential for good cyclic performance.

In group 11, copper oxides such as CuO and Cu2O are often used due to their high theoretical capacity and are promising candidates for anode materials in LIBs.291,292 However, they suffer from a large volume variation during the Li+ insertion/extraction process, which causes severe mechanical strain and rapid capacity decay. Through the support of graphene the breakdown of copper-based anode materials can be prevented, and the stability and capacity of the material can be enhanced.293–295 In one such example, graphene-based copper oxide nanocomposites (HRG/CuO, applied as an anode material for high performance LIBs) exhibit improved cycling and rate performance compared to pure CuO.296 The hybrid electrode delivered a stable reversible capacity of 600 mA h g−1 at a current density of 65 mA g−1 for 100 cycles. In addition, the HRG/CuO composite electrode still exhibited a charge capacity as high as 150 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 6400 mA g−1, where the specific charge capacity of pure CuO is nearly zero. The enhanced performance of the composite is attributed to its special design, where CuO particles are enwrapped by a thin layer of graphene elastic buffer.
P-type cuprous oxide (Cu2O) (due to the presence of copper vacancies) with a band gap of 2.17 eV is also considered a promising material with potential applications in LIBs.297,298 In order to circumvent the typical shortcomings, such as poor cycling and rate performance of Cu2O, HRG/Cu2O composite electrodes with graphite support have shown good cycling and excellent rate performance with a specific capacity of over 400 mA h g−1 at a rate of 100 mA g−1 after 20 cycles, whereas pure Cu2O exhibited 100 mA h g−1 at the same current density (cf.Fig. 12).299 During the preparation of HRG/Cu2O nanocomposites, monodisperse Cu2O spheres with diameters of 150–200 nm were loaded on the surface of graphene by sonication.
 Fig. 12  (A) CV response of a graphene/Co(OH)2 nanocomposite depicting great influence of graphene on the electrochemical properties of the composites. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.278 (B) Comparisons were made between bare Cu2O and Cu2O NPs–GNS samples displaying superior cycling performance and highlighting the crucial role of graphene in alleviating the capacity degradation. Copyrights reserved to RSC Publishing.299 
In addition to transition metals (group 4 to 12), graphene-based composites of other metals have been applied. The large theoretical specific capacity ∼782 mA h g−1 of SnO2, which is twice that of graphite, has attracted much attention.300 The lithium storage properties of SnO2 NPs have been enhanced by using the graphene support. Several studies describe the preparation of HRG/SnO2 nanocomposites by hydrothermal or solvothermal methods, and demonstrate the enhanced electrochemical properties of the composites (improved lithium storage with high reversible capacity and great cycling stability).301–303 HRG/SnO2 hybrids, where rod-like SnO2 nanocrystals were homogeneously distributed on the surface of graphene sheets, delivered a reversible capacity of 838 mA h g−1.304 In another study, a reversible capacity of 1304 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 was achieved with a HRG/SnO2 hybrid electrode.305
Despite the fact that graphene improves the electrochemical performance of the NPs, there are some limitations of the LIB performance of graphene-based hybrid anodes, because no proper contact between graphene and the NPs could be achieved, or the aggregation of the NPs increased the electronic path length in the electrodes, which in turn leads to an increase of the conductivity. These issues have been addressed through N-doping of graphene, which improved the electrochemical performance. The electrochemical performance of SnO2 NPs by using the support of N-doped graphene was reported by Wang et al.300 In addition to HRG/SnO2, HRG/SnS2 nanocomposites have found applications as anode materials in LIBs. Although these nanocomposites have demonstrated excellent electrochemical performances the stability of the nanocomposites and the capacity fading in the initial cycles are still challenges for their wide spread applications in LIBs. To find a solution to these problems, Hou et al. have demonstrated the preparation of HRG/SnS2 nanocomposites in a single step solvothermal process by using ethylene glycol both as a solvent and capping agent.306 In this composite, graphene not only enhanced the electrical conductivity but also provided stability to the anode material during the charge–discharge process (cf.Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Cyclic voltammograms of (a) HRG, (b) SnS2 nanocrystals and (c) HRG/SnS2 composites prepared at 200 °C for 12 h. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of HRG/SnS2 composites for the 1st, 2nd, 25th, and 50th cycles at a current of 500 mA g−1. Copyright reserved to the American Scientific Publishers.306 
Apart from graphene inorganic nanocomposites, graphene doped with boron, nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus also exhibits excellent electrochemical performance in energy storage devices including LIBs. Hou et al. demonstrated a facile and scalable method for the preparation of phosphorus doped graphene (PHRG) by thermal annealing using triphenylphosphine and GO as phosphorus and carbon sources respectively.307 The as-prepared PHRG was applied for the first time as an electrode material in LIBs and exhibited excellent current rate and enhanced reversible capacity compared to the undoped graphene (cf.Fig. 14). Furthermore, the combination of doped graphene and metal sulfides has attracted attention for energy storage applications.308 The combination of the properties of both the components in these composites, such as high theoretical capacities and low cost of metal sulfides, combined with the excellent conductivities and rate capabilities of doped graphene, may be exploited in LIBs. In this regard, Hou et al. reported a hydrothermal synthesis of nickel sulfides, Ni3S4 and NiS1.03, grown on nitrogen-doped graphene (NHRG) sheets.309 The as-obtained nanocomposites demonstrated excellent performance and remarkable capacity retention rate. The composite of Ni3S4/NHRG annealed at 250 °C showed ultrahigh performance with a discharge capacity of 558.2 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 95.19% after 100 cycles at 4 C. A NHRG/Co3Sn2@Co nanocomposite, which was prepared hydrothermally, exhibited good electrochemical performance in LIBs.310 The deliberate design of a core@shell architecture of Co3Sn2@Co on the surface of doped graphene facilitated a reversible capacity of 1615 mA h g−1 at 250 mA g−1 after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of 102%. The hybrid also bears superior rate capability with a reversible capacity of 793.9 mA h g−1 at 2500 mA g−1 and coulombic efficiency close to 100%.
 Fig. 14  (a) CV curves of PHRG at a scanning rate of 0.2 mV s−1 in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profile of PHRG at a current rate of 0.1 A g−1 in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. (c) Cycle performance of PHRG and undoped graphene at a current rate of 0.1 A g−1 in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. (d) Rate performance of PHRG and undoped graphene in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley and Sons.307 
The combination of graphene with various metal oxide NPs not only maximizes the practical applications of LIBs, but the synergetic effects between both the active materials helped to increase the energy storage capacity and to enhance the electrochemical performance of LIBs.208,213 In these composite materials, graphene provides a 2D support for the uniform dispersion of metal oxides, acts as a conductive template for building a 3D network to improve the electrical conductivity and to suppress the volume change and particle agglomeration during the charge–discharge process. The metal oxide NPs inhibit the agglomeration of graphene layers and thereby help to enhance the surface of graphene; ultimately leading to a high electrochemical activity of the resultant LIBs (cf.Table 2). The resulting composite is more than a mere combination of the individual components, but indeed, it is a new material with improved functionalities and properties. Despite several advantages, there remain challenges ahead for improvement of these composites in commercial applications of LIBs. So far, there has been a little control over the interface and interaction between graphene and metal oxide NPs, which is important in order to control the charge transfer processes. Therefore, there is a strong urge to develop strategies for the preparation of graphene/inorganic nanocomposites with well-defined uniform structure on graphene, which provide maximum control over surface interactions. Furthermore, controlling the phase and morphology of the NPs on the surface of graphene is necessary for enhancing the performance of LIBs.
Table 2 Electrochemical performance of graphene/inorganic NP nanocomposites as electrode materials in lithium-ion batteries






Materials
Applications
Initial discharge capacity [mA h g−1]
Potential window (V)
References




Anode
TiO2/HRG
Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity
97
1–3

220



MnO2/HRG
LIBs
208
0–3

238



Fe/HRG
LIBs
440
0–3

246



Co/HRG
LIBs
500
0–3

268



Ni(OH)2/HRG
LIBs
507
0–3

290



NiO/HRG
LIBs
646.1
—

289



Cu2O/HRG
LIBs
857
0–3

299



Mn3O4/HRG
LIBs
900
0–3

613



Co3O4/HRG
LIBs
941
0–3

266



Fe3O4/HRG
LIBs
988.5
0–3

614



LIBs
1011
0–3

252



CuO/HRG
LIBs
1043.3
0–3

630



Fe2O3/HRG
LIBs
1561
0–3

619



CoO/HRG
LIBs
1719
0–3

276



TiO2/HRG
Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity
5000
3–0.05

605









Materials
Applications
Current density
Potential range (V)
References




Cathode
V2O5/HRG
LIBs
600
2.0–4.0

225



LIBs
299
1.5–4.0

227



LIBs
383
2–4

157



LiFePO4/HRG
LIBs
70
2.0–4.2

263







3.1.2 Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors or electrochemical capacitors are an important class of energy storage devices that exhibit high power density, long cycle life and excellent charge–discharge rates compared to common batteries.311 The energy storage mechanisms of supercapacitors mainly include a carbon-based electric double layer (EDL) and metal oxide- or polymer-based pseudo-capacitive charge storage. Electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs) store the charge electrostatically (physical process) using reversible adsorption of ions of the electrolyte onto active materials. In EDLCs the charge storage is mainly dependent on the properties of the electrode material, as the energy is stored by the adsorption of ionic charges on the surface of the electrode.312 In order to increase the specific capacitance and the power density of EDLCs much attention has to be paid to the enhancement of electrode material properties. Recently, graphene has attracted attention as an electrode material in supercapacitors because of its high surface area, chemical inertness, excellent flexibility, and superb electrical conductivity.313 Single layer graphene exhibits an intrinsic capacitance of ∼21 mF cm−2, and a theoretical (if all the surface area of graphene can be used) electric double layer capacitance of ∼550 F g−1 could be achieved.314 However, the practical use of the whole surface area of graphene is difficult; therefore, graphene has been extensively used in combination with other electrochemically active metal oxides and hydroxides as electrode materials in supercapacitors.
Only a few reports on graphene-based composites of ZrO2 and V2O5 in supercapacitors have appeared so far.315,316 For metals of group VIIb reports have been found on supercapacitor applications of graphene/MnO2 and Mn3O4 nanocomposites.317 MnO2 by virtue of its low cost, high specific capacitance, good cycle stability and environmental compatibility has attracted much attention.318 However, its poor electrical conductivity (10−5 to 10−6 S cm−1) and its densely packed structure limit its application for the development of high-performance supercapacitors. Therefore the combination of graphene and layered MnO2 exhibited improved electrochemical performance. The distinct two-dimensional (2D) structure of graphene not only provides a highly reversible pseudocapacitance, but also the electrochemical double-layer capacitance.319,320
The synthesis of HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites by microwave reaction and their use as electrode materials were reported by Yan et al.321 Here, HRG sheets serve mainly as a highly conductive support, and they provide a large surface for the deposition of MnO2 NPs (ξ 5–10 nm). The electrical conductivity of the electrode could be enhanced by the interfacial contact between MnO2 and graphene. In addition, the easy surface accessibility of the nanocomposite by the electrolyte, and the improved electrochemical utilization of MnO2 (resulted from the small particle size and high surface area of graphene and manganese oxides) provided both the high reversible pseudocapacity and excellent capacitive retention ratio at a high charge–discharge rate. The nanocomposite exhibits an overall specific capacitance of 310 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and even 228 F g−1 at 500 mV s−1 in an aqueous electrolyte, and a capacitance retention ratio at high charge–discharge rates of about 88% at 100 mV s−1 and 74% at 500 mV s−1. In another study, the specific capacitance of 328 F g−1 at a charging current of 1 mA has been obtained after an electro-activation process in the nanocomposites of graphene sheets decorated with flower-like MnO2 NPs.322 The MnO2 nanoflowers, containing rods with a thickness of less than 10 nm, were electrodeposited onto graphene sheets.
However, high energy storage and large capacitance usually obtained by a high mass loading of active MnO2 materials often lead to an increased electrode resistance and decreased specific capacitance. The mass loading leads to densely packed MnO2 NPs on the surface of graphene sheets with limited electrochemically active surface area, and only a thin top layer of the oxide participates in the charge storage process. To resolve these critical problems, Yu et al. developed a “three-dimensional (3D) conductive wrapping” method to design ternary HRG/MnO2/CNT nanocomposites with improved supercapacitor performance (cf.Fig. 15).238 The nanocomposite was fabricated by wrapping an ultrathin layer of single-wall CNTs or a conducting polymer around the HRG/MnO2 hybrids. The three-dimensional wrapping not only provided an additional electron transport path (besides the HRG layer underneath MnO2 NPs), but also actively participated in the charge storage process. The specific capacitance of the as-prepared composite material could be enhanced significantly (∼20%) with values as high as ∼380 F g−1. The cycling performance with >95% capacitance retention over 3000 cycles.
 Fig. 15  HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites as electrode materials. (i-a) Conducting wrapping of graphene/MnO2 (GM) to introduce an additional electron transport path (in discharge cycle). (i-b) Graphene/MnO2/CNT (GMC) and graphene/MnO2/conducting polymer (GMP) formed by wrapping of GM nanostructures with CNTs or conducting polymer. (Black: graphene; rose: MnO2; yellow: CNTs; blue: conducting polymer). Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.238 (ii) Fabricated asymmetric supercapacitor device based on graphene/MnO2 composites as a positive electrode and activated carbon nanofibers as a negative electrode in a neutral aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley & Sons, Inc.324 
Furthermore, HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites have been applied to develop asymmetric supercapacitors. They make use of different potential windows of the two electrodes in order to increase the maximum operation voltage in the cell system, which may result in an enhanced specific capacitance and improved energy density.323 In a recent study, an asymmetric supercapacitor with high energy density has been developed using HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites as a positive electrode and activated carbon nanofibers (ACN) as a negative electrode in a neutral aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte.324 The composite material exhibits a maximum energy density of 51.1 W h kg−1, in addition to a cycling durability with 97% specific capacitance retained even after 1000 cycles. Graphene has been applied as a negative electrode rather than activated carbon nanofibers. Zilong et al. developed a flexible solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor based on two types of electrodes: a MnO2/ZnO core–shell nanorod array and a hydrogen iodide (HI) reduced graphene oxide assembly.323
Apart from MnO2, electrochemically active Mn3O4 NPs and their composites with high power nature have attracted research interest in the field of supercapacitors.325 Although only a few studies were reported with Mn3O4 as the supercapacitor electrode material due to its extremely low electrical conductivity (10−7 to 10−8 S cm−1), the number is increasing by the encouraging results obtained from combining highly conductive graphene with Mn3O4 NPs.326 Wang et al. demonstrated the preparation of HRG/Mn3O4 nanocomposites and studied their electrochemical behavior.242 Densely distributed Mn3O4 NPs with diameters of ∼10 nm on the surface of graphene sheets played a crucial role in enhancing the electrochemical performance. The nanocomposites exhibited a high specific capacitance of 175 F g−1 in a 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte and a 256 F g−1 in 6 M KOH electrolyte, respectively. In another example, the rate capability and electrochemical stability of the HRG/Mn3O4 electrode could be enhanced by the preparation of porous HRG/Mn3O4 nanocomposites via a solution-based approach.327 The HRG/Mn3O4 electrode exhibits a much better rate capability compared to the pristine electrode with a maximum specific capacitance of 236.7 F g−1 in a 2 M KOH aqueous electrolyte with a current density of 1 A g−1 and a voltage window of −0.5 to 0.40 V. More importantly, around 71% of the specific capacitance was retained even after increasing the current density up to 4 A g−1. The measured specific capacitance of 106 F g−1 at a high charge–discharge current density of 12 A g−1 suggested a good rate capability of as-prepared HRG/Mn3O4 nanocomposites. Furthermore, a decrease of 6.32% of the initial capacitance even after 1000 cycles revealed a good electrochemical stability of the HRG/Mn3O4 electrode.
For group 8 metals, graphene-based iron oxide nanocomposites have attracted attention in supercapacitors. Fe3O4 is a promising electrode material due to its high theoretical Li storage capacity, which offers a high pseudocharge capacitance through the associated redox reaction. Mainly, Fe3O4 NPs have been combined with graphene to increase and enhance the surface area and electrical conductivity of the material in order to achieve high capacitance in electrical double layer capacitors.328 Shi et al. reported the synthesis of HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites, which were used to fabricate thin film supercapacitor electrodes by applying a spray deposition technique without the need for adding insulating binders.329 The composite electrode showed higher specific capacitance than containing pristine Fe3O4 NPs, which can be further optimized by tuning the Fe3O4:HRG ratio with a maximum specific capacitance of 480 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 5 A g−1 obtained at 73.5% Fe3O4 NPs. These nanocomposites also showed stable cycling performance without any decrease in the specific capacitance after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. In another study, Qu et al. prepared sandwich-like HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites by direct growth of FeOOH nanorods on the surface of graphene sheets and the subsequent electrochemical transformation of FeOOH to Fe3O4.330 The hybrid material exhibited a capacitance up to 304 F g−1 even at a current density of 10 A g−1, which is much higher than that of many metal oxide based anode materials and comparable to (or even higher than) that of cathode materials such as MnO2, Co3O4, V2O5 and MoO3. The excellent rate capability of the nanocomposite was attributed to the synergistic effect of Fe3O4 and graphene. In addition to Fe3O4 pristine Fe2O3 and FeOOH have been applied as electrode materials in supercapacitors. However, the corresponding HRG/Fe2O3 and HRG/FeOOH nanocomposites have been reported only rarely.331,332
Besides iron, the applications of graphene-based nanocomposites of ruthenium (Ru) in supercapacitors have been reported in the literature among the elements in group 8.333,334 In particular, hydrous and amorphous ruthenium oxide (RuO2) has attracted attention because of its high capacitance, reversible charge–discharge features and good electrical conductivity, despite its high cost.335 In order to enhance the electrochemical properties of RuO2 hybrids of RuO2 with various carbonaceous materials activated carbon, CNTs and exfoliated graphite have been synthesized, which have generated excellent results in the past.336 Exploiting the distinctive properties of graphene, Wu et al. prepared HRG/RuO2 hydrous nanocomposites by a combination of sol–gel and low-temperature annealing processes. A high performance of HRG/RuO2-based electrochemical capacitors has been achieved by varying the Ru loading.337 The nanocomposites delivered a maximum specific capacitance of 570 F g−1 with 38.3 wt% Ru, which is much higher than that of pure HRG (148 F g−1) with a good rate capability, electrochemical stability and high energy power density. Wang et al. have prepared HRG/RuO2 nanocomposite capacitors which were coupled with HRG/Ni(OH)2 composite electrodes to fabricate asymmetrical supercapacitors, which exhibited a high specific capacitance and high energy and power densities.338
For group 9 metals, several reports on the application of graphene-based cobalt oxide nanocomposites in supercapacitors have appeared in the literature.339 In a recent report, Fan and co-workers have exploited both the electrochemical properties of Co3O4 (high theoretical specific capacitance (∼3560 F g−1), high redox activity and its good reversibility) and the intriguing properties of graphene (high conductivity) in a HRG/Co3O4 electrode for supercapacitors.340 The as-prepared HRG/Co3O4 electrode delivered a maximum specific capacitance of 243.2 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH aqueous solution with >95% specific capacitance retention even after 2000 cycles. In another report, a HRG/Co3O4 electrode was prepared by Zhou et al. by a two-step surfactant assisted method, where HRG platelets were incorporated into scrolls of Co3O4.341 The Co3O4 scrolls were composed of nanorods, stacked in a parallel fashion, and they were attached to the basal planes and edges of HRG nanosheets by their residual oxygen functional groups. By virtue of the unique scrolled structure of HRG/Co3O4 and the synergetic effect between HRG nanosheets and Co3O4, the as-prepared electrode exhibited an ∼13 times higher specific capacitance than pristine Co3O4 NPs (i.e., specific capacitance of 163.8 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1).
In addition, Co-based layered materials were utilized as electrodes in supercapacitors.342 As an example, HRG/Co–Al nanocomposites containing Co–Al layered double hydroxide nanosheets (LDH-NS) as a precursor and their application in a pseudocapacitor were reported by Jin and co-workers.343,344 In this case, HRG/Co–Al hybrids were fabricated by exploiting the electrostatic interaction between the positively charged layers of Co–Al LDH-NS and the negatively charged graphene sheets to create a layered assembly of two sheets.344 This kind of face-to-face assembly of Co–Al LDH-NS and HRG facilitated a maximum contact between the layers and graphene sheets, which in turn leads to a fast electron transport through the graphene during the redox reaction. The HRG/Co–Al LDH-NS electrode demonstrated a remarkable performance with a maximum average capacitance of 778 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1, and it delivered an energy density of 7.7 W h kg−1 at a power density of 4.8 kW kg−1. In an extension of this work Jin and co-workers achieved an improvement of the specific capacitance of the Co-based electrode by preparing HRG/Co–Al LDH-NS multilayer films, which exhibited a high specific capacitance of 1204 F g−1 and an areal capacitance of 90 F m−2 for a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.345 Here, the flexible electrode was fabricated by layer-by-layer deposition of a HRG/Co–Al LDH-NS film onto a PET substrate (cf.Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the layer-by-layer assembly process for making multilayer films of positively charged Co–Al LDH-NS and negatively charged HRG sheets. Electrochemical properties of Co Al LDH-NS/GO films after reduction. (A) Specific capacitance of the four films with 10, 20, 30, and 40 bilayers at various scan rates. (B) Areal capacitance of the four films at various scan rates. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.345 
From the metals of group 10, the majority of the nickel nanocomposites with graphene have found applications in energy storage systems. In particular, their oxides, in particular HRG/NiO and HRG/Ni(OH)2 have been applied as electrode materials in supercapacitors.346,347 Owing to their high theoretical capacity (2584 F g−1 within 0.5 V for NiO), their low price and excellent pseudocapacitive behavior, both NiO and Ni(OH)2 have been considered as suitable replacement for the more expensive amorphous RuO2.348,349 However, these materials largely suffer from poor electrical conductivity, low accessible surface areas and volume changes during the cycling process. To address these problems, various strategies were adopted, including the support of graphene to enhance the electrical conductivity and to improve the overall electrochemical performance of the material. Several techniques have been applied to prepare HRG/nickel oxide nanocomposites with different morphologies to minimize particle aggregation and to maintain a high surface area during the charge–discharge process.350,351
In a recent study Lv et al. proposed a multi-step strategy to produce sandwich and membrane-like HRG/NiO nanocomposites.352 The hybrids were comprised of a 3D network of homogeneously distributed NiO NPs tightly fixed on planar graphene nanosheets, which effectively avoid any particle aggregation during charge–discharge cycling and maintain the active surface area. The immobilization of NiO NPs between adjacent graphene nanosheets created ordered channels for ion transport. HRG/NiO sandwich membranes delivered a better capacitive performance. Furthermore, this type of hybrid can be easily manipulated for other energy storage applications due to its membrane-like morphology. Cao et al. demonstrated in a recent study the use of HRG/NiO nanocomposites for supercapacitors.353 The HRG/NiO hybrid exhibited a very high specific capacitance of 816 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 with a stable cycling performance even up to 2000 cycles. The good electrochemical properties of the HRG/NiO composite were attributed to its unique 3D network structure with a large specific surface area, which facilitated the rapid transport of electrolyte ions.
Apart from HRG/NiO composites with a 3D network structure, two-dimensional sheets like HRG/NiO nanocomposites have been reported to have excellent electrochemical properties in supercapacitors and deliver a much larger specific capacitance and capacity retention than that of pure NiO (ca. 528 F g−1 at 200 mA g−1 with a capacity retention of 95.4% after 1000 cycles). The hybrids were prepared by self-assembly; the electrostatic interactions of the two species were exploited to create monolayer HRG/NiO sheets with Ni2+ ions adsorbed on both sides of HRG sheets.354 During the process NiO NPs (ξ ≈ 5–7 nm) were grown densely and homogeneously on a graphene monolayer. The size of the NPs was restricted due to the confining effect of disordered graphene nanosheets. Moreover, the confinement effect of HRG facilitated effective separation of NiO NPs. As a result, the surface area of the material was enhanced significantly, as demonstrated by the specific surface area of the as-prepared hybrid material (134.5 m2 g−1), which is larger than that of pure NiO (ca. 42 m2 g−1).
The enhanced electrochemical performance of HRG/NiO nanocomposites was demonstrated in another study, where spherical HRG/NiO hybrids showed a superior energy storage performance and an impressive structural stability.355 The nanocomposites were prepared by spray pyrolysis. Nucleation and growth of NiO nanocrystals occurred predominantly on the surface of GO sheets, which are subsequently reduced to HRG/NiO composites. The globular HRG/NiO nanocomposites were constituted by encapsulation of NiO NPs (∼30 nm) in graphene sheets. This encapsulation resulted in the formation of an interconnected 3D network structure, which offers the unique advantage of introducing conductive pathways through the whole structure and improving in parallel the mechanical strength of the resulting composites.
Apart from NiO, Ni(OH)2 has been studied in supercapacitors because of its layered structure and its anion exchange capabilities.356–359 With the combination of layered Ni(OH)2 and graphene a specific capacitance of 1568 F g−1 at a current density of 4 A g−1 could be achieved. This is significantly higher than that of bare Ni(OH)2.360 A HRG/Ni(OH)2 composite electrode with such high capacity was prepared in a mechanically assisted solid-state reaction. Prior to the solid-state reaction, graphene nanosheets were functionalized with benzenesulfonate groups, which play a critical role in forming fine and uniformly distributed Ni(OH)2 NPs and in preventing particle aggregation. In another study, a HRG/Ni(OH)2 composite electrode was synthesized from α-Ni(OH)2 NPs, while most of the studies related to Ni(OH)2 were reported on β-Ni(OH)2 which is easily accessible, but NPs of the α polymorph have superior electrochemical properties compared to their β counterpart.361 Lee et al. have described a template-free method for making HRG/α-Ni(OH)2 nanocomposites in ethylene glycol with a different GO/to Ni(OH)2 mass ratio. The highest capacitance (1215 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1) was observed in an electrode prepared in a 1:20 mass ratio of GO to Ni(OH)2. Notably, by increasing the mass of Ni(OH)2 NPs the capacitance decreased due to the presence of Ni2+ ions around HRG, which induce an aggregation of NPs, thereby leading to poor dispersion and low capacitance.
By virtue of their intercalation properties, metal based layered double hydroxides (LDH) were combined with graphene to fabricate electrodes for supercapacitors.362 LDHs are well-known anionic or hydrotalcite-like clays. Typically, they contain divalent and trivalent cations and a variety of organic or inorganic anions.362 Gao et al. reported the hydrothermal synthesis of HRG/NiAl LDH nanocomposites, where Ni/Al LDH platelets were formed in situ on the graphene surface.363 The LDA/graphene composite was comprised of thin hexagonal platelets with a diameter of 50 nm, decorated on graphene sheets as a loose lamellar structure. This arrangement prevents restacking of graphene nanosheets and preserves the active surface area. In addition, graphene sheets overlap loosely with each other to afford a three-dimensional conducting network, which facilitates fast electron transfer and enhances the contact between the electrode and the electrolyte. With this electrode a high specific capacitance of 781.5 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 with long cycle life was obtained. In more recent studies, nitrogen-doped graphene (NHRG) has been used to further enhance the electrochemical performances of LDH nanocomposites, by improving the access to redox sites, enhancing the structural stability and increasing the conductivity. Hou et al. designed a unique composite of Ni and Ni/Co double hydroxide nanoparticles wrapped in nitrogen-doped graphene (NiH@NHRG & NiCoDH@NHRG) sheets.364 The hybrid materials were prepared hydrothermally and contained a well-defined network of nanostructures confined in NHRG sheets. The crystallinity and well-defined structure of the as-prepared nanocomposites promoted the transfer of electrons from redox sites to the electron collector and vice versa, which allowed nickel and cobalt to contribute to the double pseudocapacitance. The electrode material showed a remarkable performance compared to most previously reported graphene-based LDH nanocomposites.
For group 11, only a few reports on the application of HRG/Cu2O nanocomposites in supercapacitors have appeared so far.365 For group 12 metals applications as HRG/ZnO nanocomposites for energy storage were reported.366–368 HRG/ZnO nanocomposites showed enhanced performance compared to pristine ZnO NPs as electrode materials in supercapacitors. HRG/ZnO nanocomposites prepared by spray pyrolysis exhibited a specific capacitance of 61.7 F g−1 and a maximum power density of 4.8 kW kg−1. A capacitance of 62.2 F g−1 and a maximum power density of 8.1 kW kg−1 were achieved for HRG/ZnO nanocomposites prepared by reduction with glucose.369,370 The electrochemical capacitative performance appeared to depend on the morphology of HRG/ZnO nanocomposites.371 Chen et al. demonstrated a composite material with a low weight percent of HRG to be controlled by the homogeneous incorporation of HRG sheets within the ZnO matrix.372 A specific capacitance (308 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in the potential range of 0.0–1.0 V) and cycling stability (6.5% decay over 1500 cycles) has been achieved for a ZnO to HRG mass ratio of 93.3:6.7. The 3D network structure of the hybrid allowed the diffusion of electrolyte ions to the electrochemically active sites. Huang et al. used layer-by-layer deposition to fabricate HRG/ZnO nanocomposites with ZnO nanorods vertically aligned on HRG sheets using PET as a flexible substrate.373
Clearly, the combination of graphene with various metal oxide NPs leads to a significant improvement as electrode materials in supercapacitors. For instance, these nanocomposites demonstrated enhanced specific surface area, improved electrical and ionic conductivities, good cyclic stability, and excellent specific capacity as well as increased energy and power density. These enhanced properties are mainly attributed to the synergistic effects due to characteristic surface interactions between the components. Despite the great potential of these materials in supercapacitors, several problems remain: (i) the synthesis of electroactive nanocomposites with controlled size, morphology and phases is still challenging. Degradation of the electrode material due to the aggregation of graphene layers during the charge–discharge process is another major problem in this area. (iii) The contamination of the electrode material due to impurities introduced by improper reduction of GRO is a major concern.


3.1.3 Solar cells. 
Solar cells or photovoltaic cells are the electrical devices that directly convert sunlight energy into electricity by the photovoltaic effect. Graphene-based nanocomposites have potential applications in these devices due to their excellent optical, electronic and electrical properties.374 Graphene and graphene-based materials have been applied as transparent electrode materials in photoelectrochemical and photovoltaic devices. Graphene can be either a conductive platform or active element such as an electron acceptor in photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical devices, (e.g. in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)), which have gained significant attention due to their moderate light-to-electricity conversion efficiency, easy fabrication and low cost. DSSCs are composed of a photoelectrode, a counter electrode, an electrolyte and a sensitizing dye.
For group 4 metals, TiO2 NPs were commonly applied as photoanodes in DSSCs due to their large surface area, which facilitates anchoring of sensitizing dye molecules. Furthermore, due to their high conductivity and low cost, HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites have become attractive electrode materials for solar cell, electrochemical sensor and biosensor applications, where TiO2 NPs exhibit improved electrochemical properties through the support of graphene.375–377 Recently, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) were fabricated using HRG/TiO2 photoanodes, where 0.5 wt% incorporated graphene demonstrated a power conversion efficiency of 4.28%, which is 59% higher than that without graphene. The incorporated graphene, apart from increasing the dye adsorption also enhanced the electron lifetime significantly. In another study, an enhanced power conversion efficiency of 7.25% was obtained in DSSCs by delicately controlling the morphology of TiO2 NPs on graphene sheets.378 For this purpose, various HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites have been synthesized with different nanostructures including ultra-small 2 nm NPs, 12 nm NPs and nanorods. Among them, the photoanode based on the nanocomposites of ultra-small 2 nm TiO2 NPs exhibited the highest power conversion efficiency. For the electrochemical sensing, a HRG/TiO2 modified glassy carbon electrode has been prepared, which showed favorable electron transfer kinetics and electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of dopamine.379
Apart from TiO2 in group 4, HRG/NiO nanocomposites were used to fabricate photoelectrodes in DSSCs. p-semiconducting nickel oxide (NiO) has been considered a potential photocathode material for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) because of its large optical band gap (ca. 3.4 eV) and its high ionization potential (5.4 eV vs. vacuum). However, it suffers from its intrinsically low charge transfer rate.380,381 Recently Yang et al. synthesized supported NiO by graphene to enhance the charge transport properties of NiO cathodes. Apart from its large surface area and high conductivity, it may serve as a shuttle to enhance electron transport and to suppress the recombination in n-type DSSCs.382 The novel HRG/NiO composite has doubled its power conversion efficiency when applied as a photoelectrode in p-DSCs. Additionally, the composite photocathode (with an appropriate amount of graphene) offers faster hole transport and larger surface area than bare NiO films.
HRG/Pt nanocomposites were applied as counter electrodes (CEs) in DSSCs.383 Gong et al. prepared ultrathin films of HRG/Pt nanocomposites on conductive glass by layer-by-layer self-assembly using monolayers of PDDA/graphene/PDDA/H2PtCl6 as a precursor.384 The HRG/Pt monolayer as a CE in DSSCs achieved 7.66% power conversion efficiency, which is comparable to 8.16% obtained from sputtered Pt as a CE. Commonly, in Pt based DSSCs the amount of Pt loading determines the catalytic activity and cost of the device. Therefore, the support of graphene in the composite CE reduced the amount of Pt (∼1000 fold) by lowering the cost of CEs without compromising the activity of the device.
p-type semiconducting Cu2O in group 11, which exhibits high solar absorbance, has great potential for photovoltaic device applications.385 Wu et al. prepared conductive and transparent electrodes by electrochemical deposition of crystalline Cu2O films on a PET (polyethylene terephthalate) substrate that was spincoated before graphene oxide.386 Electrochemical deposition of Cl-doped n-type Cu2O was carried out by Wu et al. to prepare HRG/Cu2O–Cl electrodes for photovoltaic applications.387 Doping with Cl is carried out with carrier concentrations of up to 1 × 1020 cm−3. The surface coverage of Cl depends on the degree of Cl doping. Cl–Cu2O deposited by addition of 0.3 mmol or 1 mmol CuCl2 showed a higher light-to-electron/hole conversion efficiency.
From the above results, it is clear that the application of composites from graphene/inorganic NPs as photoelectrode materials have great potential in photovoltaic cells due to ease of processing and flexible substrate compatibility. Besides, graphene offers a broad solar spectrum; therefore, graphene-based materials as transparent electrodes may further improve the quantum efficiency of solar cells. However, in order to utilize the full potential of graphene inorganic nanocomposites in photovoltaic devices, several challenges need to be tackled: (i) the controlled synthesis of graphene, free from other chemical residues, is necessary to achieve the enhanced performance of graphene in solar cells. (ii) Since the defect-induced or doped graphene exhibits higher activity than pristine graphene, the optimization of the defect concentration during the preparation of graphene would be beneficial, which is a rather challenging task.


3.1.4 Fuel cells. 
A fuel cell utilizes the chemical energy of another fuel, which is chemically stored in electrochemical cells to produce electricity.388 Unlike batteries or other energy storage devices, it generates electricity through the reaction between a fuel (anode) and an oxidant (cathode), such as hydrogen/oxygen or methanol/oxygen, etc. Fuel cells comprised of a cathode, an anode and a separation membrane, where cathodes are the prominent materials, require special attention for the large scale commercial development. Commonly, noble metal NPs such as Pt, Ru, Au, and their hybrid materials are applied as electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). However, the high cost of these nanocatalysts prevents their large scale application in the commercial development. Recently, graphene inorganic nanocomposites have gained prominent significance as a new class of electrocatalysts, due to the outstanding physico-chemical properties of graphene, such as excellent electronic conductivity, huge specific surface area (2600 m2 g−1) and high stability.389
For this purpose, various graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites have been exploited as electrocatalysts in ORR. From groups 4 to 9, only a few examples of graphene based Co nanocomposites that have been applied as electrocatalysts in oxygen reductions reactions (ORR) and oxygen evolution reactions (OER) have appeared in the literature.390 However, the results obtained so far are very encouraging and indicate the significant potential of HRG based Co nanocomposites as electrocatalysts in fuel cells.391,392 As an example, Liang et al. developed a hybrid material consisting of spinel-structured Co3O4 nanocrystals (∼4–8 nm in size) grown on HRG sheets as a high performance bi-functional catalyst for the ORR and OER.393 Notably, pure Co3O4 NPs exhibit little ORR activity, but, the HRG/Co3O4 catalyst prepared via a two-step hydrothermal synthesis showed unexpectedly high ORR activities in alkaline solution, comparable to those of currently available commercial Pt/C catalysts. In addition, they also demonstrated a better stability and durability than a Pt/C catalyst. The ORR catalytic activity of the HRG/Co3O4 catalyst was further enhanced by nitrogen doping of HRG sheets, where the N-doped hybrid exhibited a similar catalytic activity, but a stability superior to Pt in alkaline solutions.
Moving to group 10, HRG/Pd nanocomposites were used as electrocatalysts for the ORR and the oxidation of alcohols in different types of fuel cells, such as DMFCs, DEFCs, and DFAFCs.394–396 Due to the electrocatalytic activity of Pd NPs, HRG/Pd electrocatalysts have gained attention as a cost-efficient replacement for Pt-based electrocatalysts, which are often poisoned by reaction intermediates like CO in acidic media. Zhao et al. applied poly-pyrrole-functionalized graphene as a carbon support for the Pd catalyst, which resulted in a higher electrocatalytic activity and stability for methanol oxidation compared to that of the more expensive Pt-based electrocatalysts.397 Yang et al. exploited HRG/Pd based electrocatalysts for the catalytic oxidation of formic acid in DFAFC.398 The as-prepared hybrid electrocatalysts have excellent catalytic activities for the electrooxidation of formic acid, which is attributed to the small size and high dispersion of Pd NPs and the stabilizing effect of the graphene support. Similarly, catalytic oxidation of formic acid was carried out with HRG/Pd nanocomposites.399 However, the hybrid electrocatalyst was prepared by a galvanic displacement process in the absence of surfactants or stabilizers with a copper template. The as-prepared HRG/Pd electrocatalysts obtained by etching the copper template demonstrated higher catalytic activity than conventional Pd/Vulcan electrocatalysts for formic acid oxidation in high performance DFAFCs. Similarly, the catalytic oxidation of ethanol was carried out with HRG/Pd nanocomposites,400 and graphene-supported ternary nanocomposites have also been applied as electrocatalysts in ORR and for the oxidation of alcohols.401 For instance, HRG/Pd–MWCNT nanocomposites prepared by Machado et al. have shown enhanced ORR activity and excellent durability.402 Ren et al. prepared ternary HRG/Pd–Pt nanocomposites in the absence of stabilizing agents as electrocatalysts for the oxidation of ethanol in alkaline media.403
Graphene-based platinum nanocomposites have been applied extensively as cathode and anode materials in several types of fuel cells including DMFCs (Direct Methanol Fuel Cells), DFAFCs (Direct Formic Acid Fuel Cells), PEMFCs (Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells), PEFCs (Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells) and so on.404 A wide application of platinum electrocatalysts in fuel cells has been hampered by their high costs and poor utilization coefficients. This can be overcome by carbon supports, such as SWCNTs, MWCNTs and carbon black (CB).405 The physicochemical properties of graphene have been exploited in fuel cell applications by combining Pt NPs and graphene. The open and planar structure of graphene allows both sides of the sheet to be utilized for the catalysts. Therefore HRG/Pt nanocomposites can be applied as catalyst supports in fuel cells. Several studies have reported on the properties and application of graphene nanocomposites with platinum and other platinum based materials, such as HRG/Pt, HRG/PtRu, HRG/PtCo, HRG/PtAu, HRG/Pt3Co and HRG/Pt3Cr, as catalysts in DMFCs.156,406–408
HRG/Pt nanocomposites have been synthesized by direct reduction of Pt ions on Ar–H2 or N2-treated graphene sheets at high temperature or by decoration of Pt NPs in water–ethylene glycol.409,410 Zhou et al. introduced a one-step electrochemical reduction method for the preparation of HRG/Pt nanocomposites, which exhibited a higher catalytic activity and stability compared to the Pt/Vulcan and Pt/graphite, when applied as electrocatalysts for the oxidation of methanol in DMFCs.411 Qiu et al. dispersed Pt NPs with an average size of ∼4.6 nm on prefunctionalized graphene nanosheets with PDDA to prepare HRG/Pt nanocomposites.412 Apart from providing the charged GO surface for the Pt NP deposition, PDDA helps to control the loading density of the NPs. The resultant HRG/Pt nanocomposites exhibit an improved higher electrochemical active surface area and better tolerance toward CO compared to only Pt. Thus the electrocatalytic activity is enhanced for the oxidation of methanol and the reduction of oxygen. Huang et al. chemically deposited Pt NPs with an average size of 2.3 nm on graphene nanoplatelets in order to circumvent the oxidation of graphite and subsequent reduction of graphene oxide by reduction or subsequent annealing.413 The HRG/Pt composites exhibited an electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of 53.6 m2 g−1, which is much larger than that of XC-72/Pt hybrids (33.7 m2 g−1). This was tested for methanol oxidation under acidic conditions in DMFCs. The nanocomposites exhibit excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability because of the graphene support, which significantly enhances the catalytic properties of Pt NPs and also plays a key role in decreasing the catalyst poisoning.
Platinum, however, has serious drawbacks. Most important are the costs and catalyst poisoning by the adsorption of CO formed during methanol electrooxidation. Thus different kinds of platinum-based alloys together with the graphene support, such as HRG/Pt–Ru and HRG/Pt–Au, have been tested in order to reduce the costs and to enhance the catalytic efficiency of the hybrid material.414 Lee et al. reported the hydrothermal preparation of HRG/Pt–Ru nanocomposites, where PtRu NPs were uniformly dispersed on graphene nanosheets.415 The surface area of HRG/Pt–Ru, investigated by hydrogen adsorption/desorption from the electrode surface, is 68 m2 g−1 (compared to that of Pt/MWCNT (20 m2 g−1) reported in the same study). Methanol electro-oxidation was carried out with a HRG/Pt–Ru catalyst, by cyclic voltammetry in 0.5 M H2SO4/1.0 M CH3OH solution at 25 °C and showed a peak potential and peak current density of 968 mV and 20.8 mA cm−2. In another study the electrocatalytic activity of HRG/Pt–Ru was tested for the electro-oxidation of both methanol and ethanol.416 The composite material demonstrated enhanced diffusion efficiency and oxidation potential compared to the widely used Vulcan XC-72R carbon black catalyst support. Similarly, a Pt/Pd alloy on Nafion–graphene exhibited efficient electrocatalytic activity and stability towards ethanol oxidation in alkaline solution.417 The hybrid anode catalyst showed good tolerance against poisoning by reaction intermediates during the electro-oxidation of ethanol. A hybrid material comprised of graphene supported Pt and Au delivered better electrocatalytic activity and selectivity.418 The HRG/Pt–Au catalyst was prepared by electrodeposition of Pt–Au NPs on graphene. The morphology and the composition of the nanocatalyst were controlled by adjusting the molar ratio between the Pt and Au precursors. The HRG/Pt–Au electrocatalyst with a Pt/Au molar ratio of 2:1 exhibits the highest electrocatalytic activity toward the ORR (Oxygen Reduction Reaction) and methanol oxidation reaction.
Graphene supported bimetallic Pt–Au nanocomposites are important electrocatalysts in DFAFCs fuel cells for formic acid oxidation. The incorporation of Au has an effect on Pt NPs by promoting the direct oxidation of formic acid to CO2 without pronounced CO intermediates.419 Several reports appeared on the application of HRG/Pt–Au nanocomposites for the formic acid oxidation (FAO) which suggests that the electrochemical properties of the hybrid material are affected by the preparation method.420 Zhang et al. reported on enhanced FAO activity of HRG/Pt–Au (20 wt%) nanocomposites prepared by NaBH4 reduction.421 Pt–Au alloy NPs could be dispersed with a polyelectrolyte process. Diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride acts as a nanoreactor for the preparation of the alloy NPs and facilitates the uniform dispersion of NPs on graphene. Rao et al. prepared HRG/Pt–Au NPs by polyol reduction and measured the anodic performance and compared it with that of commercial Pt/C (E-TEK) under DFAFC operating conditions.422 The hybrid anode showed a maximum power density of 185 mW cm−2 in DFAFC at 303 and 333 K, which is higher than that of HRG/Pt nanocomposites without Au, measured as a reference. The enhanced electrochemical activity is attributed to the change in electronic structure of Pt by alloying with Au. In addition to the oxidation of alcohol and formic acid in fuel cells, graphene and Pt alloy nanocomposites also find applications in PEMFCs (Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells), which were used as electrocatalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).423 ORR plays an important role in the electrochemistry of fuel cells, particularly in PEMFCs and PEFCs.424 In a recent study, HRG/Pt nanocomposites prepared with perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) as a functionalization and anchoring agent were applied as electrocatalysts for ORR.425 PFSA not only enhanced the Pt–graphene interactions and the stability of the catalyst, but also provided more channels for H+ towards Pt surfaces, thereby creating more active catalytic sites (cf.Fig. 17). In addition, PFSA facilitates absorption of CO and water on the catalyst and the formation of an active Pt–OH oxy compound which promotes the oxidation of CO to CO2. Such a PFSA-functionalized HRG/Pt hybrid showed an improved excellent oxidation of CO and lower loss rate of electrochemical active area. In another study, graphene supported Pt3Co and Pt3Cr nanocomposites were applied as electrocatalysts for ORR which exhibited a 3–4 times higher activity than HRG/Pt.426 This enhanced activity is attributed to the inhibition of formation of hydroxyl groups on the Pt surface. Maximum power densities of 875 and 985 mW cm−2 were observed with HRG/Pt3Co and HRG/Pt3Cr cathodes, respectively.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic reaction and electro oxidation mechanism carried out with HRG/Pt nanocomposites. (b) CV curves of PFSA–Pt/GNS, Pt/GNS, and Pt/C catalysts. (c) Current–potential curves for ORR in O2-saturated 0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4 and comparisons of ORR mass activities and specific activity of catalysts. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.425 
Apart from graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites, functionalized and doped graphene has also been applied as a metal free catalyst in oxygen reduction reactions in fuel cells.427 In a recent study, the enhanced electrochemical performance of amino-functionalized graphene as an efficient electrocatalyst in ORR has been demonstrated.428 The electrocatalyst was obtained solvothermally from GO in the presence of ammonia. The results demonstrated that the graphitic and amino-type of nitrogen components determine the onset potential and electron transfer number, while the total content of graphitic and pyridinic nitrogen atoms is the key factor to enhance the current density in the electrocatalytic activity for ORR.
It is clear that graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites show enhanced performance as electrocatalysts in fuel cells compared to cost-inefficient Pt/C commercial electrocatalysts. However, to further improve the performances of these materials and to fully exploit them commercially, extensive research is still required. Among various challenges that occur in this field, maintaining the smaller size of NPs on the surface of graphene is a major problem. Furthermore, the electrocatalytic activity of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites can be enhanced by controlling the interactions between graphene and the NPs, which often proves to be difficult. Additionally, the stability of the electrocatalyst plays a major role in the efficiency of fuel cells.

3.2 Catalysis
The unique 2D structure of graphene and its physical, chemical and mechanical properties provide an ultimate support for any catalytic activity. Although single layers of graphene have not been used as a catalytic support so far, the application of few-layers of graphene in the field of catalysis has gained significance.429 Apart from the large theoretical specific surface area, high adsorption capacity and good biocompatibility, graphene based materials have been applied as support materials in catalysis. By the adsorption of metal and metal oxide NPs on the surface of graphene, intriguing properties emerged due to the interactions between the individual components, which have been exploited for catalytic, electro- and photoacatalytic applications.

3.2.1 Photocatalysis. 
Due to its sp2-hybridized two-dimensional structure and the associated electrical conductivity, and large surface area, graphene has received much greater attention in photocatalysis than most other carbonaceous materials.430 Moreover, the recent development of a wide range of sequential oxidation–reduction methods for the large scale synthesis of graphene makes it an attractive support for anchoring inorganic nanomaterials such as TiO2 for photocatalytic applications.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is an attractive semiconductor material from group 4 metals that has been used in many fields including photochromic devices and sensors. It is used in particular as a photocatalyst to decompose organic contaminants in water and air.431 A popular pathway for enhancing the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 is the formulation of carbon–TiO2 nanocomposites by incorporating carbon nanomaterials (including graphene).432 Significant work has been done on HRG/TiO2, where the photocatalytic activities of TiO2 NPs have been reported to be enhanced by the inclusion of graphene.433,434 The catalytic application of HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites is largely dependent on the crystal morphology of TiO2 NPs as well as their density on HRG sheets.435,436 Recently, Wang et al. reported the synthesis of HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites, where monodisperse anatase TiO2 NPs were deposited on the surface of HRG sheets without agglomeration.437 The NPs exhibited a tetragonal cuboid-morphology with square crystal facets and a side length ranging from 250 to 300 nm, and they were enclosed by the {001} and {100} crystal facets (cf.Fig. 18). HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites with controlled exposed crystal facets were obtained by varying the concentration of the starting precursor solutions and the reaction time. The as-prepared HRG/TiO2 nanocomposite exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activities compared to the reported HRG/P25 samples in both photocatalytic H2 evolution from a methanol solution and degradation of methylene blue.438
 Fig. 18  SEM images of various HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites. (i) As-prepared HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites synthesized via hydrothermal reaction with aqueous solutions containing (NH4)2TiF6 (0.03 M) and GO at 160 °C for 4 h. (ii) Illustrates the gradual change of the morphology of TiO2 NPs with the increase of time (ii-a) cuboid-like morphology of anatase TiO2 NPs obtained in 2 h reaction time. (ii-b) After 8 h, the NPs grow fatter and the four lateral facets of the cuboid-like particles rose in the waist. (ii-c) After 12 h (ii-d) after 24 h, the NPs turned into truncated octahedral morphologies. The inset shows the corresponding magnified SEM images. Copyrights reserved to the RSC publishing.437 (iii) SEM images of HRG treated in the sulfuric acid reaction solution containing titanium sulfate at 100 C (a) pristine graphene sheets (b) after 1 h (c) after 4 h (d) after 6 h. Scale bar in (a–d) 400 nm. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley & Sons, Inc.220 (iv-a and b) SEM images of pristine TiO2. Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.441 (v) SEM images of (a) TiO2–CNF (carbon nanofibers) (b) TiO2–CCNF (carbon composite nanofibers). Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.442 
The improved reactivity of HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites was attributed to the extended optical absorption resulting from surface impurity doping (defects) and increased lifetime of TiO2-confined holes due to the injection of photoexcited electrons into the carbon nanomaterials.439 Recently, Liang et al. demonstrated the role of defects in photocatalytic activities of HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites. They prepared HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites with low defect density using SEG (Solvent Exfoliated Graphene) as a precursor that exhibited a significantly larger enhancement in the photo-oxidation of CH3CHO and photoreduction of CO2.375 Notably, in contrast to the conventional role of defects in catalysis, the less defective SEG based TiO2 nanocomposite was shown to possess a higher photocatalytic activity than the graphene-based nanocomposite (graphene has a significantly higher defect density than SEG). Furthermore, due to a variation of the graphene processing and nanocomposite loading, the optimized nanocomposites showed an improvement of their catalytic activities. In another study, Fan et al. prepared HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites by UV-assisted photocatalytic reduction, hydrazine reduction or hydrothermal reduction and compared their photocatalytic activities for H2 evolution from alcohol under UV irradiation.440 The HRG/TiO2 nanocomposite prepared by a hydrothermal method turned out to be the most efficient photocatalyst that exhibited stronger interactions between TiO2 and graphene sheets. Such strong interactions accelerated the transfer of photogenerated electrons on TiO2 to graphene, suppressed the recombination of charge carriers thereby increasing the photocatalytic performance. The HRG/TiO2 ratio in the composite determined the photocatalytic performance, and the optimum mass ratio was found to be 1/0.2.
Nanocomposites of the group 5 elements niobium and tantalum have been rarely reported in the literature.443,444 However, in some cases they have been used as photocatalytic materials. In a very recent example, Qi et al. reported a novel HRG/Nb2O5 nanocomposite, which exhibited excellent visible light photocatalytic performance.445 In addition, these transition metals have also been incorporated into graphene-based mixed metal oxides of indium (In) and tantalum (Ta) composites, respectively.446,447 The composite of HRG/InNbO4 was prepared hydrothermally and shown to improve the photocatalytic activity of InNbO4, a visible-light driven photocatalyst.446 Particles of monoclinic InNbO4 uniformly dispersed on the surface of HRG sheets provided a sufficient contact surface between the HRG and InNbO4 particles and thus facilitated the carrier transport. The kinetic constant of methylene blue (MB) removal with the HRG/InNbO4 composite was slightly higher (0.0346 min−1) than that of pristine InNbO4 (0.0185 min−1). Furthermore, the ability of graphene to act as an electron transfer highway was demonstrated by the preparation of nitrogen-doped HRG/Sr2Ta2O7−xNx composites by in situ photo-induced reduction of GRO.447 During the reaction under visible-light, tantalum oxide accelerated the reduction process by potentially injecting electrons into the GRO conduction band and reducing more functional groups. In addition, to carry out photocatalytic efficiency measurements with HRG/Sr2Ta2O7−xNx composites, platinum was loaded onto graphene sheets. The HRG/Sr2Ta2O7−xNx composites containing platinum demonstrated an additional ∼80% increase in hydrogen formation and a quantum efficiency of 6.45% (177% increase compared to pristine undoped Sr2Ta2O7) due to the efficient charge carrier separation on the photocatalyst.
In group 11, photocatalytic applications have been reported for graphene supported silver and silver based binary and/or ternary nanocomposites, containing silver halides and other metallic NPs, such as graphene oxide/Ag/AgX (X = Cl, Br) and HRG/Ag/TiO2.448,449 Silver and silver halide based nanomaterials display plasmon resonance in the visible region, due to the presence of metallic Ag NPs. Therefore, they can be applied as photocatalysts for the degradation of pollutants under visible light. The intrinsic catalytic properties of such silver based materials have been boosted by a graphene support which acts as an ideal catalyst carrier, due to its large surface area, and the locally conjugated aromatic system. Graphene oxide/Ag/AgX hybrid composites prepared in oil/water microemulsions were used for the plasmonic photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange in sunlight.450 Finally HRG/Ag and HRG/Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites were applied for the catalytic reduction of 2-nitroaniline to 1,2-benzenediamine and p-nitrophenol to p-aminophenol.451
Semiconducting ZnO finds technological applications in several fields, including photocatalysis.452,453 HRG/ZnO nanocomposites have shown enhanced photocatalytic performance in the reduction of Cr(VI) compared to pure ZnO with a maximum removal rate of 96% (under UV light irradiation).454 Furthermore, the photocatalytic degradation of dyes for waste water purification was carried out using a HRG/ZnO hybrid semiconductor photocatalyst.455 Xu et al. reported the photocatalytic performance of HRG/ZnO nanocomposites, which were prepared by reducing the surface bound GO on ZnO NPs with hydrazine for the degradation of organic dyes.456 The hybridization of graphene and ZnO increased the photocatalytic efficiency of ZnO by a factor of ∼5 (with 2.0 wt% of graphene).
In another study, the photocatalytic decomposition of rhodamine 6G under UV light was carried out with a HRG/ZnO hybrid photocatalyst, which was prepared with PVP (poly vinyl pyrrolidone) functionalized graphene and the Zn(NH3)4CO3 precursor.457 GRO was used for the preparation of photocatalysts, because the oxygen containing functional groups proved useful for the functionalization and formation of dense, homogeneous dispersions of NPs. A high-performance photocatalyst based on GRO (GRO/ZnO) was used for the degradation of methylene blue from water under visible light.458 Besides ZnO, other ternary structures incorporated with graphene were used for photocatalysis. As an example, hydrothermally prepared HRG/ZnFe2O4 nanocomposites were applied for the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue in the presence of H2O2.459


3.2.2 Conventional catalysis. 
Graphene and graphene based materials have been used for conventional catalysis.460 Beginning from group 4 to group 9, only a few examples of graphene nanocomposites occurred in the literature that were applied as catalysts. Chandra et al. reported the preparation of HRG/Rh nanocomposites by sonochemical reduction of Rh3+ using borohydride.461,462 During this process, Rh NPs with an average size of 1–3 nm were distributed homogeneously on stabilized graphene sheets. The stabilization of graphene sheets was carried out by pre-functionalizing GRO sheets with either poly(ethylene oxide)/poly(propylene oxide)/poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO/PPO/PEO) triblock copolymers or pluronic F68.461 Notably, the pluronic-stabilized HRG/Rh composites exhibited a porous structure with a surface area of 285 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 0.164 cm3 g−1, which allowed their application as a catalyst for the hydrogenation of arenes. However, examples of graphene-based materials comprising elements of group 10 of the periodic table appeared in the literature, including HRG/Ni, HRG/Pd and HRG/Pt. In one such study, the catalytic properties of HRG/Ni nanocomposites were used for the reduction of p-nitrophenol into p-aminophenol.463 The stable magnetic behavior of HRG/Ni nanocomposites has been utilized for the removal of adsorbed organic dyes from water.464
HRG/Pd nanocomposites were applied as chemical catalysts for organic reactions.465 The large surface area of graphene and the presence of functional groups (although in minor quantity) in HRG, which facilitate the sorption and intercalation of ions and molecules and the intrinsic catalytic properties of Pd, collectively contribute to the enhancement of the catalytic properties of the hybrid nanocatalysts.466 In particular, HRG/Pd-catalyzed C–C cross-coupling reactions have been used for industrial chemical and pharmaceutical synthesis. Scheuermann et al. demonstrated the excellent catalytic properties of HRG/Pd nanocomposites for Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions,467 where the immobilization of Pd2+ on graphite oxide via cation exchange and subsequent chemical reduction afforded a composite nanocatalyst. The heterogeneous catalysts have high activities with turnover frequencies of up to 39000/h with very low Pd leaching (<1 ppm). Additionally, the as-prepared nanocatalysts were air stable, readily available and easy to handle. Therefore they are promising alternatives to commercially available Pd catalysts, (e.g. Pd on charcoal).
The catalytic properties of hybrid catalysts were demonstrated as well for other carbon–carbon coupling (Suzuki, Heck) reactions. The hybrid catalysts were prepared by microwave-assisted chemical reduction, which were applied for a broad range of reactions under ligand-free ambient conditions in mixtures of ethanol/deionized water.468 The advantage of these catalysts compared to commercial systems is their easy recovery with minimal loss, excellent re-usability and better performance. Apart from coupling reactions, graphene supported Pd-based binary and ternary nanocatalysts have been applied in hydrogenation reactions.469 The hydrogenation of vinyl acetate was carried out using HRG/Pd–Fe3O4 ternary nanocomposites, where the hybrid catalyst was prepared solvothermally and the presence of Pd2+ ions assisted the formation of magnetite NPs on the surface of graphene sheets (cf.Fig. 19).470
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the synthesis of HRG/Pd/Fe3O4 nanocomposites and their application for hydrogenation reactions. Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.470 
Several examples, where multicomponent graphene/Pt based nanocomposites were applied as chemical catalysts, have been reported. HRG/Pt/TiO2 was applied as a conventional catalyst for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene (NB).471 The catalytic hydrogenation of NB is used for the synthesis of amines on an industrial scale. The nanocomposite is comprised of TiO2 NPs (ξ( ∼ 10 nm, where almost each TiO2 particle adheres to a Pt NP) uniformly distributed on the HRG sheets. The composite exhibited high activity with a turnover frequency of 59,000 h−-11 and some selectivity to aniline, and it could be reused six times without any loss of activity.
In group 11, conventional catalytic applications of graphene-supported silver and gold NP based hybrids as well as their respective binary and/or ternary nanocomposites were reported.472,473 For instance, HRG/Ag and HRG/Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites were applied for the catalytic reduction of 2-nitroaniline to 1,2-benzenediamine and p-nitrophenol to p-aminophenol.451 HRG/Au hybrids catalyze the conversion of graphene into CNTs without applying additional hydrocarbons.474 Here, graphene is assumed to enhance the catalytic activity of Au NPs, thereby facilitating the conversion of graphene into CNTs at 500 °C. It has been speculated that Au NPs create small defects in the graphitic structure of graphene layers, which initiate subsequently the formation of CNTs in the catalytic reaction. Graphene/inorganic nanocomposites may have a promising future in conventional catalysis, but the success of these materials on the industrial scale critically depends on the large scale synthesis of high quality graphene with controllable layer thickness at low cost.

3.3 Sensing
Recently, the trend of applying graphene and graphene-based materials for the fabrication of electrochemical sensors and biosensors has gained importance.475 The electrical and electronic properties of graphene have significant importance in electroanalysis. For instance, the wide electrochemical potential window, excellent charge transfer resistance and highly efficient electron transfer behavior of graphene have been successfully exploited in various analytical sensing systems.476 Additionally, due to the high electrocatalytic activity and its excellent electrochemical performance towards glucose oxidase graphene has potential applications for biosensors.

3.3.1 Chemical sensors. 
So far, several graphene based nanocomposites have been applied as electrochemical sensors for the detection of various chemicals. In group 4, zirconia (ZrO2) is a non-toxic, thermally stable inorganic oxide, which has a strong affinity to phosphoric moieties, and it has been commonly used for the detection of phosphopeptide enrichment, phosphoprotein capture and organophosphorus (OP) agents.477,478 Recently, to further enhance the electrochemical and detection properties of zirconia, Du et al. prepared HRG/ZrO2 nanocomposites, where ZrO2 NPs were used as selective sorbents for solid-phase extraction (SPE) and detection of OP pesticides and nitroaromatic OP pesticides such as methyl parathion (MP). HRG/ZrO2 nanocomposites were fabricated by electrochemical deposition, which exhibited fast electron-transfer kinetics and excellent electrocatalytic activity for the electroactive species. Due to its strong affinity to phosphorus moieties the HRG/ZrO2 electrochemical sensor facilitated the fast extraction of the target analyte. The combination of SPE and stripping voltammetric analysis allows a fast, sensitive and selective determination of MP in garlic samples.477 More recently, Gong et al. applied HRG/ZrO2 nanocomposites as SPE for the enzymeless detection of methyl parathion (0.6 ng mL−1 (S/N = 3)).479
For group 6 metals, only graphene-supported nanocomposites of WO3 have been reported.480 WO3 is an n-type semiconductor that shows efficient photocatalysis under UV light irradiation, and it has attracted great attention due to its distinctive sensing properties towards numerous gases.481 The intrinsic conductivity of WO3 plays an important role in its sensing performance; however, it is expected to be improved greatly by the effect of graphene sheets in the composite materials.482 Qin et al. reported the synthesis of HRG/WO3 nanocomposites by a multi-step process via UV-assisted photoreduction in water at room temperature.483 In the as-prepared nanocomposites graphene sheets are decorated with a dispersion of WO3 nanoplatelets with lengths of 50–200 nm, where some of the WO3 nanoplatelets were oriented perpendicular to graphene sheets. HRG/WO3 nanocomposites showed an enhanced electrical conductivity compared to pristine WO3. As a result, the gas response of the nanocomposites was considerably better than that of WO3 NPs.
In group 10, HRG/Ni(OH)2 has been applied as an electrochemical sensor because Ni-based materials possess an excellent catalytic activity towards electrocatalytic molecules such as H2O2, ethanol and glucose.484 Subramanian et al. described a non-enzymatic glucose sensor based on a HRG/Ni(OH)2 composite, which was used for the detection of glucose.485 The nanocomposite is comprised of leaf-shaped Ni(OH)2 nanoplates with a diameter of ∼150 nm, homogeneously dispersed between the graphene nanosheets. The dispersion could be dropped onto a glassy carbon electrode to demonstrate the non-enzymatic glucose sensor properties. In this way a low detection limit of 0.6 mM with a wide linear range from 2 mM to 3.1 mM could be obtained.
Furthermore, the intrinsic sensing ability of Pd NPs and the excellent sensing properties of graphene have been exploited for various sensing applications.486 The enhanced properties of HRG/Pd nanocomposites arise from a change in the electrical conductivity of graphene by charge transfer from molecules adsorbed on its surface. Recently, Johnson et al. applied HRG/Pd nanocomposites for the detection of hydrogen in fuel cells.487 For this purpose, multi-layer graphene nanoribbon networks were prepared by dispersing expanded graphite flakes, which were functionalized with Pd NPs in a water/surfactant water solution. The porous structure of the nanoribbon network provided a high specific surface area, which enabled efficient functionalization and high sensitivity for the adsorbed gas. The as-prepared composite gas sensor exhibited high sensitivity towards hydrogen at room temperature with a fast response, recovery time and good repeatability. An increase in the operating temperature leads to increased sensitivity, faster response and recovery time. At low concentrations, the sensing response showed a linear behavior as a function of H2 concentration, and the sensor resistance fully recovered upon exposure to air. Similarly, Lange et al. reported the detection of hydrogen at a level from 0.5 to 1% in synthetic air.488 The sensor composite was prepared by layer-by-layer deposition on gold electrodes. The poor hydrogen sensitivity of graphene could be enhanced by one order of magnitude by incorporating Pd NPs. HRG/Pd nanocomposites, which were prepared by sonoelectrochemistry in ionic liquids, were applied as sensors for the detection of chlorophenols.489 The formation of the nanocomposites was assumed to be driven by the electric and ultrasonic pulses. The hybrid nanocatalysts showed a remarkable current enhancement and good stability. The large electrochemical surface area led to good electrocatalytic activity, and the ionic liquid further enhanced the catalytic activity of Pd–graphene for chlorophenol. The results showed that the peak current is linear with the concentration of phenol in the range from 4 to 800 μmol L−1, with a detection limit of 1.5 μmol L−1.
In group 11, HRG/Au nanocomposites have been applied as electrode materials in conventional electrochemical sensors, which were applied for the detection of chemicals, organic molecules, and metallic ions, such as organophosphate pesticides, hydroquinone, or lead.490,491 The quenching ability of Au NPs was used to prepare a chemosensor for a “turn-on” fluorescence sensing of lead ions (Pb2+), e.g. for the detection of organophosphate pesticides. Here, the hybrid electrode was deposited with acetylcholinesterase, which was stabilized by a water soluble polyelectrolye (poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA))).492 An ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate [(EMIM)BF4] modified carbon paste electrode in combination with a HRG/Au nanocomposite hybrid film was used to detect hydroquinone.493
In group 12, the combined action of the electronic and semiconducting properties of graphene and ZnO has been exploited for the preparation of highly sensitive photosensors.494 ZnO NPs were incorporated into graphene to fabricate HRG/ZnO composite visible-blind UV photosensors, where the ZnO nanorods act as UV absorbing and charge carrier generating materials, and graphene serves as a conductive matrix.495 The thin-film photoconductor based on HRG/ZnO nanocomposites showed a photoresponse up to 22.7 A W−1 at 20 V (45000 fold higher than that of single graphene sheet based photodetectors, ∼0.1–0.5 mA W−1).
Tian et al. prepared HRG/ZnO nanocomposites by ultrasonicating Zn plates in a GO solution with ammonia at room temperature.496 This hybrid was modified with zinc porphyrin (ZnP), which acts as a photosensitizer for photocurrent generation in the visible range. The HRG/ZnO/ZnP modified ITO electrodes exhibit a prompt photocurrent response and enhanced photocurrent compared to ZnP modified electrodes. Ding et al. demonstrated the field emission and photoluminescence properties of HRG/ZnO nanocomposites, prepared on n-Si (100) substrates by using an electrophoretic deposition and magnetron sputtering technique.497 This hybrid exhibited excellent emission behavior, which may potentially be exploited in field emission displays.
The photoluminescence (PL) properties of HRG/ZnO nanocomposites have been explored for gas sensing.498 HRG/ZnO nanocomposites showed semiconducting behavior and opto-electronic properties, in the near UV to blue PL.499 The luminescent ZnO NPs not only act as spacers between the graphene sheets but also serve as sensing transducers for gases like CO, NH3 and NO. Apart from this, sensors based on HRG/SnO2 nanocomposites also showed good sensitivity and selectivity.500 A HRG/SnO2 based gas sensor showed good sensitivity towards propanol, an important volatile aldehyde used in chemical and medical industries.501 Sensors based on HRG/SnO2 nanocomposites were applied for the detection of H2S, NH3, and NO2.502,503


3.3.2 Biosensors. 
Several graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites have been reported as enzyme-free biosensors for glucose and other biomolecules.504 They exhibited improved sensitivity and selectivity during the oxidation of target molecules.505 Lu et al. reported an electrochemical biosensor based on a HRG/Pd modified electrode for the detection of glucose.506 The biosensor has enhanced the electrocatalytic oxidation of glucose in alkaline solution, and it can be applied for the quantification of glucose over a wide range (from 10 μM to 5 mM) with a detection limit of 1 μM. In another study, water-soluble HRG/Pd nanocomposites were applied for the preparation of a glucose biosensor.507 Here, graphene was functionalized covalently with chitosan, which improved the biocompatibility and hydrophilicity of the hybrid material. The hybrid biosensor was prepared subsequently by immobilization of glucose oxidase on a HRG/Pd modified glassy carbon electrode, and it showed good electrocatalytical activity, high sensitivity and good reproducibility.
By virtue of their good electrical conductivity and biocompatibility, HRG/Pt nanocomposites have also found applications as sensors and biosensors.508–510 Dey et al. developed a HRG/Pt amperometric biosensor for the detection of H2O2 and cholesterol.511 The electrode material contained randomly deposited Pt NPs on HRG. The graphene support of Pt catalyst particles facilitated the electron transfer and catalyzed the electrochemical oxidation of H2O2. In addition, a cholesterol biosensor was fabricated with the same composite by immobilization of cholesterol oxidase and cholesterol esterase on its surface. Similarly Gao et al. utilized NiPt alloy NPs to synthesize a HRG/NiPt composite biosensor for non-enzymatic glucose detection.512 The material was synthesized by an ultrasonication-assisted electrochemical method, which demonstrated high NP loading and effective graphene oxide reduction. The resulting electrocatalyst exhibited enhanced electrochemical performance for glucose detection, and showed good selectivity, stability, and a low detection limit and superior resistance to poisoning.
In the group 11 HRG/Cu, HRG/CuO and HRG/Cu2O nanocomposites have been widely applied as biosensors. HRG/Cu nanocomposites were used for electrochemical sensing of biomolecules such as carbohydrates. HRG/Cu composites were prepared by reduction of CuCl2–graphite intercalation compounds and deposition of Cu NPs with a reducing flame technique.513,514 Very recently, HRG/Cu nanocomposites were prepared by in situ chemical reduction of GO in the presence of copper(II) ions with potassium borohydride, which was used subsequently to fabricate electrodes for carbohydrate sensing.515 The analytical performance of these hybrid electrodes was demonstrated by a combination of cyclic voltammetry and capillary electrophoresis for electrochemical sensing of five different carbohydrates, including mannitol, sucrose, lactose, glucose and fructose. The peak current for the oxidation of glucose on a HRG/Cu electrode was much higher than that on a pure copper electrode, which occurred in the 0.40–0.80 V potential range (Fig. 15). The catalytic oxidation was assisted by copper ions, whereas the electrocatalytic activity was enhanced by the gradual support, which improved the electron transduction. Furthermore, the synergetic effect between Cu NPs and graphene sheets significantly enhanced the current response of carbohydrates (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  HRG/Cu nanocomposite and its application. (A–E) Fabrication process of a HRG/Cu composite paste electrode. (a–d) Cyclic voltammograms at (a) a HRG/Cu composite paste electrode (b) a Cu NP paste electrode (c) a graphite–Cu composite paste electrode (d) a graphene paste electrode. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.515 
In another study, the HRG/Cu electrode for non-enzymatic glucose detection was prepared by potentiostatic electrodeposition of Cu NPs on graphene sheets.516 For instance, the HRG/Cu electrode sensor presented a wide linear range up to 4.5 mM glucose with a detection limit of 0.5 mM, at a detection potential of 500 mV. Furthermore, the as-prepared HRG/Cu composite electrode was used to detect glucose in a simulated serum sample, where the successful detection of glucose in the presence of other electrochemically active components such as ascorbic acid and uric acid demonstrated the application potential of the HRG/Cu based biosensor in routine blood glucose sensing. Copper oxide nanomaterials have been used in combination with graphene in biosensor applications. HRG/CuO nanocomposites were used for glucose detection and cuprous oxide based HRG/Cu2O hybrids were applied for the detection of dopamine.517,518 Both composites displayed high electrocatalytic activity for the oxidative sensing of the respective materials compared to the glassy carbon electrode (GCE).
HRG/Ag nanocomposites were also applied in sensing applications, particularly for the detection of H2O2, glucose and nitroaromatic compounds.519–522 HRG/Ag nanocomposites were applied as catalysts for the reduction and detection of H2O2, as a sensor to detect glucose, and also as a SERS substrate.523 As an enzymeless H2O2 sensor, the composite material has a fast amperometric response time of less than 2 s, with an estimated detection limit of 7 × 10−6 M.
From group 11, nanocomposites of graphene-supported Au NPs have been reported for biosensing and immunosensing applications.524,525 Gold NPs have unique properties including strong adsorption ability, excellent compatibility and good conductivity.526 The ability of Au NPs to provide a suitable microenvironment for the immobilization of biomolecules has been exploited for the fabrication of biosensors.527 Because of its charge transfer properties at room temperature, extremely high specific surface area and superb charge storage properties, graphene has been applied as a support material for Au-based electrochemical biosensors.528 Zhang et al. constructed an electrochemical sensor based on a GRO/Au composite, which was synthesized by a redox reaction between AuCl4− and GO for the detection of H2O2 in food.529 The electrocatalytic efficiency of the composite biosensor was demonstrated by the reduction of H2O2 in buffered solution (pH 5.8), where it showed a dynamic response towards H2O2 in the range of 0.1 mM and 2.3 mM with a detection limit of 0.01 mM at 3 s. Chen et al. applied a carboxylate functionalized HRG/Au composite for the detection of glucose, where glucose oxidase (GOD) was surface bound by conjugation of terminal amino groups of its lysine residues and the carboxyl groups on Au NPs.530 The glucose biosensor demonstrated good stability and efficiently measured the blood sugar concentrations in human serum. Apart from carbohydrates, the electrochemical detection of amino acids has been reported with HRG/Au biosensors. A sensitive aptasensor for the detection of L-histidine, based on switching-structure DNAzymes and HRG/Au nanocomposites was reported by Liang et al.531
Graphene-supported electrochemical sensors have shown potential for the detection of dopamine.532 Multilayer film electrodes based on HRG/Au nanocomposites, which were made of polymer functionalized graphene and polyamidoamine dendrimer functionalized Au NPs by layer-by-layer self-assembly, exhibited good sensing performance for the detection of dopamine between 1 μM and 60 μM with a detection limit of 0.02 μM. Furthermore, HRG/Au based nanocomposites have been applied as FET (field effect transistor) biosensors for the detection of proteins.533,534 The FET biosensor was fabricated by suspending thermally reduced graphene oxide (TRG) sheets above the substrates across the gold electrode. When the protein was introduced, it induced changes in the electrical characteristics of the device, which were investigated by FET and direct current measurements. In other applications, apart from the detection of proteins, the HRG/Au nanocomposite biosensor has been applied for the detection of DNA and determination of the specific sequence of DNA.535,536
Other typical applications of HRG/Au based biosensors include the electrochemical detection of β-NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), a coenzyme involved in the redox reactions of cellular respiration. The ability of Au NPs for the catalytic oxidation and determination of β-NADH could be incorporation of graphene.537 The presence of several electrochemical reaction sites, such as oxygen containing functional groups on the edges of the graphene layer, and the synergetic effects of Au NPs with graphene in the HRG/Au composites enhanced the electron transfer between the enzyme and electrode. In another study, an electroactive epinephrine (EP), which is an important neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system, was detected with high sensitivity using a HRG/Au modified GCE electrode.538 Furthermore, HRG/ZnO nanocomposites were applied as non-enzymatic amperometric sensors for the detection of H2O2 and glucose.539,540 For instance, electrochemically prepared HRG/ZnO GCE electrodes towards H2O2 at −0.38 V in the concentration range of 0.02 to 22.48 μM showed a linear and fast response (<5 s).539
So far, the results suggested that graphene-based materials have excellent potential in analytical and bioanalytical applications, and they may be promising options for various sensing applications. However, there is still a long way to go for a commercial exploitation of these materials on a large scale, which greatly requires further property improvements, including detection sensitivity, shelf life, selectivity, linear range and so on. One of the greatest challenges in this field is the determination of the biocompatibility of these materials, which is crucial for the in vivo detection of bioanalytes. Furthermore, the binding of non-specific substances is a major concern, which seriously affects bimolecular interactions. Therefore, in order to detect the analyte with high specificity, the selectivity of the graphene based biosensor needs to be enhanced, which requires great efforts.

3.4 Applications of HRG as a support material

3.4.1 Adsorbent materials. 
Apart from the applications discussed above, graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites have been applied for other applications including waste water treatment or gas sorption.541 For example, graphene-based manganese oxide composites were applied as adsorbent materials.542 The combination of graphene sheets and MnO2 NPs serves the purpose of water purification. Recently, metal ion scavenging applications of HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites have been demonstrated by Sreeprasad et al. taking Hg(II) as a model pollutant.543 The composite material has a high distribution coefficient (Kd), which is one order of magnitude higher compared to that of the parent materials (>10 L g−1) for Hg(II) uptake. The as-prepared nanocomposites were immobilized on river sand using chitosan as a binder and found to be efficient adsorbent candidates for field applications. Furthermore, the HRG/Mn3O4 hybrid exhibited excellent catalytic activity towards thermal decomposition of ammonium perchlorate, due to the synergistic effect of Mn3O4 and graphene.544
In recent years, HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites have attracted much interest and have been used as adsorbents for the removal of heavy metals and other contaminants from the environment using their magnetic properties, high surface-to-volume ratio and short diffusion rate by the support of graphene.545,546 Several studies have been published in this regard, including a report of Zhang et al. on the synthesis of HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites and their application in the removal of tetracycline.547 Chandra et al. described the synthesis of HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites consisting of Fe3O4 NPs (ξ ∼ 10 nm), which showed a high binding capacity for As(III) and As(V) in drinking water.548 The composites are superparamagnetic at room temperature and can easily be separated by an external magnetic field. This suppresses any chance of creating secondary waste involving the remaining composite material. Besides heavy metals removal, HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites were used for the separation of various dye pollutants from water resources. A HRG/Fe3O4 hybrid prepared by Geng et al. demonstrated excellent adsorption performance for a series of dyes, such as RhB, R6G, AB92, OII, MG and NC.549 In addition, the material could easily and rapidly be separated from water due to the presence of magnetic Fe3O4 NPs, and efficiently regenerated and utilized via simple annealing treatment under moderate conditions. Moreover, graphene-based iron oxide nanocomposites including HRG/Fe3O4 and HRG/Fe2O3 have demonstrated excellent adsorption ability to bind other heavy metals and organic dyes such as chromium, lead, cobalt, neutral red, methylene blue and so on.550–553 More recently, a ternary composite of HRG/Fe3O4/TiO2 has been reported, which exhibited high selectivity and capacity in capturing phosphopeptides.554 In another study, zinc hydroxide (Zn(OH)2) was incorporated into graphene for hydrogen sulfide (H2S) removal.555 Among the two types of nanocomposites with Zn(OH)2, composites of Zn(OH)2 with GO (GO/Zn(OH)2) exhibited better adsorption of H2S than HRG/Zn(OH)2 nanocomposites or pristine Zn(OH)2.


3.4.2 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering substrates. 
Graphene-based nanocomposites of metallic nanoparticles (NPs) combining the properties of both the components in a synergistic manner have been used for surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS).556 SERS enhances the signal intensity by orders of magnitudes, and it has been potentially exploited for the ultra-sensitive detection of various analytes, including a number of chemical and biological molecules.557 Among the precious metal NPs, which are available with good control on size and morphology, silver (Ag) NPs have high SERS activity. Significant efforts have been made to prepare graphene silver (Ag) nanocomposites (HRG/Ag), combining the properties of Ag and graphene, e.g. high SERS activity of silver and large specific surface area of graphene.558–560 Recently, Khan et al. have described the synthesis of HRG/Ag nanocomposites using a Pulicaria glutinosa plant extract as a reducing agent (cf.Fig. 21). The plant extract functionalizes the surfaces of HRG which helps conjugating the Ag NPs to HRG. The as-prepared PE–HRG–Ag nanocomposites display excellent SERS activity, and significantly enhanced the intensities of the Raman signal of graphene.561
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the green synthesis of graphene/silver nanocomposites using an aqueous extract of Pulicaria glutinosa plant. (b) Raman spectra of HRG, HRG/Ag-1 and HRG/Ag-2 with 50 and 75 wt% of Ag respectively. With increasing the concentration of Ag NPs the intensities of the Raman signals also increase. Copyrights reserved to the MDPI.561 
SERS is a powerful and reliable analytical tool for the ultra-sensitive detection of analytes even at the single molecule level.562,563 SERS is attributed to an electromagnetic mechanism (EM) based on surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and/or a chemical mechanism (CM) based on charge transfer.564 SERS substrates often suffer from a lack of adsorption of molecules.565 Due to its flexible and smooth 2D honeycomb structure, graphene shows adsorption for many molecules, especially for aromatic ones.566 Moreover, an enhanced chemical mechanism has also been proposed for graphene, due to its high surface plasma frequency in the terahertz range.567 Therefore, graphene has been extensively applied as a support material to prepare HRG/Ag nanocomposites to obtain high SERS activity, good and efficient plasmonic and chemiluminescence properties, which facilitate the detection of molecules even at low concentrations.568,569
Ag NP decorated single-layer HRG films on a silicon surface showed Raman enhancement and adsorption of aromatic molecules (rhodamine 6G, methyl violet, rhodamine B and methylene blue).570 The hybrid material was used as an SERS substrate to detect the adsorbed molecules with a detection limit at the nanomolar level. Sun et al. prepared HRG/Ag nanocomposites as SERS substrates to detect 4-aminobenzenethiol, nile blue and rhodamine 6G, which have different coupling abilities to graphene sheets.571 The hybrid material was also used as a SERS substrate to demonstrate the combined SERS effect, and it was shown that both EM and CM effects coexist for Ag NPs, graphene sheets, and the absorbed analytes. The combined and competitive SERS effect between the adsorbed probe molecules and the graphene sheets varies depending on the species and concentration of the adsorbed probe molecules.
The morphologies of metal NPs, such as Ag or Au on pristine n-layer graphenes, depend on the number of graphene layers.572 A study of the thickness-dependent morphologies and the SERS effect of HRG/Ag nanocomposites, where 2 or 5 nm silver films were deposited onto n-layer graphenes, showed that with increasing sample temperature the thickness-dependent Ag morphologies become more pronounced due to the changes of the temperature-dependent surface diffusion coefficient of n-layer graphenes.573 The SERS effect was enhanced after thermal deposition of Ag films, and the enhancement factors were dependent on the number of graphene layers. A single layer showed the biggest SERS enhancement, which was attributed to the coupled surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of Ag NPs (cf.Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation and SEM images of graphene-supported Ag-based nanocomposites. Thickness-dependent morphologies of 5 nm Ag on n-layer graphenes with samples kept at a controlled temperature and Raman spectra of pristine and 5 nm Ag-covered n-layer graphenes. Scale bar: 1 μm. (a and b) Ag morphologies deposited on monolayer and bilayer graphene at 298 K. (c and d) Silver morphologies on monolayer and bilayer graphene at 333 K. (e and f) Ag morphologies on monolayer and bilayer graphene at 373 K. Raman spectra of pristine (a) and 5 nm Ag-covered (b) n-layer graphenes. From the intensities and shapes of the G (∼1580 cm−1) and 2D (∼2700 cm−1) peaks, SERS of n-layer graphenes can be observed obviously, which is dependent on the layer number. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.573 
The aggregation of graphene sheets due to π–π stacking interactions leads to a decrease of the SERS enhancement factor with increasing number of graphene layers. This problem can be overcome by prefunctionalization of graphene sheets. High quality single-layer HRG/Ag nanocomposites, which were used as SERS substrates for the detection of 4-aminothiophenol in liquid, were obtained using poly-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone (PVP) as the reductant and stabilizer.574 Similarly, poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride (PDDA)) was used as a stabilizer for preparing cationic polyelectrolyte functionalized graphene oxide and as a support for Ag NPs for detecting folic acid by SERS.575
Apart from silver, Au NPs (like Ag NPs) induce a large enhancement of the Raman signal when deposited on graphene. Several studies have been conducted on the enhanced SERS activity of the analytes with HRG/Au hybrids. Au NPs deposited on the surface of graphene have enhanced the Raman signal by a factor of 2.5.576–578 An enhancement of 60 has been achieved with Au nanodiscs, which were deposited on mechanically exfoliated single-layer graphene.579 An even larger enhancement (×120) could be achieved by depositing Au NPs on single-layer graphene (at excitation 633 nm).580 The SERS enhancement of single-layer graphene is much larger compared to graphene, and the enhancement of the G band was larger than that of the D band.

3.5 Biological applications
Graphene and graphene-based materials have great potential in various biomedical applications,581 as indicated by the number of publications in this area. Several studies have been carried out on biomedical applications of graphene, including drug/gene delivery, imaging, antibacterial and anti-cancer activities and so on.582,583 Superparamagnetic Fe2O3 NPs were applied in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), biological separation, and hyperthermia therapy. In this regard, HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites have attracted attention to achieve enhanced MRI contrast, improved biocompatibility and physiological stability.584–586 The synthesis of dextran-coated HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites and their application as T2-weighted contrast agents for cellular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been reported recently.587 The as-prepared nanocomposites exhibit improved T2-weighted MRI contrast due to the formation of Fe3O4 NP aggregates on HRG sheets, resulting in an enhanced T2 relaxivity. Some other applications of HRG/Fe2O3 and HRG/Fe3O4 nanocomposites for magnetically targeted drug delivery, bioseparation and other biological applications have been reported as well.588–591
Ag NPs are known to exhibit the highest bactericidal activity and biocompatibility among all antibacterial nanomaterials. They have been applied as antiseptic, disinfectant and pharmaceutical agents.592 The toxicity of Ag is strongly dependent on the size and morphology of the NPs where high surface area and easy cell penetration with small Ag NPs lead to high antibacterial activity. Macromolecules, photo-catalytic, and other carbonaceous materials, have been used as supports for monodisperse and stable Ag NPs with excellent antibacterial, optical and electronic properties.593 However, due the low solubility in water, graphene or HRG has rarely been used as an anti-bacterial agent.594,595 Graphene oxide with oxygen-containing functional groups is water soluble and therefore more biocompatible than graphene; as a result, Ag-based graphene oxide nanocomposites may be used as anti-bacterial agents.596
Oleylamine-capped Ag NPs have been anchored on graphene oxide sheets in a phase transfer system.597 The resulting graphene oxide/Ag nanocomposite revealed enhanced antibacterial properties against Gram-negative bacteria compared to pristine Ag NPs. Ma et al. showed the synergetic effect of Ag NPs and graphene oxide to be responsible for the enhanced anti-bacterial activity.598 The anti-bacterial mechanism of graphene oxide/Ag nanocomposites on E. coli bacteria appears to depend on hydrogen bonding between graphene oxide and lipopolysaccharide strings of the cell membrane, where graphene oxide sheets adhere to E. coli. This blocks the cells from taking up nutrients, which ultimately leads to cell death.
4 Conclusion and future perspective
The current developments in the synthesis of graphene, graphene-based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites with a special focus on their synthesis by a top-down approach and properties characterized by various techniques were discussed in detail. The exceptional electronic, electrical, and mechanical properties of free standing single layer graphene obtained from graphite by micromechanical cleavage have attracted the attention of the scientific community. As a result, the number of publications related to graphene and graphene-based materials has increased exponentially in recent years. The improved knowledge on graphene surface chemistry, methods of surface functionalization, preparation of stable and homogeneous dispersions of graphene in large quantities and progress in the colloidal synthesis of inorganic nanomaterials has provided a wide range of possibilities for the preparation of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites by incorporating various functional nanomaterials. The cooperative effects between graphene, metal and metal oxide materials in these nanocomposites have paved the way to design and explore a variety of new applications ranging from the medical to the energy sector (cf.Fig. 23).
 Fig. 23  Graphical illustration of the wide range of applications of graphene inorganic nanoparticles (NPs), including metal and metal oxide NP based nanocomposites. 
So far, tremendous progress has been made in the chemical preparation of graphene and graphene-based materials by methods broadly classified as top-down and bottom-up approaches. Although bottom-up strategies can yield single layer, defect free graphene, they are not suitable presently for a bulk synthesis of graphene, generally required for large scale production of graphene-based materials. Therefore, considering the great demand for the bulk production of graphene, top-down approaches have gained attention. These techniques typically involve the sequential oxidation and reduction of graphite, which is a low cost commodity material that offers economic advantages. Furthermore, top-down approaches have become more attractive due to the recent advancements in the methods of direct exfoliation of graphite in various solvents in the absence of any reducing or stabilizing agents. Hence, for the synthesis of graphene based materials required for the potential industrial applications, graphite based top-down approaches are more suitable and economically viable.
Still, there is plenty of scope to explore new protocols for top-down approaches to synthesize bulk quantities, which are cost effective, environmentally friendly and yield defect free graphene. Most of the currently available synthetic methods lack control over size, shape, edge and thickness (number of layers) of graphene due to random exfoliation, growth and assembly processes. Despite the considerable progress in the synthesis of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites, challenges exist in the application on an industrial scale. For instance, advanced applications of graphene-based metal and metal oxide nanocomposites require extensive research to understand the interactions between nanomaterials and the graphene surface, which will have direct impact on the properties of these nanocomposites. A proper understanding of these interactions will surely enhance the application potential of the nanocomposites in various fields, including biosensing, catalysis drug delivery, imaging and so on. Furthermore, to improve the processability of these nanocomposites, a work needs to be done towards the enhancement of dispersion quality. Although considerable success has been achieved in obtaining homogeneous dispersions of graphene in various organic solvents, efforts must be directed towards the prevention of restacking graphene and the improvement of the dispersion quality of graphene-based inorganic nanocomposites. Several methods have been applied to synthesize homogeneously dispersed nanocomposites by various reduction and functionalization techniques. However, many reported reductants and surfactants may have adverse effects on the potential applications of these nanocomposites. Particularly, it is important to understand the biocompatibility and toxicity of these reductants and surfactants to make the resulting nanocomposites safe for biomedical applications.
Nevertheless, graphene is a novel 2D support for the growth, assembly and nucleation of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, and the integration and synergistic effects of these nanoparticles with graphene greatly enhance the performance of the composite materials. Therefore, graphene based metal and metal oxide composites with anchored, encapsulated, wrapped, layered and mixed structures have enormous potential for many industrial applications, and they are commercially feasible compared to nanocomposites using other carbonaceous materials. The controlled synthesis of these nanocomposites, with well-defined size, shape and crystallinity of nanomaterials, not only prevents the restacking of graphene nanosheets, but also provides excellent templates for the preparation of 3D porous networks with enhanced electrical and electronic properties. Moreover, improvements in the quality of graphene will ultimately lead to the synthesis of uniform nanocomposites, which can be fine-tuned for various potential applications. Therefore a multidisciplinary approach must be used to improve the protocols for the bulk production of graphene to achieve the mature form of nanotechnology to build devices.
Abbreviations

HRGHighly reduced graphene oxide
GOGraphite oxide
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
0DZero-dimensional
CVDChemical vapor deposition
CMGChemically modified graphene
NMP
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
HR-TEMHigh resolution-transmission electron microscopy
TRGThermally reduced graphene oxide
KMGKOH-modified graphene oxide
hKMGHydrazine-reduced KMG
PEMProton exchange membrane
AFMAtomic force microscopy
HRGHighly reduced graphene oxide
rGOReduced graphene oxide
CReGOChemically reduced graphene oxide
CCGChemically converted graphene
PEPlant extracts
Mtr/OrncOuter membrane c-type cytochromes
SERSSurface enhanced Raman scattering
DIDeionized water
SEMScanning electron microscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
MWIMicrowave irradiation
EGExfoliated graphite
GICsGraphite intercalation compounds
ILIonic liquid
SCSupercritical
[BMIM][PF6]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cells
SPESolid-phase extraction
MPMethyl parathion
LIBsLithium-ion batteries
MBMethylene blue
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
ACNActivated carbon nanofibers
0DZero-dimensional
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
QDsQuantum dots
LDH-NSLayered double hydroxide nanosheets
ORROxygen reduction reaction
DMFCDirect methanol fuel cell
CBCarbon black
ECSAElectrochemically active surface area
MWCNTMulti-walled carbon nanotubes
FAOFormic acid oxidation
NBNitrobenzene
GCEGlassy carbon electrode
EMElectromagnetic mechanism
SPRSurface plasmon resonance
CMChemical mechanism
PVPPoly-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone
GODGlucose oxidase
FETField effect transistor
EPElectroactive epinephrine
ZnPZinc porphyrin

Acknowledgements
This project was funded by National Plan for Science, Technology and Innovation (MAARIFAH), King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Award Number (11NAN-1860-02).
References
K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He and Q. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 598–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Compton and S. B. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Denk, M. Hohage, P. Zeppenfeld, J. Cai, C. A. Pignedoli, H. Söde, R. Fasel, X. Feng, K. Müllen, S. Wang, D. Prezzi, A. Ferretti, A. Ruini, E. Molinari and P. Ruffieux, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4253 CAS .
H.-W. Liang, X. Zhuang, S. Brüller, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. Obrien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Kaufmann and A. Star, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2790–2797 RSC .
A. Fasolino, J. H. Los and M. I. Katsnelson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 858–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Antonietti and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Lax and R. Maxwell, National Trust Annual Archaeological Review,  1998–1999, 18–23 Search PubMed.
M. Eizenberg and J. M. Blakely, Surf. Sci., 1970, 82, 228–236 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, K. S. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieval and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mermin, Phys. Rev., 1968, 176, 250–254 CrossRef .
M. Ortila, C. Faugeras, P. Plochocka, P. Neugebauer, G. Martinez, D. K. Maude, A.-L. Barra, M. Sprinkle, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer and M. Potemski, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 267601 CrossRef .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk and J. R. Potts, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Weber, D. M. Eisele, J. P. Rabe, Y. Liang, X. Feng, L. Zhi, K. Müllen, J. L. Lyon, R. Williams, D. A. V. Bout and K. J. Stevenson, Small, 2011, 6, 184–189 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2779–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Slonczewski and P. R. Weiss, Phys. Rev., 1958, 109, 272–279 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dössel, L. Gherghel, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2540–2543 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, A. A. Abdala and C. W. Macosko, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6515–6530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Kim and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
C. Zhang, R. Hao, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7326–7329 RSC .
K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6531–6541 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
A. H. C. Neto, F. Guines, N. M. R. Peren, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Pisula, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 554–567 CrossRef CAS .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Coulson and R. Taylor, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. A, 1952, 65, 815–825 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. H. An, R. D. Piner, I. W. Jung, D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6592–6594 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. Feng, K. Müllen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2010, 466, 470–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, C. Christodoulou, M. V. Nardi, N. Koch, H. Sachdev and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3337–3346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, Z. Peng and J. M. Tour, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1327–1337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shen, J. Ding, X. Yan, W. Feng, J. Li and Q. Xue, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 4523–4531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, J. J. Kim, G. Ali and S. O. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1144–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Narita, X. Feng, Y. Hernandez, S. A. Jensen, M. Bonn, H. Yang, I. A. Verzhbitskiy, C. Casiraghi, M. R. Hansen, A. H. R. Koch, G. Fytas, O. Ivasenko, B. Li, K. S. Mali, T. Balandina, S. Mahesh, S. D. Feyter and K. Müllen, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 126–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhi and K. Mullen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1472–1484 RSC .
E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González, J. Sovich and M. D. Lima, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 221–228 Search PubMed .
D. Wei, L. Xie, K. K. Lee, Z. Hu, S. Tan, W. Chen, C. H. Sow, K. Chen, Y. Liu and A. T. S. Wee, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. Cui, C. A. Tao, Y. Wu, Z. Li, L. Ma, Y. Wen and G. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5864–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Talirz, H. Söde, J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, S. Blankenburg, R. Jafaar, R. Berger, X. Feng, K. Müllen, D. Passerone, R. Fasel and C. A. Pignedoli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2060–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bin, G. Dechao and G. Yunlong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3522–3525 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Obraztsov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 212–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Salzmann, A. Moser, M. Oehzelt, T. Breuer, X. Feng, Z. Y. Juang, D. Nabok, R. G. D. Valle, S. Duhm, G. Heimel, A. Brillante, E. Venuti, I. Bilotti, C. Christodoulou, J. Frisch, P. Puschnig, C. Draxl, G. Witte, K. Müllen and N. Koch, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10874–10883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Tan, B. Yang, K. Parvez, A. Narita, S. Osella, D. Beljonne, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2646 Search PubMed .
M. G. Schwab, A. Narita, Y. Hernandez, T. Balandin, K. S. Mali, S. D. Feyter, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18169–18172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hamwi and V. Marchand, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1996, 57, 867–872 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Okotrub, P. Asanovl, N. F. Yudanov, K. S. Babin, A. V. Guselnikov, T. I. Nedoseikina and P. N. Gevko, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2545–2548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. L. Sznopet and D. W. Olson, U. S Geological Survey Data Series,  2010, p. 140.
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Moon and J. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9681–9683 RSC .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 291–312 RSC .
L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barg, F. M. Perez, N. Ni, P. V. Pereira, R. C. Maher, E. Garcia-Tuñon, S. Eslava, S. Agnoli, C. Mattevi and E. Saiz, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4328 CAS .
T. S. Sreeprasad and V. Berry, Small, 2013, 9, 341–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z.-S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, V. Georgakilas, R. Zboril, T. A. Steriotis and A. Stubos, Small, 2009, 5, 1841–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sampath, A. N. Basuray, K. J. Hartlieb, T. Aytun, S. I. Stupp and J. F. Stoddart, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2740–2745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, F. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Liu, C. Zhang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1518–1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Behabtu, J. R. Lomeda, M. J. Green, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, D. V. Kosynkin, D. Tsentalovich, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, J. Schmidt, E. Kesselman, Y. Cohen, Y. Talmon, J. M. Tour and M. Pasquali, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 406–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu and K. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9148–9151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rangappa, K. Sone, M. Wang, U. K. Gautam, D. Golberg, H. Itoh, M. Ichihara and I. Honma, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 6488–6494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samori, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381–398 RSC .
U. Khan, A. O'Neill, M. Loty, S. De and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2010, 6, 864–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotva, P. J. King, U. Khan, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3155–3162 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ghosh, K. V. Rao, S. J. George and C. N. Rao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. An, T. Simmons, R. Shah, C. Wolfe, K. M. Lewis, M. Washington, S. K. Nayak, S. Talapatra and S. Kar, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4295–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, R. E. Bachman, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 116–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kabe, X. Feng, C. Adachi and K. Müllen, Chem.–Asian J., 2014, 9, 3125–3129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, R. R. Parajuli, D. Mastrogiovanni, B. Dai, P. Lo, W. Cheung, R. Brukh, P. L. Chiu, T. Zhou, Z. Liu, E. Garfunkel and H. He, Small, 2010, 6, 1100–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Shih, A. Vijayaraghavan, R. Krishnan, R. Sharma, H. J.-H. Han, M.-H. Ham, Z. Jin, S. Lin, G. L. C. Paulus, N. F. Reuel, Q. H. Wang, D. Blankschtein and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 439–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Rao, J. Sentilnathan, H. W. Cho, J. J. Wu and M. Yoshimura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 298–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O'Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O'Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy and T. J. Pennycook, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Boehm and E. Stumpp, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1381–1383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schafheutl, Philos. Mag., 1840, 16, 570–590 Search PubMed .
B. C. Brodie, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1859, 149, 249–259 CrossRef .
B. C. Brodie, Ann. Chim. Phys., 1860, 59, 466–472 Search PubMed .
L. Staudenmaier, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1898, 31, 1481–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
S. Pan and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4073–4083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Botas, P. Álvarez, C. Blanco, R. Santamaría, M. Granda, P. Ares, F. Rodríguez-Reinosoc and R. Menéndeza, Carbon, 2012, 50, 275–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Krishnamoorthy, M. Veerapandian, K. Yun and S.-J. Kim, Carbon, 2013, 53, 38–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, A. D. Todd and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5288–5301 RSC .
G. Ruess, Monatsh. Chem., 1946, 76, 381–417 CrossRef .
W. Scholz and H. P. Boehm, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1969, 369, 327–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nakajima and Y. Matsuo, Carbon, 1994, 32, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lerf, M. Forster and J. Klinowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4477–4482 CrossRef CAS .
T. Szabó, O. Berkesi, P. Forgó, K. Josepovits, Y. Sanakis, D. Petridis and I. Dékány, Chem. Mater., 2006, 16, 2740–2749 CrossRef .
A. Lerf, H. He, T. Riedl, M. Foster and J. Klinowski, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 101–103, 857–862 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Li, K. N. Kundin, M. J. McAllister, R. K. Prud'homme, I. A. Aksay and R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 176101-1–4 Search PubMed .
K. N. Kundin, B. Ozbas, H. C. Schniepp, R. K. Prudhumme, I. A. Aksay and R. Car, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 36–41 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Boukhvalov and M. I. Katsnelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10697–10701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Chen, N. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
J. Barkauskas, I. Stankeviciene, J. Daksevic and A. Padarauskas, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5373–5381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, R. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3342–3347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Tang and J. J. Gooding, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12435–12452 RSC .
J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon, Langmuir, 2008, 2, 10560–10564 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Jalili, S. H. Aboutalebi, D. Esrafilzadeh, K. Konstantinov, S. E. Moulton, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3981–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shen, X. Lin, N. Yousefi, J. Jia and J.-K. Kim, Carbon, 2014, 66, 84–92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Joshi, P. Carbone, F. C. Wang, V. G. Kravets, Y. Su, I. V. Grigorieva, H. A. Wu, A. K. Geim and R. R. Nair, Science, 2014, 343, 752–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cui, O. Ivasenko, K. S. Mali, D. Du, X. Feng, K. Müllen, S. D. Feyter and S. F. L. Mertens, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10376–10378 RSC .
S. Yang, Y. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 427 Search PubMed .
W. Gao, M. Majumder, L. B. Alemany, T. N. Narayanan, M. A. Ibarra, B. K. Pradhan and M. M. Ajayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1821–1826 CAS .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 291–312 RSC .
P. V. Kumar, N. M. Bardhan, S. Tongay, J. Wu, A. M. Belcher and J. C. Grossmann, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 151–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Han, X. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Li, H. Yan and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1137–1143 CAS .
G.-H. Moon, H. Kim, Y. Shin and W. Choi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2205–2207 RSC .
P. Gong, Z. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Mi, J. Sun, L. Niu, H. Wang, J. Wang and S. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6327–6330 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dinkin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H.-K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. H. Pham, T. T. Dang, K. Singh, S. H. Hur, E. W. Shin, J. S. Kim, M. A. Lee, S. H. Baeck and J. S. Chung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1070–1077 CAS .
A. N. Abbas, G. Liu, A. Narita, M. Orosco, X. Feng, K. Müllen and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7555–7558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Fernandez-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solis-Fernandez and A. Martinez-Alonso, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 CAS .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 73–78 Search PubMed .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, R. Cheng, X. Zhao, X. Duan and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 4, 1539 CrossRef PubMed  , 1–7.
T. Kuila, A. K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 52–71 RSC .
S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Carbon, 2011, 50, 3210–3228 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Esfandial, O. Akhavan and A. Irajizad, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10907–10914 RSC .
Q. Zhuo, J. Gao, M. Peng, L. Bai, J. Deng, Y. Xia, Y. Ma, J. Zhong and X. Sun, Carbon, 2013, 52, 559–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, K. Wang, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Song and B. Shao, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1686–1689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mei and J. Ouyang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5389–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Fan, W. Kai, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi and J. Feng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Akther, J. Panwar and Y.-S. Yun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 591–602 CrossRef .
S. F. Adil, M. E. Assal, M. Khan, A. Al-Warthan, M. R. H. Siddiqui and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9709–9717 RSC .
M. Khan, M. Khan, S. F. Adil, M. N. Tahir, W. Tremel, H. Z. Alkhathlan, A. Al-Warthan and M. R. H. Siddiqui, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 1507–1516 Search PubMed .
M. Khan, M. Khan, M. Kuniyil, S. F. Adil, A. Al-Warthan, H. Z. Alkhathlan, W. Tremel, M. N. Tahir and M. R. H. Siddiqui, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 9026–9033 RSC .
M. Khan, A. H. Al-Marri, M. Khan, N. Mohri, S. F. Adil, A. Al-Warthan, M. R. H. Siddiqui, H. Z. Alkhathlan, R. Berger, W. Tremel and M. N. Tahir, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24119–24125 RSC .
J. Li, G. Xiao, C. Chen, R. Li and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1481–1487 CAS .
A. Nandgaonkar, Q.-Q. Wang, K. Fu, W. E. Krause, Q. Wei, R. Gorga and L. Lucia, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3195–3201 RSC .
M. Fan, C. Zhu, Z.-Q. Feng, J. Yang, L. Liu and D. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4882–4888 RSC .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, K. A. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Carbon, 2012, 50, 914–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, F. Qian, C. W. Saltikov, Y. Jiao and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 563–570 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McAllister, J. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Kim, W. Khan and S. Y. Park, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 511, 110–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, F. Khoerunnisa, W. Gao, W. Dou and T. Hayashi, Carbon, 2013, 52, 608–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shen, D. Lu, W. Zhai and W. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 50–53 RSC .
W. Lv, D. M. Tang, Y. B. He, C. H. You, Z. Q. Shi, X. C. Chen, C.-M. Chen, P.-X. Hou, C. Liu and Q.-H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3730–3736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Zhang, J.-W. Wang, Q. Yan, W.-G. Zheng, C. Chen and Z.-Z. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5392–5397 RSC .
K. H. Liao, A. Mittal, S. Bose, C. Leighton, A. Mkhovan and W. W. Macosko, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1253–1258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Choi, M. H. Seo, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Carbon, 2011, 49, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, Y. Huang, Z. Wu, L.-M. Wang and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 976–978 RSC .
J. Yang, M. R. Jo, M. Kang, Y. S. Huh, H. Jung and Y. M. Kang, Carbon, 2014, 53, 106–113 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Gerbec, D. Magana, A. Washington and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15791–15800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, X. Wang, F. Liu, J. Wang and C. Xu, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 404–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tryba, A. W. Morawski and M. Inagaki, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2417–2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wei, Z. J. Fan, J. L. Luo, C. Zheng and D. S. Xie, Carbon, 2009, 47, 337–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Yao, Z. Lin, K. S. Moon, W. Lin and C. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4781–4783 RSC .
G. Demazeau, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 15–18 RSC .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, X. Li and H. Dia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9910–9911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Q. Bao, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Zhong and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2950–2956 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun and L. Gao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1194–1200 RSC .
S. Dubin, S. Gilje, K. Wang, V. C. Tung, K. Cha and A. S. Hall, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3845–3852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, Q.-Y. Cheng and B.-H. Han, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3920–3927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Larciprete, S. Fabris, T. Sun, P. Lacovig, A. Baralidi and S. Lizzit, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17315–17321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, G. L. Bozoklu, S. Park, M. Stroller and R. D. Piner, Carbon, 2009, 47, 145–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Jeong, Y. P. Lee, M. H. Jin, E. S. Kim, J. J. Bae and Y. H. Lee, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 470, 255–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, J. Jang and S. Nagase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 832–842 CAS .
A. Ganguly, S. Sharma, P. Papakontantino and J. Hamilton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17009–17019 CAS .
M. Acik, G. Lee, C. Mattevi, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, M. Chhowalla, K. Cho and Y. Chabal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19761–19781 CAS .
X. Fan, W. Peng, Y. Li, X. Li, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, A. K. Mishra, P. Kharna, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 1061–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, K. P. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Solon and N. Tagmatarchis, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12930–12936 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Sreeprasad and V. Berry, Small, 2013, 9, 341–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Nossol, A. B. S. Nossol, S.-X. Guo, J. Zhang, X.-Y. Fang, A. G. J. Zarbin and A. M. Bond, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 870–878 RSC .
R. Muszynski, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5263–5266 CAS .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 547–555 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, Y. Song and G. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., 2011, 176, 711–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Liu, L. Wang, X. Qin, J. Tian, W. Lu, G. Chang and X. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 538–545 RSC .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, Y. Xu, H. Zhou, S. Bai and G. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 13601–13609 RSC .
K. D. J. I. Jayawardena, R. Rhodes, K. K. Gandhi, M. R. R. Prabhath, G. D. M. R. Dabera, M. J. Beliatis, L. J. Rozanski, S. J. Henley and S. R. P. Silva, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9922–9927 CAS .
H. Kim, D. H. Seo, S. W. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 326–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wang, T. Yang, X. Guo and S. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Yang, H. Qiu, Y. Dai, Q. Zheng, G.-P. Zheng and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11451–11456 CAS .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
H. M. A. Hassan, V. Abdelsayed, R. A. E. Khder, K. M. AbouZeid, J. Terner, M. S. El-Shall, S. I. Al-Resayes and A. A. El-Azhary, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3832–3837 RSC .
X. Liu, L. Pan, T. Lv, T. Lu, G. Zhu, Z. Sun and C. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1189–1193 CAS .
M. Li, X. Bo, Y. Zhang, C. Han and L. Guo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 56, 223–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. R. Hauptmann, Z. Wei, S. Petersen, N. Bovet, T. Vosch, J. Nygård, W. Hu, Y. Liu, T. Bjørnholm, K. Nørgaard and B. W. Laursen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T. Y. Xiao, H. H. Li, J. J. Yang, Z. Wang, H. B. Yao and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, J. Fu, Z. Xu, R. Yuan and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3483–3490 CAS .
J. Shen, M. Shi, H. Ma, B. Yan, N. Li and M. Ye, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 2077–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, M. Qu and J. H. Warner, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5069–5075 RSC .
J. Shen, M. Shi, B. Yan, H. Ma, N. Li and M. Ye, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 795–806 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, B. Alemany, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang and H. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3483–3507 CAS .
K. Hu, D. D. Kulkarni, I. Choi and V. V. Tsukruk, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 1934–1972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Terrones, O. Martin, M. Gonzalez, J. Pozuelo, B. Serrano, J. C. Cabanelas, S. M. Vega-Diaz and J. Baselga, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5302–5310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, A. Winter, H. Vieker, X. Liu, S. Han, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4552–4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, D. Sun and W. P. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2012, 430, 79–82 Search PubMed .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang, H. Yin and Y. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15–32 CAS .
Q. Li, N. Mahmood, J. Zhu, Y. Hou and S. Sun, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 668–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 6217 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
C. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, Z. Feng and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 31–54 CAS .
N. Mahmood and Y. Hou, Advanced Science, 2014, 1, 1–20 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Hou and Q. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 236–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Oschmann, D. Bresser, M. N. Tahir, K. Fischer, W. Tremel, S. Passerini and R. Zentel, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 1693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bresser, B. Oschmann, M. N. Tahir, W. Tremel, R. Zentel and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Shen, P. Nie, G. Xu, B. Ding, S. Fang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9150–9155 CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, J. E. Yourey and B. M. Bartlett, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1491–1499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren and F. Li, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, S. K. Balasingam, H. Y. Jeong, W. G. Hong, H.-B. R. Lee, B. H. Kim and Y. Jun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, G. Sun, P. Yin, C. Ruan and K. Ai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11462–11470 CAS .
J. Cheng, B. Wang, H. L. Xin, G. Yang, H. Cai, F. Nie and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10814–10820 CAS .
H. Liu and W. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000–4008 CAS .
G. Du, K. H. Seng, Z. Guo, J. Liu, W. Li, D. Jai, C. Cook, Z. Liu and H. Liu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 690–697 RSC .
X. Yang, H. Ding, D. Zhang, X. Yan, C. Lu, J. Qin, R. Zhang, H. Tang and H. Song, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2011, 46, 1195–1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lu, J. Liu and M. Lei, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 6745–6755 RSC .
K. Chang, Z. Mei, T. Wang, Q. Kang, S. Ouyang and J. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7078–7087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17175–17184 RSC .
K. Chang and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 65, 4720–4728 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Youn, S. Han, J. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. G. Zhu, Y. Shi, J. I. Wong and H. Y. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9839–9845 RSC .
U. Maitra, U. Gupta, M. De, R. Datta, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13057–13061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liao, J. Zhu, X. Bian, L. Zhu, M. D. Scanlon, H. H. Girault and B. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5326–5333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, X. Lin, C. Zhang, C. Yang, Q. Zhang, W. Hu, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30150–30155 RSC .
A. Yu, H. W. Park, A. Davies, D. C. Higgins, Z. Chen and X. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1855–1860 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, H. Jian, X. Fu, Z. Ren, M. Yan, G. Qian and Z. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5367–5370 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Guo, A. Du and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3600–3605 RSC .
H. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Xia, Y. Gan, X. Tao, C. Liang and W. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 4743–4747 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Park, C. Wang, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6812–6817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, Z. X. Chen, H. S. Kim, H. Ahn and G. X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3346–3349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, M. Schroeder, S. Kluge, A. Balducci, U. Hagemann, C. Schulz and H. Wiggers, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015 10.1039/c5ta02549d .
Y. Chen, Z. Lei, H. Wu, C. Zhu, P. Gao, Q. Ouyanga, L.-H. Qia and W. Qin, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3362–3366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, G. Zhu, H. Song, X. Chen and S. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17818–17824 RSC .
B. Jang, O. B. Chae, S.-K. Park, J. Ha, S. M. Oh, H. B. Na and Y. Piao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15442–15446 CAS .
X. Huang, B. Sun, S. Chen and G. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2014, 9, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, G. Ji, Y. Ma, J. Y. Lee and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3078–3083 CAS .
C. Liang, T. Zhai, W. Wang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7214–7220 CAS .
S. H. Lee, S.-H. Yu, J. E. Lee, A. Jin, D. J. Lee, N. Lee, H. Jo, K. Shin, T.-Y. Ahn, Y.-W. Kim, H. Choe, Y.-E. Sung and T. Hyeon, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4249–4256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, M. Cao, L. Ren and C. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14469–14477 CAS .
S. K. Behera, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10371–10373 RSC .
G. Wang, T. Liu, X. Xie, Z. Ren, J. Bai and H. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 128, 336–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Huang, D. Liu, X. Wang, S. Song, L. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21567–21573 CAS .
J. Lin, A.-R. Raji, K. Nan, Z. Peng and Z. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2044–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Song, X. Ma and G. Ning, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7189–7197 CAS .
W. Zhou, J. Zhu, C. Cheng, J. Liu, H. Yang, C. Cong, C. Guan, X. Jia, H. J. Fan, Q. Yan, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4954–4961 CAS .
Y. Zou, J. Kan and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20747–20753 CAS .
X. Zhu, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3333–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Tang, D. Wang, X. Li, Y. Hu, R. Li, G. Liang, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1521–1528 CAS .
W. K. Kim, W. H. Ryu, D. W. Han, S. J. Lim, J. Y. Eom and H. S. Kwon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4731–4736 CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3353–3358 RSC .
X. L. Huang, X. Zhao, Z. L. Wang, L. M. Wang and X. B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3764–3769 RSC .
Y. Lou, J. Liang, Y. Peng and J. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8885–8893 RSC .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, G. Li, M. Qu and G. Yin, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 1628–1632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, F. Li, C. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Ren, W. Wang, Z. Ma, J. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Kim and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7188–7196 CAS .
S. Yang, G. Cui, S. Pang, Q. Cao, U. Kolb, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Mullen, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 236–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. hou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, J. Zai, K. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Xu, J. Shen, Y. Su and X. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 230–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Liu, S. Tang, H. Li and D. Cao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 2587–2592 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9735–9739 RSC .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CAS .
F. D. Wu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6636–6641 RSC .
Y. Qi, H. Zhang, N. Du and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2337–2342 CAS .
C. Peng, B. Chen, Y. Qin, S. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zuo, S. Liu and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1074–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Yang, C. Chen and D. G. Evans, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 682–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Zhu and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11829–11834 CAS .
X. L. Huang, J. Chai, T. Jiang, Y. J. Wei, G. Chen, W. G. Liu, D. Han, L. Niu, L. Wang and X.-B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3404–3410 RSC .
W. Sun and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11528–11552 RSC .
S. Yang, P. Gao, D. Bao, Y. Chen, L. Wang, P. Yang, G. Li and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6731–6735 CAS .
J. H. Warner, M. H. Rummeli, A. Bachmatiuk, M. Wilson and B. Buchner, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 470–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, C. Xu, S. Miao, H. Sun and S. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 402, 230–236 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang, J. Jiang, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5183–5190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, C. Lu, X. Wang, K. Liang and B. K. Tay, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 624–633 CAS .
J. Zai, C. Yu, L. Tao, M. Xu, Y. Xiao, B. Li, Q. Han, K. Wang and X. Qian, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 6663–6671 RSC .
Y. Zou and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2615–2620 RSC .
L. Tao, J. Zai, K. Wang, Y. Wan, H. Zhang, C. Yu, Y. Xiao and X. Qian, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3410–3415 RSC .
Y. J. Mai, S. J. Shi, D. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 155–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao, H. Zheng, Y. Lu, J. Yin and M. Qu, Chem.
Commun., 2011, 47, 3159–3161 RSC .
M. Xu, F. Wang, B. Ding, X. Song and J. Fang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2240–2243 RSC .
X. Zhou, J. Zhang, Q. Su, J. Shi, Y. Liu and G. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 615–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Mai, X. L. Wang, J. Y. Xiang, Y. Q. Qiao, D. Zhang, C. D. Gu and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Yin, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3480–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Lu and Y. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 82–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X.-L. Wu, C.-Y. Shu, Y.-G. Guo and C.-R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10661–10664 RSC .
S. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Song, S. Liang, L. Wang and Z. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 3545–3553 RSC .
N. Li, Y. Xiao, C. Hu and M. Cao, Chem.–Asian J., 2013, 8, 1960–1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Zeng, S. Song and D. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4316–4319 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Cao, L. Bourgeois, H. Guan, S. Chen, Y. Zhong, D.-M. Tang, H. Li, T. Zhai, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 2, 2682–2690 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, F. Fu, F. Zhang, H.-E. Wang, S. V. Kershaw, J. Xu, S.-G. Sun and A. L. Rogach, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2140–2148 RSC .
R. Thomas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 274–280 CAS .
J. Liang, W. Wei, D. Zhong, Q. Yang, L. Li and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 454–459 CAS .
X. Huang, X. Zhou, L. Zhou, K. Qian, Y. Wang, Z. Liu and C. Yu, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 278–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4532–4539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, Y. Feng, N. Mahmood, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 1667–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932–4937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, C. Cao, F. Idrees and X. Ma, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2556–2564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang and Y. Hou, Small, 2013, 9, 1321–1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Zhu and Y. Hou, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10307–10318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 CAS .
J. Han, L. L. Zhang, S. Lee, J. Oh, K.-S. Lee, J. R. Potts, J. Ji, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff and S. Park, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 19–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Wang, J. Huang, H. Cheng, F. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Jiang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2547–2551 CAS .
J. L. Xia, F. Chen, J. H. Li and N. J. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giri, D. Ghosh and C. K. Das, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 24, 1312–1324 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Perera, A. D. Liyanage, N. Nijem, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 130–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, N. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, Q. Shen, Y. Ma, L. Wang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9178–9184 CAS .
G. Hag, Y. Liu, E. Kan, J. Tang, L. Zhang, H. Wang and W. Tang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9898–9904 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 Search PubMed .
G. Han, Y. Liu, E. Kan, J. Tang, L. Zhang, H. Wang and W. Tang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9898–9904 RSC .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825–3833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L. C. Qin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2917–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zilong, Z. Zhu, J. Qiu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1331–1336 RSC .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. Zhi, G. Ning, T. Li and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2366–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qian, Z. Chen, S. Cottingham, W. A. Merill, N. A. Swartz, A. M. Goforth, T. L. Clarec and J. Jiao, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 371–377 RSC .
A. T. Chidembo, S. H. Aboutalebi, K. Konstantinov, C. J. Jafta, H. K. Liu and K. I. Ozoemena, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 886–892 RSC .
D. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Wang and T. Wang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 628–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Long, T. Wei, J. Yan, L. Jiang and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11325–11332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. H. Sim, Y. Y. Tay, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Sharma, M. Srinivasan, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3422–3427 RSC .
Q. Qu, S. Yang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5574–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, X. Huang, S. Dou, J. Wu and S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17231–17239 CAS .
H. Xu, Z. Hu, A. Lu, Y. Hu, L. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Zhang and H. Wu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 141, 310–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, K. X. Yao, C. Meng and Y. Han, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 1289–1296 RSC .
S.-J. Kim, H. Jung, C. Lee, M. H. Kim and Y. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 191, 298–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bharali, K. Kuratani, T. Takeuchi, T. Kiyobayashi and N. Kuriyama, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7878–7881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vellacheri, V. K. Pillai and S. Kurungot, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 890–896 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, D.-W. Wang, W. Ren, J. Zhao and G. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3595–3602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, T. Mirfakhrai, Z. Chen, H. S. Casalongue and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 729–736 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liao, N. Li, S. Jin, G. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5310–5317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, W. Qiao, B. Shao, Q. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6973–6978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Liu, T. Chen, K. S. Tan, X. Jia, Z. Luo, C. Cong, H. Yang, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 14462–14465 RSC .
T. A. Mahmood, J. Zhu, C. Cao and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 267–276 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Zhang, B. Lu, X. Ke and B. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 426, 131–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Wang, X. Y. Dong, Z. J. Zhang, X. F. Pei, X. J. Chen, B. Chen and J. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3556–3558 RSC .
X. Dong, L. Wang, D. Wang, C. Li and J. Jin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 293–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Wu, Y.-P. Lin, C.-H. Lin and J.-T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2442–2448 RSC .
W. Zhou, M. L. Tan and X. S. Zhou, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 345, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Wang, D.-D. Zhao, Y.-Q. Zhao, C.-L. Xu and H.-L. Li, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1074–1082 RSC .
Y.-Y. Yang, Z. A. Hu, Z.-Y. Zhang, F.-H. Zhang, P.-J. Liang, H.-Y. Zhang and H.-Y. Lu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 133, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ji, J. Wu, X. Shen, H. Zhou and H. Xi, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 1190–1195 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, F. Sun, D. M. Tang, H. T. Fang, C. Liu, Q. H. Yang and H.-M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9014–9019 RSC .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang and Q. Yan, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, J. Song, P. Liu, W. Zu, T. Fang, Z. Jiao, H. Zhang and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18729–18798 Search PubMed .
A. Chidembo, S. H. Aboutalebi, K. Konstantinov, M. Salari, B. Winton, S. A. Yamini, I. P. Nevirkovets and H. K. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5236–5240 CAS .
J. Zhu, S. Chen, H. Zhou and X. Wang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, X. Sun, N. Zhang, K. Xu, M. Zhou and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 65–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Zhang, S. Liu, G. L. Pan, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1524–1529 CAS .
W. Yang, Z. Gao, J. Wang, J. Ma, M. Zhang and L. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5443–5454 CAS .
Z. Sun and X. Lu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 9973–9979 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, T. Ahn, D. Soundarajan, J. M. Ko and J. D. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6305–6307 RSC .
T.-H. Gu, J. L. Gunjakar, I. Y. Kim, S. B. Patil, J. M. Lee, X. Jin, N.-S. Lee and S.-J. Hwang, Small, 2015 DOI:10.1002/smll.201500286 .
Z. Gao, J. Wang, Z. Li, W. Yang, B. Wang, M. Hou, Y. He, Q. Liu, T. Mann, P. Yang, M. Zhang and L. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3509–3516 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahmood, M. Tahir, A. Mahmood, W. Yang, X. Gu, C. Cao, Y. Zhang and Y. Hou, Science China Materials, 2015, 58, 114–125 CrossRef .
K. Wang, X. Dong, C. Zhao, X. Qian and Y. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 433–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu, T. Li, H. Jin, P. Liu, J. Zhou, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, C. Li, G. Eda, Y. Zhang, W. Lei, M. Chowalla, W. I. Milne and W.-Q. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6084–6086 RSC .
T. Lu, L. Pan, H. Li, G. Zhu, T. Lv, X. Liu, Z. Sun, T. Chen and D. H. C. Chu, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 5488–5492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, L. Pan, Y. Li and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4170–4173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Gao, Z. Li, B. Wang, Y. Yan, Q. Liu, T. Mann, M. Zhang and Z. Jiang, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Prakash and D. Bahadur, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1394–1405 CAS .
Y.-L. Chen, Z.-A. Hu, Y.-Q. Chang, H.-W. Wang, Z.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Yang and H.-Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2563–2571 CAS .
L. Huang, G. Guo, Y. Liu, Q. Chang and Y. Xie, J. Disp. Technol., 2012, 8, 1–4 CrossRef .
V.-D. Dao, Y. Choi, K. Yong, L. L. Larina and H.-S. Choi, Carbon, 2015, 84, 383–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Roy-Mayhew and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6323–6348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cheng, M. S. Akther, O.-B. Yang and F. J. Stadler, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6635–6642 CAS .
Z. He, G. Guai, J. Liu, C. Guo, J. S. C. Loo, C. M. Li and Y. T. T. Tan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4613–4616 RSC .
Y. Fan, H. T. Lu, J. H. Liu, C. P. Yang, Q. S. Jing, Y. X. Zhang, X. K. Yang and K. J. Huang, Colloids Surf., B, 2011, 83, 78–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Natu, Z. Huang, Z. Ji and Y. Wu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 950–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bajpai, S. Roy, N. Koratkar and D. S. Misra, Carbon, 2013, 56, 56–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, G. H. Guai, C. Guo, Q. Song, S. P. Jiang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang and C. M. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12209–12215 CAS .
M.-H. Yeh, L.-Y. Lin, J.-S. Su, Y.-A. Leu, R. Vittal, C.-L. Sun and K.-C. Ho, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 416–425 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gong, H. Wang and Z. S. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17676–17682 RSC .
K. P. Musselman, A. Marin, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2202–2208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11816–11821 CAS .
S. Wu, Z. Yin, Q. He, G. Lu, X. Zhou and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3467–3470 RSC .
B. Stambouli, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4507–4520 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Perreault, A. F. de Faria and M. Elimelech, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015 10.1039/c5cs00021a .
B. Zheng, J. Wang, F.-B. Wang and X. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9079–9084 CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, L. Chen, J. Liu, K. Parvez, H. Liang, J. Shu, H. Sachdev, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1450–1455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, W. Wei, Z.-S. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16002–16005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5117–5160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Singh and R. Awasthi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 778–783 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Zhan, J. Tian, S. Nie and Z. Ning, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1967–1972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, C. Tian, L. Wang and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3384–3390 RSC .
H. Zhao, J. Yang, L. Wang, C. Tian, B. Jiang and H. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2014–2016 RSC .
M. Sawangphruk, A. Krittayavathananon and N. Chinwipas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1030–1034 CAS .
L. Gao, W. Yue, S. Tao and L. Fan, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 957–964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
F. Ren, H. Wang, C. Zhai, M. Zhu, R. Yue, Y. Du, P. Yang, J. Xu and W. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3607–3614 CAS .
Z. Luo, L. Yuwen, B. Bao, J. Tian, X. Zhu, L. Weng and L. Weng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7791–7796 RSC .
W. Wei, H. Liang, K. Parvez, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1570–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xin, J.-G. Liu, Y. Zhou, W. Liu, J. Gao and Y. Xie, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1012–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, C. Wang and Z.-G. Le, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 10758–10762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kannan, T. Maiyalagan, N. G. Sahoo and M. Opallo, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4655–4666 RSC .
E. J. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama and J. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Tang and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-G. Zhou, J.-J. Chen, F.-B. Wang, Z.-H. Sheng and X.-H. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5951–5953 RSC .
J.-D. Qiu, G.-C. Wang, R.-P. Liang, X.-H. Xia and H.-W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15639–15645 CAS .
H. Huang, H. Chen, D. Sun and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 46–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Nethravathi, E. A. Anumol, M. Rajamathi and N. Ravishankar, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 569–571 RSC .
S. H. Lee, N. Kakati, S. H. Jee, J. Maiti and Y.-S. Yoon, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 3281–3284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dong, R. R. S. Gari, Z. Li, M. M. Craig and S. Hou, Carbon, 2010, 48, 781–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Q. Yang, J. Xu and C.-S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8057–8062 RSC .
Y. Hu, H. Zhang, P. Wu, H. Zhang, B. Zhou and C. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4083–4094 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2211–2214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Wang and S. P. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6883–6891 RSC .
S. Zhang, Y. Shao, H.-G. Liao, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay, G. Yin and Y. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1079–1081 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Rao, C. R. Cabrera and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21963–21970 Search PubMed .
Q. Yue, K. Zhang, X. Chen, L. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Liu and J. Jia, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3369–3371 RSC .
E. Yoo, T. Okada, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, I. Honma and J. Nakamura, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 110–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. He, K. Cheng, H. Li, T. Peng, F. Xu, S. Mu and M. Pan, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3979–3986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Rao, A. L. M. Reddy, Y. Ishikawa and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2011, 49, 931–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Hao, H. Liao and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 88–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Haag and H. H. Kung, Top. Catal., 2014, 57, 762–773 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, S. Zhu, X. Lou, L. Mao, J. Lin, F. Tian and D. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 6543–6552 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Y. Tang, K. Müllen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 734–738 CrossRef PubMed .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
S. Pang, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1566–1570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhou and L. Liu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 613–620 RSC .
S. Dutta, R. Sahoo, C. Ray, S. Sarkar, J. Jana, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 193–201 RSC .
Z. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Qin, J. Wang, Z. Zheng and H. Cheng, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1687–1692 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Jensen, R. Ulbricht, A. Narita, X. Feng, K. Müllen, T. Hertel, D. Turchinovich and M. Bonn, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5925–5930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, Q. Lai, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10694–10701 CAS .
G. D. Jiang, Z. F. Lin, C. Chen, L. H. Zhu, Q. Chang and N. Wang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2693–2701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Kim, B. H. Kim and K. S. Yang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2472–2481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hoshyargar, J. K. Sahoo, M. N. Tahir, A. Yella, M. Dietzsch, F. Natalio, R. Branscheid, U. Kolb, M. Panthöfera and W. Tremel, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 5292–5297 RSC .
S. Qi, L. Fei, R. Zuo, Y. Wang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8190–8195 CAS .
Q. Wua, L. Liao, Q. Zhang, Y. Nie, J. Xiao, S. Wang, S. Dai, Q. Gao, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, B. Liu and Y. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 158, 42–48 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 237–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mukherji, B. Seger, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3483–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, J. Yang, G. Zhu and K. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 454–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3385–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Yuan, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7245–7251 RSC .
W. Xitao, L. Rong and W. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8304–8313 Search PubMed .
S. Dong, J. Sun, Y. Li, C. Yu, Y. Li and J. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 386–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Pan, Q. Zhao, T. Lv, G. Zhu, T. Chen, T. Lu, Z. Sun and C. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 183, 238–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li and H. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3346–3349 RSC .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, L. Ren, C. Zhang, S. Huang and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2779–2785 CAS .
B. Li, T. Liu, Y. Wang and Z. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 114–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 1, 7210–7218 CrossRef .
H. Hu, J. H. Xin, H. Hu, X. Wang and Y. Kong, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 492, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, S. Bag, R. Bhar and P. Pramanik, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 2769–2777 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, G. Fan and C. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 274, 32–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ji, X. Shen, G. Zhu, H. Zhou and A. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3471–3477 RSC .
N. Li, M. Cao, Q. Wu and C. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 428–434 RSC .
J. Sun, Y. Fu, G. He, X. Sun and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1742–1748 CAS .
K. Qu, L. Wu, J. Ren and X. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5001–5009 CAS .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mülhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Siamaki, A. R. S. Khder, V. Abdelsayed, S. El-Shall and B. F. Gupton, J. Catal., 2011, 279, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Yang and D. Ma, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 10131–10134 RSC .
S. Chandra, S. Bag, P. Das, D. Bhattacharya and P. Pramanik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 519–520, 59–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, C. Huang, S. Chen and Z. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 374, 83–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Movahed, M. Fakharian, M. Dabiri and A. Bazgir, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5243–5247 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Cao, J. Xie, D. Jia, H. Qin and Z. Liang, Catal. Commun., 2015, 58, 21–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dervishi, S. Bourdo, J. A. Driver, F. Watanabe, A. R. Biris, A. Ghosh, B. Berry, V. Saini and A. S. Biris, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 501–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Varghese, S. Lonkar, K. K. Singh, S. Swaminathan and A. Abdala, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2015.04.062 .
S. K. Vashist and J. H. T. Luong, Carbon, 2015, 84, 519–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Du, J. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8032–8037 RSC .
H. Teymouriana, A. Salimia, S. Firoozia, A. Korania and S. Soltanianc, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 143, 196–206 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gong, X. Miao, H. Wan and D. Song, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 162, 341–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, D. Chu, P. Yang, Y. Du and C. Lu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 3375–3382 CAS .
T. Kida, A. Nishiyama, Z. Hua, K. Suematsu, M. Yuasa and K. Shimanoe, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 2571–2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Weng, J. Wu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5574–5584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qin, M. Cao, N. Li and C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17167–17174 RSC .
Y. Mu, D. Jia, Y. He, Y. Miao and H.-L. Wu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2948–2952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Subramanian, J. Niedziolka-Jonsson, A. Lesniewski, Q. Wang, M. Li, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5525–5533 CAS .
L. Fu, S. Yu, L. Thompson and A. Yu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40111–40116 RSC .
J. L. Johnson, A. Behnam, S. J. Pearton and A. Ural, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4877–4880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Lange, T. Hirsch, V. M. Mirsky and O. S. Wolfbeis, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3707–3712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Shi and J. J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6008–6013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, T. Lou, Z. Chen, M. Lin, W. Feng and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1080–1086 CAS .
F. Wang, L. Zhu and J. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 642–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. Zhang, D. Du, Y. Shao, Z. Li, J. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, J. Li and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5319–5325 RSC .
J. Hu, F. Li, K. Wang, D. Han, Q. Zhang, J. Yuan and L. Niu, Talanta, 2012, 93, 345–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Du and X. W. Sun, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 5136–5140 RSC .
H. Chang, Z. Sun, K. Y. F. Ho, X. Tao, F. Yan, W. M. Kwok and Z. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 258–264 RSC .
J. Tian, S. Liu, H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1318–1321 RSC .
J. Ding, X. Yan and Q. Xue, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 133, 405–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Anand, O. Singh, M. P. Singh, J. Kaur and R. C. Singh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 409–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh, A. Choudhary, D. Haranath, A. G. Joshi, N. Singh, S. Singh, S. Singh and R. Pasricha, Carbon, 2012, 50, 385–394 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, Y. Fang, D. Wen and S. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16911–16917 RSC .
H. Song, L. Zhang, C. He, Y. Qu, Y. Tian and Y. Lv, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5972–5977 RSC .
S. Mao, S. Cui, G. Lu, K. Yu, Z. Wen and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11009–11013 RSC .
Z. Zhang, R. Zou, G. Song, L. Yu, Z. Chen and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17360–17365 RSC .
L. Long, Y. Luo, B. Liu, D. Du and Y. Lin, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 4894–4897 RSC .
Q. Wang, X. Cui, J. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Liu, T. Xue, H. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Qiao and W. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6245–6249 RSC .
L. M. Lu, H. B. Li, F. Qu, X. B. Zhang, G. L. Shen and R. Q. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3500–3504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, J. S. Cheng, X. F. Liu, H. T. Bai and J. H. Jiang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 3456–3463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, R. Li, C. Hu and W. Hou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 657, 28–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Leonardi, D. Aloisio, N. Donato, P. A. Russo, M. C. Ferro, N. Pinna and G. Neri, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 617–624 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Mani, B. Dinesh, S. M. Chen and R. Saraswathi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 53, 420–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Dey and C. R. Raj, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21427–21433 CAS .
H. Gao, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3049–3057 CAS .
X. Bin, J. Chen, H. Cao, L. Chen and J. Yuan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Luechinger, E. K. Athanassiou and W. J. Stark, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445201 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, L. Zhang and G. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 171–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, S. Jiang, H. Zhang, J. Jiang and X. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 709, 47–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Gu, Z. Wang and C. Wang, Microchim. Acta, 2011, 173, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Hsu, T. K. Hsu, C. L. Sun, Y. T. Nien, N. W. Pu and M. D. Ger, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 152–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, H. Qi, X. Zhang, Z. Xue, J. Jin, X. Zhou, J. Jin, X. Zhou and X. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12494–12496 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang and X. Sun, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 4539–4548 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, Z. Liu, W. Fu and H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 1–4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Huang, Y.-J. Liu, H.-B. Wang and Y.-Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 118, 130–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Liu, L. Wang, X. Qin, J. Tian, W. Lu, G. Chang and X. Sun, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 538–545 RSC .
Z. G. Le, Z. Liu, Y. Qian and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5348–5353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, F. Li, G. Shen, J. Huang and X. Wang, Analyst, 2014, 139, 299–308 RSC .
Y.-C. Yeh, B. Creran and V. M. Rotello, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1871–1880 RSC .
E. E. Bedford, J. Spadavecchia, C. M. Pradier and F. X. Gu, Macromol. Biosci., 2012, 12, 724–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jayakumar, R. Rajesh, V. Dharuman, R. Venkatasan, J. H. Hahn and S. K. Pandian, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 31, 406–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Cui, H. Chen, B. Liu, G. Chen and D. Tang, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 1821–1829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Li, D. Sun, D. Tian, J. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7604–7611 RSC .
J. Liang, Z. Chen, L. Guo and L. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 47, 5476–5478 RSC .
Y. Yang, A. M. Asiri, D. Du and Y. Lin, Analyst, 2014, 139, 3055–3060 RSC .
S. Liu, G. Yan, G. He, D. Zhong, J. Chen, L. Shi, X. Zhou and H. Jiang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 672, 40–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, G. Lu, K. Yu, Z. Bo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Jiang, Y. Xiang, Y. Chai and R. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12798–12800 RSC .
Y. Du, S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 8584–8592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, X. Wu, C. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Jiang and X. Wang, Analyst, 2011, 136, 2735–2740 RSC .
F. Cui and X. Zhang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 669, 35–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Palanisamy, S.-M. Chen and R. Sarawathi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kavitha, A. I. Gopalan, K. P. Lee and S. Y. Park, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2994–3000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gadipelli and Z. X. Guo, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 69, 1–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Tian, Y. Guo, H. Gao, H. Li and S. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44096–44106 RSC .
T. S. Sreeprasad, S. M. Maliyekkal, K. P. Lisha and T. Pradeep, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 186, 921–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Geng, M. Cao, L. Ren, X. Zhao, B. Liu, Y. Tian and C. Hu, Carbon, 2013, 54, 124–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Guan, B. T. Zheng, M. Lu, X. Guan, G. S. Wang and L. Guo, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 50–60 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Shi, Y. Zhang, W. Gu, B. Li and Y. Xian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1745–1753 CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 634–640 Search PubMed .
V. Chandra, J. Park, Y. Chun, J. W. Lee, I. C. Hwang and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3979–3986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng, Y. Lin, X. Yu, Q. Shen, L. Ma, Z. Li, N. Pan and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3527–3535 RSC .
J. Zhu, S. Wei, H. Gu, S. B. Rapole, Q. Wang, Z. Luo, N. Haldolaarachchige, D. P. Young and Z. Guo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 977–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xie, P. Xi, H. Liu, F. Chen, L. Huang, Y. Shi, F. Hou, Z. Zeng, C. Shao and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1033–1039 RSC .
C. Santhosh, P. Kollu, S. Doshi, M. Sharma, D. Bahadur, M. T. Vanchinathan, P. Saravanan, B.-S. Kim and A. N. Grace, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28300–28308 RSC .
W. Lu, Y. Wu, J. Chen and Y. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 609–615 RSC .
Q. Min, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, F. Zhou and J.-J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11709–11711 RSC .
M. Seredych, O. Mabayoje and T. J. Bandosz, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 1337–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Turcheniuk, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 4301–4324 RSC .
K. Z. Kamali, A. Pandikumar, G. Sivaraman, H. N. Lim, S. P. Wren, T. Sund and N. M. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 17809–17816 RSC .
J. Cui, C. Hu, Y. Yang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu and Z. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8121–8126 RSC .
N. Salam, A. Sinha, A. S. Roy, P. Mondal, N. R. Jana and S. M. Islam, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 10001–10012 RSC .
J. Li and C. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 1244–1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Al-Marri, M. Khan, M. Khan, S. F. Adil, A. Al-Warthan, H. Z. Alkhathlan, W. Tremel, J. P. Labis, M. R. H. Siddiqui and M. N. Tahir, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2015, 16, 1131–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Dougan and K. Faulds, Analyst, 2012, 137, 545–554 RSC .
S. Dutta, C. Ray, S. Sarkar, M. Pradhan, Y. Negishi and T. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8724–8732 CAS .
J. R. Lombardi and R. L. Birke, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 734–742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Shim, B. Kim and H. S. Shin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2381–2387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zabel, R. R. Nair, A. Ott, T. Georgiou, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and C. Casiraghi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 617–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, L. M. Xie, Y. Fang, H. Xu, H. L. Zhang, J. Kong, M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 553–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He and H. Cu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9086–9091 RSC .
S. Murphy, L. Huang and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4740–4747 CAS .
G. Lu, H. Li, C. Liusman, Z. Yin, S. Wu and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1817–1821 RSC .
S. Sun and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 21116–21120 RSC .
Z. Luo, L. A. Somers, Y. Dan, T. Ly, N. J. Kybert, E. J. Mele and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 777–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, C. Qiu, F. Yu, H. Yang, M. Chen, L. Hu and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11348–11354 CAS .
Z. Zhang, F. Xu, W. Yang, M. Guo, X. Wang, B. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6440–6442 RSC .
W. Ren, Y. Fang and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6425–6433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Manikandan, H. N. Abdelhamid, A. Talib and H.-F. Wu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 180–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. Hines and D. L. Akins, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 2670–2675 RSC .
K. Jasuja and V. Berry, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2358–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, E. Lidorikis, A. Lombardo, V. G. Kravets, A. K. Geim, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5617–5626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, K. S. Novoselov and H. S. Shin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 608–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
A. E. Jakus, E. B. Secor, A. L. Rutz, S. W. Jordan, M. C. Hersam and R. N. Shah, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4636–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahadian, M. Estili, V. J. Surya, J. R. Azcón, X. Liang, H. Shiku, M. Ramalingam, T. Matsue, Y. Sakka, H. Bae, K. Nakajima, Y. Kawazoecm and A. Khademhosseini, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6436–6443 RSC .
J.-M. Shen, G. Huang, X. Zhou, J. Zou, Y. Yang, Y.-F. Chen and S.-K. Mena, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 50464–50477 RSC .
L. Ren, S. Huang, W. Fan and T. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 1132–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, G. Jiao, W. Zhao, P. Jin and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1143–1152 RSC .
W. Chen, P. Yi, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Deng and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4085–4091 CAS .
X. T. Zheng and C. M. Li, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2012, 9, 615–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Urbanova, M. Magro, A. Gedanken, D. Baratella, F. Vianello and R. Zboril, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6653–6673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ye, T. kong, X. Yu, Y. Yu, K. Zhang and X. Wang, Talanta, 2012, 89, 417–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Song, X.-H. Jia, N. Li, X.-F. Yang and H. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 895–902 RSC .
M. Khan, S. T. Khan, M. Khan, S. F. Adil, J. Musarrat, A. A. Alkhedhairy, A. Al-Warthan, M. R. H. Siddiqui and H. Z. Alkhathlan, Int. J. Nanomed., 2014, 9, 3551–3565 CAS .
E. Alarcon, K. Udekwu, M. Skog, N. L. Pacioni, K. G. Stamplecoskie, M. González-Béjar, N. Polisetti, A. Wickham, A. Richter-Dahlfors, M. Griffith and J. C. Scaiano, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4947–4956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5731–5736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, J. Yang, T. He, H. Shi, X. Cheng and Y. Lu, Small, 2013, 9, 3445–3454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, Q. Chen, L. Xu, S. Zhang, L. Feng, L. Cheng, H. Xu, Z. Liu and R. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3867–3874 CAS .
L. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Wang, X. Yan and D. D. Sun, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 1418–1423 RSC .
J. Ma, J. Zhang, Z. Xiong, Y. Yong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3350–3352 RSC .
Y. Gu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 319, 8–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Stengl, D. Popelkova and P. Vlacil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25209–25218 CAS .
H. J. Zhang, P. P. Xu, G. D. Du, Z. W. Chen, K. Oh, D. Y. Pan and Z. Jiao, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 274–283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, Y. Li, Z. Yu, Q. Liu, J. Li, C. Feng and D. Zhang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18, 1082–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, J. Wang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, L. Liu and X. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3085–3093 CAS .
X. Liu, L. Pan, T. Lv, G. Zhu, T. Lu, Z. Sun and C. Sun, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1245–1249 RSC .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. H. Nguyen and J. J. Shim, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 180, 38–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, H. Li, S. Gao, M. Li, S. Xu, C. Li, W. Guo, C. Qu and B. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 168, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, A. Boudiba, M.-G. Oliver, R. Snyders and M. Debliquy, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 3679–3683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6448–6454 CAS .
Y. Jin, H. Chen, M. Chen, N. Liu and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3408–3416 CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Chen, D. Zhang and Y. Ma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 336–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, L. Li, C. Zhao, H.-K. Liu and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9844–9850 CAS .
S. Baek, S. H. Yu, S. K. Park, A. Pucci, C. Marichy and D. C. Lee, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1687–1690 RSC .
Y. C. Dong, R. G. Ma, M. J. Hu, H. Cheng, C. K. Tsang, Q. D. Yang, Y. Y. Li and J. A. Zapien, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 201, 330–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2710–2714 RSC .
X. Fan, G. Jiao, L. Gao, P. Jin and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2658–2664 RSC .
W. Xiao, Z. Wang, H. Guo, X. Li, J. Wang, S. Huang and L. Gan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 148–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Ma, H. Wang, Z. Liu and Z. Hao, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 552, 486–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wei, J. Feng, Z. Fan, L. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2356–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, M. Zheng, X. Chang, G. Ji, H. Lu, L. Xue, L. Pan and J. Cao, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 953–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Min, C. Zhao, G. Chen and X. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 155–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Xiao, Y. Sun, Y. Shi, H. Dai, P. Ni, J. Hu, Z. Li, Y. Song and L. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2013, 25, 956–966 Search PubMed .
K. H. Chang, Y. F. Lee, C. C. Hu, C. I. Chang, C. L. Liu and Y. L. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7957–7959 RSC .
W. He, H. Jiang, Y. Zhou, S. Yang, X. Xue, Z. Zou, X. Zhang, D. L. Akins and H. Yang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 265–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qin and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19009–19015 CAS .
Z. Gao, J. Liu, F. Xu, D. Wu, Z. Wu and K. Jiang, Solid State Sci., 2012, 14, 276–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Cao, G. Yin, Y. Lu and J. Yin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10645–10648 RSC .
A. K. Rai, L. T. Anh, J. Gim, V. Mathew, J. Kang, B. J. Paul, N. K. Singh, J. Song and J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 435–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, G. Zeng, F. Nie, X. Xu, S. Chen, Q. Hana and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 988–994 RSC .
W.-P. Xu, L.-C. Zhang, J.-P. Li, Y. Lu, H.-H. Li, Y.-N. Ma, W.-D. Wang and S.-H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4593–4597 RSC .
Y. Wang, S. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Li, P. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 17, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, G. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Guo and Z.-H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 376–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, D. Yang, Y. Jiao, Y. Tian, Y. Wang and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3824–3832 CAS .
Z. Chen, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 3022–3030 RSC .
X. Sun, C. Zhou, M. Xie, H. Sun, T. Hu, F. Lu, S. M. Scott, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7319–7326 CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, J. Miao and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1559–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Zhou, L.-P. Jiang, W. Hou, Q. Shen and J.-J. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4974–4981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Mujeeb Khan	Mujeeb Khan is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at King Saud University, Riyadh, KSA. He received his MSc degree in materials chemistry and PhD (2008) from Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz in Germany. Later he worked as a post-doctoral fellow at Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research Mainz, Germany. His research interests are in the areas of synthesis and in-depth structural, physical characterization as well as to explore potential applications of graphene/inorganic nanocomposites, especially in the field of catalysis. He is an editorial board member of the Arabian Journal of Chemistry.
Muhammad Nawaz Tahir	Dr. Muhammad Nawaz Tahir received his M.Phil. degree from Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2001 and then joined Prof. Wolfgang Tremel’s group at the Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Germany. He was awarded his PhD in 2006 from Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz with distinction “Summa Cum Laude”. Later he undertook many research projects funded by DFG, MWFZ and the Max Planck Society. Since 2010, he has been working as a senior scientist and group leader for nanomaterials synthesis at Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz. His research interests involve the synthesis of innovative nanomaterials, characterization and surface functionalization, for biomedical and energy storage applications.
Syed Farooq Adil	S. F. Adil was born in Hyderabad, Telangana, and obtained his Bachelor’s and Master’s degree from Osmania University. He carried out his doctoral research work at the Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, and his PhD degree was awarded by the Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad. He later joined the chemistry department at the King Saud University, KSA as an assistant professor in the year 2008. His research is focused on Nanomaterials, Material Sciences and their applications. He worked as a visiting associate at CALTECH, Pasadena, CA. He is also an editorial assistant with the Journal of Saudi Chemical Society.
M. Rafiq H. Siddiqui	Prof. M. Rafiq H. Siddiqui was awarded his PhD in 1986 from Aligarh Muslim University. He worked for over four years as a scientist in a national laboratory in India. He then moved to the UK in 1992 where he worked for nearly fourteen years as a senior scientist in the Leverhulme Centre for Innovative Catalysis, Department of Chemistry, University of Liverpool. In 2004 he joined the Department of Chemistry, King Saud University in 2004, where he is a full professor. His main research interests are catalysis, nanotechnology and materials chemistry. He has over 100 publications and translated two books.
Wolfgang Tremel	Wolfgang Tremel is an inorganic materials chemist. He earned a PhD in chemistry in 1984 from the University of Münster with B. Krebs. Subsequently he joined the group of R. Hoffman at Cornell University (1984-1986) and spent one summer at Ames Laboratory with H. F. Franzen after having returned to Münster in 1987. In 1991 he was appointed associate professor and, in 1996, full professor at the Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz. His research focuses on the synthesis and structural and physical characterization as well as the design and potential applications of new materials, in particular the chemistry of organized matter.

 	Fig. 1  Graphene is a two-dimensional building block for carbonaceous materials of all other dimensions. It can be wrapped up into 0-D buckyballs, rolled into 1-D nanotubes or stacked into 3-D graphite.1	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the methods used for the synthesis of graphene, which are classified into top-down and bottom-up approaches. The top-down approach is widely used for the scalable synthesis of graphene that produces a relatively low quality of a graphene-like material commonly known as Highly Reduced Graphene Oxide (HRG) or graphene in large quantity required for the preparation of graphene-based nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 3  Preparation process of graphene. (a) A simple solution-process approach for Gly·HSO4 ionic complex preparation in aqueous solution. (b) Diagram of the electrochemical experimental setup. (c) Photographs of graphene directly in electrolyte (left) and re-dispersed in NMP after purification (right). (d) Exfoliation yields versus weight ratios of Gly·HSO4 ionic complex to water used in exfoliation experiments. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley and Sons.86	 

 	Fig. 4  Production of graphene by shear exfoliation. (a) Silverson model L5M high-shear mixer with a mixing head in a 5 L beaker of graphene dispersion. (b and c) Close-up view of the mixing heads. (d) Graphene dispersed in NMP. (e–h) TEM images of graphene nanosheets. (i) XPS and (j) Raman spectra of exfoliated graphene. (k and l) Rotor and stator for large-scale trials. (m) Shear exfoliation of graphite in 100 L water-surfactant solution. Copyright reserved to the Nature Publishing Group.87	 

 	Fig. 5  Aqueous dispersion of GO (i-a) aqueous colloidal suspension from left: graphene oxide, KOH-modified graphene oxide (KMG), hydrazine-reduced KMG (hKMG), (i-b) AFM image of hKMG sheets on a mica substrate. (i-c) TEM image of hKMG sheets, inset, selected area diffraction pattern of what were found to be two overlapping hKMG sheets. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.42 (ii) Aqueous suspension of GO in congo red solutions of various concentrations. (ii-a–d) samples without sonication. (ii-e–h) samples after 1 h sonication. Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.109	 

 	Fig. 6  Experimental procedures of the reduction of GO in the Na–NH3 system. (a) The generation of solvated electrons by dissolution of sodium in liquid ammonia. (b) Several lumps of sodium metal were then dissolved in anhydrous liquid ammonia. The deep blue color is the color of the solvated electrons. (c) Liquid ammonia was kept in a dry ice-acetone bath. (d) GO powder was dispersed in liquid ammonia to show a brown color. (e) Black HRG solution was obtained after the reduction of GO with solvated electrons. Copyrights reserved to the Nature Publishing Group.131	 

 	Fig. 7  Metal assisted reduction of GO. (i-a–d) Digital photographs of the reduction process. (i-e) TEM image of GO (i-f) SEM images of GO/aluminum particles (i-g and h) SEM images of HRG. Copyright reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.136 (ii-a) Photographs of a GO solution (A) before and (B) after the reduction with Zn powder. (ii-b) Photographs of Zn/HRG dispersed in various solutions. (ii-c) Photographs of hydrazine reduced HRG dispersed in water. (iii-a) SEM image of GO. (iii-b) SEM images of Zn/HRG. (iii-c) AFM image of GO. (iii-d) AFM image of Zn/HRG. (iii-e) TEM image of a free standing Zn/HRG sheet suspended on a lacey carbon TEM grid. (iii-f) Selected area electron diffraction (SEAD) pattern of the Zn/HRG sheet in iii-e. Figures (ii) and (iii) Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.137	 

 	Fig. 8  Green reduction of graphene oxide (GRO) using an aqueous extract of the Pulicaria glutinosa plant. Copyrights reserved to the Royal Society of Chemistry.143	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of GO reduction mechanisms. Copyright reserved to the American Chemical Society.174	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the binding mechanisms of nanoparticles (NPs) onto HRG sheets. The NPs can be loaded onto HRG sheets in two different ways by in situ or ex situ binding. A high density of NPs can be achieved via in situ binding. Both HRG sheets and NPs can be functionalized either via non-covalent π–π stacking or covalent C–C coupling reactions.	 

TiO2/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–NH4TiF6	Photocatalytic activity	
437


Ex situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–TiCl4	Photocatalytic activity	
599


In situ preparation: thermal hydrolysis	GO–titania peroxo complex (ethyl glycol)	Photocatalytic activity	
600


In situ preparation: sol–gel method	GO–tetra butyl titanate (sodium borohydrate)	Photocatalytic activity	
601


In situ preparation: sonochemical synthesis	GO–TiCl4	Photocatalytic activity	
602


In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis
	
	Photocatalytic activity	
603


In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis	GO–tetra butyl titanate	Photocatalytic activity	
604


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–titanium isopropoxide (hydrazine hydrate)	Electrochemical sensor and biosensor	
379

Self-assembly method (template free)	GO–TiSO4	Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity	
220


In- situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	
	Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity	
605


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (ionic liquid-assisted)	GO–tetrabutyl titanate [BMIM][PF6] (ascorbic acid)	
	
606

ZrO2/HRG	
Ex situ: electrochemical deposition	GO–ZrOCl2 (sodium borohydrate)	Electrochemical sensing	
477


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
	GO–ZrO(NO3)2·3H2O	Supercapacitors	
315

V2O5/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–V2O5	Cathode material in LIBs	
225


Ex situ mixing: electrochemical synthesis	GO–V2O5·nH2O (H2O2)	Cathode material in LIBs	
227


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis	GO–(NH4)2V6O16	Cathode material in LIBs	
157


In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis	GO–vanadium oxy triisopropoxide	Supercapacitors	
316

Nb2O5/HRG	
	
	Photocatalytic activity	
444

InNbO4/HRG	
Ex situ mixing: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–In(NO)3·5H2O–NbCl5	Photocatalytic activity	
446

Sr2Ta2O7−xNx/HRG	
Ex situ mixing: photo-induced synthesis	GO–Sr2Ta2O7 (sodium borohydride)	Photocatalytic hydrogen production	
447

Ta/HRG/MgO	
Ex situ deposition: electrochemical deposition	
	Biosensor	
607

MoO3/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Na2MoO4·2H2O	
	
228

WO3/HRG	
In situ preparation: photo-irradiation (UV-assisted)	GO–SrWO4	Gas sensing	
483


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
	
	Photochemical conversion	
608

MnO2/HRG	
In situ preparation: microwave irradiation	GO–KmNO4	Supercapacitors	
321


In situ deposition: electrodeposition	GO–Mn(CH3COO)2	Supercapacitors	
322


Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis
	GO–KxMnO2	Supercapacitors	
609


Ex situ deposition: electrostatic co-precipitation method	GO–Mn(NO3)2 (hydrazine hydrate)	Supercapacitors	
610

MnO2/HRG/CNT	
Ex situ deposition: electrodeposition	GO–Mn(NO3)2–SWCNT	Supercapacitors	
611

MnO2/HRG	
Ex situ deposition: ultrafiltration method	GO–KMNO4	Anode material in LIBs	
238


In situ preparation: redox-like method	GO–KMNO4	Water purification	
543

Mn3O4/HRG	
Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis	GO–MnO2 organosol	Supercapacitors	
242


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–MnAc2·4H2O	Supercapacitors	
327


In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis	GO–MnAc2·4H2O	Supercapacitors	
612


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Mn(CH3COO)2	Anode material in LIBs	
613


In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis
	Mn(COOH)2·4H2O	Catalyst	
544

Fe/HRG	
In situ preparation: thermal synthesis	GO–FeCl3·6H2O	Anode material in LIBs	
246

Fe3O4/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–FeCl3·6H2O (hydrazine hydrate)	Anode material in LIBs	
252


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Fe powder	Anode material in LIBs	
614


In situ preparation: sol–gel synthesis (microwave-assisted)	GO–Fe(acac)3(benzyl alcohol)	Anode material in LIBs	
615


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–ferric citrate	Anode material in LIBs	
616


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O	Supercapacitors	
329


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–Cu catalyzed	Adsorber material	
546


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–FeCl3, FeCl2	Adsorber material	
548


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–FeCl3	Cellular magnetic resonance imaging	
585


In situ preparation: chemical precipitation	GO–FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O	Targeted drug delivery	
617


In situ preparation: chemical precipitation	GO–FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl2·4H2O	Sensors	
590

Fe3O4/HRG/CNT	
In situ preparation
	
	Targeted drug delivery	
618

Fe2O3/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–FeCl3·6H2O	Anode material in LIBs	
619


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (microwave-assisted)	GO–FeCl3 and NH4H2PO4	Anode material in LIBs	
259


In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis	GO–FeCl3 (hydrazine hydrate)	Anode material in LIBs	
260


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Fe(NO3)3	Supercapacitors	
620


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis	GO–Fe(CO)5	Adsorber material	
550


In situ preparation: chemical hydrolysis	GO–FeCl3·6H2O	Tribological activities	
591

LiFePO4/HRG	
Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis (spray-drying and annealing)	GO–H3PO4 and LiOH (H2O2)	Cathode material in LIBs	
263

RuO2/HRG	
In situ preparation: sol–gel method (annealing assisted)	GO–RuCl3	Supercapacitors	
337


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–RuCl3	Supercapacitors	
338

Co3O4/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	
	ORR Catalysts in lithium–air batteries	
267


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis	GO–CoCl2·6H2O (NaBH4)	Anode material in LIBs	
266


In situ preparation: solvothermal synthesis	GO–CoSO4·7H2O	Anode material in LIBs	
270


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–(C2H3O2)2Co·4H2O (NH2NH2)	Anode material in LIBs	
189


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis	GO–CoC2O4	Supercapacitors	
341


In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis	GO–Co(NO3)2·6H2O	Supercapacitors	
340


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Co(C2H3O2)2	Catalyst (ORR & OER)	
393

CoO/HRG	
In situ preparation: ultrasonic synthesis	GO–Co4(CO)12	Anode material in LIBs	
276


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis	GO–Co(acac)3	Anode material in LIBs	
275

Co@graphite/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical Vapor deposition	GO–Co(NO3)2·6H2O	
	
621

Co/HRG	
In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (pyrolysis)	GO–cobalt phthalocyanine (NH2NH2)	Anode material in LIBs	
268


In situ preparation: mechanical ball milling	GO-	Hydrogen storage	
281

Co–Al LDH/HRG	
Ex situ mixing: self-assembly	GO–CoCl2·6H2O, AlCl3·6H2O	Supercapacitor	
344


Ex situ mixing: layer-by-layer assembly	GO–CoCl2·6H2O, AlCl3·6H2O	Supercapacitor	
345

CoFe2O4/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Co(CH3COO)2·4H2O, FeCl3·6H2O	Adsorbent material	
622

Rh/HRG	
In situ preparation: sonochemical synthesis	GO–RhCl3·xH2O (NaBH4)	Catalytic activity	
461

NiO/HRG	
In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (multi-step process)	GO–Ni(NO3)2	Supercapacitor	
352


Ex situ deposition: electrochemical deposition	HRG–Ni(OH)2	Supercapacitor	
353


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (self-assembly)	GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O	Supercapacitor	
354


In situ preparation: thermal synthesis (liquid-phase deposition)	GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O	Anode material in LIBs	
289


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O	Anode material in LIBs	
287


Ex situ mixing: thermal synthesis (Doctor blade method)	GO–NiCl2	Solar cells	
382

Ni(OH)2/HRG	
In situ preparation: solid-state synthesis (mechanically assisted)	GO–Ni(C2O4)·H2O	Supercapacitor	
360


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O	Pseudocapacitor	
356


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Ni foam	Supercapacitor	
623


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis (deposition)	GO–Ni(NO3)2 (NaBH4)	Anode material in LIBs	
290

Ni(OH)2/HRG	
Ex situ deposition: electrochemical deposition
	HRG–Ni2SO4	Sensors	
624

Ni-AL LDH/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Al(NO3)2·9H2O (glucose)	Supercapacitor	
363

NiCo2O4/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (microwave-assisted)	GO-	Sensing application	
625

Pd/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–H2PdCl4	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs	
397


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–H2PdCl4	Electrocatalyst in DFAFCs	
398


In situ preparation: electrochemical synthesis
	GO	Electrocatalyst in DEFCs	
401


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis (microwave-assisted)
	GO–PdNO3 (hydrazine)	Catalytic activity for C–C coupling	
468


	
In situ preparation: electrochemical synthesis
	GO–Pd(CH3COO)2 (hydrazine)	Biosensor	
506

PdPt/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–Na2PtCl6 and Na2PdCl4 (ethylene glycol)	Electrocatalyst for ORR	
626

Pt/HRG	
In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition	GO–H2PtCl6 + 10 mM KH2PO4	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs	
411


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 (NaBH4)	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs	
412


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6·H2O (hydrazine hydrate)	Electrocatalyst for ORR	
425


In situ preparation: layer-by-layer self-assembly	GO–H2PtCl6	Counter electrode in solar cells	
384


In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 (ethylene glycol)	Biosensor for H2O2	
508


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6·6H2O (NaBH4)	Biosensor for cholesterol	
511

Pt–Ru/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6·H2O + RuCl3	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs	
415

Pt–Ru/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 + RuCl3	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs and DEFCs	
416


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 + RuCl3	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs	
414

Pt–Au/HRG	
Ex situ preparation: electrodeposition	GO–H2PtCl6·6H2O (hydrazine hydrate)	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs and ORR	
418


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 + HAuCl4 (NaBH4)	Electrocatalyst in DFAFCs	
421


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 + HAuCl4 (ethylene glycol)	Electrocatalyst in DFAFCs	
422

Pt–Pd/HRG	
In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition	GO–PdCl2 + H2PtCl6 (hydrazine hydrate)	Electrocatalyst in DEFCs	
417

Pt–Ni/HRG	
In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition	GO–NiSO4·6H2O + H2PtCl6·6H2O (hydrazine hydrate)	Biosensor for glucose	
512

Pt3Co/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–H2PtCl6 + CoCl2 (ethylene glycol)	Electrocatalyst for ORR	
627

Pt/TiO2/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–TiCl3 + H2PtCl6·6H2O (NaBH4)	Catalyst for NB hydrogenation	
471

Cu/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–CuSO4·5H2O (KBH4)	Biosensor for carbohydrates	
515


Ex situ preparation: potentiostatic deposition	GO–CuSO4 (hydrazine monohydrate)	Biosensor for glucose	
516

Cu2O/HRG	
Ex situ preparation: physical adsorption	HRG–Cu2O NPs	Biosensor for H2O2	
517


In situ preparation: ultrasound-assisted synthesis	GO–Cu(CH3COO)2 (glucose)	Anode material in LIBs	
299


In situ preparation: electrochemical deposition	GO–CuSO4	Solar cells	
386


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–CuSO4 (ascorbic acid)	Photocatalytic activity	
628


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–Cu(OH)2 (glucose)	Adsorbent material	
629

CuO/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–Cu(NO3)2·H2O (ethylene glycol)	Biosensor for glucose	
518


In situ preparation: microwave assisted synthesis	GO–(Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O)	Anode material in LIBs	
630


In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis	GO–Cu(CH3COO)2 (hydrazine hydrate)	Anode material in LIBs	
293


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–Cu(OAc)2·H2O	Catalyst for NH4ClO4 decomposition	
631

Ag/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–AgNO3 (GO functional groups)	SERS substrate	
186


In situ preparation: microwave-assisted synthesis	GO–AgNO3	Anti-bacterial activity	
632


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–AgNO3 (tannic acid)	Biosensor for glucose and H2O2	
520


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–CH3COOAg (NaBH4)	Electrocatalyst in DMFCs	
633


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis	GO–AgNO3 (hydrazine hydrate)	Supercapacitor	
634


In situ preparation: photochemical synthesis	GO–AgNO3	Catalyst for 2-nitroaniline preparation	
451

Ag/graphene oxide	
Ex situ preparation: self assembly	GO–AgNO3	Anti-bacterial activity	
597

Ag/AgX/graphene oxide	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis (surfactant-assisted assembly)	GO–AgNO3	Photocatalyst for pollutant degradation	
450

Ag/TiO2/SiO2/HRG	
In situ preparation: biomimetic synthesis	GO (lysozome)	Photocatalyst	
635

Au/HRG	
In situ preparation: electrochemical synthesis
	GO–AuCl4	Biosensor	
529


Ex situ preparation: layer-by-layer self-assembly
	HRG–HAuCl4 (hydrazine)	Electrochemical sensor for dopamine	
533

Au/HRG	
In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–HAuCl4 (sodium citrate)	Electrochemical sensor for epinephrine	
538


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–HAuCl4 (sodium citrate)	Electrochemical sensor for levofloxacin	
491


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–HAuCl4·3H2O (hexamethylenetetramine)	Electrocatalytic application	
493

ZnO/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
	GO	Photocatalytic activity	
636


In situ preparation: atomic layer deposition
	GO	Anode material in LIBs	
637


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO–ZnCl2 (NaOH)	Photocatalytic activity	
458


In situ preparation: ultrasonication-assisted synthesis
	GO–Zn	Photocurrent generation	
496


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	HRG–zinc benzoate dihydra–zinate complex	Antibacterial activity	
540


In situ preparation: microwave assisted synthesis
	GO–ZnSO4·7H2O (NaOH)	Supercapacitor	
368

ZnFe2O4/HRG	
In situ preparation: hydrothermal synthesis
	GO	Photocatalytic activity	
559

CdS/HRG	
Ex situ preparation: layer-by-layer self-assembly
	HRG–CdS quantum dots	Photocatalytic activity	
638


In situ preparation: chemical synthesis
	GO	Photochemical sensor	
639


 	Fig. 11  (a) PXRD patterns of Co(CO)0.35Cl0.20(OH)1.10, Co3S4, and Co3S4/HRG composites. TEM images of (b) Co(CO)0.35Cl0.20(OH)1.10 wires (the inset is a high-resolution TEM image of Co(CO)0.35Cl0.20(OH)1.10), (c) Co3S4, and (d) Co3S4/HRG composites. (e) HRTEM image (the area enclosed by the dashed lines in the inset shows the location of the HRTEM image) and (f) SAED pattern of Co3S4/HRG composites. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley and Sons.284	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) CV response of a graphene/Co(OH)2 nanocomposite depicting great influence of graphene on the electrochemical properties of the composites. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.278 (B) Comparisons were made between bare Cu2O and Cu2O NPs–GNS samples displaying superior cycling performance and highlighting the crucial role of graphene in alleviating the capacity degradation. Copyrights reserved to RSC Publishing.299	 

 	Fig. 13  Cyclic voltammograms of (a) HRG, (b) SnS2 nanocrystals and (c) HRG/SnS2 composites prepared at 200 °C for 12 h. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles of HRG/SnS2 composites for the 1st, 2nd, 25th, and 50th cycles at a current of 500 mA g−1. Copyright reserved to the American Scientific Publishers.306	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) CV curves of PHRG at a scanning rate of 0.2 mV s−1 in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profile of PHRG at a current rate of 0.1 A g−1 in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. (c) Cycle performance of PHRG and undoped graphene at a current rate of 0.1 A g−1 in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. (d) Rate performance of PHRG and undoped graphene in the voltage range of 3–0.01 V vs. Li+/Li. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley and Sons.307	 

Anode	TiO2/HRG	Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity	97	1–3	
220

MnO2/HRG	LIBs	208	0–3	
238

Fe/HRG	LIBs	440	0–3	
246

Co/HRG	LIBs	500	0–3	
268

Ni(OH)2/HRG	LIBs	507	0–3	
290

NiO/HRG	LIBs	646.1	—	
289

Cu2O/HRG	LIBs	857	0–3	
299

Mn3O4/HRG	LIBs	900	0–3	
613

Co3O4/HRG	LIBs	941	0–3	
266

Fe3O4/HRG	LIBs	988.5	0–3	
614

LIBs	1011	0–3	
252

CuO/HRG	LIBs	1043.3	0–3	
630

Fe2O3/HRG	LIBs	1561	0–3	
619

CoO/HRG	LIBs	1719	0–3	
276

TiO2/HRG	Lithium ion batteries and photocatalytic activity	5000	3–0.05	
605


Cathode	V2O5/HRG	LIBs	600	2.0–4.0	
225

LIBs	299	1.5–4.0	
227

LIBs	383	2–4	
157

LiFePO4/HRG	LIBs	70	2.0–4.2	
263


 	Fig. 15  HRG/MnO2 nanocomposites as electrode materials. (i-a) Conducting wrapping of graphene/MnO2 (GM) to introduce an additional electron transport path (in discharge cycle). (i-b) Graphene/MnO2/CNT (GMC) and graphene/MnO2/conducting polymer (GMP) formed by wrapping of GM nanostructures with CNTs or conducting polymer. (Black: graphene; rose: MnO2; yellow: CNTs; blue: conducting polymer). Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.238 (ii) Fabricated asymmetric supercapacitor device based on graphene/MnO2 composites as a positive electrode and activated carbon nanofibers as a negative electrode in a neutral aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley & Sons, Inc.324	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the layer-by-layer assembly process for making multilayer films of positively charged Co–Al LDH-NS and negatively charged HRG sheets. Electrochemical properties of Co Al LDH-NS/GO films after reduction. (A) Specific capacitance of the four films with 10, 20, 30, and 40 bilayers at various scan rates. (B) Areal capacitance of the four films at various scan rates. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.345	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrocatalytic reaction and electro oxidation mechanism carried out with HRG/Pt nanocomposites. (b) CV curves of PFSA–Pt/GNS, Pt/GNS, and Pt/C catalysts. (c) Current–potential curves for ORR in O2-saturated 0.5 mol L−1 H2SO4 and comparisons of ORR mass activities and specific activity of catalysts. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.425	 

 	Fig. 18  SEM images of various HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites. (i) As-prepared HRG/TiO2 nanocomposites synthesized via hydrothermal reaction with aqueous solutions containing (NH4)2TiF6 (0.03 M) and GO at 160 °C for 4 h. (ii) Illustrates the gradual change of the morphology of TiO2 NPs with the increase of time (ii-a) cuboid-like morphology of anatase TiO2 NPs obtained in 2 h reaction time. (ii-b) After 8 h, the NPs grow fatter and the four lateral facets of the cuboid-like particles rose in the waist. (ii-c) After 12 h (ii-d) after 24 h, the NPs turned into truncated octahedral morphologies. The inset shows the corresponding magnified SEM images. Copyrights reserved to the RSC publishing.437 (iii) SEM images of HRG treated in the sulfuric acid reaction solution containing titanium sulfate at 100 C (a) pristine graphene sheets (b) after 1 h (c) after 4 h (d) after 6 h. Scale bar in (a–d) 400 nm. Copyrights reserved to the John Wiley & Sons, Inc.220 (iv-a and b) SEM images of pristine TiO2. Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.441 (v) SEM images of (a) TiO2–CNF (carbon nanofibers) (b) TiO2–CCNF (carbon composite nanofibers). Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.442	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the synthesis of HRG/Pd/Fe3O4 nanocomposites and their application for hydrogenation reactions. Copyrights reserved to the Elsevier Ltd.470	 

 	Fig. 20  HRG/Cu nanocomposite and its application. (A–E) Fabrication process of a HRG/Cu composite paste electrode. (a–d) Cyclic voltammograms at (a) a HRG/Cu composite paste electrode (b) a Cu NP paste electrode (c) a graphite–Cu composite paste electrode (d) a graphene paste electrode. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.515	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of the green synthesis of graphene/silver nanocomposites using an aqueous extract of Pulicaria glutinosa plant. (b) Raman spectra of HRG, HRG/Ag-1 and HRG/Ag-2 with 50 and 75 wt% of Ag respectively. With increasing the concentration of Ag NPs the intensities of the Raman signals also increase. Copyrights reserved to the MDPI.561	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation and SEM images of graphene-supported Ag-based nanocomposites. Thickness-dependent morphologies of 5 nm Ag on n-layer graphenes with samples kept at a controlled temperature and Raman spectra of pristine and 5 nm Ag-covered n-layer graphenes. Scale bar: 1 μm. (a and b) Ag morphologies deposited on monolayer and bilayer graphene at 298 K. (c and d) Silver morphologies on monolayer and bilayer graphene at 333 K. (e and f) Ag morphologies on monolayer and bilayer graphene at 373 K. Raman spectra of pristine (a) and 5 nm Ag-covered (b) n-layer graphenes. From the intensities and shapes of the G (∼1580 cm−1) and 2D (∼2700 cm−1) peaks, SERS of n-layer graphenes can be observed obviously, which is dependent on the layer number. Copyrights reserved to the American Chemical Society.573	 

 	Fig. 23  Graphical illustration of the wide range of applications of graphene inorganic nanoparticles (NPs), including metal and metal oxide NP based nanocomposites.	 
HRG	Highly reduced graphene oxide
GO	Graphite oxide
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
0D	Zero-dimensional
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
CMG	Chemically modified graphene
NMP	
N-Methyl pyrrolidone
HR-TEM	High resolution-transmission electron microscopy
TRG	Thermally reduced graphene oxide
KMG	KOH-modified graphene oxide
hKMG	Hydrazine-reduced KMG
PEM	Proton exchange membrane
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
HRG	Highly reduced graphene oxide
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
CReGO	Chemically reduced graphene oxide
CCG	Chemically converted graphene
PE	Plant extracts
Mtr/Ornc	Outer membrane c-type cytochromes
SERS	Surface enhanced Raman scattering
DI	Deionized water
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
MWI	Microwave irradiation
EG	Exfoliated graphite
GICs	Graphite intercalation compounds
IL	Ionic liquid
SC	Supercritical
[BMIM][PF6]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cells
SPE	Solid-phase extraction
MP	Methyl parathion
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries
MB	Methylene blue
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
ACN	Activated carbon nanofibers
0D	Zero-dimensional
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
QDs	Quantum dots
LDH-NS	Layered double hydroxide nanosheets
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
DMFC	Direct methanol fuel cell
CB	Carbon black
ECSA	Electrochemically active surface area
MWCNT	Multi-walled carbon nanotubes
FAO	Formic acid oxidation
NB	Nitrobenzene
GCE	Glassy carbon electrode
EM	Electromagnetic mechanism
SPR	Surface plasmon resonance
CM	Chemical mechanism
PVP	Poly-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone
GOD	Glucose oxidase
FET	Field effect transistor
EP	Electroactive epinephrine
ZnP	Zinc porphyrin

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
