Solar light harvest: modified d-block metals in photocatalysis  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CY02435B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CY02435B
(Perspective)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 5321-5344Solar light harvest: modified d-block metals in photocatalysis

        
          
            Williams Kweku 
            Darkwah
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Masso Kody Christelle 
            Sandrine
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Buanya Beryl 
            Adormaa
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Godfred Kwesi 
            Teye
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Joshua Buer 
            Puplampu
          
        
      *b
aKey Laboratory of Integrated Regulation and Resource Development on Shallow Lakes, Ministry of Education, Environmental Engineering Department, College of Environment, Hohai University, Nanjing, China. E-mail: williamsdarkwakwaku@yahoo.com
bDepartment of Biochemistry, School of Biological Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. E-mail: jpuplampu@ucc.edu.gh
Received 
      2nd December 2019
    , Accepted 21st June 2020First published on 28th July 2020AbstractWith solar light, modified d-block metal photocatalysts are useful in areas where electricity is insufficient, with its chemical stability during the photocatalytic process, and its low-cost and nontoxicity. However, because of their large band gap for excitation, only biohazardous ultraviolet (UV) light irradiation can excite d-block metals, which limits its application in the living environment. Modified d-block metal photocatalyts such as TiO2, ZnO, has recently been the center of research in Nano studies due to the ability of these metals to convert pollutants into CO2 and H2O for environmental applications such as energy, environmental purification and wastewater treatment. This paper highlights the present improvements on the photocatalytic activity of modified d-block metals through their developing structure modification strategies, solar harvest, methods of synthesis and solar light synthesis catalytic mechanisms of these photocatalysts. In this report, the full knowledge of the use of the remarkable solar light harvest potentials vis-à-vis the excellent structure of these metals are revealed. Also, this study on modified d-block metal Nano-based photocatalysts is expected to enlighten scientists on precise management and evaluating the environment, which may merit prospect research into developing suitable mechanism for energy, wastewater treatment and environmental purification.
Introduction
Solving environmental issues such as wastewater treatments, fuel production, and related is an requisite resource on earth, which makes solar photocatalysis and its applicable materials and recycling very important subject matter and substantial topics in innumerable areas, this research focuses on the catalytic activities of solar photocatalysts, with its wide range of applications including disinfection, air and water cleaning, modified d-block metals are chemically stable and inert materials, and can continuously exert catalytic performances when illuminated.
However, existing treatment of hazardous contaminants is expensive and the industry involves cost effective and innovative tactics for the treatment of such compounds to ensure clean aquatic environment.117 Photocatalytic degradation is a zero-waste procedure to treat environmental pollutants in the use of Nano based catalysts such as TiO2, ZnO among others.117 This knowledge is what creates photocatalysis one of the paramounts means to ensure safe and sustainable environment.
With solar light, modified d-block metal photocatalysts are also useful in remote areas where electricity is insufficient, with its chemical stability during the photocatalytic process, and its low-cost and nontoxicity. However, because of their large band gap for excitation, only biohazardous ultraviolet (UV) light irradiation can excite d-block metals, which limits its application in the living environment. Photocatalysis encompasses a class of reactions which use a catalyst activated by light. These reactions include the decomposition of organic compounds into environmental friendly water and carbon dioxide, leading to interesting properties of surfaces covered with a photocatalyst: they protect e.g. against incrustation of fouling matter, they are self-cleaning, antibacterial and viricidal. Among various photocatalysts, modified d-block metals are undoubtedly one of the most intensively studied materials due to its high efficiency and Pollution of water and air due to intensive human activity is undoubtedly a major concern worldwide. This challenge urges the scientific community to look for sustainable, green solutions to obtain the purity of these media without imposing more strain on the environment. Using materials which can be activated by renewable energy sources – such as sunlight – could be an ideal solution for that. d-Block metal are semiconductor materials which are capable of generating electron – hole pairs under UV light irradiation. These evolved charge carriers then can react with the surrounding water and oxygen molecules to generate reactive radicals which can thus induce photo-degradation of various pollutants, toxic substances or even viruses, bacteria, thus, d-block metals are suitable for the purification and detoxification of air and water, and production of purified fuel. The major limitations of this compound to be applied as a purifying agent in commercial use is its low quantum efficiency due to the fast recombination rate of charge carriers and the large band gap which fundamentally determines the minimum photon energy of the irradiating light for the charge separation to occur. The ideal case would be if modified d-block metals were able to be “activated” by visible light with high quantum efficiency thus a vast amount of light coming from the Sun could be harvested and cleaning of air or water media by means of photocatalysis would finally be solved under large scale conditions, utilising the largest renewable energy source.
Once considering the application of modified d-block metals in practical use, one has to make sure that the recovery of this solids is meticulously executed both for economic and environmental reasons. Given this challenge, a lot of works has been done on many photocatalysts such as TiO2, C3N4, BIPO4 among others because it's believed to be economically good, environmentally friendly, and safe in water. Comparatively, not much has been done on d-block metal such as ZnO because of its polycrystalline nature.25,114–116 Gaya and coworkers113 indicated that TiO2, the chief semiconductor, used due to its inertness both chemically and biologically, it's efficient, economically viable but it has some shortcomings to the application of titanium in the wastewater remediation when used on a large scale and suggested that there should be a renewed interest to search for more reliable photocatalysts. They therefore, posited that ZnO demonstrates relatively equivalent attributes and flexibility to TiO2.113
The objective of this work is to assess and discuss the feasibility of using modified d-block metal solar photocatalysis for future applications.
This report is addressed to tackle the competency and efficacy of using solar photocatalysis with d-block metals for water treatment, fuel production, environmental purifications and other related in order to design future implementations to solve some problems related to these issues globally.
Solar light harvesting
Most modified d-block metals such as TiO2, ZnO, ZnS and CdS have band gap energy which corresponds to absorption in UVA/B and C regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Table 1 below shows the wavelengths in the UV/vis regions that can be employed with modified d-block metals photocatalysis and their corresponding energies in eV. The sun emits all energies, thus, gamma, X-ray, UV-vis, however the light that reaches the earth is above 300 nm.119 Since the majority of photocatalytic studies employ Pyrex glassware that contains a light filter (<300 nm), these conditions can be considered to be optimum for solar heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Table 1 UV categories and corresponding energies in eV




Spectral sub category
Spectral sub category

E (in eV)




UV-A
400–315
3.09–3.93


UV-B
315–280
3.93–4.42


UV-C
280–100
4.42–12.39




The basic principle of solar light harvest (photocatalysis) is the promotion of an electron from the valence band to the conduction band which is initiated by photon absorption. In order for this to occur, a photon with energy of 3.2 eV or greater must be absorbed by the semiconductor.114 Upon promotion of an electron, a charged separated state is formed as shown with an electron in the conduction band and a hole (h+) in the valence band. This can be referred to as an electron–hole pair. There are numerous processes which can then occur.120
What are d-block metals?
d-Block metals are also called transition metals. These metals are the elements found in the groups 3 to 12 of the periodic table. Example of these d-block elements are zinc (Zn), cadmium (Cd) and mercury (Hg) etc.… d-block metals are elements with an incomplete d subshell or elements that can form a cation with an incomplete d subshell.
d-Block metals can show several oxidation states as their valence electrons can be present in more than one atomic orbital. A lot of studies have revealed that almost all d-block metals are hard, malleable and ductile, and conduct electricity and heat metals192–197 (Table 2). Most of them will form one of the typical metal structures.
Table 2 Typical properties of d-block metals in photocatalysis




d-Block metals
Properties
Ref




V
1. Extends light absorption into the visible region

197, 198


2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably


Cr
1. Extends light absorption into the visible region

198, 199


2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably


Mn
1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation

197



2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers


Fe
1. Extends light absorption into the visible region

197–199



2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably


Co
1. Extends light absorption into the visible region

200



2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably


Ni
1. Extends light absorption into the visible region

198, 200, 202


2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably


Cu
1. Extends light absorption into the visible region

198, 200


2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably


Cd.
1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity

198, 202


2. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation


Ce
1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity

198, 202


2. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation


Co
1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity

198–200, 202


2. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation


3. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers


4. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation


Cr
1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation

200, 201


2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers


Fe
1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation

200, 201


2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers


Mn
1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation

200, 201


2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers


Pt
1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity

200–202



2. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation


Zn
Considerably change the photocatalytic activity of TiO2

201





The concentration of chemical compounds is determined by the rate of chemical reactions as described by Yu and coauthors.81 Nevertheless, the promise, d-block metals reveal low adsorption ability, specifically, nonporous compounds which is as a result of their polar structure. Making the syntheses of d-block metals with adsorbents as a supreme factor of advancing the adsorption property of d-block metals.192–194 The adsorbents would engross the compounds on the adsorbent support. Yu and coauthors81,197 reported that an upturn in the photoreaction rate comes about due to the formation of high environmental concentration of the compounds around the nonporous d-block metals. Consequently, numerous schemes have been established to alter the properties of d-block metals, anticipating to lengthen the lifespan of photo generated electron–hole pairs and narrowed the band gap (Table 1).
Modified d-block metals as a photocatalyst
Modified d- block metals are the leading semiconductor photocatalysts in water, fuel production, detoxification and related studies. Some of the other modified d-block metal chalcogenides such as ZnO, ZnS and CdS have been used in comparative studies alongside TiO2 however, these semiconductors are generally less active under similar conditions and in some cases, can be less stable under illumination.118
Graphene is a single layer sp2 hybridized carbon organized in honeycomb structure (Fu et al., 2010). Graphene is considered as a potential candidate for the fabrication of graphene supported nanocomposite photocatalyst.235 Hu et al. prepared graphene supported ZnS nanocomposite using microwave radiation assisted method.236,237 Liu et al. synthesized BiOI/Graphene composite through hydrothermal method and claimed their improved photocatalytic activity and stability for methylene green dye degradation.159,238
Photocatalysis and modified d-block metals
Swift progress of industrialization, population growth and continuing droughts had led to an increased demand and shortage of clean water sources, this has become one of the utmost issues globally. Owning to this growing demand, innumerable practical schemes and solutions have been implemented to yield more sustainable water resources. The storage of rainwater for day-to-day accomplishments and increasing the catchment volume for storm water are just a few examples that could resolve the problems in short-term.
Photocatalysis is designed to harvest visible light (the major component of solar radiation that reaches the Earth's surface) by photocatalysts to drive chemical transformations (Fig. 1). It is generally known that photocatalytic reaction usually takes place on the surface of photocatalysts. Photocatalysis reaction is best known to be carried out in media such as gas phase, pure organic liquid phases or aqueous solutions. Also, in most chemical degradation methods, photocatalytic degradation vis-à-vis photons and a catalyst is often identified as the best in controlling of organic wastewater, solar energy utilization, and environmental treatment, biomedical and sensing applications.108–110 Hence, the utmost technology used for the treatment of organic wastewater and related applications is attributed to the evolving solar light-driven photocatalysts.111
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram demonstrating photocatalysis mechanism. The figure obtained from ref. 116. 
Application of semiconductors catalysts such as TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3, CdS, GaP and ZnS for an advanced technology called heterogeneous photocatalysis has revealed to be more efficient in degrading a wide range of indistinct recalcitrant organics into readily environmental compounds, and ultimately mineralized them to safe carbon dioxide and water. Among these light responsive catalysts are numerous transitional metals such as TiO2, ZnO, Fe2O3, CdS.
A number of significant qualities for photocatalysis have long-drawn-out their realistic submissions in water treatment, such as; ambient operating temperature and pressure, complete mineralization of parents and their intermediate compounds without secondary pollution and low operating costs (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Comparison of photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4vs. TiO2 catalysts towards the degradation of (A) rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB), and (B) methyl orange (MO) and phenol under the same conditions (identified by the same color). The data obtained from.11,15,17 The photocatalytic activity of pure g-C3N4 was investigated by treating 5 mg L−1 of RhB,15 10 mg L−1 of MB,17 13.5 mg L−1 of MO and 16.6 mg L−1 of BF11 as the target contaminants. The photocatalytic results including comparisons between g-C3N4 and TiO2, under the same experimental conditions are provided in Fig. 2. C3N4 has a more suitable band gap structure and stronger redox ability of the photogenerated carriers than TiO2. This is consistent with conclusions from.13,14 However, g-C3N4 has its own drawbacks such as limited light absorption and high recombination of electron–hole pairs.12,16,18 
Magnetic separation of d block photocatalysts
Magnetic nanomaterials specifically d-block metals, are emerging as an ideal choice to deal with problem of tedious catalyst separation and lower recyclability of metallic photocatalysts after treatment process.225,228 Among various magnetic oxides, spinel ferrites, MFe2O4 (M = Mn, Co, Zn, Ni, Mg, etc.) are well-known for cubic spinel materials where oxygen atom forms a face centered cubic close packing and M2+ and Fe3+ occupy either tetrahedral or octahedral interstitial sites.228,229 Due to highly stable crystal structure, good magnetic properties and chemical stability, d-block metals and spinel ferrites have been widely used in optoelectronic, spintronic devices, microwave adsorption and drug-loading materials. Manganese ferrite (MnFe2O4) with good magnetism and functional surface have been widely used in water purification technology.230 d-Block metals have high adsorption capacity, biocompatibility and magnetic susceptibility when compared with MnFe2O4NiFe2O4, CoFe2O4 and CuFe2O4 nanoparticles.231 Vignesh et al. synthesized magnetically recoverable MnFe2O4/g-C3N4/TiO2 photocatalyst and tested its activity for photodegradation of methyl orange dye.232 Pal et al. reported tartrate modified superparamagnetic MnFe2O4 nanoparticles for photocatalytic removal of methylene blue dye.233 Guo et al. prepared colloidal nanocrystals cluster of MnFe2O4 with submicron scale and explored their photocatalytic activity for methylene blue degradation.234
Chandel et al.227 successfully fabricated novel visible-light-driven nitrogen-doped graphene (NG) supported magnetic ZnO/ZnFe2O4 (ZnO/ZF/NG) and ZnO/CoFe2O4 (ZnO/CF/NG) nanocomposites. ZnO/ZF/NG displayed superparamagnetic behavior and was isolated from the reaction solution in 20 s using an external magnetic field. The magnetization hysteresis curve of ZnO/CF/NG reveals a typical ferromagnetic nature having saturation magnetization. Due to the negative reduction potential in CB of ZnO, photogenerated electrons reacted with molecular O to produce O− radicals. The photogenerated holes in VB of ZnO and O− radicals were led to superparamagnetic behavior, and hence degradation of organic dye and mineralize it into degraded products. The improved photocatalytic performance can be explained by two main reasons as can be concluded from the observations. First, because of the lower band gap of the nanocomposite, higher numbers of photons are absorbed which can raise photocatalytic activity. Second, the interdependent influence of ZnO, NG and ZF semiconductors could prohibit electron–hole pair recombination by charge transfer process.
Z-Scheme photocatalysis
The Z-scheme heterojunction was developed to solve the steric hindrance exerted in type II heterojunction.226 Currently there are three generations of the Z-scheme photocatlytic system. These types are: 1st, 2nd, and 3rd generation Z-scheme heterojunctions.
The 1st generation Z-scheme heterojunctions is built by combining two different semiconductors with a shuttle redox mediator (viz. an electron acceptor/donor (A/D) pair). Also, the 2nd generation Z-scheme photocatalytic system is composed of two different semiconductors and a noble-metal nanoparticle (NP) as the electron mediator.223–234 The use of the d-block metals solves the backward reaction that was happening in the first generation (liquid phase Z-scheme). The 3rd generation Z-scheme photocatalyst consists of only two semiconductors that have a direct contact at their interface.21,44,88,156,216,226 All the advantaged features in the previous two generation are inherited in direct Z-scheme photocatalyst. Unlike type I and II semiconductor, electrons in CB of semiconductor B migrate to recombine with the holes generated in VB of semiconductor A forming a Z-transfer. d-Block metals were used to functionalize g-C3N4 with better carrier mobility, reduced band gap and improved absorption in visible region of spectrum.
Wang and group160 studied synergistic intervalence e− transfer effect of Ti+4 to Ti+3 doped g-C3N4 for the application of RhB dye removal. Radical and hole trapping experiments were carried out to identify main ROS involved in RhB dye degradation using three scavengers: EDTA-2Na (h+), p- benzoquinone (˙O2−) and isopropyl alcohol (OH˙). The obtained results showed that photodegradation mechanism is largely dependent upon h+ and ˙O2− compared with OH˙.221
Synthesis of modified d-block metals
There have been a lot of methods used in the preparation of these catalysts for their various applications. Among these techniques are; Thermal condensation, solvothermal, sol–gel method, microwave-assisted, polymerization and hydrothermal synthesis approached are methods which have been effectively used in the preparation of these catalysts for different purposes and analysis in the area of photocatalysis and related.1,219
Dong and group prepared one of the laudable transitional metals used for photocatlysis application, thus, A C/N co-doped TiO2/diatomite composite by using sol–gel method.2 In their experiments, these researchers happened to employ tetrabutyl titanate as a titanium precursor and hexamethylenetetramine as C/N dopant. Many researches3 have revealed that the d-block metal based photocatalyst exhibited excellent enactment when a diatomite was used as a carrier due to the silicon hydroxy groups and hydrogen bonds on the surface of diatomite.
Studies revealed that the presentation of a C/N dopant can commendably foster the progress of the highly active anatase facet of TiO2.4–6
Recently, research had shifted to modification of metals, due the impressive inputs of some modified transitional metals such as, lead free BaTiO3-based ferroelectric ceramics for various applications such as piezoelectric actuators and electrically tunable microwave devices,8,9 and multilayer ceramic capacitor.7,10 According to Li and coworkers,10,220 the short-range hopping of oxygen vacancy contributed to the dielectric relaxation and long-distance movement of doubly ionized oxygen vacancies contributed to the conduction. It was found that P–E loops became slimmer and slimmer, this presented the increase of relaxor behavior due to increasing BMT contents.
Centered on research experience gotten from the synthesis of graphene oxide, numerous oxidation methods such as, thermal polymerization21,231 and related technologies, of CN were both developed and advanced. Most of these techniques led to the cleavages of bulk CN which then produce various CN nanostructures, though concurrently introducing a suitable number of functional groups onto the edge of CN. A work pioneered by Qu and co-workers exhibited that layered CN solids can be efficiently oxidized and delaminated into 2D nanosheets in the presence of a concentrated acid and oxidant.19,20
In the synthesis of silver nanoparticles using chemical reduction method, silver nitride,22–24 silver acetate,26,27 silver citrate27–30 and silver chlorate28–30 are the commonly used precursors. Also, mostly known reducing agents among the available reducing agents are ascorbate, citrate, carbohydrates, and borohydride compounds with hydroxyl or carboxyl groups such as aldehydes, alcohol, and their derivatives.31–34 Physical method utilizing dispersion/condensation and laser ablation from metallic bulk materials in liquid solution (Fig. 3) is one of the best means of preparing silver for photocatalytic activities and other related applications.35
 Fig. 3  Schematic of experiment setup for silver nanoparticle production with laser ablation. Adapted with permission from ref. 35 and 46. 
Characterization and morphology of modified d-blocked Nano based metals in photocatalysis
The morphological structure of the synthesized transitional metals plays a significant role in its photocatalytic activity.37,38,66,90 SEM, TEM and XRD are used to study the morphology of the as prepared photocatalyst.39,40 XRD shows different peaks that confirms that the formed structures are in agreement with the standard cards.36 SEM and TEM shows the morphology of the as prepared transitional Nano based metal for responsive light catalysis.41
XRD analysis showed that Fe2O4/ZnO-nanowires have been attached to the bulk wurtzite ZnO and ZnFe2O4 crystalline phases.42,70–72 To continue on the XRD analysis of CdS, this d-blocked modified metal demonstrated that the peaks of the cubic zinc blend structure appear clearly in the pattern. It's also noted that the cubic structure of this metal is similar to the peaks of the hexagonal structure53,54 (see Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  XRD pattern of a prepared CdS Nano based transitional metal. The data was obtained from ref. 47. 
Chen and coworkers found out that there is no observable peak corresponding to ZrO2 or SiO2 when these researchers synthesized nano sized ZrO2 and SiO2 by the soft- chemical synthesis method in the presence of surfactants.59,97,144
The morphological features and surface roughness of Fe2O4/ZnO-nanowires synthesis by dip-coating were studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) by Benaboud and group.42 There were low and high magnification SEM images of FZO-NWs as revealed in Fig. 5. Also, the fibers sizes of the ZnO films were reported by these scientists.35–45
 Fig. 5  Low and high magnification SEM images of FZO-NWs. The data obtained from ref. 42. 
The morphology and crystal structure of most commonly known transitional metal oxides such as TiO2 strongly depend on the microstructure and phase composition of titanium foil.60–65
From the illustration in Fig. 5(a1–a3), the absorption band is in the ultraviolet and visible spectrum region.55,67–69 The strong broad absorption bands of 1 around 308 nm and 2 around 312 nm can be recognized as p–p* transfer of the ligands. It was noticed that there was unclear form of the materials in the weak absorptions band of the visible spectrum region as seen in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  (a) UV vis diffuse-reflectance spectra of 1–2 and H4cbta ligand with BaSO4 as background. (b) Kubelka Munk-transformed diffuse reflectance spectra of 1–2. Data was obtained from ref. 55. 
One of the main factors that affect the properties of transitional metals in their applications is their morphology and characteristics. A lot of new ideas regarding the morphologies have been deeply investigated. Many studies on cadmium selenide48–51 had revealed that there are highly faceted geometries such as hexagons, pyramids, rods, cubes, and tetrapods. CdS nanoparticle is said to have been influenced most by the energies of TEM beam and this may cause them to melt and then changed these d-blocked metals into smaller nanowires.47,52,56–58
Effect of adsorption onto photocatalytic process
During semiconductor photocatalysis, when exposed to light with photonic energy greater than the band gap of a semiconductor, the valence electrons (VB) are excited to empty the conduction band (CB). This excitation leads to the formation of electron (eCB) and positive hole (h+VB) pair.214,215 Metal oxides have poor adsorption ability for aqueous phase pollutants.156 These drawbacks have motivated researchers to couple graphene and other photocatalyts with a d-block metals to gain an improved photocatalytic activity. The photocatalytic degradation of phenolic compounds was studied under two conditions (simultaneous adsorption (A + P) and photocatalysis and adsorption followed by photocatalysis (A − P)) by Shandilya and coworkers.213 During the A + P process, synergetic effect between photocatalysis and adsorption caused enhanced phenol degradation. A + P was the most efficient for photocatalytic process of removal of phenolic compounds. The mechanistic details of adsorption process, it is crucial to identify main oxidant species involved in degradation of the pollutant. Usually, hydroxyl radicals (OH˙), superoxide radicals (O2˙), photogenerated holes (h+VB) and electrons (e− CB) are major oxidant species218 in adsorption reactions. Shandilya and group prepared fluorine doped graphene (FG) as high dispersed adsorbent by sonochemical exfoliation method. The simultaneous adsorption and photocatalysis was most efficient process for degradation of selected phenolic compounds. The oxidative radical species OH˙ and O2˙− played vital role in photodegradation and adsorption process.217
Enhancement of the activity by modification
Modified d-block metals are excellent UV-responsive photocatalysts for the36,146,147 environmental remediation. The high activity is due to their metallic oxyacid structure which is supposed to accelerate the separation of photogenerated charges. To compensate the cost, further enhancement of these photocatalysts are still needed. Two methods based on photocatalytic principles have been developed, including: (i) Promoting the separation and transfer of photogenerated charge carriers, (ii) extending the absorption wavelength to the visible light region. At present, the modifications that enhance the visible-light photocatalytic activity of modified d-block metals may be more attractive as they can utilize a large portion of sunlight. But in particular, these modifications should not decrease the UV photocatalytic activity at the same145 time, otherwise the activity under the real sunlight irradiation (UV+vis) cannot be enhanced the activity of d-block metal itself could be enhanced by improving the synthesis methods for optimizing the structural parameters. These effective modification methods with some of them used to modify TiO2 include: the doping, formation of the heterojunction structure, surface immobilizations, creation of the surface oxygen vacancies and so on.11,143 by these methods, either the solar light harvesting or charge separation of the modified d-block metal has been successfully improved, which thus enhances the photocatalytic activity.
Immobilisation on surfaces
Modified d-block metals can be configured in either a suspended form or an immobilised form. There are obvious disadvantages to configuration in an immobilised form such as a decreased surface area, however there are notable advantages such as the prevention of light scattering, ease of removal, and easy reuse. Modified d-block metals have been immobilised on various stationary surfaces such as thin films, reticulated foam monoliths, fiber glass, glass/ceramic rings, sand, glass beads, glass wool, silica fibres, titanium alloys, quartz, stainless steel and Pyrex glass tubes containing scratched polymeric fibres (to enhance the availability of light). There are other immobilisation substrates which are possible; however, these have not been applied for the interest of water remediation and will therefore not be discussed. There are numerous methods for immobilisation of modified d-block metals on surfaces and they all depend on the application required.
Different immobilisation techniques include: dip coating, sol gel and electrophoretic coating, thermal, and aerosol powder coating among others.122
Hierarchical morphology
Changing the morphology of the synthesised photocatalysts plays a significant effect in its photocatalytic activity.148 Optical, electronic, mechanical, magnetic and chemical properties of carbon nitride materials are highly dependants on the change of size, composition, dimension and shape.
Hard and soft templating methods, template-free methods, exfoliation strategies are among the methods used to modify the structure of the synthesized carbon nitride photocatalysts.1,149 It is well known that the photocatalytic activity is related to the morphology of the photocatalysts.150,151 Hierarchical nanostructures have turned out to be favorable for photocatalyst design, because they combine reactive nanoscale architectures with high surface areas. Hierarchical microspheres composed of nanorods and nanosheets showed large specific surface area, good physical and chemical properties.86,152–155
Doping with metals
Many studies have been performed in relation to metal or ion doping in order to enhance the photophysical properties of the semiconductor in heterogeneous photocatalysis. Doping with metals such as the Lanthanides, Fe, Pt, Ag and other noble metals may effectively enhance the photocatalytic efficiency.121 It has been postulated that doping the d-block metal surface with various metals and oxides can reduce recombination processes by effectively trapping electrons and additionally extending absorption into the visible region. It can also enhance the rate of the photocatalytic reaction, enhance the yield of a particular product or change the reaction products.19
One of the major challenges with d-block metals photocatalysis has been electron–hole recombination as generally this process competes with photodegradation: doping with metals provides a solution to this problem. It prevents this process with migration of the electron to the metal, by the alignment of the Fermi levels of both the metal and the semiconductor. This not only suppresses the process but also the decrease in electron density causes an increase in hydroxyl acidity which affects the photocatalytic process. The major drawback with adding a dopant is that it heightens the cost of the process particularly when metals such as Ag or Pt are applied.
Selective oxidation/reduction can also be achieved by doping. Depending on the compound, d-block metals mediated photocatalysis can either preferentially oxidise or reduce the contaminant.96 In a study undertaken by (Hoffman, 1995 (ref. 120)). They found that doping with vanadium (IV) accelerated the oxidation of chloroform, and doping with ruthenium accelerated the reduction of carbon tetrachloride. Doping with other species such as silica-tungstic acid can effectively inhibit one of these processes also resulting in a potentially ‘selective’ decomposition.
Catalytic mechanisms of modified d-block metals
Degradation of pollutants
The groups of Wang and Yu have recently studied on Cu2O–ZnO heterostructures on photocatalysis.16,81,167 Luo and coworkers161 also reported the ZnO/CNF/ NiO heteroarchitecture for high-performance photocatalysis. Liu and group stated electrospun nanofiber NiO/ZnO heterojunctions with enhanced photocatalytic activity.159,238 ZnO/CdS structure also has higher photocatalytic activity than pristine materials.162–164 These reports indicate that the heterostructures of most modified d-block metals possessed higher photocatalytic activity of dye decomposition than pristine semiconductors (Table 3). However, the efficiency of photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO) needs further improvement.
Table 3 Photodegradation activities of modified d-block metals




Modified d-block metals
Pollutants
Catalytic performances
Ref




ZnO/Cu2O
RhB
50

166



ZnO/CNF/NiO
RhB
78

12



ZnO/NiO
RhB
55

12



ZnO/CdS
MO
95

162



ZnO/NiO
MO
99.8




ZnO/Cu2O
MO
99

81



ZnO/CuSCN (3D)
MO
99.5






Their mechanism of degradation of organic contaminants occurs either by a H-abstraction in the case of alkene/olefinic or alcohol functionalities. In the case of aromatic species, the general case is hydroxylation of the phenyl ring, and perhaps subsequent displacement of EWGs such as halides. In general, reactions of hydroxyl radicals can be summarized into H-abstraction, electrophilic addition and electron transfer.123 In the majority of studies, only one of the oxidants mentioned above is selected and used. If more than one is used or ‘too much’ is used, various inhibitory processes come into play and the efficiency of degradation is somewhat compromised.123 This is realized in reported studies by124–125,222 where degradation efficiency decreases once a threshold of H2O2 is reached. Adan and coworkers124 performed studies using TiO2 immobilised on silica fibres with various oxidants. They found that after 300 min irradiation 38% salicylic acid is removed using H2O2 at 29 mmol, and after 300 min irradiation using oxygen 33% salicylic acid is removed. At this concentration Adan and group then124 reported that various recombination processes start to compete with degradation. They also reported that the degradation rate limits due to recombination of hydroxyl radicals with various other radical species such as hydroperoxyl radicals and peroxide.
ZnO, Cu2O, CuSCN, and NiO nanostructures with different orientation were fabricated by the cost-effective electrodeposition method at room temperature.158,165 NiO has the highest catalytic activity among these modified d-block metal nanostructures of ZnO, Cu2O, CuSCN, and NiO. The greatest enhancement of the photocatalytic activity is obtained using a ZnO/NiO heterostructure, this can be ascribed to the heterojunction structure and extremely higher specific surface area, which can degrade MO.
Kaniou et al.125 found, in the photocatalytic degradation of sulfamethazine, that concentrations above 200 mg L−1 resulted in a decrease in the reaction rate. This particular study examined both TiO2 and ZnO on the degradation of sulfamethazine. Addition of H2O2 to ZnO, interestingly had no effect positive or negative on the reaction rate. Kaniou and co-workers125 explained this in relation to the negligible adsorption of H2O2 on the surface of ZnO which was also noticed by.126,127 The adsorption of H2O2 on d-block metals is much more photocatalytically favorable due to an increase in the reduction by photogenerated electrons of H2O2 and therefore a reduced e−/h+ recombination rate. All in all, optimum concentrations must be realised for the most efficient degradation.
CO2 reduction
Clean and renewable energy is well known to be one of the best means of reducing the fabrication of CO2 in the atmosphere79,80 according to The SDG 7. Recently, there has been a swift increased in industrialization as well population growth globally, this current issue has been a menace to the environment with much harmful effects on the atmosphere.84 An increased in CO2 existence lately has caused an essential agenda to the universe.74,75 CO2 produced (Fig. 7) from burning of fuel from domestic to industrial level has contributed much on the atmospheric air pollution hence resulting into the current global warming the world is suffering today.76–78 Many studies had come out with numerous approaches with well-developed novel techniques to cut down the production of CO2. But increasing demand of fuel and productions in the industries still make the contribution of CO2 to be high (Tables 4 and 5). Technologies have been developed to degrade the produced CO2. Among others, photocatalytic reactions have promised to be one of the best technologies for the CO2 reduction (see Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Mechanism of photoreduction of CO2 to methoxyl radical on TiO2 in the presence of water during photocatalytic reaction. Reproduced with permission.112,116 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Table 4 Modified d-block metals in carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction




Photocatalyst
Source of light
Application
Performance
Ref




g-C3N4/ZnO
300 W xenon arc lamp
CO2 reduction
0.6 μmol h−1 g−1 CH3OH

73, 81, 82


SnO2−X/g-C3N4
500 W xenon lamp
CO2 reduction
22.7 μmol h−1 g−1 CO, CH3OH, CH4


BiOI/g-C3N4
300 W xenon arc lamp (λ > 400 nm cut-off filter)
CO2 reduction
17.9 μmol g−1 CO




Table 5 Typical d-block metal photocatalysis




Metals
Properties
Modified metals
Modification schemes
Method of synthesis
Photocatalytic activity
Ref




Ti


TiO2
g-C3N4–N-TiO2 heterojunction
Facile in situ synthesis, thermal treatment
Excellent photoreduction of CO2 to CO

83



Fe


Co–Fe nitrides
Coupling
Thermal treatment
Enhanced CO2 reduction

89, 164


Au


Modified Au (111) by assembling 4-mercaptopyridine (4MPy) and 4-aminothiophenol (4ATP


Chemically functionalized with substituted and unsubstituted Fe(II)-phthalocyanines technique
Excellent electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of L-cysteine

102–106



Mn


Mn3O4–MnO2 hetero-nanorods/graphene nanocomposite (MM-HNRS/GS)
Heterojunction
Prepared by merging a hydrothermal method, a wet chemical process and a thermal treatment, and X-ray diffraction is adopted to demonstrate the formation process
Outstanding synergistic influence and evidently improved the electrocatalytic activity

107



Sn


SnO2−X/g-C3N4
Heterojunction


An enhanced CO2 reduction

82



Zn


g-C3N4/ZnO
Heterojunction


An enhanced CO2 reduction

81



Ti
g-C3N4 and TiO2, under the same experimental conditions are surface of diatomite
TiO2




Excellent degradation of (A) rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue MB), and (B) methyl orange (MO) and phenol under the same conditions

11, 15, 17–18


Fe


Fe2O4/ZnO
Heterojunction
Thermal method
Showed and enhanced degradative activity

42



Zr


ZrO2


Soft- chemical synthesis



11



Si


SiO2


Soft- chemical synthesis



12





Sheng Zhou and co-workers83,175 reported the facile in situ synthesis of one of the much-studied modified metal, g-C3N4–N-TiO2 heterojunction as an efficient photocatalyst for the selective photoreduction of CO2 to CO. The composites of graphitic carbon nitride and nitrogen-doped titanium dioxide composites (g-C3N4–N-TiO2) were in situ synthesized by thermal treatment of the well mixed urea and Ti(OH)4 in an alumina crucible with a cover at different mass ratios. The mixture was heated to 550 °C for 3 h and then 580 °C for 3 h at a heating rate of 5 °C min−1 to obtain the product. The product was washed with nitric acid (0.1 M) and distilled water for several times to remove residual alkaline and sulfate species (e.g. ammonia and SO42−) adsorbed on the sample, and then dried at 80 °C overnight to get the final product.
The coupling of outstanding active sites derived from Co–Fe nitrides and superior CO2 reduction reaction active centers of some other metal such as-N–C and graphitic N to acquire high-performance and low-cost catalysts is an ideal solution. Therefore, a successful combination of d-block metals, cobalt–iron bimetallic nitrides with N-doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes serves as a very good catalyst for CO2 reduction.
Photo-reduction of bacterial endospore activity
To battle severe environments, thus, to endure in deprived nutrition conditions, several types of bacteria produce tough and temporarily dormant structures called endospores. Endospores can survive desiccation, high temperatures, extreme freezing, and conditions without nutrients.125,134,135 They are also resistant to c-radiation, UV radiation, and chemical disinfectants.135,142 Antibacterial agents, which destroy vegetative cell walls, have minimal effects on endospores. Bacterial endospores have, therefore, long caused serious problems in public health, food industry, and medicine because they are so difficult to kill. Kim and Lee131 first used photocatalysis to treat bacterial endospores. They identified that B. cereus endospores were resistant to treatment (see Fig. 8) using a commercial modified d-block metals such as, ZnO, CdS, TiO2, AgO, Cd–NiP photocatalysts, Degussa P25, but treatment with a nanocomposite, composed of d-block metals and carbon nanotubes, and solar UV lamps inactivated 90% of these spores. Application of metal doping in d-block metals photocatalysis further improved the efficiency of the UV-activated photocatalytic sporicidal effects.136,137 For visible light-responsive photocatalytic inactivation of bacterial endospores,132,133,141 synthesized an Ag, C, and S co-doped TiO2 substrate, excitable under visible light, which showed strong antimicrobial properties against E. coli cells and B. subtilis spores. Kau and group132 reported that photocatalysis by visible light- responsive d-block metals substrates doped with N and C significantly reduced the cell numbers and spore activity of B. subtilis, B. thuringiensis, B. cereus, and B. anthracis. In this report, findings on the photocatalytic treatment of the endospores of the bacterial strains were of particular interest. Although the visible light induced photocatalysis did not kill the spores as effectively as the cells, injection of the photocatalysis-treated B. anthracis spores into mice greatly reduced their mortality.132,138–140 These results indicated that despite incomplete destruction of the endospores, the photocatalysis inactivated some of their pathogenic components without eliminating their germination ability, thus reducing the induced mortality.
 Fig. 8  Proposed model for common mechanism of killing by bactericidal antibiotics the primary drug-target interactions (amino- glycoside with the ribosome, quinolone with DNA gyrase, and b-lactam with penicillin-binding proteins) stimulate oxidation of NADH via the electron transport chain that is dependent upon the TCA cycle. Hyperactivation of the electron transport chain stimulates superoxide formation. Superoxide damages iron–sulfur clusters, making ferrous iron available for oxidation by the Fenton reaction. The Fenton reaction leads to hydroxyl radical formation, and the hydroxyl radicals damage DNA, proteins, and lipids, which results in cell death. Figure adapted from.130,139,239 
Electrochemical/electrocatalytic activity
Considerably, d-block metals and carbon materials,44,85,89,163 as promising replacements for precious metal materials, have attracted wide attention because of their outstanding electrochemical performance and low cost.155,216,226 Therefore, lots of transition metal-based materials (nickel,91 cobalt,92,93 iron94,95) are used to prepare high-efficient oxygen electrocatalysts. With these metals, cobalt- based catalysts are particularly prominent because of the robust OER active sites: Co(III/IV) centers (derive from cobalt-based compounds), such as oxides,87 phosphates35 and nitrides.12
Gao and coworkers163,182 coupled the oxygen evolution reaction active sites oxides derived from Co–Fe nitrides and the oxygen reduction reaction active centers metal–N–C and graphitic N (see Fig. 9) to acquire high-performance of electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the preparation process and catalytic strategy for the Co–Fe–N@MWCNT. Obtained from ref. 164 with permission. 
Also, Francisco Silva and group99 modified Au (111) by assembling 4-mercaptopyridine (4MPy) and 4-aminothiophenol (4ATP) on this d- block metal using surfaces chemically functionalized with substituted and unsubstituted Fe(II)-phthalocyanines technique. These compounds are known for their electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of L-cysteine,100–106,183 an important amino acid in living systems. It is found that the effect of substituents on the Pc-ring on the Fe(III)/(II) redox potential is weak when FePc molecules are confined directly on Au and with the 4MPy SAMs/FePc, but their more pronounced when FePc molecules are located on the outermost position of the SAM assembly with a 4ATP molecules.99
Mn3O4–MnO2 hetero-nanorods/graphene nanocomposite (MM-HNRS/GS) was exclusively prepared by merging a hydrothermal method, a wet chemical process and a thermal treatment, and X-ray diffraction is adopted to demonstrate the formation process.107 Electrochemical analysis of the mentioned modified metal disclosed that the hetero-structure based on Mn3O4 and MnO2 brings about an outstanding synergistic influence and evidently improved the electrocatalytic activity (see Fig. 10 and Table 4).
 Fig. 10  (a) Amperometric i–t curve of MM-HNRS/GS/GCE in a stirred 0.1 M NaOH solution with successive addition of H2O2 at 0.4 V (vs. SCE), (inset) i–t curve in the low H2O2 concentrations. (b) Calibration curve of the response current vs. H2O2 concentration. The data was obtained from ref. 107. 
Methanol electrooxidation reaction
Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) are the emerging tools that transform chemical energy into electrical energy efficiently through electro-chemical reactions while the fuel is supplied. DMFC appears as a substitute technology to cost-effectively produce clean energy for convenient functions.188
Methanol is a liquid fuel which can be easily stored, handled and produced from oil, natural gas, coal or biomass, that is, methanol should be extensively accessible and economical. It's been quite a long time from the time of electrooxidation of methanol studies, all catalysts have been based on platinum. Recent studies have proven that d-block metals with much emphasis on modified ones, have revealed their efficacy in activation of the dissociative adsorption of methanol.189–191
Recent study led by Gavidia and group186 demonstrated that specific carbon-supported Pt-free catalysts (Pd, PdFe, PdIr and PdFeIr) synthesized by the borohydride method revealed that Membrane electrode assembly with a cathode containing PdFeIr/C catalyst yields elevated performance in DMFC, while the electrode cost is dramatically reduced. The top panel of Fig. 6 shows the voltage–current density and power–current density curves registered in the single DMFC operating with a 2 M aqueous methanol at 60 °C and atmospheric pressure for the MEA with a composition PtRu/C|N115|PdFeIr/C. In conclusion, low-cost carbon-supported Pd and Pd- based alloys (PdFe/C, PdIr/C, PdFeIr/C) with elevated catalytic activity and high specificity toward the ORR were successfully synthesized by the borohydride method to be used as cathodic material in a DMF.
Lima and coworkers187 also investigated on electrochemical oxidation of methanol on Pt–Ru–X ternary metallic catalysts (with X= Au, Co, Cu, Fe, Mo, Ni, Sn or W) by preparing these d-block metals using electrochemical deposition and dispersed in a conductive three-dimensional matrix, an electronic conducting polymer, polyaniline. Several ternary catalysts towards the electro-oxidation of methanol revealed that PAni/Pt–Ru–Mo is the greatest effectual anode at potentials. It was also noticed that the ternary catalyst leads to higher power densities than the PAni/Pt–Ru binary catalyst.
Water-oxidation reaction
Oxygen production
Water splitting using visible light harvest (hydro-oxidation reaction) is one of the promising advances for attaining renewable oxygen production. Miseki and Sayama,157 studied Z-scheme water splitting using a [Fe(CN)6]3−/4- redox mediator that can function at neutral pH. Surface-modified WO3, thus, Fe–H–Cs–WO3 showed an excellent activity (see Fig. 11) for the water oxidation reaction using [Fe(CN)6]3−. Oxygen was produced until all the [Fe(CN)6]3− ions were reduced to [Fe(CN)6]4− ions. Abe et al. also reported no reliable O2 evolution by various particulate photocatalysts, such as WO3 and TaON, was observed in the presence of [Fe(CN)6]3− as the electron acceptor although these are famous oxygen evolution photocatalysts.
 Fig. 11  Time courses of the water-splitting reaction in K–Pi solutions (0.1 M, pH 7.8) containing 0.5 mM K4[Fe(CN)6]when a (a) Xe lamp attached with L42 cut-off filter and (b) solar simulator calibrated to AM 1.5 (1 SUN, 9 cm2) are used as the light source under visible-light irradiation. (catalyst mass: 40 mg (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh) and 400 mg (surface-treated). The data obtained from ref. 157. 
Hydrogen production
Designing semiconductor photocatalysts for conversion of renewable and limitless solar energy to clean hydrogen energy has been a promising center for study since its discovery by Fujishima and Honda.91,109,128,129,168–174 The main brain behind this promising investigation is to design an ideal material that should be low-cost, efficient for hydrogen production under visible light illumination.121,178–180
Ao and team researched into Ni2P–CdS hybrid by the in situ growth of well dispersed ultrafine Ni2P nanoparticles on CdS nanorods by a simple solvothermal method and a further surface phosphatization treatment for the first time. They found out that Ni2P–CdS hybrid with optimal composition presented a standard hydrogen evolution rate of 34.9 mmol h−1 g−1 which was about 23 times as high as pure CdS. The improved photocatalytic activity may be due to the intimate interface between well dispersed ultrafine Ni2P coctalysts and the CdS nanorods which was favorable for the photogenerated electrons transfer (Fig. 12) and separation which promoted the visible light catalytic activity.
 Fig. 12  a) XPS VB spectra of CS and bulk BP; b) and c) illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of FPS/CS system under visible-light irradiation. Figure obtained with permission from ref. 185. 
Studied have proven that combining d-block metals with noble-metal-free cocatalysts, such as sulfide,181 phosphide95,98,165,176,177,185 and carbide183 has been proved to be an efficient way to improve the photocatalytic performance for hydrogen evolution. Moreover, it has been found that d-block-metal phosphides possess the similar properties with zero-valent metals.184 Ran and coworkers,185 for the first time used density functional theory to guide the application of phosphorene as a high-efficiency metal-free co-catalyst for CdS, Zn0.8Cd0.2S or ZnS. Particularly, phosphorene modified CdS revealed a high apparent quantum yield of 34.7% at 420 nm. The outstanding activity of CdS arose from the strong electronic coupling between phosphorene and CdS, as well as the favorable band structure, high charge mobility and massive active sites of phosphorene.
Applications of modified d-block metals photocatalysis
Modified d-block metal photocatalysis is generally employed because of its versatility in that it can be carried out in both gas and aqueous or organic liquid phases. Herman & J. M. 2005.128 Photoinduced redox reactions were sparked by Fujishima and Honda109,129 with the discovery of water splitting by a single crystal d-block metal electrode. Nowadays, photocatalysis involving d-block metals can be used in various organic reactions such as oxidations, reductions, oxidative cleavages, polymerisations. d-Block metals also have potential uses in environmental decontamination: with the destruction of organic pollutants and the treatment of wastewater, furthermore d-block metals also feature in current solar cell models and self-cleaning window applications among other commercial uses.
It is important to note that the density functional theory (DFT) approach to large transition-metal complexes is currently the only feasible one if their chemistry shall be routinely investigated. Even if special variants of ab initio methods are feasible for a certain molecule, the molecule's structure is likely to be optimized in a DFT calculation under the assumption that the molecular structure will be reliable even if the corresponding DFT energy is not. Therefore, the assessment of DFT methods in transition-metal chemistry is decisive. One systematic failure of DFT of particular importance in transition-metal chemistry is the spin-state energetics problem.211,212
Theoretical investigations have illustrated the structure properties, physicochemical characteristics, and electrochemical behaviors of modified d-block metal materials when loading the uniform terminated –O, –F, and –OH in various density functional theory (DFT) studies205–208 For example, DFT studies have shown that the termination groups of Ti3C2 MXene layers mainly have two distinct configurations: hollow sites located near three neighboring C atoms and hollow sites distributed on the two sides of Ti3C2 sheets.44,46,156,208,209
Challenges in modified d-block metal-photocatalysis
There are two main challenges that face the field of d-block metal photocatalysis and currently these issues can impede its function in wastewater treatment and related.
a. Immobilization of d-block metal such that the material can be easily removed and recycled. Many immobilisation substrates are possible, although achieving the same removal rates and efficiency as suspended d-block metal is the overall goal.
b. The development of visible light sensitised photocatalytic materials such that cheaper visible light sources or solar light can be harnessed. Currently, UV light is required which heightens the cost of the process significantly. Achieving visible light sensitised photocatalysts can be done in many ways such as doping with metals, or coating with dyes. Overcoming these drawbacks is the present focus of research in modified d-block metal photocatalysis.
Future prospects and conclusion
From the discussion, the future research of the modified d-block metal photocatalysts may consider designing and synthesizing of more effective nanostructures, for instance, hollow spheres with a high surface area or nanoplates with the highly active surface; and the degradation behaviour and mechanism of more types of pollutants, especially for non-dyed pollutants, better CO2 reduction and hydrogen production.
Also, future prospect should consider scheming of modified d-block metals that are responsive to morphology monitoring, evaluating the photocatalysis practicality and efficacy of traditional synthesis and preparative strategies of modified d-block metals and then discovering the functions of distinct modified d-block metals particles in considering viable fuel production, and its effective application in solar energy utilization.
Modified d-block metals are known to have mostly been used as co-catalysts to help improve the separation and transfer efficacy of electron–hole pairs to enhance the photocatalytic performances of the catalysts. A work led by Li and coworkers201,203,210 indicated that the modified d-block metals such as Cu3P etc.… coupled with Nano based particles for instance, n-type graphitic carbon nitride usually forms a p–n junction to promote charge separation and transfer for an improved photocatalytic activity.
Modified d-block metals are very important in the management of the environment especially those which are used in the photocatalytic processes. This was confirmed by ref. 204 in their research which they indicated that noble metal catalysts have significant application prospects in the chemical production processes and environmental protection fields.
To conclude, this comprehensive discussion on modified d-block metal photocatalysis highlights the contemporary enhancements on the photocatalytic activity of these metals through their structure modifications, synthesis, and catalytic potentials. This perspective presents a better understanding of the various mechanisms of solar harvest of modified d-block metals for better visible light responsive activities. In view of that, more studies are also required in order to making full use of the excellent properties of these modified d-block metals in solar synthesis.
Conflicts of interest
The Authors declares that they have no conflict of interest.
References
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chemical Synthesis of Mesoporous Carbon Nitrides Using Hard Templates and Their Use as a Metal-Free Catalyst for Friedel–Crafts Reaction of Benzene, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, Z. Sun, X. Zhang, L. Xue and S. Zheng, Synthesis and Enhanced Solar Light Photocatalytic Activity of a C/N Co-Doped TiO2/Diatomite Composite with Exposed(001) Facets, Aust. J. Chem., 2018, 71, 315–324,  DOI:10.1071/CH17544 .
M. Rafatullah, O. Sulaiman, R. Hashim and A. Ahmad, Adsorption of methylene blue on low-cost adsorbents: A review, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 177(1–3), 70–80,  DOI:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.12.047 .
L. Zhang, Q. Liu, P. Hu and R. Huang, Adsorptive removal of methyl orange using enhanced cross-linked chitosan/bentonite composite, Desalin. Water Treat., 2015, 1–12,  DOI:10.1080/19443994.2015.1088478 .
K.-J. Hsien, W.-T. Tsai and T.-Y. Su, Preparation of diatomite–TiO2 composite for photodegradation of bisphenol-A in water, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 51(1), 63–69,  DOI:10.1007/s10971-009-1921-6 .
Z. Sun, Y. Yan, G. Zhang, Z. Wu and S. Zheng, The influence of carriers on the structure and photocatalytic activity of TiO2/diatomite composite photocatalysts, Adv. Powder Technol., 2015, 26(2), 595–601,  DOI:10.1016/j.apt.2015.01.007 .
Z. Tian, X. Wang, L. Shu, T. Wang, T. H. Song and Z. Gui, 
            et al., Preparation of Nano BaTiO3–Based Ceramics for Multilayer Ceramic Capacitor Application by Chemical Coating Method, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 830–833 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Hong, H. P. Kim, B. Y. Choi, H. S. Han, J. S. Son and C. W. Ahn, 
            et al., Lead-free piezoceramics–where to move on?, J. Materiomics, 2016, 2, 1–24 CrossRef .
D. Wang, D. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Vardaxoglou, W. G. Whittow and D. Cadman, 
            et al. Cold-Sintered Temperature Stable Na0.5Bi0.5MoO4–Li2MoO4 Microwave Composite Ceramics, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2438–2444 CrossRef CAS .
M.-D. Li, X.-G. Tang, S.-M. Zeng, Y.-P. Jiang, Q.-X. Liu, T.-F. Zhang and W.-H. Li, Oxygen-vacancy-related dielectric relaxation behaviours and impedance spectroscopy of Bi(Mg1/2Ti1/2)O3 modified BaTiO3 ferroelectric ceramics, J. Materiomics, 2018 DOI:10.1016/j. jmat.2018.03.001 .
Y. Chen, W. Huang, D. He, Y. Situ and H. Huang, Construction of heterostructured g- C3N4/Ag/TiO2 microspheres with enhanced photocatalysis performance under visible-light irradiation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14405–14414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Hu, X. Jiang, S. Meng and X. Fu, Fabrication and characterization of novel Z-scheme photocatalyst WO3/g-C3N4 with high efficient visible light photocatalytic activity, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 149–150, 512–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Y. Tian, B. Chang, F. Xi and X. Dong, BiOBr–carbon nitride heterojunctions: synthesis, enhanced activity and photocatalytic mechanism, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21159–21166 RSC .
Y. He, J. Cai, T. Li, Y. Wu, H. Lin, L. Zhao and M. Luo, Efficient degradation of RhB over GdVO4/g-C3N4 composites under visible-light irradiation, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 215–216, 721–730 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, H. Tao, L. Chen and Y. Sun, Synthesis of Fe/g-C3N4 composites with improved visible light photocatalytic activity, Mater. Lett., 2014, 116, 265–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Polymeric graphitic carbon nitride as a heteroge- neous organocatalyst: from photochemistry to multipurpose catalysis to
sustainable chemistry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, X. Li, J. Liu and L. Huang, Synthesis and photocatalytic performance of europium-doped graphitic carbon nitride, J. Rare Earths, 2013, 31(11), 1085–1091 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, M. B. Ahmed, J. L. Zhou, A. Altaee, G. Xu and M. Wu, Graphitic carbon nitride-based nanocomposites for the photocatalysis of organic contaminants under visible irradiation: Progress, limitations and future directions, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 633, 546–559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Functionalized Graphitic Carbon Nitride for Metal-free, Flexible and Rewritable Nonvolatile Memory Device via Direct Laser-Writing, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Molecular engineering of polymeric carbon nitride: advancing applications from photocatalysis to biosensing and more, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2298–2321,  10.1039/c7cs00840f .
A. Sudhaik, P. Raizada, P. Shandilya, D.-Y. Jeong, J.-H. Lim and P. Singh, Review on fabrication of graphitic carbon nitride based efficient nanocomposites for photodegradation of aqueous phase organic pollutants, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.jiec.2018.07.007 .
T. M. Tolaymat, A. M. El Badawy, A. Genaidy, K. G. Scheckel, T. P. Luxton and M. Suidan, An evidence-based environmental perspective of manufactured silver nanoparticle in syntheses and applications: A systematic review and critical appraisal of peer-reviewed scientific papers, Sci. Total Environ., 2010, 408, 999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Creighton, C. G. Blatchford and M. G. Albrecht, Plasma resonance enhancement of Raman scattering by pyridine adsorbed on silver or gold sol particles of size comparable to the excitation wavelength, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1979, 75, 790 RSC .
Z. Sui, X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Chai, C. Yang and J. Zhao, An improved approach for synthesis of positively charged silver nanoparticles, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Lv and H. A. Wang, facile approach to synthesize silver nanorods capped with sodium tripolyphosphate, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 2698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Horiuchi, M. Shimada, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Size-controlled synthesis of silver nanoparticles on Ti-containing mesoporous silica thin film and photoluminescence enhancement of rhodamine 6G dyes by surface plasmon resonance, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6745 RSC .
A. Zielinska, E. Skwarek, A. Zaleska, M. Gazda and J. Hupka, Preparation of Silver Nanoparticle, Procedia Chem., 2009, 1, 1560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein and M. Giersig, Formation of colloidal silver nanoparticles. Capping action of citrate, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9533 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pietrobon and V. Kitaev, Photochemical Synthesis of Monodisperse Size- Controlled Silver Decahedral Nanoparticles and Their Remarkable Optical Properties, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, Chem. Mater., 2002, 10, 444 CrossRef ; A. B. Mayer, S. H. Hausner and J. E. Mark, Colloidal Silver Nanoparticles Generated in the Presence of Protective Cationic Polyelectrolytes, Polym. J., 1998, 32, 15 CrossRef .
S. K. Sivaraman, I. Elango, S. Kumar and V. Santhanam, Room-temperature synthesis of gold nanoparticles—Size-control by slow addition, Curr. Sci., 1997, 7, 1055 Search PubMed .
K. Yoosaf, B. I. Ipe, C. H. Suresh and K. G. Thomas, In Situ Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles and Selective Naked-Eye Detection of Lead Ions from Aqueous Media, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12839 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Chou and Y. S. Lai, Effect of polyvinyl pyrrolidone molecular weights on the formation of nanosized silver colloids, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2004, 83, 82 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Chou, Y. C. Lu and H. H. Lee, Effect of alkaline ion on the mechanism and kinetics of chemical reduction of silver, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 94, 429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Tang and B. Vlahovic, A Review on Preparation and Applications of Silver-Containing Nanofibers, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 80,  DOI:10.1186/s11671-016-1286 .
J. Pan, Z. Dong, B. Wang, Z. Jiang, C. Zhao and J. Wang, The enhancement of photocatalytic hydrogen production via Ti 3 + self- doping black TiO 2 / g-C 3 N 4 hollow core-shell nano-heterojunction, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242(2018), 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marschall, Semiconductor composites: Strategies for enhancing charge carrier separation to improve photocatalytic activity, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(17), 2421–2440 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, 
            et al., Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution with simultaneous antibiotic wastewater degradation via the visible-light-responsive bismuth spheres-g-C 3 N 4 nanohybrid : Waste to energy insight, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358(2018), 944–954 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faisal, A. A. Ismail, F. A. Harraz and S. A. Al-sayari, Fabrication of highly effi cient TiO 2 / C 3 N 4 visible light driven photocatalysts with enhanced photocatalytic activity, J. Mol. Struct., 2018, 1173, 428–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. Eslami, 
            et al., Efficient photocatalytic oxidation of arsenite from contaminated water by Fe2O3-Mn2O3nanocomposite under UVA radiation and process optimization with experimental design, Chemosphere, 2018, 207, 303–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. I. Litter and I. K. Levy, TiO 2 -photocatalytic reduction of pentavalent and trivalent arsenic : production of elemental arsenic and arsine, in The 5th International Congress on Arsenic in the Environment, May 11-16,  2014, pp. 820–824 Search PubMed.
A. Benaboud, M. Zaabat, M. S. Aida, B. Boudine, S. Benzitouni and T. Saidani, Fe2O4/ZnO-nanowires synthesis by dip-coating for Orange II-dye photodegradation, Optik, 2017, 144, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, L. Xiao, C. Chen and Q. Cao, Synthesis of novel Cu2O/BiOCl heterojunction nanocomposites andtheir enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357, 1171–1179 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Jia, B. Naijing, J. Wu and Q. Zhen, Photocatalytic degradation of methyl blue using Fe2O3/TiO2 composite Ceramics, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 643, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
N. Praveen Kumar, M. Lakshmana Reddy, B. Mamatha Kumari, V. Srinivas, B. Durga Kumari, V. Sreedhar, O. Roddatis, M. Bondarchuk, B. Karthik and M. V. Neppolian, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 136, 157–166 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Li and S. Liu, Novel porous Ag2S/ZnS composite nanospheres: fabrication and enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activities, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 655, 38–43 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Dhage, H. A. Colorado and T. Hahn, Morphological variations in cadmium sulfide nanocrystals without phase transformation, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 420 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, Mechanisms of the Shape Evolution of CdSe Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1389 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi, E. G. Kim and T. G. Hyeon, One-Pot Synthesis of Copper-Indium Sulfide Nanocrystal Heterostructures with Acorn, Bottle, and Larva Shapes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pinna, K. Weiss, H. Sack-Kongehl, W. Vogel, J. Urban and M. P. Pileni, Triangular CdS Nanocrystals: Synthesis, Characterization, and Stability, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7982 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner and R. D. Tilley, Synthesis and Self-Assembly of Triangular and Hexagonal CdS Nanocrystals, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2997 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Fonoberov and E. P. Pokatilov, Exciton states and optical transitions in colloidal CdS quantum dots: Shape and dielectric mismatch effects, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 85310 CrossRef .
S. Mahanty, D. Basak, F. Rueda and M. Leon, Optical properties of chemical bath deposited CdS thin films, J. Electron. Mater., 1991, 28, 559 CrossRef .
O. Zelaya-Angel, J. J. Alvarado-Gil, R. Lozada-Morales, H. Varges and A. Ferreira da Silva, Band-gap shift in CdS semiconductor by photoacoustic spectroscopy: Evidence of a cubic to hexagonal lattice transition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 291 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Chen, Y. Zhou, H.-L. Cui, H. Yang, Y.-X. Ren, J.-J. Wang and L. Tang, Two novel d10 metal coordination polymers based on an asymmetric polycarboxylate ligand: Synthesis, crystal structure, photoluminescence and photocatalysis, J. Mol. Struct., 2019, 1175, 593–600 CrossRef CAS .
F. Akti, Photocatalytic degradation of remazol yellow using polyaniline–doped tin oxide hybrid photocatalysts with diatomite support, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.06.019 .

          S. Lowell, J. E. Shields, M. A. Thomas and M. M. Thommes, Characterization of porous solids and powders: surface area and pore size and density, Kluwer Academic Publishers, NewYork,  2006, pp. 12, 23, 132 Search PubMed .

          M. Bryjak, N. Kabay, B. L. Rivas and J. Bundschuh, Innovative Materials and Methods for Water Treatment: Solutions for Arsenic and Chromium Removal, Taylor&Francis Group, London,  2016, p. 83 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, X. Wang and X. Fu, Hierarchical macro/mesoporous TiO2/SiO2 and TiO2/ZrO2 nanocomposites for environmental photocatalysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 872–877 RSC .
A. Trenczek-Zajac, Influence of etching on structural, optical and photoelectrochemical properties of titanium oxides obtained via thermal oxidation, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2018, 83, 159–170 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Ren, G. Cai, M. Hong, W. Li, X. Xiao, W. Wu and C. Jiang, Fabrication of TiO2 nanofilm photoelectrodes on Ti foil by Ti ion implantation and subsequent annealing, Adv. Condens. Matter Phys., 2014, 4(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. F. Houlihan, D. P. Madacsi, S. V. Campus and L. N. Mulay, Improved solar energy conversion efficiencies for the photocatalytic production of hydrogen via TiO2 semiconductor electrodes, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 1191–1198,  DOI:10.1016/0025-5408(76)90020-9 .
W. Gissler, P. L. Lensi and S. Pizzini, Electrochemical investigation of an illuminated TiO2-electrode, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1976, 6, 9–13,  DOI:10.1007/BF01058864 .
K. Wysmulek, J. Sar, P. Osewski, K. Orlinski, K. Kolodziejak, A. Trenczek-Zajac, M. Radecka and D. A. Pawlak, A SrTiO3-TiO2 eutectic composite as a stable photoanode material for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 538–546,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2017.01.054 .
M. Radecka, M. Rekas, A. Trenczek-Zajac and K. Zakrzewska, Importance of the band gap energy and flat band potential for application of modified TiO2 photoanodes in water photolysis, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 46–55,  DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2007.10.082 .
K. Goswami, R. Ananthakrishnan and S. Mandal, Facile synthesis of cation doped ZnO-ZnCo2O4 hetero-nanocomposites for photocatalytic decomposition of aqueous organics under visible light, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 206, 174–185 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Roshan and V. Kumar, Mg-Doped ZnO Nanoparticles for Efficient Sunlight-Driven Photocatalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2717–2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Al-Ghamdi, O. A. Al-Hartomy, M. E. Okr, A. M. Nawar, S. El-Gazzar, F. El-Tantawy and F. Yakuphanoglu, Semiconducting properties of Al doped ZnO thin films, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2014, 131, 512–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Hammad, J. K. Salem and R. G. Harrison, Structure, optical properties and synthesis of Co-doped ZnO superstructures, Appl. Nanosci., 2013, 3, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
H. Parangusan, D. Ponnamma, M. A. A. Al-Maadeed and A. Marimuthu, Nanoflower-like Yttrium-doped ZnO Photocatalyst for the Degradation of Methylene Blue Dye, Photochem. Photobiol., 2018, 94(2), 237–246,  DOI:10.1111/php.12867 .
N. R. Yogamalar and A. Chandrabose, Burstein-Moss shift and room temperature near- band- edge luminescence in lithium doped Zinc oxide, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2011, 103, 33–42 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, S. W. Chan, J. E. Spanier, E. Apak, Q. Jin, R. D. Robinson and I. P. Herman, Cerium oxide nanoparticles: size selective formation and structure analysis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 50, 127–129 CrossRef .
J. C. Wang, 
            et al., Indirect Z-Scheme BiOI/g-C3N4Photocatalysts with Enhanced Photoreduction CO2Activity under Visible Light Irradiation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(6), 3765–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakravarty, A. Chikkatur, H. de Coninck, S. Pacala, R. Socolow and M. Tavoni, Sharing global CO2 emission reductions among one billion high emitters, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106(29), 11884–11888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rogelj, 
            et al., Energy system transformations for limiting end-of-century warming to below 1.5 °C, Nat. Clim. Change, 2015, 5(6), 519–527 CrossRef .
L. A. Duguma, P. van Am and N. Minang, Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation in the Land Use Sector : From Complementarity to Synergy, Environ. Manage., 2014, 54, 420–432 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu and V. Ramanathan, Well below 2 °C: Mitigation strategies for avoiding dangerous to catastrophic climate changes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114(39), 201618481 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Solano Rodriguez, P. Drummond and P. Ekins, Decarbonizing the EU energy system by 2050: an important role for BECCS, Clim. Policy, 2017, 17, S93–S110 CrossRef .
J. Fuglestvedt, 
            et al., Implications of possible interpretations of ‘greenhouse gas balance’ in the Paris Agreement, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2018, 376(2119), 20160445 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Duscha, A. Denishchenkova and J. Wachsmuth, Achievability of the Paris Agreement targets in the EU: demand-side reduction potentials in a carbon budget perspective, Clim. Policy, 2018, 3062, 1–14 Search PubMed .
W. Yu, D. Xu and T. Peng, Enhanced photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 for selective CO2reduction to CH3OH via facile coupling of ZnO: A direct Z-scheme mechanism, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(39), 19936–19947 RSC .
Y. He, 
            et al., Z-scheme SnO2-x/g-C3N4composite as an efficient photocatalyst for dye degradation and photocatalytic CO2reduction, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, 
            et al., Facile in situ synthesis of graphitic carbon nitride( g-C 3 N 4 ) -N-TiO 2 heterojunction as an efficient photocatalyst for the selective photoreduction of CO 2 to CO, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158–159, 20–29 CrossRef CAS .

          S. E. Manahan, The endangered Global Atmosphere, in Environmental Chemistry, Lewis Publisher, Boca Raton, Landon, New York, Washington D.C, 7th edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
H. W. Liang, X. Zhuang, S. Brüller, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Hierarchically porous carbons with optimized nitrogen doping as highly active electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4973–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, P. Li and D. Xiao, Enhanced electrocatalytic performance for oxygen reduction via active interfaces of layer-by-layered titanium nitride/titanium carbonitride structures, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Hierarchical nanostructured NiCo2O4 as an efficient bifunctional non-precious metal catalyst for rechargeable zinc-air batteries, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
B. Li, D. Geng, X. S. Lee, X. Ge, J. Chai and Z. Wang, 
            et al., Eggplant-derived microporous carbon sheets: Towards mass production of efficient bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts at low cost for rechargeable Zn-air batteries, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8841–8844 RSC .
W. Niu, L. Li, X. Liu, N. Wang, J. Liu and W. Zhou, 
            et al., Mesoporous N- doped carbons prepared with thermally removable nanoparticle templates: an efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5555–5562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Li, P. X. Hou, S. Y. Zhao, C. Liu, D. M. Tang and M. Cheng, 
            et al., A 3D bi- functional porous N-doped carbon microtube sponge electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3079–3084 RSC .
X. Chen, G. Zeng, T. Gao, Z. Jin, Y. Zhang and H. Yuan, 
            et al., In situ formation of high performance Ni-phytate on Ni-foam for efficient electrochemical water oxidation, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 74, 42–47 CrossRef .
Y. R. Zheng, M. R. Gao, Q. Gao, H. H. Li, J. Xu and Z. Y. Wu, 
            et al., An Efficient CeO2/CoSe2 Nanobelt Composite for Electrochemical Water Oxidation, Small, 2015, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Liu, M. Park, M. G. Kim, S. Gupta, X. Wang and G. Wu, 
            et al., High- performance non-spinel cobalt-manganese mixed oxide-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for rechargeable zinc-air batteries, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 315–325 CrossRef .
T. Gao, Z. Jin, M. Liao, J. Xiao, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, A trimetallic V-Co-Fe oxide nanoparticle as an efficient and stable electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17763–17770 RSC .
M. Jiang, Y. Li, Z. Lu, X. Sun and X. Duan, Binary nickel–iron nitride nanoarrays as bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 630–634 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. Gao, Z. Jin, X. Chen and D. Xiao, A robust water oxidation electrocatalyst from amorphous cobalt-iron bimetallic phytate nanostructures, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15888–15895 RSC .
P. Chen, K. Xu, Z. Fang, Y. Tong, J. Wu and X. Lu, 
            et al., Metallic Co4N porous nanowire arrays activated by surface oxidation as electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14710–14714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, Z. Jin, Y. Zhang, G. Tan, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, Coupling cobalt-iron bimetallic nitrides and N-doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes as high-performance bifunctional catalysts for oxygen evolution and reduction reaction, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Francisco Silva, J. Pavez, C. P. Silva and J. H. Zagal, Electrocatalytic activity of modified gold electrodes based on self-assembled monolayers of 4-mercaptopyridine and 4-aminothiophenol on Au(111) surfaces chemically functionalized with substituted and unsubstituted iron phthalocyanines, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 7–13 CrossRef .
J. H. Zagal, S. Griveau, J. F. Silva, T. Nyokong and F. Bedioui, Metallophthalocyanine- based molecular materials as catalysts for electrochemical reactions, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2755 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Mafatle and T. Nyokong, Electrocatalytic oxidation of cysteine by molybde- num(V) phthalocyanine complexes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 408, 213 CrossRef .
S. M. Chen, The electrocatalytic reactions of cysteine and cystine by water soluble iron porphyrin, manganese porphyrin and iron(II) phenanthrolines, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 1663 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mimica, F. Bedioui and J. J. Zagal, Reversibility of the L-cysteine/L-cystine redox process at physiological pH on graphite electrodes modified with co-enzyme B-12 and vitamin B-12, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Griveau, M. Gulppi and J. Pavez, Cobalt phthalocyanine-based molecular materials for the electrocatalysis and electroanalysis of 2-mercaptoethanol, 2-mercaptosulfonic acid, reduced glutathione and L-cysteine, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 779 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sehloto, T. Nyokong, J. H. Zagal and F. Bedioui, Electrocatalysis of oxi- dation of 2-mercaptoethaniol, L- cysteine and reduced glutathione by adsorbed and electrodeposited cobalt tetra phenoxypyrrol and tetra ethoxythiophene substituted phthalocyanines, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5125 CrossRef .
M. A. Gulppi, F. J. Recio, F. Tasca, G. Ochoa, J. F. Silva, J. Pavez and J. H. Zagal, Optimizing the reactivity of surface confined cobalt N4-macrocyclics for the electrocatalytic oxidation of L-cysteine by tuning the Co(II)/(I) formal potential of the catalyst, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 126, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zeng, Y. Pan, Y. Yang, Q. Li, G. Li and Z. Hou, G Gu Facile construction of Mn3O4-MnO2 hetero-nanorods/graphene nanocomposite for highly sensitive electrochemical detection of hydrogen peroxides, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 587–596 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Umar and H. A. Aziz, Photocatalytic Degradation of Organic Pollutants in Water, Organic pollutants: Monitory, Risk, and Treatment,  2006, vol. 8, pp. 195–208,  DOI:10.5772/53699 .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical Photolysis of Water at a Semiconductor, Nature, 1972, 238(5358), 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Boroski, A. C. Rodrigues, J. C. Garcia, L. S. Sampaio, J. Nozaki and N. Hioka, Combined Electrocoagulation and TiO2 Photoassisted Treatment Applied to Wastewater Effluents from Pharmaceutical and Cosmetic Industries, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 162, 448–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Darkwah and Y. Ao, Mini review on the structural and properties (photocatalysis), and preparation techniques of graphitic carbon nitride Nano-based particle, and Its Applications, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 388 CrossRef PubMed .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, B. K. Vijayan, O. G. Poluektov, T. Rajh, K. A. Gray, H. He and P. Zapol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. Gaya, A. H. Abdullah, Z. Zainal and M. Z. Hussein, Photocatalytic Treatment of 4-Chlorophenol in Aqueous ZnO Suspensions: Intermediates, Influence of Dosage and Inorganic Anions, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 168(1), 57–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Shi, C. Xie, C. He, C. Liu, C. Gao, S. Yang, J. W. Chen and G. Li, Photocatalytic Performance Comparison of Titania Hollow Spheres Composed of Nanoplates with Dominant {001} Facets and Nanoparticles without Dominant {001} Facets, Catal. Commun., 2015, 66, 46–49 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Shon, S. Phuntsho and S. Vigneswaran, Effect of Photocatalysis on the Membrane Hybrid System for Wastewater Treatment, Desalination, 2008, 225(1–3), 235–248 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Adormaa, W. K. Darkwah and Y. Ao, Oxygen Vacancies of the TiO 2 Nano-Based Composite Photocatalysts in Visible Light Responsive Photocatalysis, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(58), 33551–33563 RSC .
A. Durairaj, T. Sakthivel, A. Obadiah and S. Vasanthkumar, Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity of Transition Metal Ions Doped g–C3N4 Nanosheet Activated by PMS for Organic Pollutant Degradation, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29(10), 8201–8209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peral, J. Cascado and J. Domenesch, Light Induced Oxidation of Phenol over ZnO Powder, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1988, 44, 209–217 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Oppenlander, Photochemical Purification of Water and Air: Advanced Oxidation Processes(AOPs): Principles, Reaction Mechanisms, Reactor Concepts, Wiley- VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Environmental Applications of Semiconductor Photocatalysis, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ou and S. Lo, Effect of Pt/Pd-Doped TiO2 on the Photocatalytic Degradation of Trichloroethylene, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 275, 200–205 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Hiscock and T. Grischek, Attenuation of Groundwater Pollution by Bank Filtration, J. Hydrol., 2002, 266, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
O. Legrini, E. Oliveros and A. M. Braun, Photochemical Processes for Water Treatment, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 671–698 CrossRef CAS .
C. Adan, J. M. Coronado, R. Bellod, J. Soria and H. Yamaoka, Photochemical and Photocatalytic Degradation of Salicylic Acid with Hydrogen Peroxide over TiO2/SiO2 Fibres, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 303(2), 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaniou, K. Pitarakis, I. Barlagianni and I. Poulios, Photocatalytic Oxidation of Sulfamethazine, Chemosphere, 2005, 60, 372–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Carraway, A. J. Hoffman and M. R. Hoffmann, Photocatalytic Oxidation of Organic Acids on Quantum sized Semiconductor Colloids, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1994, 28, 786–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, Photocatalytic Production of H2O2 and Organic Peroxides in Aqueous Suspensions of TiO2, ZnO, and Desert Sand, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1988, 22(7), 798–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Hermann, Heterogeneous Photocatalysis: State of the Art and Present Applications, Top. Catal., 2005, 34, 49–65 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical Photolysis of Water at a Semiconductor Electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Kohanski, D. J. Dwyer, B. Hayete, C. A. Lawrence and J. J. Collins, A Common Mechanism of Cellular Death Induced by Bactericidal Antibiotics, Cell, 2007, 130(5), 797–810,  DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2007.06.049 .
S.-C. Kim and D.-K. Lee, Inactivation of algal blooms in eutrophic water of drinking water supplies with the photocatalysis of TiO2 thin film on hollow glass beads, Water Sci. Technol., 2005, 52(9), 145–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kau, D. S. Sun, W. J. Tsai, H. F. Shyu and H. H. Huang, 
            et al. Antiplatelet Activities of Anthrax Lethal Toxin Are Associated with Suppressed p42/44 and p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Pathways in the Platelets, J. Infect. Dis., 2005, 192, 1465–1474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Graphene/metal oxide composite electrode materials for energy storage, Nano Energy, 2012, 1(1), 107–131,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2011.11.001 .
L. Rizzo, S. Meric, M. Guida, D. Kassinos and V. Belgiorno, Heterogenous Photocatalytic Degradation Kinetics and Detoxification of an Urban Wastewater Treatment Plant Effluent Contaminated with Pharmaceuticals, Water Res., 2009, 43(16), 4070–4078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pecci, R. Reyes, P. Sanhueza and J. Villase-nor, Photocatalytic Degradation of pentachlorophenol on TiO2-Sol Gel Catalysts, Chemosphere, 2003, 41, 141–146 Search PubMed .

          K. O'Connor, C. P. Martin, J. N. Jensen and K. Holtz, Evaluation of Ultraviolet(UV) Radiation Disinfection Technologies for Wastewater Treatment Plant Effluent’(for the New York State Research and Development Authority) Report 04–07 December,  2004, http://www.esemag.com/archive/1105/lethbridge.html (accessed: 2016-08-28) Search PubMed .
A. J. Feitz, T. D. Waite, G. J. Jones, B. H. Boyden and P. T. Orr, Photocatalytic degredation of the blue-green algal toxin Microcystin-LR in a natural organic-aqueous matrix, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33(2), 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ireland, P. Klostermann, E. W. Rice and R. M. Clark, Inactivation of Escherichia coli by titanium dioxide photocatalytic oxidation, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1993, 59(5), 1668–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wist, J. Sanabria, C. Dierolf, W. Torres and C. Pulgarin, Evaluation of photocatalytic disinfection of crude water for drinking-water production, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 147(3), 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Murray, E. H. Goslan and S. A. Parsons, TiO2/UV: single stage drinking water treatment for NOM removal?, J. Environ. Eng. Sci., 2007, 6(3), 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
A.-G. Rincon and C. Pulgarin, Effect of pH, inorganic ions, organic matter and H2O2 on E. coli K12 photocatalytic inactivation by TiO2: implications in solar water disinfection, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 51(4), 283–302 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marugan, R. van Grieken, C. Sordo and C. Cruz, Kinetics of the photocatalytic disinfection of Escherichia coli suspensions, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 82(1–2), 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Surface oxygen vacancy induced photocatalytic performance enhancement of a BiPO 4 nanorod, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1174–1182 RSC .
D. Chen, Z. Wang, T. Ren, H. Ding, W. Yao, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, Influence of Defects on the Photocatalytic Activity of ZnO, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(28), 15300–15307 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, D. Li, X. Ma and Y. Zhu, Effects of distortion of PO 4 tetrahedron on the photocatalytic performances of BiPO 4 w, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1399–1405,  10.1039/c1cy00261a .
X. Pan, M.-Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Defective TiO2 with oxygen vacancies: synthesis, properties and photocatalytic applications, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601 RSC .
R. Méndez-Román and N. Cardona-Martínez, Relationship between the formation of surface species and catalyst deactivation during the gas-phase photocatalytic oxidation of toluene, Catal. Today, 1998, 40, 353–365 CrossRef .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Synthesis of g-C3N4 nanoparticles in mesoporous silica host matrices, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(14), 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, 
            et al., MOF-derived nitrogen doped carbon modified g-C 3 N 4 heterostructure composite with enhanced photocatalytic activity for bisphenol A degradation with peroxymonosulfate under visible light irradiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Pei, S. Wang, N. Lin, H. D. Liu and Y. H. Guo, Vanadium doping of strontium germanate and their visible photocatalytic properties, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 48144,  10.1039/C4RA07324J .
M. K. Chine, F. Sediri and N. Gharbi, Mater. Solvothermal synthesis of V4O9 flake-like morphology and its photocatalytic application in the degradation of methylene blue, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3422,  DOI:10.1016/j.materresbull.2012.07.016 .
W. Cai, W. D. Xiang, J. J. Wang, X. M. Wang, J. S. Zhong and L. J. Liu, Biomolecule-assisted synthesis of copper indium sulfide microspheres with nanosheets, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 2495,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2009.08.050 .
H. W. Che, A. F. Liu, X. L. Zhang, J. B. Mu, Y. M. Bai and J. X. Hou, Three-dimensional hierarchical ZnCo2O4 flower-like microspheres assembled from porous nanosheets: Hydrothermal synthesis and electrochemical properties, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 7556,  DOI:10.1016/j.ceramint.2015.02.079 .
H. Li, Z. Jin, H. Y. Song and S. J. Liao, Synthesis of Co submicrospheres self-assembled by Co nanosheets via a complexant-assisted hydrothermal approach, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2010, 322, 30,  DOI:10.1016/j.jmmm.2009.08.028 .
W. Xie, E. Polikarpov, J.-P. Choi, M. E. Bowden, K. Sun and J. Cui, Effect of ball milling and heat treatment process on MnBi powders magnetic properties, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 680, 1–5,  DOI:10.1016/j.jallcom.2016.04.097 .
W. K. Darkwah, B. B. Adormaa, M. K. C. Sandrine and Y. Ao, Modification Strategies for Enhancing Visible Light Responsive Photocatalytic activity of the BiPO4 Nano base composite Photocatalysts, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9(1) 10.1039/c8cy02039f .
Y. Miseki and K. Sayama, Photocatalytic water splitting employing [Fe(CN)6]3−/4- redox mediator under visible light, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9(8) 10.1039/c9cy00100j .
L. Wang, S. Zisheng and J. Yuan, The Influence of Materials, Heterostructure, and Orientation for Nanohybrids on Photocatalytic Activity, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 20,  DOI:10.1186/s11671-019-2851-z .
K. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Gao, T. Xie and D. Wang, Photocatalytic property of ZnO microrods modified by Cu2O nanocrystals, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 552, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Li, H. Shi and K. Yu, Facile synthesis of p-type Cu2O/n-type ZnO nano-heterojunctions with novel photoluminescence properties, enhanced field emission and photocatalytic activities, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7817–7824 RSC .
C. Luo, D. Li, W. Wu, C. Yu, W. Li and C. Pan, Preparation of 3D reticulated ZnO/CNF/NiO heteroarchitecture for high-performance photocatalysis, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 217–223 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, C. Wang, M. Zhang and Y. Liu, Electrospun nanofibers of p-type NiO/n-type ZnO heterojunctions with enhanced photocatalytic activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2915–2923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, Q. Xi, H. Zhou, Y. Zhao, C. Wu, L. Wang, P. Guo and J. Xu, Selectivity of quantum dots sensitizing ZnO nanotubes array for improved photocatalytic activity, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 11366–11372 RSC .
W. L. Ong, S. Natarajan, B. Kloostra and G. W. Ho, Metal nanoparticle-loaded hierarchically assembled ZnO nanoflakes for enhanced photocatalytic performance, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5568–5575 RSC .
T. Chen, Y. Zheng, J. Lin and G. Chen, Study on the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange in water using Ag/ZnO as catalyst by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization ion-trap mass spectrometry, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2008, 19, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Wang, M. Gao, H. Xu and G. Li, A novel strategy to prepare ZnO/ PbS heterostructured functional nanocomposite utilizing the surface adsorption property of ZnO nanosheets, Catal. Today, 2010, 158, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, P. Wang, J. Hou, J. Qian, C. Wang and Y. Ao, In-situ surface engineering of ultrafine Ni2P nanoparticles on cadmium sulfide for robust hydrogen evolution, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 9(8) 10.1039/C8CY00519B .
J. J. Xu, J. W. Yang, P. Zhang, Q. Yuan, Y. H. Zhu and Y. Wang, Preparation of 2D square-like Bi2S3-BiOCl heterostructures with enhanced visible light-driven photocatalytic performance for dye pollutant degradation, Water Sci. Eng., 2017, 10, 334–339 CrossRef .
X. L. Deng, C. G. Wang, H. C. Yang, M. H. Shao, S. W. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Ding, J. Z. Huang and X. J. Xu, One-pot hydrothermal synthesis of CdS decorated CuS microflower-like structures for enhanced photocatalytic properties, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3877 CrossRef PubMed .
G. X. Zhao, Y. B. Sun, W. Zhao, X. K. Wang, K. Chang, G. G. Liu, H. M. Liu, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Superior Photocatalytic H2 Production with Cocatalytic Co/Ni Species Anchored on Sulfide Semiconductor, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703258 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Q. Yang, J. F. Huang, L. Shi, L. Y. Cao, W. Zhou, K. Chang, X. G. Meng, G. G. Liu, Y. N. Jie and J. H. Ye, Efficient hydrogen evolution over Sb doped SnO2 photocatalyst sensitized by Eosin Y under visible light irradiation, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 331–340 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Li, Y. Wu, H. Wu, L. Wu, P. Tan, J. Pan and X. Xiong, Facile fabrication of novel porous graphitic carbon nitride/copper sulfide nanocomposites with enhanced visible light driven photocatalytic performance, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 476, 132–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tanvir, C. Cao, I. Aslam, Z. Ali, F. Idrees, W. S. Khan, M. Tahir, S. Khalid, G. Nabi and A. Mahmood, Synthesis of CuS flowers exhibiting versatile photo-catalyst response, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 1459–1468 RSC .
P. Y. Kuang, L. Y. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. G. Yu, Enhanced charge transfer kinetics of Fe2O3 /CdS composite nanorod arrays using cobalt-phosphate as cocatalyst, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 570–580 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, M. F. Wu, Q. J. Xing, F. Li, H. Liu, X. B. Luo, J. P. Zou, J. M. Luo and A. Q. Zhang, Synthesis and characterizations of metal-free semiconductor/MOFs with good stability and high photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution: a novel Z-scheme heterostructured photocatalyst formed by covalent bonds, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Zhang, W. Gao, X. Q. Zhang, Z. Li and G. X. Lu, Surface spintronics enhanced photo-catalytic hydrogen evolution: mechanisms, strategies, challenges and future, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 434, 643–668 CrossRef .
J. Xie, C. Yang, M. Duan, J. L. Tang, Y. Y. Wang, H. Wang and J. Courtois, Amorphous NiP as cocatalyst for photocatalytic water splitting, Ceram. Int., 2017, 44, 5459–5465 CrossRef .
W. Liu, L. L. Cao, W. R. Cheng, Y. J. Cao, X. K. Liu, W. Zhang, X. L. Mou, L. L. Jin, X. S. Zheng, W. Che, Q. H. Liu, T. Yao and S. Q. Wei, Single-site active cobalt-based photocatalyst with long carriers lifetime for spontaneous overall water splitting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9312–9317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Zhou, Y. G. Wang, T. Wen, S. Y. Zhang, B. B. Chang, Y. Z. Guo and B. C. Yang, Mesoporous Cd1-xZnxS microspheres with tunable bandgap and high specific surface areas for enhanced visible-light-driven hydrogen generation, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 467, 97–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, X. G. Yin, Y. Huang, P. W. Du and B. Zhang, Hydrogen production on a hybrid photocatalytic system composed of ultrathin CdS nanosheets and a molecular nickel complex, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4571–4575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yuan, J. Q. Wen, Y. M. Zhong, X. Li, Y. P. Fang, S. S. Zhang and W. Liu, Enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution over noble-metal-free NiS cocatalyst modified CdS nanorods/g-C3N4 heterojunctions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18244–18255 RSC .
W. Z. Gao, Y. Xu, Y. Chen and W. F. Fu, Highly efficient and selective photocatalytic reduction of nitroarenes using the Ni2P/CdS catalyst under visible-light irradiation, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13217–13220 RSC .
S. S. Yi, J. M. Yan, B. R. Wulan and Q. Jiang, Efficient visible-light-driven hydrogen generation from water splitting catalyzed by highly stable CdS@Mo2C-C core-shell nanorods, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15862–15868 RSC .
S. Rundqvist, A. Hede, E. Varde and G. Westin, The structures of Co2P, Ru2P, and related phases, Acta Chem. Scand., 1960, 14, 1961–1979 CrossRef .
J. Ran, B. Zhu and S. Qiao, Phosphorene Co-catalyst Advancing Highly-efficient Visible-light Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(35) DOI:10.1002/anie.201703827 .
L. M. R. Gavidia, G. García, D. Anaya, A. Querejeta, F. Alcaide and E. Pastor, Carbon-supported Pt-free catalysts with high specificity and activity toward the oxygen reduction reaction in acidic medium, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 12–19 CrossRef .
A. Lima, C. Coutanceau, J.-M. LeGer and C. Lamy, Investigation of ternary catalysts for methanol electrooxidation, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 379–386 CrossRef CAS .
F. Segura and J. M. Andu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2309–2322 CrossRef .

          C. Lamy and J.-M. Léger, Advanced electrode materials for the direct methanol fuel cell, in Interfacial Electrochemistry. Theory, Experiment, and Applications, ed. A. Wieckowski, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York,  1999, ch. 48, p. 885 Search PubMed .

          A. S. Arico, V. Baglio and V. Antonucci, Direct methanol fuel cells: history, status and perspectives, in Electrocatalysis of Direct Methanol Fuel Cells: from Fundamentals to Applications, ed. H. Liu and J. Zhang, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2009, ch. 1, pp. 3–9 Search PubMed .

          P. van der Heide, X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, An Introduction to Principles and Practice, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Jersey, United States of America,  2012 Search PubMed .
C. Di Valentin, 
            et al., Adsorption of Water on Reconstructed Rutile TiO 2(011) -(2×1): TiO Double Bonds and Surface Reactivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9895–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoneyama and T. Torimoto, Titanium dioxide/adsorbent hybrid photocatalysts for photodestruction of organic substances of dilute concentrations, Catal. Today, 2000, 58, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ao and S. C. Lee, Combination effect of activated carbon with TiO2 for the photodegradation of binary pollutants at typical indoor air level, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 161, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Ye, S. Zhao and G. Wang, A back projection-filtration algorithm for nonstandard spiral cone-beam CT with an n-PI-window, Phys. Med. Biol., 2005, 50, 2099–2111 CrossRef PubMed .

          W. Kaim and B. Schwederski, Bioinorganic chemistry: inorganic elements in the chemistry of life: an introduction and guide, Wiley, Chichester,  1994 Search PubMed .

          N. G. Connelly, Nomenclature of inorganic chemistry: IUPAC recommendations, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2005, vol. 200 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao and X. Yang, Photocatalytic oxidation for indoor air purification: A literature review, Build. Environ., 2003, 38, 645–654 CrossRef .
C. Belver, M. J. López-Muñoz, J. M. Coronado and J. Soria, Palladium enhanced resistance to deactivation of titanium dioxide during the photocatalytic oxidation of toluene vapors, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 46, 497–509 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat and D. Meisel, Nanoparticles in advanced oxidation processes, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 7, 282–287 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, A metal-free polymeric photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water under visible light, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lan, X. Li, G. Li and Y. Luo, Sol-gel method to prepare graphene/Fe2O3 aerogel and its catalytic application for the thermal decomposition of ammonium perchlorate, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 395 CrossRef .
Z. Qin, M. Wang, R. Li and Y. Chen, Novel Cu3P/g-C3N4 p-n Heterojunction Photocatalysts for Solar Hydrogen Generation, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61(6), 861–868 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, L. Zhu, H. Zhang, A. Kroner, J. Zheng, N. Zhang, J. He and B. Hui, ScienceDirect Ruthenium Stabilized on Transition Metal-on- Transition Metal Oxide Nanoparticles for Naphthalene Hydrogenation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, Are MXenes promising anode materials for Li ion batteries? Computational studies on electronic properties and Li storage capability of Ti3C2 and Ti3C2X2(X = F, OH) monolayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Caffrey, Effect of mixed surface terminations on the structural and electrochemical properties of two-dimensional Ti3C2T2 and V2CT2 MXenes multilayers, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13520–13530 RSC .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, 25th anniversary article: MXenes: A new family of two-dimensional materials, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, Q. Xiang, Y. Liao and H. Zhang, CdS-Based photocatalysts, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1362,  10.1039/c7ee03640j .
L. Cheng, X. Li, H. Zhang and Q. Xiang, Two-Dimensional Transition Metal MXene-Based Photocatalysts for Solar Fuel Generation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3488–3494,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b00736 .
Q. Li, L. Xin, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, CdS/Graphene Nanocomposite Photocatalysts, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1500010,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201500010 .

          M. Dolg, ‘Relativistic Effective Core Potentials’, in Relativistic Quantum Chemistry– Vol I. Theory, ed. P. Schwerdtfeger, Elsevier,  2002, pp. 793–86 Search PubMed .
M. Reiher, A Theoretical Challenge: Transition-Metal Compounds, Chimia, 2009, 63, 140–145,  DOI:10.2533/chimia.2009.140 .
P. Shandilya, D. Mittal, M. Soni, P. Raizada, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei, A. K. Saini and P. Singh, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 203, 386–399,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.08.271 .
P. Raizada, B. Priya, P. Thakur and P. Singh, Solar light induced photodegradation of oxytetracyline using Zr doped TiO2/CaO based nanocomposite, Indian J. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg., Bio-inorg., Phys., Theor. Anal. Chem., 2016, 55, 803–809 Search PubMed .
P. Raizada, P. Singh, A. Kumar, B. Pare and S. B. Jonnalagadda, Zero valent iron- brick grain nanocomposite for enhanced solar-Fenton removal of malachite green, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 133, 429–437 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, S. Gautam, P. Shandilya, B. Priya, V. P. Singh and P. Raizada, Graphene bentonite supported ZnFe2O4 as super-paramagnetic photocatalyst for anti- biotic degradation, Adv. Mater. Lett., 2017, 8(3), 229–238 CrossRef CAS .
P. Shandilya, D. Mittal, A. Sudhaik, M. Soni, P. Raizada, A. K. Saini and P. Singh, GdVO4 modified fluorine doped graphene nanosheets as dispersed photocatalyst for mitigation of phenolic compounds in aqueous environment and bacterial disinfection, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.seppur.2018.08.077 .
P. Shandilya, 
            et al., Islanding of EuVO4 on high-dispersed fluorine doped few layered graphene sheets for efficient photocatalytic mineralization of phenolic compounds and bacterial disinfection, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.jtice.2018.08.034 .
W. K. Darkwah, G. K. Teye and Y. Ao, Graphene Nanocrystals in CO2 Photo-reduction with H2O for Fuel Production, Nanoscale Adv., 2020 10.1039/C9NA00756C .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, State-of-the-art progress in diverse heterostructured photocatalysts toward promoting photocatalytic performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25(7), 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hasija, P. Raizada, A. Sudhaik, K. Sharma, A. Kumar, P. Singh, S. B. Jonnalagadda and V. K. Thakur, Recent advances in noble metal free doped graphitic carbon nitride based nanohybrids for photocatalysis of organic contaminants in water: A review, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 15, 494–524,  DOI:10.1016/j.apmt.2019.04.003 .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Yin, Y. Zuo and L. Cui, Synthesis of Ti-doped graphitic carbon nitride with improved photocatalytic activity under visible light, Mater. Lett., 2015, 139, 70–72,  DOI:10.1016/j.matlet.2014.10.008 .
S. Sharma, V. Dutta, P. Singh, P. Raizada, A. Rahmani-Sani, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei and V. K. Thakur, Carbon quantum dot supported semiconductor photocatalysts for efficient degradation of organic pollutants in water: A review, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 228, 755–769,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.292 .
P. Singh, P. Shandilya, P. Raizada, A. Sudhaik, A. Rahmani-Sani and A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei, Review on various strategies for enhancing photocatalytic activity of graphene based nanocomposites for water purification, Arabian J. Chem., 2018, 13, 3498–3520 CrossRef .
A. Sudhaik, P. Raizada, P. Shandilya and P. Singh, Magnetically recoverable graphitic carbon nitride and NiFe2O4 based magnetic photocatalyst for degradation of oxytetracycline antibiotic in simulated wastewater under solar light, J. Environ. Chem. Eng. DOI:10.1016/j.jece.2018.05.03 .
W. K. Darkwah and K. A. Oswald, Photocatalytic Applications of Heterostructure Graphitic Carbon Nitride: Pollutant Degradation, Hydrogen Gas Production, and CO2 Reduction, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 234 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Chandel, 
            et al., Magnetically separable ZnO/ZnFe2O4 and ZnO/CoFe2O4 photocatalysts supported onto nitrogen doped graphene for photocatalytic degradation of toxic dyes2O4 and ZnO/CoFe2O4 photocatalysts, Arabian J. Chem., 2019 DOI:10.1016/j. arabjc.2019.08.005 .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, stabilization, vectorization, physicochemical characterizations, and biological applications, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ida, K. Yamada, T. Matsunaga, H. Hagiwara, Y. Matsumoto and T. Ishihara, Preparation of p-Type CaFe2O4 photocathodes for producing hydrogen from water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17343–17345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Hou, J. Feng, X. D. Xu and M. L. Zhang, Synthesis and characterizations of spinel MnFe2O4 nanorod by seed-hydrothermal route, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 491, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, Y. Cai, F. Lu, F. Wei, X. Wang and S. Wang, Magnetic recoverable MnFe2O4 and MnFe2O4-graphene hybrid as heterogeneous catalysts of peroxymonosulfate activation for efficient degradation of aqueous organic pollutants, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 270, 61–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vignesh, A. Suganthib, B. K. Minc and M. Kanga, Photocatalytic activity of magnetically recoverable MnFe2O4/g-C3N4/TiO2nanocomposite under simulated solar light irradiation, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 395, 373–383 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pal, R. Rakshit and K. Mandal, Surface modification of MnFe2O4 nanoparticles to impart intrinsic multiple fluorescence and novel photocatalytic properties, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4903–4910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, G. Zhang, J. Yu, H. Li and X. S. Zhao, Controlled synthesis, magnetic and photocatalytic properties of hollow sphere of manganese ferrite and colloidal nanocrystal clusters, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 395, 168–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gautam, P. Shandilya, B. Priya, V. P. Singh, P. Raizada, R. Rai, M. A. Valente and P. Singh, Superparamagnetic MnFe2O4 dispersed over graphitic carbon sand composite and bentonite as magnetically recoverable photocatalyst for antibiotic mineralization, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 172, 498–511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu and X. Wang, Magnetically separable ZnFe2O4–graphene catalyst and its high photocatalytic performance under visible light irradiation, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 7210–7218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, X. Wang, F. Liu, J. Wang and C. Xu, Rapid microwave-assisted synthesis of graphene nanosheets–zinc sulfide nanocomposites: optical and photocatalytic properties, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, W. R. Cao, Y. Su, Z. Chen and Y. Wang, Bismuth oxyiodide-graphene nanocomposites with high visible light photocatalytic activity, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 398, 161–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. K. Teye, W. K. Darkwah, H. Jingyu, L. Ke and Y. Li, Photodegradation of Pharmaceutical and Personal Care Products(PPCPs) and Antibacterial Activity in Water by Transition Metals, in Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology(Continuation of Residue Reviews), Springer, Cham,  2020 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

UV-A	400–315	3.09–3.93
UV-B	315–280	3.93–4.42
UV-C	280–100	4.42–12.39

V	1. Extends light absorption into the visible region	
197, 198
2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably
Cr	1. Extends light absorption into the visible region	
198, 199
2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably
Mn	1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation	
197

2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers
Fe	1. Extends light absorption into the visible region	
197–199

2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably
Co	1. Extends light absorption into the visible region	
200

2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably
Ni	1. Extends light absorption into the visible region	
198, 200, 202
2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably
Cu	1. Extends light absorption into the visible region	
198, 200
2. There is reduction in the Photocatalytic activity in the UV region considerably
Cd.	1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity	
198, 202
2. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation
Ce	1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity	
198, 202
2. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation
Co	1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity	
198–200, 202
2. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation
3. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers
4. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation
Cr	1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation	
200, 201
2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers
Fe	1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation	
200, 201
2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers
Mn	1. Decline in photocatalytic activity of TiO2 under UV irradiation	
200, 201
2. These metal ions act as recombination sites for the photo - generated charge carriers
Pt	1. Has an opposing influence on its photocatalytic activity	
200–202

2. Sol–gel system can be used to prepare the  layers for phenol degradation
Zn	Considerably change the photocatalytic activity of TiO2	
201


 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram demonstrating photocatalysis mechanism. The figure obtained from ref. 116.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4vs. TiO2 catalysts towards the degradation of (A) rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue (MB), and (B) methyl orange (MO) and phenol under the same conditions (identified by the same color). The data obtained from.11,15,17 The photocatalytic activity of pure g-C3N4 was investigated by treating 5 mg L−1 of RhB,15 10 mg L−1 of MB,17 13.5 mg L−1 of MO and 16.6 mg L−1 of BF11 as the target contaminants. The photocatalytic results including comparisons between g-C3N4 and TiO2, under the same experimental conditions are provided in Fig. 2. C3N4 has a more suitable band gap structure and stronger redox ability of the photogenerated carriers than TiO2. This is consistent with conclusions from.13,14 However, g-C3N4 has its own drawbacks such as limited light absorption and high recombination of electron–hole pairs.12,16,18	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of experiment setup for silver nanoparticle production with laser ablation. Adapted with permission from ref. 35 and 46.	 

 	Fig. 4  XRD pattern of a prepared CdS Nano based transitional metal. The data was obtained from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 5  Low and high magnification SEM images of FZO-NWs. The data obtained from ref. 42.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) UV vis diffuse-reflectance spectra of 1–2 and H4cbta ligand with BaSO4 as background. (b) Kubelka Munk-transformed diffuse reflectance spectra of 1–2. Data was obtained from ref. 55.	 

ZnO/Cu2O	RhB	50	
166

ZnO/CNF/NiO	RhB	78	
12

ZnO/NiO	RhB	55	
12

ZnO/CdS	MO	95	
162

ZnO/NiO	MO	99.8	

ZnO/Cu2O	MO	99	
81

ZnO/CuSCN (3D)	MO	99.5	


 	Fig. 7  Mechanism of photoreduction of CO2 to methoxyl radical on TiO2 in the presence of water during photocatalytic reaction. Reproduced with permission.112,116 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

g-C3N4/ZnO	300 W xenon arc lamp	CO2 reduction	0.6 μmol h−1 g−1 CH3OH	
73, 81, 82
SnO2−X/g-C3N4	500 W xenon lamp	CO2 reduction	22.7 μmol h−1 g−1 CO, CH3OH, CH4
BiOI/g-C3N4	300 W xenon arc lamp (λ > 400 nm cut-off filter)	CO2 reduction	17.9 μmol g−1 CO

Ti	
	TiO2	g-C3N4–N-TiO2 heterojunction	Facile in situ synthesis, thermal treatment	Excellent photoreduction of CO2 to CO	
83

Fe	
	Co–Fe nitrides	Coupling	Thermal treatment	Enhanced CO2 reduction	
89, 164
Au	
	Modified Au (111) by assembling 4-mercaptopyridine (4MPy) and 4-aminothiophenol (4ATP	
	Chemically functionalized with substituted and unsubstituted Fe(II)-phthalocyanines technique	Excellent electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of L-cysteine	
102–106

Mn	
	Mn3O4–MnO2 hetero-nanorods/graphene nanocomposite (MM-HNRS/GS)	Heterojunction	Prepared by merging a hydrothermal method, a wet chemical process and a thermal treatment, and X-ray diffraction is adopted to demonstrate the formation process	Outstanding synergistic influence and evidently improved the electrocatalytic activity	
107

Sn	
	SnO2−X/g-C3N4	Heterojunction	
	An enhanced CO2 reduction	
82

Zn	
	g-C3N4/ZnO	Heterojunction	
	An enhanced CO2 reduction	
81

Ti	g-C3N4 and TiO2, under the same experimental conditions are surface of diatomite	TiO2	
	
	Excellent degradation of (A) rhodamine B (RhB) and methylene blue MB), and (B) methyl orange (MO) and phenol under the same conditions	
11, 15, 17–18
Fe	
	Fe2O4/ZnO	Heterojunction	Thermal method	Showed and enhanced degradative activity	
42

Zr	
	ZrO2	
	Soft- chemical synthesis	
	
11

Si	
	SiO2	
	Soft- chemical synthesis	
	
12


 	Fig. 8  Proposed model for common mechanism of killing by bactericidal antibiotics the primary drug-target interactions (amino- glycoside with the ribosome, quinolone with DNA gyrase, and b-lactam with penicillin-binding proteins) stimulate oxidation of NADH via the electron transport chain that is dependent upon the TCA cycle. Hyperactivation of the electron transport chain stimulates superoxide formation. Superoxide damages iron–sulfur clusters, making ferrous iron available for oxidation by the Fenton reaction. The Fenton reaction leads to hydroxyl radical formation, and the hydroxyl radicals damage DNA, proteins, and lipids, which results in cell death. Figure adapted from.130,139,239	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the preparation process and catalytic strategy for the Co–Fe–N@MWCNT. Obtained from ref. 164 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Amperometric i–t curve of MM-HNRS/GS/GCE in a stirred 0.1 M NaOH solution with successive addition of H2O2 at 0.4 V (vs. SCE), (inset) i–t curve in the low H2O2 concentrations. (b) Calibration curve of the response current vs. H2O2 concentration. The data was obtained from ref. 107.	 

 	Fig. 11  Time courses of the water-splitting reaction in K–Pi solutions (0.1 M, pH 7.8) containing 0.5 mM K4[Fe(CN)6]when a (a) Xe lamp attached with L42 cut-off filter and (b) solar simulator calibrated to AM 1.5 (1 SUN, 9 cm2) are used as the light source under visible-light irradiation. (catalyst mass: 40 mg (Ru/SrTiO3:Rh) and 400 mg (surface-treated). The data obtained from ref. 157.	 

 	Fig. 12  a) XPS VB spectra of CS and bulk BP; b) and c) illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of FPS/CS system under visible-light irradiation. Figure obtained with permission from ref. 185.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
