Metal chalcogenide quantum dot-sensitized 1D-based semiconducting heterostructures for optical-related applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE02143K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02143K
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1454-1494Metal chalcogenide quantum dot-sensitized 1D-based semiconducting heterostructures for optical-related applications

        
          
            Shiyu 
            Yue
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Luyao 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Scott C. 
            McGuire
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nathaniel 
            Hurley
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Stanislaus S. 
            Wong
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3400, USA. E-mail: stanislaus.wong@stonybrook.edu; sswong@bnl.gov
Received 
      23rd July 2018
    , Accepted 6th February 2019First published on 28th February 2019AbstractIn terms of understanding and tuning the optoelectronic behavior of 3rd generation solar cells, such as quantum dot (QD)-sensitized solar cells, QD-based heterostructures represent an excellent and relevant model system and opportunity for analyzing exciton dissociation and charge separation across a well-defined nanoscale interface. In particular, because QDs possess a tunable bandgap and the capability of initiating multi-electron exciton generation, QD-based components tend to be incorporated within optical-related devices, including photovoltaics, light emitting diodes, photoelectrochemical devices, photosensors, and phototransistors. The community has collectively expended significant effort in terms of creating, formulating, and optimizing novel forms of heterostructures comprised of QDs, immobilized by predominantly chemical means onto one-dimensional (1D) motifs, such as but not limited to carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon nanofibers (CNFs). In so doing, it has been noted that key physical variables such as but not limited to (a) QD size, (b) QD loading and coverage, as well as (c) ligand identity can impact upon optoelectronic behavior of CNT-based heterostructures. In recent years, work has extended towards analyzing the optoelectronic ‘cross-communication’ between QDs with related, adjoining 1D semiconducting metal oxides, metal chalcogenides, and metal fluorides. In these examples, other important factors that also are relevant for determining the optical properties of these more generalized classes of heterostructures include parameters, such as (i) morphology, (ii) surface coverage, (iii) chemical composition of the underlying platform, (iv) QD identity, (v) luminescence properties of activating species, as well as (vi) the identity and concentration of dopant ions. In other words, to alter, manage, and manipulate the charge versus energy transfer channels within these materials in a deterministic manner requires basic insights into the close correlation and interplay between physical structure, chemical bonding, and observed performance.
Shiyu Yue
Shiyu Yue received her BSc degree in Chemistry in 2014 from Zhejiang University, China. She is currently a PhD candidate in Dr Stanislaus S. Wong's group in the Department of Chemistry at Stony Brook University. Her research interests center on the synthesis, chemical functionalization, and characterization of nanomaterials for energy-related applications, primarily associated with energy storage and conversion (including work on solar cells and batteries).
Luyao Li
Luyao Li earned her BSc degree in Chemistry in 2014 from Chongqing Normal University. She came to the U.S. in 2014 in pursuit of her Masters degree, and is currently studying for her PhD degree in Chemistry at Stony Brook University, under the direction of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. Her research interests focus primarily on the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for solar energy and fuel applications.
Scott C. McGuire
Scott C. McGuire acquired his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2017 from the University at Buffalo. He is currently studying for his PhD degree in Chemistry at Stony Brook University under the supervision of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests have mainly concentrated on the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for applications in solar energy and fuel cells.
Nathaniel Hurley
Nathaniel Hurley obtained his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2016 from the University of Arizona. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree in Chemistry at Stony Brook University, under the guidance of Dr Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests have converged on the synthesis and characterization of novel classes of nanomaterials of relevance for a wide variety of energy and sensor applications.
Stanislaus S. Wong
Stanislaus S. Wong earned his PhD from Harvard University in 1999 with Professor Charles M. Lieber, and is currently Professor of Chemistry at Stony Brook University. Professor Wong was recently appointed as an Executive Editor for ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, and was formerly a section editor of Nanotechnology. Over the years, Professor Wong has been named as an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, an American Association for the Advancement of Science Fellow, as well as a Royal Society of Chemistry Fellow. He and his group are interested in developing sustainable strategies for producing novel nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.

Broader context
One means of combining the unique physical and chemical properties of distinctive and complementary classes of material component motifs (such as carbon nanotubes, semiconducting nanowires, metal chalcogenide quantum dots (QDs), and metal oxide nanostructures, as illustrative examples) within an interesting functional configuration can be achieved by generating zero-dimensional (0D) QD – one-dimensional (1D) nanotube/nanowire-based heterostructures. These materials could be subsequently utilized as novel and interesting constituent building blocks for the assembly of functional light harvesting devices, and because of their architectural and functional flexibility, can potentially open up novel means of using renewable energy sources. In this Perspective, we not only report on strategies for inducing a reliable and reproducible synthesis of several unique and distinctive model 0D–1D-based heterostructured systems but also provide for key insights into understanding charge transfer and energy flow properties within mixed-dimensionality nanomaterial systems for their potential incorporation into a range of practical solar energy conversion devices and light sensitizing configurations. The knowledge gained from these model systems is invaluable for guiding future efforts towards developing additional, chemically tunable, and potentially promising material synthesis targets.

1. Introduction
The ability to synthesize pure crystalline motifs of functional nanomaterials and to understand their transport, optical and mechanical properties lies at the forefront of current materials science research. From a basic science point-of-view, it is important to understand structure–property correlations that fundamentally define unique and unusual behavior within materials. Nanostructured materials offer several potential advantages for solar energy conversion by providing for efficient exciton separation, relatively high electron and hole transport efficiencies, large excitation multiplication possibilities, high surface area-to-volume ratios, and short electron–hole diffusion lengths to junctions. All of these interesting attributes are also beneficial for a number of other optical-based device applications, including but not limited to light-emitting diodes (LED),1 photocatalysts,2 light sensing,3 and optoelectronics.4 However, the role of nanoscale heterojunctions in promoting exciton dissociation and charge separation is not completely understood. It is expected that junctions between nanomaterials will behave differently as compared with bulk junctions, since the presence of low dimensionality as a structural ‘variable’ in addition to the concomitant high surface area associated with nanostructures in general may collectively promote favorable synergistic interactions.
With respect to these optical-based applications, the key objective is to maximize the longevity and efficiency of charge/exciton separation while simultaneously minimizing competing processes, such as charge recombination. Choosing the correct model material system that will successfully accomplish this goal is therefore necessarily challenging. Specifically, the semiconductor in question can only absorb photons with an energy equal to or greater than its intrinsic band gap energy level in order to generate sufficient numbers of either electron–hole pairs or excitons. These excitons and charges can then be transferred to either counter electrodes or reactive active sites to initiate the intended photophysical and photochemical activity.5 However, undesirable relaxation pathways are possible. For example, the photo-generated electrons and holes can potentially recombine either in bulk or on the surfaces of these semiconductors within a very short time duration, giving off the excess energy in the form of either waste heat or as lower-energy photons.6 Therefore, the key issues of (a) constructing a novel composite architecture with a proper band gap alignment so as to improve photon conversion (i.e., light harvesting and exciton generation) while (b) maximizing charge separation and transfer efficiency are two critical problems that have occupied our attention and that of many other groups. As such, we have chosen to investigate novel semiconductor-based, low-dimensional nanoscale heterostructures with the idea of being able to chemically ‘tune in’ and control advantageous and desirable charge and exciton creation and movement. We should also emphasize at the outset, that in this Perspective, in order to simplify the discussion, we will focus primarily on heterostructures incorporating semiconducting–semiconducting (S–S) junctions as opposed to broadening our analysis to probing their interesting metal–semiconducting analogues. The implication within these S–S systems is that the valence and conduction bands (VB and CB) of the constituent semiconducting units, i.e. band edge positions, can be aligned, relative to each other, so as to promote separation and migration of photogenerated carriers (such as electron–hole pairs) in a tunable and spatially directed manner. The expectation is that such a degree of control will have an impact with respect to the probability of electron–hole recombination7 and hence, subsequent operational efficiency for relevant optical-related applications.8
Over the years, our group, along with many others in the field, has attempted to gain valuable insights into the basic principles underlying and governing charge separation versus less desirable processes such as either charge recombination or charge trapping (which can limit the efficiency of charge transfer) within a prototypical heterogeneous nanomaterial system, such as zero-dimensional (0D)–one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterial hybrids. In so doing, we have put forth a fundamental emphasis on synthesizing and understanding more complex nanoscale materials, including metal oxide-based heterostructures in particular, of significance to being able to thoughtfully design, tailor, and develop novel and effective classes of light harvesting motifs.
In these efforts, a key strategic direction we and others have pursued has been to combine the unique physical and chemical properties of both 1D systems (such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in addition to analogous metal oxide, metal chalcogenide, metal phosphate, and metal fluoride nanowires) with complementary zero-dimensional material motifs (such as metal chalcogenide quantum dots (QDs)) so as to achieve nanotube/nanowire-based heterostructures. These component nanoscale materials were conceptualized as novel and interesting constituent building blocks for the basic understanding and subsequent assembly of optical-based energy harvesting motifs and devices. Because of their architectural and functional flexibility, these unique heterostructures can potentially open up novel means of effectively exploiting, converting, and ultimately storing the essential products of renewable energy sources.
In this Perspective, we present various means for inducing the reliable and reproducible production of several model 0D–1D-based heterostructured systems as well as include an accompanying discussion about the charge transfer and energy flow properties of these materials for their potential incorporation within a range of practical optical-based devices. Specifically, the objective was to (i) systematically vary synthesis reaction conditions and/or preparative methods in order to control key parameters (such as local physical structure and chemical bonding) within a model system that combined both a 0D quantum dot with a 1D material, (ii) characterize the physical structure and optoelectronic properties of these materials, and (iii) put forth a set of viable structure–property correlations to enable and improve upon our understanding of charge and energy flow in such mixed-dimensionality nanomaterial systems. Indeed, the underlying goal was to tune these composite heterostructures for their potential use and to gauge their possible limitations for practical optical-based (e.g. solar) applications. The knowledge gained from these model systems should hopefully guide the rational production of additional material synthesis targets.
2. 0D QD–1D heterostructures
Nanometer-sized QDs are sometimes referred to as artificial atoms and exhibit properties substantially different as compared with analogous bulk materials. For example, with the quantum confinement effect in these materials, the band gap between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) widens with decreasing crystallite size,9 leading to unique phenomena such as size-dependent fluorescence emission and size-tunable absorption properties.10 Hence, in principle, one can design a controlled synthesis of semiconducting chalcogenide-based QDs (i.e., CdS, CdSe, and CdTe), possessing different sizes to span, match, and overlap with the entire solar absorption spectrum.
A more interesting and relevant attribute of QDs has been the discovery that these nanoscale particles can undergo multiple exciton generation (MEG), whereby the injection of a single photon can (in both theory and practice) lead to the generation of multiple electron–hole pairs or excitons. That is, whereas with conventional bulk semiconductors, the excess kinetic energy of electrons and holes often gets wasted as either heat or other inefficient, ineffectual energy-intensive processes,9,11 the use of QDs offers an alternative, viable means of potentially exceeding the standard Shockley–Queisser limit of 31% maximum conversion efficiency12 by allowing for this excess kinetic energy to be ‘usefully’ absorbed in creating additional excitons.13–17 Such a capability is particularly intriguing, as this underlies the potential development of so-called 3rd generation solar cells, such as QD-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), with the exciting promise of quantum efficiencies that can exceed 100%.17–20
Experimentally as an example, PbSe QD-based solar cells were reported to maintain an internal quantum efficiency of 130%.21 Nevertheless, the limitations of QD-based solar devices cannot be minimized. Specifically, QD-based systems yield high quantum efficiencies but relatively lower power conversion efficiencies (PCE). That is, theoretical thermodynamic conversion efficiencies can be as high as 44%.22 Experimentally, the observed performance metrics of (i) 10.4% within mixed-PbS QD-based systems, denoting one of the highest values reported, and (ii) 3.35% associated with a complementary architecture consisting of TiO2/CdS QDSSCs wherein the QDs were coated by a Cu–ZnS passivation layer23 still lag behind those of many other types of dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) configurations.24 For instance, third-generation, state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells give rise to PCE metrics as high as either 20%25 or 21%,26 denoting values which are more than double those measured for conventional QDSSCs.
This Perspective, which is primarily focused on the QD-based heterostructure ‘building block’ itself, is not necessarily meant to be a treatise on perfecting the design and device engineering of QDSSCs. That discussion is beyond the scope of the present work. Nonetheless, it is worth pointing out that the initial optimism and promise regarding the widespread ubiquity and commercialization of QDSSCs has been tempered by a number of practical considerations.
First and foremost, the reliance on consistent, sustained, and prolonged MEG formation appears to be somewhat problematic and misplaced within the context of a photovoltaic device. Specifically, electron–hole pair formation (in addition to electron and hole mobilities themselves) is necessarily affected by a host of practical processing conditions including QD film thicknesses, surface ligand treatments (and consequently, degree of surface passivation), sizes, and reproducible loading concentrations, in addition to the presence of defects.21 Second, to be effective, QDs need to access and absorb radiation across the full range of the solar spectrum through proper bandgap matching, but MEG is not necessarily uniform at all absorption wavelengths,27,28 as the MEG multiplication factor varies with bandgap itself.29 One strategy towards mitigating for this deficiency has been to incorporate multilayers of QDs of varying mean sizes as well as different chemical compositions and dopant profiles to span ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near-IR regions;30,31 one manifestation of this idea has been the creation of ‘rainbow solar cells’ incorporating differently-sized CdSe QDs deposited onto a TiO2 nanotube so as to increase the effective capture efficiency of incident light.32 Third, charging processes can increase the possibility of non-radiative Auger relaxation, which can compete with electron transfer from QDs toward the electrodes and thereby lead to a quenched luminescence.33 Fourth, high charge recombination at the interface of the photoanode and the surrounding electrolyte, perhaps due to poor redox coupling, complicates matters still further.34,35 All of these limitations have led to relatively poor current–potential characteristics and low fill factors (FF) for practical QDSSCs.36,37 Nevertheless, in spite of these drawbacks, QDSSCs still represent a promising low cost and high efficiency alternative,37 whose performance shortcomings may be enhanced with additional research. Indeed, the challenging (and as yet unsolved) problem associated with applying conventional self-assembly and patterning techniques to the spatial organization of QD-based heterostructures over large areas, while simultaneously maintaining their favorable optoelectronic attributes in the process, denotes one such avenue of exploration.38,39
In terms of other optical applications in which QDs play a significant role, a number of appealing possibilities exist. For instance, it has been reported that QDs can act as a co-sensitizer along with ZnO nanowire array-based photoanodes for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation,40 wherein the presence of a strong absorption by QDs can give rise to a relatively high incident-photon-to-current-conversion efficiency (IPCE). Another example consists of QD-based light emitting diodes (QLEDs), which have begun to be commercially incorporated within large screen display devices. Specifically, as compared with the older generation of liquid crystal display (LCD) and organic light-emitting diode (OLED)-based television (TV) sets, QLED-based TVs maintain a number of advantages, including a wider high dynamic range (HDR), a lower cost, and a larger area of projection, coupled with a better efficiency, a higher pixel resolution, an improved color-quality scheme, and an overall greater stability as compared with conventional analogues.41 Overall, these favorable advantages of QDs underlie the ‘bright’ future of QLED-based displays and more significantly, highlight the benefits of incorporating QDs within useful and interesting optical-based applications.
Again, as with solar cell-based applications, issues of undesirable charge recombination and short excitonic lifetimes remain. Work in these areas is driven by the prospect of low-cost, large-area, high-efficiency, high-color-quality, stable, all-solution-processed electroluminescent QD-based devices for display and lighting.42 Hence, for all of these applications, we have sought to exploit the unique quantum size effect of QDs, which can yield a tunable band gap and light absorption profile, by combining these nanomaterials with the favorable optical characteristics of complementary low-dimensional 1D motifs as a rational strategy for improving upon the observed charge separation and exciton transport efficiency.
Indeed, single-crystalline 1D nanostructures represent desirable structural motifs, as they possess (a) high aspect ratios, (b) fewer lattice boundaries, (c) long segments of smooth crystal planes, and (d) a low number of surface defect sites.43–47 Moreover, the surfaces of 1D morphologies can be tuned so as to preferentially display different crystal faces.48,49 Within 1D systems, the charge collection efficiency can be improved by enhanced charge transport.
With single-walled CNTs in particular, electronic band structure calculations predict that the (n,m) indices of the roll-up vector will determine whether a nanotube is either metallic or semiconducting. Interestingly, CNTs can give rise to ballistic charge transport over relatively large distances at room temperature,50–52 because of the possibility of reasonably long electron mean free paths in low-dimensional materials.53,54 This phenomenon of ballistic charge transfer can dramatically reduce the observed resistance of CNTs. Furthermore, excitons have large binding energies and are very stable at room temperature within low-dimensional systems, thereby yielding favorable overall conduction properties.55 Recent studies have even shown the quantum dot-like excitonic behavior within an isolated single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT).57 Moreover, when subjected to optical excitation and irradiation, CNTs can undergo detectable charge separation, which can be analyzed using both absorption and emission measurements.58 In addition, the formation of hierarchical architectures, consisting of semiconducting CNTs coupled with adjoining semiconducting component units such as QDs, is conducive to potentially reducing undesirable electron recombination.56
Carbon nanofibers (CNFs) share many structural similarities with CNTs in terms of a nanoscale hollow structure, but these materials possess a stacked-cup morphology based on an underlying graphene motif.59 Moreover, CNFs maintain large active ‘surface areas’, a high aspect ratio, and a reasonable conductivity, all of which are useful for their incorporation as viable components of batteries, field-emission devices, supercapacitor electrodes, and electrochemical probes. Furthermore, CNFs can enhance photocatalytic activity by inducing photogenerated charge carrier separation and production.60
In general, one individual nanoscale component will have some but not all of the desired properties needed for enhanced overall solar energy utilization. Hence, by ‘merging’ CNTs, CNFs, and additional analogous 1D semiconducting-based motifs with other nanostructures, unique heterostructures, with surprising and potentially unexpected optoelectronic properties, can be generated. Indeed, heterostructures created from distinctive nanomaterial components offer a practical means of not only lowering the exciton binding energy by delocalizing one type of carrier versus the other but also allowing for the option of selectively favoring the formation of one charge carrier channel versus another in order to facilitate charge transfer.61 As such, the study of the interface itself will be critical towards fundamentally understanding and both physically and chemically tailoring the processes that underlie charge separation, charge recombination, and trapping efficiency, all of which are vital towards reliably improving upon the performance of these materials for optical-based devices.
For example, QDs can be used to enhance absorption. One possible mechanism for collecting the separated charges and minimizing charge recombination in QDs is through close proximity with a 1D structure to harvest the exciton created by absorption in the quantum dot. There are several possible pathways for charge transfer and energy flow in combinations of 0D and 1D materials which could lead to more efficient devices. As an example, chemically attaching semiconducting QDs onto CNTs represents a convenient and practical method of not only capturing photo-induced charges but also transporting them to the electrode surface.58 Not surprisingly, CNT-based composites have been reported as building blocks within light harvesting architectures, because of their excellent carrier mobilities and tunable direct band gaps.62,63 Therefore, optimizing exciton harvesting through the mediation of well-defined nanoscale interfaces will be critical, if the use of nanomaterials can result in an increased overall efficiency and potential integration within a real, practical device for solar electric systems.64
In this Perspective, we describe various research directions from a number of different groups, aimed at creating specifically tailored 0D–1D heterostructures. Selected systems, findings, and associated implications for applications are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 for carbon-based and non-carbonaceous-based composite studies, respectively. The goal of these efforts has been not only to induce favorable exciton harvesting but also to promote either charge transfer or energy transfer through rational chemical strategies and manipulation of key reaction variable(s). In this context, 0D–1D heterostructures have been created in which QDs of diverse sizes and compositions have been immobilized onto underlying 1D platforms, consisting of materials such as but not limited to carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, semiconducting metal oxides, metal chalcogenides, metal sulfides, and metal fluorides. Despite the crucial advantage of functional ‘flexibility’ in terms of being able to tune in a range of physical and chemical capabilities into these heterostructures, 0D–1D composites are not the perfect ‘panacea’ for optoelectronic applications. In part, as implied earlier, this situation has arisen, because these types of composites, which have been meticulously tailored to maintain favorably desirable, reliable, and reproducible performance metrics at the lab scale, are correspondingly difficult to produce over a larger, commercially relevant scale in an environmentally sustainable and cost-efficient fashion. For instance, precise control over important observables such as photophysics has been much more challenging to achieve, replicate, and maintain within practical and stable bulk-like device configurations under standard operating conditions. Not surprisingly, alternative research directions, meant to overcome all of these limitations, have included detailed studies of analogous 0D–2D heterostructures, denoting an important model system beyond the scope of the current Perspective.65–70
3. Carbon-based heterostructures
3.1. Carbon nanotube-based heterostructures
In the past within our group, we have successfully demonstrated not only a covalent but also an in situ route towards the site-selective synthesis of a series of SWNT and multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWNT) – nanoparticle-based conjugates containing two different types of nanoscale species, i.e. Au nanoparticles (NPs) and CdSe/CdTe QDs.71–74 The key point is that we demonstrated the capability of not only spatially controlling where we placed our nanoparticles (e.g. ends versus sidewalls) but also their size, density, and numbers on the CNT surface. Moreover, we quantitatively probed the effects of varying oxidation treatments, precursor concentrations, and incubation times to alter the spatial coverage and distribution of either metallic NPs or semiconducting QDs immobilized onto the MWNT sidewalls and tips.75
In this previous work, we and others found that the emission of the CdSe QDs appears to be totally quenched when bound covalently to the MWNT, suggesting a strong and intimate electronic ‘communication’ with the adjoining nanotubes.76,77 To explain the observed emission quenching, the de-activation process of photo-excited CdSe QDs could be attributed to an appreciable and rapid electron transfer and charge injection from the excited semiconducting QDs into the MWNT platform.58,78 That is, once MWNTs were brought into physical contact with these excited QDs, a non-radiative quenching process became competitive with the intrinsic radiative decay process, thereby resulting in the observed decrease in the intrinsic photoluminescence (PL) intensity of the CdSe QDs.79 The analogous quenching of the excitonic emission of QDs has also been previously observed in SWNT-QD composites by our group and others.73,74,76,77,80 This phenomenon has been ascribed to the electron-acceptor behavior of SWNTs. That is, photoexcited electrons produced upon illumination of QDs can conceivably flow into SWNTs, nonradiatively, prior to their recombination with photogenerated holes in QDs. Indeed, an enhanced charge injection from photoexcited QDs into underlying CNTs can contribute to an increased photoconversion efficiency of the corresponding hybrid solar cells.81
The overall point is that efficient charge separation and transport can be achieved in these nanoscale conjugate systems but this process needs to be optimized and controlled in a way that it is predictable and hence, useful for potential applications. As such, complementary and innovative pathways have been developed towards accomplishing this objective. Specifically, within CNT-based heterostructures, we have sought to achieve this goal by (i) exploring different attachment protocols with which to combine QDs with the CNTs, (ii) varying constituent QD sizes, and (iii) altering the physical and electronic properties of the linkers connecting the 0D and 1D motifs.

3.1.1. Attachment protocols within heterostructures. 
We have spent significant effort primarily on exploring covalent and non-covalent means of creating the desired heterostructures. Moreover, in our group's experiments, we have specifically chosen to use double-walled carbon nanotubes (DWNTs) as opposed to SWNTs. With DWNTs, in principle, we can achieve the best of all scenarios in that we can selectively functionalize the outer tube for attachment of the QDs and yet still retain the desirable and favorable electronic properties of the inner tube.82
In terms of a traditional chemical means of attaching QDs with CNTs, we devised a covalent attachment method to synthesize DWNT–CdSe QD heterostructures. Specifically, we utilized the 2-aminoethanethiol (AET) molecule in the role of both the capping agent and the linker. We observed a trap emission for CdSe QDs upon coating with AET ligands, and this emission peak was quenched after conjugation with DWNTs, implying charge transfer from CdSe QDs to DWNTs.82
Our next step was to develop a different and alternative attachment method through a parallel non-covalent protocol, which was an inherently milder procedure that did not involve any high temperature, in situ, electrodeposition, or reduction reactions. Our hypothesis was that we could effectively control the degree of charge transfer between these two nanoscale components via tuning of the attachment method. Hence, in exploring the non-covalent route, we expected to take advantage of π–π stacking interactions, which could make full use of the extended and delocalized π-conjugated electron system, characteristic of the CNT surface.83
In practice, we chose 4-aminothiophenol (ATP) ligand as the linker between the DWNTs and the adjoining CdSe QDs to create the desired heterostructures via two different and contrasting sets of synthesis protocols, namely covalent attachment and non-covalent π–π stacking. Fig. 1A and B highlights the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images acquired of DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, prepared using covalent and non-covalent methods, respectively. In effect, both procedures successfully yielded heterostructures.
 Fig. 1  (A and B) TEM images of DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures synthesized by covalent attachment and π–π stacking, non-covalent methods, respectively. Inset figures highlight the expected chemical bonding configuration, associated with each protocol. (C–G) Extinction (black curves) and emission (red curves, excited at 415 nm) spectra for (C) pristine CdSe QDs, (D) ATP-capped CdSe QDs, (E) pristine DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures fabricated through a non-covalent π–π stacking protocol, and purified DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures synthesized using both (F) non-covalent and (G) covalent techniques, respectively. (H) Raman spectra, measured at an excitation wavelength of 514 nm (2.14 eV) and accompanying G-band analysis of not only purified DWNTs (in the presence and absence of ATP attachment), but also purified DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, generated both covalently and non-covalently. Adapted from L. Wang, J. Han, J. Hoy, F. Hu, H. Liu, M. M. Gentleman, M. Y. Sfeir, J. A. Misewich, and S. S. Wong, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 7480–7490 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Moreover, photoluminescence and Raman spectra were acquired to compare and analyze the influence of these two distinctive synthetic attachment modes upon the resulting CdSe QD coverage and hence, the degree of charge transfer between QDs and the adjoining DWNTs. That is, we probed charge transfer behavior within ATP-functionalized CdSe QD-DWNT heterostructures. Specifically, we note the spectral signature differences between that found for bare (Fig. 1C) and functionalized (Fig. 1D) QDs versus that observed for QDs incorporated within DWNT-QD heterostructures, that had been generated using non-covalent (Fig. 1F) and covalent (Fig. 1G) techniques, respectively. From our microscopy visualization data, it was evident that heterostructures generated by non-covalent π–π stacking interactions gave rise to a higher observed QD coverage density. In parallel, we found not only greater PL quenching but also a larger Raman G band shift with these non-covalently-derived heterostructures (Fig. 1H). As such, due to the larger numbers of attached QDs, these non-covalently-bound DWNT-based systems evinced notably more efficient charge transfer as compared with their counterparts, produced using covalent linker-mediated protocols alone. These observations could fundamentally be ascribed to the retention and conservation of the inherent electronic structure of the DWNTs, characteristic of the non-covalent π–π stacking method.83
In recent years, a novel, ligand-free means of covalently attaching QDs onto MWNTs has been demonstrated. In essence, the 0D–1D ‘connection’ was created through the mediation of robust ligand exchange between the organic ligands (specifically, oleic acid) coating the QDs and the pendant oxygen-containing, carboxylic acid groups on functionalized MWNTs in a process, incorporating an ultrasonication step. This covalent-based approach appeared to provide for a robust and relatively uniform attachment of CdSe QDs onto the external surfaces of the MWNTs, with extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (EXAFS) providing for confirmation of a direct metal-oxygen bond formation between the Cd atoms of the QDs and the oxygen-containing acid moieties of the MWNTs.84 Importantly, fast charge transfer between these two species was confirmed by the observations of not only a complete quenching of the steady state PL response of the QDs but also a significant decrease in the measured PL lifetimes of QDs, as noted by time-resolved luminescence studies, consistent with the successful formation of 0D–1D heterostructures with closely interacting constituent components. Specifically, PL lifetimes of pristine, ‘free’ CdSe QDs were more than an order of magnitude longer than what were observed for analogous QDs incorporated within these heterostructures. Overall, this ligand free-based protocol allows for a more facile, efficient, and potentially generalizable way to induce the covalent attachment of QDs not only onto CNTs but also onto other functionalizable 1D surfaces.
An ultrasonication method84 has been reported as a means of directly depositing CdSe QDs (∼3 nm in diameter) onto the external surfaces of carboxylic acid-functionalized MWNTs (fMWNTs). This strategy represents a facile means of attaching QDs onto MWNTs, though the resulting heterostructure may be correspondingly less stable. The characteristic luminescence peak for these CdSe QDs (at ∼522 nm) essentially disappeared after introducing in the fMWNTs. The quenching process was indicative of electron transfer from the conduction band of QDs to the fMWNTs, because of the latter's high electron affinity.82 With respect to analogous time-resolved fluorescence spectra, the normalized luminescence emission of the 0D–1D composite decayed much faster than that of pure CdSe QDs alone, corroborating the idea that charge transfer accounted for the observed quenching.63
Lastly, we should note that an ‘in situ growth’ protocol has been used as a means for fabricating 0D–1D PbSe–SWNT composites.85 To be more specific, a pre-heated Pb-precursor stock solution was mixed in with a certain amount of SWNT under argon flow, followed by a rapid injection and quenching of the Se precursor after various reaction times so as to create QDs spanning size ranges of 5 to 35 nm. PbSe QDs were found to have grown with their (002) planes aligned perpendicularly to the SWNT bundles.86 Since the typical Raman D-band peak intensity at ∼1290 cm−1 is a probe of the amount of defects within the SWNTs, the invariance of the D-band intensity for the resulting PbSe QD-SWNT hybrid upon functionalization suggested that the interaction between QDs and the SWNTs was ‘non-covalent’. That is, the intrinsic conjugated π-electron network of the underlying SWNTs was not chemically altered by the reaction, but in fact, appeared to have stabilized growth of the PbSe QDs.87 As such, this in situ growth method demonstrated an effective way of forming QD–CNT composites with controllable QD sizes.


3.1.2. Size and coverage density dependence of charge transfer within heterostructures. 
It is well known that TEM images (Fig. 2A–C), near-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy (NEXAFS) data (Fig. 2D), Raman spectra, and electrical transport measurements (Fig. 2F and G) can be separately and independently used as complementary probes of charge transfer and QD coverage within various types of CNT-based heterostructures. Our novel contribution was to utilize a collective and systematic combination of all of these disparate and distinctive measurement techniques in an effort to achieve unique qualitative and quantitative insights within these 1D CNT–0D QD systems. Indeed, our focus was to understand and correlate the effect of varying different parameters, including but not limited to (i) QD sizes and (ii) QD coverage density, with the corresponding charge and energy transfer behavior of our as-prepared nanoscale composites. We should note that the observed QD coverages are fundamentally dependent upon other factors, including, most significantly, QD size, ligand identity, and the attachment method used. As such, our efforts were initially directed towards analyzing charge transfer behavior within nanoscale heterostructures as a function of both QD size and coverage.88
 Fig. 2  (A–C) TEM images of DWNT–MTH-capped CdSe QD (with average constituent QD diameters of 2.3, 3.0, and 4.1 nm, respectively) heterostructures, synthesized using a non-covalent π–π stacking methodology. (D) C K-edge spectra of oxidized DWNTs (black), DWNT–MTH composite control samples (red), and DWNT–MTH-capped CdSe QD (with constituent QD average diameters of 2.3 nm (blue), 3.0 nm (pink), and 4.1 nm (green)) heterostructures, respectively. (E) The schematic illustrates how we envision electrons tunneling from a CdSe QD possessing varying sizes to the adjoining DWNTs, mediated by the presence of the ligand. Smaller QD sizes tend to give rise to smaller tunneling barriers. The HOMO and LUMO levels shown in the figure are merely qualitative representations of their relative positions. (F) Representative transfer characteristics for various DWNT devices, generated both with and without functionalization. (G) Extracted charge transfer efficiency (ke) values for different QD sizes and at various laser excitation wavelengths (i.e., 488, 514, and 531 nm), assuming that the coverage density and the number of transferred electrons (Δn) are totally correlated variables. Panels A–D were adapted with permission from L. Wang, J. Han, Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z.-Q. Li, G. T. Taylor, D. A. Fischer, J. Appenzeller and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(47), 26327–26338. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Panels E–G were adapted with permission from Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, L. Wang, S. S. Wong, and J. Appenzeller, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(3), 717–725. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
As such, we probed the structure and morphology of our heterostructures with TEM, and studied the interfaces of a number of different DWNT–CdSe QD heterostructures, possessing various QD average diameters (i.e., 2.3 nm, 3.0 nm, and 4.1 nm) (Fig. 2A–C). These composites were created using a facile, non-covalent π–π stacking attachment strategy, through the mediation of a bridging hole-trapping thiol linker molecule, i.e. 4-mercaptophenol (MTH) in this case. What we noted from the TEM images was that the observed QD coverages depended on the sizes of the constituent QDs. For example, heterostructures incorporating 4.1 nm diameter QDs yielded the highest coverage densities, whereas heterostructures containing 2.3 nm diameter QDs exhibited the lowest coverage densities (Fig. 2A–C).
Our objective was to correlate these structural measurements with the nature of charge transfer, which we detected via (i) changes in the NEXAFS intensities of π* resonance in the C K-edge (Fig. 2D) and Cd M3-edge spectra as well as (ii) corresponding trends in the down shifts of the G-band frequency within as-collected Raman spectra. In fact, from an optical perspective, all of these results were consistent with the idea that the heterostructures incorporating the smallest QD sizes (i.e. 2.3 nm) gave rise to the largest driving force for charge transfer, in accordance with what one would have predicted from Marcus theory. Fig. 2E highlights the tunneling barriers as well as the band gap alignment of these various systems that support this assertion. We explained the anomalously greater charge transfer behavior of heterostructures incorporating the largest 4.1 nm diameter QDs versus ones characterized by smaller 3.0 nm diameter QDs as being plausibly attributable to the higher QD coverage densities on the underlying DWNT templates, associated with the former (4.1 nm) as opposed to the latter (3.0 nm). To summarize, control over QD size (i.e. the smaller, the better) may have resulted in a rational manipulation of the driving force for charge transfer, but this trend was necessarily impacted to some degree by the actual magnitude of QD loading onto the DWNT surfaces.
In terms of the corresponding field effect transistor (FET) devices constructed from pristine and MTH – capped QD (i.e., 2.3 nm, 3.0 nm, & 4.1 nm) individual functionalized DWNTs, we obtained output and transfer characteristics both (i) with and (ii) without illumination to understand transport in these various hybrid structures. In the absence of illumination, the functionalized QD–DWNT FETs revealed a clear threshold voltage shift trend with increasing amount of QD ‘doping’ onto the underlying DWNTs (Fig. 2F), that not only was consistent with a charge transfer model but also was found to be dependent upon the QD coverage density. By contrast, in the presence of light, we were able to quantitatively compute a nominal charge transfer efficiency, ke, between the MTH-capped QDs and the underlying DWNTs, whose inherent magnitude critically depended on the QD size itself and not necessarily on the laser frequency used (Fig. 2G). Smaller QDs yielded smaller effective tunneling barrier heights, and hence, a larger driving force for electron transfer from the QDs to the DWNTs.89
To reinforce the importance of QD coverage, mercaptopropionic (MPA)-capped CdTe QD–MWNT heterostructures have been generated by a different group using an ambient, relatively simple, and non-covalent route. Specifically, these hierarchical structures were constructed, based on taking advantage of electrostatic interactions between negatively charged, carboxylate-terminated QDs and self-assembled layers of positively charged, cationic polyelectrolytes, such as poly(4-styrene sulfonate) and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride), deposited onto the MWNT surface. In effect, a series of composites was produced with varying QD coverages. It was noted that due to the presence of charge transfer and/or energy transfer from the CdTe QDs to the MWNTs, the observed PL intensity quenching within the heterostructures altered directly and proportionately with increasing QD concentration.90
To re-emphasize the significance of QD coverage,91 CdS QD–MWNT nanohybrids with different QD loadings were prepared by another team. Decreased PL intensities were observed with higher CdS QD content, suggestive of an enhanced electron–hole separation efficiency with increasing QD coverage. This coverage variation had practical consequences. Specifically, the photocatalytic decomposition efficiencies of malachite green (MG) pollutant increased, as follows: pure MWNTs (34.2%) < 1.0 CdS QD–MWNT (81.8%) < 1.5 CdS QD–MWNT (90.7%) < 2.0 CdS QD–MWNT (92.4%) < 2.5 CdS QD–MWNT (94.9%). That is, the hybrids all exhibited much higher activity as compared with pure MWNTs alone, with the observed photocatalytic activity enhancement ascribable to enhanced electron–hole separation within the heterostructures.
In a very recent report, CdSe QDs with four different sizes ranging from 2.49 nm to 3.06 nm were prepared by a typical hot injection method and immobilized onto purified MWNTs.92 To probe the interaction between 0D QDs and 1D MWNTs, UV-visible absorption spectra for all of the various heterostructures were collected. A number of key observations were noted. First, a red shift in the CdSe excitonic bands was observed, as the QD sizes were increased. Second, excitonic peaks within the heterostructures shifted to lower wavelengths as compared with pure, free CdSe QDs alone, indicative of a charge transfer from the QDs to the underlying MWNTs. To compare the optical conductivity for all of the nanocomposites, terahertz (THz) spectra were acquired. The scattering rates for all of the CdSe QD–MWNT composites decreased gradually with increasing QD sizes; pure MWNTs evinced the highest scattering rates. All of these data could be rationalized by postulating that larger QD sizes were associated with a higher electronic density of states and gave rise to an enhanced charge transport to the underlying MWNTs. These results also were consistent with what has been previously published earlier by other groups.93


3.1.3. Ligand dependence of charge transfer within heterostructures. 
The presence of either a surfactant or a ligand on the QD surface can behave as a stabilizing influence, while also facilitating chemical bonding and electron transport within the context of a larger heterostructure constructed from a number of constituent components.
We emphasize the role and importance of two different types of ligands herein. (1) Long-chain alkyl-based surfactants (such as hexadecanoic acid) used during the synthesis process can stabilize a QD solution. However, they are often insulating and can inhibit exciton transport. By contrast, (2) shorter-chain conductive ligands (such as aminoethanethiol) are generally more conductive and by contrast, facilitate exciton movement in solution. Therefore, to highlight the importance of the ligand itself in charge transfer, we addressed the issue of charge transfer in nanotube-QD model systems with the objective of understanding (i) the structural and chemical role of the pendant functional group as well as (ii) the presence of the π-conjugated system within various ligands upon the optoelectronic behavior of as-prepared nanocomposites.94
The average diameter of QDs we probed in this set of studies was kept fixed at ∼4.1 nm, whereas the CNTs were initially treated with a similar oxidative protocol. The ligands used to covalently mediate the linkage of the CdSe QDs with the adjoining DWNTs were systematically varied. Specifically, we deliberately chose p-phenylenediamine (PPD), 2-aminoethanethiol (AET), and 4-aminothiophenol (ATP) within DWNT–CdSe QD composites (Fig. 3A–C), because these ligands maintained different terminal functionalities (i.e. amine versus thiol moieties) and degrees of conjugation (i.e. presence or absence of π-conjugated groups).
 Fig. 3  (A–C) TEM images of DWNT–PPD-capped CdSe QD, DWNT–AET-capped CdSe QD, and DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, respectively, synthesized by an amide-mediated covalent attachment strategy. The inset images denote the chemical structures of the various as-synthesized heterostructures, respectively. (D–F) C K-edge spectra of DWNT–ligand-capped CdSe QD systems. The ligands tested included PPD, AET, and ATP, respectively. (G–I) Raman G-band spectra, measured at an excitation wavelength of 514 nm (2.41 eV), of the three as-prepared heterostructures, associated with the previous figures, by comparison with their respective controls. Adapted from L. Wang, J. Han, B. Sundahl, S. Thornton, Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z. Q. Li, G. T. Taylor, D. A. Fischer, J. Appenzeller, R. J. Harrison, and S. S. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15553–15570 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
We discovered that the choice of ligand had a discernible impact upon the coverage density observed. Specifically, heterostructures generated using PPD-capped QDs yielded the lowest surface coverage of DWNTs, whereas heterostructures produced with AET-capped QDs gave rise to the highest surface coverages of QDs on the underlying DWNT templates. In terms of NEXAFS and Raman spectra, shown in Fig. 3D–I, we correlated evidence of charge transfer as manifested in detectable trends associated with (i) shifts of the C K-edge peaks in NEXAFS spectra (Fig. 3D–F) and (ii) alterations in Raman peak positions (Fig. 3G–I), both before and after CdSe QD deposition onto the underlying DWNT surface. We also found predictable (iii) changes in the observed threshold voltages within our associated transport data.
Our overall data suggested that the key characteristics dictating the charge transfer behavior of the ligands included not only the chemical identity and electron affinity of their pendant groups but also the presence of an underlying π-conjugated carbon framework. For example, the PPD-capped CdSe QDs yielded a much lower coverage density as compared with their AET and ATP-based heterostructured counterparts. We believe that this observation can be ascribed to the weaker binding strength of –NH2 within PPD as compared with the –SH groups, characteristic of AET and ATP, in anchoring ligands to the Cd sites spatially localized on the QD surface (Fig. 3A–C). Similarly, the larger enhancement of the C K-edge peak within the NEXAFS spectra associated with the AET-based heterostructures versus the PPD-bounded ones could be attributed not only to their greater associated QD coverages but also to the inherently higher electron affinity of AET's terminal –SH groups versus PPD's pendant –NH2 moieties (Fig. 3D–F). Moreover, based on trends noted not only with the experimental C K-edge spectra (specifically the CC π* transition) but also with the DWNT G+-band down-shift in the Raman spectra, ATP's intrinsic π-conjugated, electron-rich aromatic system likely mediates and facilitates greater charge transfer as compared with its aliphatic AET counterpart (Fig. 3G–I).
Theoretical findings were generally consistent with all of these experimental results. Moreover, theory corroborated previous published data which implied that electron-rich, conjugated systems are much more efficacious at enabling the charge transfer process as compared with their non-conjugated counterparts.95 Highlighting the key role of small molecule-mediated optoelectronic behavior in heterostructures, we noted the peculiar selectivity of ligands for tuning observed QD coverage densities, electron transfer efficiency, and ultimately, optical performance.96
The significance of ligands with respect to QD–MWNT architectures, created through covalent attachment, has also been emphasized by other groups. As a specific example, CdSe@ZnS core/shell QDs have been directly attached onto not only the CNT sidewalls using a diazonium salt-based linker but also the corresponding CNT ends with the mediation of mercaptotriethoxysilane. In both cases, a significant PL quenching effect was observed, which highlighted a degree of charge transfer from the QDs to the CNTs. Interestingly, it was the species at the CNT ends as opposed to the sidewalls, which yielded a more significant PL peak intensity decrease, despite the fact that mercaptotriethoxysilane is insulating. The explanation for this observation was attributed to a higher electron mobility permitting for a more reliable charge transfer, induced by the presence of mercaptotriethoxysilane. This ligand is effectively a shorter linker than the thiolated diazonium coupling agent, thereby permitting for a ‘direct’, less diluted, and hence more effective charge transfer from the QDs to the adjoining CNTs. The diazonium linker was also thought to polymerize in an undesirable fashion on the surfaces of the CNTs.97
In a similar vein, the controlled assembly of organic–inorganic heterostructures, consisting of individual, DNA-wrapped SWNTs selectively coupled to single QDs, which were spatially localized at the nanotube ends, in aqueous solution has been successfully reported. Specifically, the sidewalls of the SWNTs were stabilized and encapsulated by DNA, such that amino-terminated CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs could be attached onto SWNT ends via covalent bond-inducing amidation reactions. Time-resolved and steady-state photoluminescence studies performed both in solution and on the surfaces of these single nanohybrids yielded expected evidence of an electronic coupling between the QDs and the SWNTs. It was even explicitly proposed that varying the lengths and chemical nature of the ligands would allow for deliberative tuning of the electronic coupling at the organic–inorganic interface, of relevance for creating novel QD-based optoelectronic and light-energy conversion devices.98


3.1.4. CNT-based heterostructures incorporating compositionally distinctive QDs. 
Variations on the QD–CNT theme exist. For instance, one could consider using alternative QDs. Specifically, apart from conventional chalcogenide CdSe, CdS, and CdTe QDs, analogous heterostructures have been created by using either core–shell InP/ZnS QDs or ZnO QDs, which possess different absorptive and emissive properties.
As one example, a combination of QDs with MWNTs was probed as a potential additive within the active layer of polymer-based solar cells. Specifically, InP/ZnS core/shell QDs with an emission peak wavelength of 660 nm were added to MWNTs within a non-conducting and transparent polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) matrix. In this case, the role of the QDs was designated as a light sensitizer to enhance the long wavelength response of the solar cell, whereas the CNTs were meant to increase overall charge carrier efficiency by enhancing charge separation and conductivity.99
Composites composed of ZnO QDs deposited onto O2 plasma-treated CNTs through a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) method give rise to a cathodoluminescence profile characterized by a weak UV emission peak coupled with two distinctive and strong green emission peaks at 2.51 eV and 2.4 eV, the latter of which could be attributed to Zn-rich band-to-donor and oxygen-rich ZnO band-to-acceptor transitions, respectively.100,101 Moreover, these heterostructures evinced dramatically enhanced field emission properties, likely due to the prevalence of extra electron emission paths and higher charge carrier concentrations.102
ZnO QD–MWNT heterostructures have also been reported as excellent photo-sensitive, high-performance ultraviolet photodetectors. In particular, the conjugation of these two components enabled a direct transfer of photoinduced charge carriers from ZnO QDs to MWNTs, thereby creating efficient electrical pathways which lessened charge recombination during UV exposure. Overall, the hybrid heterostructures exhibited an excellent reversible photoresponse behavior and superior response times in photodetection as compared with control devices.103

3.2. Carbon nanofiber-based heterostructures
The morphology, growth mechanism, degree of surface oxidation,104 and corresponding physical properties (i.e. optical and electronic) of CNFs are typically controlled by synthesis methods such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),105 electrospinning,106 and the use of a hard template.105 Each of these protocols has specific advantages. As an example, the morphology of as-produced CNF can be controlled by tailoring CVD growth conditions.105 Electrospun carbon nanofibers fabricated via electrospinning can be produced not only on a large-scale but also with uniform alignment such that complex functional three-dimensional structures can be created from one-dimensional constituent nanofiber components.106 Interestingly, with CNFs, control over both structure107 and degree of oxidation104 can lead to perceptible enhancements in optical performance. Given the high electrical conductivity of CNFs,108 CNF-based heterostructures have been incorporated as components of solar cell configurations and photocatalysts.

3.2.1. CNF-based heterostructures used within dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been reported as a promising alternative to conventional energy conversion devices, because of inherent advantages associated with a simple fabrication procedure, a relatively low cost, and a high PCE.109,110 A traditional DSSC is typically composed of (i) a dye-sensitized photoanode, (ii) an electrolyte containing a redox couple of I−/I3−, (iii) a porous semiconducting film, and (iv) a standard platinum counter electrode (CE), also known as a catalytic cathode. Platinum is typically used as the counter electrode, because it can not only serve as an efficient catalyst for the redox reaction within the electrolyte but also assist in transferring electrons. However, as a precious metal, Pt is both scarce and comparatively expensive.111 Hence, replacing Pt with a more earth-abundant and low-cost material, such as but not limited to carbonaceous compounds, conducting polymers, metal sulfides, as well as metal oxides,112 while simultaneously retaining Pt's excellent electrocatalytic activity, remains a significant challenge. Typically, as compared with Pt itself, these material alternatives tend to exhibit a decreased efficiency, mostly due to their poor charge transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface.113
Carbon nanofibers possess a relatively more efficient conductivity and a better chemical stability as compared with most materials studied, which can lead to not only a lower charge transfer resistance but also a greater availability and abundance of reaction sites, all of which can promote the overall efficiency of DSSCs.109,114 Thus, the combination of CNFs with QDs within a 0D/1D composite represents a viable architectural motif as the counter electrode that can be used within a DSSC configuration. Indeed, experimental investigations of these composites have revealed that the synergistic effects introduced by the simultaneous presence of both the 1D carbon nanofiber support and the 0D QDs can give rise to a higher catalytic activity, an increased chemical stability, and an enhanced energy conversion efficiency.115,116
As examples, composites composed of metal sulfides with CNFs are thought to promote charge transport within a solar cell device. Specifically, various compositions of 0D CoxSy nanoparticles, such as Co3S4, have been combined with 1D CNFs to create 0D/1D hybrids, created through the mediation of a hydrothermal treatment. Specifically, an aqueous mixture of Co(NO3)2 and cysteine coupled with carbon nanofibers was heated within a Teflon-lined autoclave at 160 °C for 12 h; the final product was isolated by means of filtration, followed by washing with alcohol. TEM and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images indicated that as-prepared 0D Co3S4 nanoparticles were relatively evenly dispersed on the external surface of CNFs without apparent aggregation. To highlight the role of the carbon nanofiber support towards the Co3+ reduction reaction, cyclic voltammetry (CV) analysis was carried out on pure Co3S4 nanoparticles as well as on the Co3S4/CNF composite itself. Current densities measured for the Co3+ reduction process followed the sequence of Co3S4/CNF composite (i.e., 0.308 mA cm−2) > pure Pt (i.e., 0.236 mA cm−2) > pure Co3S4 (i.e., 0.205 mA cm−2). Additionally, the peak-to-peak separation (ΔEp) value of the 0D/1D composite decreased significantly with respect to pure Co3S4 nanoparticles alone. Since ΔEp is inversely proportional to the charge transfer rate, these findings implied that the composite possessed an increased charge transfer rate as compared with the pure Co3S4 nanoparticulate control sample. The high current density and relatively small ΔEp value both were consistent with the superior catalytic activity of the 0D/1D composite as compared with the pure Co3S4 control alone. To further ascertain the photovoltaic potential of these as-prepared hybrid materials, a functional cell was subsequently fabricated and tested.
In effect, a high photovoltaic performance was noted with these as-fabricated heterostructures used as the CE within DSSCs.117 Specifically, the solar cell employing Co3S4/CNF heterostructures as the CE evinced a PCE value of 9.23%, which is higher than that of the solar cell incorporating controls consisting of either a pure Pt CE (i.e. 8.38%), a pure Co3S4 CE (i.e. 6.77%), or a pure carbon nanofiber CE (i.e. 6.04%). The high PCE demonstrated by the DSSC utilizing Co3S4/CNF as the counter electrode can be explained by its superior incident light reflecting ability, which resulted in a higher photo-generated electron efficiency. Hence, because the 0D/1D composite heterostructures gave rise to not only a higher photovoltaic performance within the DSSC but also a more favorable catalytic activity towards the Co3+ reduction reaction as compared with control samples, all of these results collectively confirmed the validity of substituting the Pt CE with as-prepared Co3S4/CNF composites.
A similar scenario was observed with Co9S8 QDs, dispersed uniformly onto the surface of an underlying 1D CNF support (Fig. 4A–C).118 The Co9S8/CNF hybrid was similarly synthesized using a hydrothermal protocol but with a slightly different combination of precursors and solvents; moreover, the isolated powder was further annealed under nitrogen at 350 °C for 2 h so as to notably improve upon sample crystallinity. CV curves were also obtained for the composite towards the oxidation and reduction of the I−/I3− system. Specifically, the Co9S8/CNF composite yielded a higher current density as compared with that of both pure Pt and CNF alone, thereby implying an enhanced catalytic activity associated with the hybrid. Fig. 4D highlights how photoelectrons generated at the anode could flow via the external circuit to the CE; the Co9S8/CNF composite (i.e. the CE) at the counter electrode injects electrons to the electrolyte to complete the electrical circuit. To evaluate the photovoltaic performance of these as-prepared heterostructures within the DSSC, relevant experimental parameters, such as the short circuit current density (Jsc), the open circuit voltage (Voc), and the PCE, were examined under AM 1.5 illumination with a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 4E). In effect, the composite used as the counter-electrode (Jsc = 23.91 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.676 V, and PCE = 8.37%) dramatically outperformed that of the pure CNF alone (Jsc = 19.20 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.641 V, and PCE = 6.23%) with the improved metrics of the composite ascribable to the synergistic combination of Co9S8 nanoparticles coupled with the CNF support. Moreover, stability testing of the DSSC incorporating the 0D/1D hybrid as CE exhibited outstanding performance. In effect, 98.5% of the original PCE value was retained, even after thirty days of testing. Hence, 0D cobalt sulfide/1D carbon nanofiber heterostructures denote a promising alternative material with which to substitute pure Pt as the counter electrode within a DSSC.
 Fig. 4  (A and B) Representative TEM and HRTEM images of as-prepared 0D/1D Co9S8/CNF composites, respectively. (C) HAADF-STEM and associated EDX mapping results for a typical Co9S8/CNF composite heterostructure. (D) Schematic diagram of the working principle of the DSSC fabricated using the hybrid as the counter electrode. (E) Photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves measured for the DSSCs with the Co9S8/CNF composite, Pt, and pure CNFs, respectively, as counter electrodes. Adapted from J. Qiu, D. He, R. Zhao, B. Sun, H. Ji, N. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 522, 95–103. Copyright, with permission from Elsevier. 
In the case of metal oxides, molybdenum oxides (MoOx) in particular are considered as an attractive material for energy-related applications, because of their high theoretical capacity, sizeable conductivity, as well as attractive chemical stability.119 One such study utilized a solvothermal fabrication protocol, involving heating a homogeneous dispersion, comprised of CNFs and ammonium molybdate within aqueous ethanol, for 12 h at 180 °C to yield a MoO2/CNF composite. The expected uniform spatial distribution of 0D MoO2 nanoparticles on the external surface of 1D CNF of as-synthesized heterostructures was confirmed by means of TEM and SEM. The corresponding chemical composition was measured and verified using a combination of TEM-based elemental mapping, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Electrochemical results (i.e., CV curves) revealed that the composite in the role of the DSSC CE maintained a higher catalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox couple. In particular, the composite yielded a higher peak current (i.e., 5.4 mA), and more importantly, a decreased ΔEp value (i.e., 0.450 V) as compared with a conventional Pt (i.e., 5.2 mA for peak current and 0.499 V for ΔEp) control, thereby highlighting the effective performance of the composite as a counter electrode.
To examine the potential applicability of such a heterostructure as a viable component within a realistic functioning cell environment, photocurrent density versus photovoltage (J–V) data were collected for both the composite and pure Pt, operating as the CE within DSSCs. Not surprisingly, the MoO2/CNF composite as the CE evinced a noticeably enhanced photovoltaic performance (Jsc = 21.12 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.722 V, and PCE = 7.60%) with respect to the Pt CE (Jsc = 20.70 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.685 V, and PCE = 7.34%) alone. In addition to the obvious improvement in PCE, it is also worth noting that the thickness of the MoO2/CNF composite CE film had a perceptible impact upon the observed photovoltaic results. Specifically, the 20 μm thick film exhibited an optimized PCE value of 7.6%, which was not only superior to that of Pt alone (7.34%) but also surpassed the corresponding activity of both the 10 μm thick (i.e. 6.99%) and the 30 μm thick films (i.e. 5.63%), respectively. To more thoroughly examine the photophysical nature of the composite system, multiple, representative IPCE curves spanning the wavelength range from 300 to 800 nm were acquired. At the peak position of ∼500 nm, the composite gave rise to the best IPCE value of ∼75%, whereas the corresponding standard Pt and pure CNF samples yielded 70% and 60%, respectively. These data for the MoO2/CNF composite reflected the higher light collecting efficiency of the anode. Hence, overall, the relatively low cost and the higher photovoltaic efficiency of as-fabricated MoO2/CNF composites yielded a very promising CE for DSSCs.120
With respect to metals, heterostructures, composed of Pt3Ni nanoparticles supported onto Cr-doped carbon nanofibers, have been synthesized and subsequently utilized as a counter electrode within DSSCs.121 With respect to the order for the catalytic activity towards I−/I3− redox couples, the CV curves demonstrated it to be the following: Pt3Ni: Cr–CNF composite > Pt standard > CNFs. Whereas the power conversion efficiency of a bare CNF counter electrode and a bare Pt counter electrode were reported to be 5.75% and 7.04%, respectively, as-prepared heterostructures evinced correspondingly higher values of as much as 8.76%. The enhanced PCE performance of the composite as a counter electrode was ascribed to its rapid charge transfer capability, resulting in not only a higher short-circuit current density but also an increased fill factor. These data are consistent with the observed electrochemistry. Specifically, composites fabricated with Mo-doped Pt3Ni nanoparticles deposited onto carbon nanofiber supports122 similarly showed superior catalytic activity towards the I−/I3− regeneration reaction with respect to pure Pt, and not surprisingly, exhibited an improved value of 9.47% as a DSSC counter electrode, when measured with a simulated full solar intensity (AM 1.5 G). All of these examples highlight the viable idea of substituting Pt with complex heterostructures, characterized by equal if not superior performance metrics within actual devices.


3.2.2. CNF-based heterostructures within QD-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). 
Replacing the functional role of dyes with that of QDs within the context of QDSSCs enables one to exploit the size quantization effect and MEG potential of QDs.123,124 Nevertheless, the relatively low solar energy conversion efficiency of QDSSCs has limited their viable and ubiquitous commercial applicability. As with DSSCs, one primary area of concern relates to the cathode (i.e. counter electrode). Specifically, the performance of a conventional Pt counter electrode is hindered not only by the strong absorption of sulfur-containing species within the electrolyte but also by its low chemical stability.106 Whereas alternative cathode materials, such as Cu2S125 and ZnS,35 have demonstrated an improved photovoltaic performance at lower cost, CNFs represent another promising and cost-effective substitute for Pt as a counter electrode.126
QDSSCs consisting of a tin oxide photoanode and a CNF counter electrode gave rise to a 2.5% power conversion efficiency, a value higher than that of Pt (i.e., 2.1%).127 Heterostructures composed of CuS controllably grown onto electrospun CNFs by a hydrothermal method have been used as an effective counter electrode within QDSSCs to facilitate charge transport, reduce charge transfer resistance, and decrease interfacial recombination, so as to improve overall efficiency.128 In terms of sample preparation, an aqueous mixture of electrospun CNFs, CuCl2, and L-cysteine was transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave and heated to 160 °C for 12 h. The morphology of the CNF substrate both (i) before and (ii) after CuS nanoparticle deposition was studied by SEM; collected images confirmed the relatively uniform attachment of 0D CuS nanoparticles onto the underlying 1D CNF surface. TEM elemental mapping and XPS were also used to analyze elemental distribution and oxidation states. In effect, the CNF ‘platform’ served to bridge the adjoining CuS nanoparticles together, thereby exposing more active sites and enabling the production of spatial pathways to facilitate electron transport, all of which are beneficial for catalysis. Hence, when used as a counter electrode within QDSSC devices, the trend in efficiency for the various material systems tested was in the order of CuS/CNF composite (i.e. 3.86%) > CuS nanoparticles (i.e. 3%) > standard Pt (i.e. 2.1%) > CNF (i.e. 1.62%). The enhanced charge transfer promoted by the CuS/CNF composite, ascribable to a synergistic combination of catalytically active CuS nanoparticles coupled with the superior charge transport of 1D carbon nanofibers, likely contributed to the excellent PCE value of the QDSSC. Specifically, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results on the CuS/CNF composite (used as the CE) highlighted that whereas the CNF support improved the observed charge transfer efficiency, the complementary metal sulfide possessed not only low resistance but also yielded a high catalytic activity for the polysulfide redox reaction.


3.2.3. CNF-based heterostructures for additional optically-related applications. 
Solar-driven photocatalysts is regarded as an effective and economical pathway for environmental remediation. In effect, visible light occupies a substantial component of the solar spectrum,129 and semiconductors with wide band gaps, such as metal oxides, have often been used to photocatalyze the degradation of organic-based pollutants and model dye compounds in water.130 As a typical example, 0D/1D composites composed of titanium oxide (TiO2) nanoparticles, decorated onto the surfaces of CNFs, photocatalyze methylene blue degradation131 in as little as 2 min, which is much faster as compared with bare TiO2 nanoparticles (i.e., 60 min).
ZnO is recognized as a very promising photocatalyst, due to its wide band gap (3.37 eV), high quantum efficiency, and excellent photosensitivity.132 However, the fast recombination of charge carriers within ZnO limits its applicability as an effective photocatalyst. Nevertheless, the addition of CNFs as a support material can promote the potential for photogenerated electron transfer coupled with a reduction in electron–hole recombination. Not surprisingly, ZnO/CNF composites were more active towards organic dye degradation under UV irradiation133 as compared with bare ZnO alone. Yet, what also proved to be significant was the nature to which ZnO was attached onto the underlying CNF walls. Specifically, wet chemical treatments were used to construct different variants of identical composites, whose precise formulation depended upon merely interchanging specific reaction steps. In effect, these CNF-based heterostructures were characterized by either (i) an inhomogeneous distribution and agglomeration of non-uniformly-sized ZnO particles on relatively defective CNF surfaces or (ii) a uniform distribution of more monodisperse, smaller, and well-formed ZnO particles on comparatively defect-free CNF surfaces, as implied by SEM and TEM data. The latter composites exhibited a ∼2-fold higher rate constant towards organic pollutant (i.e. Rhodamine B or RB) degradation as compared with the former. This evident catalytic enhancement could be explained by an improved interfacial contact between ZnO and CNF, owing to a decreased amount of CNF defects, which in turn led to a more efficient charge transfer process. In a separate study, ZnO QD (size < 5 nm) – CNF heterostructures were formed via a combination of electrospinning and hydrothermal techniques under pH-controlled conditions.134 Their photocatalytic activity towards organic pollutants was tested. Experiments were carried out under UV light irradiation, and the measured RB degradation turned out to be 70% and 96% for pure ZnO and ZnO–CNF composites, respectively. Additionally, PL emission spectra of as-synthesized ZnO–CNF composites exhibited a much lower intensity with respect to the ZnO control sample, reinforcing the efficiency of charge separation within the 0D/1D heterostructures.
It is assumed that electrons generated by the ZnO QDs transferred to the CNF supports, while holes reacted with surface oxygen species; the as-generated hydroxyl radicals produced on the ZnO surface also assisted in organic pollutant decomposition. The same group moreover noted the improved catalytic behavior of an analogous recyclable composite, composed of a CNF support coupled with In2O3 nanocubes. As with the ZnO/CNF system, the enhanced photogenerated electron–hole separation within the comparable In2O3/CNF system was substantiated by the PL emission behavior, wherein the In2O3/CNF composite evinced a noticeable decrease in PL intensity as compared with In2O3 alone. The increased charge separation efficiency yielded not only longer charge carrier lifetimes but also consequentially, an improved photocatalytic activity for the In2O3/CNF hybrid. In effect, the composite's superior performance in all of these examples was attributed to the idea that charge recombination was inhibited and charge separation was enhanced, because of the cooperative coupling of the two constituent components, whereas charge transfer was improved upon, largely as a result of the highly conductive CNF.135

4. Metal oxide-based heterostructures.
Over the years, in a parallel effort, our group has been actively involved in the development of innovative syntheses of nanotubular, nanorod, and nanocube formulations of oxide (particularly, technologically significant perovskites), sulfide, and fluoride-based materials.136–139 In the context of this Perspective, metal oxides are able to not only enhance the efficient movement of photo-generated excitons but also improve upon charge separation and transport capabilities for photovoltaic, light harvesting, and/or light-emitting diode applications. As such, we and other groups have been particularly interested in reliably tuning and tailoring photo-induced charge transfer and energy transfer processes within more generalized (i.e., apart from carbon-based) classes of composite heterostructures through manipulation of key reaction variables, such as (1) the excitation wavelength used; (2) the presence or absence of dopant species; (3) morphology and crystallinity; (4) QD coverage and density; (5) QD identity; as well as (6) the chemical composition of the relevant constituent metal oxide/fluoride/chalcogenide in question. As an example of the significance of each reaction parameter, we note that the precise morphology of the metal oxides themselves controls not only the extent of exposed reactive surface area but also the quantitative loading ratio and coverage density of immobilized QDs.
To highlight the importance and relevance of these metal oxide-based structures for solar cell applications, it is worth noting that all-inorganic heterostructured n–p junction devices created from ‘inks’ of colloidal PbS QDs (e.g., light harvester) and anatase TiO2 nanorods (e.g. electron acceptor) have been fabricated under relatively mild, room temperature, and solution-based conditions. Through Kelvin probe force microscopy and femtosecond pump and probe spectroscopy measurements, electron transfer was reported to have occurred at the interface between the QDs and the anatase nanorods with an overall observed power conversion efficiency of ∼3.6% on glass and ∼1.8% on flexible plastic substrates, respectively.140
In essence, a fundamental understanding of metal oxide-based heterostructures could lead to an improved capability to tailor the optoelectronic properties of constituent nanomaterials for possible incorporation within functional light harvesting and PV devices. Composite architectures, in which structure, morphology, and chemical composition can be treated as independent reaction ‘variables’ with which to deliberately control optical behavior, offer an opportunity with which to initiate and promote highly efficient charge separation by purposely modulating localized chemical interactions within discrete constituent units.
4.1. Binary metal oxide-based heterostructures
As alluded to thus far, metal oxides represent one of the most diverse classes of materials, with important structure-related properties, including superconductivity, ferroelectricity, magnetism, colossal magnetoresistivity, conductivity, and gas sensing capabilities. More precisely, metal oxides are plentiful and functionally active for many different types of applications. In this context, our group and many other laboratories have expended a lot of effort in the use of molten-salt synthetic methods, hydrothermal protocols, and ambient template-directed techniques as viable methodologies to generate homogeneous and monodisperse metal oxide nanostructures with precise size and shape control without necessarily sacrificing on sample quality, purity, and crystallinity. With respect to this Perspective, a number of metal oxides, especially their doped analogues, possess intrinsically interesting optical (i.e. desirable band gaps), electronic, and catalytic properties that render them as viable candidates with which to couple with 0D QDs so as to create novel, high-performing composites. As an illustrative example, 1D WO3 nanostructures linked with CdS QDs are highly effective in terms of their photocatalytic efficiency, an observation which can be attributed to their enhanced visible light absorption and efficient charge separation potential.141 Due to space constraints, our discussion focuses on a subset of arguably more ‘commonly used’ metal oxides, such as CeO2, SnO2, ZnO, and TiO2.

4.1.1. CeO2: photocatalytic H2 evolution. 
For example, doped cerium dioxide (CeO2) is a highly sought-after semiconducting photocatalyst, because of its stability, natural abundance, relative non-toxicity, and low-cost.142 Recently, a heterostructure combining 1D CeO2 nanorods with 0D CdSe QDs was created using a simple hydrothermal method in which the amount of CdS QDs coating the external surfaces of the nanorods could be quantitatively controlled by the molar ratio of QDs and cerium precursors utilized in the reaction. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution experiments were performed to compare the activity of pure CeO2 nanorods with that of analogous CdS/CeO2 heterostructures. The resulting data (i.e. H2 generation) were consistent with a very large enhancement observed for the heterostructures (i.e., up to 101.12 μmol h−1 g−1) as compared with that of the nanorods alone (i.e., 2.25 μmol h−1 g−1). Moreover, PL measurements indicated that the emission intensities for the CdS/CeO2 heterostructures were considerably lower than those of pure CeO2. This evident quenching in emission suggests that the interface between CdS QDs and the adjoining CeO2 promotes effective charge separation. This observation can be explained by the bandgap alignment of these two materials with the Z-scheme, in which the CdS QDs and CeO2 nanorods consume the h+ species generated by CdS QDs and the corresponding e− produced by CeO2 nanorods. By contrast, average lifetime measurements for CdS/CeO2 heterostructures and pure CeO2 yielded values of 4.05 and 2.14 ns, respectively. These cumulative findings suggest that CdS/CeO2 heterostructures maintain a faster and more effective charge separation and transfer of charge carriers as compared with pure CeO2 alone, thereby confirming the higher photocatalytic activity of these composite heterostructures.143


4.1.2. SnO2: photocatalytic degradation and solar cell applications. 
SnO2 possesses a wide band gap of 3.6 eV at 300 K, and as such, has been incorporated as a component of not only (i) photocatalysts but also (ii) electrodes of DSSCs.144 With respect to photocatalytic activity, CdS QD/SnO2 nanorod-based heterostructures were found to induce the degradation of both methylene blue145 and Congo Red solution146 at notably higher levels as compared with pure SnO2 nanowires alone. It was proposed that significant quenching of the band edge emission for not only SnO2 but also CdS induced efficient charge separation. Analogous CdSe QD/SnO2 nanowire-based heterostructures could initiate the corresponding photodegradation of hydrochlorothiazide.147
With respect to solar cell applications, flower-like clusters of SnO2 nanorods sensitized with CdS QDs evinced an IPCE of 6.5% in the range of 400 to 440 nm,147,148 with similar findings reported for analogous 1D SnO2–0D CdS hierarchical composites.145,146,149 With heterostructures generated from SnO2 nanowires and CdSe QDs,150 the photocurrent was found to have enhanced by as much as 350% upon deposition of CdSe QDs onto the underlying SnO2 nanowire surface. Promising data were also collected on a series of heterostructures composed of Cd-free QDs consisting of CuInS2 (CIS), ZnS–CuInS2 (ZCIS), and core/shell ZCIS/ZnS, respectively coupled with SnO2 nanowires.151 In particular, the photoresponses of pure SnO2 nanowires and of the corresponding nanowires immobilized with CIS, ZCIS, and ZCIS/ZnS QDs were measured at 325 and 488 nm, denoting energies both higher and lower than the intrinsic band gap of SnO2, respectively. At 325 nm, an increase in the photocurrent of about 700%, 400%, and 200% for the CIS, ZCIS, and ZCIS/ZnS QD-based heterostructures, respectively, was measured. At 488 nm, the photocurrent for SnO2 was barely detectable, as expected, since the excitation energy was lower than that of the band gap for SnO2, but the observed photocurrents for the attached CIS and ZCIS QDs themselves increased by ∼400% and 200%, respectively. These collective data were consistent with charge transfer emanating from the type II band alignment between constituent QDs and SnO2 nanowires within the heterostructures.


4.1.3. ZnO: solar cell-based applications. 
As stated above, ZnO is a low-cost, II–VI compound semiconductor, with a direct wide band gap value of 3.37 eV, and it possesses high mechanical, thermal, and chemical stability. Nevertheless, ZnO's wide band gap limits the absorption of visible light and decreases the light conversion efficiency. Apart from doping, chemical coordination with QDs offers a viable means for improving upon and extending ZnO's light absorption range.
1D ZnO/CdS QD core–shell heterostructures were initially formed using a sonochemical synthesis protocol.152 PL spectra highlighted significant quenching for ZnO/CdS QD heterostructures as compared with both pure ZnO nanorods and pure CdS QDs, suggestive of the presence of charge transfer. Additional developments of this composite centered on applications as diverse as but not limited to energy and catalysis-related fields, such as photoelectrochemical water splitting,153,154 photodegradation,155,156 and photocatalysis.157
Regarding solar cell applications, the initial 1D ZnO/CdS QD heterostructures incorporated within a solar cell configuration yielded power conversion efficiencies of up to 0.54%,158 with additional efforts only marginally improving upon this value.159–161 As an example of some of the additional strategies developed to rectify this low efficiency problem, the IPCE of ZnO flower-like nanoarrays sensitized with a layer of CdS QDs162 could be more than doubled by coating the ZnO/CdS heterostructure with a layer of CdSe QDs, thereby yielding a measured power conversion efficiency of 1.08%. PL spectra of bare ZnO gave rise to a narrow emission band at 407 nm, attributed to the near-band-edge emission of ZnO. Within the ZnO/CdS heterostructures, the band edge emission was significantly quenched and blue shifted, thereby implying that photogenerated electrons could be efficiently transferred from CdS to ZnO. Upon addition of the CdSe layer, the emission was found to have quenched even more, thereby suggesting that the bi-sensitization process further improved upon electron transfer, thereby accounting for the higher power conversion efficiency value observed. In effect, within a bi-sensitized ZnO photoelectrode, electron transfer occurred towards the lower conduction band of ZnO, while hole transfer emanated from the valence band (VB) from ZnO to CdS and onwards to CdSe.
With respect to pure ZnO/CdSe QD heterostructures alone, first created using a linker-assisted assembly (LAA) method,163 these composites incorporated within a solar cell configuration164 achieved internal quantum efficiencies of 50–60% and a power conversion efficiency of 0.4%, when using MPA as the ligand. Comparable solar cells generated using heterostructures, incorporating thioglycolic acid (TGA) as the capping ligand on the CdSe QDs,165 yielded a power conversion efficiency value of 0.66%. This increase in PCE was attributed to the shorter chain length of TGA, which allowed for faster charge transfer. With respect to data on the photocatalytic activity of these 1D ZnO/CdSe QD heterostructures,166 the presence of a shorter ligand linker chain also corroborates the idea of a more efficient charge transfer process within these composites. On analogous composite architectures created from ZnO 1D nanorods decorated with CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs, the acquired results showed that the core–shell motif led to a less effective photocatalytic ability, not only because the ZnS shell layer served as a barrier to electron transport but also because the conduction band of CdSe was lower than that of ZnS, denoting data highlighting the primary importance of charge transfer in governing the observed performance of these heterostructures.
Based on all of these cumulative results, it is evident that co-sensitization of 1D ZnO with both individual CdS and CdSe QD species is more relevant for increasing efficiency as opposed to manipulating the linker chemistry itself. As such, solar cells incorporating ZnO nanowires co-sensitized with CdS and CdSe QDs with a ZnS passivation layer167 demonstrated initial power conversion efficiency values of 1.33%, which was a tangible improvement as compared with data for 1D ZnO sensitized with either CdS or CdSe QDs alone.162,165 It is also worth mentioning that the ZnS passivation layer performed differently as compared with a ZnS shell layer, which, as we noted earlier in a previous example, served to hinder hole transfer from ZnO to the adjacent QDs. In this case, the ZnS passivation layer, deposited onto ZnO/CdS/CdSe photoelectrode, was able to protect the QD from photocorrosion, and operated as a means for enabling hole transfer toward the electrode through bandgap level engineering considerations. In effect, optimizing the thickness of the ZnS passivation layer led to power conversion efficiencies of up to 2.03%.168 To accentuate the equally significant role of the fabrication procedure itself, it was found that an in situ sequential assembly process involving both successive ionic layer absorption and reaction (SILAR) and chemical bath deposition (CBD) to create the requisite heterostructures, composed of ZnO nanowires sensitized with both CdS and CdSe QDs with a passivating layer of ZnS, led to power conversion efficiencies of 2.68%.169 Recent work has also focused on the deposition of electronically more complex, as-formed CdS/CdSe core/shell QDs onto ZnO nanowires.170
Beyond the use of CdS and CdSe QDs alone, additional QD species, such as PbS and ZnS, have also been deposited onto 1D ZnO nanostructures. As representative examples, 1D/0D QD-based solar cells encapsulating ZnO/PbS,171–173 ZnO/ZnSe,174 and ZnO/PbSe heterostructures175 have been reported, though the associated PCE values varied in magnitude. One of the best performance metrics recorded was for the QDSSC incorporating the ZnO/PbS composite with a measured PCE of 6.87%. It is also worth noting that a CdTe QD monolayer sensitized ZnO nanowire array has been generated as an efficient photoelectrode for water splitting with 200% higher maximum PCE values as compared with that of ZnO alone.176 In addition, ZnO/PbS QD heterojunction-based solar cells have been found to be effective in the near-IR region with ultra-high IPCE values measured at 58% (obtained at 1020 nm).177 Overall, these results reveal the important role of proper band gap alignment of constituent materials for initiating the desired charge transfer.


4.1.4. TiO2: solar and photocatalytic-based applications. 
TiO2 is a wide bandgap material (3.0–3.2 eV), which exists as either crystalline anatase, rutile, or brookite. These materials have been utilized as components of applications including but not limited to batteries, photovoltaic cells, advanced photocatalysts for environmental purification, pigments, cosmetics, photonics, optoelectronic devices, and gas sensors, partly due to their low cost, chemical stability, and robustness under UV illumination. Coupled with quantum dots of varying chemical compositions, such as CdSe, CdS, CdTe, and PbSe as illustrative examples, it is conceivable to create an ‘adjustable’ heterostructure, wherein in principle, the degree of charge separation under visible light excitation can be tunably and systematically controlled by reaction variables, a theme we have already extensively investigated in the context of carbon nanotubes.
As we have seen previously, size matters. For example, when CdSe QDs of varying, controlled diameters (i.e., 2.3 nm, 2.6 nm, 3.0 nm, and 3.7 nm) were immobilized onto TiO2, it was evident that smaller-sized CdSe QDs evinced greater charge injection rates and also higher IPCE values (i.e. 36%) at the excitonic band. By contrast, larger QDs gave rise to an improved absorption profile in the visible region but were less efficient at injecting electrons into TiO2.
Morphology makes a difference. Specifically, the use of a hollow 1D tubular structure as opposed to a 0D nanoparticle as an underlying scaffold affords heterostructures which generate higher maximum IPCE values within solar cell configurations.32 Specifically, in moving beyond the use of 0D TiO2 nanoparticle films to 1D TiO2 nanotube arrays, the IPCE readings of the corresponding CdSe QD-based heterostructures improved from 26% to 55%.178 In addition, CdSe QD-sensitized 1D porous TiO2 nanofibers, employed within a solar cell, achieved PCE values of up to 2.15% as compared with 1.50% for bare TiO2 nanofibers179 Not surprisingly, CdSe QD-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays photocatalytically outperformed those of conventional nanoparticles in degrading methyl orange at values of up to 88.20% in 2 h.180 Though these collective data from different papers are not directly comparable, they do also highlight the likely and related significance of QD surface loadings upon the observed metrics measured.
The attachment chemistry is another important variable. With respect to the photocatalytic activity of CdS QD-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays,181 the effect of the attachment method (i.e. the use of chemical bath deposition versus sonochemistry to deposit QDs) on the resulting performance of the heterostructures was analyzed. Heterostructures created using the sonochemical method gave rise to superior photocatalytic activity in terms of being able to degrade 61.4% of methyl orange dye within 180 min. By contrast, the corresponding values for samples prepared with the chemical bath deposition method and for bare TiO2 nanotube array controls were 53.0% and 4.2%, respectively. Other groups have also probed the rates of photodegradation of dyes using TiO2/CdS heterostructures,182–184 with the highest observed degradation of methyl orange reported to be as much as 98.83% after 3 cycles of activity.185
As was observed with ZnO, co-sensitization of 1D TiO2 nanostructures with both CdS and CdSe QDs gave rise to an evidently better photoelectrochemical performance than either TiO2/CdS or TiO2/CdSe composites alone.186 As an added nuance to the previous studies on co-sensitization, if the sequence of QD addition were manipulated, it was found that the performance of the heterostructures was enhanced when CdS QDs were initially deposited onto the TiO2 nanotubes followed by the subsequent combination with CdSe QDs. This apparent difference in performance can be rationalized on the basis of the band gaps of the three individual constituent components. In effect, because the band gap between the conduction and the valence band of CdS is closer to that of TiO2, charge transfer is more efficient within a CdS–TiO2 interface as opposed to a CdSe–TiO2 interface. Furthermore, the overall positioning of energy levels suggests that CdSe could block charge transfer towards CdS, if the sequence of QD addition had been reversed. Nonetheless, co-sensitization with both types of QDs was found to further enhance the observed charge transfer. Not surprisingly, TiO2/CdS/CdSe structures have been used to fabricate solar cells with measured power conversion efficiencies of 2.52%.187
A different group showed TiO2/CdS/CdSe composites could be used for hydrogen generation at a rate of as much as 10.24 μmol h−1 cm−2.188 Interestingly, the spatial distribution of these CdS and CdSe QD species can also be precisely controlled. Indeed, an unusual tandem heterostructure configuration, grown onto FTO, consisting of TiO2 nanotubes onto which CdS QDs had been controllably deposited on one side while CdSe QDs had been immobilized on their opposite side,189 yielded a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 2.78%, which was greater than that achieved by mixed CdS/CdSe QD-co-sensitized TiO2 nanotubes without such a degree of spatial manipulation.
Beyond CdS and CdSe QDs, heterostructures incorporating CdTe, PbS, and PbSe QDs have also been created and probed for a variety of optical applications. For example, composites generated from CdTe QDs deposited onto TiO2 nanotube arrays could give rise to a photocurrent density of as high as 6 mA cm−2, which is about 35 times higher than that for bare TiO2 nanotubes alone. Additional studies were able to increase the observed photocurrent density of 1D TiO2/CdTe QD heterostructures to 15.83 mA cm−2 with a corresponding PCE of 7.9%.190 In terms of photocatalysis, the oxidative decomposition of p-nitrophenol (PNP) was analyzed using CdTe QD-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays with the finding that PNP photodegradation could be induced in as little as 2 h.191 The quenching of the PbSe QD bandgap emission within PbSe QD-sensitized TiO2 nanorods fabricated by a hot-injection method demonstrated the possibility of a rapid 2.1 ns transfer of photoinduced carriers into the TiO2 domain.192 As such, in terms of taking advantage of this interesting photophysics, PbSe QD-sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays have been shown to photocatalytically degrade methyl orange by as much as 90% in 6 h;193 TiO2 nanotubes sensitized with PbSe QDs can generate hydrogen with power conversion efficiencies of up to 10.6%;194 and finally, 1D TiO2/PbS QD heterostructures can yield power conversion efficiencies of 1.9%, a value which is 40 times higher than that for bare TiO2 alone.195


4.1.5. Examples of other metal oxide-based heterostructure systems. 
As implied earlier, we have discussed major, relevant examples of binary metal oxide-based 1D–0D heterostructures, incorporating TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, and CeO2. Additional examples exist. For brevity, we highlight a few more instances so as to illustrate the breadth of work on these types of structures, including Fe2O3 and a combined ZnO/TiO2 metal oxide conjugate, which are conceptual extensions of the cases we have previously described.
α-Fe2O3 hematite nanowires have been combined with PbSe QDs using an interesting epitaxial synthesis method, based on an initial dehydration procedure under ultra high vacuum conditions at high temperature followed by a hot-injection process to induce QD nucleation.196 The resulting heterostructure consisted of PbSe QDs immobilized onto 100 nm hematite nanowires such that the PbSe(002) and Fe2O3(003) facets overlaid upon each other, along the [10] crystallographic direction of the wire. It was noted that longer dehydration times increased the QD coverage density and narrowed the QD diameter distribution, whereas lower injection temperatures decreased both the observed QD diameter and diameter distribution. It was postulated that other types of QDs including but not limited to CdSe and CdS could be similarly attached onto other binary metal oxide 1D structures with implications for bandgap alignment matching relevant for solar cell and/or water splitting applications.
ZnO/TiO2 conjugate structures consisting of a thin TiO2 passivation layer deposited onto the exterior surface of a ZnO nanorod array served as the platform for the subsequent accretion of a p-type CdTe shell to create a final composite with a PCE of 1.44%.197 The TiO2 thin layer ranged from 0.5 nm to 4 nm to effectively ‘neutralize’ the surface defects of the ZnO nanorods.

4.2. Complex metal oxide-based heterostructures

4.2.1. Orthophosphate-based heterostructures. 
• CePO4: initial proof of principle – idea of structure & chemical composition controlling charge vs. energy transfer channels.
Tb-doped CePO4 nanostructures have been extensively used as a green emitting material in fluorescent lamps, and have also been considered for optoelectronics as well as for biological labeling applications.198–200 Our motivation for the initial study in this area was to create a model semiconducting and luminescent 0D QD–1D metal oxide architecture.83 Specifically, we generated crystalline Tb3+ doped, high-aspect ratio 1D CePO4 nanowires through a ‘biomineralization’ process that our group has developed and refined over the years. In parallel, we prepared 0D CdSe QDs coated with AET ligands, wherein the thiol groups were bound onto the CdSe surface. We successfully anchored the 0D CdSe QDs onto the external sidewalls of the 1D nanowires via hydrogen bonding interactions between the AET linkers and H2O molecules that had intercalated within the CePO4 structure. The as-generated 0D CdSe QD–1D CePO4:Tb3+ nanowire-based heterostructures were characterized by HRTEM and TEM analysis (Fig. 5A).
 Fig. 5  (A) HRTEM image of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures. The inset corresponds to the TEM image of these heterostructures, obtained at low magnification. (B) Electronic energy level diagram of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures. Viable charge transfer pathways for these materials are shown. (C and D) PL emission spectra of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures prepared at various concentration ratios of [CePO4:Tb3+]/[CdSe] (namely at 0.33, 0.66, and 1, respectively) and excited at (C) 375 nm and (D) 280 nm, respectively. (E) PL decay curves (λex = 388 nm) associated with the excitonic emission of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures prepared, from top to bottom, at increasing concentration ratios of [CePO4:Tb3+]/[CdSe], used to synthesize these various nanoscale composites. Adapted with permission from J. Han, L. Wang, and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(11), 5671–5682. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Due to their lower photobleaching capability, comparatively high quantum yields (QY) (QY with measured levels of up to 60%), good chemical stability, and relatively low toxicity,201,202 metal ion-doped lanthanide orthophosphates represent an optically attractive class of metal oxides. Not surprisingly, Tb-doped CePO4 nanostructures have been incorporated as viable components of different kinds of device applications including but not limited to fluorescent lamps, optoelectronics, and biological labeling.199,200 Within our studies, we characterized the optical absorption, luminescence behavior, and lifetimes (Fig. 5E) of our CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ nanoscale heterostructures. In Fig. 5C and D, we noted a perceptible PL quenching effect of our QDs at different excitation wavelengths as compared with unbound CdSe QDs and free CePO4:Tb nanowires. Moreover, in terms of deducing structure–property correlations, we systematically varied the concentration ratios of CdSe QDs to CePO4:Tb3+ from 3:1 to 3:2 to 1:1, and found that the degree of quenching within the heterostructures correlated with the relevant amounts of these two constituent components. Specifically, not only did the observed lifetimes shorten but also the amount of PL quenching of the CdSe increased proportionately with higher QD coverages immobilized onto the underlying phosphate templates. We also showed the relative band gap alignments of all of the constituent units within the heterostructure in Fig. 5B.
From this picture, we were able to prove that not only is photo-induced charge transfer possible within novel luminescent CdSe semiconducting QDs and CePO4:Tb3+ metal oxide nanowire heterostructures but also the direction of that charge transfer activity can be controlled by the magnitude of the irradiation energy used. Specifically, under near-UV-to-visible excitation, hole transfer from the valence band of the CdSe QDs to the conduction band of the CePO4:Tb3+ nanowires was responsible for the reduction in the CdSe QD signal, whereas under deep UV irradiation, electron transfer from CePO4:Tb3+ to CdSe QDs was posited as accounting for the observed quenching of the CePO4:Tb3+ emission peaks (Fig. 5B). These dual effects were more pronounced with higher coverages of CdSe QDs immobilized onto and therefore interacting with the underlying CePO4:Tb3+ nanowire motif.83,198
• LaPO4: effect of morphology, surface coverage, and dopants on optical properties.
Rare-earth-doped LaPO4 has not only been considered as an emitting material in fluorescent lamps but also has also been used within optoelectronics,203–205 due to its lower photo-bleaching capability, relatively high quantum yields (up to 90% at deep UV excitation), reasonable chemical stability, and fairly low toxicity. Our objectives in creating QD-based heterostructures, derived from these phosphates, were manifold.206
(a) First, from the synthesis perspective, we proposed a novel route with respect to generating a three-dimensional (3D), rare-earth-doped LaPO4 submicron urchin-like structure. This synthesis technique was distinctive, because it incorporated a relatively facile, template-free, ambient, large-scale, and aqueous solution-directed protocol. The morphology of the as-prepared 3D phosphates is shown in Fig. 6A. The ‘sea-urchin’-like structures possessed an apparent overall diameter of ∼500 nm and consisted of numerous constituent nanowires concentrically projecting out from a central core, like spokes of a wheel (Fig. 6A).
 Fig. 6  (A and B) Representative TEM images of LaPO4:Eu3+ 3D urchin-like architectures and 1D nanowires, respectively. (C–F) PL emission spectra of AET-capped CdSe QDs, AET-capped CdSe QD–3D LaPO4:Eu3+ urchin-like heterostructures, and undoped AET-capped CdSe QD–3D LaPO4 urchin-like heterostructures, respectively, under (C) 380 nm and (E) 260 nm excitation, respectively. PL emission spectra of AET-capped CdSe QDs, AET-capped CdSe QD–1D LaPO4:Eu3+ heterostructures, and undoped AET-capped CdSe QD–1D LaPO4 heterostructures, acquired under (D) 380 nm and (F) 260 nm excitation, respectively. (G) Electronic energy diagram describing the various energy band alignments associated with heterostructures composed of CdSe QDs attached onto LaPO4, LaPO4:Ce3+, LaPO4:Eu3+, and LaPO4:Tb3+, respectively. (H) PL emission spectra of AET-capped CdSe QDs as well as of AET-capped CdSe QDs coupled with either LaPO4, LaPO4:Eu3+, LaPO4:Tb3+, or LaPO4:Ce3+ as components of 3D-urchin-based heterostructures, excited at 380 nm. (I) PL decay curves (λex = 388 nm) associated with the excitonic emission of AET-capped CdSe QDs within heterostructures, composed of AET-capped CdSe QDs, coupled with 3D motifs of LaPO4, LaPO4:Ce3+, LaPO4:Eu3+, and LaPO4:Tb3+, respectively. Adapted from J. Han, L. Wang, and S. S. Wong, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34963–34980 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
(b) Second, we analyzed the growth mechanism of our 3D sub-micron LaPO4-based architectures in fairly rigorous detail through a meticulous and thorough time-dependent SEM visualization analysis. We found that isolated sizes of our hierarchical assemblies correlated proportionately with higher La/P molar elemental ratios (i.e. a measure of the chemical potential) and longer reaction times. In parallel, we prepared larger 1D nanowires (Fig. 6B) with controlled diameters using a hydrothermal-based technique.
(c) Third, to test the role of morphology upon the optical properties of the resulting heterostructures, we attached semiconducting CdSe QDs onto these two different motifs of lanthanum phosphate to create a unique and novel family of 0D CdSe QD – 1D/3D rare earth doped LaPO4 heterostructures. In so doing, our objective was to couple and take advantage of the intrinsically interesting optoelectronic properties of each of these nanomaterial components.
(d) Fourth, in terms of gaining a fundamental understanding of the optical behavior of our QD–LaPO4 systems, we collected and subsequently interpreted a series of optical absorption and luminescence (i.e. emission) data (including lifetime measurements) on these CdSe QD–LaPO4 heterostructures. We studied these phenomena as a function of (i) morphology, (ii) QD coverage density, and (iii) the presence of LaPO4 dopants (i.e. Ce, Eu, and Tb).
Specifically, our results demonstrated that heterostructures attached with CdSe QDs yielded significant PL quenching and shorter average lifetimes as compared with pristine LaPO4. Nevertheless, in terms of a distinctive morphological effect, we found that under both 380 nm and 260 nm excitation, the CdSe QD–3D LaPO4:Eu3+ heterostructures exhibited much less PL quenching and longer lifetimes as compared with their 1D counterparts (as noted by comparing Fig. 6C and E with Fig. 6D and F). This assertion was ascribed to the observation that the 3D heterostructures possessed a nearly 3 times higher coverage density of CdSe QDs attached onto their surfaces as compared with their 1D analogues. As such, the presence of these additional QDs resulted in a more effective absorption of the LaPO4: Eu3+ emission. Fig. 6G highlights the relative band gap alignments of the species involved, and supports the idea that the observed PL quenching is most likely due to a photo-induced charge transfer from CdSe QDs to LaPO4 through the mediation of water molecules coating the surfaces of LaPO4.
Moreover, the identity of the rare-earth dopant ion used could also largely influence the magnitude of the PL signal and the corresponding lifetimes measured within the CdSe QD (0D)–LaPO4 (1D/3D) heterostructures. Specifically, after doping with Eu, the PL intensity increased as compared with the undoped heterostructure, as is evident in Fig. 6C and D for both 1D and 3D morphologies. From the band gap alignment picture, it is reasonable to suggest that charge transfer from CdSe QDs to LaPO4:Eu3+ and a corresponding energy transfer from LaPO4:Eu3+ to CdSe QDs are both feasible processes within this heterostructure motif. Moreover, heterostructures based on the 3D morphology seemed to be more efficient than their 1D counterparts for both of these charge and energy transfer processes.
In essence, the observed optical behavior was reflective of the band gap alignments of the various lanthanide ion participant species relative to that of CdSe itself. For example, with Ce3+, under the excitation of near UV-visible light illumination (i.e. 380 nm), photoexcited electrons from the VB of the QDs can flow into the corresponding VB of LaPO4:Ce3+ in a non-radiative fashion, prior to their recombination with photogenerated electrons in the QDs. This scenario would explain the PL quenching shown in Fig. 6H. Conversely, under the excitation of deep UV light irradiation (i.e. 260 nm), the CB levels of the Ce3+ dopant ions are higher in energy than the corresponding CB levels of CdSe QDs, implying that photoexcited electrons can migrate from Ce3+ to CdSe, thereby accounting for the evident reduction of the inherent PL emission signal of Ce3+ incorporated as part of LaPO4. By contrast, the positions of the VB levels of both Eu3+ (at −9.0 eV) and Tb3+ (at −7.7 eV) within LaPO4 were located below that of CdSe QDs (−6.1 eV) themselves. Hence, we would not necessarily expect charge transfer from CdSe QDs to occur to either Eu3+ or Tb3+ ions, as this process would be nominally forbidden.
However, depending on the incident irradiation, either charge or energy transfer from Eu3+ and Tb3+ ions to CdSe QDs was possible, because the corresponding CB levels of Tb3+ and Eu3+ were located at a higher energy than that of CdSe QDs. Hence, due to a more pronounced spectral overlap of its emission band with the absorption profile of CdSe QDs, Tb-doped 3D-urchin-based heterostructures displayed both a higher PL intensity and a longer lifetime as compared with analogous Ce and Eu-activated heterostructures (Fig. 6H and I).206
In terms of a different example of an orthophosphate motif immobilized with QDs, BiVO4 QDs have been attached onto BiPO4 nanorods to generate 0D/1D heterojunctions as visible-light-driven photocatalysts. The resulting Rhodamine B dye degradation activity of the composite heterostructure was 8.3 times and 6.3 times faster than that of pristine BiPO4 and BiVO4 constituent components, respectively.207


4.2.2. Tungstate-based heterostructures. 
• CaWO4: deliberative band gap alignment between acceptors and donors – concept of optical behavior mediated by ligands and morphology.
CaWO4 is known as a ‘self-activated’ luminescent material, whose optical properties (i.e. an intrinsic luminescence unrelated to any external doping) are defined and determined to a large degree by its inherent structural properties. In our initial efforts,208 we constructed a potentially optically significant class of distinctive heterostructures purposely incorporating not only 1D/0D self-activating metal oxide luminescent materials but also 0D semiconducting CdSe QDs, via electrostatic interactions mediated by the presence of a MPA linking agent. Our composite materials were structurally characterized by TEM (Fig. 7A and B).
 Fig. 7  (A and B) Representative TEM images associated with the formation of CaWO4 1D/0D-MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures. Yellow circles highlight regions pertaining to CdSe QDs. (C) PL emission spectra of CaWO4 0D nanoparticles (NP), CaWO4 1D nanowires (NW), MPA-capped CdSe QDs, 1D CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, and 0D CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, excited at 260 nm. (D) Electronic energy diagram of CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures and the corresponding plausible charge transfer schematics governing these materials. (E) Cd M2,3 edge partial electron yield spectra of both 1D/0D CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe 0D QD heterostructures as well as of MPA-capped CdSe QDs. Adapted with permission from J. Han, C. McBean, L. Wang, J. Hoy, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z.-Q. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, D. A. Fischer, G. T. Taylor, J. A. Misewich, and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(3), 778–792. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The actual occurrence and corresponding efficiency of charge transfer between the component constituent subunits could be tuned not only by alteration of (i) the QD coverage density onto CaWO4 but also by modification of (ii) the crystallite size of the CaWO4 itself. We highlight that there were no dopants at all within our tungstate system.
In so doing, we demonstrated the synthetic ability to use the chemistry and structure of these two constituent components to selectively alternate between and/or favor either energy or charge transfer processes or a combination of the two. Specifically, our results demonstrated that both of our 1D and 0D heterostructures evinced not only a notable PL quenching but also shorter lifetimes of the CaWO4 signal upon attachment with CdSe QDs, especially as compared with the unbound CaWO4, with the relevant data shown in Fig. 7C. Upon analyzing the relative band gap alignments of the various species shown in Fig. 7D, we were able to ascribe this collective PL behavior to charge transfer between CaWO4 and the adjoining CdSe QDs, a scenario corroborated by complementary NEXAFS data (Fig. 7E). In effect, the CB position of CaWO4 is much higher than that of the corresponding CB levels of not only the MPA linker as but also the CdSe QDs. As such, it is likely that electron transfer occurred from CaWO4 to CdSe QDs in a process facilitated by the presence of the MPA linker. Conversely, we would expect complementary photoinduced holes to be presumably trapped by the ligand as opposed to flowing freely back to the metal oxides, because of the relatively low VB position of CaWO4 relative to that of either the CdSe QDs or the MPA linker (Fig. 7D).
In terms of highlighting the importance of QD coverage and CaWO4 crystallite size, we noted that the PL quenching of heterostructures incorporating 0D CaWO4 (despite its lower coverage) was surprisingly greater as compared with the analogous 1D CaWO4. This unexpected observation was attributed to the inherently larger crystallite size of 0D CaWO4 which would have given rise not only to an intrinsically higher PL output and a PL QY, associated with the production of more photoinduced charge carriers, but also to the larger PL quenching effect noted upon coupling with adjoining CdSe QDs.208 As such, understanding and clearly delineating charge and energy transfer processes within our model CaWO4–CdSe QD heterostructures were key to fundamentally understanding the optoelectronic behavior of nanoscale interfaces.
• CaMoO4–CaWO4: roles of QD identity and metal oxide composition.
Scheelite materials associated with the family of tungstate and molybdate compounds are widely used as components of phosphors,209 scintillation detectors,210 gas sensors,211 optical fibers,212 laser materials,213 amplifiers,214 and photocatalysts.215 In our study,216 we sought to fundamentally understand how controlled alterations in the chemical composition would enable corresponding insights into relevant structure–property (in this case, optical) correlations.
As such, we not only created stable, crystalline, and stoichiometrically pure solid solution mixtures of Eu3+-activated CaWO4 and CaMoO4 scheelites within the structural context of a unique 1D motif but also systematically varied the relative amounts of tungstate and molybdate in a controlled and deterministic manner. Specifically, the synthesis was initiated using our U-tube protocol to produce 1D CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+ with ‘x’ varying in quantity from 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, to 1. The idea herein was to modulate optical behavior by tuning interactions among the emission centers associated with the constituent and discrete molybdate and tungstate subunits. Not surprisingly, under excitation at both 280 nm and 395 nm, we found that the peak located near 270–290 nm, which was attributable to the presence of charge transfer between the oxygen and either the tungsten or molybdenum atoms within the anion complex of WO42− or MoO42−, generally red-shifted with increasing ‘x’ within the series of CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+. This observation not only was consistent with the formation of a homogeneous, uniform, and ‘ideal’ solid solution with the presence of little, if any, impurities (Fig. 8A) but also supported the notion of a clear composition-dependent optical behavior. Indeed, the highest emission intensity was observed when ‘x’ = 0.8 (Fig. 8B).
 Fig. 8  (A) PL excitation spectra of nanowires of as-prepared 1D CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+ (“x” = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1). (B) Normalized PL emission intensity of the Eu3+ emission in CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+ as a function of increasing “x” under both 280 nm and 395 nm excitation conditions. (C and E) Representative HRTEM images and the corresponding TEM images (inset), associated with the formation of CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+–(0D CdSe or CdSe QD) heterostructures, respectively. (D) Electronic energy diagram schematic, describing plausible electronic interactions within CaWO4–CaMoO4:Eu3+–MPA-capped CdS QD heterostructures and the corresponding CaWO4–CaMoO4:Eu3+–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures. (F) PL emission spectra of CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+–CdS QD heterostructures, CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+–CdSe QD heterostructures, CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+ nanowires, and MPA-capped CdSe QDs, excited at a wavelength of 300 nm. Adapted with permission from J. Han, C. McBean, L. Wang, C. Jaye, H. Liu, D. A. Fischer, and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C., 2015, 119(7), 3826–3842. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Subsequently, to take advantage of the inherently intriguing optoelectronic properties of the constituent ‘precursor’ nanomaterials, we generated new classes of more complex heterostructures by attaching and immobilizing different types of 0D chalcogenide QDs (i.e. CdSe and CdS) onto the surfaces of 1D Eu3+-activated CaWO4–CaMoO4 metal oxides through the mediation of organic small-molecule MPA ligands as a connecting linker. Associated HRTEM and TEM images are presented in Fig. 8C and E. Because we measured the highest PL intensity with CaW0.2Mo0.8O4 (i.e. ‘x’ = 0.8), not surprisingly, we discovered the largest amount of PL quenching within the PL emission spectra with 1D CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu nanowire – QD heterostructures. These data could be rationalized as originating from favorable photoexcited charge transfer from the underlying metal oxide host lattice to the immobilized QDs. Importantly, our work emphasized the importance of the QD identity itself, as we reported on a measurably more significant quenching of CaW0.2Mo0.8O4 with adjoining CdSe QDs as opposed to CdS QDs (Fig. 8F). We can account for this behavior in part to the larger CB band offset between CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+ and CdSe QDs (a difference of ∼2.2 eV) as compared with that between the corresponding CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+ and CdS QDs (a gap of ∼1.4 eV). Hence, it was more advantageous and more favorable for charge transfer to occur from the mixed metal oxides to the attached CdSe (instead of CdS) QDs (Fig. 8D).216
• Heterostructures incorporating other tungstates with CdS.
Heterostructures consisting of hydrothermally generated ZnWO4 nanowires and CdS QDs have also been produced.217 The as-prepared ZnWO4 measured about 20 nm in diameter and 100 nm in length, whereas the CdS QDs had an average diameter of ∼5 nm. When applied for ciprofloxacin degradation under visible light irradiation, it was noted that electron transfer from the conduction band of CdS to the corresponding conduction band of ZnWO4 promoted exciton formation. Moreover, this composite evinced not only increased photo-activity but also improved photo-stability as compared with controls, in agreement with a parallel study.218
With the analogous CdS-decorated CdWO4-based heterostructures,219 the effect of varying the structural CdWO4 motif was probed. Specifically, pure nanowire arrays measuring ∼10–50 nm in diameter and 8 microns in thickness and 3D flower-like micron-scale hierarchical assemblies composed of constituent 200–600 nm nanorods of CdWO4 gave rise to photocurrents of 0.35 mA cm−2 and 0.11 mA cm−2, respectively. Upon the addition of CdS QDs, the resulting heterostructure yielded a higher absorption of visible light and greater exciton generation as compared with pristine CdWO4 alone. In particular, the CdS 0D–CdWO4 1D nanowire heterostructure delivered a photocurrent of 0.66 mA cm−2, which is 20% larger than that of the pristine CdWO4 alone.


4.2.3. Other types of complex metal oxide-based heterostructures. 
• β-Pb0.33V2O5 – tunable interfacial energy offsets.
As highlighted with QDs attached onto carbon nanotubes, the nature of the attachment protocol creating the heterostructures interface has a major effect upon the observed charge transfer. In the case of heterostructures created from CdSe QDs immobilized onto β-Pb0.33V2O5 nanowires, composites were produced by not only a linker (i.e. cysteine) – assisted assembly method but also through a SILAR protocol (Fig. 9A and B). In the SILAR route, successive precipitation cycles could be used to tune and alter CdSe QD surface coverage. The degree of transfer of photogenerated holes from the valence bands of the CdSe QDs to the mid-gap states of β-Pb0.33V2O5 nanowires could be tailored by variation of not only cation stoichiometry but also particle size, denoting a set of novel means for modulating the driving force for enabling charge transfer (Fig. 9C and D), i.e. the overlap between the valence band of the CdSe QD and the midgap state of the adjoining β-PbxV2O5. PL measurements (Fig. 9C) also provided evidence for interfacial hole transfer from CdSe QDs to the β-PbxV2O5. To be specific, whereas ‘free’ CdSe QDs possessed average lifetimes of 26 ± 1 ns, within heterostructures, that value reduced to 16.6 ± 0.2 ns, a finding indicative of faster charge transfer within the heterostructure. In effect, this study revealed excellent model systems for facilitating both efficient light harvesting and effective interfacial charge transfer for solar energy conversion.220
 Fig. 9  TEM images of β-PbxV2O5 nanowires coated with CdSe QDs via (A) a linker-assisted assembly method and (B) via three SILAR cycles. (C) Absorption (solid) and emission (dashed) spectra of cysteine-capped CdSe (Cys-CdSe) QDs, mixed dispersions of Cys-CdSe QDs coupled to V2O5 nanowires, and mixed dispersions of Cys-CdSe QDs linked with β-PbxV2O5 nanowires. (D) Illustration of binding energies of V2O5, Pb0.33V2O5, and CdSe–Pb0.33V2O5 characterized by different coverage ratios. Adapted from K. E. Pelcher, C. C. Milleville, L. Wangoh, S. Chauhan, M. R. Crawley, P. M. Marley, L. F. J. Piper, D. F. Watson, and S. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(7), 2468–2479. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
• Silicate/silica-based heterostructures with tunable optical emission.
As a viable phosphor, the observed color emission of wide-bandgap Zn2SiO4 can be tuned by the nature and amount of dopant integrated into it. Specifically, Mn-doped zinc silicate (Zn2SiO4:Mn2+) has been incorporated as a key element of fluorescent lamps, neon discharge lamps, oscilloscopes, black-and-white televisions, color televisions, and many other displays and lighting devices,221 respectively, due to its long lifetime, which is of significant importance in minimizing the degree of flicker within displays.222 In our study,223 we systematically varied the Mn dopant quantity from 0 to 8% so as to control the corresponding Mn2+ emission peak behavior. With respect to the optical properties of the corresponding CdSe QD–Mn2+:Zn2SiO4 heterostructures, we noted simultaneous energy transfer and charge transfer phenomena between the two constituent components. Specifically, upon photo-excitation, energy transfer likely occurred from the dopant Mn2+ species to CdSe QDs, whereas electron transfer went in the opposite direction from the CdSe QDs to the dopant Mn2+ ions. Upon excitation of the CdSe QDs alone, probable charge transfer emanated from the CdSe QDs to the adjoining Mn2+.223
Silica is relatively nontoxic, and its thickness can be tuned with nanometer precision.224 Moreover, silica contains free silanol groups that can be subsequently reacted with additional, appropriate functional groups through relevant silanization reactions.225,226 QD-doped silica tubes have been synthesized by adding in QDs into a sodium silicate solution, and were subsequently processed so as to form QD-doped glass fibers. The resulting heterostructures, characterized by a concentrated but well dispersed loading of QDs, exhibited reasonable near IR emission with potential for use as a component of a viable microfluidic system.227 An analogous composite structure, composed of PbS QD-doped glass fibers,228 was generated by crystallization of 2 nm QDs within a host glass matrix at 390 °C for 5 h. Changing the QD size by processing at different melting temperatures yielded heterostructures with correspondingly variable near IR emission properties and lifetimes.

5. Metal chalcogenide-based heterostructures
5.1. Binary metal chalcogenide-based heterostructures

5.1.1. 0D QD–1D nanorod structures: quasi core/shell dot-in-rod (DIR) structures. 
The DIR composite is a semiconducting quasi type-II structure, wherein the energy levels of the conduction band and the valence band of the core and shell materials are offset from each other. As such, electrons and holes readily separate. The holes are confined to the CdSe QD core, whereas electrons are localized within the CdS shell.229–233 Not surprisingly, 1D/0D DIR heterostructures denote excellent candidates as viable components of representative devices, such as photodetectors, LEDs, and lasers. Moreover, different types of metal chalcogenide-based DIR heterostructures have also been reported, including but not limited to CdSe/CdS,229,231–234 ZnSe/CdS,235 Cu2Se/Cu2S,236 ZnSe/ZnS,237 and PbSe/PbS.236
In essence, the DIR motif resembles a ‘core/shell structure’ and is another manifestation of the role and importance of morphology as a means of controlling observed performance. Specifically, DIR structures can be grown by coating 1D rod-like shells of CdS around CdSe 0D quantum dot cores.234 In effect, the aspect ratio of CdS can be tuned continuously, while keeping the size of the CdSe QDs constant. The maximum electron–hole separation quantum efficiency was found to be 70–75% with rods possessing an aspect ratio of 1.6 to 2. An increase in aspect ratio correlated with a decrease in the oscillator strength per unit volume, thereby leading to a steady reduction in the measured fluorescence decay and a corresponding red shift to longer wavelengths for both PL and absorption spectra.
Moreover, as added refinements to this concept, photon-to-electron quantum efficiencies for various core–shell structure configurations incorporating CdSe and CdS have been comparatively reported, including those of (a) quantum dots attached onto CdS rods, (b) a traditional spherical core–shell CdSe/CdS architecture, and (c) CdS/CdSe DIR structures (Fig. 10B and C), respectively, for hydrogen generation. In these sets of experiments, the chemical composition, size, and shape of the constituent components of these nanoscale heterostructures were systematically varied, and the structural modifications were correlated with the resulting photoluminescence data, a measure of the effectiveness of hole trapping efficiency.
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic depiction of relevant processes in a light-driven reduction of methylviologen (MV2+) using colloidal quasi-type II CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod nanorods as a light absorber and charge separator and mercaptopropionic acid as a sacrificial electron donor. (B) Schematic structures and TEM images of CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod (DIR) nanorods (NRs) as well as of CdS NRs of similar dimensions, CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar lowest exciton energy (CS-SE), and CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar volume (CS-SV) as the DIR. The horizontal lines in the schematic structures indicate the extent of delocalization of the lowest energy conduction band electron and valence band hole. (C) Initial quantum yields of MV+˙ radical generation using different sensitizers with the schematic structure of each, as shown. (D) Extinction coefficient spectra of CdSe/CdS DIR, CdSe seed, CdS NR, CdSe/CdS CS-SE, CdSe/CdS CS-SV, and Ru(bipy)32+, with the inset figure highlighting the expanded view of the lowest energy exciton bands. (E) Illustration of a linear CdTe/CdSe/CdTe heterostructure nanorod. The conduction and valence band offsets for bulk CdSe and bulk CdTe form a type-II (staggered) alignment. (F) Energy band diagram and schematic of the geometric structure of double-heterojunction nanorods, consisting of a type II staggered band offset involving CdS and ZnSe, both in contact with the smaller band gap emitting CdSe quantum dot. Panels A–D adapted from H. Zhu, N. Song, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(28), 11701–11708. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. Panel E adapted with permission from A. E. Saunders, B. Koo, X. Wang, C. K. Shih, and B. A. Korgel, Chemphyschem. 2008, 9, 1158–1163. Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panel F adapted with permission from N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Zhai, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas, and M. Shim, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3642. Copyright © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Indeed, the DIR system evinced enhanced absorption and photoluminescence profiles that were a unique and cumulative function of individual CdS rods and CdSe seeds coupled with additional absorption transitions, originating from the interaction of both of these separate chalcogenide components (Fig. 10D). As such, this DIR architecture evinced photon-to-electron quantum yields of as high as 98%, designating a far superior value to that of any of the other structures tested (Fig. 10A and C). Because all of these DIR structures possess basically identical conduction and valence band alignment, the observed differences in performance can likely be ascribed to morphology considerations. When these heterostructures were subsequently coupled with a Pt catalyst, floating free in solution, the measured internal quantum yield for the reduction of water to hydrogen was 13.6%, whereas the external quantum yield was 7.5%, all of which were promising in nature.238 Not surprisingly, analogous motifs of this CdSe/CdS DIR heterostructure have been produced, encompassing disparate species such as either Pt tips238,239 or different classes of electron donors and acceptors240 to improve upon H2 production efficiency.


5.1.2. Complex 0D QD–1D–0D QD chalcogenide-based DIR heterostructures. 
As an extension of the DIR quasi-core/shell idea, 0D–1D–0D ‘bar-bell’ heterojunctions, incorporating QDs (identical or different) as caps at either the end of a 1D rod structure, have been formed. For example, linear CdTe/CdSe/CdTe heterostructure nanorods have been synthesized via a single-pot, high-temperature colloidal synthesis (Fig. 10E). Because of the limited interfacial area between the CdSe and CdTe domains, the optical properties of the linear heterostructures were noted to be qualitatively different from their individual constituent components. In particular, exciton formation initially occurred within the central CdSe region with holes possibly tunneling into one of the CdTe end caps, thereby giving rise to a lower energy emission peak, indicative of type II recombination. Moreover, the photoluminescence intensity of these materials increased with decreasing temperature (down to 5 K), while the peaks themselves simultaneously narrowed and shifted to higher energy, an observation ascribable to lattice contraction as the heterostructures cooled.241 It is also worth noting that the interface between CdTe and CdSe is quite distinctive, partly because the difference in the lattice spacing of these two materials may lead to significant physical strain at the interface which itself can impact upon the resulting charge transfer and separation. Additional work on this system242,243 corroborated the idea that the energy and lifetime of the charge-transfer photoluminescence band could be tuned by changing the relative alignment of band edges within these heterostructures.
Analogous families of ZnSe/CdS/ZnSe heterostructures were initially synthesized through a solution-phase synthesis method,244 and yielded a robust photoluminescence emission signal at 583 nm. Interestingly, charge transfer within this system was not hindered by the strain of overgrown quantum dot caps, due to the low lattice mismatch between ZnSe and CdS of ∼2.5%. As such the photoluminescence peak for the nanoscale ‘bar-bells’ was much more intense than that for CdS nanorods alone, due to a staggered band gap alignment between the two nanoscale components. In other words, these heterostructures represented true ‘type II’ structures in that (i) the crystal domains for both constituent materials were distinct and separate and (ii) moreover, the conduction and valence bands of CdS were lower in energy than those of ZnSe, implying that holes were confined to ZnSe with electrons localized onto CdS. As expected, additional absorption features appeared at lower energies than that of the bandgap of either ZnS or CdS nanocrystals. Upon probing these heterostructures using transient absorption spectroscopy, it was noted that the photoinduced charge transfer between the two nanocrystalline domains could be controlled by changing the excitation wavelength, i.e. the excitation energy. Specifically, the resonant excitation of carriers within ZnSe led to electron injection into CdS on a time scale of 350 fs, whereas carrier excitation within CdS resulted in a slower transfer of holes into ZnSe at a corresponding time scale of 95 ps. That is, with resonant excitation of ZnSe tips, it is expected that there will be an ultrafast transfer of excited carriers into the CdS domain in a process known as resonant pumping, thereby resulting in overall faster electron transfer.245
As an additional complication, a more complicated architecture consists of CdSe/ZnSe core/shell QDs anchored on either end of the CdS nanorods (Fig. 10F).246 These composite nanorods in essence are characterized by two type II junctions, leading to additional electronic transitions as compared with either CdS nanorods or CdSe/CdS nanoscale ‘bar-bells’ alone. In effect, a noticeable red shift and a much more intense photoluminescence peak were observed as compared with that of not only CdS rods alone but also CdSe/CdS DIR structures. The emission intensity also increased with increasing ZnSe content within the structure. Not surprisingly, these heterostructures, when used within an LED device as the electroluminescent layer, demonstrated notable improvement in performance over that of previously reported devices incorporating less chemically complex, control systems with similar morphologies. In effect, the measured efficiency improved from 1.7% to 2.62% with a favorably lower threshold voltage and narrow bandwidth, presumably due to the potential for more facile charge injection.


5.1.3. Doped 0D QD–1D nanorod structures: QD/dopant chemistry with a ZnS host. 
Depending on its crystal structure, ZnS maintains known direct bandgaps of ∼3.7 to 3.8 eV,247 critical for a number of optoelectronic applications, such as flat-panel displays, injection lasers, as well as light-emitting diodes. In our study,248 upon successful synthesis of the Mn-doped ZnS nanowire host, we attached AET-capped CdSe QDs presumably through electrostatic interactions so as to create viable 0D–1D heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 11A.
 Fig. 11  (A) HRTEM image and associated TEM image (inset) for ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures. (B) PL emission spectra of ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, possessing [ZnS:Mn2+]:[AET-capped CdSe QD] ratios of 1:1.5 (red) and 1:3 (blue), respectively. (C) PL emission spectra of ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, associated with a series of actual Mn2+ doping ratios of 0%, 0.45%, 1.19%, 1.51%, and 2.22%, respectively. (D) CIE chromaticity diagram of corresponding ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures (molar ratio of 1:1.5) with actual Mn2+ doping ratio of 0% (black), 0.45% (blue), 1.19% (cyan), 1.51% (green), 1.75% (yellow), and 2.22% (red), respectively. (E) Diagram of energy level alignments of ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures with labeled charge transfer pathways as well as possible energy transfer channels. Adapted with permission from S. Yue, Y. Zhou, S. Zou, L. Wang, H. Liu, and S. S. Wong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5(20), 1700089. Copyright © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
By constructing these 1D Mn-doped ZnS nanowire – CdSe QD heterostructures, we sought to combine the unique emissive optical signatures of individual Mn ions, ZnS nanowires, and CdSe QDs, such that the effective optical profile of the final discrete heterostructures could span the entire visible spectrum (i.e. 400 to 700 nm) to yield white light emission. Our ‘multi-component’ architecture consisted of (a) annealed 1D ZnS:Mn2+ nanowires, pertaining to the cubic zinc blende phase with an intrinsic direct bandgap of 3.72 eV and characterized by a defect-related blue emission band located at 400–500 nm, (b) a Mn2+ dopant-induced orange emission with a peak centered at ∼580 nm (associated with the 4T1 to 6A1 transition of Mn2+), and (c) 0D CdSe QDs, characterized by an average diameter of 2.3 nm with a green emission peak situated at ∼520 nm. Hence, these heterostructures possessed three different but independently tunable luminescent centers, i.e. emissive ‘building blocks’.
From a photophysical perspective, our as-prepared nanoscale ZnS:Mn2+ NW – AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures displayed PL quenching for both ZnS and Mn2+ emission bands as compared with unbound 1D ZnS:Mn2+. Plausible explanations included a combination of (i) a photoexcited charge transfer occurring from both of the ZnS and Mn2+ species to attached CdSe QDs coupled with (ii) energy transfer from the ZnS host onto the immobilized CdSe QDs, in accordance with the bandgap alignment scenario presented in Fig. 11E. In parallel, the emission intensities of attached CdSe QDs decreased upon incorporation within as-prepared heterostructures, as compared with their free, unbound counterparts.
More importantly, we found that we could manipulate the intensity and wavelength of these observed emission peaks within these heterostructures, through relatively simple steps such as modifying the attachment ratios of the CdSe QDs onto the underlying ZnS nanowires and/or controlling the doping amounts of Mn2+ ions. In Fig. 11B, for example, we increased the CdSe QD to ZnS:Mn2+ ratio from 1.5:1 to 3:1, and noted that the resulting PL profile exhibited significantly more PL quenching. Separately, we were able to produce a shift in chromaticity within the overall white color region by reducing the Mn2+ dopant ratio from 2.22% to 0.45%. As such, our inorganic QD-based heterostructures possessed not only broadly tunable color emission performance (Fig. 11D) but also structural durability. These interesting property attributes are helpful towards engineering an increase in device lifetimes under high luminance conditions, a necessary requirement for flat panel displays and imaging applications.248


5.1.4. Other examples: epitaxial growth of 0D–1D hybrid nanostructures. 
Epitaxial growth, which implies the deposition and growth of a crystalline material onto the well-defined surface of a crystalline substrate with the overlayer possessing the same crystalline orientation as the underlying substrate, is important and relevant for creating metal chalcogenide materials, such as but not limited to MoS2 and WSe2,249,250 which maintain wide applicability in diverse fields, such as optoelectronics, photocatalysis, and plasmonics. In particular, this method is effective in creating well-defined 2D–2D heterojunction systems.251 Nevertheless, epitaxial growth, through the mediation of techniques such as colloidal synthesis, chemical reduction, and CVD, can also be utilized into the analogous production of 0D–1D heterostructures, characterized by high degree of control over parameters, such as chemical composition, morphology, crystalline phases, and facet production.252 Herein, we provide for two illustrative examples that demonstrate the vast potential of this synthesis method.
For instance, CdS nanoparticles have been immobilized onto Bi2S3 nanowires to generate 0D–1D heterostructures through epitaxial growth.253 The underlying Bi2S3 nanowires measured several hundred nanometers long and 10 nm wide; as-prepared, 20 nm-sized, triangular CdS nanoparticles were grown epitaxially onto the surfaces of these nanowires. In this system, the orthorhombic Bi2S3(501) and Bi2S3(002) planes were parallel to that of hexagonal CdS (110) and CdS (20), respectively; moreover, the direction of the crystalline Bi2S3[010] zone axis was parallel to that of the corresponding zone axis of CdS[0001]. This heterostructure was used as a photocatalyst to decompose methyl red under UV light. As compared with commercial TiO2, the 0D–1D heterostructure exhibited an excellent activity with the ability to degrade 90% of the dye after 40 min of reaction. This enhanced performance was attributed to the fortuitous combination of (i) the size of the CdS nanoparticles, which impacted their observed band gap, with implications for the charge carrier separation and recombination potential within the entire heterostructure and (ii) the high specific surface area of the underlying Bi2S3 nanowire.
A related example involved the synthesis of branched topological heterostructures254 in which 0D nanoparticles of CdSe were immobilized onto extended tetrapods of CdTe. What was interesting about these heterostructured branched tetrapods was that long-range charge separation could be achieved with the electrons localized at the CdSe zinc blende core and the holes delocalized in the outer CdTe branches, 30 nm or more away; as such, this charge separation was found to strongly quench heterostructure luminescence. Because this ‘charge separation distance’ could be tuned by varying the physical dimensions of the central tetrapod, this architecture was highly relevant in terms of designing novel photovoltaic energy conversion configurations.

5.2. Ternary metal chalcogenide-based heterostructures
By analogy with binary metal chalcogenide-based heterostructures, ternary metal chalcogenide possess similarly desirable optical characteristics. For example, the emission of common II–III–VI ternary metal chalcogenides, such as CuInS2 or CuInSe2, can be systematically tuned from the visible range to IR region,255 an attribute ideal for bio-imaging or LED applications. As an example, CuInSe2/CuInS2 dot-in-rod heterostructures, generated through a series of cation exchange processes, give rise to a near IR luminescence255 with slower carrier dynamics and longer lifetimes, as compared with constituent control samples, an observation which is beneficial for associated photovoltaic applications. A different 0D–1D heterostructure with a chemical composition of Cu31S16–CuInS2 was generated using an oil/aqueous interlayer and incorporating in both Cu2+ and In3+ precursors; the resulting composite possessed a ‘carrot-like’ motif with a 0D Cu31S16 ‘head’ structure of ∼28 nm in diameter atop a 1D CuInS2 ‘tail’ with a length of 62.5 nm.256 Despite these tangible advances in heterostructure synthesis, we should note that neither of these composites had been effectively optimized for their photophysical attributes.
6. Ternary metal fluoride-based heterostructures
6.1. NaYF4

Idea of intrinsic morphology-specific physical surface area and porosity. Trend in energy transfer efficiency correlates well with QD loading.

NaYF4 compounds represent an exceptional host lattice for upconversion materials, because they possess inherently lower phonon energies, and can thereby reduce non-radiative phonon relaxation processes with added rare-earth ion dopants by minimizing interactions between electrons and phonons.257,258 In this effort,259 our foremost objective was to produce samples characterized by a pure and well-defined combination of crystallographic phase and morphology with the hope of being able to make meaningful structure–property correlations based on size, shape/morphology, and chemical composition.
What we found was that ostensibly minor alterations in reaction conditions made a substantial difference. For example, the sample synthesized in the presence of 0.2 M ammonia at 100 °C for 2 h yielded exclusively α phase for composition coupled with a spherical morphology measuring 150 nm to 300 nm (Fig. 12A). Interestingly, the sample generated with a slightly higher base concentration, i.e. 0.8 M ammonia under otherwise identical conditions, yielded an exclusive β crystalline phase but this environment also led to the formation of larger nanowire aggregate bundles with overall dimensions of 1.5 ± 0.1 μm in diameter and 5.3 ± 0.6 μm in length, each of which was individually composed of constituent, ultrathin (d ∼ 5 nm), micron-long one-dimensional subunits (Fig. 12B). Our subsequent optical characterization analysis implied that (i) the presence of β-phase in addition to (ii) the overall crystalline domain size could account for improved upconversion efficiencies.
 Fig. 12  (A and B) Representative TEM images of α-phase nanoscale spheres and β-phase nanowire bundles (with a higher resolution TEM image (inset)), respectively. (C) Upconversion data associated with heterostructures composed of CdSe QDs attached onto 0D NaYF4 nanoscale sphere samples. (D) Upconversion data associated with heterostructures composed of CdSe QDs attached onto samples of 1D NaYF4 nanowire bundles. (E) Electronic energy diagram associated with CdSe QD–NaYF4 heterostructures. Adapted from H. Liu, J. Han, C. McBean, C. S. Lewis, P. Kumar Routh, M. Cotlet, and S. S. Wong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2153-2167 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The corresponding NaYF4–CdSe QD heterostructures were formed by the incubation of a mixture of fluoride, organic surfactant, and a CdSe QD solution in a controlled atmosphere, followed by a combination of sonication, low-temperature heating, and stirring steps. In terms of their resulting optical behavior, we demonstrated increased quenching with composites incorporating the notably more nanoporous 0D particulates as opposed to using 1D nanowires of NaYF4 with the data shown in Fig. 12C and D. This observation was ascribed to the relatively higher surface area of the 0D motifs, coupled with surface “anchoring” hydroxyl groups for optimal QD loading. These distinctive low dimensional morphological manifestations of fluoride structures also turned out to be an excellent energy donating species towards CdSe QDs, as we measured significant PL intensity increases in the CdSe emission peak at 620 nm upon heterostructure formation. Our data suggested that with higher QD loading ratio, the efficiency of Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) improved and hence was dependent upon the quantitative amount of QDs present, immobilized onto the underlying fluoride host. As an additional ‘reaction knob’, we found that doping with different rare-earth metal ions, i.e. Yb3+ and Er3+, could also yield distinctive optical signatures (Fig. 12E). In effect, we showed that we could potentially tune the optoelectronic properties of these heterostructures, i.e. optimize the energy transfer process from upconverting NaYF4 to an adjoining light sensitizing species, such as CdSe QDs, by simply altering the morphology and phase of the constituent component NaYF4 materials to effectively harness a broader range of the solar spectrum.259
A similar, recently reported conceptual effort centered260 on the production of NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ micron-scale rods synthesized with Yb3+ and Tm3+ dopant concentrations set at 30% and 0.5%, respectively. Yb3+ was the sensitizer in the near IR region, whereas Tm3+ could absorb light in both the visible and UV light regions of the spectrum. CdS was subsequently deposited onto the surface of NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ through an in situ reaction process, thereby forming a core–shell composite with excellent photocatalytic capability in terms of more effectively degrading Rhodamine B dye under near IR light irradiation as compared with standard CdS nanocrystals.
6.2. Metal fluoride systems beyond NaYF4
Based on a thorough search of the literature and to the best of our knowledge, apart from what we have discussed herein, we can conclude that there are no additional reports of other 1D metal fluorides bound to 0D QDs. However, we have found evidence for a number of other potential fluoride-containing motifs that could be viably construed as optically relevant, constituent ‘building blocks’ in combination with QDs for future composite heterostructures.
Examples include structures such as rare-earth fluoride nanowires incorporating Y, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, and Ho,261 wherein Eu3+ and Tb3+ dopants could have been used for down-conversion with either Yb3+/Er3+ or Yb3+/Tm3+ co-dopants for up-conversion. In addition, core–shell structures composed of NaYF4 nanorods co-doped with Yb3+ and Er3+ and coated with a thin SiO2 shell maintain a high surface-area, porous geometry, implying the potential of NaYF4/SiO2–QD heterostructures for strong upconversion luminescence.262 Furthermore, β-NaGdF4 have been controllably generated as multiple, uniform morphologies including as 0D nanoparticles, 1D micron-scale rods, and 3D submicron-scale spherical motifs, which might serve as viable platforms for subsequent attachment with QDs.263 Moreover, as both YF3 and YOF possess the potential for multicolor emission with tunable optical properties, one could envision exploring the roles of deliberatively tuning either their chemical composition (i.e., doping with different rare earth elements such as Tb, Eu, Tm, Dy, Ho, or Sm) or their morphology/aspect ratio (i.e., 1D nanorod, 0D spheres/nanoparticles, or 3D motifs)264 to tailor a desired optical behavior. In combination with QDs, such a strategy could be used to produce LEDs of variable emissive coloration.265
7. Thoughts on future directions for the field
As previously mentioned, nanoscale heterostructures offer a number of desirable attributes for optical applications, including but not limited to relatively high electron and hole transport efficiencies, a tunable band-gap alignment, and the possibility of multi-exciton generation. The preponderance of research discussed herein has demonstrated that the optical properties of heterostructures can be reproducibly tuned via rational variations of physical structure, morphology, and chemical composition. However, a number of scientific issues remain unresolved, and these limitations prevent the widespread, ubiquitous, and practical use of these heterostructures, especially for solar-based applications.
For example, the role of interfaces between the 0D and 1D constituent components within these heterojunctions remains ill-defined. Furthermore, there are few, if any, clear theoretical models that can adequately and convincingly predict the behavior of these systems, especially a priori. As we have seen, density functional theory (DFT) calculations suggest that not only that the energy levels of QDs shift with different chemical ligand treatments266 but also the binding modes of linker molecules can influence QD coverage and aggregation, all of which impact upon the nature of observed charge separation, recombination, and transport properties.125,267 More sophisticated efforts including devising improved theoretical models, creating relevant frameworks for processing data-intensive research sets, and applying the lessons of machine learning would be collectively useful for controlling and initiating a better understanding of the behavior of these systems. Indeed, there are clearly a number of complex and interconnected photodynamic processes occurring, which dominate charge separation and transfer, as manifested in (i) narrowing and broadening of the observed peak shape, (ii) shifts in the peak position itself, as well as (iii) quenching and enhancement of the peak intensity. Nonetheless, these observations are ostensibly governed by chemical and structural factors, such as the presence of point defects, internal grain boundaries, and dopants, all of which affect the degree of scattering and recombination with consequential effects upon parameters such as the observed photocurrent, fill factors, open circuit voltages, and photoconversion efficiency.124
Therefore, understanding the local nature and effect of these interfaces is critical to fully controlling and tailoring the performance of practical ‘field-ready’ systems, such as solar cells, light emitting diodes, and photocatalysts. In our group, we have attempted to achieve deeper insights through a simultaneous and synergistic combination of Raman, NEXAFS, theory, and electrical transport measurements. As an example, within DWNT–CdSe heterostructure shown in Fig. 2, the C K-edge of the DWNTs was analyzed as an indirect probe of charge transfer. In the literature, as an illustrative case, synchrotron radiation photoelectron spectroscopy has been used to ascertain band alignment within ZnO/PbSe heterostructured interfaces.268 Moreover, analogous ZnO/CdSe heterostructures have been analyzed using synchrotron-based ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy; bandgap alignment in the context and presence of different QD sizes were deduced more accurately using this approach.269 Yet much more needs to be done.
As such, it is likely that the application of more sophisticated and intrinsically more sensitive characterization techniques would be helpful towards gaining a better perspective about the structural and electronic nature of the interfaces within these heterostructures with simultaneously high spatial and temporal resolution. Moreover, it would be preferable at some point in the future to be able to truly ‘visualize’ and monitor the intricate dynamics and evolution of charge transfer occurring not only at but also across multi-dimensional nanoscale interfaces in real time and under in situ conditions, especially in the context of realistic device configurations. What progress has been made towards achieving that specific goal?
Under current experimental conditions, what can be done reliably and reproducibly is to study photoinduced ultrafast electron transfer from CdSe QDs to a metal complex using transient spectroscopy.270 Indeed, transient absorption (TA) spectra have also been used to ascertain the photophysics of CdSe–metal oxide donor-to-acceptor complexes,271 with the transient absorption kinetic decay spectra used to examine recombination behavior. Indeed, TA spectroscopy is especially suitable for understanding interfacial electron recombination and transfer within different types of systems, including but not limited to colloidal QDs,272 core shell QDs,273,274 and ligand-modified QDs.275 However, this technique, especially in complementary combination with other characterization methods, has not been fully utilized to probe the interfaces of 0D–1D heterostructures, due to difficulties associated with data interpretation and sample throughput.276 Moreover, this type of idea has been explored in the context of analogous 0D–2D heterostructures. Specifically, ultrafast femtosecond pump–probe measurements detected sub-45 fs charge transfer in a core–shell CdSe/ZnS QD–2D WS2 hybrid structure, and it was concluded that electron transfer from the 2D excitons to the 0D QD was the dominant charge-transfer pathway.277 Within analogous core–shell CdSe/ZnS–2D SnS2 heterostructures, the rate of intrahybrid non-radiative energy transfer increased with the added numbers of SnS2 atomic layers,278 of relevance for photovoltaics and photon sensing. These studies collectively monitored charge and energy transfer within interfacial junctions as a means for potentially controlling exciton recombination. While comparable TA literature exists with respect to individual discrete systems such as Ag nanoparticles and nanowires,279 CdSe and CdTe nanowires,280,281 as well as ZnO nanowires,282 the more complex and interesting combination of 0D–1D heterostructures still remains to be properly analyzed using this technique.
Nonetheless, the ability to properly tune and tailor the magnitude and direction of energy versus charge transfer channels ‘on demand’ within heterostructure configurations, especially within a complex electrolytic solution environment characteristic of QDSSCs, still remains as a significant challenge. Indeed, a viable means of simultaneously enhancing absorption while optimizing light harvesting efficiencies (in terms of capturing hot electrons, encouraging MEG enhancement effects, and promoting charge diffusion) continues to be an elusive goal.
Beyond fundamental science, serious issues still remain with respect to developing protocols for reproducibly generating ‘pure’ (i.e. defect minimization so as to increase concomitant carrier mobility), homogeneous (i.e., with precise surface geometry and exposed facets of individual components), crystalline (so as to decrease trap states),283 and uniformly well-characterized heterostructures in gram and even ton quantities, which would be at a production level relevant and useful for practical commercial device applications. As an example, commercializing heterostructure-based QDSSCs would necessitate not only consistent and uniform large-scale heterostructure film fabrication (possibly incorporating multiple sensitizing species with high loadings and reproducible surface coverage) but also their proven functional compatibility with additional polymer, counter-electrode, and electrolyte components within the device configuration. Indeed, the scalability issue, i.e. the reliable generation of regularly ordered and well-packed assemblies of these composites over macroscopic areas especially incorporating solution processing conditions, hinders the pursuit of more imaginative and more nuanced strategies towards a rational engineering of devices for improving and optimizing performance metrics within stable, effective solar cell, photocatalytic, and LED configurations. Nonetheless, as we have seen in this Perspective, ‘lab-scale’ studies have at least demonstrated the potential of these 0D–1D heterojunctions as a viable means towards improving light harvesting capabilities, light absorption and power conversion efficiencies, and enhanced photo-responses.143
Toxicology is another critical consideration that impacts not only the choice of heterostructure production routes but also the expected life cycle of these materials in terms of their disposal, recovery, and subsequent re-use. For example, QDs contain toxic heavy metals, such as cadmium, whereas the intrinsic toxicity of CNTs themselves is dependent upon their size, anisotropic shape, and surface chemistry (i.e., degree of oxidation). Few, if any, reports exist on the potential toxicity of 1D–0D heterostructures, incorporating these types of materials, resulting from either inhalation, dermal contact, or ingestion routes. Hence, a number of issues remain, concerning the possible cytotoxicity and in vivo degradation pathways of these unusual composites.284–286 These issues have motivated the search for ‘greener’ and potentially more sustainable alternatives and improved methods for the reliable production of not only the individual nanoscale constituent components but also the composite heterostructures themselves.
Overall, an important future step would be in promoting advances towards the spatial integration, stabilization, and ultimately, optimization of these composite materials within more sophisticated, realistic device scenarios. Such an approach would minimize recombination issues and other undesirable loss mechanisms, while simultaneously maximizing key long-term performance parameters including stability and photocurrent generation, especially under ambient and/or realistic operating environmental conditions.
8. Conclusions
In reported work on heterostructures, we and others have subscribed to the notion that (a) the most interesting optoelectronic behavior (e.g. phenomena such as charge transfer as well as energy transfer) occurs at the interfaces created between 2 (or more) distinctive nanomaterials bound together and that (b) controlled synthesis can be used to impact upon structure–property correlations. Within our own group, we have been interested in the design of a series of chemically linked, multi-functional nanoscale hetero-structures using diverse and generalizable solution-based strategies. As previously mentioned, the idea is that the unique and desirable properties of individual nanostructures can be significantly enhanced in potentially unforeseen ways through the formation of inorganic nanoscale heterostructures composed of different, unique, and complementary constituent subunits. We have concentrated our attention primarily on 0D–1D heterostructure formation, and highlighted a number of distinctive heterostructures as representative model examples. However, similar concepts are highly applicable towards the production of other presumably more complex types of composites, composed of multiple constituent subunits possessing arbitrary size, shape and chemical composition. As highlighted earlier, to assist in acquiring a holistic idea all of the various, mixed-dimensional composite-based systems discussed in this Perspective, we have constructed a series of summary tables (Tables 1 and 2) in which we have presented the collective wisdom of lessons learned from the past literature. These results point out the importance of not only (i) the chemical composition and tunable reaction parameters (i.e., size and associated linker identity) of the 0D QDs but also (ii) the physical morphology, chemistry, and crystallographic nature of the underlying 1D motifs, coupled with (iii) the attachment protocol used to create the as-prepared heterostructures. All of these factors have measurably impacted upon the net observables for various applications of these 0D–1D materials in terms of photocatalytic performance, light harvesting potential, and optoelectronic behavior.
Table 1 Summary of carbon-based heterostructured systems, discussed in this Perspective




Underlying 1D platform
Parameter tested and/or reaction variable analyzed with intended structure and application
Chemical composition
Key concept tested
Further elaboration and details on crucial idea tested
Effect on applications




Carbon nanotubes
Attachment protocol
CdSe-DWNTs
Covalent attachment
ATP as linker
Less efficient charge transfer


Non-covalent attachment
ATP with π–π stacking
More efficient charge transfer


CdSe-MWNTs
Ligand-free method
Ligand exchange by ultrasonication
Fast charge transfer


CdSe-fMWNTs
Presence or absence of functional CNTs
Carboxylic functional groups
Enhanced attachment


PbSe-SWNTs
In situ growth
Non-covalent linkage
Effective size control


QD size and coverage variation
CdSe-DWNTs
2.3 nm
Lowest coverage
Larger driving force for charge transfer


3.0 nm
Medium coverage
Mediocre effects on charge transfer


4.1 nm
Highest coverage
Smaller driving force for charge transfer


CdTe-MWNTs
Different QD coverages
Higher density
Improved charge transfer


CdS-MWNTs
QD loading
Pollutant degradation efficiency
Higher activity with higher loading


CdSe-MWNTs
2.49 to 3.06 nm
Larger sizes
More charge transfer noted


Ligand control
CdSe-DWNTs
PPD linker
Lower coverage
Worsened charge transfer


AET linker
Higher electron affinity
Mediocre effects on charge transfer


ATP linker
π-Conjugation
Improved charge transfer


CdSe/ZnS-MWNTs
Diazonium salt linker
Attachment onto sidewalls
Less efficient charge transfer


Mercaptotriethoxy-silane as ligand
Attachment onto ends
More efficient charge transfer


CdSe/ZnS-DNA/SWNTs
Amino-terminated linker
End attachment
Varying length and chemical nature affect properties


Others
InP/ZnS-MWNTs
—
PMMA matrix
Active layer in Solar Cell


ZnO-MWNTs
—
VLS method
Enhanced field emission properties


Carbon nanofibers
DSSC
CoxSy–CNFs
Chemical composition
Co3+/2+ redox couple
Enhanced solar cell stability


MoO2–CNFs
Thickness of the composite layer
Higher power conversion efficiency
Counter electrode in solar cell


Doped Pt3Ni–CNF
Transition metal dopant
Rapid charge transport
Enhanced light-reflecting capability


QDSSC
CuS–CNF
CNF network
Strong 0D–1D connection
Increased catalytic activity


Others
TiO2–CNF
CNF activation time
Porous structure
Water pollutant decomposition


ZnO–CNF
—
Enhanced photocatalytic activity
Degradation of pollutant


In2O3–CNF
In2O3 morphology
Efficient electron–hole separation
Degradation of pollutant




Table 2 Summary of non-carbonaceous-based heterostructured systems, discussed in this Perspective




Heterostructure theme investigated
Underlying 1D platform
Material system with corresponding application
Chemical composition
Key parameter tested or observation made
Further elaboration of effects on application
Effects on applications




Metal oxides
Binary metal oxides
CeO2 – HER
CdS–CeO2
50 times increased HER activity
2 times longer lifetime
Photocatalytic H2 evolution


SnO2
Catalysis
CdS–SnO2
—
Higher activity
Photocatalytic degradation


Solar cell
CdSe–SnO2
CdSe QDs deposited on SnO2 NW surface
Low photocurrent
High IPCE


Hierarchical composition
350% higher


CIS–SnO2
Cd-Free QDs (at 325 nm)
700% increase
Increased charge transfer


ZCIS–SnO2
400% increase


ZCIS/ZnS core/shell-SnO2
200% increase


ZnO – solar cell
CdS–ZnO
QD composition
Bi-sensitized photoelectrode
Higher solar cell efficiency


CdSe–ZnO
Capping ligand
Faster charge transfer
Excellent quantum efficiency


CdSe/ZnS core/shell-ZnO
Shell layer
Hindered charge transport
Decreased photocatalytic performance


CdTe–ZnO
—
Efficient photoconversion
Water splitting


PbS–ZnO
Surface morphology of ZnO
Efficient carrier collection
Heterojunction solar cell


TiO2 – solar cell & catalysis
CdSe–TiO2
TiO2 morphology
QD surface loadings
Pollutant degradation; IPCE value of 55%


CdS–TiO2
Attachment method
Photocatalytic activity increment
Pollutant degradation of 98.83% (highest report to date)


CdSe/CdS–TiO2
QD distribution
Efficient energy conversion
Hydrogen generation


CdTe–TiO2
—
High photocurrent density
Pollutant degradation


PbSe–TiO2
Methyl orange degradation noted at levels of 90%
Photoinduced charge injection
Photocatalysts


Others
PbSe–Fe2O3
Synthesis method
Interface matching
QD coverage density and size distribution


CdTe–ZnO/TiO2
TiO2 thin layer
Passivation of surface defects
PCE value of 1.44%


Ternary metal oxides
Orthophosphates
CdSe–CePO4:Tb3+
QD loading ratio
Higher coverages; shorter lifetimes; and increased PL quenching


CdSe–LaPO4:Re
1D vs. 3D
1D – lower coverages
More quenching and shorter lifetimes


Ce3+/Tb3+/Eu3+
Band gap alignment of 3 RE ions
Tb-dopant: higher PL intensities and longer lifetimes


Tungstates
CdSe–CaWO4
0D
Larger crystallite size
Higher PL output and QY


1D
Larger PL quenching
Lower PL output and QY


CdSe/CdS–CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+
CdS vs. CdSe
Larger band offset between 1D and CdSe
CdSe: more charge transfer observed



X = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1
Red shift when increasing ‘x’

X = 0.8 yielded highest emission intensity


CdS–ZnWO4
Electron transfer from CdS to ZnWO4
Increase in photoactivity and stability
Photocatalyst for ciprofloxacin degradation


CdS–CdWO4
Nanowires vs. nanoflowers
1D motifs yield improved photocurrents.


Others
β-Pb0.33V2O5
CdSe–Pb0.33V2O5
SILAR cycle – tuning QD surface coverage
Degree of hole transfer proportional to coverage
Light harvesting and solar cell applications


Silicates/silica
CdSe–Zn2SiO4:Mn2+
Mn doping amounts
Energy transfer from 1D to 0D and charge transfer from 0D to 1D
Controllable LED emission


Aspect ratio of 1D


CdSe/ZnS–silica glass
QD loading concentration

In situ growth inside glass tube
Near IR emission


PbS–silicate glass
QD size tuning by temperature
Different emission
Near IR emission






Metal chalcogenides
Binary metal oxides
DIR
CdSe–CdS (expand to other compositions)
QD on rod surface
Low photon- to electron QY
H2 generation


0D core/shell


Dot in rod
Highest photon- to electron QY


0D–1D–0D
CdTe–CdSe–CdTe
Bar-bell
Interface lattice matching
Band edge alignment with optimized charge transfer


ZnSe–CdS–ZnSe
Bar-bell


CdSe–ZnSe
QD at one end
Lower threshold voltage, narrow bandgap
LED device


QDs on surface
CdSe–ZnS:Mn2+
Mn2+ doping ratios
Orange emission
Higher ratios – ‘warmer’ light


QD loading ratios
Green emission
Higher amounts – ‘whiter’ hue


HgTe–CdSe/CdS
HgTe QD
mid IR
Bi-color detector


Core/crown CdSe/CdS nanoplatelets
Visible light


MoS2/MoSe2–CdS
MoS2/MoSe2 few layers
MoSe2 as bridge
HER


Epitaxial growth
CdS–Bi2S3
Surface matching
CdS size control
Photocatalysis


CdSe–CdTe
CdSe central core coupled with CdTe extended tetrapod branches
CdTe phase control (zinc blende/würtzite); PL quenching
LEDs or phototransistors


Ternary metal oxides
CuInSe2/CuInS2
Dot-in-rod
Cation exchange
Near IR luminescence


Cu31S16–CuInS2
Carrot shape ‘head–tail’ motif
Oil/aqueous interlayer synthesis
Optoelectronic devices or solar cells






Metal fluorides
NaYF4
CdSe–NaYF4:Yb3+/Eb3+
0D nanospheres: α phase
Higher surface area
More PL quenching


1D nanowire bundles: β phase
Lower surface area
Less PL quenching


CdS–NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+
Yb3+-30%
Near-IR region
Good photocatalyst for Rhodamine B degradation


Tm3+-0.5%
UV-visible region


Other potential candidates
NaYF4: with Y, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, and Ho elements


NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ with SiO2 shell


NaGdF4


YF3


YOF




What the community has shown in this Perspective is that the size dependent optical and electronic properties of QDs can be ‘re-defined’ and ‘re-tooled’ in the context of nanoscale QD-based heterostructures. Broadly speaking, the quenching behavior of QDs when in contact with 1D motifs can be purposefully controlled by deliberative modifications in the attachment protocols (i.e. covalent versus non-covalent). At a deeper level, tunable modifications in the chemistry and physical structure of ligands as manifested in tailorable lengths, degree of electron-rich π-conjugation, identity of functional terminal groups, and variable electron donating/withdrawing behavior become critical in terms of dictating observed optoelectronic behavior. Nevertheless, it has been demonstrated that controlling additional structural and chemical parameters also makes a tangible difference. In this light, we and others have recently correlated the optical absorption, luminescence (i.e. emission) behavior, as well as the corresponding lifetimes with tunable synthetic parameters, such as (i) morphology and dimensionality considerations (i.e. 0D, 1D, 3D, as well as DIR motifs), (ii) QD size and coverage density, (iii) QD identity, (iv) the presence of activating species such as rare earth lanthanide dopant ions (i.e. Ce, Eu, & Tb), (v) the physical tunability and chemical processability of intervening ligands, and (vi) the formation of composites incorporating co-sensitized species. All of these diverse reaction variables fundamentally govern the observed behavior of classes of QD (i.e. CdSe and CdS) – one-dimensional (i.e. carbon nanotubes as well as phosphates, tungstates, sulfides, and fluorides) heterostructures.
These particular efforts have been of general interest for creating interesting photovoltaic and solar cell architectures. Nonetheless, it is still experimentally non-trivial either (i) to probe the growth and structural evolution of these structures kinetically or (ii) to monitor their associated dynamic charge transfer processes under realistic in situ, operando conditions. Contributions in these specific areas would enable corresponding advances in the theoretical understanding of nanoscale behavior within these complex motifs. In terms of additional challenges that still hinder progress in the field and render reliable structure–property correlations more difficult,287 a number of important ones still remain, despite years of concerted efforts from a number of different groups. Some of the most notable concerns include (i) developing innovative, generalizable, and reproducible ways of reliably controlling the number, density, and spatial localization of QDs functionalized onto any of these types of underlying 1D templates; (ii) understanding the role and improving the detectability of defects; as well as (iii) sustainably and reliably producing these composites on a large industrial-scale level for their widespread incorporation within functional device configurations.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Research funding for the original underlying studies had been provided by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division and were related to experiments, writing, and analyses conducted at Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-SC-00112704. SCM acknowledges financial support from the GAANN program (U.S. Department of Education Grant number, P200A160163), based at Stony Brook University. We also thank the prior inspiration, contributions, and work of Jinkyu Han, Lei Wang, Haiqing Liu, James Misewich, Robert Harrison, Daniel Fischer, and Joerg Appenzeller, which had been instrumental in preparing the content of this paper.
References
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lai, M. Meng, Y. Yu, X. Wang and T. Ding, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 105, 335–345 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Y. Bando, M. Liao, U. K. Gautam, C. Zhi, B. Dierre, B. Liu, T. Zhai, T. Sekiguchi, Y. Koide and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2034–2039 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ravindran, S. Chaudhary, B. Colburn, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, F. Xiao, Y. X. Pan, Y. Y. Ma and Q. Y. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 71, 1–34 CrossRef .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601494 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang and M. Jaroniec, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 430, 2–17 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Noms and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 457, 3–11 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6871–6890 Search PubMed .
M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1282–1288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. C. Hanna, J. M. Luther, B. K. Hughes and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. Law, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 836–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Luque, A. Martí and A. J. Nozik, MRS Bull., 2011, 32, 236–241 CrossRef .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, K. P. Knutsen, P. R. Yu, J. M. Luther, Q. Song, W. K. Metzger, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2506–2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nair, S. M. Geyer, L. Y. Chang and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 125325 CrossRef .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16827–16845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Lee, C. V. V. M. Gopi, A. E. Reddy, C. Nagaraju and H.-J. Kim, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 1914–1917 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, A. H. Proppe, F. P. G. Arquer, D. Rossouw, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, M. Liu, G. Walters, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. Sun, S. Hoogland, G. A. Botton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1325 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Zhu, N. Pellet, J. Luo, C. Yi, X. Liu, H. Liu, S. Wang, X. Li, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ahmad, M. A. Najeeb, R. A. Shakoor, S. A. Al-Muhtaseb and F. Touati, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 1551–1564 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, H. Ji, P. Yu and Z. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 266 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Hanna, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2857–2862 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu and A. Madhukar, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3443–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. E. Halpert, J.-M. Caruge, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3581–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2887 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604–609 CrossRef .
H. Choi and S. Jeong, IJPEM-GT, 2018, 5, 349–358 Search PubMed .
S. Ruhle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290–2304 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tian and G. Cao, Nano Rev., 2013, 4, 22587 Search PubMed .
M. R. Kim and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 85–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bera, L. Qian, T.-K. Tseng and P. H. Holloway, Materials, 2010, 3, 2260–2345 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Weber, R. Singhal, S. Zekri and A. Kumar, Int. Mater. Rev., 2008, 53, 235 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Cai and R. Q. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 60, 1–51 CrossRef .
L. Cademartiri and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1013–1020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. G. Sun, Y. Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. D. Yin, F. Kim and Y. Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, M. J. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. M. Lu, Y. M. Zhu and Y. N. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Zhang, C. R. Li and Z. Zhang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 82, 33–37 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tomioka, J. Motohisa, S. Hara and T. Fukui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3475–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Berger, Y. Yi, Z. L. Wang and W. A. de Heer, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2002, 74, 363–365 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javey, G. Jing, W. Qian, M. Lundstrom and H. Dai, Nature, 2003, 424, 654–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Wind, J. Appenzeller and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 058301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. White and T. N. Todorov, Nature, 1998, 393, 240–242 CrossRef CAS .
H. Suzuura and T. Ando, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 235412 CrossRef .
Y. Kanemitsu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1358–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
X. Wang, J. A. Alexander-Webber, W. Jia, B. P. Reid, S. D. Stranks, M. J. Holmes, C. C. Chan, C. Deng, R. J. Nicholas and R. A. Taylor, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, R. M. Dominguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zou, D. Zhang, C. Dong, H. Li, K. Xiong, L. Fei and Y. Qian, Carbon, 2006, 44, 828–832 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, C. Shao, J. Mu, X. Huang, Z. Zhang, Z. Guo, P. Zhang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 577–584 RSC .
A. Robin, E. Lhuillier, X. Z. Xu, S. Ithurria, H. Aubin, A. Querghi and B. Dubertret, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Farrow and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11124–11131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Biswas, H. Jeong, M. S. Jeong, W. J. Yu, D. Pribat and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3653–3660 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Giebink, G. P. Wiederrecht, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 195326 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Kovoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, M. S. Prevot, N. Guijarro and K. Sivula, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7596 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Friend and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1987, 36, 1–94 CrossRef CAS .
E. Benavente, M. A. S. Ana, F. Mendizabal and G. Gonzalez, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2002, 224, 87–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10342–10350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 34–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1866–1867 RSC .
X. Peng and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 682–694 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2458–2463 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cho, K. R. Choudhury, R. B. Thapa, Y. Sahoo, T. Ohulchanskyy, A. N. Cartwright, K. S. Lee and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 232–236 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vietmeyer, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2935–2940 CrossRef CAS .
M. Olek, T. Busgen, M. Hilgendorff and M. Giersig, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12901–12904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Biju, T. Itoh, Y. Baba and M. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 26068–26074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, J. K. Baral, H. Zhao, B. A. Gonfa, V.-V. Truong, M. A. El Khakani, R. Izquierdo and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4010–4018 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, M. Y. Sfeir, F. Zhang, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8766–8773 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Han, J. Hoy, F. Hu, H. Liu, M. M. Gentleman, M. Y. Sfeir, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 7480–7490 RSC .
S. Azoz, J. Jiang, G. Keskar, C. McEnally, A. Alkas, F. Ren, N. Marinkovic, G. L. Haller, S. Ismail-Beigi and L. D. Pfefferle, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6893–6900 RSC .
J. Schornbaum, B. Winter, S. P. Schießl, B. Butz, E. Spiecker and J. Zaumseil, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2663–2669 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ka, V. Le Borgne, D. Ma and M. A. El Khakani, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6289–6294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin and A. E. V. Shevchenko, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1213–12189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Han, Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z.-Q. Li, G. T. Taylor, D. A. Fischer, J. Appenzeller and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26327–26338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, L. Wang, S. S. Wong and J. Appenzeller, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 717–725 CrossRef CAS .
K. O. Vieira, J. Bettini, J. L. Ferrari and M. A. Schiavon, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 149-150, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, M. Sun, Y. Zhou, Q. Liang, Z. Li and S. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 656, 771–776 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abouelsayed, B. Anis, A. Okasha, A. M. Ali, W. Elhotaby and A. S. G. Khalil, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 203, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4136–4137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Diedenhofen, D. Kufer, T. Lasanta and G. Konstantatos, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e234 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Metzger, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 3803–3834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Han, B. Sundahl, S. Thornton, Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z. Q. Li, G. T. Taylor, D. A. Fischer, J. Appenzeller, R. J. Harrison and S. S. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15553–15570 RSC .
F. Mammeri, A. Ballarin, M. Giraud, G. Brusatin and S. Ammar, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 439, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. Attanzio, A. Sapelkin, F. Gesuele, A. van der Zande, W. P. Gillin, M. Zheng and M. Palma, Small, 2017, 13, 1603042 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Landi, M. Henninger, A. De Girolamo del Mauro, C. Borriello, T. Di Luccio and H. C. Neitzert, Opt. Mater., 2013, 35, 2490–2495 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thierry, G. Perillat-Merceroz, P. H. Jouneau, P. Ferret and G. Feuillet, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Son, B. W. Kwon, D. H. Park, W. S. Seo, Y. Yi, B. Angadi, C. L. Lee and W. K. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 465–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-T. Hu, J.-M. Wu, J.-W. Yeh and H. C. Shih, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 60877–60887 RSC .
B. D. Boruah and A. Misra, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 355204 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Mao, X. Yang, J. Wu, W. Tian, G. C. Rutledge and T. A. Hatton, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4574–4585 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 2679–2687 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, J. Kong Yoong Lee, L. Tian, M. Srinivasan, S. Adams and S. Ramakrishna, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 361–395 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inagaki, Y. Yang and F. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2547–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, N. Xie and J. Zhong, Materials, 2014, 7, 3919–3945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, S. Sigdel, J. Gong, B. Vaagensmith, H. Elbohy, H. Yang, S. Krishnan, X.-F. Wu and Q. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 558–563 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Gajjela, K. Ananthanarayanan, C. Yap, M. Grätzel and P. Balaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 838–845 RSC .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, M. Zhou, L. Wang, S. Zhao, Q. Wang, B. Ding and S. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 215, 626–636 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jeong, J. Lee, K. L. Vincent Joseph, H. I. Lee, J. K. Kim, S. Yoon and J. Lee, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 392–400 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, Q. Chen, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3572–3577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huo, J. Wu, M. Zheng, Y. Tu and Z. Lan, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 570–576 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sigdel, A. Dubey, H. Elbohy, A. Aboagye, D. Galipeau, L. Zhang, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11448–11453 RSC .
L. Li, J. Xiao, H. Sui, X. Yang, W. Zhang, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 6–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiu, D. He, R. Zhao, B. Sun, H. Ji, N. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 522, 95–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Jiang, Y. Ruan, X. Ao, K. Ostrikov, W. Zhang, J. Lu and Y. Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28441–28450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, H. Sui, K. Zhao, W. Zhang, X. Li, S. Liu, K. Yang, M. Wu and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, M. Cui, M. Wang, H. Sui, K. Yang, L. Li, W. Zhang, X. Li, G. Fu, A. Hagfeldt and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 328, 543–550 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Sui, W. Zhang, X. Li, K. Yang, Y. Zhang and M. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 350–355 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CrossRef CAS .
V. González-Pedro, X. Xu, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5783–5790 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fang, M. Kim, S.-Q. Fan, J. H. Kim, D. P. Wilkinson, J. Ko and J.-S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8742–8748 RSC .
V. Ganapathy, E. H. Kong, Y. C. Park, H. M. Jang and S. W. Rhee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3296–3301 RSC .
L. Li, P. Zhu, S. Peng, M. Srinivasan, Q. Yan, A. S. Nair, B. Liu and S. Samakrishna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16526–16535 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Chen, W. Zhang, L. Zhou and S. Liu, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 308, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ye, Y. Bando, G. Shen and D. Golberg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15146–15151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Lee, S. M. Jo, H. I. Joh, M. H. Lee and S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2718–2720 RSC .
V. Etacheri, R. Roshan and V. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2717–2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Dillip, A. N. Banerjee, V. C. Anitha, S. W. Joo, B. K. Min, S. Y. Sawant and M. H. Cho, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3214–3232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mu, C. Shao, Z. Guo, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, P. Zhang, B. Chen and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 590–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mu, C. Shao, Z. Guo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. Zhang, B. Chen and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1786–1793 RSC .
Y. Mao, T. J. Park and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5721–5735 RSC .
Y. Mao, T. J. Park, F. Zhang, H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, Small, 2007, 3, 1122–1139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Patete, X. Peng, C. Koenigsmann, Y. Xu, B. Karn and S. S. Wong, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 482–519 RSC .
A. L. Tiano, C. Koenigsmann, A. C. Santulli and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8093–8130 RSC .
A. Loiudice, A. Rizzo, G. Grancini, M. Biasiucci, M. R. Belviso, M. Corricelli, M. L. Curri, M. Striccoli, A. Agostiano, P. D. Cozzoli, A. Petrozza, G. Lanzani and G. Gigli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1565–1572 RSC .
H. Kim, Y. Tak, K. Senthil, J. Joo, S. Jeon and K. Yong, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2009, 27, 2182–2186 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Liyanage, S. D. Perera, K. Tan, Y. Chabal and K. J. Balkus, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 577–584 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Bian, Y. Liu, A. Zhu, H. Wu, H. Cui, D. Chu and J. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2552–2562 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, Y. Makari, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 385–390 RSC .
A. Kar, S. Kundu and A. Patra, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10222–10230 RSC .
J. Pan, J. Li, Z. Yan, B. Zhou, H. Wu and X. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3022–3029 RSC .
V. K. Gupta, A. Fakhri, M. Azad and S. Agarwal, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 508, 575–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, S.-Z. Kang and J. Mu, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2009, 30, 384–387 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, W. Liu, A. Zhu, X. Xiong and J. Pan, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 045019 CrossRef .
M. L. Lu, C. H. Lin and Y. F. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 081109 CrossRef .
M.-L. Lu, C.-W. Lai, H.-J. Pan, C.-T. Chen, P.-T. Chou and Y.-F. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1920–1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, Q. Li and T. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 887–892 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Z. Liu, X. Geng, J. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Liu and L. Yan, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 1532–1538 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Nie, L. Yang, C. Cao, Y. Zeng, G. Wang, C. Wang and S. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh and N. Khare, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 634, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, F. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11291–11297 RSC .
S. Kumar, R. Sharma, V. Sharma, G. Harith, V. Sivakumar and V. Krishnan, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 1684–1697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, S. K. Min, V. Dhas, S. B. Ogale and S.-H. Han, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 103–106 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mo, Y. Huang, S. Lu, Y. Fu, X. Shen and H. He, Optik, 2017, 149, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, W. Liu, C. Biswas, G. Zhang, L. Sun, Z. Wang, X. Hu and Y. Zhang, Opt. Commun., 2015, 349, 198–202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thambidurai, N. Muthukumarasamy, N. Sabari Arul, S. Agilan and R. Balasundaraprabhu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 3267–3273 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sudhagar, S. Chandramohan, R. S. Kumar, R. Sathyamoorthy, C.-H. Hong and Y.-S. Kang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 474–479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim and F. E. Osterloh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10152–11053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Sun, J. Chen, J. L. Song, D. W. Zhao, W. Q. Deng and W. Lei, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 1296–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, S. Liu, L. Kuang, Y. Zhao, T. Jiang, S. Liu and X. Xu, J. Environ. Sci., 2013, 25, 2487–2491 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Rawal, S. D. Sung, S.-Y. Moon, Y.-J. Shin and W. I. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2012, 82, 240–243 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. A. Javed, W. Que, Y. Gao, Y. Xing and L. B. Kong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 178, 139–148 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jung, J. Lee, Y.-M. Kim, J. Kim, C.-U. Kim and M.-J. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 500–510 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui, X. L. Zhang, R. S. Mane and M. Naushad, Sol. Energy, 2016, 125, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, T. Kubo, J. Nakazaki and H. Segawa, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2110–2117 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Zhao, Z. Su and D. Shen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 106 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, L. Gan, J. Zhang, F. Zhuge and T. Zhai, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600316 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Singh, Z. Salam, N. Sivasankar and A. Subramania, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 64, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Hoye, B. Ehrler, M. L. Bohm, D. Munoz-Rojas, R. M. Altamimi, A. Y. Alyamani, Y. Vaynzof, A. Sadhanala, G. Ercolano, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and K. P. Musselman, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301544 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, Y. C. Chang, C. W. Tsai, R. S. Liu, S. F. Hu, W. S. Chang and K. H. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6102–6105 CrossRef .
H. Wang, T. Kubo, J. Nakazaki, T. Kinoshita and H. Segawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2455–2460 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805–811 CrossRef CAS .
N. Singh, Z. Salam, A. Subasri, N. Sivasankar and A. Subramania, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 179, 417–426 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Xu, G. He, X. Song, Z. Sun, J. Lv, L. Yang and X. Jiang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 636 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xie, G. Ali, S. H. Yoo and S. O. Cho, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2910–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mumin, G. Moula and P. A. Charpentier, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 67767–67779 RSC .
V. Nguyen, W. Li, V. Pham, L. Wang, P. Sheng, Q. Cai and C. Grimes, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 462, 389–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qian, C. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Zhu, W. Yao and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4945–4952 RSC .
Y. Li, L. Zhang, W. Wu, P. Dai, X. Yu, M. Wu and G. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 270 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-F. Gao, W.-T. Sun, G. Ai and L.-M. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 153104 CrossRef .
X. Ren, L. Yu, Z. Li, H. Song and Q. Wang, Superlattices Microstruct., 2018, 113, 696–705 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, W. Zhu, B. Chong and K. Qin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 90–99 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Kao, S. Y. H. Liou, C. L. Dong, P. H. Yeh and C. L. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 210–218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Yang, M. Liu, G. Li, W. Li, S. Gao and Y. Luo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, D55–D58 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, T. Tran, T. L. Chen, L. Yuan and Q. Cai, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 215-216, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Acharya, T. R. Alabi, N. Schmall, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, M. Kirsanova, A. Nemchinov, E. Khon and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19531–19535 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gyori, Z. Konya and A. Kukovecz, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liao, B. Wang and Z. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 10962–10970 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pathak, M. Podzorski, D. Bahnemann and V. R. Subramanian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13659–13668 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Selinsky, S. Shin, M. A. Lukowski and S. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1649–1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Ding, Y. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Lin, S. Jiang, Q. Zhang, N. Pan, Y. Luobc and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 71883–74889 RSC .
F. Zhang and S. S. Wong, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 99–112 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Maestro and D. Huguenin, J. Alloys Compd., 1995, 225, 520–528 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Fang, A. W. Xu and W. F. Dong, Small, 2005, 1, 967–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Patra, R. Bhattacharya, S. Patra, S. Basu, P. Mukherjee and D. Mukhopadhyay, Clin. Chem., 2007, 53, 2029–2031 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, P. Huang, Y. J. Zhu, J. Wu, C. L. Zhang and D. X. Cui, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 9031–9039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Buissette, M. Moreau, T. Gacoin, J.-P. Boilot, J.-Y. Chane-Ching and T. Le Mercier, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3767–3773 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fu and W. Bu, Solid State Sci., 2008, 10, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, A. de la Cotte, R. Deloncle, S. Archambeau, C. Biver, J.-P. Cano, K. Lahlil, J.-P. Boilot, E. Grelet and T. Gacoin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4949–4956 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, L. Wang and S. S. Wong, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34963–34980 RSC .
B. Li, Z. Cao, S. Wang, Q. Wei and Z. Shen, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 10288–10298 RSC .
J. Han, C. McBean, L. Wang, J. Hoy, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z.-Q. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, D. A. Fischer, G. T. Taylor, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 778–792 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Liang, J. Wang, M. Gong and Q. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 071921 CrossRef .
M. Minowa, K. Itakura, S. Moriyama and W. Ootani, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1992, A320, 500–503 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sekimoto, H. Nakagawaa, S. Okazaki and K. Fukuda, Sens. Actuators, 2000, B66, 142–145 CrossRef .
S. Okazaki, H. Nakagawa, S. Asakura, Y. Tomiuchi, N. Tsuji, H. Murayama and M. Washiya, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kato, S. Oishi, T. Shishido, M. Yamazaki and S. Iida, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 2079–2081 CrossRef CAS .
G. Poirier, V. A. Jerez, C. B. de Araújo, Y. Messaddeq, S. J. L. Ribeiro and M. Poulain, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1493–1497 CrossRef CAS .
F. Amano, K. Nogami, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9320–9326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, C. McBean, L. Wang, C. Jaye, H. Liu, D. A. Fischer and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3826–3842 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huo, Y. Tang, M. Zhou, J. Li, Z. Ye, C. Ma, L. Yu and Y. Yan, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 37, 340–346 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Shi, T. Niu, J. He, H. She and B. Su, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2017, 83, 555–566 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xua, C. Zheng, H. Hua, Q. Yanga, L. Chena, Y. Xia and C. Hua, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 327, 140–148 CrossRef .
K. E. Pelcher, C. C. Milleville, L. Wangoh, S. Chauhan, M. R. Crawley, P. M. Marley, L. F. J. Piper, D. F. Watson and S. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2468–2479 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feldmann, T. Justel, C. R. Ronda and P. J. Schmidt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Ahmadi, M. Haase and H. Weller, Mater. Res. Bull., 2000, 35, 1869–1879 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Moronta, L. Li, S. Yue and S. S. Wong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 10086–10099 RSC .
M. Alejandro-Arellano, T. Ung, A. Blanco, P. Mulvaney and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 257–267 CAS .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ruckenstein and Z. F. Li, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 113, 43–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Makki, X. Ji, H. Mattoussi and O. Steinbock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6463–6469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Fang, S. Kang, W. Peng, G. Dong, B. Zhou, Z. Ma, S. Zhou and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7927–7934 RSC .
J. Müller, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann, D. V. Talapin and H. Weller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 205339 CrossRef .
S. Asokan, K. M. Krueger, A. Alkhawaldeh, A. R. Carreon, Z. Mu, V. L. Colvin, N. V. Mantzaris and M. S. Wong, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2000–2011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Mukhina, A. S. Baimuratov, I. D. Rukhlenko, V. G. Maslov, F. Purcell Milton, Y. K. Gun'ko, A. V. Baranov and A. V. Fedorov, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8904–8909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zahra, D. Elmaghroui, I. Fezai and S. Jaziri, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 205702 CrossRef .
K. Wu, W. E. Rodriguez-Cordoba, Z. Liu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7173–7185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Gotzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. Benson, J. Feldmann and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1677–1681 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Grennell, J. K. Utterback, O. M. Pearce, M. B. Wilker and G. Dukovic, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3764–3774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, L. Amirav, S. Aloni and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9997–9999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, R. Brescia, R. Krahne, G. Bertoni, M. J. P. Alcocer, C. D’Andrea, F. Scotognella, F. Tassone, M. Zanella, M. D. Giorgi and L. Manna, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1637–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Z. Chen, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7708–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 851–859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Z. Chen, K. Wu and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3905–3914 RSC .
A. E. Saunders, B. Koo, X. Wang, C. K. Shih and B. A. Korgel, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 1158–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, M. Jones, S. S. Lo and G. D. Scholes, Small, 2007, 3, 1633–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. K. Bonil Koo, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2490–2496 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kirsanova, A. Nemchinov, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, N. Schmall and M. Zamkov, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4305–4309 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, M. Kirsanova, I. Nemitz, P. Z. El-Khoury, A. Nemchinov and M. Zamkov, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1837–1844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Zhai, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas and M. Shim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3642 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Carrette, K. A. Friedrich and U. Stimming, ChemPhysChem, 2000, 1, 162–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yue, Y. Zhou, S. Zou, L. Wang, H. Liu and S. S. Wong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700089 CrossRef .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12162–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jin, P. Huang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhou, X. Zhang, L. Li, J. Su, H. Li and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800181 CrossRef .
C. Tan, J. Chen, X.-J. Wu and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17089 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, Y. Liu, Y. Fan, Y. Ni, X. Wei, K. Tang, J. Shen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13968–13976 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. van der Stam, E. Bladt, F. T. Rabouw, S. Bals and C. de Mello Donega, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11430–11438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, A. Tang, Z. Liu, L. Peng, Y. Yuan, X. Shi, C. Yang and F. Teng, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 67–73 RSC .
S. D. Jackson, Opt. Lett., 2003, 28, 2192–2194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Singh, S. K. Srivastava, R. Mishra and R. S. Ningthoujam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18087–18096 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Han, C. McBean, C. S. Lewis, P. Kumar Routh, M. Cotlet and S. S. Wong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2153–2167 RSC .
P. Feng, Y. Pan and H. Ye, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 35306–35313 RSC .
Z. Xu, C. Li, P. Yang, C. Zhang, S. Huang and J. Lin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4752–4758 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Deng, Q. Wu, J. Zhou, H. Bao, Q. Li, F. Zhang, F. Li, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8850–8856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Li, D. Yang and J. Lin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 429–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, D. Geng, X. Kang, M. Shang, Y. Wu, X. Li, H. Lian, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 12986–12994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Murali, R. K. Mishra, J. M. Lee, Y. C. Chae, J. Kim, Y. D. Suh, D.-K. Lim and S. H. Lee, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 11, 3055–3061 CrossRef .
P. R. Brown, D. Kim, R. B. Lunt, N. Zhao, M. G. Bawendi, J. C. Grossman and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5863–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Margraf, A. Ruland, V. Sgobba, D. M. Guldi and T. Clark, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 2434–2438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Cai, B. P. Zhang, R. F. Li, H. Z. Wu, T. N. Xu, W. H. Zhang and J. F. Zhu, Eur. Biophys. J., 2012, 99, 37010 Search PubMed .
R. Li, C. Cai, L. Hu, H. Wu, W. Zhang and J. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 276, 258–261 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, D. Stockwell, H. Huang, D. L. Mohler and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5632–5633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ben-Lulu, D. Mocatta, M. Bonn, U. Banin and S. Ruhman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H.-Y. Wang, B.-R. Gao, L.-Y. Pan, Y. Jiang, Q.-D. Chen, W. Han and H.-B. Sun, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2011, 47, 1177–1184 CAS .
Y. Zeng and D. F. Kelley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16657–16664 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, G. Zhang, J. Ye, Z. Sun, R. Hua and J. Cui, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 29, 1123–1130 CrossRef .
A. Boulesbaa, K. Wang, M. Mahjouri-Samani, M. Tian, A. A. Puretzky, I. Ivanov, C. M. Rouleau, K. Xiao, B. G. Sumpter and D. B. Geohegan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14713–14719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zang, P. K. Routh, Y. Huang, J. S. Chen, E. Sutter, P. Sutter and M. Cotlet, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4790–4796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Staleva and G. V. Hartland, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3809–3817 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Carey, Y. Yu, M. Kuno and G. V. Hartland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19077–19081 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 303–309 RSC .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bai, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou and S. Wu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4377–4382 RSC .
R. Hardman, Environ. Health Perspect., 2006, 114, 165–172 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Rzigalinski and J. S. Strobl, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2009, 238, 280–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Lam, J. T. James, R. McCluskey and R. L. Hunter, Toxicol. Sci., 2004, 77, 126–134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Liu, R. M. Konik, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8134–8156 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Shiyu Yue
	Shiyu Yue received her BSc degree in Chemistry in 2014 from Zhejiang University, China. She is currently a PhD candidate in Dr Stanislaus S. Wong's group in the Department of Chemistry at Stony Brook University. Her research interests center on the synthesis, chemical functionalization, and characterization of nanomaterials for energy-related applications, primarily associated with energy storage and conversion (including work on solar cells and batteries).

Luyao Li
	Luyao Li earned her BSc degree in Chemistry in 2014 from Chongqing Normal University. She came to the U.S. in 2014 in pursuit of her Masters degree, and is currently studying for her PhD degree in Chemistry at Stony Brook University, under the direction of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. Her research interests focus primarily on the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for solar energy and fuel applications.

Scott C. McGuire
	Scott C. McGuire acquired his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2017 from the University at Buffalo. He is currently studying for his PhD degree in Chemistry at Stony Brook University under the supervision of Prof. Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests have mainly concentrated on the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials for applications in solar energy and fuel cells.

Nathaniel Hurley
	Nathaniel Hurley obtained his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2016 from the University of Arizona. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree in Chemistry at Stony Brook University, under the guidance of Dr Stanislaus S. Wong. His research interests have converged on the synthesis and characterization of novel classes of nanomaterials of relevance for a wide variety of energy and sensor applications.

Stanislaus S. Wong
	Stanislaus S. Wong earned his PhD from Harvard University in 1999 with Professor Charles M. Lieber, and is currently Professor of Chemistry at Stony Brook University. Professor Wong was recently appointed as an Executive Editor for ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, and was formerly a section editor of Nanotechnology. Over the years, Professor Wong has been named as an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, an American Association for the Advancement of Science Fellow, as well as a Royal Society of Chemistry Fellow. He and his group are interested in developing sustainable strategies for producing novel nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion.

Broader context
One means of combining the unique physical and chemical properties of distinctive and complementary classes of material component motifs (such as carbon nanotubes, semiconducting nanowires, metal chalcogenide quantum dots (QDs), and metal oxide nanostructures, as illustrative examples) within an interesting functional configuration can be achieved by generating zero-dimensional (0D) QD – one-dimensional (1D) nanotube/nanowire-based heterostructures. These materials could be subsequently utilized as novel and interesting constituent building blocks for the assembly of functional light harvesting devices, and because of their architectural and functional flexibility, can potentially open up novel means of using renewable energy sources. In this Perspective, we not only report on strategies for inducing a reliable and reproducible synthesis of several unique and distinctive model 0D–1D-based heterostructured systems but also provide for key insights into understanding charge transfer and energy flow properties within mixed-dimensionality nanomaterial systems for their potential incorporation into a range of practical solar energy conversion devices and light sensitizing configurations. The knowledge gained from these model systems is invaluable for guiding future efforts towards developing additional, chemically tunable, and potentially promising material synthesis targets.


 	Fig. 1  (A and B) TEM images of DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures synthesized by covalent attachment and π–π stacking, non-covalent methods, respectively. Inset figures highlight the expected chemical bonding configuration, associated with each protocol. (C–G) Extinction (black curves) and emission (red curves, excited at 415 nm) spectra for (C) pristine CdSe QDs, (D) ATP-capped CdSe QDs, (E) pristine DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures fabricated through a non-covalent π–π stacking protocol, and purified DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures synthesized using both (F) non-covalent and (G) covalent techniques, respectively. (H) Raman spectra, measured at an excitation wavelength of 514 nm (2.14 eV) and accompanying G-band analysis of not only purified DWNTs (in the presence and absence of ATP attachment), but also purified DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, generated both covalently and non-covalently. Adapted from L. Wang, J. Han, J. Hoy, F. Hu, H. Liu, M. M. Gentleman, M. Y. Sfeir, J. A. Misewich, and S. S. Wong, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 7480–7490 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A–C) TEM images of DWNT–MTH-capped CdSe QD (with average constituent QD diameters of 2.3, 3.0, and 4.1 nm, respectively) heterostructures, synthesized using a non-covalent π–π stacking methodology. (D) C K-edge spectra of oxidized DWNTs (black), DWNT–MTH composite control samples (red), and DWNT–MTH-capped CdSe QD (with constituent QD average diameters of 2.3 nm (blue), 3.0 nm (pink), and 4.1 nm (green)) heterostructures, respectively. (E) The schematic illustrates how we envision electrons tunneling from a CdSe QD possessing varying sizes to the adjoining DWNTs, mediated by the presence of the ligand. Smaller QD sizes tend to give rise to smaller tunneling barriers. The HOMO and LUMO levels shown in the figure are merely qualitative representations of their relative positions. (F) Representative transfer characteristics for various DWNT devices, generated both with and without functionalization. (G) Extracted charge transfer efficiency (ke) values for different QD sizes and at various laser excitation wavelengths (i.e., 488, 514, and 531 nm), assuming that the coverage density and the number of transferred electrons (Δn) are totally correlated variables. Panels A–D were adapted with permission from L. Wang, J. Han, Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z.-Q. Li, G. T. Taylor, D. A. Fischer, J. Appenzeller and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(47), 26327–26338. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Panels E–G were adapted with permission from Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, L. Wang, S. S. Wong, and J. Appenzeller, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(3), 717–725. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A–C) TEM images of DWNT–PPD-capped CdSe QD, DWNT–AET-capped CdSe QD, and DWNT-ATP-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, respectively, synthesized by an amide-mediated covalent attachment strategy. The inset images denote the chemical structures of the various as-synthesized heterostructures, respectively. (D–F) C K-edge spectra of DWNT–ligand-capped CdSe QD systems. The ligands tested included PPD, AET, and ATP, respectively. (G–I) Raman G-band spectra, measured at an excitation wavelength of 514 nm (2.41 eV), of the three as-prepared heterostructures, associated with the previous figures, by comparison with their respective controls. Adapted from L. Wang, J. Han, B. Sundahl, S. Thornton, Y. Zhu, R. Zhou, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z. Q. Li, G. T. Taylor, D. A. Fischer, J. Appenzeller, R. J. Harrison, and S. S. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15553–15570 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A and B) Representative TEM and HRTEM images of as-prepared 0D/1D Co9S8/CNF composites, respectively. (C) HAADF-STEM and associated EDX mapping results for a typical Co9S8/CNF composite heterostructure. (D) Schematic diagram of the working principle of the DSSC fabricated using the hybrid as the counter electrode. (E) Photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves measured for the DSSCs with the Co9S8/CNF composite, Pt, and pure CNFs, respectively, as counter electrodes. Adapted from J. Qiu, D. He, R. Zhao, B. Sun, H. Ji, N. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 522, 95–103. Copyright, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) HRTEM image of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures. The inset corresponds to the TEM image of these heterostructures, obtained at low magnification. (B) Electronic energy level diagram of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures. Viable charge transfer pathways for these materials are shown. (C and D) PL emission spectra of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures prepared at various concentration ratios of [CePO4:Tb3+]/[CdSe] (namely at 0.33, 0.66, and 1, respectively) and excited at (C) 375 nm and (D) 280 nm, respectively. (E) PL decay curves (λex = 388 nm) associated with the excitonic emission of CdSe QD–CePO4:Tb3+ heterostructures prepared, from top to bottom, at increasing concentration ratios of [CePO4:Tb3+]/[CdSe], used to synthesize these various nanoscale composites. Adapted with permission from J. Han, L. Wang, and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(11), 5671–5682. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A and B) Representative TEM images of LaPO4:Eu3+ 3D urchin-like architectures and 1D nanowires, respectively. (C–F) PL emission spectra of AET-capped CdSe QDs, AET-capped CdSe QD–3D LaPO4:Eu3+ urchin-like heterostructures, and undoped AET-capped CdSe QD–3D LaPO4 urchin-like heterostructures, respectively, under (C) 380 nm and (E) 260 nm excitation, respectively. PL emission spectra of AET-capped CdSe QDs, AET-capped CdSe QD–1D LaPO4:Eu3+ heterostructures, and undoped AET-capped CdSe QD–1D LaPO4 heterostructures, acquired under (D) 380 nm and (F) 260 nm excitation, respectively. (G) Electronic energy diagram describing the various energy band alignments associated with heterostructures composed of CdSe QDs attached onto LaPO4, LaPO4:Ce3+, LaPO4:Eu3+, and LaPO4:Tb3+, respectively. (H) PL emission spectra of AET-capped CdSe QDs as well as of AET-capped CdSe QDs coupled with either LaPO4, LaPO4:Eu3+, LaPO4:Tb3+, or LaPO4:Ce3+ as components of 3D-urchin-based heterostructures, excited at 380 nm. (I) PL decay curves (λex = 388 nm) associated with the excitonic emission of AET-capped CdSe QDs within heterostructures, composed of AET-capped CdSe QDs, coupled with 3D motifs of LaPO4, LaPO4:Ce3+, LaPO4:Eu3+, and LaPO4:Tb3+, respectively. Adapted from J. Han, L. Wang, and S. S. Wong, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34963–34980 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A and B) Representative TEM images associated with the formation of CaWO4 1D/0D-MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures. Yellow circles highlight regions pertaining to CdSe QDs. (C) PL emission spectra of CaWO4 0D nanoparticles (NP), CaWO4 1D nanowires (NW), MPA-capped CdSe QDs, 1D CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, and 0D CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, excited at 260 nm. (D) Electronic energy diagram of CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures and the corresponding plausible charge transfer schematics governing these materials. (E) Cd M2,3 edge partial electron yield spectra of both 1D/0D CaWO4–MPA-capped CdSe 0D QD heterostructures as well as of MPA-capped CdSe QDs. Adapted with permission from J. Han, C. McBean, L. Wang, J. Hoy, C. Jaye, H. Liu, Z.-Q. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, D. A. Fischer, G. T. Taylor, J. A. Misewich, and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(3), 778–792. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) PL excitation spectra of nanowires of as-prepared 1D CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+ (“x” = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1). (B) Normalized PL emission intensity of the Eu3+ emission in CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+ as a function of increasing “x” under both 280 nm and 395 nm excitation conditions. (C and E) Representative HRTEM images and the corresponding TEM images (inset), associated with the formation of CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+–(0D CdSe or CdSe QD) heterostructures, respectively. (D) Electronic energy diagram schematic, describing plausible electronic interactions within CaWO4–CaMoO4:Eu3+–MPA-capped CdS QD heterostructures and the corresponding CaWO4–CaMoO4:Eu3+–MPA-capped CdSe QD heterostructures. (F) PL emission spectra of CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+–CdS QD heterostructures, CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+–CdSe QD heterostructures, CaW0.2Mo0.8O4:Eu3+ nanowires, and MPA-capped CdSe QDs, excited at a wavelength of 300 nm. Adapted with permission from J. Han, C. McBean, L. Wang, C. Jaye, H. Liu, D. A. Fischer, and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C., 2015, 119(7), 3826–3842. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM images of β-PbxV2O5 nanowires coated with CdSe QDs via (A) a linker-assisted assembly method and (B) via three SILAR cycles. (C) Absorption (solid) and emission (dashed) spectra of cysteine-capped CdSe (Cys-CdSe) QDs, mixed dispersions of Cys-CdSe QDs coupled to V2O5 nanowires, and mixed dispersions of Cys-CdSe QDs linked with β-PbxV2O5 nanowires. (D) Illustration of binding energies of V2O5, Pb0.33V2O5, and CdSe–Pb0.33V2O5 characterized by different coverage ratios. Adapted from K. E. Pelcher, C. C. Milleville, L. Wangoh, S. Chauhan, M. R. Crawley, P. M. Marley, L. F. J. Piper, D. F. Watson, and S. Banerjee, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(7), 2468–2479. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic depiction of relevant processes in a light-driven reduction of methylviologen (MV2+) using colloidal quasi-type II CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod nanorods as a light absorber and charge separator and mercaptopropionic acid as a sacrificial electron donor. (B) Schematic structures and TEM images of CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod (DIR) nanorods (NRs) as well as of CdS NRs of similar dimensions, CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar lowest exciton energy (CS-SE), and CdSe/CdS core/shell QDs of similar volume (CS-SV) as the DIR. The horizontal lines in the schematic structures indicate the extent of delocalization of the lowest energy conduction band electron and valence band hole. (C) Initial quantum yields of MV+˙ radical generation using different sensitizers with the schematic structure of each, as shown. (D) Extinction coefficient spectra of CdSe/CdS DIR, CdSe seed, CdS NR, CdSe/CdS CS-SE, CdSe/CdS CS-SV, and Ru(bipy)32+, with the inset figure highlighting the expanded view of the lowest energy exciton bands. (E) Illustration of a linear CdTe/CdSe/CdTe heterostructure nanorod. The conduction and valence band offsets for bulk CdSe and bulk CdTe form a type-II (staggered) alignment. (F) Energy band diagram and schematic of the geometric structure of double-heterojunction nanorods, consisting of a type II staggered band offset involving CdS and ZnSe, both in contact with the smaller band gap emitting CdSe quantum dot. Panels A–D adapted from H. Zhu, N. Song, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(28), 11701–11708. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. Panel E adapted with permission from A. E. Saunders, B. Koo, X. Wang, C. K. Shih, and B. A. Korgel, Chemphyschem. 2008, 9, 1158–1163. Copyright © 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panel F adapted with permission from N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Zhai, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas, and M. Shim, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3642. Copyright © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) HRTEM image and associated TEM image (inset) for ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures. (B) PL emission spectra of ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, possessing [ZnS:Mn2+]:[AET-capped CdSe QD] ratios of 1:1.5 (red) and 1:3 (blue), respectively. (C) PL emission spectra of ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures, associated with a series of actual Mn2+ doping ratios of 0%, 0.45%, 1.19%, 1.51%, and 2.22%, respectively. (D) CIE chromaticity diagram of corresponding ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures (molar ratio of 1:1.5) with actual Mn2+ doping ratio of 0% (black), 0.45% (blue), 1.19% (cyan), 1.51% (green), 1.75% (yellow), and 2.22% (red), respectively. (E) Diagram of energy level alignments of ZnS:Mn2+ NW-AET-capped CdSe QD heterostructures with labeled charge transfer pathways as well as possible energy transfer channels. Adapted with permission from S. Yue, Y. Zhou, S. Zou, L. Wang, H. Liu, and S. S. Wong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5(20), 1700089. Copyright © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A and B) Representative TEM images of α-phase nanoscale spheres and β-phase nanowire bundles (with a higher resolution TEM image (inset)), respectively. (C) Upconversion data associated with heterostructures composed of CdSe QDs attached onto 0D NaYF4 nanoscale sphere samples. (D) Upconversion data associated with heterostructures composed of CdSe QDs attached onto samples of 1D NaYF4 nanowire bundles. (E) Electronic energy diagram associated with CdSe QD–NaYF4 heterostructures. Adapted from H. Liu, J. Han, C. McBean, C. S. Lewis, P. Kumar Routh, M. Cotlet, and S. S. Wong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 2153-2167 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Carbon nanotubes	Attachment protocol	CdSe-DWNTs	Covalent attachment	ATP as linker	Less efficient charge transfer
Non-covalent attachment	ATP with π–π stacking	More efficient charge transfer
CdSe-MWNTs	Ligand-free method	Ligand exchange by ultrasonication	Fast charge transfer
CdSe-fMWNTs	Presence or absence of functional CNTs	Carboxylic functional groups	Enhanced attachment
PbSe-SWNTs	In situ growth	Non-covalent linkage	Effective size control
QD size and coverage variation	CdSe-DWNTs	2.3 nm	Lowest coverage	Larger driving force for charge transfer
3.0 nm	Medium coverage	Mediocre effects on charge transfer
4.1 nm	Highest coverage	Smaller driving force for charge transfer
CdTe-MWNTs	Different QD coverages	Higher density	Improved charge transfer
CdS-MWNTs	QD loading	Pollutant degradation efficiency	Higher activity with higher loading
CdSe-MWNTs	2.49 to 3.06 nm	Larger sizes	More charge transfer noted
Ligand control	CdSe-DWNTs	PPD linker	Lower coverage	Worsened charge transfer
AET linker	Higher electron affinity	Mediocre effects on charge transfer
ATP linker	π-Conjugation	Improved charge transfer
CdSe/ZnS-MWNTs	Diazonium salt linker	Attachment onto sidewalls	Less efficient charge transfer
Mercaptotriethoxy-silane as ligand	Attachment onto ends	More efficient charge transfer
CdSe/ZnS-DNA/SWNTs	Amino-terminated linker	End attachment	Varying length and chemical nature affect properties
Others	InP/ZnS-MWNTs	—	PMMA matrix	Active layer in Solar Cell
ZnO-MWNTs	—	VLS method	Enhanced field emission properties
Carbon nanofibers	DSSC	CoxSy–CNFs	Chemical composition	Co3+/2+ redox couple	Enhanced solar cell stability
MoO2–CNFs	Thickness of the composite layer	Higher power conversion efficiency	Counter electrode in solar cell
Doped Pt3Ni–CNF	Transition metal dopant	Rapid charge transport	Enhanced light-reflecting capability
QDSSC	CuS–CNF	CNF network	Strong 0D–1D connection	Increased catalytic activity
Others	TiO2–CNF	CNF activation time	Porous structure	Water pollutant decomposition
ZnO–CNF	—	Enhanced photocatalytic activity	Degradation of pollutant
In2O3–CNF	In2O3 morphology	Efficient electron–hole separation	Degradation of pollutant

Metal oxides	Binary metal oxides	CeO2 – HER	CdS–CeO2	50 times increased HER activity	2 times longer lifetime	Photocatalytic H2 evolution
SnO2	Catalysis	CdS–SnO2	—	Higher activity	Photocatalytic degradation
Solar cell	CdSe–SnO2	CdSe QDs deposited on SnO2 NW surface	Low photocurrent	High IPCE
Hierarchical composition	350% higher
CIS–SnO2	Cd-Free QDs (at 325 nm)	700% increase	Increased charge transfer
ZCIS–SnO2	400% increase
ZCIS/ZnS core/shell-SnO2	200% increase
ZnO – solar cell	CdS–ZnO	QD composition	Bi-sensitized photoelectrode	Higher solar cell efficiency
CdSe–ZnO	Capping ligand	Faster charge transfer	Excellent quantum efficiency
CdSe/ZnS core/shell-ZnO	Shell layer	Hindered charge transport	Decreased photocatalytic performance
CdTe–ZnO	—	Efficient photoconversion	Water splitting
PbS–ZnO	Surface morphology of ZnO	Efficient carrier collection	Heterojunction solar cell
TiO2 – solar cell & catalysis	CdSe–TiO2	TiO2 morphology	QD surface loadings	Pollutant degradation; IPCE value of 55%
CdS–TiO2	Attachment method	Photocatalytic activity increment	Pollutant degradation of 98.83% (highest report to date)
CdSe/CdS–TiO2	QD distribution	Efficient energy conversion	Hydrogen generation
CdTe–TiO2	—	High photocurrent density	Pollutant degradation
PbSe–TiO2	Methyl orange degradation noted at levels of 90%	Photoinduced charge injection	Photocatalysts
Others	PbSe–Fe2O3	Synthesis method	Interface matching	QD coverage density and size distribution
CdTe–ZnO/TiO2	TiO2 thin layer	Passivation of surface defects	PCE value of 1.44%
Ternary metal oxides	Orthophosphates	CdSe–CePO4:Tb3+	QD loading ratio	Higher coverages; shorter lifetimes; and increased PL quenching
CdSe–LaPO4:Re	1D vs. 3D	1D – lower coverages	More quenching and shorter lifetimes
Ce3+/Tb3+/Eu3+	Band gap alignment of 3 RE ions	Tb-dopant: higher PL intensities and longer lifetimes
Tungstates	CdSe–CaWO4	0D	Larger crystallite size	Higher PL output and QY
1D	Larger PL quenching	Lower PL output and QY
CdSe/CdS–CaW1−xMoxO4:Eu3+	CdS vs. CdSe	Larger band offset between 1D and CdSe	CdSe: more charge transfer observed

X = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1	Red shift when increasing ‘x’	
X = 0.8 yielded highest emission intensity
CdS–ZnWO4	Electron transfer from CdS to ZnWO4	Increase in photoactivity and stability	Photocatalyst for ciprofloxacin degradation
CdS–CdWO4	Nanowires vs. nanoflowers	1D motifs yield improved photocurrents.
Others	β-Pb0.33V2O5	CdSe–Pb0.33V2O5	SILAR cycle – tuning QD surface coverage	Degree of hole transfer proportional to coverage	Light harvesting and solar cell applications
Silicates/silica	CdSe–Zn2SiO4:Mn2+	Mn doping amounts	Energy transfer from 1D to 0D and charge transfer from 0D to 1D	Controllable LED emission
Aspect ratio of 1D
CdSe/ZnS–silica glass	QD loading concentration	
In situ growth inside glass tube	Near IR emission
PbS–silicate glass	QD size tuning by temperature	Different emission	Near IR emission


Metal chalcogenides	Binary metal oxides	DIR	CdSe–CdS (expand to other compositions)	QD on rod surface	Low photon- to electron QY	H2 generation
0D core/shell
Dot in rod	Highest photon- to electron QY
0D–1D–0D	CdTe–CdSe–CdTe	Bar-bell	Interface lattice matching	Band edge alignment with optimized charge transfer
ZnSe–CdS–ZnSe	Bar-bell
CdSe–ZnSe	QD at one end	Lower threshold voltage, narrow bandgap	LED device
QDs on surface	CdSe–ZnS:Mn2+	Mn2+ doping ratios	Orange emission	Higher ratios – ‘warmer’ light
QD loading ratios	Green emission	Higher amounts – ‘whiter’ hue
HgTe–CdSe/CdS	HgTe QD	mid IR	Bi-color detector
Core/crown CdSe/CdS nanoplatelets	Visible light
MoS2/MoSe2–CdS	MoS2/MoSe2 few layers	MoSe2 as bridge	HER
Epitaxial growth	CdS–Bi2S3	Surface matching	CdS size control	Photocatalysis
CdSe–CdTe	CdSe central core coupled with CdTe extended tetrapod branches	CdTe phase control (zinc blende/würtzite); PL quenching	LEDs or phototransistors
Ternary metal oxides	CuInSe2/CuInS2	Dot-in-rod	Cation exchange	Near IR luminescence
Cu31S16–CuInS2	Carrot shape ‘head–tail’ motif	Oil/aqueous interlayer synthesis	Optoelectronic devices or solar cells


Metal fluorides	NaYF4	CdSe–NaYF4:Yb3+/Eb3+	0D nanospheres: α phase	Higher surface area	More PL quenching
1D nanowire bundles: β phase	Lower surface area	Less PL quenching
CdS–NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+	Yb3+-30%	Near-IR region	Good photocatalyst for Rhodamine B degradation
Tm3+-0.5%	UV-visible region
Other potential candidates	NaYF4: with Y, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, and Ho elements
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ with SiO2 shell
NaGdF4
YF3
YOF

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
