Depth-dependent defect manipulation in perovskites for high-performance solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE02287C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE02287C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6526-6535Depth-dependent defect manipulation in perovskites for high-performance solar cells†

        
          
            Yuzhuo 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yanju 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Lichen 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyu 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cheng-Hung 
            Hou
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Wu
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuang 
            Jia
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jing-Jong 
            Shyue
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Deying 
            Luo
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Maotao 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiuyang 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qihuang 
            Gong
          
        
      acg and 

        
          
            Rui 
            Zhu
          
        
      *acg
aState Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Frontiers Science Center for Nano-optoelectronics & Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: lczhao@pku.edu.cn; iamzhurui@pku.edu.cn
bResearch Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan. E-mail: chhou@gate.sinica.edu.tw
cPeking University Yangtze Delta Institute of Optoelectronics, Nantong, Jiangsu 226010, China
dInternational Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
eDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
fDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto M5G 3E4, Canada
gCollaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China
Received 
      23rd July 2021
    , Accepted 25th October 2021First published on 25th October 2021AbstractDefects at the bulk grain boundaries and heterojunction interfaces could dictate the power losses of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) during the operation process, which are regarded as major roadblocks towards further development of this emerging photovoltaic technology. The common modulation strategies reported for the state-of-the-art cells cannot concurrently heal the defects located at the grain boundaries and interfaces. Herein, a depth-dependent manipulation strategy is demonstrated to concurrently modulate the bulk and interfacial defects in the perovskite films. According to the distinct penetrability of the employed binary modulators within the polycrystalline perovskite film, one of the modulators can penetrate through the bulk to the buried interface, accompanied by bulk and buried interface defect healing, while the other remains to anchor atop the surface along with the surface defect modulation, assuring simultaneous defect management from the interfaces to the bulk. As a result, the mitigated non-radiative losses and the improved charge transport of the modulated perovskite film boost the efficiency of PSCs from 21.79% to 24.36%. This universally effective depth-dependent manipulation strategy provides new insights into spatial defect modulation, which would open up a promising way for defect modulator design for highly efficient perovskite optoelectronic devices.

Broader context
Emerging as potent rivals among next-generation photovoltaic technologies, metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have urged their highest certified power conversion efficiency to over 25% in 10 years. Defects at the bulk grain boundaries and at heterojunction interfaces, which are regarded as critical recombination centers to trigger the power losses of PSCs, cannot concurrently be addressed using common modulation strategies. Herein, a depth-dependent manipulation strategy profiting from the selective penetrability within the polycrystalline perovskite films of a binary modulator system is demonstrated to concurrently manipulate the bulk and interfacial defects. Accordingly, one of the modulators is capable of healing the defects in bulk and at the buried interface as it can penetrate across the film, while the other enables modulation of the surface defects as it anchors atop the film surface, rendering a holistic defect management from the interfaces to the bulk. Consequently, the PSC efficiency improves from 21.79% to 24.36% due to the minimization of non-radiative recombination losses and the optimization of charge transport. The universality of this effective depth-dependent manipulation strategy has also been validated. In summary, this strategy provides new insights into spatial defect modulation and opens up a promising way for defect modulator design for high-performance perovskite optoelectronic devices.

Introduction
The power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of laboratory-scale perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have skyrocketed from 3.8% in 2009 to a recently certified value of 25.5%.1,2 Such remarkable developments in the field of next-generation photovoltaics are due to the superior optoelectronic properties of the perovskite absorbers.3–7 In general, perovskite absorbers are solution-processed polycrystalline thin films, in which the parasitic and introduced defects are often generated at the interfaces and grain boundaries in bulk during crystal growth.8–11 In a real device, the polycrystalline perovskite film is directly attached to charge-carrier transport layers [i.e., an electron-transport layer (ETL) and a hole-transport layer (HTL)]; so defects at the contacts can influence energy-level alignments, and consequently dictate the charge-carrier dynamics at the interfaces.12,13 All these defects from the interfaces to bulk are inevitable and regarded as predominant sources for recombination losses and perovskite decomposition, leading to lowered device performance and unfavourable device degradation.14–16 Therefore, eliminating all the undesired nonradiative recombination pathways is an essential factor to approach the PCE towards the Shockley–Queisser limit.17,18
The modulation of detrimental defects is considered to be an effective strategy for improving the performances of PSCs.19 Several strategies such as precursor engineering,20,21 crystallization regulation22,23 and interface optimization24,25 have been extensively studied.26–28 However, the ionic nature of perovskite makes the charged defects prone to migrate from the bulk to interfaces under external bias voltages, rendering it difficult to fully modulate nonradiative recombination centres.29 Additionally, considering the spatial distribution characteristic of defects in a complete device, the imperfections at the buried interface are commonly neglected, which are also responsible for insufficient utilization of photon-generated charge carriers and have been demonstrated in our previous work.30 Although the above-mentioned strategies are just used for modulating partial defects within the device, there are rarely any results on passivating both the bulk defects and the double interfacial defects in perovskite by a facile one-step post treatment.31,32 Implementing two or more modulation strategies successively is complicated and tedious, sometimes even suffering from process incompatibility. Therefore, a precise defect modulation strategy to simultaneously reduce imperfections in the bulk and at the top/buried interfaces of perovskite is highly desirable.
In this regard, we here demonstrate a depth-dependent manipulation strategy to modulate both the interface (i.e., the top surface and the buried interface) defects and bulk defects via a one-step treatment with a binary mixture of guanidinium iodide and 4-tert-butyl-phenylmethylammonium iodide, denoted as GuaI and tBPMAI, respectively. Benefiting from the favourable penetrability within the perovskite film, GuaI can penetrate across the bulk directly to the buried interface, which ensures the modulation of the defects in the bulk and at the buried interface. On the contrary, tBPMAI anchors at the top surface owing to its limited penetrability, ensuring the surface defect modulation. Consequently, the defects from the top surface to the buried interface of the perovskite film can be simultaneously modulated using the binary GuaI/tBPMAI system, which is conducive to lowering the defect-assisted nonradiative recombination losses and maximizing the overall device performance. As a proof of concept, the regular-structure PSCs based on this binary modulation system have achieved a champion PCE of 24.36% with a small voltage loss of 0.388 V and a stabilized power output (SPO) of 24.08%. In addition, the extended type of penetration-selective binary modulator system exhibits consistent reliability and adaptability in the depth-dependent manipulation strategy, suggesting the potential feasibility of this strategy in other perovskite optoelectronic devices.
Results and discussion
We mainly focused on the widely studied formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3)-based PSCs.9,33–35 The FAPbI3-based perovskite films were deposited on the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/compact titanium dioxide (c-TiO2)/mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) substrates, shown in Fig. 1a. Note that the perovskite films were post-treated without or with the ammonium salts as modulators, and the molecular structures of the ammonium salts are illustrated in Fig. 1b. We first assessed the surface morphologies of the untreated and modulated perovskite films by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Fig. 1c), where the samples were named control, GuaI, tBPMAI and GuaI/tBPMAI, respectively. Micron-sized apparent grains remain intact in perovskite films with the post treatment of the ammonium salts. However, given that the surface morphology of GuaI-treated film is similar to that of control, surface flattening is observed in both the tBPMAI and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated samples as verified by the atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. S1, ESI†). The morphological differences between the samples suggest the penetrating and anchoring nature of GuaI and tBPMAI modulator, respectively. We then employed X-ray diffraction (XRD) to investigate the changes in the crystallographic structure. As shown in Fig. 1d, all the films show two characteristic peaks of α-phase FAPbI3 positioned at 14.1° and 28.2°, corresponding to the (001) and (002) crystal planes, respectively.34 Additionally, a small peak at 11.7° indexed to δ-phase FAPbI3 (δ-FAPbI3) indicates that a small amount of δ-FAPbI3 could be produced during the thermal annealing process.35 The diffraction peak at 12.8° is assigned to PbI2 diffraction4 and its intensity slightly decreases upon treatment with ammonium salts, implying that the PbI2 phase is partially digested. The PbI2 digestion is most obvious in the GuaI-modulated perovskite film, where the PbI2 phase almost disappears. No new peaks can be identified in the XRD patterns for all the post-treated perovskite films, indicating that no additional crystal phases are formed.10 Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectra of the ammonium salt-modulated perovskite films are identical to those acquired from the control film, showing no noticeable shift in the UV-vis cutoff edges as verified in Fig. S2 (ESI†). The optical bandgaps of perovskites are estimated to be around 1.535 eV using the corresponding Tauc plots.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic view of the depth-dependent manipulation strategy. The perovskite film is deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrate. (b) Molecular structures of GuaI and tBPMAI. (c–e) Surface SEM images (c), XRD patterns (d) and surface XPS spectrum for C 1s (e) of the control and ammonium salt-treated perovskite films, respectively. These perovskite films were deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates. 
To confirm the surface environment changes on the top surface of the perovskite film caused by the introduction of different ammonium salts, we performed X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) on various perovskite films, and the C 1s spectra are compared in Fig. 1e. In addition to the adventitious carbon peak at the binding energy (BE) of 284.8 eV, the peak located at the BE of 288.4 eV is assigned to the carbon in the FA cations for the control film.36 This peak is significantly suppressed for the perovskite film with unitary tBPMAI treatment. Additionally, new peaks at BE of 286.6 eV and 292.0 eV for C–N and π–π bonding in tBPMA cations are observed (Fig. 1e and Fig. S3a, ESI†). The evolution of the peak intensity confirms a successful tBPMAI modification on the top surface. When the perovskite film is treated with unitary GuaI, the carbon peak belonging to FA cations at a BE of 288.4 eV maintains with predominant relative intensity, suggesting little amount of residual GuaI at the surface of the perovskite film, as proved by the peak fitting results shown in Fig. S3b (ESI†). It is worth noting that the binary GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite film presents a C 1s spectrum similar to that obtained from the unitary tBPMAI-treated perovskite, which indicates the tBPMAI anchoring and GuaI paucity on the treated perovskite surface.
The surface compositional variations inspire us to get further insights into the spatial distributions of binary GuaI/tBPMAI in the perovskite films via the time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) technique. ToF-SIMS depth profiles and the reconstructed three-dimensional (3D) images of the control and treated perovskite films deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates are illustrated in Fig. 2 and Fig. S4–S7 (ESI†). The ToF-SIMS depth profiles and the side views of the 3D images confirm uniform FA and Pb distributions of the GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite film (Fig. 2a and c), which is in good agreement with the component distributions acquired from the control film (Fig. S4, ESI†). Interestingly, a surface-confined tBPMA distribution is identified in the binary GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite film, whereas a uniform Gua distribution is recognized throughout the entire perovskite bulk, as verified by the ToF-SIMS depth profiles shown in Fig. 2a and Fig. S5 (ESI†). Fig. 2b illustrates the overall spatial distribution that includes all the components, which can be depicted solely as well, as shown in Fig. 2c–e. The disassembled side-view 3D images exhibit the clear selective penetration characteristics of the GuaI/tBPMA binary modulators, i.e. Gua is able to penetrate the perovskite bulk from the top surface to the buried interface, while tBPMA can only anchor on the top surface. It is worth mentioning that both the surface and bulk defects are not uniformly distributed within the perovskite film, indicating the distribution of defect sites for modulator anchoring is not uniform. As a result, the incomplete occupation of Gua and tBPMA modulators are identified in the treated perovskite film as shown in the ToF-SIMS 3D images. In short, the ToF-SIMS depth profiles and 3D images confirm that the binary GuaI/tBPMAI treatment leads to vertical gradient distributions, which are consistent with the selective penetration characteristics resulting from the unitary GuaI and unitary tBPMAI treatments (Fig. S6 and S7, ESI†). Given the ammonium salts featuring with the functionalization of defect modulation in the perovskites, we thus propose that the binary GuaI/tBPMAI system will result in a comprehensive passivation effect on the treated film as illustrated in Fig. S8 (ESI†): (i) The surface-anchored tBPMA+ with a π-conjugation structure of the benzene ring could promote charge transport and reduce the neutral iodine-related defects;37,38 (ii) The Gua+ binds the surrounding halides tightly, and thus increases the formation energy of halide vacancies and improves the structural stability;39 (iii) Both Gua+ and tBPMA+ can donate a lone pair of electrons to specifically passivate the positively charged defects such as ionic vacancies, uncoordinated Pb and/or Pb clusters by coordinate bonding in the film surface and bulk;40 (iv) The additional free I− ions could compensate halide vacancies within the film.41 The proposed passivating mechanism can be well-supported by the high-resolution XPS spectra shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†), where the downshifted binding energies of Pb4f and I3d peaks considering the peak area symmetry confirm that both Gua and tBPMA can act as electron-donating Lewis bases and modulate various kinds of defects. Consequently, the binary GuaI/tBPMAI system may simultaneously modulate the defects in bulk and at the bilateral interfaces due to the selective penetration characteristics.
 Fig. 2  (a) ToF-SIMS depth profiles and (b) ToF-SIMS 3D images of the binary GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite film deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrate. (c–e) Side-view 3D images of the solely depicted FA, Gua and tBPMA distribution, respectively. The tracked ions are all positively charged monovalent fragments and the tracked m/z values are 45 (CH(NH2)2+) for FA, 32 (CH3NH3+) for MA, 208 (Pb+) for Pb, 48 (Ti+) for Ti, 60 (C(NH2)3+) for Gua, and 147 (C4H9C6H4CH2+) for tBPMA. 
Modulation of defects usually contributes to the suppression of nonradiative recombination losses and, thus, leads to improved photovoltaic performances of PSCs. Therefore, we fabricated and tested regular-structure FAPbI3-based PSCs (Fig. S10, ESI†) to demonstrate the advantages of the binary GuaI/tBPMAI system. Post treatments with binary GuaI/tBPMAI with various weight ratios are executed atop the perovskite films. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of the corresponding PSCs are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). An optimized weight ratio of 1:2 for GuaI/tBPMAI delivers the champion PSC with a PCE of 24.36% [VOC of 1.147 V, short-circuit current density (JSC) of 25.86 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 82.14%] as shown in Fig. 3a, and we denote the best-performing content as GuaI/tBPMAI in the following text. In comparison with the unitary GuaI or unitary tBPMAI-treated devices, the GuaI/tBPMAI-based PSCs show higher VOC and FF, validating our speculation on the superiority of binary GuaI/tBPMAI treatment. Also, we investigated the performances of PSCs using unitary GuaI (∼1.67 mg mL−1) and tBPMAI (∼3.33 mg mL−1) modulators (Fig. S11 and Table S1, ESI†). The slightly enhanced performances indicate that incomplete manipulation of defects is obtained because of the insufficient amounts of the unitary passivators. With respect to the optical bandgap of 1.535 eV, the GuaI/tBPMAI-treated device exhibits a minimum voltage deficit of 0.388 V, demonstrating the significantly suppressed nonradiative recombination losses benefiting from the depth-dependent modulation of defects. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-modulated devices are shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†). The modulated device shows no noticeable difference in the EQE spectrum compared with that of the control, which is consistent with the UV-vis spectra (Fig. S2a, ESI†). In addition, we observe a slight hysteresis behaviour in the J–V curves between reverse and forward scans in all cases delineated in Fig. 3b. The hysteresis could be attributed to the ion migration or the charge accumulation at the TiO2/perovskite interface, which arises from the ionic nature of metal halide perovskites or the mismatch between the carrier mobilities of the ETL and HTL.42,43 The statistical PCEs of 50 devices were obtained in one experiment, in which the GuaI/tBPMAI-treated devices show better performances with a superior reproducibility (Fig. 3c). The stabilized power output (SPO) values for 600 seconds obtained at a fixed voltage near the maximum power points are 21.50% and 24.08% for the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated devices, respectively (Fig. 3d), despite the initial increased current appeared due to the light soaking (Fig. S13, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) The J–V curves of control and PSCs treated with different ammonium salts. (b) J–V curves of the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated PSCs measured with different scan directions. (c) Statistical results of PCEs fitted with Gaussian distributions from a batch of 50 devices for the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated PSCs. (d) The stabilized power outputs of the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated PSCs under the voltages at maximum power points of 0.889 V and 0.993 V, respectively. JMPP indicates J at the maximum power points. 
In order to further understand the positive effect of the binary GuaI/tBPMAI system on the enhanced photovoltaic performance, we performed the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) measurement to uncover the changes in radiation luminescence in the perovskite films induced by binary GuaI/tBPMAI treatment, and the results are illustrated in Fig. 4a. The GuaI, tBPMAI and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite films hold a similar PL peak position and exhibit stronger peak intensity compared to the control film. The enhanced PL emission confirms the reduced defect-induced non-radiative recombination losses. To further verify the above conclusion, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) decay measurements were applied to study the dynamics of the photogenerated carriers, and the results are plotted in Fig. 4b. Compared with the control film (ca. 538 ns), GuaI-treated perovskite film (990 ns) and tBPMAI-treated perovskite film (1196 ns) present longer carrier lifetimes due to the manipulation of the defects by unitary Gua or tBPMA. Benefiting from the synergetic depth-dependent modulation of defects with binary Gua/tBPMA, remarkably prolonged carrier lifetimes (ca. 1670 ns) for GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite film are obtained. The detailed two-component exponential fitting results are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The film, which was deposited using the precursor solution with GuaI additive and sequentially followed by additional tBPMAI post-treatment, was also investigated to verify the necessity of binary-system post-treatment after the perovskite growth. Given that the ToF-SIMS results (Fig. S14, ESI†) highly resemble those shown in Fig. 2, the PL and TRPL results (Fig. S15 and Table S2, ESI†) indicate an inferior defect passivation effect when compared to the binary GuaI/tBPMAI-treated film. This suggests that both the film surface and bulk require defect manipulation after crystal growth, validating our post-treatment with a binary system as a crucial strategy in achieving a high-efficiency PSC.
 Fig. 4  (a) Steady-state and (b) time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra measured under the excitation wavelength of 450 nm after 150 second illumination. (c) Linear relationship of VOC with the natural logarithmic light intensity. (d) Linear relationship between JSC and the incident light intensity. (e) I–V curves of the hole-only devices for quantitative measurement of the trap densities. (f) J–V curves of the control and PSCs with the treatment of another binary system. 
Subsequently, we tested the light-dependent VOC and JSC to investigate the charge-carrier behaviours in the PSCs (Fig. 4c and d, and Fig. S16, ESI†). The plots of VOC against logarithmic light intensity provide slopes of 1.46kBT/q, 1.35kBT/q, 1.38kBT/q and 1.23kBT/q for the control, GuaI-, tBPMAI- and binary GuaI/tBPMAI-based devices, respectively, where kB is Boltzmann constant, q is the elementary charge and T is the absolute temperature. The reduced ideality factor (n) demonstrates that GuaI/tBPMAI treatment can effectively modulate the defects in the perovskite films, ensuing the suppression of defect-assisted recombination. Moreover, we find that JSC shows a linear relationship with the light intensity, indicating negligible bimolecular recombination and unblocked transport for the carriers in PSCs.
The space-charge limited current (SCLC) method was executed to evaluate the trap-state densities, which could deliver direct evidence of the modulation effect by the one-step GuaI/tBPMAI treatment. We fabricated the hole-only devices with the structure of FTO/PEDOT: PSS/Perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, where FTO is fluorine-doped tin oxide, PEDOT: PSS is poly (3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) and Spiro-OMeTAD is 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene. The dark currents of these devices were then measured under applied bias. The trap-filled limit (TFL) region starts at a bias voltage exceeding the kink point, where the current abruptly increases (Fig. 4e). The trap-filled limit voltage (VTFL) is the applied voltage at the kink point, namely the onset voltage of the TFL region, corresponding to 0.616 V and 0.162 V for the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-modulated devices, respectively. The trap-state densities are calculated using the equation VTFL = eNtL2/2εε0, where ε is the relative dielectric constant, Nt represents the trap density, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, e is the elementary charge and L is the thickness of the perovskite film, respectively. We obtained a hole trap density of 6.95 × 1015 cm−3 for the control device. Slightly suppressed trap densities are observed for the unitary GuaI- and tBPMAI-treated devices with the values of 4.36 × 1015 cm−3 and 2.25 × 1015 cm−3, respectively (Fig. S17, ESI†). The GuaI/tBPMAI-treated devices exhibit the lowest trap density of 1.83 × 1015 cm−3, uncovering the effective defect modulation with the binary GuaI/tBPMAI treatment.
To investigate the thermal stability of perovskites influenced by post-treatments, we carried out XRD measurement on various films to monitor their crystallographic variations at 85 °C in a N2 atmosphere (Fig. S18, ESI†). The GuaI/tBPMAI-treated film exhibits substantially improved thermal stability along with a slower perovskite decomposition rate and suppressed phase conversion from the photoactive α phase to the detrimental non-perovskite δ phase, compared to the control counterpart. This mainly results from the comprehensive passivation effects and the protection of capping layer induced by binary GuaI/tBPMAI post-treatment.44–46
Furthermore, to validate the universality of the depth-dependent defect manipulation strategy using other binary modulation systems, we selected ethylamine hydroiodide (denoted as EAI) and phenethylammonium iodide (denoted as PEAI) as the modulator candidates to verify the advantages brought by the binary modulation systems. The PSC based on the binary EAI/PEAI treatment shows an outstanding photovoltaic performance with a PCE of 24.12%, which is superior to that of unitary EAI or unitary PEAI-treated PSCs (Fig. 4f and Table S3, ESI†). Additionally, we provided statistical distributions of PCEs obtained from 50 devices in one batch with respect to each type. As shown in Fig. 4f and Fig. S19 (ESI†), the EAI/PEAI-treated PSCs show more excellent photovoltaic performances and higher reproducibility in comparison with the control and the unitary EAI- or unitary PEAI-treated PSCs, coinciding well with the case of binary GuaI/tBPMAI system as we predicted. The depth-dependent defect manipulation of the EAI/PEAI-treated film is also verified by the ToF-SIMS analysis. As shown in Fig. S20 (ESI†), the distribution of large PEA is surface-confined whereas small EA tends to diffuse into the film. Similar distribution characteristic to PEAI and tBPMAI is also observed in the phenylamine hydroiodide (PAI)-treated film (Fig. S21, ESI†). The superior photovoltaic performance of the binary EAI/PEAI-treated PSC is therefore ascribed to the depth-dependent defect passivation enabled by the different diffusion dynamics of the modulators. In short, different binary systems that realize simultaneous modulation of defects in perovskites from bulk to interfaces have been demonstrated, validating the considerable reliability and universality of this strategy in enhancing PSC efficiency.
To probe the defect density as a function of depth and further qualitatively elucidate the depth-dependent defect manipulation effects induced by post-treatment with different ammonium salts at the microscale, we performed the confocal PL microscopy measurement of the cross sections of the control and GuaI-treated, tBPMAI-treated, and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite films. The cross-sectional SEM images of these samples are shown in Fig. S22 (ESI†). From the PL emission (Fig. S23a, ESI†) and the corresponding lifetime mappings of the control sample (Fig. 5a), we observe that the luminescence is not continuous laterally in the film. There is a large dark gap in the middle breaking the cross section into two parts, which could be attributed to the luminescence quenching at the grain boundary while considering the apparent grain sizes estimated from the top-view SEM images. Interestingly, this dark gap linking to grain boundary was lit up when the perovskite film was treated with GuaI, tBPMAI or GuaI/tBPMAI (Fig. S23b–d, ESI†). The statistical average results extracted from the lifetime mapping of the GuaI-treated sample show that the penetration of GuaI into the perovskite film prolongs the carrier lifetimes at the buried interface (Fig. 5f), indicating the defect healing there. The synergistic effect of fluorescence heterogeneity across the film and defect modulation at the buried interface is conducive to enhancing the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, although a slightly decreased lifetime was obtained by GuaI treatment in comparison to the control sample. For the tBPMAI-treated sample, the carrier lifetimes at the top surface are longer due to the confinement of tBPMAI molecules there (Fig. 5g), even though it presents much higher average values than the control and GuaI-treated ones. The GuaI/tBPMAI treatment endows the perovskite film with the longest statistical average carrier lifetimes across the entire cross section (Fig. 5h). We thus interpret this to indicate that the synergetic effect of GuaI/tBPMAI with various penetration depths in perovskite film is beneficial to synchronously manipulating the defects in the bulk and at the bilateral interfaces.
 Fig. 5  (a–d) Cross-sectional lifetime mapping images of the control (a), GuaI-treated (b), tBPMAI-treated (c), and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated (d) perovskite films, which were processed from confocal PL. The perovskite films were deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates. The bright red areas represent the lifetime distribution in the cross-sections of the perovskite films. The dotted lines indicate the interfaces of the perovskite films. (e–h) Statistical average carrier lifetimes extracted from (a) to (d). The light blue and light green sections indicate the top surface and buried interface, respectively. 
Conclusions
In summary, based on the selective penetration of GuaI and tBPMAI within the perovskite film, we developed a depth-dependent manipulation strategy to modulate the overall defects in perovskites by the binary GuaI/tBPMAI post-treatment. The selective penetration characteristics of the binary GuaI/tBPMAI modulation system contribute to the simultaneous manipulation of the bulk and interfacial defects. As a result, the perovskite film with binary GuaI/tBPMAI modulation showed improved charge-carrier dynamics, reduced defect density and minimized nonradiative recombination losses of charge carriers. As a proof of concept, a champion PCE of 24.36% with a small voltage loss of 0.388 V was obtained, along with a stabilized output efficiency of 24.08%. Furthermore, the depth-dependent manipulation strategy exhibited reliability and universality with the extended application of the binary EAI/PEAI system. Our study provides a distinct perspective and in-depth understanding of defect modulation characteristics in spatial dimension, which further inspires us to achieve highly efficient PSCs and other perovskite optoelectronic devices.
Author contributions
R. Z. conceived the idea and led this project. L. Z. and X. Y. preliminarily selected an appropriate material system and conducted the early experiments. L. Z., Y. Z. and Y. W. designed the experiments. L.Z. provided the fabrication technology of mesoporous PSCs. Y. Z. and Y. W. fabricated and optimized all the devices and samples for measurements. Y. Z. and Y. W. conducted XRD, UV-vis and characterization of PSCs. Y. Z., Y. W. and X. Y. conducted PL, TRPL and EQE measurements. Y. Z. and L. Z. carried out confocal PL measurement and analyzed the data. C. H. performed ToF-SIMS, AFM and XPS measurements and analyzed the data. C. H., J.-J. S., Y. Z., Y. W., D. L. and L. Z. contributed to ToF-SIMS and XPS analysis. S. J. and L. Z. contributed to XRD measurements. X. Y., J. W. and P. C. conducted SEM measurements. R. S., M. Y., Q. L, L. L. and Q. G. contributed to PL and TRPL characterization. Y. Z. and Y. W. wrote the first draft of the paper. L. Z. revised the paper. All authors contributed to the discussion, comment and review of the paper.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (21905111, 61722501), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M670036) and R&D Fruit Fund (20210001). We acknowledge Dr Yan Guan from the Analytical Instrumentation Center of Peking University/the Center for Physicochemical Analysis and Measurements in ICCAS for her kind assistance with confocal PL measurements.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL, “Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart | Photovoltaic Research | NREL,” https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
Y. Zheng, R. Su, Z. Xu, D. Luo, H. Dong, B. Jiao, Z. Wu, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cordero, F. Craciun, F. Trequattrini, A. Generosi, B. Paci, A. M. Paoletti and G. Pennesi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sánchez, M. Vallés-Pelarda, J. A. Alberola-Borràs, R. Vidal, J. J. Jerónimo-Rendón, M. Saliba, P. P. Boix and I. Mora-Seró, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 39 CrossRef .
Y. Tu, G. Xu, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, R. Su, D. Luo, W. Yang, Y. Miao, R. Cai, L. Jiang, X. Du, Y. Yang, Q. Liu, Y. Gao, S. Zhao, W. Huang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2019, 62, 974221 Search PubMed .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, O. Durand, J. W. Strzalka, B. Chen, R. Verduzco, P. M. Ajayan, S. Tretiak, J. Even, M. A. Alam, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. Nie and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2018, 360, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi and J. Lee, Science, 2020, 369, 1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 44 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, T. Liu, C. Liang, J. Xia, D. Li, H. Zhang, A. Amini, G. Xing and C. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000863 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902650 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Wolff, P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, R. X. Peng, G. Wang, J. L. Logsdon, B. H. Wang, X. B. Hu, Y. Chen, V. P. Dravid, M. R. Wasielewski, J. S. Yu, W. Huang, Z. Y. Ge, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, S. M. Hosseini, R. Gunder, A. Petsiuk, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, S. Shoaee, P. Meredith, S. Schorr, T. Unold, P. L. Burn, D. Neher and M. Stolterfoht, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901090 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, J.-W. Lee, H. S. Jung, H. Shin and N.-G. Park, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, D. Marongiu, X. Chang, S. Masi, A. Rizzo, S. Colella, F. Quochi, M. Saba, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 44629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fu, H. Li, L. Wang, R. Yin, B. Li and L. Yin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4017 RSC .
B.-E. Cohen, Y. Li, Q. Meng and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Kan, J. Shi and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, A. Hinderhofer, F. T. Eickemeyer, H. Zhu, J.-Y. Seo, J. Zhang, F. Schreiber, H. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Ghua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Suo, E. Mosconi, D. Ricciarelli, W. Tress, F. D. Angelis, H.-S. Kim and A. Hagfeldt, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3159 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Xiang, L. Zhao, M. Anaya, Y. Shen, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y.-H. Chiang, Y. Tu, R. Su, Q. Hu, H. Yu, G. Shao, W. Huang, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, S. D. Stranks, W. Zhang and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Cho, A. M. Soufiani, J. S. Yun, J. C. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. Seidel, X. F. Deng, M. A. Green, S. J. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703392 CrossRef .
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Science, 2020, 370, 108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, M. Kim, S.-U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, W. R. Tress, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Yang, F. Fu, Z. Wang, C. E. Avalos, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhan, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, L. Zheng, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2020, 370, eabb8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, F. Ji, Z. Li, G. Cui, P. Gao, E. Oveisi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and S. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707143 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Béchu, M. Ralaiarisoa, A. Etcheberry and P. Schulz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904007 CrossRef .
X. Yang, Y. Fu, R. Su, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, M. Yu, P. Cheng, Y. Wang, J. Wu, D. Luo, Y. Tu, L. Zhao, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Shi, J. Deng, Z. Chen, Y. Li, W. Zhao, J. Wu, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907096 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, H. Xue, Y.-H. Jia, G. Brocks, S. Tao and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905739 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16099 CrossRef .
W.-Q. Wu, P. N. Rudd, Z. Ni, C. H. V. Brackle, H. Wei, Q. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2020, 142, 3989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Y. Lei, Y. Xu, L. Han, Z. Ci and Z. Jin, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000586 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995 RSC .
Y. Fan, H. Meng, L. Wang and S. Pang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900215 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, Y. Liu, F. T. Eickemeyer, L. Pan, D. Ren, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, B. Carlsen, B. Yang, X. Dong, Z. Wang, H. Liu, S. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Ibrahim Dar, X. Li and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Ni, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Tu, Q. Gong, H. Yu and R. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2404 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee02287c‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Emerging as potent rivals among next-generation photovoltaic technologies, metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have urged their highest certified power conversion efficiency to over 25% in 10 years. Defects at the bulk grain boundaries and at heterojunction interfaces, which are regarded as critical recombination centers to trigger the power losses of PSCs, cannot concurrently be addressed using common modulation strategies. Herein, a depth-dependent manipulation strategy profiting from the selective penetrability within the polycrystalline perovskite films of a binary modulator system is demonstrated to concurrently manipulate the bulk and interfacial defects. Accordingly, one of the modulators is capable of healing the defects in bulk and at the buried interface as it can penetrate across the film, while the other enables modulation of the surface defects as it anchors atop the film surface, rendering a holistic defect management from the interfaces to the bulk. Consequently, the PSC efficiency improves from 21.79% to 24.36% due to the minimization of non-radiative recombination losses and the optimization of charge transport. The universality of this effective depth-dependent manipulation strategy has also been validated. In summary, this strategy provides new insights into spatial defect modulation and opens up a promising way for defect modulator design for high-performance perovskite optoelectronic devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic view of the depth-dependent manipulation strategy. The perovskite film is deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrate. (b) Molecular structures of GuaI and tBPMAI. (c–e) Surface SEM images (c), XRD patterns (d) and surface XPS spectrum for C 1s (e) of the control and ammonium salt-treated perovskite films, respectively. These perovskite films were deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) ToF-SIMS depth profiles and (b) ToF-SIMS 3D images of the binary GuaI/tBPMAI-treated perovskite film deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrate. (c–e) Side-view 3D images of the solely depicted FA, Gua and tBPMA distribution, respectively. The tracked ions are all positively charged monovalent fragments and the tracked m/z values are 45 (CH(NH2)2+) for FA, 32 (CH3NH3+) for MA, 208 (Pb+) for Pb, 48 (Ti+) for Ti, 60 (C(NH2)3+) for Gua, and 147 (C4H9C6H4CH2+) for tBPMA.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The J–V curves of control and PSCs treated with different ammonium salts. (b) J–V curves of the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated PSCs measured with different scan directions. (c) Statistical results of PCEs fitted with Gaussian distributions from a batch of 50 devices for the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated PSCs. (d) The stabilized power outputs of the control and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated PSCs under the voltages at maximum power points of 0.889 V and 0.993 V, respectively. JMPP indicates J at the maximum power points.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Steady-state and (b) time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectra measured under the excitation wavelength of 450 nm after 150 second illumination. (c) Linear relationship of VOC with the natural logarithmic light intensity. (d) Linear relationship between JSC and the incident light intensity. (e) I–V curves of the hole-only devices for quantitative measurement of the trap densities. (f) J–V curves of the control and PSCs with the treatment of another binary system.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–d) Cross-sectional lifetime mapping images of the control (a), GuaI-treated (b), tBPMAI-treated (c), and GuaI/tBPMAI-treated (d) perovskite films, which were processed from confocal PL. The perovskite films were deposited on the FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2 substrates. The bright red areas represent the lifetime distribution in the cross-sections of the perovskite films. The dotted lines indicate the interfaces of the perovskite films. (e–h) Statistical average carrier lifetimes extracted from (a) to (d). The light blue and light green sections indicate the top surface and buried interface, respectively.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee02287c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
