Solution processed flexible and bending durable heterojunction colloidal quantum dot solar cell   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR02617B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR02617B
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11520-11524Solution processed flexible and bending durable heterojunction colloidal quantum dot solar cell†

        
          
            Xiaoliang 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jindan 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Liu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Erik M. J. 
            Johansson
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry-Ångström, Physical Chemistry, Uppsala University, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: erik.johansson@kemi.uu.se
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, 100191 Beijing, China
Received 
      22nd April 2015
    , Accepted 8th June 2015First published on 15th June 2015AbstractA flexible hybrid heterojunction PbS colloidal quantum dot solar cell, where the photoactive layers are deposited using a solution processed fabrication approach under ambient condition and at room temperature is presented. The bending stability of the obtained solar cell is evaluated. The results show that the solar cell exhibits high bending stability and even under the bent state the cell also maintains a high performance, which shows the potential of the quantum dot solar cell toward a lightweight, bendable power source with many possible applications.
Solution processed colloidal quantum dot (QD) films are interesting for application in solar cells and much progress has recently been made towards technologically relevant efficiencies.1–6 QDs exhibit size-dependent optical, electronic, and optoelectronic properties,7–9 and the light absorption spectrum of some QDs may therefore be tuned to match the spectrum of the sun-light reaching the earth.10 Due to that the energy levels and optoelectronic properties are adjustable through different surface ligands,11 the solar cell may be fabricated with different architectures to improve the photovoltaic performance.12 Moreover, the multiple exciton generation (MEG) of QDs, where one photon produces more than one electron–hole pair, may be used to overcome the Shockley-Queisser limitation for a single bandgap based solar cell,13–15 and an external quantum efficiency exceeding 100% in the QD solar cell has been reported.16 The above excellent properties of QDs make them an attractive materials for the solar cell fabrication.
Even though the high efficiency is important in a solar cell, a fabrication approach with low cost and low energy consumption is also important for large scale commercial fabrication. Solution-processed techniques, such as spray-coating, roll-to-roll or ink-jet printing, are promising approaches toward continuous large scale fabrication,10,16 which also allows for construction of the solar cell on a flexible substrate, such as plastic foil. A flexible light-weight substrate may both give advantages in the production process, but also gives a lower carbon foot-print in the transportation of the light weight devices due to lower energy consumption. In addition, a flexible solar cell also enable new applications such as use on curved surfaces on buildings, vehicles or devices, or use in portable photovoltaics on a roll or even wearable photovoltaics. As such, flexible dye-sensitized solar cell was fabricated on poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate and 3.5% efficiency was obtained.17 Recently, a perovskite solar cell was fabricated on a flexible polymer substrate,18,19 and a PCE up to 12.2% was reported.20 Flexible QD solar cells may also have some interesting properties including a tunable bandgap, which could be interesting for tuning the utilization of solar light between the infrared and the visible region. Furthermore, the QD film in a QD solid solar cell can be deposited using a solution based deposition approach, which is advantageous for preparation of flexible solar cells.3,21 Recently, a QD solar cell based on a curved and flexible substrate was reported using a spraying method for QD film deposition.22 However, it is not clear if a flexible QD solar cell can survive bending and how it will behave especially at the bent state, which is crucial for the usage of flexible solar cell panels on curved surfaces for example on buildings, vehicles or wearable and portable devices.23,24
Here, we present a flexible colloidal QD solar cell prepared using a solution processed fabrication approach of the photoactive layers at room temperature and under ambient conditions, and the operation at the bent state and the bending stability of the obtained solar cell is evaluated. The solar cell is built on a flexible PET substrate employing organic–inorganic hybrid heterojunction architecture. The bending stability test is performed by mechanically bending the solar cell on a curved surface with a circular diameter of 40 mm, which shows that the solar cell can withstand more than 200 consecutive bending cycles with only slight decrease in performance during the first 30 bending cycles and thereafter a stable performance. The photovoltaic performance under the bent state is also investigated by bending the solar cell over a circular shaped surface with a diameter of 15–105 mm, and no large reduction in performance is observed under the bent state. The above results therefore imply that the flexible QD solar cell constructed in this report works at the bent state and is bending durable.
The bendable hybrid heterojunction colloidal QD solar cell was built on an indium tin oxide (ITO) covered flexible PET substrate at ambient condition and at room temperature. Fig. 1a shows the schematic drawing of the solar cell with a regular architecture (PET/ITO/ZnO/QDs/P3HT/Ag). Briefly, the ZnO nanoparticle (∼5 nm, see ESI, Fig. S1†) layer working as electron acceptor was prepared on the ITO covered PET substrate. The PbS QDs have a strong light absorption starting from ultraviolet (UV) region and until near (infrared) IR region, which is beneficial for the solar cell fabrication. Oleic acid capped PbS QDs with a bandgap energy (Eg) of ∼1.3 eV were synthesized according to literature (see ESI, Fig. S2†).28,29 The QD film working as light absorber was deposited on the ZnO nanoparticle layer via a layer-by-layer spin-cast approach and followed by a 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) treatment increasing the charge carrier mobility between QDs. Poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) working as hole transport interlayer was deposited on the QD film. Finally, the solar cell was completed by thermal evaporation of an Ag layer with a thickness of ∼150 nm as a top counter electrode.
 Fig. 1  Schematic drawing of the bendable hybrid heterojunction QD solar cell with (a) a regular architecture (PET/ITO/ZnO/QDs/P3HT/Ag) and (b) an inverted architecture (PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/ZnO/Al), respectively. (c) Approximate energy levels of the materials for the solar cell fabrication, which are obtained from ref. 18, 25–27. 
The solar cell with an inverted architecture (PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/ZnO/Al) was also fabricated for comparison, and the corresponding structure is shown in Fig. 1b. The difference compared to the solar cell with a regular architecture is that the hole transport material (HTM) is poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), which was firstly deposited on the ITO covered PET substrate, and finally Al was used as top contact electrode. Thus, for the inverted solar cell the illumination light comes from the HTM side. Different HTMs were applied for the solar cell with a regular architecture and an inverted architecture in order to avoid the effect of water-based PEDOT:PSS solution on the QDs, which may otherwise have affected the performance. It should be noted that all processing steps for the solar cell fabrication were performed from solution at ambient atmosphere and room temperature, except of the top metal electrode deposition. The experimental detail is in the ESI.†Fig. 1c shows the energy level diagram of the materials for the solar cell fabrication, the energy values of which are obtained from ref. 18, 25–27.

Fig. 2a shows the photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of the bendable solar cell with both a regular architecture (PET/ITO/ZnO/QDs/P3HT/Ag) and an inverted (PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/ZnO/Al) architecture, respectively, and the corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters are summarized in Table 1. The measurements were performed under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5 G) and at ambient condition. The solar cell with a regular architecture shows a short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 12.1 mA cm−2, open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.56 V and a PCE up to 3.36%. For the solar cell with an inverted architecture, a Jsc of 10.8 mA cm−2, Voc of 0.53 V were obtained, leading to a slightly lower efficiency, 2.74% PCE. For the solar cell with a regular architecture, the photogenerated electron is collected by the ZnO nanoparticle layer and finally transported to ITO, and meanwhile the hole is collected by the P3HT hole transport interlayer and finally transported to the Ag contact. The incident light is absorbed by the QD film close to the ZnO/QD interface, which may be advantageous for the collection of photogenerated charges.30,31 For the inverted solar cell, the PEDOT:PSS hole transport interlayer blocks some light before reaching the QD film, which may contribute to the relative lower efficiency of the inverted solar cell. Moreover, the optical electro-magnetic field in the QD film is varying with the solar cell thickness, which may also affect the charge carrier generation.32
 Fig. 2  (a) J–V characteristics curves of the solar cell with a regular architecture (PET/ITO/ZnO/QDs/P3HT/Ag) and an inverted architecture (PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/ZnO/Al), respectively. The measurements were performed under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5 G) and ambient atmosphere condition. Inset is a photograph of the solar cell with a regular architecture. (b) IPCE spectra of the solar cell with a regular architecture. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters of the solar cell with a regular architecture and an inverted architecture, respectively. The measurements were performed under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5 G) and ambient atmosphere condition




Device

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)




Regular
0.56
12.1
0.496
3.36


Inverted
0.53
10.8
0.476
2.74




Inset in Fig. 2a is a photograph of the bendable solar cell with a regular architecture. Fig. 2b shows the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of the solar cell with a regular architecture, which indicates the solar cell exhibits good photon response in a range of 350–1100 nm, in accordance to the light absorption of PbS QDs solution(see ESI, Fig. S2†).
The solar cells with above architectures were also fabricated on an ITO covered glass substrate for photovoltaic performance comparison (see ESI, Fig. S3†). The solar cell on glass substrate with a regular architecture shows 4.17% efficiency, which is similar to the reported solar cell with same structure and same surface ligands of QDs.21,33 We also found that the solar cell on glass substrate with a regular architecture shows relative higher efficiency than the solar cell with an inverted architecture, in accordance with the PET-based cells. However, the cells on glass substrate show better performance than the cells on PET substrate, which may be due to the better transparency and conductivity of the ITO covered glass substrate (see ESI, Fig. S4†).18,19 This also agrees with the results for other type solar cells, such as perovskite cells.18,20 The higher transmission properties of glass substrate will result in more incident photons reaching the QD film leading to higher photon-current conversion efficiency. However, even though the glass-based cells show higher efficiency, the flexible substrate is more compatible with low-cost large scale fabrication of solution processed techniques, such as roll to roll or ink-jet printing approach, and the flexible solar cell may have more applications, such as usage of flexible cell panels on curved surfaces of buildings or vehicles, and wearable photovoltaic devices.
It should be noted that withstanding repeated bending is important for the flexible solar cell both in production and in different applications, especially for a wearable photovoltaic device. Therefore, the bendable solar cell with a regular architecture was mechanically bent around a circular shaped surface with a diameter of 40 mm for bending test under ambient condition and at room temperature. Fig. 3 presents the photovoltaic parameters with bending cycles, and the corresponding J–V characteristic curves are shown in Fig. S5 (see ESI†). Even after 200 consecutive bending cycles test, the Jsc and Voc only decrease by 8.2% and 5.3%, respectively, and the solar cell remain ∼83% of the initial efficiency. We think that the reason for the solar cell maintaining the high level performance may be due to the QD film and electron acceptor layers are made of inorganic nanoparticles with several nano-meters (see ESI, Fig. S1 and S2†), which only change the distance between neighbour QDs (or nanoparticles) during the bending because no large crystals are used. Moreover, the hole transport interlayer (P3HT or PEDOT:PSS) in the solar cell is organic macromolecular, which have a good stretch properties and generally applied for the flexible organic solar cells. Comparing with solar cells based on large inorganic crystals, the QD solar cell may therefore be more suitable for flexible photovoltaics due to the higher flexibility of the QD layer and the polymer film. The long term stability of PbS QD solar cell can be controlled by the surface ligands of QDs, and the solar cells exhibit comparable performance in several months under ambient condition, which indicates that the QD solar cells are promising candidates toward next generation photovoltaics.6,34 However, the photovoltaic performances of QD cells have to be improved to meet the practical applications.
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic parameters (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF and (d) PCE as a function of mechanical bending cycles. The solar cell was consecutively mechanical bent with a diameter of 40 mm under ambient condition. 
As to obtain more detailed information about the stability for bending, the dark J–V curves were also measured before and after the bending test, which shows around one order of magnitude increase in reverse current after the bending test (see ESI, Fig. S6†). The increased dark current may explain the slightly reduced efficiency and indicates that some permanent change has occurred. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was further applied to investigate the QD film after the mechanical bending test (see ESI, Fig. S7†), which indicates that even there are some cracks formed in the QD film, the QD film remains compact and is still attached to the substrate.
The solar cell function under the bent state is of great interest and importance for the flexible solar cell applications. The solar cell was bent with various diameters for efficiency measurements at the bent state. We found that even under the bent state with a diameter of 40 mm, the cell also shows Jsc more than 10 mA cm−2 and 2.8% PCE (see ESI, Fig. S8†). As to investigate the performance of the solar cell under different bent state the cell was bent around a curved surface with a diameter of 15–105 mm to examine photovoltaic performance and the corresponding normalized PCE as a function of bending diameter is shown in Fig. 4. It is interesting that the solar cell also shows high performance even under the bent condition. Especially, the solar cell maintains ∼82% of initial efficiency at a bent state with a bending diameter of 15 mm that has similar dimension as a human finger (inset in Fig. 4), which suggests that the described bendable solar cell has potential toward a wearable power source. The dark J–V curves were also investigated for the solar cell under flat state (initial state) and bent state (see ESI, Fig. S9†), which shows that the dark current also increases under the bent condition. This may also explain the slightly lower efficiency compared to the flat state. Moreover, some of the light is not perpendicular to the PET foil surface when the solar cell is under bent state. The light reflection loss at the PET surface and the interfaces inside solar cell may increase when the solar cell is under the bent state.35 As to confirm that, the light transmission spectra of the PET substrate were performed with the light incident onto the substrate with different incident angle (see ESI, Fig. S10†). The results show that an increased angle of the incident light gives higher reflection at the PET substrates, which results in decreased light incident into the solar cell and thereby partly explains the slightly reduced performance at the bent state.
 Fig. 4  Normalized PCE of the solar cell at the bent state with different diameters. Inset is a photograph of solar cell bending on a finger that has same dimension with a diameter of 15 mm for bent performance test. 
Conclusions
In summary, a bending durable colloidal QD solar cell was constructed on a flexible PET substrate using a solution based approach to prepare the electron conductor, light absorber and hole conductor layers for both regular architecture and inverted architecture. The solar cell with a regular architecture exhibited higher performance due to better transparency of ZnO compared to PEDOT:PSS, which results in better light harvesting in the QD film. The solar cell could withstand repeated bending tests and remained ∼83% of initial efficiency even after 200 consecutive bending cycles. Under the bent state, the solar cell also showed high performance, and even under a bent state with a diameter of 15 mm the solar cell maintained ∼82% of initial efficiency. The bending durable QD solar cell therefore is compatible with a large scale solution processed fabrication approach and has potential applications toward a lightweight, portable and wearable power source, and also for use on curved surfaces for examples on buildings and vehicles.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the Göran Gustafsson Foundation, Swedish Energy Agency, the Swedish Research Council FORMAS, and Swedish Research Council (VR). We thank Leif Häggman for the help of materials preparation and helpful discussion.
Notes and references
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, O. Voznyy, J. Pan, S. Hoogland, V. Adinolfi, J. Xu, M. Li, A. R. Kirmani, J. P. Sun, J. Minor, K. W. Kemp, H. Dong, L. Rollny, A. Labelle, G. Carey, B. Sutherland, I. Hill, A. Amassian, H. Liu, J. Tang, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 822–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. H. Wang, R. Debnath, D. K. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, S. Masala and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 233–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Robel, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 128, 4136–4137 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Moreels, Y. Justo, B. De Geyter, K. Haustraete, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2004–2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 133–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Brown, D. Kim, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, M. G. Bawendi, J. C. Grossman and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5863–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ning, D. Zhitomirsky, V. Adinolfi, B. Sutherland, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, P. Maraghechi, X. Lan, S. Hoogland, Y. Ren and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1719–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin and A. J. Nozik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1252–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Sandeep, S. ten Cate, J. M. Schins, T. J. Savenije, Y. Liu, M. Law, S. Kinge, A. J. Houtepen and L. D. Siebbeles, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2360 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Liu and E. M. Johansson, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1454–1462 RSC .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H. Y. Chen, J. B. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vomiero, V. Galstyan, A. Braga, I. Concina, M. Brisotto, E. Bontempi and G. Sberveglieri, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3408–3413 CAS .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
C. Roldán-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Soriano, G. Mínguez Espallargas, A. Garcia, P. Reinecke, T. Kroyer, M. I. Dar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 994–997 Search PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo, K. S. Hong, N.-G. Park, S. Lee and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 CAS .
M.-J. Choi, J. Oh, J.-K. Yoo, J. Choi, D. M. Sim and Y. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3052 CAS .
I. J. Kramer, G. Moreno-Bautista, J. C. Minor, D. Kopilovic and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 163902 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Li, G. Guan, S. Pan, Z. Zhu, D. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11571–11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, Z. Yang, P. Chen, J. Deng, H. Li and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6110–6114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Mora-Sero, L. Bertoluzzi, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, K. W. Kemp, E. H. Sargent and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2272 Search PubMed .
G. H. Kim, B. Walker, H. B. Kim, J. Y. Kim, E. H. Sargent, J. Park and J. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3321–3327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, R. Zhu, F. Li, Q. Wang and B. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7038–7043 CAS .
X. Wang, G. I. Koleilat, A. Fischer, J. Tang, R. Debnath, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3792–3795 CAS .
D. A. Barkhouse, R. Debnath, I. J. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina, L. Etgar, M. Grätzel and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3134–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, H. Liu, D. Zhitomirsky, S. Hoogland, X. Wang, M. Furukawa, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Willis, C. Cheng, H. E. Assender and A. A. Watt, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1522–1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, S. Hoogland, K. W. Kemp, A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3803 CAS .
P. R. Brown, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, D. D. Wanger, L. Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, Y. Kuga, I. Mora-Seró, T. Toyoda, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase, J. Bisquert and Q. Shen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5446–5456 RSC .
J. M. Ball, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Hörantner, S. Hüttner, W. Zhang, E. J. W. Crossland, I. Ramirez, M. Riede, M. B. Johnston, R. H. Friend and H. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 602–609 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, light absorption spectra, TEM images, light transmission spectra, J–V characteristics curves, SEM image, and dark current curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02617bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic drawing of the bendable hybrid heterojunction QD solar cell with (a) a regular architecture (PET/ITO/ZnO/QDs/P3HT/Ag) and (b) an inverted architecture (PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/ZnO/Al), respectively. (c) Approximate energy levels of the materials for the solar cell fabrication, which are obtained from ref. 18, 25–27.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) J–V characteristics curves of the solar cell with a regular architecture (PET/ITO/ZnO/QDs/P3HT/Ag) and an inverted architecture (PET/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs/ZnO/Al), respectively. The measurements were performed under a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5 G) and ambient atmosphere condition. Inset is a photograph of the solar cell with a regular architecture. (b) IPCE spectra of the solar cell with a regular architecture.	 

Regular	0.56	12.1	0.496	3.36
Inverted	0.53	10.8	0.476	2.74

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic parameters (a) Voc, (b) Jsc, (c) FF and (d) PCE as a function of mechanical bending cycles. The solar cell was consecutively mechanical bent with a diameter of 40 mm under ambient condition.	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalized PCE of the solar cell at the bent state with different diameters. Inset is a photograph of solar cell bending on a finger that has same dimension with a diameter of 15 mm for bent performance test.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details, light absorption spectra, TEM images, light transmission spectra, J–V characteristics curves, SEM image, and dark current curves. See DOI: 10.1039/c5nr02617b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
