Broadband phototransistors realised by incorporating a bi-layer perovskite/NIR light absorbing polymer channel  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TC06229C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TC06229C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4808-4816Broadband phototransistors realised by incorporating a bi-layer perovskite/NIR light absorbing polymer channel

        
          
            Ning 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yanlian 
            Lei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wing Kin Edward 
            Chan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Furong 
            Zhu
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics, Research Centre of Excellence for Organic Electronics, and Institute of Advanced Materials, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: frzhu@hkbu.edu.hk
Received 
      10th December 2018
    , Accepted 20th March 2019First published on 22nd March 2019AbstractHigh performing ultraviolet (UV) to near infrared (NIR) light broadband phototransistors (PTs) are realised by incorporating a bi-layer methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) perovskite/NIR light absorbing diketopyrrolopyrrole-dithienylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DPP-DTT) polymer channel. The bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel has the advantages of the (1) complementary absorption and (2) high charge transport efficiency of the two materials. The on- and off-state transfer characteristics of the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel PTs, in the presence of different intensities of UV, visible and NIR light, were analyzed. The bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel PTs possess simultaneously a specific detectivity (D*) of >109 Jones over the UV to visible light wavelength range and a high D* of >107 Jones over the NIR light wavelength range. The broadband PTs can be operated at a low voltage (−1 V) without showing persistent photoconductivity behavior. The results are very encouraging. It is anticipated that the bi-layer perovskite/NIR light absorbing polymer channel concept is a very promising approach for realising high performance UV to NIR light broadband PTs.
1. Introduction
High-sensitivity solution-processable ultraviolet (UV) to near infrared (NIR) light broadband photodetectors are crucial for applications in image formation, and safety and wellness monitoring.1–3 In comparison to conventional inorganic semiconductor technologies, solution-processable UV-NIR light broadband photodetectors offer a promising alternative due to their low cost, flexible design, adaptability to various fabrication methods, and large area manufacturability. Phototransistors (PTs) achieve tunable photoresponsivity and high gain upon adjusting the gate voltage, and can be operated either electrically or optically for light detection and imaging applications.4–6 The performance of conventional broadband PTs with a single layer channel is often limited due to their narrow absorption spectrum7,8 and their imperfect charge transport properties.6,8 PTs with a bi-layer heterojunction or a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) channel have some advantages, such as multispectral response,8 enhanced responsivity9–11 and improved response speed.6,12 Various approaches have taken this route, such as incorporating different materials and a BHJ channel to improve charge separation processes in the channel.6,8–12 However, all had only limited success due to their technical challenges.
Methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3)-based perovskite semiconductors have been adopted for fabricating high efficiency solar cells, achieving power conversion efficiencies of >20%.13–15 The MAPbI3 perovskite is also a promising material for application in UV-visible light detection. Perovskite-based broadband PTs that incorporated different functional materials including graphene,16–18 zinc oxide nanowires,19 indium gallium zinc oxide,20 and organic materials21,22 have been reported. However, these hybrid broadband photodetectors have some limitations, e.g., high operating voltages,21 sophisticated fabricating procedures16–19 and unsatisfactory solution fabrication processes.21
In this work, we propose a novel approach for incorporating a bi-layer MAPbI3/NIR light absorbing diketopyrrolopyrrole-dithienylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene (DPP-DTT) channel for realising a solution-processable high performance UV-NIR light broadband PT. The DPP-DTT polymer has a high NIR absorption and a carrier mobility suitable for high sensitivity NIR light detection. Recently, we demonstrated a high performing solution-processable NIR to visible light up-conversion device, comprising a DPP-DTT/nonfullerene acceptor BHJ NIR charge generation layer and a perovskite light-emitting emitter, for visualizing the NIR light.1 The DPP-DTT polymer is also a good candidate for fabricating high performance organic field effect transistors,23–25 demonstrating high-sensitivity NIR PTs with both high photoresponsivity and photosensitivity.4
The PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in this work have the advantages of the (1) complementary absorption of MAPbI3 and DPP-DTT to realize UV-NIR light broadband photodetection and (2) high charge transport efficiency. The broadband PTs having a specific detectivity (D*) of >109 Jones over the UV-visible light wavelength range and a high D* of >107 Jones over the NIR light wavelength range were demonstrated. The photoresponsivity enhancement in the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel PTs in the on- and off-states was analyzed. The solution-processable PT technology thus developed provides functional superiority for application to large area UV-NIR light broadband photo-detection.
2. Experimental
Bottom-gate bottom-contact (BGBC) PTs having a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel were fabricated using heavily p-doped Si substrates, with a ∼300 nm thick thermally grown SiO2 layer acting as the gate dielectric. The Si substrates were cleaned by ultrasonication sequentially with deionized water, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol each for 15 min. The substrates were dried with a stream of pure N2 gas and stored in an oven, and the SiO2 surfaces were modified with trichloro(octadecyl)silane (Sigma Aldrich) for the passivation of surface traps and improvement of surface hydrophobicity.23–25 40 nm thick Au source and drain contacts, defining a channel length of 80 μm and a channel width of 1500 μm, were deposited on the modified SiO2 surfaces by thermal evaporation. Then, the DPP-DTT polymer, dissolved in 1,2-dichlorobenzene at a concentration of 6 mg mL−1, was overlaid on the surface of the BGBC PT template by spin-coating at a rotation speed of 1000 rpm for 240 s in a glovebox, with the oxygen and moisture levels less than 0.1 ppm. After the annealing process at 180 °C for 10 min, the surface of the DPP-DTT polymer layer was modified by argon (Ar) plasma treatment to create a hydrophilic surface assisting the growth of the subsequent perovskite layer. The adduct method26 was employed for preparing a MAPbI3 layer on the DPP-DTT surface. A perovskite precursor solution with a concentration of 1 mol L−1 was prepared by mixing 1 millimole lead iodide (Xian Polymer), 1 millimole methanaminium iodide (Dyenamo) and 1 millimole dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma Aldrich) in 1 mL dimethylformamide (Sigma Aldrich). The precursor solution was stirred at room temperature overnight before use. A control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel was also fabricated for comparison studies.
The thicknesses of the DPP-DTT layer and the perovskite layer were controlled at about 70 nm and 230 nm, respectively, measured using a Veeco Dektak 150 Profilometer. The absorption spectra of the films were recorded using an HP 8453 spectrophotometer. XRD spectra of the perovskite films were measured using a Bruker D8 Advance system (Cu X-ray source). The morphological images of the samples were obtained using a LEO 1530 SEM. The current–voltage characteristics of the PTs were measured using a Keithley 2636B dual-channel source meter coupled with a probe station. The broadband photoresponses of the PTs were measured using UV (365 nm), visible (450 nm) and NIR (850 nm) LED (Zolix) light sources. The intensities of the different light sources were controlled using neutral optical filters and calibrated using a power meter (Thorlabs). All the measurements were performed under ambient conditions.
3. Results and discussion
The molecular structures of the MAPbI327 perovskite semiconductor and the DPP-DTT polymer are shown in Fig. 1a and b respectively. The schematic configuration of a BGBC type PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel is shown in Fig. 1c. The absorption spectra measured for the MAPbI3, NIR light absorbing DPP-DTT polymer and bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT layers are shown in Fig. 1d. Complementary absorption of the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT layer over the UV-NIR light wavelength range is clearly seen. The MAPbI3 layer exhibits good light absorption in the UV-visible light wavelength region. The DPP-DTT layer also has a high absorption coefficient of ∼2.6 × 105 cm−1, which is much higher than that of silicon (∼1 × 103 cm−1) at this wavelength. The absorption of the DPP-DTT polymer layer peaks at 820 nm, with the absorption extending to a long wavelength of 950 nm. Therefore, the use of a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT configuration takes advantage of the strong light absorption in the UV-visible region due to MAPbI3 and high NIR absorption due to the DPP-DTT polymer, making it promising for UV-NIR light broadband photo-detection.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structures of (a) MAPbI3 perovskite and (b) DPP-DTT polymer semiconductors. (c) The schematic cross-sectional view of a PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel. (d) The absorption spectra measured for a MAPbI3 layer, a DPP-DTT layer, and a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT film. 
The DPP-DTT polymer layer has a hydrophobic surface, as revealed in the contact angle measurements. The surface of a pristine DPP-DTT polymer layer has a large contact angle of 105°, as shown in Fig. 2a. The hydrophobic polymer surface is unfavorable for the growth of the MAPbI3 layer. To resolve this problem, the hydrophobic DPP-DTT polymer surface was modified by Ar plasma treatment to form a hydrophilic surface. The contact angle measured for the Ar-plasma treated DPP-DTT polymer layer surface decreased dramatically as compared to that measured for the pristine DPP-DTT polymer surface, as shown in Fig. 2b–d, indicating a decrease in hydrophobicity. The contact angle decreased from 105° for the un-treated DPP-DTT surface to 63.1°, 61.5° and 52.7°, respectively, after 3 s, 5 s and 10 s Ar plasma treatments. It was found that a 3 s Ar plasma-treated DPP-DTT layer was effective in creating the desired surface properties for the growth of the MAPbI3 layer.
 Fig. 2  Contact angles measured for surfaces of (a) the pristine DPP-DTT polymer layer, and the DPP-DTT polymer layers modified by the Ar plasma treatment for (b) 3 s, (c) 5 s and (d) 10 s. 
The morphological and structural properties of the MAPbI3 thin films grown on the SiO2/Si and DPP-DTT surfaces were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. The cross-sectional view and top view SEM images obtained for the MAPbI3 film grown on the SiO2/Si substrate are shown in Fig. 3a and b, and those measured for a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT film formed on the SiO2/Si substrate are shown in Fig. 3c and d. The SEM image shown in Fig. 3c reveals that a dense and uniform MAPbI3 layer was formed on the surface of the Ar plasma-treated DPP-DTT polymer layer. There is no observable change in the top view SEM images measured for the MAPbI3 layers grown on the SiO2 and DPP-DTT polymer surfaces, suggesting that the MAPbI3 layers grown on the SiO2 and DPP-DTT polymer surfaces had similar polycrystalline characteristics. The XRD patterns, as shown in Fig. 3e and f, agree well with the SEM observation in showing that the MAPbI3 layers, grown on the SiO2 and DPP-DTT polymer surfaces, possess the same crystallinity and film quality. It is clear that the XRD patterns measured for the MAPbI3 layers having three characteristic diffraction peaks at 14.2°, 28.5° and 31.9°, associated, respectively, with (110), (220) and (310) planes, agree well with previously reported results.26 These results suggest that the Ar plasma-treated DPP-DTT polymer surface is suitable for the growth of the MAPbI3 layer.
 Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional view and (b) top view SEM images measured for a MAPbI3 layer grown on SiO2/Si substrates. (c) Cross-sectional view and (d) top view SEM images measured for a MAPbI3 layer grown on the surface of a plasma-treated DPP-DTT layer. XRD patterns measured for the MAPbI3 films grown on (e) SiO2 and (f) Ar plasma-treated DPP-DTT surfaces. 
The transfer curves of the PTs as a function of light intensity were measured. The gate voltage (VGS) was scanned from 10 V to −10 V and the source–drain voltage (VDS) was fixed at −1 V in the measurements. The photoresponses of the broadband PTs were characterized using different UV (365 nm), visible (450 nm) and NIR (850 nm) light sources. The transfer curves measured for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are plotted in Fig. 4a–c. The corresponding transfer curves measured for the broadband PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are plotted in Fig. 4d–f. The results reveal clearly that the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel exhibit much profound change in the photocurrent, particularly over the UV-visible light wavelength range, as compared to that of the control PT with a single layer channel, implying an enhanced photoresponse.
 Fig. 4  Transfer curves measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT PT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding transfer curves measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. The transfer curves were measured at a fixed VDS of −1 V. 
The photoresponsivity (R) of the PTs can be calculated using the equation R = (Ilight − Idark)/Pincident, where Ilight and Idark are the channel currents measured for the PTs in the presence of light and the absence of light, respectively. Pincident is the intensity of the incident light. The values of R were extracted from the transfer characteristics. Photoresponsivity characteristics as a function of VGS measured for the PTs with a single DPP-DTT channel and a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are presented in Fig. 5. It is clear that the R of the PTs is dependent on VGS, indicating that higher responsivity and gain can be readily obtained by applying an appropriate VGS. The photoresponsivities measured for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are shown in Fig. 5a–c. The corresponding photoresponsivities measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are plotted in Fig. 5d–f. The photoresponsivities of the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel obviously exceeded those of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel, particularly in the UV-visible light wavelength region. The results reveal that the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel exhibit clearly enhanced UV-NIR light broadband photoresponses, taking advantage of the complementary absorption of MAPbI3 and DPP-DTT, enabled by the bi-layer channel configuration, and thereby leading to a high performance broadband photoresponsivity.
 Fig. 5  Photoresponsivity characteristics measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding photoresponsivity characteristics measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements. 
The photoresponsivities measured for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel and those with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel, operated in the on-state (VGS = −8 V) and off-state (VGS = 8 V), as a function of the intensity of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are plotted in Fig. 6. The VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements. The photoresponsivities of the different PTs operated in the on-state (VGS = −8 V) in the presence of the UV (2 μW cm−2), visible 450 nm (2 μW cm−2) and NIR 850 nm (215 μW cm−2) light sources are plotted in Fig. 6a, while the corresponding photoresponsivities of the PTs operated in the off-state (VGS = 8 V) are presented in Fig. 6b. The results in Fig. 6 reveal clearly that the photoresponsivity enhancement in PTs with a bi-layer channel is realized, when operated in the on- and off-states in the presence of UV-visible light. The photoresponsivity values of the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel, when operated in the on-state in the presence of lower light intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources, were 7.6 A W−1, 9.5 A W−1 and 0.08 A W−1, which are 5, 5.9, and 1.3 times higher than those of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel measured under the same conditions in the presence of UV light (1.5 A W−1), visible light (1.6 A W−1), and NIR light (0.06 A W−1), respectively. In the off-state, the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel had photoresponsivities of 0.38 A W−1, 0.43 A W−1 and 0.0023 A W−1 in the presence of the UV, visible and NIR light sources, which are 214, 480 and 230 times higher than those measured for the PTs with a single layer polymer channel under the UV (1.77 × 10−3 A W−1), visible (8.9 × 10−4 A W−1) and NIR (1 × 10−5 A W−1) light sources, respectively. The significant broadband enhancement in the photoresponsivity is enabled by incorporating a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the PTs, taking advantage of the (1) complementary absorption of MAPbI3 and DPP-DTT and (2) high charge transport efficiency in the perovskite in the MAPbI3/polymer channel.
 Fig. 6  Photoresponsivity characteristics measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel and a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel operated in the (a) on-state (at VGS = −8 V) and (b) off-state (at VGS = 8 V), as a function of the intensity of UV, visible and NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements. 
To unravel the origin of the advantages of the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel on the photoresponsivity enhancement in the broadband PTs, the transistor properties of both types of the PTs in the absence of light were examined. The dark transfer curves as a function of gate voltage and source–drain voltage measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel under different VDS values in the dark are plotted in Fig. 7a, exhibiting typical p-type conduction behavior. It shows that by varying the VDS from −1 V to −10 V the change in channel current (IDS) in the PTs operated in the off-state is more prominent than the change in IDS measured for the PTs in the on-state. In the off-state, the IDS measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel was higher than that of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel, operated at VDS = −1 V, as shown in Fig. 7b. On the other hand, in the on-state, both types of PTs exhibit similar transistor behaviors with comparable IDS, as shown in Fig. 7b. In the on-state, the charge carrier transport preferably through the DPP-DTT layer due to the accumulation of the holes at the DPP-DTT/SiO2 interface is induced by a negative VGS, forming an ultra-high conductance of the polymer channel. In the off-state, no holes are accumulated near the vicinity of the DPP-DTT/SiO2 interface in the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel. In such a situation, a relatively higher IDS, observed in the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the off-state, comes from the transport of the charge carriers in the perovskite layer. To illustrate this point, IDS values for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel and a single layer DPP-DTT channel in the off-state (VGS = 8 V) as a function of VDS were measured. IDS measured for a PT with a single layer MAPbI3 channel at VGS = 0 V as a function of VDS was also presented for comparison. The results are presented in Fig. 7c. They clearly show that with the increase in VDS the IDS measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel is much higher than that measured for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel. On the other hand, IDS measured for the PTs with a single layer MAPbI3 channel is similar to the one observed for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel. Our results reveal clearly that the higher IDS seen in the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel, operated in the off-state, is enabled primarily by the hole transport in the MAPbI3 layer, which has a higher hole mobility as compared to that in the DPP-DTT layer. Apparently, the hole transport in the DPP-DTT layer was hindered in the PTs operated at a positive VGS. The schematic diagrams illustrating the device structures and the current flows in the PTs with a single layer DPP-DTT channel, a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel, and a single layer MAPbI3 channel are presented in Fig. 7d–f.
 Fig. 7  (a) Transfer characteristics measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel under different VDS values in the absence of light. (b) Comparison of the transfer curves measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel and a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel operated at VDS = −1 V. (c) The dark channel currents measured for different PTs in the off-state (VGS = 8 V) as a function of VDS. The dark channel current measured for a PT with a single layer MAPbI3 channel at VGS = 0 V as a function of VDS is also presented for comparison. Schematic diagrams illustrating the device structures and the current flows in the PTs with (d) a single layer DPP-DTT channel and (e) a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the off-state, and (f) a single layer MAPbI3 channel at VGS = 0V. 
PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel are able to provide two charge transport paths upon varying the VGS: (1) the MAPbI3 charge transport path for the PTs operating in the off-state and (2) the DPP-DTT charge transport path for the PTs operating in the on-state. The unique feature of the dual charge transport path, enabled by the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel, offers an attractive photodetection option for the broadband PTs that can be operated in both the off-state and on-state for enhanced photoresponsivity. The photogenerated excitons in the MAPbI3 perovskite layer can be dissociated efficiently due to the low exciton binding energy,27 generating a high density of charge carriers in the presence of light, which can be efficiently transported in the MAPbI3 layer in the off-state and in the DPP-DTT layer in the on-state. The schematic diagrams illustrating the current flows in the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the off-state and on-state in the presence of UV-visible light are shown in Fig. 8a and b, respectively. In the off-state, the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel exhibit a higher photoresponsivity due to the strong light absorption in the UV-visible light range and excellent electrical properties of the MAPbI3 layer28,29 as compared to the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel. In the on-state, the high density of photogenerated charge carriers in the MAPbI3 layer in the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel can be diffused to the underlying DPP-DTT layer, as schematically shown in Fig. 8b. This helps in increasing the density of charge carriers in the DPP-DTT layer, resulting in a higher channel current as compared to the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel. Therefore, an enhancement in the photoresponsivity of the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the UV-visible light region was observed in both the off- and on-states.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagrams illustrating the current flows in a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the (a) off-state and (b) on-state in the presence of UV-visible light. (c) Steady state and (d) time-resolved PL characteristics measured for a MAPbI3 film and a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT film grown on the SiO2/Si substrates. 
The transfer of the charge carriers between the MAPbI3 layer and the DPP-DTT layer was further analyzed using the steady state and time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements. PL characteristics are closely associated with the behavior of the charge transfer process near the vicinity of the interface between two adjacent photosensitive materials,30 providing qualitative information about charge transfer and recombination processes. The steady state and time-resolved PL spectra measured for the single layer MAPbI3 film and bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT film formed on the SiO2/Si substrates were measured. The results are plotted in Fig. 8c and d, respectively. There is an obvious decrease in the intensity of the steady state PL spectra measured for the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT as compared to that measured for the single layer MAPbI3 film over the wavelength range from 650 nm to 850 nm, revealing the processes of charge transfer from the MAPbI3 layer to the DPP-DTT layer taking place at the MAPbI3/DPP-DTT interface. The time-resolved PL characteristics indicate that photogenerated charge carriers with a shorter lifetime were observed in the MAPbI3 layer when it was formed on the DPP-DTT surface, caused by the charge transfer occurring at the MAPbI3/DPP-DTT interface. Based on these PL results, it is anticipated that the charge transfer occurring at the MAPbI3/DPP-DTT interface in the broadband PTs is responsible for the photoresponsivity enhancement.
The photosensitivity (P) of the different PTs, defined as the ratio of the photocurrent to the dark current, was analyzed. The photosensitivity characteristics as a function of VGS measured for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are presented in Fig. 9a–c. The photosensitivity values as a function of VGS measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are plotted in Fig. 9d–f. The PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel show high photosensitivity, which is clearly demonstrated as compared to that of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel in the UV-visible light region. The observed enhancement in the photosensitivity of the PTs with a bi-layer channel also is attributed to the high absorption in the MAPbI3 layer in the UV-visible light region.
 Fig. 9  Photosensitivity characteristics as a function of VGS measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding photosensitivity characteristics as a function of VGS measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements. 
The advantage of the broadband PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel can be further elucidated by analyzing D* of the PTs. The shot noise of a photodetector can be described by , where q is the electron charge, Idark is the dark current, and Δf is the bandwidth. Shot noise is frequency independent, such that the specific detectivity can be estimated using the equation: , where R is the photoresponsivity and A is the active area of the detector. The wavelength-dependent specific detectivity of the PTs as a function of light intensity was analyzed. The D*–VGS characteristics measured for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are shown in Fig. 10a–c. The corresponding D*–VGS characteristics measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of the UV, visible and NIR light sources are plotted in Fig. 10d–f. Benefiting from the much enhanced photoresponsivity in the UV-visible region, the D* of the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel was much higher than that of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT PT channel.
 Fig. 10  
D*–VGS characteristics measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding D*–VGS characteristics measured for a PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements. 
The transient photoresponse speed of the PTs was measured using a 0.5 Hz modulated visible light (450 nm) source with an intensity of 2 μW cm−2. VGS and VDS used in the transient measurements were fixed at −1 V. The results are shown in Fig. 11a. It is clear that the photoresponse speed measured for the PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel was much faster than that of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel. The rise and fall times of the PTs are estimated by measuring the times taken for the photocurrent to increase from 10% to 90% of its maximum value and decrease from the 90% to 10% of its maximum value, respectively. The results are plotted in Fig. 11b. The broadband PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel have a much faster response time, e.g., a rising time of 0.17 s and a falling time 0.25 s, than that of the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel (e.g., >2.0 s) for both rising and falling times. The results are consistent with the observation reported in our previous work.4 The slow photoresponse obtained for the control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel is attributed to the presence of defects, relatively short exciton diffusion length,31 and imperfection of the charge separation and transport in the single layer channel.32
 Fig. 11  (a) Transient photoresponses measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel and a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using a 0.5 Hz modulated visible light (450 nm) source with an intensity of 2 μW cm−2. VGS and VDS were fixed at −1 V. (b) The broadband bilayer channel PTs have a much faster photoresponse time, e.g., a rising time of 0.17 s and a falling time of 0.25 s as compared to a control PT with a DPP-DTT channel (>2.0 s). 
The performance of all polymer-based PTs is often limited due to their low carrier mobility, and the mismatch between the charge transport scale and absorption depth over a broader spectral range. There are not many choices in the photoactive polymer materials that exhibit simultaneously high NIR absorption and high carrier mobility. The relatively low photoresponsivity and photosensitivity in solution-processable broadband polymer PTs are still an open challenge. The accomplishment of broadband PTs with a bi-layer perovskite/NIR light absorbing polymer channel as demonstrated in this work will have a profound impact on the development of high performance broadband photodetectors.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, high performing UV to NIR light broadband PTs with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel were demonstrated. The use of the bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel largely enhances the photoresponsivity, photosensitivity and specific detectivity of the broadband PTs. The bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel PTs also exhibit enhanced transient photoresponses as compared to that of a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel, benefiting from the combined effects of complementary absorption and high charge transport in the bilayer channel. It is anticipated that the bi-layer channel PT developed in this work is very attractive for application in low energy consumption and portable electronics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, General Research Fund (GRF/12302817) and the Hong Kong Baptist University Inter-institutional Collaborative Research Scheme (RC-ICRS/15-16/04).
References
N. Li, Y. S. Lau, Z. Xiao, L. M. Ding and F. R. Zhu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1801084 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Song, M. Cao, Y. Che, H. Dai, J. Yang, J. Wang, H. Zhang and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 445–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. J. Lan, L. F. Cai and F. R. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3711–3729 RSC .
Y. L. Lei, N. Li, W. K. E. Chan, B. S. Ong and F. R. Zhu, Org. Electron., 2017, 48, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Z. Bao and J. H. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 629–639 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, J. Cao, H. Li, L. Ding and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3138–3146 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, X. Liao, J. Zheng, C. A. Di, X. Gao and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 137 Search PubMed .
R. M. Pinto, W. Gouveia, A. I. S. Neves and H. Alves, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 109 CrossRef .
E. H. Huisman, A. G. Shulga, P. J. Zomer, N. Tombros, D. Bartesaghi, S. Z. Bisri, M. A. Loi, L. J. A. Koster and B. J. Van Wees, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11083–11088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hwang, H. Kim, S. Nam, D. D. C. Bradley, C. S. Ha and Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2275–2279 RSC .
S. Park, S. J. Kim, J. H. Nam, G. Pitner, T. H. Lee, A. L. Ayzner, H. Wang, S. W. Fong, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. J. Park, M. L. Brongersma and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 759–765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Song, B. Liu, G. Chen, D. Chen, C. Zhou and G. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1202–1209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J. P. Correa Baena, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cai, L. Yang, Y. Yan, J. Zhang, F. Qin, D. Liu, Y. B. Cheng, Y. Zhou and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9402–9411 RSC .
Y. Lee, J. Kwon, E. Hwang, C. H. Ra, W. J. Yoo, J. H. Ahn, J. H. Park and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Spina, M. Lehmann, B. Náfrádi, L. Bernard, E. Bonvin, R. Gaál, A. Magrez, L. Forrõ and E. Horváth, Small, 2015, 11, 4824–4828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Q. Dang, G. S. Han, T. Q. Trung, L. T. Duy, Y. U. Jin, B. U. Hwang, H. S. Jung and N. E. Lee, Carbon, 2016, 105, 353–361 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Xiong and T. Zhai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700206 CrossRef .
S. Du, G. Li, X. Cao, Y. Wang, H. Lu, S. Zhang, C. Liu and H. Zhou, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600325 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Liu, G. Wang, L. Wang and C. Jiang, Org. Electron., 2016, 38, 158–163 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tong, J. Sun, C. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Zhang, J. Shen, H. Xie, D. Niu, S. Xiao, Y. Yuan, J. He, J. Yang and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700058 CrossRef .
Y. L. Lei, P. Deng, M. Lin, X. Zheng, F. R. Zhu and B. S. Ong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6687–6694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Lei, P. Deng, J. Li, M. Lin, F. R. Zhu, T. W. Ng, C. S. Lee and B. S. Ong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Lei, B. Wu, W. K. E. Chan, F. R. Zhu and B. S. Ong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 12267–12272 RSC .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, X. Yang, D. Dong, B. Li, D. Yang, S. Yuan, K. Qiao, Y. B. Cheng, J. Tang and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7963–7969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yuan, S. Najmaei, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Lei, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J. Lou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 555–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3417–3428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Teng, M. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Xie and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5969–5974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structures of (a) MAPbI3 perovskite and (b) DPP-DTT polymer semiconductors. (c) The schematic cross-sectional view of a PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel. (d) The absorption spectra measured for a MAPbI3 layer, a DPP-DTT layer, and a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT film.	 

 	Fig. 2  Contact angles measured for surfaces of (a) the pristine DPP-DTT polymer layer, and the DPP-DTT polymer layers modified by the Ar plasma treatment for (b) 3 s, (c) 5 s and (d) 10 s.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Cross-sectional view and (b) top view SEM images measured for a MAPbI3 layer grown on SiO2/Si substrates. (c) Cross-sectional view and (d) top view SEM images measured for a MAPbI3 layer grown on the surface of a plasma-treated DPP-DTT layer. XRD patterns measured for the MAPbI3 films grown on (e) SiO2 and (f) Ar plasma-treated DPP-DTT surfaces.	 

 	Fig. 4  Transfer curves measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT PT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding transfer curves measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. The transfer curves were measured at a fixed VDS of −1 V.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoresponsivity characteristics measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding photoresponsivity characteristics measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoresponsivity characteristics measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel and a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel operated in the (a) on-state (at VGS = −8 V) and (b) off-state (at VGS = 8 V), as a function of the intensity of UV, visible and NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Transfer characteristics measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel under different VDS values in the absence of light. (b) Comparison of the transfer curves measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel and a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel operated at VDS = −1 V. (c) The dark channel currents measured for different PTs in the off-state (VGS = 8 V) as a function of VDS. The dark channel current measured for a PT with a single layer MAPbI3 channel at VGS = 0 V as a function of VDS is also presented for comparison. Schematic diagrams illustrating the device structures and the current flows in the PTs with (d) a single layer DPP-DTT channel and (e) a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the off-state, and (f) a single layer MAPbI3 channel at VGS = 0V.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagrams illustrating the current flows in a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel in the (a) off-state and (b) on-state in the presence of UV-visible light. (c) Steady state and (d) time-resolved PL characteristics measured for a MAPbI3 film and a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT film grown on the SiO2/Si substrates.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photosensitivity characteristics as a function of VGS measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding photosensitivity characteristics as a function of VGS measured for a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements.	 

 	Fig. 10  
D*–VGS characteristics measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (a) UV, (b) visible and (c) NIR light sources. The corresponding D*–VGS characteristics measured for a PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using different intensities of (d) UV, (e) visible and (f) NIR light sources. VDS was set at −1 V in the measurements.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Transient photoresponses measured for a control PT with a single layer DPP-DTT channel and a broadband PT with a bi-layer MAPbI3/DPP-DTT channel using a 0.5 Hz modulated visible light (450 nm) source with an intensity of 2 μW cm−2. VGS and VDS were fixed at −1 V. (b) The broadband bilayer channel PTs have a much faster photoresponse time, e.g., a rising time of 0.17 s and a falling time of 0.25 s as compared to a control PT with a DPP-DTT channel (>2.0 s).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
