Metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrogen: mechanisms, recent advances and perspective  - Reaction Chemistry & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8RE00111A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8RE00111A
(Review Article)
React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3, 591-625Metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrogen: mechanisms, recent advances and perspective

        
          
            Jun-Hao 
            Zhou
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ya-Wen 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications, PKU-HKU Joint Laboratory in Rare Earth Materials and Bioinorganic Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: ywzhang@pku.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10 62756787;   Tel: +86 10 62756787
Received 
      21st June 2018
    , Accepted 6th July 2018First published on 6th July 2018AbstractIn recent years, the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2RR) and the reduction of nitrogen (NRR) have attracted increasing attention due to their potential to transform energy from renewable and clean sources to chemical energy stored in value-added chemicals, such as hydrocarbons, alcohols and ammonia (NH3). Meanwhile, CO2RR can also reduce the global carbon footprint and address global climate change, while NRR may significantly improve the energy efficiency of NH3 production. However, because CO2 and N2 molecules are inert, electrocatalysts with low overpotentials, high selectivities and superior faradaic efficiencies (FE) are required to enhance these two kinetically slow reactions. For the first time, this review discusses the similarities and differences between CO2RR and NRR in the following aspects: (1) fundamental theory of the reaction mechanisms and the corresponding catalyst design principles; (2) reaction systems and product analysis methods; (3) recent advances in heterogeneous electrocatalysts synthesized from different metals with various compositions, structures and morphologies. Much progress has been achieved to improve catalytic performance towards CO2RR and NRR. Finally, an outlook of future developments for CO2RR and NRR is proposed.Jun-Hao ZhouJun-Hao Zhou was born in November 1995 in Hubei, China. He received his BSc degree in Material Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2016. Currently, he is working toward his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Ya-Wen Zhang at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University. His current research focuses on the controllable synthesis of noble and non-noble metal-based nanomaterials and their applications in the electrochemical reduction of CO2.Yawen ZhangYawen Zhang is a full professor and principal investigator at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Peking University. The research interests of his group are rational design, controllable synthesis, ordered assembly, catalytic properties and structure–function relationships of rare earth and noble metal nanostructures. He has published more than 130 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals and was a Winner of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. He obtained his BSc degree, MSc degree, and PhD degree from Peking University in 1988, 1994 and 1997, respectively, and performed postdoctoral research at the State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications of Peking University from 1998 to 2000; he was also a visiting scholar at the Department of Chemistry of the University of California at Berkeley and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory from 2006 to 2008.
1. Introduction
During the past centuries, the development of human civilization has consumed much of the traditional energy sources, such as coal and oil. It has been recognized that these non-renewable fossil fuels will be exhausted in the future if no action is taken. Thus, renewable energy, which is collected from renewable sources such as sunlight, wind, tides, waves and geothermal heat, has drawn increasing attention during the last decade due to its natural replenishment on a human timescale.1 The rapid growth of renewable energy is also driven by other factors: improving the cost-competitiveness of renewable technologies, policy initiatives, friendliness to the environment, energy security, etc.2 According to REN21's 2016 report, renewable energy provided 19.2% of global final energy consumption in 2014, of which 8.9% came from traditional biomass and 10.3% came from modern renewable sources, such as wind/solar/geothermal heat.2 Renewable energy often plays roles in three areas: electricity generation, transportation and air/water heating and cooling. Among these, electricity generation is of great significance due to the wide use of electricity in human industry and life.
Electricity is convenient for transmission and use; thus, it is expected to be the main form of energy for human beings for a long time. Due to the daily growing application of renewable energy, electricity resources will be much more accessible in the future. However, most renewable energy sources are intermittent and geography- or weather-dependent.3 Traditional sources can maintain a steady energy output; however, power generation from renewable sources varies greatly over time/space, so that energy cannot always be provided at the proper time or at the right location. As a result, the conversion and storage of electricity generated from renewable energy is a vital problem. The development of rechargeable lithium batteries, supercapacitors and flow batteries is one possible solution; however, all these suffer from low energy densities and high costs.4–9 Another promising method is converting and storing electricity from renewable energy in the form of chemical bonds. Water (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrogen (N2) are reduced in the cathode, and electricity is converted and stored in hydrogen (H2), carbon monoxide (CO), formate acid (HCOOH), hydrocarbons, alcohols and ammonium (NH3).10–13 These reactions are called the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR) and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR). These value-added products are more suitable for storage and can be applied directly for electricity generation (hydrogen–oxygen, methane, methanol or ethanol fuel cells) or in the chemical industry.
CO2RR and NRR are two chemical reactions that can protect the environment and generate value-added products at the same time. It is known that the increasing atmospheric CO2 concentration caused by the high consumption of fossil fuels is bringing about global climate change and that action must be taken to lower global carbon emissions.14 Thus, CO2RR, which can convert detrimental CO2 into helpful products, is of great significance.15,16 Unlike CO2RR, NRR may be beneficial to the environment in an indirect way. NH3 is not only essential for producing various chemicals in the chemical industry but is also an important energy storage intermediate.17–19 Industrial ammonium production is currently dominated by the traditional high-temperature and high-pressure Haber–Bosch process, which consumes large amounts of energy (still mainly provided by traditional fossil fuels).20,21 Additionally, the high purity H2 used for reducing N2 is largely produced by steam reforming of natural gas from fossil fuels.22–24 The large consumption of fossil fuels is not only energy-inefficient but is also detrimental to the environment. If electricity could replace heat as the main energy form to produce ammonium, the energy efficiency of the synthesis process would be remarkably improved and the reductant H2 would no longer be needed. Thus, electrochemical reduction of nitrogen is increasingly desired.
Although CO2RR and NRR appear to be highly suitable for addressing the conversion/storage of renewable energy and protecting the environment, they are still very far from application in actual industry and life. The linear CO2 molecule is chemically inert to reduction due to its low electron affinity and the large energy gap between its highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO).25 It has been reported that the first electron transfer for reducing CO2 requires potentials more negative than −1.90 V (vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)) in water or −1.97 V (vs. SHE) in dimethylformamide (DMF).26–28 The linear molecule N2, which has a closed-shell electron configuration, is also difficult to reduce (bond energy: 940.95 kJ mol−1).29 Additionally, 6 electrons are needed in the process of reducing N2 to ammonium. For these two reasons, NRR is both thermodynamically and kinetically unfavourable.
In recent years, much effort has been devoted to accelerating these kinetically slow reactions. A variety of heterogeneous electrocatalysts have been developed, which can be divided into two groups: metal-based electrocatalysts and metal-free electrocatalysts. Compared to metal-free electrocatalysts, investigation of metal-based electrocatalysts began earlier and is more comprehensive due to the accessibility and stability of metal-based materials.30 Based on their chemical compositions and structures, metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts can be further classified as noble metal-based electrocatalysts and non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts. For both CO2RR and NRR, although some of the synthesized metal-based electrocatalysts have shown relatively superior catalytic performance, these two fields still face the challenges of large overpotential, low faradaic efficiency (FE) and poor product selectivity due to the competitive HER.13,31,32
Considering the important roles of metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts in CO2RR and NRR and their unsatisfactory performance, a timely summary of these electrocatalysts will not only promote the understanding of recent advances in these areas, but also inspire the design and synthesis of future CO2RR and NRR catalysts with practical performance. Although several high-quality reviews have summarized recent advances in CO2RR or NRR in different aspects, none of them have discussed these two reactions together.33–43 Much research has shown that CO2RR and NRR differ significantly in their mechanisms and reaction pathways; however, there are numerous similarities between them in terms of their measurement systems and suitable metal-based materials. Therefore, a review focused on a comparison between CO2RR and NRR is highly desirable not only to better understand these two reactions but also to guide the design of future electrocatalysts that are suitable for both reactions.
In this review, we summarize and compare recent developments in CO2RR and NRR. We firstly discuss the fundamental theory of the reaction mechanisms and corresponding catalyst design principles for CO2RR and NRR. Secondly, current mainstream reaction systems and analysis methods of products for CO2RR and NRR are introduced. Then, the recent design and synthesis of metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR are categorized and reviewed based on their chemical compositions and structures, which is the core purpose of this review. The comparison of different metal-based materials that are suitable for CO2RR, NRR or both is emphasized where applicable. We finally provide some conclusions and a perspective of future developments in cutting-edge studies for CO2RR and NRR.
2. Mechanisms and electrocatalyst design principles of CO2RR and NRR
Some research has reported possible CO2RR and NRR processes on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts based on theoretical calculations and experimental results. Understanding the reaction pathways would guide the design and fabrication of electrocatalysts with superior activities and stabilities. In this section, the mechanisms of CO2RR and NRR are summarized; based on these mechanisms, the design principles of metal-based materials for CO2RR and NRR catalysts are discussed.
2.1 Reaction pathways of CO2RR and NRR

2.1.1 Reaction pathways of CO2RR. 
Research of CO2RR on metal electrodes, such as Au, Ag, Cu, Pb, and Zn, can be traced back to the last century.44–47 The possible reaction pathways of CO2RR on these electrodes have been thoroughly studied experimentally and theoretically for years.48–62 As displayed in Fig. 1, it is commonly believed that the rate-determining step (RDS) of CO2RR is the transfer of the first electron to CO2 to form the CO2˙− intermediate. Whether the oxygen atom or the carbon atom binds to the electrode surface determines which step will happen next.63 In the first situation, the oxygen atom in the CO2˙− intermediate binds to the electrode surface, which inspires the formation of the *OCHO intermediate; in the second situation, the carbon atom in the CO2˙− intermediate binds to the electrode surface, generating the *COOH intermediate. The formation of the *OCHO intermediate leads to the generation of formic acid (HCOOH), while the formation of the *COOH intermediate leads to the generation of the *CO intermediate and, finally, CO or hydrocarbons/alcohols.48,62 As a result, the tendencies of different metals to bind to various intermediates determine the final products.46,64 Jaramillo's group studied the relationship between the selectivities towards CO and HCOOH of different metals (Au, Ag, Cu, Zn, Pt, Ni, Sn) and their binding energies of the *COOH and *OCHO intermediates.53 A trend in activity was found in the form of a volcano plot (Fig. 1b and c). Au and Sn possessed the most appropriate binding energies of the *COOH and *OCHO intermediates, respectively; accordingly, jCO of Au and jHCOOH of Sn were the largest among these metals. This finding is consistent with the Sabatier principle, which indicates that binding to key intermediates that is neither too weak nor too strong leads to the best activity.65,66
 Fig. 1  (a) Reaction pathways of CO2RR on different metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts; (b) volcano plot using the *COOH binding energy as a descriptor for the CO partial current density at −0.9 V vs. RHE; (c) volcano plot using the *OCHO binding energy as a descriptor for the HCOO− partial current density at −0.9 V vs. RHE. (b) and (c) are adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Thus, we can divide metal electrodes into two groups based on their binding energies of *COOH and *OCHO, in which Sn, Pb, Hg, In, etc. can be classified in group I while Au, Ag, Zn, Pd, Cu, etc. can be classified in group II (Fig. 1a).46,64 Metals belonging to group I have more appropriate binding energies of the *OCHO intermediate than of the *COOH intermediate, which leads to the final product HCOOH; in contrast, metals belonging to group II have more appropriate binding energies of the *COOH intermediate, which guides the formation of CO or hydrocarbons/alcohols. It should be noted that Cu is very different from other metals in group II when considering their binding energies of the *CO intermediate. The *CO intermediate is weakly bound to the surfaces of Au, Ag, Zn, Pd, etc. in group II; thus, it easily desorbs from the surfaces and emerges as the main product. However, Cu can bind the *CO intermediate tightly and convert it to higher-value added products (hydrocarbons/alcohols).48 In summary, various metals can convert CO2 to HCOOH, CO and hydrocarbons/alcohols, respectively, and this is determined by their binding energies of the *OCHO, *COOH and *CO intermediates.


2.1.2 Reaction pathways of NRR. 
To date, there are two hypothetical theories about the mechanism of NRR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts, i.e. associative and dissociative mechanisms; research in this area has not sufficiently proved whether one mechanism is the true one or whether they are respectively more suitable for different circumstances.21,40 In the associative mechanism, just as its name implies, two N atoms bind to each other while the N2 molecule adsorbs on the catalyst surface and undergoes hydrogenation. The associative mechanisms can be further classified as the associative distal pathway and the associative alternating pathway. In the associative distal pathway (Fig. 2a), hydrogenation may occur firstly on the N atom further from the catalyst surface to generate an NH3 molecule and leave behind a metalN, which will be then hydrogenated to generate another NH3. Unlike in the distal pathway, in the associative alternating pathway, H atom may react with both N atoms and form two NH3 molecules almost at the same time (Fig. 2b). The dissociative mechanism is quite easy to understand; the triple bond in N2 molecule firstly breaks, leaving two N atoms bound to the catalyst surface for the subsequent hydrogenation to produce NH3 molecules (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  Three possible reaction pathways of NRR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. 
Theoretical calculations about NRR on a metal surface are of great significance for revealing the free energy changes of possible intermediates during the reaction process.67,68 Nørskov's group studied the NRR process on Ru electrocatalyst with a flat (0001) surface based on adopting an associative distal mechanism (Fig. 3).67 When no potential is applied, the adsorption energy of a N2 molecule on Ru (0001) surface is −0.4 eV. After considering the large loss in entropy due to the transformation of gas phase to a surface-bound molecule (*N2), the free energy change is calculated to be +0.08 eV. The addition of the first H atom to the *N2 intermediate to form the *N2H intermediate is regarded as the rate-determining step because this step is the most exergonic, with uphill values of +0.75 eV in energy and +1.08 eV in free energy. After a potential of −1.08 V is applied, the energy required for all the elementary steps is lower; thus, NRR is more likely to occur.
 Fig. 3  Free energy for the associative distal mechanism on a flat Ru (0001) surface obtained from DFT calculations with no potential applied and with an applied potential of −1.08 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.2 Electrocatalyst design principles of CO2RR and NRR

2.2.1 Electrocatalyst design principles of CO2RR. 
As mentioned above, the reaction pathway and final product of CO2RR are mainly determined by the ability of metal electrodes to bind various intermediates. Thus, when we are designing a metal-based electrocatalyst for CO2RR, choosing metals with appropriate binding energies of the reaction intermediates is the key point to generate the desired product. For example, Sn, Pb, etc., which have appropriate binding energies of *OCHO, are suitable for producing HCOOH; meanwhile, Au, Pd, etc., which have appropriate binding energies of *COOH, are suitable for producing CO. Additionally, if CH4 or C2–C3 products are highly sought, Cu, which has an appropriate binding energy of *COOH and can bind to *CO tightly, is a compelling choice. Furthermore, the competitive HER should not be neglected in the case of CO2RR. Pt and Ni are more appropriate for HER and have inappropriate binding energies of the *COOH and *OCHO intermediates; thus, they should be excluded when designing CO2RR electrocatalysts.69–71
Most research shows that pure, unmodified metal electrodes are not suitable choices for CO2RR. Various methods have been applied to improve the electrocatalytic performance of metal-based materials by nanoengineering their phases, valences, structures and compositions.72–80 The abilities of these methods to lower the overpotentials and/or improve the FEs of electrocatalysts towards CO2RR can be summarized in two points: 1) increasing the CO2 adsorption ability of the electrocatalyst; 2) stabilizing the CO2˙− intermediate on the surface of the electrocatalyst. During the heterogeneous catalytic process, CO2 should firstly adsorb on the catalyst surface for the next reduction reaction; thus, due to the superior adsorption ability of CO2, more CO2 molecules can be converted to the final product, which increases the FE of CO2RR.81 Analysis of the reaction pathway of CO2RR indicates that the addition of the first electron to form the CO2˙− intermediate is the rate-determining step. As a result, if we can stabilize the CO2˙− intermediate on the electrocatalyst surface and accelerate this elementary step, the catalytic activity towards CO2RR will be enhanced dramatically.
The design of a partially oxidized atomic cobalt layer for electrochemical reduction of CO2 is a good example of these principles.72 Xie's group used a ligand-confined growth strategy to synthesize ultrathin partially oxidized cobalt nanosheets which were found to show an extremely high FE of HCOOH with a lower overpotential (Fig. 4a and b). The results of CO2 adsorption isotherms and ECSA-corrected Tafel plots for HCOOH formation suggested that this superior performance can be ascribed to the oxidation state and enhanced CO2 adsorption ability of the cobalt nanosheets, in which the oxidation state of Co served as the active site for facilitating CO2 activation by stabilizing the CO2˙− intermediate (Fig. 4c and d). The design of amorphous Cu nanoparticles (NPs) for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to liquid fuels with high FE also confirmed these principles.82 Jiang's group fabricated amorphous Cu NPs by direct reduction of Cu precursors with various reducing agents; they unexpectedly found that this electrocatalyst showed a high FE of liquid fuels (HCOOH and C2H5OH) towards CO2RR. After various characterizations and comprehensive discussion, they suggested that the fine particle size, large ECSA, and enhanced CO2 adsorption ability of the amorphous Cu NPs accounted for this superior performance, in which a large ECSA results in more active sites for stabilizing the CO2˙− intermediate.
 Fig. 4  (a) Synthetic scheme of Co 4-atom-thick layers with and without partially oxidized surfaces; (b) FEs of electro-reduction of CO2 to HCOOH on four different electrodes; (c) CO2 adsorption amounts on the four electrodes; (d) ECSA-corrected Tafel plots for HCOOH production on the four electrodes. For (b)–(d), the four electrodes are partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers (red), Co 4-atom-thick layers (blue), partially oxidized bulk Co (violet) and bulk Co (black), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 


2.2.2 Electrocatalyst design principles of NRR. 
Unlike CO2RR, all electrocatalysts designed for NRR are supposed to convert N2 to NH3, and it is not necessary to connect the different metal electrodes with various products as in the last section. However, these two reactions are both heterogeneous catalytic processes for reducing gas-phase reagents, for which the prerequisite should be binding of the gas molecule to the catalyst surface. Thus, like the design principles for CO2RR electrocatalysts mentioned above, ideal metal-based materials for NRR should have optimized binding energies of nitrogen to enhance the N2 adsorption ability. Nørskov's group studied the relationship between the catalytic performance of fcc metals (Re, Ru, Rh, Co, Ni, Ir, Pt, Pd, Cu, Au and Ag) and their binding energies of nitrogen using the *N binding energy as a descriptor (Fig. 5).83 Taking (111) surfaces as an example, for metals such as Au and Ag, their binding to nitrogen is weak and the reductive adsorption of N2 to form *N2H is regarded as the rate-determining step. The limiting potential needed for NRR of Au and Ag is too negative, which indicates that these metals are not suitable for NRR. For metals including Ru, Rh, Co, Ni, Ir, Pt, Pd and Cu, the rate-determining step is the same as for Au and Ag; however, their binding to nitrogen is relatively strong, and the limiting potential required for NRR is much more positive. For metals with strong binding energies of nitrogen, such as Re, the protonation of *NH to *NH2 or the removal of *NH2 as NH3 becomes the rate-determining step, and the limiting potential needed for NRR of Re is the most positive among these metals.
 Fig. 5  Limiting potentials for N2 electro-reduction on the (111) surfaces of fcc metals as a function of the *N binding energy descriptor. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
If we only consider the limiting potential needed for NRR, Re, Ru, Rh, Co, Ni, Ir, Pt, Pd and Cu all appear to be good choices for designing an electrocatalyst for NRR. However, if we take the competitive HER into consideration, we may understand why the performance of electrocatalysts for NRR is still very poor. H2 is much more readily reduced than N2; thus, HER is almost always the dominant reaction in the NRR process. In the same work, Nørskov et al. compared the NRR limiting potentials and HER limiting potentials of these metal electrodes.83 It was disappointing to find that all these metals showed more positive limiting potentials for HER than for NRR, which suggests that none of these metals can achieve satisfactory FEs towards NRR.
Practically speaking, almost none of the currently fabricated electrocatalysts have shown satisfactory performance towards NRR. Therefore, guidelines for designing NRR catalysts with superior electrocatalytic activity are even more important. According to Nørskov's standpoint, we can propose some promising principles for reference: 1) selectively stabilizing the *N2H intermediate and destabilizing the *NH2 or *NH intermediate, which may reduce the overpotential needed for NRR; 2) suppressing HER on the catalyst during the reaction process, although this is not easily realized.83

3. Measurement systems of CO2RR and NRR
With the increasingly thorough investigation of CO2RR and NRR during the past years, more integrated and standardized measurement systems for both CO2RR and NRR have been established; thus, the experimental results obtained from different research groups are more comparable and convincing. In this section, the progress in these measurement systems is summarized to help researchers in this field to standardize their measurement procedures and to enable researchers who wish to participate in this area to establish measurement methods. Additionally, CO2RR and NRR have many similarities in their measurement processes, which is very convenient for researching both these processes simultaneously.
3.1 Measurement systems of CO2RR
Overall, a typical measurement system of CO2RR can be divided into two parts: the electrochemical reaction part and the product analysis part (Fig. 6). The electrochemical reaction part includes the electrode, reaction vessel, electrolyte, gas flow mass-meter and electrochemical workstation, while the product analysis part plays a role in the qualitative and quantitative analyses of the reductive gas/liquid product of CO2.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the measurement systems applied for the investigation of CO2RR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. 

3.1.1 Electrode. 
Working electrode. 
In heterogeneous electrocatalytic reactions, electrocatalysts should bind to a conductive substrate during the measurement process rather than being dispersed in the electrolyte. Thus, it is vital to choose a suitable substrate. Carbon paper and glassy carbon electrode are two common substrates used for working electrodes.72,84 Carbon paper is usually cut into regular rectangles for convenience of calculating the geometric area of the electrode. When preparing a working electrode, electrocatalysts dispersed in solution (containing Nafion or PVDF as a binder) are dropped or painted on the substrate and dried before testing.72,84
Counter electrode and reference electrode. 
In most cases, platinum electrodes with various shapes are used as the counter electrode.72,85,86 For the reference electrode, Ag/AgCl electrode (saturated KCl or 3 M KCl) or calomel electrode (saturated KCl) are most commonly used.72,86


3.1.2 Electrolyte and reaction vessel. 
Aqueous solutions of NaHCO3, KHCO3, Na2SO4 and ionic liquids with different concentrations have all been reported to be used as electrolytes in CO2RR.72,87–89 It has been reported that the type and concentration of electrolyte may have an influence on the performance of the electrocatalyst.90 According to the reaction pathway of CO2RR, protonation will occur during the conversion of *CO to CH4; thus, the pH value will greatly influence the formation of CH4. Meanwhile, the formation of C2H4 depends on the *CO coupling, which is pH-independent. As a result, the low local pH caused by the high concentrations of NaHCO3 and KHCO3 will facilitate the formation of CH4 while decreasing the concentration of NaHCO3; KHCO3 will enhance the selectivity towards C2H4.
A gas-tight H-type two chamber reaction vessel is often applied for electrochemical reduction of CO2, where the cathode and anode are immersed in electrolyte in the vessel. The two chambers are separated by an anion exchange membrane to avoid generating reduced anion products due to CO2 diffusing to the anodic chamber and re-oxidizing on the anode. Throughout the electrolysis, the electrolyte in the cathodic chamber is stirred with a magnetic stir bar.72


3.1.3 Gas mass flow controller (MFC) and electrochemical station. 
To start the experiment, CO2 should firstly flow through the working compartment at a certain flow rate for some time to saturate the electrolyte.84 As a result, a gas MFC is necessary to control the flow rate of CO2. Additionally, if CO2 or other gas products are directly introduced to the gas sample loop of the gas chromatograph (GC) for real-time analysis, another gas MFC is needed to monitor the flow rate of gas going into the GC to calculate the FE of the gas product.91
After the electrolyte is saturated, cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and amperometric i–t curves are carried out using the electrochemical station. It should be noted that all potentials should be iR-compensated.


3.1.4 Product analysis system. 
Gas products are usually analyzed by a GC, such as Agilent 7890A, which is equipped with TCD and FID for quantitative analysis of H2, CO and hydrocarbons.91 For liquid products (HCOOH, alcohols), 1H NMR spectroscopy is the most commonly used analysis method. A certain amount of electrolyte containing liquid product is mixed with deuterium oxide (D2O); a trace amount of an internal standard, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), is also added. The 1H NMR spectrum is measured with water suppression by implementing a solvent pre-saturation technique.72 The concentration of liquid product can be calculated from the peak area ratio of the liquid product and the internal standard in the NMR spectrogram.

3.2 Measurement systems of NRR
As stated above, CO2RR and NRR are both reactions that involve reduction of a gas molecule by a heterogeneous electrocatalyst. As a result, there are many similarities between the measurement systems of these two reations.92–94 The measurement system of NRR can also be divided into an electrochemical reaction part and a product analysis part. Furthermore, the electrochemical reaction part of NRR is almost the same as that of CO2RR, except for the electrolyte (Fig. 7).92 KOH or H2SO4 rather than NaHCO3, KHCO3 and Na2SO4 is usually used as the electrolyte in NRR.92–94
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the electrochemical reaction part applied for the investigation of NRR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
However, the product analysis part of NRR is quite different from that of CO2RR. The CO and hydrocarbons produced during the CO2RR process are almost insoluble in water; thus, GC is necessary for quantitative analysis of gas products. For liquid products (HCOOH and alcohols), the most efficient and convincing quantitative method is 1H NMR spectroscopy. These two methods are both relatively expensive. Unlike the gas products of CO2RR, NH3 generated in NRR diffuses in water to form NH4+ or NH3·H2O in an acidic/alkaline environment. Nessler's reagent colorimetric method and the indophenol blue colorimetric method are two common methods for determining the amount of ammonia in an aqueous solution.18,93–96

Nessler's reagent colorimetric method. 
This method is based on the following equation:NH4+ + 2[HgI4]2− + 4OH− − HgO·Hg(NH2)I↓ + 7I− + 3H2O
In this equation, potassium tetraiodomercurate (K2[HgI4]), which is known as Nessler's reagent, is prepared by dissolving a certain amount of anhydrous mercury iodide (HgI2) and anhydrous potassium iodide (KI) in an alkaline aqueous solution (such as NaOH aq.).96,97
The details of a typical detection procedure are as follows:
1) A suitable volume of electrolyte taken from the cathodic chamber after electrolysis of NRR is pipetted into a colorimetric tube;
2) KOH solution is added to adjust the pH of the solution;
3) A certain amount of potassium sodium tartrate (KNaC4H4O6) aqueous solution is added to chelate soluble metal ions;
4) A suitable volume of Nessler's reagent is added and the mixture is diluted with water to a certain volume;
5) The solution is allowed to stand for a while for color development;
6) The UV-vis absorption spectrum is measured. Background correction is performed with a blank solution, and the absorbance of the solution is then measured at 425 nm;
7) A calibration curve is plotted by replacing the electrolyte with a series of standard ammonium chloride solutions with known concentrations.
Indophenol blue colorimetric method. 
Indophenol blue is another reagent that is commonly applied for the determination of ammonia in aqueous solution.93
The details of a typical detection procedure are as follows:
1) A suitable volume of electrolyte taken from the cathodic chamber after electrolysis of NRR is pipetted into a colorimetric tube;
2) A certain amount of NaOH solution containing salicylic acid and sodium citrate is added;
3) Suitable volumes of NaClO aq. and sodium nitroferricyanide (C5FeN6Na2O) aq. are added, followed by diluting with water to a certain volume;
4) The solution is allowed to stand for a while for color development;
5) The UV-vis absorption spectrum is measured. Background correction is performed with a blank solution, and the absorbance of the solution is then measured at 655 nm;
6) A calibration curve is plotted by replacing the electrolyte with a series of standard ammonium chloride solutions with known concentrations.

4. Electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR
Based on their chemical compositions and structures, metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR can be further classified as noble metal-based electrocatalysts and non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts. In this section, the electrocatalytic CO2RR and NRR performance of these two types of electrocatalysts is discussed in detail. We wish to stress that some metals show potential for catalyzing both reactions, and an electrocatalyst which can electrochemically reduce CO2 and N2 with high efficiency may be realized in the future.
4.1 Noble metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR
Due to their ability to bind various reaction intermediates tightly, outstanding stability under acidic/alkaline conditions and superior electrical conductivity, noble metals are widely investigated in electrocatalytic fields. The most widely explored noble metals for CO2RR and NRR are Au, Ag, Pd, Rh, Ru, and Pt. However, the scarcity and high cost of noble metals also hinder their wide application on an industrial scale.

4.1.1 Au-Based electrocatalysts. 
Au has been one of the most widely and thoroughly investigated metals for CO2RR in recent years; it shows superior catalytic performance for converting CO2 to CO.73,98–105 Most research shows that the electrocatalytic activity of Au is closely related to the size and morphology of Au NPs.73,98–100 Sun's group reported the synthesis of Au NPs with various sizes; among these Au NPs, 8 nm Au NPs showed the best CO2RR activity, with up to 90% CO FE (Fig. 8a and b).73 The size-dependent properties of the Au NPs were studied by means of a combination of experimental results and DFT calculations; they found that the different crystal facets of the Au NPs had a crucial influence on the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO. According to the free energy diagrams for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO and of protons to hydrogen on Au (111) and Au (211) or a 13-atom Au cluster, it was determined that the Au (111) crystal face is unsuitable for CO2RR due to the large free-energy gap between CO2 and *COOH, while Au (211) (edge sites) is more favourable for the production of CO (Fig. 8c). Furthermore, although the formation of *COOH is more facile on Au13 cluster, HER on Au13 cluster is also more facile than on Au (111) and Au (211); this suggests that Au13 cluster (corner sites) is also unfavourable for CO2RR (Fig. 8d). As a result, 8 nm Au NPs with a near-optimum number of edge sites, which are particularly active for reducing CO2 to CO while minimizing the number of corner sites that are favourable for HER, showed the maximum CO FE. Based on this finding, in their next study, Sun's group fabricated a series of Au nanowires (NWs) with various lengths.98 They proposed that longer Au NWs with more edge sites should show a higher CO FE in CO2RR than shorter Au NWs, which was confirmed by their experimental results.
 Fig. 8  (a) Potential-dependent FEs of CO on a C–Au electrode; (b) current densities of CO formation on the C–Au electrode at applied potentials; free energy diagrams for the electrochemical reduction of (c) CO2 to CO and (d) H+ to H2 on Au(111), Au(211), or a 13-atom Au cluster at −0.11 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
A more comprehensive understanding of the effects of Au morphology on CO2RR was reported by Jung's group.99 They modelled Au NWs with square, pentagonal, and hexagonal cross sections and NPs with cubic, icosahedral, and cuboctahedral shapes; these were denoted as s-NW, p-NW, h-NW, cubic-NP, ico-NP and cubo-NP, respectively. Additionally, the subscripts “c” and “e” were added to the corner and edge sites of the NPs for clarity. Theoretical calculations were carried out to display the differences between the limiting potentials (UL) of HER and CO2RR on all these models to compare their catalytic performance towards CO2RR. As shown in Fig. 9, a more positive UL(CO2RR) − UL(HER) indicates greater selectivity for CO2RR than for HER, and a more positive UL(CO2RR) indicates more activity towards CO2RR. They concluded with two points: 1) for Au NPs, the corner sites are more active reaction sites for CO2RR than the edge sites; 2) all the edge sites of Au NWs are more active and selective than those of Au NPs, except for cubic-NP. Recently, Jin's group reported two types of atomically precise Au25 nanoclusters with distinct nanorod and nanosphere morphologies, which enabled more convincing mechanistic studies.100 Experimental results and first-principles calculations indicated that the better performance of Au25 nanospheres can be attributed to the negative charge and the energetically favourable removal of one ligand to generate an active site, which can stabilize the crucial *COOH intermediate better in CO2RR.
 Fig. 9  
U
L(CO2RR) − UL(HER) plotted vs. UL(CO2RR) of various models. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the limitation of rarity, alloying Au with another non-noble metal is a promising method to lower its cost. A series of studies reported by Yang's group revealed the catalytic properties of Au–Cu alloys towards CO2RR. In their first study, they synthesized various Au–Cu alloy NPs with similar morphologies but different chemical compositions.75 The measurement results showed that the pure Au NPs only produced H2 and CO (CO FE ∼50%) in the CO2RR process; meanwhile, adding a Cu component to the NPs introduced more reducing products but decreased the overall FE of CO2RR. The catalytic performance of Au–Cu alloy NPs was relatively poor; hence, they focused on improving the CO FE in their second study, in which they achieved a CO FE of 80% through the ordering of Au–Cu alloy NPs.106 Their third study realized the rational design of a family of Au–Cu alloy electrocatalysts that can be programmed to fabricate syngas with tunable H2/CO ratios.87 Recently, our group also reported a facile synthesis of Au–Cu bimetallic hollow NPs via galvanic replacement and the Kirkendall effect between copper and gold.107 The hollow Au–Cu NPs exhibited a maximal CO FE of 53.3% at −0.7 V vs. RHE and a higher gold mass current density compared to pure Au NPs. The Au–Cu hollow NPs were then annealed in air and N2 to determine the origin of the catalytic performance; we concluded that more defects and Au atoms were distributed on the surface of the Au–Cu hollow NPs, which facilitated the reduction of CO2 to CO.
In addition to Au–Cu alloy, the synthesis of Au–Fe alloy NPs has also been attempted by Wang's group.108 They reported a facile method for fabricating Au–Fe core–shell alloy NPs (Au–Fe–CSNP) which showed a lower overpotential and 100-fold higher mass activity towards CO2RR compared to pure Au NPs. This decrease in overpotential was ascribed to surface defects introduced by Fe leaching during the synthesis process (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (a) Element mapping image of Au–Fe–CSNP; (b) potential-dependent CO FEs of Au–Fe–CSNPs, Au NPs and Au foils; (c) mass activities of Au–Fe–CSNPs and Au NPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 108 (open access). 
It has been found that Au is not active for electrochemically reducing N2 due to its weak binding to nitrogen; however, according to the discussion above, it is also an inactive metal for HER. Taking these two aspects into consideration, recent research has indicated that Au may be a good choice for NRR.92,94,109,110 Theoretical studies showed that the intermediates in the NRR process are bound more strongly to the active sites located on steps than on flat terraces; thus, stepped facets are favourable active sites on electrocatalysts for NRR.111,112 Based on this theory, Zhang's group proposed that tetrahexahedral (THH) Au, which is a typical noble metal enclosed by (730) crystal planes, may show good performance towards NRR.113 They successfully fabricated THH Au by a seeded growth method using a binary surfactant mixture; the resulting catalyst endowed NRR with low activation energy (≈13.704 kJ mol−1) and a high production yield (NH3: 1.648 μg h−1 cm−2, N2H4·H2O: 0.102 μg h−1 cm−2) at −0.2 V vs. RHE.92 DFT calculations were conducted, and it was concluded that N2 was reduced on THH Au by an alternating hydrogenation mechanism.
Other work has supported Au on metal oxides to improve its catalytic performance towards NRR. Jiang's group developed a facile methodology for the synthesis of amorphous Au NPs supported on CeOx-RGO by a co-reduction method using GO as the RGO source, HAuCl4/Ce(NO3)3·6H2O as the Au/CeOx precursor and NaBH4 as the reducing agent in aqueous solution (Fig. 11a).109 The Raman spectra indicated the generation of CeOx; this was inferred to facilitate the formation of amorphous Au, which possesses much greater structural distortion and more active sites for catalytic NRR than its crystalline counterpart (Fig. 11b). As a result, the amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO exhibited a peak ammonia FE of 10.1% and a production yield of NH3 (8.3 μg h−1 mg−2), which were much higher than those of crystalline Au/RGO (Fig. 11c and d). Furthermore, RGO was beneficial for good dispersion and small particle sizes of the catalysts, which favour improved electrocatalytic performance; thus, the NH3 production yield of amorphous Au/CeOx was much lower than that of amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO. The same group also reported the preparation of Au sub-nanoclusters (0.5 nm) embedded on a TiO2 surface via a facile tannic acid (TA) reduction method.110 The surface-embedded atomic Au active sites led to great enhancements in the NH3 production yield (21.4 μg h−1 mg−2), FE (8.11%) and selectivity (no N2H4 was detected).
 Fig. 11  (a) STEM image of amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO; the inset is a photograph of amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO suspended in water. (b) Raman spectra of the amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO (blue plot) and crystalline Au/RGO (red plot). The Raman peak centered at about 453 cm−1 was assigned to the symmetric stretching mode of O atoms around Ce ions, while the blueshift of this peak (compared to the Raman peak of bulk CeO2 at 465 cm−1) was attributed to the existence of Ce3+. (c) Potential-dependent NH3 FEs and yield of the amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO; (d) NH3 yield of the four samples at −0.2 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 


4.1.2 Ag-Based electrocatalysts. 
Due to its structural similarities with Au, Ag-based materials also perform well in the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO.114–123 The catalytic properties of Ag-based electrocatalysts are also highly associated with their particle size and morphology. Hwang et al. fabricated Ag NPs with three different sizes (3, 5 and 10 nm) immobilized on a carbon support via a one-pot method.114 Cysteamine was used as an anchoring agent to initiate the nucleation of Ag. The 5 nm Ag NPs exhibited the highest FE of CO (84.4% at −0.75 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 12a), low overpotential (∼500 mV at 1 mA cm−2) (Fig. 12b), high mass activity and high exchange current density with excellent stability. The remarkable decrease of overpotential was ascribed to the cysteamine anchoring agent, which established an Ag–S interaction. According to the DFT calculations, when cysteamine was introduced, the Ag–S interaction would induce surface localization of the unpaired electron; thus, the stabilization of the CO2˙− intermediate was enhanced, and the electrocatalytic performance was improved (Fig. 12c). Recently, Zhang's group reported a novel Ag nanocluster (NC) electrocatalyst capped with bovine serum albumin (AgNC@BSA).115 To further improve the catalytic performance towards CO2RR, they introduced an electron transfer mediator ([α-SiW12O40]4− anion) to the reaction conditions to enhance the electrical communication between the strongly-capped AgNC and the cathode. This AgNC@BSA exhibited a CO FE over 75% at a lower overpotential (400 mV more positive than that found at a bulk Ag electrode).
 Fig. 12  (a) FEs for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to Co at six different electrodes at −0.75 V vs. RHE. (b) The relationships between the overpotential and CO partial current density of four different electrodes. (c) Electron spin densities computed from DFT wave functions; “Cys” is an abbreviation of cysteamine. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
By controlling the morphology of Ag NPs, their performance towards CO2RR can be further enhanced. Jiao et al. reported a nanoporous Ag electrocatalyst with a CO FE of approximately 92% at a current density over 3000 times higher than that of its polycrystalline counterpart under moderate overpotentials lower than 500 mV.116 The Tafel slopes of polycrystalline Ag and nanoporous Ag were 132 mV s−1 and 58 mV s−1, respectively, which indicates that the formation of the CO2˙− intermediate is the rate-determining step for polycrystalline Ag and that the nanoporous morphology with a highly curved surface enhanced the stabilization of the CO2˙− intermediate. Additionally, the electrochemical surface area of nanoporous Ag was much higher. All these factors resulted in the extremely high catalytic performance of nanoporous Ag. Another report by Polyansky's group showed the synthesis of high-surface-area Ag nanocoral electrocatalysts.117 In addition to the nanomorphology, adsorbed chloride anions also played a key role in the CO2RR process by suppressing the side reaction of HER. Both these aspects led to a current density of 2 mA cm−2 and 95% CO FE at a low overpotential of 0.37 V for the Ag nanocoral electrocatalysts.
Introducing defects to the surface of a catalyst is another viable method to improve its electrocatalytic performance. Cuenya's group implemented a plasma oxidation pre-treatment on silver foil, which exhibited more than 90% FE of CO at −0.6 V vs. RHE.118 Quasi-in situ XPS measurements, TEM and operando EXAFS revealed that under the reaction conditions, Ag distributed on the near-surface of the catalysts was reduced to its metallic state within the first 3 min, while the bulk of the catalysts remained as Ag oxide after 1 h of reaction. DFT calculations revealed that a high population of defects on the surface can lower the thermodynamic barriers of CO2RR, allowing the reduction of CO2 to CO at a low overpotential.
Although Ag-based electrocatalysts have exhibited extraordinary performance for electrochemically reducing CO2 to CO, it is disappointing that higher value-added products, such as hydrocarbons and alcohols, cannot be acquired on pristine Ag. Some recent studies showed that Ag–Cu bimetallic NPs can convert CO2 to C2 products with satisfactory efficiency.124–127 Meyer's group reported ultrasmall (Cu)n,(Ag)m bimetallic NPs synthesized by electrodepositing Cu and Ag precursors on an underlayer of poly-[Fe(vbpy)3(PF6)2] glassy carbon electrode with the aid of CN− (Fig. 13a).124 The Cu/Ag cations were bridged to the polymer by the CN− ligands and sequentially reduced to nanoclusters, which were stabilized by the polymer. The catalytic activities of the NPs towards CO2RR were evaluated; among all the samples, the Cu2Ag3/polymer/GCE electrode showed the highest acetate FE of 21.2% at −1.33 V vs. RHE (Fig. 13b and c). It should be noted that benzotriazole was added to the measurement system; without this addition, no acetate was detected (Fig. 13d). Both Ag and Cu were indispensable in the formation of acetate; meanwhile, Ag catalyzed CO formation, which was then captured on the neighbouring Cu sites for the formation of C–C bonds. The authors hypothesized two possible reaction pathways for the formation of acetate: in the dimerization route, two CO molecules would dimerize before the next hydrogenation; in the insertion route, one CO molecule would first react with a H2O molecule, followed by the insertion of another CO molecule to form a C–C bond (Fig. 13e).
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthetic scheme of (Cu)n,(Ag)m/polymer/GCE electrodes; (b) CO FEs of six different electrodes at −1.53 V vs. RHE; (c) potential-dependent CO FEs of Cu2Ag3/polymer/GCE electrode; (d) product distribution with (solid) and without (empty) 8 ppm benzotriazole on Cu2Ag3/polymer/GCE electrode; (e) two possible reaction pathways of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3COOH on (Cu)n,(Ag)m/polymer/GCE electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences. 
Gewirth's group also reported a nanoporous CuAg alloy for electrochemically reducing CO2 to ethylene and ethanol.125 Three samples (Cu-wire, CuAg-poly and CuAg-wire) were prepared using an electrodeposition method, in which 3,5-diamino-1,2,4-triazole was added as an inhibitor for the formation of the nanowire morphology. The CuAg-wire showed the best performance; the FEs of C2H4 and C2H5OH reached nearly 60% and 25%, respectively, at a potential of only −0.7 V vs. RHE and a total current density of −300 mA cm−2 (Fig. 14a–d). The low-frequency region of the in situ Raman spectrogram of CuAg-wire showed two peaks at 260 cm−1 and 369 cm−1, while the same spectrogram of Cu-wire showed only one peak at 356 cm−1; this indicates that the CO concentration on the surface of CuAg-wire was relatively lower than that on the Cu-wire (Fig. 14e). In the high-frequency region of the in situ Raman spectrogram, the Cu-wire exhibited two bands at 526 cm−1 and 624 cm−1, which were associated with Cu(I) oxide and Cu(II) oxide, while the CuAg-wire only exhibited the band of Cu(I) oxide (Fig. 14f). The authors attributed the high selectivity of CuAg-wire to the incorporation of Ag, which was beneficial for the stabilization of Cu2O and could facilitate the formation of C2 products. Additionally, Ag was beneficial to generate more CO; hence, the neighbouring Cu active sites would have more opportunities to connect the C–C bonds. Another study reported by Lee's group also confirmed that the phase-blended mixing pattern of Ag–Cu2O exhibited an extraordinary C2H5OH FE of 34.15%; the high selectivity was due to the incorporation of Ag, which generated more CO, and the closer distance between the Ag and Cu sites for the formation of C–C bonds.126
 Fig. 14  (a) and (c) Potential-dependent FEs of C2H4 (a) and C2H6 (c) on three electrodes; (b) and (d) partial current densities of C2H4 (b) and C2H6 (d) on three electrodes. The three electrodes were Cu wire (blue), CuAg-poly (black) and CuAg-wire (red), respectively. (e) and (f) In situ Raman spectra of Cu wire and CuAg wire at −0.7 V vs. RHE in two regions: (e) Cu–CO stretch and (f) Cu–O stretch. Adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Although several studies have researched the application of Au in the NRR field, almost no research on Ag-based electrocatalysts for NRR has been reported. Considering that Au and Ag exhibit many similarities in the electrocatalytic area, Ag-based materials may also be promising electrocatalysts for NRR, and further investigation is greatly needed.


4.1.3 Pd-Based electrocatalysts. 
Pd-Based materials are typically considered to be efficient electrocatalysts for CO2RR, with CO as the main product.78,128–131 Like Au and Ag, the particle sizes of Pd electrocatalysts also have a great impact on their performance for CO2RR. Bao's group fabricated a series of different-sized Pd NPs, ranging from 2.4 to 10.3 nm.78 Prominent size-dependent activity and selectivity was found in the electrolysis tests: the 10.3 nm Pd NPs showed the lowest CO FE of 5.8%, while the 3.7 nm Pd NPs showed the highest CO FE of 91.2% at −0.89 V vs. RHE, along with an 18.4-fold increase in CO partial current density (Fig. 15a and b). The authors used flat Pd (111) surfaces, stepped Pd (211) surfaces and Pd58/Pd33 clusters to represent three different reaction sites (terrace, edge and corner sites), thus simplifying the simulation of CO2 reduction over different-sized Pd NPs. DFT calculation results indicated that the rate-determining step was the formation of *COOH, which was more favourable on Pd58/Pd33 and then Pd (211) (Fig. 15c). As a result, the catalytic activity and selectivity towards CO2RR of the Pd NPs was highly dependent on the particle size due to the varying ratios of corner, edge and terrace sites.
 Fig. 15  (a) Potential-dependent CO FEs of Pd NPs with various particle sizes; (b) potential-dependent CO partial current densities of Pd NPs with various particle sizes; (c) free energy diagrams for electrochemical CO2 reduction to CO on Pd (111), Pd (211), Pd55, and Pd38. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
However, unlike Au and Ag, research has also showed that Pd-based electrocatalysts are capable of converting CO2 to HCOOH at relatively positive potentials but very low current densities, and they deactivate quickly.76,132 Kanan's group investigated the reason behind the deactivation of Pd when catalyzing the reduction of CO2 to HCOOH.76 They dispersed Pd NPs on a carbon support and tested their performance towards CO2RR. The results indicated that the Pd/C electrode could catalyze the reduction of CO2 with a high current density at a low overpotential, and the FE of HCOOH could reach nearly 100%. However, the catalyst deactivated significantly, with a dramatically decreased current density at more negative potentials during the 3 h test. The authors carried out a series of electrokinetic experiments and revealed a totally new mechanism for the reduction of CO2 to HCOOH on Pd electrode (Fig. 16). Pd hydride firstly formed on the surface, then reacted with carbonate in the solution. CO2 molecule reacted with the adsorbed H atom to afford HCOO, which was then reduced to HCOO−. The rate-determining step occurred more readily; thus, HCOOH could be generated at a lower overpotential. As for the deactivation of the catalyst, it was explained that the trace CO produced during the electrolysis poisoned the Pd catalyst, which could be solved by removing CO with air exposure.
 Fig. 16  Mechanism for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to HCOOH on Pd/C electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Doping Pd with nonmetallic elements has been reported to be a promising method for ameliorating the electrocatalytic activity/selectivity of Pd electrodes towards CO2RR. Cai's group prepared a B-doped Pd catalyst (Pd-B/C) through aqueous chemical synthesis using dimethylamine borane as the reducing agent.133 The CO2RR test results demonstrated that this Pd-B/C electrode showed a much higher selectivity for HCOOH than homemade Pd/C (Pd/C (home)) and commercial Pd/C (Pd/C (com)): the HCOOH FE of Pd-B/C could reach 70% at −0.5 V vs. RHE, leading to a HCOOH concentration of ca. 234 mM mg−1 Pd (Fig. 17a and b). Furthermore, the selectivity of FEHCOOH/FECO on Pd-B/C was always higher than that on Pd/C. The authors compared the adsorption energies of *HCOO and *COOH on both H-adsorbed and bare Pd (111) surfaces using DFT calculations; they found that the incorporation of boron would cause the adsorption energy of HCOO* to become more negative relative to that of *COOH, which indicates that the formation of HCOOH was more favourable on the Pd-B/C electrode (Fig. 17c–f). Sun's group also reported a novel electrocatalyst fabricated via doping Pd with minor Te for converting CO2 to CO.32 This Te-doped Pd exhibited a CO FE of 90% at −0.8 V vs. RHE with a CO partial current density of 4.4 mA cm−2. DFT calculations suggested that the doped-Te adatoms preferentially bind at the terrace sites of Pd, thereby suppressing undesired HER and improving the reduction of CO2.
 Fig. 17  (a) Potential-dependent HCOOH FEs of three kinds of electrodes; (b) potential-dependent as-formed HCOOH concentration normalized to Pd masses of three different electrodes; (c) and (d) Gibbs free energy diagrams for the CO2RR from the initial state of *+CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− to the final state of *+HCOOH without (c) and with (d) H adsorbate on Pd (111) (black) and Pd (111)-4B (red) surfaces; (e) and (f) Gibbs free energy diagrams for the CO2RR from the initial state of *+CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− to the final state of *+CO + H2O without (e) and with (f) H adsorbate Pd (111) (black) and Pd (111)-4B (red) surfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Pd–Cu alloy, like Ag–Cu alloy, has also showed potential for converting CO2 to C2 products in CO2RR.134–136 Kenis et al. synthesized five types of bimetallic CuPd electrocatalysts: ordered, disordered and phase-separated CuPd, plus disordered Cu3Pd and CuPd3.134 These five electrocatalysts exhibited quite different catalytic performance towards CO2RR: the ordered CuPd and CuPd3 achieved the highest CH4 and CO FEs of over 80%, while the phase-separated CuPd and Cu3Pd showed significantly higher selectivities (>60%) for C2H4 and C2H5OH. Furthermore, the disordered CuPd showed the highest CH4 FE of over 7%. The authors explained that the neighbouring Cu sites in phase-separated CuPd favoured the formation of C2 products, while the alternating Cu–Pd arrangements facilitated the production of CH4. In another study reported by Sun's group, they prepared a series of Pd@Cu electrocatalysts for CO2RR by underpotential deposition.135 Two kinds of Pd nanocrystals (NCs) were chosen as the seeds: THH Pd NCs with (311) high-index facets and Pd NCs with exposed (111) facets. It was found that the Cu/THH Pd NCs exhibited a remarkably higher selectivity for ethanol than the Cu/(111)-faceted Pd NCs, and the coverage of Cu also influenced the selectivity towards ethanol/methanol (Fig. 18a and b). Calculation results of the CO adsorption free energies at the step and terrace sites on Pd (310) surfaces with different Cu coverage indicated that at a low Cu coverage of 0.67 ML, the CO adsorption energy was relatively large; thus, the formation of C1 product (methanol) was more favoured. Meanwhile, at a higher Cu coverage of 1 ML, the CO adsorption energy decreased to a moderate level and the formation of C–C bonds was more facile; thus, the FE of ethanol was improved (Fig. 18c).
 Fig. 18  (a) Potential-dependent FEs of methanol and ethanol on two types of Pd@Cu NCs electrocatalysts; (b) Cu coverage-dependent FEs of methanol and ethanol on Cu/THH Pd NCs at −0.46 V vs. RHE; (c) CO adsorption free energies at the steps (blue) and terraces (red) on a Pd (310) surface with increasing Cu coverage from 0 ML to 1.67 ML. Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Research of the application of Pd in the NRR field is quite rare for unclear reasons. Only one study reported by Xu's group mentioned Pd-based electrocatalysts for NRR.96 In this work, commercial Pd/C electrode was tested for NRR in hydroxide exchange membrane (HEM)-based electrolyzers (HEMELs) and proton exchange membrane (PEM)-based electrolyzers (PEMELs). Under both measurement conditions, the Pd/C electrode exhibited poor NH3 production rates (∼10−12 mol cm−2 s−1 in PEMELs and ∼10−13 mol cm−2 s−1 in HEMELs) and FEs (∼0.02% in PEMELs and ∼0.04% in HEMELs) at −0.2 V vs. RHE. Whether Pd-based materials are suitable for catalyzing NRR remains debatable, and more experimental and theoretical research is required.


4.1.4 Other noble metal-based electrocatalysts. 
In addition to the aforementioned Au, Ag and Pd electrodes, Rh, Ru and Pt are three noble metals which have been investigated as potential electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR. Rh or Ru-based electrocatalysts for CO2RR in recent research are often in the form of metal organic complexes, which will not be discussed in this review.137 For Pt-based materials, it is commonly believed that HER on Pt electrodes is so competitive that CO2RR is difficult to achieve; hence, there has been almost no experimental research about the application of Pt-based electrocatalysts for CO2RR in recent years. In this section, we will mainly discuss the application of Rh, Ru and Pt-based electrocatalysts for NRR.
In 2015, Wessling et al. fabricated Rh and Ru-coated Ti felts via galvanic replacement between the noble metals and the substrate Ti.138 The Ru/Ti catalyst exhibited a higher density of defects in the coatings and a stronger electron affinity than the Rh/Ti catalyst, leading to a lower overpotential and higher NRR activity. Additionally, the authors mentioned that the total cost of the Ru coating was only ∼1/3 of the cost of the Rh coating; thus, Ru-based electrocatalysts for NRR are more deserving of research from an economic standpoint.
Lambrou's group also developed a Ru/C electrocatalyst for NRR.139 They found that at 90 °C, this Ru/C electrode exhibited the maximum ammonia production rate of 1.30 μg h−1 cm−2 at −1.02 V vs. Ag/AgCl, while the highest current efficiency of 0.92% appeared at −0.96 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Furthermore, they investigated the relationship between the ammonia production rate and temperature at −1.10 V vs. Ag/AgCl; they found that at 20 °C, the rate of formation of ammonia was 0.21 μg h−1 cm−2, while at 100 °C, this rate increased by appropriately five times and reached nearly 1.0 μg h−1 cm−2.
For Pt-based electrocatalysts for NRR, Tao's group reported a novel synthesis of ammonia by directly using air and water as the nitrogen and hydrogen sources.95 Commercial Pt/C was loaded on gas diffusion layers as both the cathode and anode, and a NH4+/H+-conducting Nafion membrane was hot pressed to prepare the membrane electrode assembly (MEA). This Pt-based electrolyte cell exhibited an ammonia production rate of 1.14 × 10−9 mol cm−2 s−1 and a current efficiency of ∼0.5% when a voltage of 1.6 V was applied (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  NH3 formation rates and FEs of an air, Pt|nafion 211| Pt, H2O cell under different applied voltages. The cathode was supplied with air, and the anode was supplied with H2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
The aforementioned research of Xu's group also tested the performance towards NRR of commercial Pt/C and Ru/C NPs. However, in this work, both electrodes performed poorly. For the Pt/C electrode at −0.2 V vs. RHE, the ammonia production rate was ∼5 × 10−13 mol cm−2 s−1 in PEMELs and ∼10−13 mol cm−2 s−1 in HEMELs, while the FE was ∼0.02% in PEMELs and ∼0.12% in HEMELs. For the Ru/C electrode at −0.2 V vs. RHE, the ammonia production rate was ∼5 × 10−13 mol cm−2 s−1 in PEMELs and ∼10−13 mol cm−2 s−1 in HEMELs, while the FE was ∼0.05% in PEMELs and ∼0.03% in HEMELs.

4.2 Non-noble metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR
In recent years, non-noble metals, especially transition metals, have drawn increasing attention due to their accessibility and low cost compared to noble metals. Numerous studies have reported the application of non-noble metals in CO2RR and NRR, such as Cu, Sn, Zn, and Pb and their derivatives. It should be noted that under the CO2RR measurement conditions (NaHCO3 or KHCO3 as the electrolyte), the electrode is immersed in a nearly neutral solution; thus, the stability of the electrocatalysts is not of great concern. However, the electrocatalysts are in an acidic (H2SO4 as the electrolyte) or alkaline (KOH as the electrolyte) environment during the testing process of NRR; thus, the stability of the non-noble metal-based materials is a considerable problem.

4.2.1 Cu-Based electrocatalysts. 
In the above section, when discussing the mechanism of CO2RR, we mentioned that Cu is almost the only metal that is capable of electrochemically converting CO2 to CH4 or C2 products. As a result, there has been much research investigating the application of Cu-based materials in the CO2RR area, using various methods to tune their morphologies, structures, particle sizes, valences and compositions.31,48,56,79,82,89,140–153 Yang's group carried out a thorough study on the influences of morphology changes, the substrate, and the electrolyte on the performance of Cu NPs towards CO2RR.140 They synthesized a series of Cu NPs supported on carbon paper with different loadings. The electrode with the highest loading exhibited the best selectivity towards C2 and C3 products (Fig. 20a and b). They attributed the high selectivity to the structural transformation process during the initial stage of electrolysis, which occurred more readily when the Cu NPs loading was higher. To prove this explanation, they separated the Cu NPs from each other via (i) mixing them with carbon black before depositing them on carbon paper; (ii) replacing the Cu NPs with Cu nanocubes as the starting materials; and (iii) using a low surface area carbon plate as the substrate. The selectivities of the C2 and C3 products all decreased in varying degrees (Fig. 20c and d). Furthermore, they changed the electrolyte to CsHCO3, which was reported to promote higher CO2 concentrations near the electrode surface. As expected, the selectivity of the C2 and C3 products increased as the overpotential decreased (Fig. 20e and f).
 Fig. 20  (a) and (b) Product distributions of CO2RR on Cu NPs electrodes with various loadings at the applied potential of −0.81 V vs. RHE; (c) and (d) product distributions of CO2RR on Cu NPs supported on carbon paper with a loading of ×22.5 (referred to as trans-CuEn) and Cu NPs electrodes in which the Cu NPs were separated from each other; (e) and (f) potential-dependent product distributions of CO2RR on trans-CuEn in 0.1 M CsHCO3. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences. 
Much effort has been paid to improving the catalytic performance of Cu materials towards CO2RR by modulating their morphologies and structures. Zheng's group reported a facile synthesis of stable Cu/Ni(OH)2 nanosheets with a thickness of ∼2.8 nm. These ultrathin Cu nanosheets exhibited a maximum CO FE of 92% at a low overpotential of 0.39 V, with extraordinary stability.79 Cuenya's group fabricated prism-shaped Cu nanocrystals by an electrodeposition method.141 The simultaneous effects of the presence of low-coordinated Cu atoms on the roughened prism surface and the possible changes in the local pH resulted in high efficiency of the Cu prisms for converting CO2 to ethylene. Fontecave's group developed a porous dendritic Cu electrode which showed the highest HCOOH FE of 83% at −1.55 V vs. Fc+/Fc in water/ionic liquid electrolyte (H2O/[EMIM](BF4)).89 The combination of the porous dendritic morphology and the use of ionic liquid led to the formation of HCOOH with a high FE and current density. Jiang et al. proposed a facile method to prepare amorphous Cu NPs using tannic acid as the reducing agent.82 They surprisingly found that this amorphous Cu NPs exhibited peak FEs of HCOOH and C2H5OH of 37% and 22%, respectively, wherein the appropriate particle size, amorphous morphology, large electrochemical active area and superior CO2 adsorption ability played crucial roles.
The O species on the surface of a Cu electrode are believed to have a critical impact on its CO2RR performance.142 In 2017, Cuenya et al. reported two studies using plasma pre-treatment to oxidize Cu NPs to better understand the effects of the oxide species and adsorbed anions on the catalyst surface. In the first study, Cu nanotubes were firstly synthesized by electrochemically anodizing an electropolished Cu foil with five triangular potential scans, followed by O2, H2 or Ar plasma pre-treatment.143 Scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy plus quasi-in situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy demonstrated that the samples without or with different plasma treatments showed similar cubic nanomorphologies but totally different O contents before and after the electrochemical reaction (Fig. 21a and b). Subsequent measurements during CO2RR revealed that the catalytic performance of CO2RR had a remarkable relationship with the surface and subsurface oxygen contents of the Cu NPs rather than with their cubic nanomorphology (Fig. 21c). Their second study further investigated the catalytic performance of plasma-oxidized Cu foils in electrolytes containing different halide ions.144 It was found that the halide ions had a great impact on the nanostructure of the oxidized Cu surface. Furthermore, the introduction of halide ions could facilitate the formation and stabilization of the *COOH intermediate, resulting in a lower overpotential and higher production rate without sacrificing their superior selectivities of C2 and C3 products.
 Fig. 21  (a) SEM images of Cu nanocube samples after various plasma treatments and after 1 h of electrochemical reaction (EC) at −1.0 V vs. RHE. (b) Quasi-in situ Cu XPS spectra of Cu nanocube samples treated with various plasmas before and after EC at −1.0 V vs. RHE. (c) The relationships between the nanomorphology and oxygen content and the geometric current density and C2H4 FE of the Cu nanocube electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Using nonmetal elements or organic molecules to modify Cu electrodes has been proved to be another method for optimizing their electrocatalytic performance for CO2RR. For example, Ramírez et al. reported a scalable preparation of nanosized CuS loaded on carbon paper with various particle sizes and loadings by a wet chemistry approach.145 The testing results of CO2RR indicated that the CuS NPs with the largest particle size exhibited the peak HCOOH FE (Fig. 22a). To determine whether CuS would be reduced during the measurement process, XPS and SEM analysis was conducted on the electrodes after the CO2RR test. A reductive loss of CuS was evidenced by XPS spectra, while the SEM results illuminated that the particle size of CuS decreased dramatically after the electrochemical tests (Fig. 22b and c). They concluded that the CuS NPs underwent rapid reconstruction upon exposure to the CO2RR measurement conditions. Thus, to further understand the relationship between the particle size/S content and the catalytic activity/selectivity, the authors solvothermally prepared a series of Cu–S catalysts with different S contents. Surprisingly, they found that these S-modified Cu electrodes attained similar surface states irrespective of their initial S contents under the CO2RR testing conditions, resulting in indistinguishable and superior catalytic performance of the electrodes with S contents over 0.007% for CO2RR (Fig. 22d). However, the sample with the lowest S content (0.007%) showed much more competitive HER, suggesting that there was a minimum required amount of S to develop this catalytically advantageous surface. Another study reported by Andreoli's group proposed a strategy to enhance the catalytic performance of Cu electrode for CO2RR by modifying the Cu electrode surface with poly(acrylamide), which led to a maximum C2H4 FE of 26% at −0.96 V vs. RHE.146 Theoretical results and DFT calculations revealed the reason behind the enhancement of the C2H4 selectivity: 1) CO was activated for dimerization by the charge donated from the poly(acrylamide) to the Cu surface; 2) the CO dimer was stabilized by H-bond interactions with the –NH2 groups of the poly(acrylamide); 3) the adsorption of CO molecules was promoted near the polymer, resulting in higher local coverage.
 Fig. 22  (a) FEs of CO, HCOOH and H2 plus current densities at −0.6 V vs. RHE and −0.8 V vs. RHE of four different CuS NPs, where the order of the particle size was CuS-1 < CuS-2 < CuS-3 < CuS-4; (b) S 2p XPS spectra of CuS-1 and CuS-4 before and after the CO2RR test, in which a considerable decrease of the relative area of the CuS peak was found (162.5 eV); (c) particle size distributions counted from STEM images for representative CuS-1 and CuS-4 before and after CO2RR tests; (d) FEs of CO, HCOOH and H2 plus current densities at −0.6 V vs. RHE of Cu–S samples with various S contents. Adapted with permission from ref. 145 (open access). 
Although Cu-based electrocatalysts behave excellently in the CO2RR field, little research has focused on their application in NRR. Very early work reported by Yoshiba et al. mentioned the utilization of CuS to electrochemically reduce nitrogen; however, the current efficiency and ammonia production rate were quite unsatisfactory. Considering that Cu possesses a relatively appropriate binding energy of N and does not catalyze HER very well, further investigation should be performed to determine whether Cu-based materials can realize satisfactory performance in NRR.


4.2.2 Co, Sn, Bi, Pb, and Zn-based electrocatalysts. 
These five metals are sorted in one section because they have been widely investigated in the CO2RR field but almost no research about NRR has reported for them. In most cases, Co, Sn, Pb and Bi-based electrocatalysts are capable of converting CO2 to HCOOH while CO2 is reduced to CO on Zn-based electrocatalysts. In this section, we will review the recently achieved progress using these five non-noble metals for catalyzing electrochemical CO2 reduction.72,74,86,88,91,154–178
Co. 
In the last three years, Xie's group published a series of excellent studies using Co-based materials to catalyze the conversion of CO2 to HCOOH with extremely high efficiency. Their first work has been mentioned above, in which they carefully designed and synthesized partially oxidized Co layers with a thickness of 4 atoms using a ligand-defined method. The ultrathin Co layers with well-controlled thicknesses were perfect models to explore the role the oxide species plays in the CO2RR process. Compared to the Co 4-atom-thick layers, the partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers exhibited a much higher HCOOH FE and a smaller Tafel slope (44 mV per decade); this illuminates that the existence of Co oxide species helps to stabilize the CO2˙− intermediate, facilitating the formation of HCOOH.72 In their second study, two types of ultrathin Co layers with different thicknesses (1.72 nm and 3.51 nm) were synthesized and tested for catalyzing CO2RR.154 The 1.72 nm Co layer showed over 1.5 times more electrocatalytic activity than its thicker counterpart, which can be ascribed to the higher CO2 adsorption amount and more low-coordinated surface Co atoms of the 1.72 nm Co layers. Their third study further established a model in which oxygen vacancies were confined in 0.84 nm thick Co layers.155 The sample containing more O vacancies exhibited better catalytic performance than that containing fewer O vacancies. The following DFT calculations illuminated that O vacancies can lower the rate-demining activation barrier via stabilizing the CO2˙− intermediate, leading to a higher HCOOH FE.
Lee et al. further combined Co3S4 and Co3O4 into a Co3S4@Co3O4 core–shell octahedron nanostructure by a hydrothermal lattice anion exchange protocol which implemented the electro-reduction of not only CO2 but also O2 with extraordinary performance.156 Compared to its pristine Co3S4 and Co3O4 counterparts, the Co3S4@Co3O4 core–shell nanostructure exhibited a higher selectivity for HCOOH with a much larger current density. CO2 adsorption isotherms and Tafel plots demonstrated that the enhanced catalytic performance towards CO2RR could be attributed to the synergetic coupling effect of the heterojunction structure, which can enhance the electron transfer efficiency while lowering the energy barrier to convert CO2 into adsorbed CO2˙− intermediate.
Single atom electrocatalysts for CO2RR have attracted increasing attention in recent years since the concept of using N-coordination to stabilize the single metal atoms was proposed. Li′s group adopted a template method to fabricate the SiO2@polymer core–shell structure, followed by high-temperature pyrolysis and HF etching to obtain hollow N-doped porous carbon spheres (HNPCSs).157 CoPc was then introduced to the hollow spheres with high surface areas, superior electrical conductivity and abundant coordination N sites to construct the single atomic Co–N5/HNPCSs (Fig. 23a). Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images and Fourier-transformed (FT) k3-weighted EXAFS spectra results evidenced that the atomically dispersed Co–N5 sites were anchored on HNPCSs (Fig. 23b and c). Further investigation of CO2RR revealed a higher current density and higher CO FE of the Co–N5/HNPCSs than of CoPc and the HNPCSs (Fig. 23d and e). Additionally, single atomic Fe–N5/HNPCSs, Ni–N5/HNPCSs and Cu–N5/HNPCSs were synthesized using similar methods and tested for CO2RR. However, none of these exhibited a CO FE as high as that of the Co–N5/HNPCSs (Fig. 23f). DFT calculations indicated that the energy barriers of *COOH formation and CO desorption were much lower on the single atom Co–N5 sites, facilitating the generation of CO (Fig. 23g).
 Fig. 23  (a) Synthetic scheme of Co–N5/HNPCSs; (b) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Co–N5/HNPCSs; (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of Co–N5/HNPCSs, in which only one main peak appears at 1.5 Å (corresponding to the first coordination of Co–N) and no Co–Co coordination peak at 2.2 Å could be found; (d) LSV curves of three different electrocatalysts; (e) potential-dependent CO and H2 FEs of Co–N5/HNPCSs and CoPc; (f) potential-dependent CO and H2 FEs of Co, Fe, Ni and Cu–N5/HNPCSs; (g) free energy of CO2RR, in which the red short dashed line represents the desorption free energy level of CO while the dash dot lines represent the desorption free energy of CO. Adapted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Sn. 
In 2014, Meyer et al. reported a series of nanostructured Sn catalysts with various particle sizes loaded on carbon black for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to HCOOH, among which 5 nm SnO2 NPs exhibited the maximum HCOOH FE of 86.2% at −1.8 V vs. SCE.160 To explore how the adsorption of the CO2˙− intermediate varied with particle size, they examined the adsorption of OH− as a surrogate of CO2˙−. It was found that adsorption of OH− increased with the particle size and reached a maximum on the 3 nm SnO2 NPs. The relationship between the particle size and adsorption of CO2˙− could not totally explain the effects of particle size on the catalytic performance, and the authors further explained that too strong adsorption of CO2˙− would increase the energy barrier to further reduction and protonation of CO2˙−, which is adverse for the formation of HCOOH; thus, the SnO2 NPs with 5 nm particle sizes showed the most extraordinary selectivity of HCOOH. Furthermore, the authors loaded the 5 nm SnO2 NPs on graphene and obtained a catalyst with an even higher FE of HCOOH (93.6%) and a higher current density (10.2 mA cm−2). This enhanced catalytic performance may arise from the stronger electron donating ability of graphene, which can facilitate the adsorption of CO2 and the CO2˙− intermediate.
Sn and Sn oxides with novel nanostructures have been developed in recent years for optimizing the catalytic activity and selectivity of CO2RR. Xie's group designed and synthesized intricate metallic Sn nanosheets confined in graphene.74 The confinement of graphene protects the active Sn nanosheets from being oxidized upon direct exposure to air. Due to the superior electrical conductivity of graphene, the rate-determining electron transfer from CO2 to the CO2˙− intermediate is more favourable, and the low-coordinated Sn atom enables the CO2˙− to be stabilized more efficiently. The combination of these two advantages resulted in excellent catalytic performance of the Sn nanosheets confined in graphene. Another study reported by Zhang's group adopted carbon cloth as a template to construct hierarchical mesoporous SnO2 nanosheets.161 These SnO2 nanosheets achieved a superior HCOOH FE with a high current density at a moderate potential with long-term stability, which can be explained by the excellent activity of SnO2 as well as its large surface area and robust structure.
A recent study by Hu et al. demonstrated that CO product can also be generated on Sn-based electrocatalysts.162 The authors adopted a co-precipitation method using SnCl2 and Na2C2O4 as reagents to obtain SnC2O4, which was then pyrolyzed in N2 or air atmosphere to afford SnO/C or SnO2/C (Fig. 24a). The Sn/C sample was prepared in aqueous solution using NaBH4 as the reducing agent. This SnO/C catalyst exhibited a much higher CO FE and CO partial current density compared to its SnO2/C and Sn/C counterparts (Fig. 24b–e). Although both SnO and SnO2 were reduced to Sn in CO2RR conditions, the particle size of Sn derived from SnO was smaller, leading to a higher surface area; this may partially account for the enhanced catalytic activity. On the other hand, this smaller SnO/C catalyst exposed higher populations of step and corner sites; this led to higher adsorption ability of the CO2˙− intermediate, also facilitating the reduction of CO2. However, particle size effects cannot explain the high selectivity towards CO formation; thus, another SnO/C catalyst with a similar particle size but a lower SnO density was fabricated (referred to as l-SnO/C). The difference between the catalytic performance towards CO2RR of the two samples indicated that the catalyst with more densely packed particles was more favourable for the formation of CO; this resulted from the higher local pH value around each NP, which led to a larger CO production rate (Fig. 24f).
 Fig. 24  (a) Synthetic scheme of SnO/C and SnO2/C; (b)–(d) potential-dependent H2, CO and HCOOH FEs of SnO/C (b), SnO2/C (c) and Sn/C (d); (e) potential-dependent CO partial current density of three different electrocatalysts; (f) potential-dependent CO and HCOOH FEs of SnO/C and l-SnO/C. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Pb. 
In fact, Pb-based materials are not considered to be ideal catalysts in the electrochemical field due to their toxicity; research about the application of Pb-based electrocatalysts in CO2RR has been rare in recent years. Kanan's group adopted a common strategy to prepare nanocrystalline Pb films in which PbO2 precursors were directly used as the cathode and reduced to metallic Pb in the initial stage of CO2RR electrolysis.167 This oxide-derived Pb catalyst exhibited nearly 100% HCOOH FE at potentials ranging from −0.75 V vs. RHE to −1.0 V vs. RHE, which is much higher than that of polycrystalline Pb foil. Furthermore, even with very low CO2 concentrations in N2-saturated NaHCO3 electrolyte, this well-performing Pb sample showed up to 95% HCOOH FE, while Pb foil could only produce HCOOH with a selectivity of 5%. The authors proposed that the discrepancy between the catalytic performance of the oxide-derived Pb electrode and Pb foil arises from the difference in the coverage of metastable Pb oxide, which is active for CO2 reduction and passivating for H2 evolution.
Bi. 
Bi-Based materials are attractive for electrocatalyst development in CO2RR; this is partially because they have few significant commercial applications and thus are inexpensive.
In most cases, CO2 is reduced to HCOOH on Bi-based electrocatalysts due to their intrinsic activity. Various Bi-based materials with different structures and compositions have been developed for enhancing the selectivity of HCOOH. For example, in 2017, Min's group reported a hierarchical Bi dendrite catalyst via e-beam evaporating a Bi source on a Cu foil, followed by electrodeposition of a Bi3+ precursor (Fig. 25a).91 Compared to Bi foil, this dendrite Bi showed a larger peak HCOOH FE of 89% at a more positive potential with a higher current density (Fig. 25b–d). Based on the XRD results and DFT calculations, the authors concluded that the dendrite Bi catalyst had a higher population of high-index planes, which can stabilize the *OCHO intermediate and lead to a higher selectivity of HCOOH (Fig. 25e and f). In other work reported by Nam et al., they prepared carbon-black supported BiOx NPs using a facile solvothermal method; the NPs exhibited an extremely high FE of HCOOH (93.4% at potentials ranging from −1.37 V vs. Ag/AgCl to −1.70 V vs. Ag/AgCl) with a larger current density compared to its Bi2O3 counterpart.169 The electrokinetics studies indicated that dual mechanisms may function in BiOx/C catalysts at different applied potentials.
 Fig. 25  (a) Synthetic scheme of a Bi dendrite electrocatalyst; (b) XRD patterns of Bi dendrite and Bi foil, showing that the (012), (110), and (104) facets were preferentially developed on Bi dendrite while the (003) facet was preferentially developed on Bi foil; (c) and (d) potential-dependent H2, CO and HCOOH FEs of Bi foil (c) and Bi dendrite (d); (e) LSV curves of Bi foil and Bi dendrite; (f) calculated free energies from the initial state of *+CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− to the final state of *+HCOOH via the formation of the *OCHO intermediate, showing that the *OCHO intermediate was more stabilized on the high-index (012), (110) and (104) facets than on the (003) facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
However, some recent research has demonstrated that in nonaqueous media such as MeCN, CO can also be generated as the main product on Bi-based electrocatalysts with the assistance of ionic liquid. Rosenthal's group sequentially published two studies in which they prepared an inexpensive Bi-carbon monoxide evolving catalyst (Bi-CMEC) using versatile electrodeposition in aqueous or nonaqueous conditions.170,171 This inexpensive system could catalyze the reduction of CO2 to CO with a high energy efficiency of appropriately 80% and a current density as high as 25 to 30 mA cm−2 in CO2-saturated MeCN containing a certain amount of ionic liquid. In recent work reported by Zhu's group, Bi NPs with different particle sizes (36 nm and 7 nm) and a conventional electrodeposited Bi film (Bi-ED) were fabricated.172 After CO2 electroreduction tests in MeCN media containing [bmim]OTf, they found that the surface inhibiting layer could significantly hinder the reduction of CO2. The Bi NPs were then exposed to air to be oxidized, followed by surface activation using hydrazine treatment. Before the surface activation, a clear particle size effect could be observed when comparing the catalytic performance of these two Bi NPs. However, this difference became negligible after the surface activation, and the activated 36 nm Bi NPs achieved a CO FE as high as 96.1% and a superior mass activity for CO formation of 15.6 mA mg−1 at −2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl.
Zn. 
Zn is also an earth-abundant and inexpensive element; hence, investigation towards the application of Zn-based materials in electrocatalytic fields is of great significance. In recent research, Zn-based materials have been commonly believed to electrochemically convert CO2 to CO; as with other metals, much effort has been paid to enhancing the catalytic activity and selectivity towards CO2RR of Zn-based electrocatalysts via modulating their morphologies and structures. For example, Jiao's group in 2015 reported a nanostructured Zn dendrite catalyst prepared by a facile electrodeposition method.174 The formation of the dendrite morphology was driven by the low Zn concentration near the electrode surface created by the high deposition rate, which forced the Zn dendrite to grow outward toward the high Zn concentration region. Compared to the bulk Zn electrode, this Zn dendrite electrode exhibited an order of magnitude higher CO current density and a 3 times higher peak CO FE (79% at −1.1 V vs. RHE). The authors focused on the stability of the Zn electrode in different applied potentials and revealed that at potentials more negative than −0.7 V vs. RHE, the Zn dendrite electrode was quite structurally stable. A very recent study reported by Zeng et al. proposed a novel strategy to enhance the catalytic performance of ZnO by introducing O vacancies into the electrocatalysts using H2 plasma treatment.175 As the concentration of O vacancies increased, the current density and selectivity towards CO of the ZnO electrode also increased (Fig. 26a and b). Various kinetics and mechanism studies revealed the relationship between the catalytic performance and the concentration of O vacancies; it was found that the introduction of O vacancies can greatly promote the activation of CO2via enhancing the binding strength of CO2 (Fig. 26c–e).
 Fig. 26  (a) LSV curves of ZnO with a high concentration of O vacancies (referred to as VO-rich ZnO), a low concentration of O vacancies (referred to as VO-poor ZnO) and no O vacancies (referred to as pristine ZnO). (b) Potential-dependent CO FEs of VO-rich ZnO, VO-poor ZnO and pristine ZnO; (c) Tafel plots for CO production of three different electrocatalysts, in which VO-rich ZnO exhibited the minimum Tafel slope, suggesting the strongest stabilization of the CO2˙− intermediate; (d) CO2-temperature programmed desorption (TPD) profiles for three ZnO nanosheets, in which VO-rich ZnO exhibited the highest CO2 desorption temperature, suggesting the strongest binding of CO2. (e) Calculated free energies for CO2 reduction to CO on ZnO slabs without/with oxygen vacancies, in which the introduction of O vacancies lowered the energy barriers of the formation of CO. Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Zhang's group recently published a novel study reporting that HCOOH can also be generated as the main product on a Zn electrode with a layer of Zn NPs.176 Zn foil was used as the working electrode for the following electrodeposition of Zn2+, and the obtained deposited Zn electrode (D-Zn) was then annealed and electrochemically reduced (RAD-Zn). Compared to Zn foil and D-Zn electrode, this RAD-Zn electrode exhibited the most outstanding performance towards CO2RR. The D-Zn electrode showed a peak HCOOH FE of 61.7% at −1.93 V vs. RHE, while the RAD-Zn sample showed the maximum HCOOH FE of 87.1% at the same potential. The annealing and electroreduction operations on the D-Zn electrode created a dense layer composed of NPs with a large specific surface area and rough texture on its surface; this surface can contain more low-coordinated Zn atoms, promoting the conversion of CO2.


4.2.3 Ni-Based electrocatalysts. 
Empirically, Ni-based materials are often considered to be unsuitable for catalyzing CO2RR or NRR owing to the high selectivity of Ni for H2 evolution. However, some recent research has revealed attractive prospects of Ni-based electrocatalysts for CO2RR by adopting a novel strategy to fabricate single atomic Ni-based electrocatalysts.77,179–181 Similar to the single atomic Co-based electrocatalysts mentioned above, the atomically dispersed Ni sites are often stabilized by N-coordination. In 2017, Li′s group reported the preparation of a catalyst containing single atom Ni sites with the aid of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). ZIF-8, an inexpensive and easily fabricated MOF, was firstly synthesized, followed by impregnation of Ni precursors; it was then pyrolyzed at extremely high temperatures to afford single atomic Ni sites anchored on an N-doped carbon skeleton (Ni SAs/NC) (Fig. 27a).77 Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images and FT-EXAFS spectra confirmed the atomically dispersed Ni sites, which were stabilized by the coordination of N sites (Fig. 27b and c). Compared with pyrolyzed ZIF-8 and Ni NPs, this Ni SAs/NC exhibited a much higher selectivity for HCOOH (peak FE of 71.9% at −0.9 V vs. RHE) and a larger current density (Fig. 27d and e). The authors attributed the superior catalytic performance to the abundant low-coordinated Ni sites in Ni SAs/NC, which can tightly bind to CO2˙−. Additionally, the Ni SAs/NC attained a Tafel slope of 249 mV s−1; this is quite different from those reported for nanosized and bulk electrocatalysts, demonstrating a different mechanism for CO2RR (Fig. 27f). Further investigation should be carried out to obtain a thorough understanding of the mechanism of CO2RR on the Ni-SAs/NC electrode. Other research also reported the design and synthesis of single atomic Ni-based electrocatalysts for CO2RR based on various strategies, among which Xie's group attained an efficient CO2 electrocatalyst containing abundant Ni-N4 sites via initial synthesizing Ni-doped g-C3N4 with a carbon-coated layer and then transforming it topo-chemically to Ni-N4-C; meanwhile, Liu's group developed a single atomic Ni-based electrocatalyst consisting of isolated, high-density, low-valent Ni(I) anchored on an N-doped graphene matrix for CO2RR.179,180
 Fig. 27  (a) Synthetic scheme of Ni SAs/NC; (b) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Ni SAs/NC; (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of four samples, in which Ni SAs/NC exhibits one main peak at 1.42 Å (corresponding to the first Ni–N coordination) and no Ni–Ni coordination peak at 2.18 Å can be found. (d) Potential-dependent CO FEs of Ni SAs/NC and Ni NPs/NC; (e) LSV curves of Ni SAs/NC and Ni NPs/NC in N2-saturated or CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3; (f) Tafel plot of CO formation for Ni SAs/NC at different applied potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Ni-Based materials have also been reported to catalyze the electroreduction of nitrogen. A typical example is the work reported by Han et al. in 2016, in which they used a porous Ni electrode as the cathode and a gas diffuser for N2 purging.182 H2SO4 was used as the electrolyte, while a mixture of H2O and 2-propanol was added as an electrolyte medium. The testing results of NRR in different measurement conditions indicated that the concentration of H2SO4, the applied potential and the addition of H2O or 2-propanol greatly influenced the catalytic activity and selectivity towards NRR (Fig. 28a–c). However, the maximized N2 reduction FE could not even reach 1%, and the NH3 production rate was also quite poor. Much effort towards promoting the electroreduction of N2 on Ni-based electrocatalysts is still needed.
 Fig. 28  (a) Effects of the electrolyte medium on the NH3 synthesis rate and FE; (b) effects of H2SO4 concentration on the NH3 synthesis rate and FE; (c) current density-dependent NH3 synthesis rate and FE. Adapted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2016, The Electrochemical Society. 


4.2.4 Fe, Mo-based electrocatalysts. 
Fe and Mo-based materials are rarely used as the main body of CO2RR electrocatalysts, possibly due to their very poor catalytic performance towards CO2RR compared to other metals. However, research into their application in NRR has been reported.93,183,184
Fe. 
A recent study published in 2017 by Centi et al. proposed a novel strategy to obtain a NRR electrocatalyst with a high production rate of ammonia in which they supported Fe2O3 on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) by annealing a mixture of Fe(NO3)3 and oxidized CNTs.183 This Fe2O3-CNT catalyst was then deposited on carbon paper to form a gas diffuser layer (GDL), followed by joining to a Nafion membrane to obtain the membrane-electrode assembly. At an applied potential of −2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, this catalyst can achieve an ammonia production rate of 2.2 × 10−3 g m−2 h−1, which is much higher than that achieved by a Ru/C electrode (Fig. 29a). The specific carbon active sites formed at the interface between Fe2O3 and CNT can activate N2 for the next hydrogenation and hence account for the high production rate. Additionally, this Fe2O3-CNT catalyst demonstrated superior stability for at least 60 h of testing for CO2RR. However, N2 the reduction FEs of this catalyst were quite poor; they were ∼0.15% and ∼0.025% at −1.5 V and −2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, respectively (Fig. 29b). Whether the tactic of sacrificing energy efficiency to obtain a higher production rate is effective is debatable.
 Fig. 29  (a) NH3 formation rates at different applied voltages when the cathode was feed with 10 mL min−1 of N2 constantly and 5 mL min−1 of H2 was introduced at 42 min. (b) Potential-dependent FEs of H2 and NH3 of this Fe2O3-CNT catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Mo. 
Wang's group recently reported an investigation of Mo-based electrocatalysts for NRR.93 They adopted an electrochemical method to prepare three types of Mo-based electrocatalysts: 1) Mo-A-R, prepared by a sequential electrochemical anodization and reduction process using a Mo film; 2) Mo-D-R-1 h, prepared by the electrodeposition of a Mo–Fe bimetallic layer on a Mo film for 1 h followed by removing Fe with HCl; 3) Mo-D-R-5 h, prepared by the same procedure as that of Mo-D-R-1 h except that the electrodeposition time was 5 h. The XRD results elucidated the crystal plane intensities of these three catalysts plus Mo foil: for the (110) facets, the order was Mo-D-R-5 h > Mo-D-R-1 h > Mo foil > Mo-A-R; for the (211) facets, the order was the opposite (Fig. 30a). Measurements during NRR of these four electrodes indicated that Mo-D-R-5 h exhibited the highest FE of 0.72% with an overpotential of only 140 mV; at −0.49 V vs. RHE, it could achieve an ammonia production rate of 3.09 × 10−11 mol s−1 cm−2 (Fig. 30b and c). Furthermore, even compared to the abovementioned porous Ni, Ru/C and Fe2O3-CNT electrode, this Mo-D-R-5 h catalyst still had the best overpotential, FE and production rate. Finally, to explain the origin of the superior performance of this sample, the authors combined the results of XRD and electrochemical measurements and proposed that the synergistic effect of the nanosized surface and (110) orientation endowed the Mo-D-R-5 h with superior efficiency for N2 reduction to NH3 (Fig. 30d).
 Fig. 30  (a) XRD patterns of four samples; (b) potential-dependent NH3 FEs of four different electrocatalysts; (c) potential-dependent NH3 formation rates of the four electrocatalysts. (d) Relationships between the (110) orientation, (211) orientation and maximum FE of the four electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.5 Multi-metallic electrocatalysts. 
With the deeper and more thorough investigation towards the application of non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts composed of only one metal in the CO2RR and NRR fields, it has been realized that the catalytic performance of single metal-based electrocatalysts is sometimes unsatisfactory; combining two or more non-noble metals to prepare multi-metallic electrocatalysts may be a promising method to further optimize the catalytic activity, selectivity and stability of non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR.
Multi-metallic electrocatalysts for CO2RR. 
The most investigated multi-metallic electrocatalysts for CO2RR are Cu–M (M: one or more non-noble metals)-based materials.84,185–190 Several recent comprehensive reviews have already summarized the application of Cu-based alloys for CO2RR.34,191 As a result, we will only introduce some representative research about Cu-based alloys for CO2RR. Additionally, other work investigating Cu–M-based electrocatalysts with non-alloy structures will be introduced.
A noteworthy study is that reported by Yeo's group in 2016, in which they surprisingly found that the doping of Zn with different amounts of Cu-based oxides could tune the selectivity of electrocatalysts towards ethanol and ethylene in CO2RR.185 They prepared a series of oxide-derived CuxZn electrocatalysts with various molar ratios of Cu and Zn by electrodepositing Cu or CuxZn oxides onto polished Cu disks. Additionally, Zn oxide films were prepared using a similar method except that they were deposited onto Zn disks. Among these electrocatalysts, Cu4Zn exhibited the maximum ethanol FE of 29.1% at −1.05 V vs. RHE with a current density of −8.2 mA cm−2. To reveal the important role that Zn played in enhancing the selectivity towards ethanol, the authors further synthesized Cu3.5Ni and CuxNi to test their performance towards CO2RR; they found that none of these materials could achieve an ethanol FE as high as that achieved by Cu4Zn. Additionally, the operando Raman spectroscopy results illuminated that during the CO2RR measurement process, Cu and Zn oxide were reduced to metallic states. Combining all these results, a two-site mechanism was proposed to simulate the electroreduction process of CO2 on Cu4Zn electrode, in which the synergetic effect of Cu sites and Zn sites forced the formation of ethanol (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 31  Proposed reaction pathway for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to ethanol on CuxZn electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
A series of studies published in recent years demonstrated that Cu–In bimetallic electrocatalysts can also endow CO2 electroreduction with superior activity and selectivity. In 2015, Takanabe et al. reported a non-noble electrocatalyst based on a Cu–In alloy which could convert CO2 to CO with a high FE of 95% at −0.7 V vs. RHE.186 DFT calculations revealed that this superior catalytic performance arose from the incorporation of In atoms, which preferred to locate on the edge sites of the Cu surface, increasing the adsorption ability of the neighbouring Cu sites. In the next year, Ramírez also prepared Cu–In nanoalloy electrocatalysts via the reduction of Cu NPs supported on In2O3 (referred to as Cu/IO) to CuInO2 for CO2RR.187 In the initial stage of the CO2RR electrolysis, these Cu–In nanoalloys performed poorly. However, over several electrocatalytic cycles, the current density and FE of HCOOH both increased (Fig. 32a). Characterization results revealed the formation of a heterogeneous nanostructure with a Cu-rich core and an In(OH)3 shell during the electrolysis, which may account for the increasing catalytic performance of these Cu–In bimetallic NPs (Fig. 32b). In 2017, another study reported by Zangari et al. adopted an electrodeposition method to prepare a series of Cu–In dendrite nanoalloys with various weight ratios of Cu and In for CO2RR.188 Measurement results of CO2RR indicated the formation of CO and HCOOH during the electrolysis, and the maximum HCOOH FE of 62% was achieved by 80 at% In catalyst at −1.0 V vs. RHE. Additionally, by changing the percentage of In to 40 at%, an ideal syngas composition of CO/H2 could be realized.
 Fig. 32  (a) Current efficiencies, total current densities (circle) and CO partial current densities (diamond) tested at −0.6 V vs. RHE of two electrodes, where each electrolytic run lasted for 2 h; (b) XRD patterns of Cu/IO and CuInO2 electrodes during each electrocatalytic cycle, showing the increasing intensity of the In(OH)3 peaks during the whole reaction process. Adapted with permission from ref. 187 (open access). 
Another study we would like to introduce is that reported by Sun's group, in which a novel core–shell nanostructure composed of a Cu core and a SnO2 shell was firstly designed and synthesized.84 They prepared Cu NPs with an average particle size of 7 nm, which were then capped by a shell consisting of a SnO2 layer with a thickness of 0.8 nm or 1.8 nm. Surprisingly, when the thickness of the SnO2 shell was changed, this core–shell Cu/SnO2 catalyst exhibited totally different performance towards CO2RR. With a 0.8 nm SnO2 shell, a maximum CO FE of 93% at −0.7 V vs. RHE could be achieved, while with a 1.8 nm SnO2 shell, the selectivity changed completely and a peak HCOOH FE of 85% could be achieved at −0.9 V vs. RHE (Fig. 33a and b). DFT calculations illuminated that with a thicker SnO2 layer, the formation of HCOOH was more energetically favourable; meanwhile, when the Cu core was capped by a 0.8 nm SnO2 shell with both 10% uniaxial compression and 2 Cu atoms on the surface, the formation of CO was more likely to occur.
 Fig. 33  (a) and (b) Potential-dependent H2, CO and HCOOH FEs of Cu/SnO2 with a thickness of 0.8 nm (referred to as C–Cu/SnO2-0.8) (a) and Cu/SnO2 with a thickness of 1.8 nm (referred to as C–Cu/SnO2-1.8) (b). Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to Cu–M-based electrocatalysts, multi-metallic electrocatalysts composed of other non-noble metals have also been fabricated and applied for catalyzing CO2RR.80,192–195 For example, Yuan et al. reported a facile synthesis of GDE-In0.90Sn0.10, GDE-In0.47Sn0.53 and GDE-In0.22Sn0.78via electrodepositing In–Sn alloys on carbon fiber paper.192 Compared to Sn foil and In foil, these three In–Sn-based electrodes all exhibited higher FEs of HCOOH at the applied potentials. Furthermore, a maximum HCOOH FE of ∼92% was achieved by GDE-In0.90Sn0.10 at −1.2 V vs. RHE; this superior performance was attributed to its composition, unique crystal phase and nanostructure. Other interesting research reported by Lewis's group combined two metals that are rarely used in CO2RR (Ni and Ga) into three types of Ni–Ga bimetallic electrocatalysts with various phases (NiGa, Ni3Ga and Ni5Ga3) for electrochemically converting CO2 to CH4, C2H4 and C2H6.193 This is one of the few examples of using non-Cu-based materials for producing hydrocarbons in CO2RR. It was observed that these three phases of Ni–Ga electrodes exhibited the same onset potentials for the formation of CH4, C2H4 and C2H6, −0.48 V vs. RHE; this is lower than that of Cu electrodes. However, it should be noted that the energy efficiency for producing these three kinds of hydrocarbons was quite poor (all lower than 3% at the applied potentials). Considering the poor catalytic selectivity, we cannot say that these Ni–Ga bimetallic electrodes are suitable for catalyzing CO2RR.
Multi-metallic electrocatalysts for NRR. 
Because the electrochemical N2 reduction reaction is not currently attracting much attention, there is relatively little research about the application of multi-metallic electrocatalysts in the NRR field. In 2017, Tao et al. reported a quite complex multi-metallic electrocatalyst for catalyzing NRR, in which they used a combined EDTA–citrate complexing sol–gel process to obtain the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.3O3−δ–Ce0.8Gd0.18Ca0.02O2−δ complex cathode.196 N2 was electroreduced to ammonia on this cathode at a production rate of 1.5 × 10−10 mol s−1 cm−2 at 400 °C (Fig. 34). Considering the excellent performance of multi-metallic electrocatalysts in CO2RR, it is expected that the strategy of combining two or more non-noble metals as an electrode is also feasible for fabricating novel electrocatalysts with high activity, selectivity and stability for NRR; much more effort should be paid to realizing this goal.
 Fig. 34  Temperature-dependent NH3 formation rate and NH3 FE of the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.3O3−δ–Ce0.8Gd0.18Ca0.02O2−δ complex cathode under a constant voltage of 1.4 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 196 (open access). 
In summary, based on the research we have introduced and discussed, we can point out some findings that may help us understand the common features of CO2RR and NRR, thereby guiding the design of novel catalysts with excellent performance towards CO2RR, NRR or even both reactions. Firstly, CO2RR and NRR are both reactions in which gas molecules first diffuse into the electrolyte and then adsorb on the surface of the electrode. As a result, materials which can adsorb CO2 or N2 more strongly may be more promising for catalyzing the relevant reactions with satisfactory performance. Secondly, CO2 and N2 are reduced on the active sites after their adsorption on the electrode surface. Therefore, the number of active sites on the surface of the electrocatalysts will greatly influence the reduction of CO2 and N2; by increasing the active sites (such as introducing more vacancies or low-coordinated atoms), we can enhance their catalytic performance towards CO2RR and NRR. Thirdly, as we have stressed above, proper binding energies of the key intermediates in CO2RR and NRR are also crucial for catalyzing the two reactions with high activity and selectivity. Thus, metal-based electrocatalysts containing coinage group metals and/or main group metals (from IIIA to VA) with appropriate binding abilities to the key intermediates (e.g., *COOH and *N2H) in the catalytic process are more capable of catalyzing these two reactions with outstanding performance. These three findings may be universal strategies that can be referred to when designing and synthesizing metal-based electrocatalysts with satisfactory performance towards CO2RR and NRR.

5. Summary and perspective
During the past decades, the large consumption of conventional energy sources such as fossil fuels may not only cause an energy crisis in the near future but may also severely harm the environment. As a result, renewable energy sources, such as wind, sunlight and tides, which appear to be substitutes of conventional energy sources, have attracted increasing attention because they are renewable and environmentally friendly. However, many of these renewable energy sources are intermittent and geography- or weather-dependent; thus, the conversion and storage of renewable energy is a vital problem. Using the electricity generated from renewable energy sources for electrochemical reduction of CO2 and N2 to produce value-added chemical products is a highly promising solution. Furthermore, CO2RR can also lower global carbon emissions and remit global climate change, while NRR can significantly enhance the energy efficiency of producing ammonia from N2 compared to the traditional high-temperature and high-pressure Haber–Bosch process. However, due to the stubbornly inert chemical nature of CO2 and N2 molecules, electrocatalysts with high activities, selectivities and stabilities with relatively low overpotentials are desired for successful CO2RR and NRR implementation. In recent years, much effort has been paid to developing electrocatalysts with satisfactory performance for CO2RR and NRR, and much progress has been achieved. Among the various electrocatalysts, metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts are the most investigated due to their accessibility, stability and relatively easily controllable morphologies, compositions, structures, valences and defect states. Recently developed metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts can be categorized based on the metal elements used; Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate the most recent achievements in the development of metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR, respectively.
Table 1 Representative performance of CO2RR using different metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts




Metal
Electrocatalyst
Potential
Products (FE (%))
Electrolyte
Ref. (year)




Au & AuM
8 nm Au NPs
−0.67 V vs. RHE
CO (90%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 73 (2013)


500 nm Au nanowires
−0.35 V vs. RHE
CO (94%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 98 (2014)


Au25 clusters
−1.0 V vs. RHE
CO (∼100%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 105 (2012)


Au–CeOx/C
−0.89 V vs. RHE
CO (89.1%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 101 (2017)


Au-CDots-C3N4
−0.50 V vs. RHE
CO (79.8%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 102 (2017)


Ordered AuCu
−0.77 V vs. RHE
CO (∼80%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 106 (2017)


Au–Fe core–shell NPs
−0.4 V vs. RHE
CO (97.6%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 108 (2017)


Ag & AgM
5 nm Ag NPs
−0.75 V vs. RHE
CO (84.4%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 114 (2015)


Nanoporous Ag
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (∼90%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 116 (2014)


Nanocoral Ag
<−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (95%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 117 (2015)


Defect-rich Ag
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (>90%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 118 (2017)


Ag2S nanowires
−0.864 V vs. RHE
CO (∼92%)
50/50 v/v [EMIM][BF4]/H2O

Ref. 119 (2018)


(Cu)n,(Ag)m
−1.33 V vs. RHE
CH3COOH (21.2%)
0.5 M KHCO3 with BTA

Ref. 124 (2018)


Ag–Cu2O
−1.2 V vs. RHE
C2H5OH (34.15%)
0.2 M KCl

Ref. 126 (2017)


CuAg wire
−0.7 V vs. RHE
C2H4 (∼60%) & C2H5OH (∼25%)
1 M KOH

Ref. 125 (2018)


Ag3Sn@SnO2
−0.8 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (∼80%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 199 (2017)


Pd & PdM
3.7 nm Pd NPs
−0.89 V vs. RHE
CO (91.2%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 78 (2015)


Pd concave cubes
−0.9 V vs. RHE
CO (90.6%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 128 (2018)


Pd icosahedra
−0.8 V vs. RHE
CO (91.1%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 131 (2017)


Pd/C
−0.05 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (∼100%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 76 (2015)


Pd-B/C
−0.5 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (70%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 133 (2018)


PdTe/few layer graphene
−0.8 V vs. RHE
CO (∼90%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 32 (2018)


Ordered CuPd
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (∼80%)
1 M KOH

Ref. 134 (2017)


Phase-separated CuPd
−0.7 V vs. RHE
C2H4 (48%) & C2H5OH (15%)
1 M KOH

Ref. 134 (2017)


Cu/THH Pd NCs
−0.46 V vs. RHE
C2H5OH (20.4%)
0.1 M NaHCO3

Ref. 135 (2017)


Cu3Pd
−1.2 V vs. RHE
CH4 (40.6%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 136 (2017)


Pd3Cu
−0.9 V vs. RHE
CO (82.1%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 136 (2018)


PdSn/C
−0.43 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (>99%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 197 (2017)


Cu
Cu NPs/carbon paper
−0.75 V vs. RHE
C2H4 & C2H5OH & n-C3H7OH (50%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 140 (2017)


5-Fold twinned Cu nanowires
−1.25 V vs. RHE
CH4 (55%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 153 (2017)


Cu nanosheets
−0.5 V vs. RHE
CO (92%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 79 (2017)


Porous dendrite Cu
−1.55 V vs. Fc+/Fc
HCOOH (83%)
92/8 v/v [EMIM][BF4]/H2O

Ref. 89 (2017)


Plasma-activated Cu nanocubes
−1.0 V vs. RHE
C2H4 & C2H5OH & n-C3H7OH (∼73%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 143 (2017)


Amorphizing Cu NPs
−1.4 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (37%) C2H5OH (22%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 82 (2018)


Cu–S NPs
−0.8 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (∼80%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 145 (2018)


Poly-amide modified Cu foam
−0.96 V vs. RHE
C2H4 (26%)
0.1 M NaHCO3

Ref. 146 (2018)


CuS nanosheet
−1.1 V vs. RHE
CH4 (∼73%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 200 (2017)


Polymer-based Cu gas diffusion electrode
−0.55 V vs. RHE
C2H4 (70%)
7 M KOH

Ref. 198 (2018)


Co
Partially oxidized Co atomic layer
−0.85 V vs. SCE
HCOOH (90.1%)
0.1 M Na2SO4

Ref. 72 (2016)


Co3O4-CDots-C3N4
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (89%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 159 (2017)


Co3S4@Co3O4
−0.64 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (85.3%)
0.1 M Na2SO4

Ref. 156 (2017)


Co–N5/HNPCSs
−0.73 V and −0.79 V vs. RHE
CO (>99%)
0.2 M NaHCO3

Ref. 157 (2018)


Sn
5 nm SnO2 NPs/graphene
−1.8 V vs. SCE
HCOOH (>93%)
0.1 M NaHCO3

Ref. 160 (2014)


Sn nanosheets confined in graphene
−1.8 V vs. SCE
HCOOH (89%)
0.1 M NaHCO3

Ref. 74 (2016)


Hierarchical mesoporous SnO2 nanosheets
−1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl
HCOOH (87%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 161 (2017)


SnO NPs
−0.66 V vs. RHE
CO (37%) HCOOH (36%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 162 (2018)


Pb
Oxide-derived Pb
−1.0 V–−0.75 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (∼100%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 163 (2012)


Bi
Bi dendrite
−0.74 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (∼89%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 91 (2017)


Bi nanosheets
−1.2 V–−0.9 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (>90%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 173 (2018)


BiOx/C
−1.70 V–−1.37 V vs. Ag/AgCl
HCOOH (93.4%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 169 (2018)


36 nm Bi NPs
−2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
CO (96.1%)
MeCN with [BMIM][OTF]

Ref. 172 (2016)


Bi-CMEC
−1.95 V vs. SCE
CO (∼95%)
MeCN with [EMIM][BF4]

Ref. 171 (2013)


Zn
Nanoscale Zn
−1.6 V vs. SCE
CO (93%)
0.5 M NaCl

Ref. 177 (2015)


Hexagonal Zn
−0.95 V vs. RHE
CO (85.4%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 178 (2016)


VO-Rich ZnO nanosheets
−1.1 V vs. RHE
CO (83%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 175 (2018)


RAD-Zn
−1.9 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (87.1%)
0.5 M NaHCO3

Ref. 176 (2016)


Ni
Ni SAs/NC
−0.9 V vs. RHE
CO (71.9%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 77 (2017)


Ni–N4–C
−0.81 V vs. RHE
CO (99%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 179 (2017)


Ni in graphene
−0.8 V vs. RHE
CO (95%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 181 (2018)


Ni(I) on nitrogenerated graphene
−0.5 V vs. RHE
CO (97%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 180 (2018)


Multi-metallic electrocatalysts
Cu–Sn
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (>90%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 201 (2016)


Cu@0.8 nm SnO2
−0.7 V vs. RHE
CO (93%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 84 (2017)


Cu@0.8 nm SnO2
−0.9 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (85%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 84 (2017)


Cu4Zn
−1.05 V vs. RHE
C2H5OH (29.1%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 185 (2016)


Cu–In nanoalloys
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (∼53%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 187 (2016)


Dendrite 20 at% Cu-80 at% In
−1.0 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (62%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 188 (2017)


Cu–In alloy
−0.6 V vs. RHE
CO (∼90%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 186 (2015)


Cu0.2Zn0.4Sn0.4
−0.7 V vs. RHE
CO (>80%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 190 (2017)


Cu0.2Sn0.8
−0.7 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (>80%)
0.5 M KHCO3

Ref. 190 (2017)


GDE-In0.90Sn0.10
−1.2 V vs. RHE
HCOOH (∼92%)
0.1 M KHCO3

Ref. 192 (2017)














Ni5Ga3
−0.88 V vs. RHE
CH4 (∼2.2%)
0.1 M Na2CO3

Ref. 193 (2016)






C2H4 (∼0.5%)






C2H6 (∼1.7%)




Table 2 Representative performance of NRR using different metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts




Metal
Electrocatalyst
V (V) or I (mA cm−2)
FE (%)
NH3 formation rate
Electrolyte
Ref. (year)




Au
Au tetrahexahedral nanorods
−0.2 V vs. RHE
∼4%
1.648 μg h−1 cm−2
1 M KOH

Ref. 92 (2017)


Amorphizing Au/CeOx-RGO
−0.2 V vs. RHE
10.1%
8.3 μg h−1 cm−2
pH = 1 HCl

Ref. 109 (2017)


Au/TiO2
−0.2 V vs. RHE
8.11%
21.4 μg h−1 cm−2
pH = 1 HCl

Ref. 110 (2017)


Pd
Pd/C
−0.2 V vs. RHE
0.02%
∼10−12 mol cm−2 s−1
Solid state electrolyte

Ref. 96 (2017)


Rh
Rh/Ti felts
−0.228 V vs. NHE
N/A
1.5 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1
N/A

Ref. 138 (2015)


Ru
Ru/Ti felts
−0.207 V vs. NHE
N/A
1.2 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1
N/A

Ref. 138 (2015)


Ru
−1.02 V vs. Ag/AgCl
0.24%
1.30 μg h−1 cm−2
2 M KOH

Ref. 139 (2000)


Pt
Pt/C
1.6 V
∼0.5%
1.14 × 10−9 mol cm−2 s−1
Solid state electrolyte

Ref. 95 (2013)


Ni
Porous Ni
0.5 mA cm−2
∼0.9%
1.54 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1
9/1 v/v 2-propanol/H2O with 10 mM H2SO4

Ref. 182 (2016)


Fe
Fe2O3-CNT
−2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl
0.025%
2.2 × 10−3 g h−1 m−2
Diluted KHCO3

Ref. 183 (2017)


Mo
Mo nanofilm
−0.49 V vs. RHE
0.22%
3.09 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1
0.01 M H2SO4

Ref. 93 (2017)




The progress achieved in the CO2RR and NRR fields in recent years is impressive and significant. As we mentioned above, increasing numbers of puzzles in the reaction mechanisms of CO2RR and NRR have been solved. Furthermore, more integrated and standardized measurement systems have been established for both CO2RR and NRR; thus, the experimental results obtained by different research groups are more comparable and convincing. Regarding the electrocatalysts, increasing numbers of novel metal-based materials have been developed for catalyzing CO2RR and NRR with superior performance. Much of the research mentioned above has demonstrated that we can enhance the activity and tune the selectivity of electrocatalysts towards CO2RR and NRR mainly by varying their morphologies, structures, compositions and oxidation states; further analyzing and discussing the as-gained achievements reveals that the enhanced catalytic performance mostly arises from the increasing adsorption of reagent molecules and the optimal binding energy of a particular intermediate in the reaction process. To develop metal-based electrocatalysts with outstanding performance towards CO2RR or NRR or even both reactions, materials with excellent adsorption abilities of CO2 and N2, more active sites for reducing CO2 and N2, and optimal binding energies of the key intermediates in the catalytic process should be cautiously considered. However, the electrocatalysts currently being developed are still far from fulfilling the requirements for commercial applications. To realize the goal of widely applying CO2RR and NRR in human industry and life, more research in the future should be performed in the following major directions.
5.1 Superior selectivity, especially towards high value-added products
Considering the difference between the product distributions of CO2RR and NRR, the requirements for electrocatalysis of these two reactions in this aspect are not the same. First, we will discuss CO2RR. It is encouraging to find that a variety of electrocatalysts have been developed in recent years which can convert CO2 to CO or HCOOH with FEs higher than 90% or even almost 100%, in parallel with high current density, at relatively positive potentials.157,197 However, when we take the relatively low values and market sizes of CO and HCOOH into consideration, we realize that these electrocatalysts cannot bring as much value as we expect, and electrocatalysts with superior selectivity towards products with more than two electrons transferred are eagerly desired. As a result, Cu-based materials, which are able to convert CO2 to higher value-added products, are quite worthy of investigation for improving their catalytic performance. Very recently, Sargent et al. reported a novel fabrication of polymer-based Cu gas diffusion electrodes which can reduce CO2 to ethylene with an FE as high as 70% at a quite positive potential of −0.55 V vs. RHE.198 They used a KOH solution with a quite high concentration of 10 M as the electrolyte and found that OH− ions on or near the Cu surface can lower the activation energy barriers of CO2 reduction and CO–CO coupling, thereby facilitating the formation of ethylene. To ensure the stability of the Cu electrodes in the extremely alkaline conditions, a strategy of using polymer and carbon particles to sandwich the Cu catalyst was proposed. Another recent study reported by Yu and Sargent et al. focused on steering the post C–C coupling selectivity by establishing a Cu2S@Cu(V) core–shell nanostructure.202 Due to the introduction of Cu vacancies and subsurface S atoms, the conversion of the *CH2CHO intermediate to C2H5OH is more favourable, thus enhancing the FE of C2H5OH to ∼32% with a much higher current density. These two studies not only realized high selectivity towards C2 products on Cu-based electrocatalysts but, more importantly, it also increases our confidence that an electrocatalyst which can convert CO2 to high value-added products with a desirably high FE can finally be developed in the future.
On the other hand, non-Cu-based electrocatalysts which are capable of reducing CO2 to hydrocarbons or alcohols, such as the Ni–Ga electrocatalyst mentioned above, should also receive attention.193 Some theoretical calculations have identified several promising materials.203,204 For example, Jung et al. attempted for the first time to combine several criteria (CO binding energy, OH binding energy and H binding energy) as the activity- and selectivity-determining descriptors for preferentially producing methanol over methane in CO2RR.203 They proposed a concept of near-surface alloys (NSAs) and constructed a series of related models, such as Re/Au, W/Au, V/Cu, and Ta/Cu. The calculation results illuminated that a W/Au alloy with a single Au layer on the top of W electrode may be a candidate for converting CO2 to methanol with higher selectivity and lower overpotential than conventional Cu electrodes. More experimental research should be conducted for verifying and exploiting these calculation predictions, resulting in the development of novel electrocatalysts with superior selectivity towards high value-added products for CO2RR.
As for NRR, the main reduction product of N2 is ammonia; sometimes, hydrazine is also generated. However, the most crucial problem in the NRR field is not the preference for ammonia or hydrazine, but the extremely competitive H2 evolution. All the electrocatalysts for NRR mentioned above suffer from extremely high H2 FEs; thus, enhancing the selectivity towards N2 reduction and suppressing the reduction of H2O is a priority. In fact, many strategies for improving the catalytic performance of metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts have not been thoroughly explored, such as optimizing the compositions, structures, valences and morphologies of the electrocatalysts or constructing multi-metallic electrocatalysts. There are still many opportunities in the NRR field, and we believe that with further and deeper investigation of this reaction, electrocatalysts with satisfactory performance will finally be developed.
5.2 Low-cost electrocatalysts prepared by facile methods with excellent stability
If we want to generalize CO2RR and NRR in commercial applications, another problem we cannot neglect is the cost and production of electrocatalysts. In fact, most current research into CO2RR and NRR is focusing on optimal catalytic performance, with no consideration of the production cost and the complexity of the fabrication procedures. Therefore, developing low-cost electrocatalysts prepared by facile methods with excellent stability is of great significance. Although many of the aforementioned noble metal-based electrocatalysts perform well in catalyzing CO2RR and NRR, they are not advantageous in terms of cost compared to non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts, which hence are worthier of study. On the other hand, increasing the utilization of noble metal atoms is another method to lower production costs if the complicated fabrication procedures are neglected. As for the preparation procedures, many of the powder electrocatalysts with superior performance reported in recent years are elaborate nanostructured catalysts which are prepared by complex methods with relatively low productivity. More facile and robust preparation methods would enhance productivity and decrease production costs. Finally, an electrocatalyst with a longer service life will absolutely decrease the cost; thus, the synthesis of electrocatalysts with high stability for CO2RR and NRR should also receive attention.
5.3 Deeper understanding of the reaction mechanisms
In recent years, with the deeper and more thorough investigation of CO2RR and NRR, many more researchers have begun to focus on the reaction mechanisms of CO2RR and NRR because a more comprehensive understanding of the reaction pathway will aid the design of novel catalysts with superior performance. A variety of in operando characterization techniques (such as attenuated total reflection (ATR)-surface enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS) or Raman spectroscopy, synchrotron-based ambient-pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy) have been applied for revealing the real reaction pathways of CO2RR and NRR by directly monitoring the surfaces and interface species and observing changes in the composition, oxidation state, morphology and crystallinity of electrodes in real time.150,185,205 For example, Shao's group in 2017 reported the direct observation of reaction intermediates of CO2RR performed on a Cu electrode using the powerful ATR-SEIRAS technique in combination with isotopic labelling and potential stepping techniques.150 In addition to a frequently reported and well-studied intermediate (surface-bonded CO), they also observed the evolution of other intermediates (such as multiple CO or *CHO, *COOH and bidentate COO−) for the first time. Furthermore, surface-bonded CO was also observed when using Ar-saturated KHCO3 as the electrolyte, suggesting that the bicarbonate anions play a critical role rather than only acting as a pH buffer or proton source. After analyzing the isotopic labelling results, the authors concluded that surface-bonded CO was generated from the CO2 molecules in equilibrium with bicarbonate rather than those dissolved in the solution.
On the other hand, the remarkable advances in DFT calculations enable research of these electrocatalysts on the atomic scale, hence revealing the reaction mechanisms of CO2RR and NRR theoretically. It can be seen that much of the aforementioned research has adopted DFT calculations to explain the experimental results or predict novel electrocatalysts while revealing their activity and selectivity descriptors. However, restricted computational sources and imperfect computational methods limit the construction of models similar to real electrocatalysts, leading to lower accuracy. Thus, we should strive to expand computational resources and optimize computational methods in the future to provide a better and more accurate understanding of CO2RR and NRR.
5.4 Novel electrocatalysts catalyzing both CO2RR and NRR with outstanding performance
In recent years, a variety of novel electrocatalysts which can catalyze more than one reaction have been reported.156,206,207 These multi-functional electrocatalysts are aimed at improving the utilization of metal-based materials and lower their production costs. For example, the aforementioned research reported by Lee's group designed a Co3S4@Co3O4 core–shell nanostructure which can catalyze both oxygen and carbon dioxide reduction reactions with superior performance.156 As mentioned above, several metal elements are suitable for catalyzing both CO2RR and NRR; thus, designing an electrocatalyst which can catalyze CO2RR and NRR with excellent performance is completely feasible in theory. On the other hand, due to the similarities between CO2RR and NRR in measurement systems, it is quite facile to test the performance of prepared electrocatalysts for both reactions.
In summary, recent advances in CO2RR and NRR have demonstrated the possibility of converting renewable energy to chemical energy stored in value-added products reduced from CO2 and NRR by metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. Although the electrocatalysts developed for CO2RR and NRR still face numerous problems, we should be confident that in the future, electrocatalysts for CO2RR and NRR with high activity, superior selectivity and robust stability with low cost will finally be developed, and we will even be able to directly transform the products obtained in CO2RR and NRR to more complex and useful carbon and/or nitrogen- containing compounds applied in fields such as the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. At that time, all the effort that has been made will be appreciated.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFB0701100), the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21573005, 21771009, and 21621061), and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (No. 2162019).
Notes and references
O. Ellabban, H. Abu-Rub and F. Blaabjerg, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 748–764 CrossRef .

          R. S. COMMITTEE, Renewables 2016 Global Status Report,  2017 Search PubMed.
C. Beer, M. Reichstein, E. Tomelleri, P. Ciais, M. Jung, N. Carvalhais, C. Rödenbeck, M. A. Arain, D. Baldocchi, G. B. Bonan, A. Bondeau, A. Cescatti, G. Lasslop, A. Lindroth, M. Lomas, S. Luyssaert, H. Margolis, K. W. Oleson, O. Roupsard, E. Veenendaal, N. Viovy, C. Williams, F. I. Woodward and D. Papale, Science, 2010, 329, 834 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef .
C. Jia, F. Pan, Y. G. Zhu, Q. Huang, L. Lu and Q. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500886 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
G. L. Soloveichik, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11533–11558 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Duan, R. S. Vemuri, J. D. Milshtein, S. Laramie, R. D. Dmello, J. Huang, L. Zhang, D. Hu, M. Vijayakumar, W. Wang, J. Liu, R. M. Darling, L. Thompson, K. Smith, J. S. Moore, F. R. Brushett and X. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5448–5456 RSC .
P. C. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 951–957 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Ager and A. A. Lapkin, Science, 2018, 360, 707 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1709–1742 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, M. Ali, M. Kar, A. N. Simonov, C. McDonnell-Worth, C. Sun, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2516–2520 RSC .
C. N. Waters, J. Zalasiewicz, C. Summerhayes, A. D. Barnosky, C. Poirier, A. Galuszka, A. Cearreta, M. Edgeworth, E. C. Ellis, M. Ellis, C. Jeandel, R. Leinfelder, J. R. McNeill, D. Richter, W. Steffen, J. Syvitski, D. Vidas, M. Wagreich, M. Williams, A. Zhisheng, J. Grinevald, E. Odada, N. Oreskes and A. P. Wolfe, Science, 2016, 351, 2622 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Spatzal, K. A. Perez, O. Einsle, J. B. Howard and D. C. Rees, Science, 2014, 345, 1620 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. McEnaney, A. R. Singh, J. A. Schwalbe, J. Kibsgaard, J. C. Lin, M. Cargnello, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1621–1630 RSC .
R. D. Milton, S. Abdellaoui, N. Khadka, D. R. Dean, D. Leech, L. C. Seefeldt and S. D. Minteer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2550–2554 RSC .
M. Kitano, Y. Inoue, Y. Yamazaki, F. Hayashi, S. Kanbara, S. Matsuishi, T. Yokoyama, S. W. Kim, M. Hara and H. Hosono, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 934–940 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. van der Ham, M. T. Koper and D. G. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183–5191 RSC .
J. Yin, Q. Fan, Y. Li, F. Cheng, P. Zhou, P. Xi and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14546–14549 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kitano, S. Kanbara, Y. Inoue, N. Kuganathan, P. V. Sushko, T. Yokoyama, M. Hara and H. Hosono, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6731 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. van Kessel, D. R. Speth, M. Albertsen, P. H. Nielsen, H. J. Op den Camp, B. Kartal, M. S. Jetten and S. Lucker, Nature, 2015, 528, 555–559 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Freund and M. W. Roberts, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1996, 25, 225–273 CrossRef .
W. H. Koppenol and J. D. Rush, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 4429–4430 CrossRef .
H. A. Schwarz and R. W. Dodson, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 409–414 CrossRef .
E. Lamy, L. Nadjo and J. M. Saveant, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1977, 78, 403–407 CrossRef .
K. Honkala, A. Hellman, I. N. Remediakis, A. Logadottir, A. Carlsson, S. Dahl, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Nørskov, Science, 2005, 307, 555 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, J. Xu, Z. Wei, J. Ma, S. Guo, S. Wang, H. Liu and S. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701784 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tao, X. Sun, S. Back, Z. Han, Q. Zhu, A. Robertson, T. Ma, Q. Fan, B. Han, Y. Jung and Z. Sun, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 483–487 RSC .
F. Li, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6235–6260 RSC .
C. W. Lee, K. D. Yang, D. H. Nam, J. H. Jang, N. H. Cho, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2018 DOI:10.1002/adma.201704717 .
L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11326–11353 CrossRef PubMed .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423–3452 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, X. Xue, R. Chen, S. Yang and Z. Jin, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700275 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen and F. Jiao, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 38–47 CrossRef .
M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 57–68 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Xia, H. Wang, K. Huang, C. Qian, C. T. Maravelias and G. A. Ozin, Joule, 2018, 2, 1055–1074 CrossRef .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
N. Cao and G. Zheng, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2992–3008 CrossRef .
K. K. Yoshio Hori and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 1695–1698 CrossRef .
G. Kyriacou and A. Anagnostopoulos, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1992, 328, 233–243 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef .

          O. Koga, T. Matsuo, H. Yamazaki and Y. Hori, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. T. Inui, M. Anpo, K. Izui, S. Yanagida and T. Yamaguchi, Elsevier,  1998, vol. 114, pp. 569–572 Search PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Shi, H. A. Hansen, A. C. Lausche and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4720–4727 RSC .
C. Shi, K. Chan, J. S. Yoo and J. K. Nørskov, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 1424–1430 CrossRef .
J. T. Feaster, C. Shi, E. R. Cave, T. Hatsukade, D. N. Abram, K. P. Kuhl, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4822–4827 CrossRef .
Z. P. Jovanov, H. A. Hansen, A. S. Varela, P. Malacrida, A. A. Peterson, J. K. Nørskov, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 215–231 CrossRef .
H. Ooka, M. C. Figueiredo and M. T. M. Koper, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9307–9313 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5 Search PubMed .
F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7282–7285 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, J. L. White and A. B. Bocarsly, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3148–3156 CrossRef .
A. Dutta, A. Kuzume, M. Rahaman, S. Vesztergom and P. Broekmann, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7498–7502 CrossRef .
M. Dunwell, Q. Lu, J. M. Heyes, J. Rosen, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan, F. Jiao and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3774–3783 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, S. H. Chan and Q. Sun, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8663–8683 RSC .
R. P. S. Chaplin and A. A. Wragg, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 1107–1123 CrossRef .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-P. Jones, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54, 1451–1466 CrossRef .
E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8226–8239 RSC .
D. C. Grenoble, M. M. Estadt and D. F. Ollis, J. Catal., 1981, 12, 90 CrossRef .
E. Skulason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdottir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
Y. Abghoui, A. L. Garden, V. F. Hlynsson, S. Bjorgvinsdottir, H. Olafsdottir and E. Skulason, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4909–4918 RSC .
M. Chhetri, S. Sultan and C. N. R. Rao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 8986 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Gomez, A. Fernandez-Vega, J. M. Feliu and A. Aldaz, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 4769–4776 CrossRef .
N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, B. Xiao, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13638 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, Ö. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lei, W. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, K. Liu, L. Liang, T. Yao, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12697 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4948 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Min and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4701–4708 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4288–4291 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dai, Q. Qin, P. Wang, X. Zhao, C. Hu, P. Liu, R. Qin, M. Chen, D. Ou, C. Xu, S. Mo, B. Wu, G. Fu, P. Zhang and N. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701069 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, L. Lu, Q. Zhu, C. Wu, D. Yang, C. Chen and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2427–2431 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3465–3520 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Duan, F. L. Meng, K. H. Liu, S. S. Yi, S. J. Li, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706194 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Montoya, C. Tsai, A. Vojvodic and J. K. Nørskov, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2180–2186 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Fu, W. Zhu, Z. Chen, B. Shen, L. Wu, Z. Xi, T. Wang, G. Lu, J. J. Zhu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4290–4293 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zheng, P. De Luna, F. P. García de Arquer, B. Zhang, N. Becknell, M. B. Ross, Y. Li, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, M. Liu, O. Voznyy, C. T. Dinh, T. Zhuang, P. Stadler, Y. Cui, X. Du, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2017, 1, 794–805 CrossRef .
D. L. T. Nguyen, M. S. Jee, D. H. Won, H. Jung, H.-S. Oh, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11377–11386 CrossRef .
M. B. Ross, C. T. Dinh, Y. Li, D. Kim, P. De Luna, E. H. Sargent and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9359–9363 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, F. Li, X. Zhang, T. Williams, C. D. Easton, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4714–4720 RSC .
T. N. Huan, P. Simon, G. Rousse, I. Génois, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Chem. Sci., 2016 10.1039/c6sc03194c .
R. Kas, R. Kortlever, H. Yılmaz, T. M. Koper Marc and G. Mul, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 2, 354–358 CrossRef .
J. H. Koh, D. H. Won, T. Eom, N.-K. Kim, K. D. Jung, H. Kim, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5071–5077 CrossRef .
D. Bao, Q. Zhang, F. L. Meng, H. X. Zhong, M. M. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. M. Yan, Q. Jiang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604799 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, T. Chen and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18967–18971 RSC .
Y. Yao, S. Zhu, H. Wang, H. Li and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1496–1501 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lan, J. T. Irvine and S. Tao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1145 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nash, X. Yang, J. Anibal, J. Wang, Y. Yan and B. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F1712–F1716 CrossRef .
A. P. Vanselow, Ind. Eng. Chem., Anal. Ed., 1940, 12, 516–517 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, Y. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Back, M. S. Yeom and Y. Jung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4274–4280 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, N. Austin, M. Li, Y. Song, S. D. House, S. Bernhard, J. C. Yang, G. Mpourmpakis and R. Jin, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4996–5001 CrossRef .
D. Gao, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, F. Cai, X. Zhao, W. Huang, Y. Li, J. Zhu, P. Liu, F. Yang, G. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5652–5655 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhao, Z. Tang, S. Guo, M. Han, C. Zhu, Y. Zhou, L. Bai, J. Gao, H. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, ACS Catal., 2017, 8, 188–197 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang and J. C. Flake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3399–3405 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Kauffman, D. Alfonso, C. Matranga, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10237–10243 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, C. Xie, N. Becknell, Y. Yu, M. Karamad, K. Chan, E. J. Crumlin, J. K. Nørskov and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8329–8336 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-H. Zhou, D.-W. Lan, S.-S. Yang, Y. Guo, K. Yuan, L.-X. Dai and Y.-W. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1524–1532 RSC .
K. Sun, T. Cheng, L. Wu, Y. Hu, J. Zhou, A. Maclennan, Z. Jiang, Y. Gao, W. A. Goddard 3rd and Z. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15608–15611 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Li, D. Bao, M. M. Shi, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Shi, D. Bao, B. R. Wulan, Y. H. Li, Y. F. Zhang, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606550 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Hellman, E. J. Baerends, M. Biczysko, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen, D. C. Clary, S. Dahl, R. van Harrevelt, K. Honkala, H. Jonsson, G. J. Kroes, M. Luppi, U. Manthe, J. K. Nørskov, R. A. Olsen, J. Rossmeisl, E. Skúlason, C. S. Tautermann, A. J. C. Varandas and J. K. Vincent, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17719–17735 CrossRef PubMed .
Á. Logadóttir and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 273–279 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, L. Han, H. Jing, D. A. Blom, Y. Lin, H. L. Xin and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2960–2974 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Kim, H. S. Jeon, T. Eom, M. S. Jee, H. Kim, C. M. Friend, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13844–13850 CrossRef PubMed .
S. X. Guo, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 80–87 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Hsieh, S. D. Senanayake, Y. Zhang, W. Xu and D. E. Polyansky, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5349–5356 CrossRef .
H. Mistry, Y. W. Choi, A. Bagger, F. Scholten, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Sinev, N. J. Divins, I. Zegkinoglou, H. S. Jeon, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, J. Rossmeisl and B. Roldan Cuenya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11394–11398 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Tao, Q. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Liu and J.-L. Luo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1469–1475 CrossRef .
M. R. Singh, J. D. Goodpaster, A. Z. Weber, M. Head-Gordon and A. T. Bell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, E8812–E8821 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings, Q. Lu, S. Rivera, Y. Zhou, D. G. Vlachos and F. Jiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4293–4299 CrossRef .
K. Sun, L. Wu, W. Qin, J. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Jiang, B. Shen and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12616–12623 RSC .
G. P. Lau, M. Schreier, D. Vasilyev, R. Scopelliti, M. Gratzel and P. J. Dyson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7820–7823 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Wang, C. J. Dares, S. L. Marquard, M. V. Sheridan and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 278–283 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. Verma, S. Ma, T. T. Fister, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5791–5797 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lee, G. Park and J. Lee, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8594–8604 CrossRef .
Z. Chang, S. Huo, W. Zhang, J. Fang and H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11368–11379 CrossRef .
H. Dong, L. Zhang, P. Yang, X. Chang, W. Zhu, X. Ren, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.ces.2018.03.029 .
F. Cai, D. Gao, H. Zhou, G. Wang, T. He, H. Gong, S. Miao, F. Yang, J. Wang and X. Bao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2569–2573 RSC .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, F. Cai, D. Wang, Y. Hu, B. Jiang, W.-B. Cai, X. Chen, R. Si, F. Yang, S. Miao, J. Wang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2181–2191 CrossRef .
H. Huang, H. Jia, Z. Liu, P. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Luo, J. Yang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3594–3598 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Stalder, S. Chao and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 3673–3675 CrossRef .
B. Jiang, X. G. Zhang, K. Jiang, D. Y. Wu and W. B. Cai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2880–2889 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, M. Heima, R. Luo, R. T. Haasch, J. I. Gold, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 47–50 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Y. Zhang, T. Sheng, N. Tian, L. Liu, C. Xiao, B. A. Lu, B. B. Xu, Z. Y. Zhou and S. G. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8085–8088 RSC .
W. Zhu, L. Zhang, P. Yang, X. Chang, H. Dong, A. Li, C. Hu, Z. Huang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Small, 2018, 14, 1703314 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sato, T. Arai and T. Morikawa, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 034001 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kugler, M. Luhn, J. A. Schramm, K. Rahimi and M. Wessling, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 3768–3782 RSC .
V. Kordali, G. Kyriacou and C. Lambrou, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1673–1674,  10.1039/b004885m .
D. Kim, C. S. Kley, Y. Li and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10560–10565 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, S. Kunze, F. Scholten and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2017, 8, 531–535 CrossRef .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, I. Zegkinoglou, N. J. Divins, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, P. Grosse and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4825–4831 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, F. Scholten and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5112–5120 CrossRef .
T. Shinagawa, G. O. Larrazábal, A. J. Martín, F. Krumeich and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 837–844 CrossRef .
S. Ahn, K. Klyukin, R. J. Wakeham, J. A. Rudd, A. R. Lewis, S. Alexander, F. Carla, V. Alexandrov and E. Andreoli, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4132–4142 CrossRef .
M. Rahaman, A. Dutta, A. Zanetti and P. Broekmann, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7946–7956 CrossRef .
L. Cao, D. Raciti, C. Li, K. J. T. Livi, P. F. Rottmann, K. J. Hemker, T. Mueller and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8578–8587 CrossRef .
S. Le Duff Cécile, J. Lawrence Matthew and P. Rodriguez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12919–12924 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhu, B. Jiang, W. B. Cai and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15664–15667 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lum and J. W. Ager, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 551–554 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. Ma, J. I. Gold, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3313–3321 CrossRef .
Y. Li, F. Cui, M. B. Ross, D. Kim, Y. Sun and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1312–1317 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, X. Jiao, Z. Sun, W. Zhang, Y. Sun, C. Wang, Q. Hu, X. Zu, F. Yang, S. Yang, L. Liang, J. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 698–702 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Z. Sun, W. Liu, X. Jiao, X. Zu, Q. Hu, Y. Sun, T. Yao, W. Zhang, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14503 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, K. Li, X. Chen, Y. Yang and J.-M. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1701724 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sekar, L. Calvillo, C. Tubaro, M. Baron, A. Pokle, F. Carraro, A. Martucci and S. Agnoli, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7695–7703 CrossRef .
S. Guo, S. Zhao, X. Wu, H. Li, Y. Zhou, C. Zhu, N. Yang, X. Jiang, J. Gao, L. Bai, Y. Liu, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee and Z. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1828 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, P. Kang and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1734–1737 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, L. Chen, G. P. Knowles, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 505–509 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gu, F. Heroguel, J. Luterbacher and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2943–2947 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986–1989 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Chen, F. Li, C. D. Easton, J. Li, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4846–4853 CrossRef .
E. Irtem, T. Andreu, A. Parra, M. D. Hernández-Alonso, S. García-Rodríguez, J. M. Riesco-García, G. Penelas-Pérez and J. R. Morante, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13582–13588 RSC .
C. Cui, J. Han, X. Zhu, X. Liu, H. Wang, D. Mei and Q. Ge, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 257–265 CrossRef .
C. H. Lee and M. W. Kanan, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 465–469 CrossRef .
Q. Zhu, J. Ma, X. Kang, X. Sun, H. Liu, J. Hu, Z. Liu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9012–9016 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Lee, J. S. Hong, K. D. Yang, K. Jin, J. H. Lee, H.-Y. Ahn, H. Seo, N.-E. Sung and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 931–937 CrossRef .
J. Medina-Ramos, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8361–8367 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8798–8801 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Chi, G. M. Veith, P. Zhang, D. A. Lutterman, J. Rosenthal, S. H. Overbury, S. Dai and H. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6255–6264 CrossRef .
P. Su, W. Xu, Y. Qiu, T. Zhang, X. Li and H. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 848–853 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings, Q. Lu, R. V. Forest, A. Moore and F. Jiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4586–4591 CrossRef .
Z. Geng, X. Kong, W. Chen, H. Su, Y. Liu, F. Cai, G. Wang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6054–6059 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Zhang, H. Zhong, Y. Qiu, X. Li and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16670–16676 RSC .
F. Quan, D. Zhong, H. Song, F. Jia and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16409–16413 RSC .
H. Won da, H. Shin, J. Koh, J. Chung, H. S. Lee, H. Kim and S. I. Woo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9297–9300 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, W. Bi, M. Chen, Y. Sun, H. Ju, W. Yan, J. Zhu, X. Wu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14889–14892 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nature Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
K. Kim, N. Lee, C.-Y. Yoo, J.-N. Kim, H. C. Yoon and J.-I. Han, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F610–F612 CrossRef .
S. Chen, S. Perathoner, C. Ampelli, C. Mebrahtu, D. Su and G. Centi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2699–2703 CrossRef PubMed .
V. A. a. M. S. A. Sclafani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 734–736 CrossRef .
D. Ren, B. S.-H. Ang and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8239–8247 CrossRef .
S. Rasul, D. H. Anjum, A. Jedidi, Y. Minenkov, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2146–2150 CrossRef PubMed .
G. O. Larrazábal, A. J. Martín, S. Mitchell, R. Hauert and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6265–6274 CrossRef .
Z. B. Hoffman, T. S. Gray, K. B. Moraveck, T. B. Gunnoe and G. Zangari, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5381–5390 CrossRef .
H. Robatjazi, H. Zhao, D. F. Swearer, N. J. Hogan, L. Zhou, A. Alabastri, M. J. McClain, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 27 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, K. E. Dettelbach, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16579–16582 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vasileff, C. Xu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem, 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.chempr.2018.05.001 .
Q. Lai, N. Yang and G. Yuan, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 83, 24–27 CrossRef .
D. A. Torelli, S. A. Francis, J. C. Crompton, A. Javier, J. R. Thompson, B. S. Brunschwig, M. P. Soriaga and N. S. Lewis, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2100–2104 CrossRef .
J. Medina-Ramos, R. C. Pupillo, T. P. Keane, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5021–5027 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Dong, C. J. Yoo and J. L. Lee, ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43575–43582 CrossRef PubMed .
I. A. Amar, R. Lan, J. Humphreys and S. Tao, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 51–56 CrossRef .
X. Bai, W. Chen, C. Zhao, S. Li, Y. Song, R. Ge, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12219–12223 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. García de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luc, C. Collins, S. Wang, H. Xin, K. He, Y. Kang and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1885–1893 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, X. Peng, X. Liu, X. Sun, J. Shi, L. Han, G. Li and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20239–20243 RSC .
S. Sarfraz, A. T. Garcia-Esparza, A. Jedidi, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2842–2851 CrossRef .
T.-T. Zhuang, Z.-Q. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. De Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. Min, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, Y. Pang, M. Zhong, B. Zhang, J. Li, P.-N. Chen, X.-L. Zheng, H. Liang, W.-N. Ge, B.-J. Ye, D. Sinton, S.-H. Yu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 421–428 CrossRef .
S. Back, H. Kim and Y. Jung, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 965–971 CrossRef .
X. Hong, K. Chan, C. Tsai and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4428–4437 CrossRef .
M. Papasizza and A. Cuesta, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6345–6352 CrossRef .
E. Zhang, Y. Xie, S. Ci, J. Jia, P. Cai, L. Yi and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17288–17298 RSC .
S. Amiinu Ibrahim, Z. Pu, X. Liu, A. Owusu Kwadwo, R. Monestel Hellen Gabriela, O. Boakye Felix, H. Zhang and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702300 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Jun-Hao Zhou	Jun-Hao Zhou was born in November 1995 in Hubei, China. He received his BSc degree in Material Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2016. Currently, he is working toward his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Ya-Wen Zhang at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University. His current research focuses on the controllable synthesis of noble and non-noble metal-based nanomaterials and their applications in the electrochemical reduction of CO2.
Yawen Zhang	Yawen Zhang is a full professor and principal investigator at the College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering of Peking University. The research interests of his group are rational design, controllable synthesis, ordered assembly, catalytic properties and structure–function relationships of rare earth and noble metal nanostructures. He has published more than 130 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals and was a Winner of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in 2010. He obtained his BSc degree, MSc degree, and PhD degree from Peking University in 1988, 1994 and 1997, respectively, and performed postdoctoral research at the State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications of Peking University from 1998 to 2000; he was also a visiting scholar at the Department of Chemistry of the University of California at Berkeley and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory from 2006 to 2008.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Reaction pathways of CO2RR on different metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts; (b) volcano plot using the *COOH binding energy as a descriptor for the CO partial current density at −0.9 V vs. RHE; (c) volcano plot using the *OCHO binding energy as a descriptor for the HCOO− partial current density at −0.9 V vs. RHE. (b) and (c) are adapted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Three possible reaction pathways of NRR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 3  Free energy for the associative distal mechanism on a flat Ru (0001) surface obtained from DFT calculations with no potential applied and with an applied potential of −1.08 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Synthetic scheme of Co 4-atom-thick layers with and without partially oxidized surfaces; (b) FEs of electro-reduction of CO2 to HCOOH on four different electrodes; (c) CO2 adsorption amounts on the four electrodes; (d) ECSA-corrected Tafel plots for HCOOH production on the four electrodes. For (b)–(d), the four electrodes are partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers (red), Co 4-atom-thick layers (blue), partially oxidized bulk Co (violet) and bulk Co (black), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Limiting potentials for N2 electro-reduction on the (111) surfaces of fcc metals as a function of the *N binding energy descriptor. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the measurement systems applied for the investigation of CO2RR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the electrochemical reaction part applied for the investigation of NRR on metal-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 
NH4+ + 2[HgI4]2− + 4OH− − HgO·Hg(NH2)I↓ + 7I− + 3H2O

 	Fig. 8  (a) Potential-dependent FEs of CO on a C–Au electrode; (b) current densities of CO formation on the C–Au electrode at applied potentials; free energy diagrams for the electrochemical reduction of (c) CO2 to CO and (d) H+ to H2 on Au(111), Au(211), or a 13-atom Au cluster at −0.11 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Adapted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  
U
L(CO2RR) − UL(HER) plotted vs. UL(CO2RR) of various models. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Element mapping image of Au–Fe–CSNP; (b) potential-dependent CO FEs of Au–Fe–CSNPs, Au NPs and Au foils; (c) mass activities of Au–Fe–CSNPs and Au NPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 108 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) STEM image of amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO; the inset is a photograph of amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO suspended in water. (b) Raman spectra of the amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO (blue plot) and crystalline Au/RGO (red plot). The Raman peak centered at about 453 cm−1 was assigned to the symmetric stretching mode of O atoms around Ce ions, while the blueshift of this peak (compared to the Raman peak of bulk CeO2 at 465 cm−1) was attributed to the existence of Ce3+. (c) Potential-dependent NH3 FEs and yield of the amorphous Au/CeOx–RGO; (d) NH3 yield of the four samples at −0.2 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) FEs for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to Co at six different electrodes at −0.75 V vs. RHE. (b) The relationships between the overpotential and CO partial current density of four different electrodes. (c) Electron spin densities computed from DFT wave functions; “Cys” is an abbreviation of cysteamine. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthetic scheme of (Cu)n,(Ag)m/polymer/GCE electrodes; (b) CO FEs of six different electrodes at −1.53 V vs. RHE; (c) potential-dependent CO FEs of Cu2Ag3/polymer/GCE electrode; (d) product distribution with (solid) and without (empty) 8 ppm benzotriazole on Cu2Ag3/polymer/GCE electrode; (e) two possible reaction pathways of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH3COOH on (Cu)n,(Ag)m/polymer/GCE electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2018, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) and (c) Potential-dependent FEs of C2H4 (a) and C2H6 (c) on three electrodes; (b) and (d) partial current densities of C2H4 (b) and C2H6 (d) on three electrodes. The three electrodes were Cu wire (blue), CuAg-poly (black) and CuAg-wire (red), respectively. (e) and (f) In situ Raman spectra of Cu wire and CuAg wire at −0.7 V vs. RHE in two regions: (e) Cu–CO stretch and (f) Cu–O stretch. Adapted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Potential-dependent CO FEs of Pd NPs with various particle sizes; (b) potential-dependent CO partial current densities of Pd NPs with various particle sizes; (c) free energy diagrams for electrochemical CO2 reduction to CO on Pd (111), Pd (211), Pd55, and Pd38. Adapted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Mechanism for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to HCOOH on Pd/C electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Potential-dependent HCOOH FEs of three kinds of electrodes; (b) potential-dependent as-formed HCOOH concentration normalized to Pd masses of three different electrodes; (c) and (d) Gibbs free energy diagrams for the CO2RR from the initial state of *+CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− to the final state of *+HCOOH without (c) and with (d) H adsorbate on Pd (111) (black) and Pd (111)-4B (red) surfaces; (e) and (f) Gibbs free energy diagrams for the CO2RR from the initial state of *+CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− to the final state of *+CO + H2O without (e) and with (f) H adsorbate Pd (111) (black) and Pd (111)-4B (red) surfaces. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Potential-dependent FEs of methanol and ethanol on two types of Pd@Cu NCs electrocatalysts; (b) Cu coverage-dependent FEs of methanol and ethanol on Cu/THH Pd NCs at −0.46 V vs. RHE; (c) CO adsorption free energies at the steps (blue) and terraces (red) on a Pd (310) surface with increasing Cu coverage from 0 ML to 1.67 ML. Adapted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  NH3 formation rates and FEs of an air, Pt|nafion 211| Pt, H2O cell under different applied voltages. The cathode was supplied with air, and the anode was supplied with H2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) and (b) Product distributions of CO2RR on Cu NPs electrodes with various loadings at the applied potential of −0.81 V vs. RHE; (c) and (d) product distributions of CO2RR on Cu NPs supported on carbon paper with a loading of ×22.5 (referred to as trans-CuEn) and Cu NPs electrodes in which the Cu NPs were separated from each other; (e) and (f) potential-dependent product distributions of CO2RR on trans-CuEn in 0.1 M CsHCO3. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) SEM images of Cu nanocube samples after various plasma treatments and after 1 h of electrochemical reaction (EC) at −1.0 V vs. RHE. (b) Quasi-in situ Cu XPS spectra of Cu nanocube samples treated with various plasmas before and after EC at −1.0 V vs. RHE. (c) The relationships between the nanomorphology and oxygen content and the geometric current density and C2H4 FE of the Cu nanocube electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) FEs of CO, HCOOH and H2 plus current densities at −0.6 V vs. RHE and −0.8 V vs. RHE of four different CuS NPs, where the order of the particle size was CuS-1 < CuS-2 < CuS-3 < CuS-4; (b) S 2p XPS spectra of CuS-1 and CuS-4 before and after the CO2RR test, in which a considerable decrease of the relative area of the CuS peak was found (162.5 eV); (c) particle size distributions counted from STEM images for representative CuS-1 and CuS-4 before and after CO2RR tests; (d) FEs of CO, HCOOH and H2 plus current densities at −0.6 V vs. RHE of Cu–S samples with various S contents. Adapted with permission from ref. 145 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Synthetic scheme of Co–N5/HNPCSs; (b) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Co–N5/HNPCSs; (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of Co–N5/HNPCSs, in which only one main peak appears at 1.5 Å (corresponding to the first coordination of Co–N) and no Co–Co coordination peak at 2.2 Å could be found; (d) LSV curves of three different electrocatalysts; (e) potential-dependent CO and H2 FEs of Co–N5/HNPCSs and CoPc; (f) potential-dependent CO and H2 FEs of Co, Fe, Ni and Cu–N5/HNPCSs; (g) free energy of CO2RR, in which the red short dashed line represents the desorption free energy level of CO while the dash dot lines represent the desorption free energy of CO. Adapted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Synthetic scheme of SnO/C and SnO2/C; (b)–(d) potential-dependent H2, CO and HCOOH FEs of SnO/C (b), SnO2/C (c) and Sn/C (d); (e) potential-dependent CO partial current density of three different electrocatalysts; (f) potential-dependent CO and HCOOH FEs of SnO/C and l-SnO/C. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Synthetic scheme of a Bi dendrite electrocatalyst; (b) XRD patterns of Bi dendrite and Bi foil, showing that the (012), (110), and (104) facets were preferentially developed on Bi dendrite while the (003) facet was preferentially developed on Bi foil; (c) and (d) potential-dependent H2, CO and HCOOH FEs of Bi foil (c) and Bi dendrite (d); (e) LSV curves of Bi foil and Bi dendrite; (f) calculated free energies from the initial state of *+CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− to the final state of *+HCOOH via the formation of the *OCHO intermediate, showing that the *OCHO intermediate was more stabilized on the high-index (012), (110) and (104) facets than on the (003) facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) LSV curves of ZnO with a high concentration of O vacancies (referred to as VO-rich ZnO), a low concentration of O vacancies (referred to as VO-poor ZnO) and no O vacancies (referred to as pristine ZnO). (b) Potential-dependent CO FEs of VO-rich ZnO, VO-poor ZnO and pristine ZnO; (c) Tafel plots for CO production of three different electrocatalysts, in which VO-rich ZnO exhibited the minimum Tafel slope, suggesting the strongest stabilization of the CO2˙− intermediate; (d) CO2-temperature programmed desorption (TPD) profiles for three ZnO nanosheets, in which VO-rich ZnO exhibited the highest CO2 desorption temperature, suggesting the strongest binding of CO2. (e) Calculated free energies for CO2 reduction to CO on ZnO slabs without/with oxygen vacancies, in which the introduction of O vacancies lowered the energy barriers of the formation of CO. Adapted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Synthetic scheme of Ni SAs/NC; (b) aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Ni SAs/NC; (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of four samples, in which Ni SAs/NC exhibits one main peak at 1.42 Å (corresponding to the first Ni–N coordination) and no Ni–Ni coordination peak at 2.18 Å can be found. (d) Potential-dependent CO FEs of Ni SAs/NC and Ni NPs/NC; (e) LSV curves of Ni SAs/NC and Ni NPs/NC in N2-saturated or CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3; (f) Tafel plot of CO formation for Ni SAs/NC at different applied potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Effects of the electrolyte medium on the NH3 synthesis rate and FE; (b) effects of H2SO4 concentration on the NH3 synthesis rate and FE; (c) current density-dependent NH3 synthesis rate and FE. Adapted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2016, The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) NH3 formation rates at different applied voltages when the cathode was feed with 10 mL min−1 of N2 constantly and 5 mL min−1 of H2 was introduced at 42 min. (b) Potential-dependent FEs of H2 and NH3 of this Fe2O3-CNT catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) XRD patterns of four samples; (b) potential-dependent NH3 FEs of four different electrocatalysts; (c) potential-dependent NH3 formation rates of the four electrocatalysts. (d) Relationships between the (110) orientation, (211) orientation and maximum FE of the four electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  Proposed reaction pathway for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to ethanol on CuxZn electrocatalysts. Adapted with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Current efficiencies, total current densities (circle) and CO partial current densities (diamond) tested at −0.6 V vs. RHE of two electrodes, where each electrolytic run lasted for 2 h; (b) XRD patterns of Cu/IO and CuInO2 electrodes during each electrocatalytic cycle, showing the increasing intensity of the In(OH)3 peaks during the whole reaction process. Adapted with permission from ref. 187 (open access).	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) and (b) Potential-dependent H2, CO and HCOOH FEs of Cu/SnO2 with a thickness of 0.8 nm (referred to as C–Cu/SnO2-0.8) (a) and Cu/SnO2 with a thickness of 1.8 nm (referred to as C–Cu/SnO2-1.8) (b). Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  Temperature-dependent NH3 formation rate and NH3 FE of the La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.3O3−δ–Ce0.8Gd0.18Ca0.02O2−δ complex cathode under a constant voltage of 1.4 V. Adapted with permission from ref. 196 (open access).	 

Au & AuM	8 nm Au NPs	−0.67 V vs. RHE	CO (90%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 73 (2013)
500 nm Au nanowires	−0.35 V vs. RHE	CO (94%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 98 (2014)
Au25 clusters	−1.0 V vs. RHE	CO (∼100%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 105 (2012)
Au–CeOx/C	−0.89 V vs. RHE	CO (89.1%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 101 (2017)
Au-CDots-C3N4	−0.50 V vs. RHE	CO (79.8%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 102 (2017)
Ordered AuCu	−0.77 V vs. RHE	CO (∼80%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 106 (2017)
Au–Fe core–shell NPs	−0.4 V vs. RHE	CO (97.6%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 108 (2017)
Ag & AgM	5 nm Ag NPs	−0.75 V vs. RHE	CO (84.4%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 114 (2015)
Nanoporous Ag	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (∼90%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 116 (2014)
Nanocoral Ag	<−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (95%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 117 (2015)
Defect-rich Ag	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (>90%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 118 (2017)
Ag2S nanowires	−0.864 V vs. RHE	CO (∼92%)	50/50 v/v [EMIM][BF4]/H2O	
Ref. 119 (2018)
(Cu)n,(Ag)m	−1.33 V vs. RHE	CH3COOH (21.2%)	0.5 M KHCO3 with BTA	
Ref. 124 (2018)
Ag–Cu2O	−1.2 V vs. RHE	C2H5OH (34.15%)	0.2 M KCl	
Ref. 126 (2017)
CuAg wire	−0.7 V vs. RHE	C2H4 (∼60%) & C2H5OH (∼25%)	1 M KOH	
Ref. 125 (2018)
Ag3Sn@SnO2	−0.8 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (∼80%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 199 (2017)
Pd & PdM	3.7 nm Pd NPs	−0.89 V vs. RHE	CO (91.2%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 78 (2015)
Pd concave cubes	−0.9 V vs. RHE	CO (90.6%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 128 (2018)
Pd icosahedra	−0.8 V vs. RHE	CO (91.1%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 131 (2017)
Pd/C	−0.05 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (∼100%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 76 (2015)
Pd-B/C	−0.5 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (70%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 133 (2018)
PdTe/few layer graphene	−0.8 V vs. RHE	CO (∼90%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 32 (2018)
Ordered CuPd	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (∼80%)	1 M KOH	
Ref. 134 (2017)
Phase-separated CuPd	−0.7 V vs. RHE	C2H4 (48%) & C2H5OH (15%)	1 M KOH	
Ref. 134 (2017)
Cu/THH Pd NCs	−0.46 V vs. RHE	C2H5OH (20.4%)	0.1 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 135 (2017)
Cu3Pd	−1.2 V vs. RHE	CH4 (40.6%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 136 (2017)
Pd3Cu	−0.9 V vs. RHE	CO (82.1%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 136 (2018)
PdSn/C	−0.43 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (>99%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 197 (2017)
Cu	Cu NPs/carbon paper	−0.75 V vs. RHE	C2H4 & C2H5OH & n-C3H7OH (50%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 140 (2017)
5-Fold twinned Cu nanowires	−1.25 V vs. RHE	CH4 (55%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 153 (2017)
Cu nanosheets	−0.5 V vs. RHE	CO (92%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 79 (2017)
Porous dendrite Cu	−1.55 V vs. Fc+/Fc	HCOOH (83%)	92/8 v/v [EMIM][BF4]/H2O	
Ref. 89 (2017)
Plasma-activated Cu nanocubes	−1.0 V vs. RHE	C2H4 & C2H5OH & n-C3H7OH (∼73%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 143 (2017)
Amorphizing Cu NPs	−1.4 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (37%) C2H5OH (22%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 82 (2018)
Cu–S NPs	−0.8 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (∼80%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 145 (2018)
Poly-amide modified Cu foam	−0.96 V vs. RHE	C2H4 (26%)	0.1 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 146 (2018)
CuS nanosheet	−1.1 V vs. RHE	CH4 (∼73%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 200 (2017)
Polymer-based Cu gas diffusion electrode	−0.55 V vs. RHE	C2H4 (70%)	7 M KOH	
Ref. 198 (2018)
Co	Partially oxidized Co atomic layer	−0.85 V vs. SCE	HCOOH (90.1%)	0.1 M Na2SO4	
Ref. 72 (2016)
Co3O4-CDots-C3N4	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (89%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 159 (2017)
Co3S4@Co3O4	−0.64 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (85.3%)	0.1 M Na2SO4	
Ref. 156 (2017)
Co–N5/HNPCSs	−0.73 V and −0.79 V vs. RHE	CO (>99%)	0.2 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 157 (2018)
Sn	5 nm SnO2 NPs/graphene	−1.8 V vs. SCE	HCOOH (>93%)	0.1 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 160 (2014)
Sn nanosheets confined in graphene	−1.8 V vs. SCE	HCOOH (89%)	0.1 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 74 (2016)
Hierarchical mesoporous SnO2 nanosheets	−1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl	HCOOH (87%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 161 (2017)
SnO NPs	−0.66 V vs. RHE	CO (37%) HCOOH (36%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 162 (2018)
Pb	Oxide-derived Pb	−1.0 V–−0.75 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (∼100%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 163 (2012)
Bi	Bi dendrite	−0.74 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (∼89%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 91 (2017)
Bi nanosheets	−1.2 V–−0.9 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (>90%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 173 (2018)
BiOx/C	−1.70 V–−1.37 V vs. Ag/AgCl	HCOOH (93.4%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 169 (2018)
36 nm Bi NPs	−2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	CO (96.1%)	MeCN with [BMIM][OTF]	
Ref. 172 (2016)
Bi-CMEC	−1.95 V vs. SCE	CO (∼95%)	MeCN with [EMIM][BF4]	
Ref. 171 (2013)
Zn	Nanoscale Zn	−1.6 V vs. SCE	CO (93%)	0.5 M NaCl	
Ref. 177 (2015)
Hexagonal Zn	−0.95 V vs. RHE	CO (85.4%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 178 (2016)
VO-Rich ZnO nanosheets	−1.1 V vs. RHE	CO (83%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 175 (2018)
RAD-Zn	−1.9 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (87.1%)	0.5 M NaHCO3	
Ref. 176 (2016)
Ni	Ni SAs/NC	−0.9 V vs. RHE	CO (71.9%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 77 (2017)
Ni–N4–C	−0.81 V vs. RHE	CO (99%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 179 (2017)
Ni in graphene	−0.8 V vs. RHE	CO (95%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 181 (2018)
Ni(I) on nitrogenerated graphene	−0.5 V vs. RHE	CO (97%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 180 (2018)
Multi-metallic electrocatalysts	Cu–Sn	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (>90%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 201 (2016)
Cu@0.8 nm SnO2	−0.7 V vs. RHE	CO (93%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 84 (2017)
Cu@0.8 nm SnO2	−0.9 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (85%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 84 (2017)
Cu4Zn	−1.05 V vs. RHE	C2H5OH (29.1%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 185 (2016)
Cu–In nanoalloys	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (∼53%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 187 (2016)
Dendrite 20 at% Cu-80 at% In	−1.0 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (62%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 188 (2017)
Cu–In alloy	−0.6 V vs. RHE	CO (∼90%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 186 (2015)
Cu0.2Zn0.4Sn0.4	−0.7 V vs. RHE	CO (>80%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 190 (2017)
Cu0.2Sn0.8	−0.7 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (>80%)	0.5 M KHCO3	
Ref. 190 (2017)
GDE-In0.90Sn0.10	−1.2 V vs. RHE	HCOOH (∼92%)	0.1 M KHCO3	
Ref. 192 (2017)

	
	
	
	

Ni5Ga3	−0.88 V vs. RHE	CH4 (∼2.2%)	0.1 M Na2CO3	
Ref. 193 (2016)

	
	C2H4 (∼0.5%)	
	

C2H6 (∼1.7%)

Au	Au tetrahexahedral nanorods	−0.2 V vs. RHE	∼4%	1.648 μg h−1 cm−2	1 M KOH	
Ref. 92 (2017)
Amorphizing Au/CeOx-RGO	−0.2 V vs. RHE	10.1%	8.3 μg h−1 cm−2	pH = 1 HCl	
Ref. 109 (2017)
Au/TiO2	−0.2 V vs. RHE	8.11%	21.4 μg h−1 cm−2	pH = 1 HCl	
Ref. 110 (2017)
Pd	Pd/C	−0.2 V vs. RHE	0.02%	∼10−12 mol cm−2 s−1	Solid state electrolyte	
Ref. 96 (2017)
Rh	Rh/Ti felts	−0.228 V vs. NHE	N/A	1.5 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1	N/A	
Ref. 138 (2015)
Ru	Ru/Ti felts	−0.207 V vs. NHE	N/A	1.2 × 10−10 mol cm−2 s−1	N/A	
Ref. 138 (2015)
Ru	−1.02 V vs. Ag/AgCl	0.24%	1.30 μg h−1 cm−2	2 M KOH	
Ref. 139 (2000)
Pt	Pt/C	1.6 V	∼0.5%	1.14 × 10−9 mol cm−2 s−1	Solid state electrolyte	
Ref. 95 (2013)
Ni	Porous Ni	0.5 mA cm−2	∼0.9%	1.54 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1	9/1 v/v 2-propanol/H2O with 10 mM H2SO4	
Ref. 182 (2016)
Fe	Fe2O3-CNT	−2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	0.025%	2.2 × 10−3 g h−1 m−2	Diluted KHCO3	
Ref. 183 (2017)
Mo	Mo nanofilm	−0.49 V vs. RHE	0.22%	3.09 × 10−11 mol cm−2 s−1	0.01 M H2SO4	
Ref. 93 (2017)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
