Highly efficient perovskite solar cells with a compositionally engineered perovskite/hole transporting material interface   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE03182J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE03182J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621-627Highly efficient perovskite solar cells with a compositionally engineered perovskite/hole transporting material interface†

        
          
            Kyung Taek 
            Cho‡
, 
      
        
          
            Sanghyun 
            Paek‡
, 
      
        
          
            Giulia 
            Grancini
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Cristina 
            Roldán-Carmona
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yonghui 
            Lee
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Mohammad Khaja 
            Nazeeruddin
          
        
      *
      Group for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: yonghui.lee@epfl.ch; mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch
Received 
      30th October 2016
    , Accepted 3rd January 2017First published on 3rd January 2017AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) have experienced an outstanding advance in power conversion efficiency (PCE) by optimizing the perovskite layer morphology, composition, interfaces, and charge collection efficiency. To enhance PCE, here we developed a new method i.e., engineering a compositional gradient thinly at the rear interface between the perovskite and the hole transporting materials. We demonstrate that charge collection is improved and charge recombination is reduced by formation of an engineered passivating layer, which leads to a striking enhancement in open-circuit voltage (VOC). The passivation effect induced by constructing an additional FAPbBr3−xIx layer on top of the primary (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 film was proven to function as an electron blocking layer within the perovskite film, resulting in a final PCE of 21.3%. Our results shed light on the importance of the interfacial engineering on the rear surface of perovskite layers and describe an innovative approach that will further boost the PSC efficiency.

Broader context
As environmental problems have been deteriorated for the past decade, considerable interest in photovoltaic technologies has become an unavoidable choice for the clean energy source. Perovskite solar cells have been rapidly growing due to the high performance and low cost for fabrication, compared to silicon solar cells. Despite fast improvement in the power conversion efficiency and high open circuit voltage (VOC), there remains further optimization of device design to be close to theoretical values. Surface passivation has been widely used in various solar cells to reduce charge carrier recombination. Here we demonstrate formamidinium bromide (FABr) as an interfacial passivating modifier to generate additional perovskite layers, FAPbBr3−xIx, between (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 the perovskite layer and a hole transporting material (spiro-OMeTAD) layer. By this additionally formed perovskite layer, enhancement of VOC from reduced charge carrier recombination is achieved. The passivation effect induced by constructing the additional FAPbBr3−xIx layer on top of the original mixed perovskite film (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 was proven to function as an electron blocking layer within the perovskite film. Therefore, our interfacial modification by engineering compositions of the perovskite can be a novel guideline toward facile passivating methods and high efficiencies.

Perovskite solar cells have been intensively researched in the recent few years because of the unique properties of perovskite materials, which combine a high absorption coefficient,1 good charge carrier mobility,2,3 long charge carrier diffusion lengths and a low recombination rate,3,4 together with an adjustable bandgap depending on the perovskite constituents.5–7 As a result, power conversion efficiency of PSCs has reached up to 22.1%, approaching a similar value of the commercial silicon solar cells.8 Such a high PCE is attributed to the relatively large open-circuit voltage (VOC) of PSCs, generally over 1.0 V, which is outstanding compared to other photovoltaic technologies such as organic- or silicon based solar cells. However, given that the energy loss ratio of VOC to the bandgap energy (Eg) in PSCs is lower than that of silicon solar cells, and considering theoretical Shockley–Queisser minimum loss in energy is about 250 meV,9 there is still some gain to achieve a higher PCE by further improving VOC.
Surface passivation is one of the most studied methods to enhance VOC in solar cells without sacrificing short circuit current (JSC) and the fill factor (FF), by reducing charge carrier recombination occurring at heterojunctions. Several materials and methods for inducing passivation have been explored in different solar cells including perovskite photovoltaics.10–15 Especially, mesoscopic perovskite solar cells, comprising a fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO)/a compact TiO2 (c-TiO2)/a mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2)/a perovskite/a hole transport material (HTM)/gold (Au), have been found to be strongly influenced by the efficient charge transfer that takes place at the interface of TiO2/perovskite, rather than that of perovskite/HTMs.16 As a result, several studies have been focused on improving the interface between the electron transport materials and perovskite layers.13,14,17,18 However, the formation of a rear surface passivation region on the perovskite layer has been hardly attempted except in few works where PbI2 was partially formed on the perovskite surface and affected the PSCs positively.13 The importance of the rear side passivation through the back surface field (BSF) was already recognized and employed in commercialized Si solar cells.19,20 On the other side, the use of sequential layers comprised of quantum dots of different sizes has been recently reported to convey photoelectrons toward an electron acceptor by the induced electric field.21,22 These findings clearly determined that engineering at both interfaces is equally crucial to accomplishing a high PCE.
Here we introduced a surface passivation layer by spin-coating a formamidinium bromide (FABr) precursor on an as-prepared mixed perovskite, (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, film with the presence of excess PbI2. By this approach, an additional perovskite layer with enriched Br composition, in the form of FAPbBr3−xIx, was formed after reaction with the excess of PbI2 present on the surface. The wider bandgap bromide perovskite on the rear surface acts as a barrier for charge carrier recombination at the interface between the perovskite and the hole transport layer, resulting in the improvement of VOC.
The cell configuration used in this study was based on the following architecture FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite: [(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15]–[FAPbBr(3−x)Ix]/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au, illustrated in Fig. 1a. The perovskite layer was fabricated by sequential deposition of the two different perovskites, (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 and FAPbBr3−xIx.7,23Fig. 1b shows a schematic of the energy level diagram corresponding to the device and includes the possible passivation working mechanism for the graded composition perovskite structure. The energy levels used for the conduction and valence band of the different perovskites are presented in Fig. S1 (ESI†) and are estimated from previous reports using photoelectron spectroscopy in air.24–26
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a passivated perovskite solar cell. FTO; fluorine-doped tin oxide/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/perovskite; (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 and FAPbBr3−xIx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au; gold. (b) Energy bandgap diagram of the device and illustration of how a gradient composition perovskite improved VOC. A different perovskite layer with wide Eg placed at a rear region can block transfer of excited electrons to the HTM layer. The black dashed line represents an assumed bended conduction band energy level. 
We assumed that the bandgap edges of the newly formed perovskite, FAPbBr3−xIx on top of the mixed perovskite (at the rear surface), would be close to that of FAPbBr3 which has a larger Eg and a higher conduction band than (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, leading to the favored energy level alignment. By introducing the thin perovskite layer to the rear surface as depicted in Fig. 1b, a gradient in the conduction band was assumed. Expected upward bandgap bending by the passivation layer could prevent backflow of electrons from the conduction band of the perovskite to HTMs,22,27 improving the charge collection. In addition, it is known that traps or defects are located more at the surface of the perovskite film, where the recombination of electron–hole pairs has frequently occurred. This newly fabricated layer will possibly passivate such defects, reducing the interfacial charge recombination and leading to higher VOC.
The detailed fabrication process to create the graded composition perovskite is illustrated in Fig. 2a. Firstly, the primary perovskite layer, (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15, was coated on the mp-TiO2 layer by the assistance of chlorobenzene dropping (see the methods section for further details). The film was then annealed at 100 °C for 90 min to form a highly crystalline perovskite layer. After cooling down to room temperature, surface treatment was performed by spin-coating FABr precursor solution in isopropanol. By this treatment, the partial or total conversion of unreacted PbI2 present at the surface region was expected. Finally, the as-prepared FABr film was converted to the thin FAPbBr3−xIx layer by thermal annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. Fig. 2b and c show images of the perovskite film surface recorded using a high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) before and after FABr treatment, respectively, where the change in the morphology occurring at the surface of the perovskite film can be easily observed. Both films are fully covered with polycrystalline perovskite layers over the mp-TiO2 layer. However, the passivated perovskite film exhibits a denser and more homogeneous surface morphology than the as-prepared film, even when a conspicuous change of the grain size is not observed.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of a method for fabricating a continuous graded perovskite film by further spin-coating FABr solution in isopropanol on the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite film. SEM top-view images of an as-prepared film (b) and a passivated film (c), respectively. Proposed change of cross sectional structures from the as-prepared perovskite film (d) to the passivated film (e). 
It is reported that impurities like PbI2 would likely be placed mostly in the grain boundaries and film surfaces for lowering the formation energy during crystallization.28 In such a scenario, segregated phases of perovskites and PbI2 may be formed, favored not only by the presence of PbI2 excess in the precursor solution but also by the post-annealing treatment, which generates very thin PbI2-rich layers or a few PbI2 crystals at the surface.28,29 This PbI2 excess region can then be transformed into a FAPbBr3I3−x layer as depicted in Fig. 2d and e by using a weakly polar solvent, isopropanol, as the FABr precursor solution. Cross-sectional SEM images of two different complete devices are displayed in Fig. S2 (ESI†). In contrast to the visible change shown in the top-surface morphology of the perovskite films, any distinctive difference was not found in the cross section images.
The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of these PSCs with the as-prepared and the passivated perovskite films are shown in Fig. 3a. After generating the passivating layer, the PCE increased from 18.7% to 20.5%. It is notable that this improvement in PCE resulted from the increase of VOC while JSC and FF were almost unchanged. As can be seen in Fig. 3b, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) demonstrates values around 90% in the whole wavelength range. For the passivated cells, a small blue-shift of light harvesting shown is maybe due to the formation of a wider bandgap perovskite, this slight difference does not influence JSC. In both cases, the short circuit current-densities integrated from EQE are over 22 mA cm−2, in agreement with those obtained from J–V curves. Moreover, there is a negligible hysteresis when measuring the passivated cells between the forward and reverse bias (Fig. 3c), discarding any induced detrimental effect in the charge carrier mobility. Stability was investigated in both the unsealed devices and the passivated cell showed a similar degradation in PCE to the as-prepared one (Fig. S3, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of as-prepared and passivated PSCs. (b) EQE and corresponding integrated JSC of the devices. (c) J–V curve hysteresis of the passivated cell. 
To explore the passivation layer, we investigated the crystalline structure of the perovskite film. Fig. 4a shows X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the as-prepared and passivated perovskite films. Considering the use of an excess of PbI2 in the precursor solution and the post-annealing time of the perovskite film, it is not strange to find a peak at 12.7° associated with the presence of PbI2 among other peaks, at 14° and 20°, of typical (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15.13,23,30–33
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns of the as-prepared and passivated perovskite films coated on FTO substrates. Cross-sectional SEM images of the as-prepared (b) and passivated (d) perovskite films. EDX mapping of Br component distribution corresponding to the b image (c) and d image (e). 
Interestingly, after reacting with FABr solution the strong peak of PbI2 is no longer observed, while the other peaks corresponding to the perovskite phase including the hexagonal δ-phase23 of FAPbI3 at around 11.5° are retained with very little change of intensity and positions. In addition, no visible change in the grain size and crystalline primary perovskite has occurred after reaction with a FABr solution, as verified from the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) values of the (−111) diffraction peaks (∼0.15 for both cases). This is clear evidence that FABr reacted with the excess of PbI2 present on the surface and did not affect the primary perovskite layer. To further verify the surface conditions, cross-sectional SEM with elemental mapping via energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis was also performed. Fig. 4b and d showed the cross-sectional SEM images of the as-prepared and passivated perovskite films deposited on the mesoporous TiO2 layer, and the corresponding EDX mapping images of Br are given in Fig. 4c and e, respectively. As observed from the figures, the perovskite films are uniformly deposited over the mp-TiO2 layer with a 400 nm thick capping layer for all samples. By tracing the three main elements of Pb, I and Br in the films (see Fig. S4, ESI†), we confirmed that both Pb and I elements are uniformly distributed over both perovskite films, without any change due to the influence of FABr solution. On the other hand, although Br ions are likely to exist on top of the perovskite layers even when no post deposition is performed, the stronger intensity of Br can be observed after a passivating layer is created (Fig. 4c and e). This point is quite interesting as the aggregation of the Br component was exhibited in mixed lead excess perovskite layers even after one day of aging. However, we can conclude that increasing Br on the surface of mixed perovskite layers by FABr treatment leads to increase of VOC. The quantified EDX analysis from the top view of perovskite films was also carried out and the relative atomic ratio displayed in Fig. S5 (ESI†) can support the increased Br concentration. It indicates that the passivation layer was successfully generated on the surface of perovskite films.
We investigated the optical changes after formation of the passivation layer. Absorbance spectra in Fig. 5a displays that both films have a comparable light absorption, and this is a good agreement with the results that we obtained from EQE and J–V curve measurements. From the absorption profile, a slight shift of the band edge is visible. To highlight it, we measured the reflectance of the films, and the determination of Eg was calculated by applying the Kubelka–Munk (F(R)) method which is based on the following equations. (1) (F(R) × hν)2(2)where R is the reflectance, and hν is the photon energy. By plotting eqn (2) as a function of the energy in eV, the small difference in bandgaps of these perovskite films (about 0.014 eV) was obtained as shown in Fig. 5b.34 It is confirmed again that the reaction with FABr solution may increase the bandgap of the product layer.
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-Vis absorbance spectra of the films. (b) Bandgap estimation from reflectance. (c) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra. (d) Time-resolved PL decays of the perovskite films. All of the measurement was conducted with the films deposited on FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2 without HTMs. 
The bandgap shift is also detected using the photoluminescence (PL) emission spectra, displayed in Fig. 5c. We used an incident excitation light of 450 nm from the top surface of perovskite films and measured the PL emission spectra with configuration of FTO/compact and mesoporous TiO2/perovskite. Note that the light penetration depth being <100 nm, we specifically investigate the properties of the top perovskite layers. As presented, the perovskite film without a passivation layer exhibits a PL peak at 785 nm, whereas the passivated perovskite has the blue-shifted PL peak at 779 nm, which supports the reaction of FABr. This result is further corroborated by the PL-excitation measurements added in Fig. S6a (ESI†). Besides the blue-shift of the emission peak position, the emission intensity of the passivated perovskite film is reduced by ca. 30% compared to that of the as-prepared film. This can be possibly due to the change of the perovskite layer to contain more Br ions leading to intrinsic lower PL yield. However, it can also be explained as resulting from quenching, transfer of the excited electrons to the bottom perovskite layer, as allowed by the energetics difference (Fig. 1b). The quenching is confirmed again by time-resolved PL decay profiles as displayed in Fig. 5d, which was achieved by detecting the emission at 770 nm with the incident exciting light at 700 nm to the perovskite surface. The passivated perovskite film exhibits faster decay fitted by two-time constants of 40 ns and 320 ns than the as-prepared perovskite layer with a time constant of 80 ns. As no HTM was applied on perovskite layers, the shortened PL lifetime can be assigned to a favorable electron transfer occurring at the interface with the bottom perovskite film.24 To further support, additional PL measurement was fulfilled with different configuration with glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD (Fig. S6b, ESI†). Consistent with the above data, even with the HTM the enhanced charge transfer was shown. On the basis of these results, we thus can suggest that the charge recombination was suppressed by the passivated perovskite layers in complete devices. Because the FAPbBr3−xIx surface passivation layer at the rear surface causes a quenching that can be due to the favorable electron transfer,15 in the illuminated solar cells the passivation layer will prevent electrons from recombining with holes at the rear surface.
Although the reduced charge recombination leading to improved VOC was attained from spin coating FABr and post annealing, it remained to be proven if these results came from the passivating layer within the perovskite films or the ion modification of the main perovskite layer after reacting with FABr. To verify the difference between the gradient compositional structure and another homogeneously mixed perovskite structure, we carried out an additional experiment by preparing solar cells from different precursor (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 solution where an excess of FABr was added. Different concentrations of FABr were tested from 0 to 10 mol% excess because we could not find the exact amount of FABr reacted with the as-prepared perovskite layer when preparing the passivation layer. The results, including the absorbance EQE, PL spectra, and J–V measurements, as well as XRD patterns, are displayed in Fig. S7 (ESI†).
As can be seen, quite different results were observed compared to those obtained when using passivating layers. Regardless of the amount, it was found that mixing excess FABr with the precursor solution affected the performance negatively. In Fig. S7a (ESI†), the perovskite films fabricated from solutions including excess FABr show decreasing absorbance from 1 mol%. Additionally, a dramatic decrease in EQE and a strong blue shifted PL emission peak were also found at increased 10 mol% excess (Fig. S7b and c, ESI†), together with a higher VOC but reduced JSC, probably due to the formation of FAPbBr3 or FAPbBr3−xIx. None of the samples where an excess of FABr had been incorporated showed any improvement in PCE (Fig. S7d, ESI†). Finally, we investigated the XRD patterns of the FABr mixed perovskite films (Fig. S7e, ESI†). As the amount of mixed FABr increased, the intensity of PbI2 and α-FAPbI3 peaks decreased, while a δ-FAPbI3 peak became obtrusive gradually.23,25 It is worth noting that PSCs with 1 and 3 mol% excess of FABr show a lower PCE than that of a reference device despite their decreased PbI2 peak like the passivated perovskite film. It implies that the formation of FAPbBr3−xIx inside the primary perovskite layer, rather than at the surface, does not have a passivation effect and even remove the beneficial role of PbI2. As PbI2 has been reported to enhance the electronic quality and ion migration resulting in higher VOC,24,35 the decreased PbI2 content without passivation could be the reason for the lower performance in samples containing 1 and 3 mol% excess of FABr. Furthermore, decreasing α-FAPbI3 phase peaks may be another reason for less PCE. Consequently, the higher efficiency obtained from an additional deposition of FABr solution was not achieved by forming a new kind of perovskite with larger Eg, but by introducing the passivation layer at the rear surface between the perovskite and the HTM. As a result, improved efficiencies with PCE average over 20% were obtained, as shown in Fig. 6a. When comparing VOC, it is clearly shown that the enhancement in performance is produced by increased VOC, which we associate with the passivation layer (Fig. 6b). The J–V curve of the champion cell is also shown in Fig. 6c. With backward scanning, the cell exhibited 23.18 mA cm−2 of JSC, 1.16 V of VOC, 78% of FF and 21.31% PCE under 1 sunlight illumination.
 Fig. 6  Histogram of the PCE distribution (a) and the VOC distribution (b) for devices with as-prepared (20 cells) and passivated perovskite films (40 cells). (c) The J–V curve of the champion cell from the passivated perovskite. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have investigated and underlined an effect of introducing a passivating layer into a rear surface of a perovskite film for improving the photovoltaic performance. By treating the surface with a FABr solution, superficial PbI2 was converted into a FAPbBr3−xIx perovskite layer on top of the perovskite film. Due to its wider bandgap and matched alignment of the conduction/valence band, VOC was boosted without conspicuous dropping of JSC. We verified that electrons were blocked and the reduced charge carrier recombination was resulted from the passivation layer in a gradient perovskite film. Also, it is demonstrated that the improved efficiency is realized by the fabrication of a passivation layer, not by generating a new kind of perovskite within a primary perovskite film. Our findings can broaden the understanding of perovskite solar cells by suggesting a deeper insight into possible solutions through interfacial engineering of perovskite films towards larger VOC.
Experimental
Device fabrication
FTO glass (Nippon sheet glass) substrates were sequentially cleaned with the detergent solution, acetone, and ethanol. A compact TiO2 layer was then coated on the cleaned FTO substrate by spray pyrolysis deposition at 450 °C with a precursor solution prepared by diluting titanium diisopropoxide (Sigma-Aldrich) in ethanol. Mesoporous TiO2 films were prepared using a diluted TiO2 paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) in ethanol solution. Films were spin-coated at 2000 rpm for 20 s, and sintered on a hot plate at 500 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, films were treated with 0.1 M Lithium bistrifluoromethanesulfonimidate solution (Li-TFSI, Aldrich) in acetonitrile by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 10 s, and finally baked again at 500 °C for 30 min. The lead excess (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 precursor solution was prepared by mixing FAI (1.1 M), PbI2 (1.15 M), MABr (0.2 M) and PbBr2 (0.2 M) in a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO = 4:1 (volume ratio). The solution was then spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and continuously at 6000 rpm for 30 s. During the second step, 100 μL of anhydrous chlorobenzene was poured 15 seconds before the process was finished. Films were then annealed at 100 °C for 90 min. For the surface passivation treatment, the films were cooled down to room temperature and treated with a FABr solution. 100 μL of FABr solution (5 mg ml−1) were spin-coated on the as-prepared perovskite substrates at 5000 rpm for 30 s, and annealed at 100 °C for 5 min. Finally, Spiro-OMeTAD was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 20 s. The Spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving in chlorobenzene at 70 mM and adding 4-tert-butylpyridine, Li-TFSI in acetonitrile, and Co[t-BuPyPz]3[TFSI]3 (FK209) in acetonitrile at the molar ratio of Spiro:FK209:Li-TFSI:TBP of 1:0.03:0.5:3.3. Devices were fabricated with a 70 nm thick gold counter electrode by using thermal evaporation.
Film and device characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer in an angle range of 2θ = 10° to 30°. The morphology of the films was characterized using a high-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM, ZEISS Merlin). The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectra and composition analysis were performed with SEM. It was carried out two days after preparing the films. The absorbance and reflectance were measured with an integrating sphere using UV/Vis/NIR spectroscopy (PerkinElmer Lambda). The photoluminescence dynamics were measured using the Time-Resolved Single Photon Counting (TRSPC) technique that is incorporated into the same Fluorolog-312 spectrofluorometer. The solar cell measurement was done using commercial solar simulators (Oriel, 450 W Xenon, AAA class/Oriel VeraSol-2, LED, AAA class). The light intensity was calibrated with a Si reference cell equipped with an IR-cutoff filter (KG5, Newport), and it was recorded before each measurement. Current–voltage characteristics of the cells were obtained by applying an external voltage bias while measuring the current response using a digital source meter (Keithley 2400/2604). The voltage scan rate was 10 or 25 mV s−1 and no device preconditioning such as light soaking, or forward voltage bias applied for a long time, was applied before starting the measurement. The cells were masked with an active area of 0.16 cm2 to fix the active area and reduce the influence of the scattered light. EQE was measured with IQE200B (Oriel) without bias light.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge SNSF NRP 70 project; number: 407040_154056, European Commission H2020-ICT-2014-1, SOLEDLIGHT project, grant agreement N°: 643791 and the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI), and CTI 15864.2 PFNM-NM, Solaronix, Aubonne, Switzerland. G. G. acknowledges support from the ‘EPFL Fellows’ fellowship program co-funded by Marie Skłodowska-Curie, Horizon 2020 grant agreement no. 665667 and Y. L. acknowledges support from Special funding for energy research, managed by Prof. Andreas ZÜTTEL, Funds N° 563074.
Notes and references
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Han, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun, Y.-T. Hsieh, Y. Yang, Y. S. Rim, H. Zhao, Q. Chen, W. Shi, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2253–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 562–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
N. R. E. L. (NREL), Research Cell Efficiency Records.
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
P. Saint-Cast, J. Benick, D. Kania, L. Weiss, M. Hofmann, J. Rentsch, R. Preu and S. W. Glunz, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2010, 31, 695–697 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, O. Acton, N. S. Baek, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5113–5119 RSC .
L. Cattin, F. Dahou, Y. Lare, M. Morsli, R. Tricot, S. Houari, A. Mokrani, K. Jondo, A. Khelil, K. Napo and J. C. Bernède, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 034507 CrossRef .
Y. H. Lee, J. Luo, M.-K. Son, P. Gao, K. T. Cho, J. Seo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3966–3972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giordano, A. Abate, J. P. Correa Baena, M. Saliba, T. Matsui, S. H. Im, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, K. NazeeruddinMd, M. Gratzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, S. Mukhopadhyay, K. Gartsman, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3461 Search PubMed .
R. C. Crisitna, G. Paul, Z. Iwan, G. Giulia, G. Pao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550–3556 Search PubMed .
O. von Roos, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 3503–3511 CrossRef CAS .
K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Mishima, N. Matsubara, T. Yamanishi, T. Takahama, M. Taguchi, E. Maruyama and S. Okamoto, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 1433–1435 CrossRef .
I. J. Kramer, L. Levina, R. Debnath, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3701–3706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, V. Adinolfi, B. R. Sutherland, O. Voznyy, S. J. Kwon, T. W. Kim, J. Kim, H. Ihee, K. Kemp, M. Adachi, M. Yuan, I. Kramer, D. Zhitomirsky, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7772 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, X.-H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. Chan Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .
Y. H. Lee, S. H. Im, J. A. Chang, J.-H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 975–979 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T.-B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H.-S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Supasai, N. Rujisamphan, K. Ullrich, A. Chemseddine and T. Dittrich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183906 CrossRef .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, K. Fu, Y. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CAS .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
R. López and R. Gómez, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 1–7 CrossRef .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J. P. Correa Baena, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1501170 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: General information, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03182j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
As environmental problems have been deteriorated for the past decade, considerable interest in photovoltaic technologies has become an unavoidable choice for the clean energy source. Perovskite solar cells have been rapidly growing due to the high performance and low cost for fabrication, compared to silicon solar cells. Despite fast improvement in the power conversion efficiency and high open circuit voltage (VOC), there remains further optimization of device design to be close to theoretical values. Surface passivation has been widely used in various solar cells to reduce charge carrier recombination. Here we demonstrate formamidinium bromide (FABr) as an interfacial passivating modifier to generate additional perovskite layers, FAPbBr3−xIx, between (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 the perovskite layer and a hole transporting material (spiro-OMeTAD) layer. By this additionally formed perovskite layer, enhancement of VOC from reduced charge carrier recombination is achieved. The passivation effect induced by constructing the additional FAPbBr3−xIx layer on top of the original mixed perovskite film (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 was proven to function as an electron blocking layer within the perovskite film. Therefore, our interfacial modification by engineering compositions of the perovskite can be a novel guideline toward facile passivating methods and high efficiencies.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a passivated perovskite solar cell. FTO; fluorine-doped tin oxide/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/perovskite; (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 and FAPbBr3−xIx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au; gold. (b) Energy bandgap diagram of the device and illustration of how a gradient composition perovskite improved VOC. A different perovskite layer with wide Eg placed at a rear region can block transfer of excited electrons to the HTM layer. The black dashed line represents an assumed bended conduction band energy level.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of a method for fabricating a continuous graded perovskite film by further spin-coating FABr solution in isopropanol on the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 perovskite film. SEM top-view images of an as-prepared film (b) and a passivated film (c), respectively. Proposed change of cross sectional structures from the as-prepared perovskite film (d) to the passivated film (e).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves of as-prepared and passivated PSCs. (b) EQE and corresponding integrated JSC of the devices. (c) J–V curve hysteresis of the passivated cell.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns of the as-prepared and passivated perovskite films coated on FTO substrates. Cross-sectional SEM images of the as-prepared (b) and passivated (d) perovskite films. EDX mapping of Br component distribution corresponding to the b image (c) and d image (e).	 
	(1)
(F(R) × hν)2	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-Vis absorbance spectra of the films. (b) Bandgap estimation from reflectance. (c) Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra. (d) Time-resolved PL decays of the perovskite films. All of the measurement was conducted with the films deposited on FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2 without HTMs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Histogram of the PCE distribution (a) and the VOC distribution (b) for devices with as-prepared (20 cells) and passivated perovskite films (40 cells). (c) The J–V curve of the champion cell from the passivated perovskite.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: General information, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03182j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
