Coordination compounds in lithium storage and lithium-ion transport   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00881K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00881K
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1624-1642Coordination compounds in lithium storage and lithium-ion transport†

        
          
            Jingwei 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daixi 
            Xie
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Shi
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Peng 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (MOE), College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. E-mail: shiwei@nankai.edu.cn; pcheng@nankai.edu.cn
Received 
      13th December 2019
    First published on 25th February 2020AbstractLithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have enabled wireless revolution of portable digital products. However, for high-performance applications such as large-scale energy storage and next-generation portable devices, the energy and power densities as well as the cycle life of LIBs still need to be further enhanced. This can be realized by improving the electrochemical performance of the three main components of LIBs: cathode, anode, and electrolyte. In addition to LIBs, lithium–metal batteries (LMBs) have also attracted considerable attention owing to their ultra-high energy density arising from the lithium–metal anode. However, LMB performance is currently limited by dendrite formation and poor interfacial contact between electrode and electrolyte. Herein we highlight the applications of coordination chemistry in LIBs and LMBs, especially for realization of promising next-generation electrode and electrolyte materials based on coordination compounds with well-defined molecular structures. We start by introducing the development of coordination chemistry from discrete coordination compounds to coordination polymers and metal–organic frameworks. Then, we present the design strategies of coordination compounds for lithium storage and lithium-ion transport. Approaches to enhance the electrochemical properties, working potential, capacity, cycling stability, and rate capability of coordination compound-based electrodes are discussed in detail. The reticular chemistry endowing metal–organic frameworks with desired structures and pore metrics as electrolytes for lithium-ion transmission is also summarized. Finally, the current challenges and promising research directions of coordination chemistry for LIBs and LMBs are presented.
Jingwei Liu
Jingwei Liu was born in Hebei, China. She received her BSc in 2016 from Northwest University. She was then recommended as a PhD candidate to join Nankai University under the supervision of Prof. Wei Shi and Prof. Peng Cheng. Her research interest is rational design and synthesis of metal–organic frameworks for energy storage and conversion.
Daixi Xie
Daixi Xie was born in Chongqing, China. She graduated from high school in 2017 and is currently an undergraduate student of Nankai University. Her research interest is the application of metal–organic frameworks in rechargeable batteries.
Wei Shi
Wei Shi received his BSc and PhD in 2001 and 2006 from Nankai University under the supervision of Prof. Peng Cheng. He then joined the faculty at Nankai University and was promoted to full professor in 2015. He was a visiting scholar at the University of California, Berkeley, working with Prof. Jeffrey R. Long. He has published over 190 SCI index papers with co-authors. His current research interests are the synthesis and property studies of metal–organic frameworks for practical applications.
Peng Cheng
Peng Cheng obtained his BSc, MSc and PhD from Nankai University in 1985, 1991 and 1994, respectively. Subsequently, he started his academic career at the same university and was appointed as a full professor in 1996. From 1997 to 1999 he worked at Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination du CNRS as a visiting professor and at Texas A&M University as a postdoctoral research fellow. Since 2007, he has been Cheung Kong professor at Nankai University, where he currently works on functional coordination polymers and molecule-based materials.

Key learning points
(1) Overview of the applications of coordination chemistry in lithium storage and lithium-ion transport.
(2) Use of coordination compounds as electrode materials for lithium storage from design principles to synthetic strategies.
(3) The design strategies of metal–organic frameworks for lithium-ion transport.
(4) Future challenges and opportunities for coordination chemistry in lithium-ion batteries and lithium–metal batteries.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing global demand for energy resources is accompanied by an economic boom, resulting in severe environmental and energy crises. The development and use of green and sustainable energy resources such as solar and wind energy have thus attracted great attention. To efficiently utilize these renewable energy resources, it is crucial to develop eco-friendly high-performance electrochemical energy storage materials.1 Among the energy storage devices developed to date, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have achieved great commercial success because of their electrochemical merits such as slow self-discharge, light weight, environmental friendliness, and relatively high energy density.2 The 2019 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to John B. Goodenough, M. Stanley Whittingham, and Akira Yoshino by Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for the development of LIBs and their wide applications from mobile phones to laptops and electric vehicles, which greatly benefit humankind.
Both energy density (capacity × voltage) and power density (current × electrical potential) of LIBs still need to be improved to meet the evolving requirements of applications. Because of the limit of energy density of 400 W h kg−1 expected from intercalation chemistry,1 various approaches to realize high energy density have been devised including the design of appropriate electrode systems, such as metal fluoride conversion–reaction cathodes and lithium (Li)–metal anodes, and the selection of electrolytes with a suitable voltage window. In particular, lithium–metal batteries (LMBs) with a Li–metal anode have recaptured researchers’ attention recently because their serious challenges including dendrite formation and poor interfacial contact could be overcome through the development of new Li electrolytes.3 The electrochemical properties of basic battery components—cathode, anode, and electrolyte—need to be improved to satisfy the requirements of scale-up technology for next-generation rechargeable LIBs and LMBs.
Coordination compounds are an old family of materials, but they still have important applications in many fields in the modern world. Constructed of metal centers and ligands that interact through coordination bonds, coordination compounds can be discrete (zero-dimensional; 0D) or multi-dimensional. One-, two-, and three-dimensional (1D, 2D, and 3D, respectively) coordination compounds are also named coordination polymers (CPs) and porous 2D/3D CPs are often termed metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).4 As an important subfamily of coordination compounds, MOFs feature the advantageous characteristics of high porosity and high surface area, making them excellent candidates for numerous applications.5 Prominent reviews have summarized recent advances of MOF-based materials including pristine MOFs and MOF-based composites, and MOF-derived materials for energy-related applications such as photochemical and electrochemical fuel production, supercapacitors, and rechargeable batteries, which provided comprehensive knowledge of MOF-related materials from synthetic strategies to varied applications.6,7 However, the design principles and optimum strategies for development of coordination compounds, along with their working mechanisms, for Li storage and lithium-ion (Li+) transport have not been summarized in detail.
Herein, we present a tutorial review of design strategies based on the principles of coordination chemistry for cathode materials, anode materials and solid Li electrolytes in rechargeable LIBs and LMBs. First, we introduce the progress of coordination chemistry and the features of coordination compounds, including recently developed CPs and MOFs. Then, the working mechanisms of coordination compounds as cathode and anode materials and effective approaches to improve the electrochemical performance are extensively discussed. The design principle and ionic conduction mechanism of MOF-based solid Li electrolytes are then presented. Last, we summarize the fundamental points that need to be considered to construct desired coordination compound-based materials for high-performance Li storage and Li+ transport.
2. Recent developments in coordination chemistry applied to Li storage and Li+ transport
2.1 Conceptual advances of coordination chemistry from discrete coordination compounds to coordination polymers and metal–organic frameworks
In 1893, Alfred Werner published his pathbreaking study on the spatial arrangement of ligands around metal centers that gave the modern definition of coordination compounds based on two concepts: the primary or ionizable valence (oxidation state) and secondary or non-ionizable valence (coordination number) of coordination compounds.8 The boom of coordination chemistry was enabled by the use of X-ray technology for structural determination of coordination compounds. Coordination compounds from 0D systems to 1D, 2D, and 3D CPs, in which MOFs are an important subfamily of coordination compounds with high-dimensional framework structures and porosity, have received great attention (Fig. 1).9 Coordination compounds have been applied in many fields because of their well-defined compositions and structures.
 Fig. 1  Conceptual advances of coordination compounds from discrete 0D coordination compounds to 1D, 2D, and 3D coordination polymers and 2D and 3D metal–organic frameworks. 
CPs with extended metal–organic structures were first reported in 1959.10 However, because of the relatively weak coordination interactions of the organic nitrile- or pyridine-based neutral linker and flexible coordination geometry of the single metal center, this type of CPs was too weak to maintain permanent porosity upon the removal of guest species and thus had limited application value. To overcome these shortcomings and maintain a permanent porous structure, charged chelating ligands like carboxylates were used to connect metal ions to construct stable extended metal–organic structures like MOFs. The strong interaction of chelating ligands with metal nodes and the formation of polynuclear clusters11 led to the formation of robust frameworks. Since then, the synthesis and applications of MOFs with tailorable pore architectures under the guidance of coordination chemistry have become research hotspots in both chemistry and materials science.5,9,11
2.2 Operating mechanisms of Li-ion batteries and Li–metal batteries
Currently, commercial LIBs mainly use LiCoO2 as the cathode material and graphite as the anode material separated by electrolyte and separator. Such LIBs usually show a gravimetric energy density of about 260 W h kg−1 with a cell voltage of 4.1 V, corresponding to a power density of 50 W kg−1, as illustrated in Fig. 2a.2
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of a representative LIB. (b) Relative energies of the electrolyte window Eg and electrode electrochemical potentials μA and μC. ΦA and ΦC are the work functions of the anode and cathode, respectively. 

Fig. 2b displays the relative energy levels of the electrolyte and electrode electrochemical potentials. The electromotive force (E) of a battery is the difference between the electrochemical potentials of the anode (μA) and cathode (μC), which is limited by the “window” of the electrolyte, namely, the band-gap energy (Eg) between the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the electrolyte. Usually the formation of a stable solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer at the electrode/electrolyte boundary increases the kinetic stability and widens the voltage window of the battery to realize long cycle life.12 To achieve high-performance LIBs, the major challenges are the use of appropriate electrode materials and the optimization of electrolytes to obtain chemical compatibility between the electrodes and the electrolyte, which deeply affect the thermodynamics and kinetics of electrochemical reactions between the electrodes and electrolytes during cycling. According to thermodynamic principles, the energy density (Ed) of an LIB obeys the following equations:2,13 Ed = E × Q(1) (2) (3)where Q is the specific capacity (mA h g−1), ΔG is the Gibbs free energy change (J), n is the number of transferred electrons (mol), F is the Faraday constant (C mol−1), and Mw is the per unit molar mass (g). According to eqn (1), enhancing E and Q is beneficial to realize high Ed. Based on eqn (2), cathode materials with high operating potential and anode materials with low operating potential are desired to achieve high E. A large number of reversible Li storage sites and active materials with low Mw will deliver higher theoretical Q according to eqn (3).
In addition to Ed determined by thermodynamic factors, power density (Pd) is another important parameter for batteries, which reflects the rate capability of active materials. To realize high Pd, it is important to enhance rate performance, which requires favorable reaction kinetics with fast electron and Li+ transfer upon cycling. Pd is the product of current and electrical potential. As the current increases, Pd rises to a peak and then declines because of the battery voltage decrease that occurs when the current goes beyond a certain limit. The polarization phenomenon can be attributed to ion diffusion and the internal resistance of the battery. Therefore, Pd can be described by kinetic equations as follows:14 Pd = E × I(4) (5) (6)where I is the current, i0 is the exchange current, α and η are the transfer coefficient and polarization, respectively, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and Rct is the charge transfer impedance. According to eqn (4)–(6), when E is fixed, high Pd requires large i0 and effective Li+ transport.
The electrochemical and safety performance of a battery are mainly governed by the electrode and electrolyte materials. Table S1 (ESI†) summarizes representative electrode materials of LIBs and their redox mechanisms.3,13,15–17 The cathode materials are mainly high-capacity organic materials and Li-rich layered oxides, high-potential spinel oxides and nickel-rich layered oxides, and highly stable polyanionic compounds.16 For the anode side, materials with high capacities of over 800 mA h g−1 such as silicon (Si)-based materials and transition metal oxides have been extensively studied over the last decade.17 With the continuous upsurge in the demand for high-density energy storage, LMBs have attracted attention recently.18 Although a Li metal anode has an ultra-high theoretical specific capacity of 3860 mA h g−1, a low density of 0.59 g cm−3, and the most negative working potential of 0 V versus Li+/Li, it encounters serious safety issues caused by the uncontrolled growth of Li dendrites, which can penetrate the separator and result in the short-circuit of the battery. The development of new types of solid Li electrolytes based on porous coordination compounds for LMBs could be a promising solution to this problem. However, the relatively low Li+ conductivity and the high interfacial resistance of such solid electrolyte materials are currently barriers for their practical application.
Because of their academic and practical importance, numerous experimental reports and review articles have focused on electrode and electrolyte materials for LIBs and LMBs.3,15–18 Coordination compounds ranging from discrete molecules to CPs and MOFs provide a platform to develop new materials for Li storage and Li+ transport (Fig. 3). The features of coordination compounds such as structural diversity, redox-active sites, and tunable pore space can not only increase the density of Li storage sites to realize high capacity over a wide operating voltage range but also enhance Li+ transport through rational molecular design via the well-understood mechanisms of these molecular systems.
 Fig. 3  Potential applications of coordination compounds in Li storage and Li+ transport. 
3. Coordination compounds for Li storage: mechanism, design principle, and synthetic strategy
Because of their compositional and structural tailorability, coordination compounds represent a promising platform for the study of Li storage.19–38 Well-designed coordination compounds have shown high capacity and stable cycling performance comparable or better than those of commercial materials.7 To rationally design and synthesize coordination compounds with improved electrochemical properties including working potential, capacity, cycling stability, and rate performance, understanding the Li storage mechanisms at a molecular level is of great importance, which are summarized in the first part of this section. The design principles and synthetic strategies for such coordination compounds are summarized in the second part of this section.
3.1 Li storage mechanisms of coordination compound-based electrode materials
According to the reaction mechanism of electrode materials with Li, active materials can be divided into the three categories of insertion-type, alloying-type, and conversion-type materials (Fig. 4).39 The insertion reaction is prominent among cathode materials whereas a few anode materials such as carbonaceous materials and titanium-based materials also follow this process. Main-group elements, such as Si, Ge, Sn, Al, Bi, Zn, and Sb, can alloy with Li at a low potential. Transition metal compounds with the general formula of MaXb (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu, X = O, S, F, P, N) can be reduced to metal nanoparticles through a conversion reaction with Li to form LinX.7
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration and representatives of three reaction mechanisms of electrode materials for Li storage. 
Compared with the Li storage mechanisms of inorganic materials, those of coordination compounds are more complicated, involving the electron transfer processes of both metal centers and organic ligands. A variable-valence metal center can serve as not only a coordination node but also an active site for Li storage through a conversion- or alloying-type reaction mechanism.19,20 For organic ligands, carboxylate groups, amide groups, aromatic rings, imidazole rings, and pyridine rings of the ligand could provide insertion sites for Li+.7 On the basis of the charge-state change of active sites, the redox reaction of organic ligands in coordination compounds such as carboxylates and carbonyl compounds is usually n-type. That is, the organic ligands are reduced to anions followed by the combination with Li+ during the discharge process, showing relatively low potentials (<3 V versus Li+/Li).13 In addition, specific organic ligands, such as π-conjugated dicarboxylates, can offer the superlithiation mechanism under lower operating voltage (<1 V versus Li+/Li),21 which can greatly enhance specific capacity. By taking advantage of multiple Li storage mechanisms, coordination compounds can serve as either the cathode or anode depending on their practical working potentials.
3.2 Design principles and synthetic strategies for coordination compound electrode materials
Energy density, power density, and cycling stability are three main parameters for the evaluation of a battery, which are strongly associated with the working potential, specific capacity, and rate capability of the electrode materials. To enhance these parameters, the rational design and optimization of coordination compound-based electrodes for Li storage should be considered from the following three aspects: (i) abundant host chemistry to realize desirable working potential and high specific capacity; (ii) efficient ion and electron transport to obtain good rate performance, and (iii) long-term structural stability to achieve high cycling stability.
The host chemistry of coordination compounds is based on composition and structure, which govern the working potential and specific capacity, and thus energy density (eqn (1)). The working potential of coordination compounds can be tuned by both the reactions of metal centers with Li and the charge-state variation of organic ligands.7 According to eqn (3), a high specific capacity of coordination compounds can be realized through increasing the density of redox-active sites and decreasing the molecular weight.
High rate performance requires efficient ion and electron transport in both electrode and electrolyte materials, which is governed by their intrinsic molecular and electronic structures.2 However, coordination compounds usually have low conductivity and thus exhibit poor rate capability. To obtain coordination compounds with fast ion and electron kinetics, the strategies of increasing π-conjugation, optimizing particle size, and incorporation of conductive materials have been proposed and demonstrated.13,33,36
Cycling stability is of great importance for the commercialization of a battery, which requires electrode materials with long-term structural stability. The capacity fading observed for many prototype batteries can be ascribed to the following aspects: solubility of active materials, passivated and insulated SEI film, side reactions, phase change, and unstable intermediates.6 In general, the strong coordination bond of metal and ligand could endow the coordination compounds with excellent energy storage activity because the stability of coordination compounds influences the reversibility of the reaction with Li during charge and discharge processes and thus the long-term cycling performance. To achieve coordination compounds with excellent cycling stability, strengthening coordination bonds by an appropriate combination of metal centers and ligands, morphology control, and incorporation of buffer materials should be considered. Based on the above design principles, several synthetic strategies have been developed to improve the electrochemical properties of coordination compounds as electrode materials, including the molecular design of coordination compounds to optimize both molecular and electronic structures, optimization of morphology and particle size, and construction of composites containing coordination compounds.20–38

3.2.1 Molecular design of coordination compounds. 
The varied structural features of coordination compounds provide great opportunities to tune their electrochemical properties via rational structural design and post-modification at a molecular level. The specific capacity, working potential, rate performance, and cycling stability of coordination compounds in Li storage can be optimized by adjusting their composition and/or structure via chemically tunable metal centers, organic linkers, and structural dimensionality.20–31
Specific capacity. 
High specific capacity can help achieve high energy density. To achieve coordination compounds with high specific capacity, the contributions from the metal center, organic ligand, and space between the coordination units should all be considered. Specifically, when directly applying MOFs as electrode materials, the large pore structure of MOFs usually leads to relatively low specific capacity, due to the unutilized space. However, these pores of MOFs are necessary because they provide suitable channels for Li+ transport. The key to balance the effect of the pore structure of MOFs on the specific capacity and thus the energy density is to model a comprehensive relationship between pore structure (include pore size and surface area) and Li storage performance.
A metal center with variable valence could not only serve as an active site for reaction with Li but also suppress the solubility of organic substances in the electrolyte through the formation of coordination bonds.20,23 For Li+, Na+, or K+-based coordination compounds, issues such as poor redox activity utilization, low conductivity, and undesired solubility in electrolytes greatly limit both reversible capacity and cycle life. Besides enhancing the chemical stability of the coordination units in electrolytes, the metal ions of transition metal-based coordination compounds can also serve as active sites for Li storage because of their variable valence states. Therefore, the introduction of transition metal ions instead of alkali metal ions to coordinate with organic ligands could markedly improve specific capacity and thus Li storage behavior.23 For example, although a carbonic acid salt (Na2C5O5) with multiple active sites shows promise for Li storage, its capacity and cycling stability are unsatisfactory because of its solubility in electrolytes.13 Our group reported two isostructural 1D transition metal-based CPs [M(C5O5)(H2O)3]n (M = Mn and Co) with chain structures fabricated using a facile slow evaporation method.23 Because of the reversible reduction/oxidation of transition metal ions and improved structural stability in the electrolyte, the reversible capacities of Mn–C5O5 and Co–C5O5 chains were 729 and 741 mA h g−1, respectively, which were much higher than that of 176 mA h g−1 for Na2C5O5.
For organic ligands, functional groups such as carboxylate groups, amide groups, aromatic rings, imidazole rings, and pyridine rings could provide active sites for Li storage but their theoretical capacity strongly depends on the molecular structure.7 For example, in three Li organic salts with similar molecular weights but different Li storage sites, the theoretical capacities increase in the order of 2N-Li2BDC > N-Li2BDC > Li2BDC (H2BDC = 1,4-dicarboxybenzene) because of the increasing number of active sites induced by nitrogen substitution of the carbon atoms of the BDC ligand, as shown in Fig. 5. In particular, the superlithiation mechanism of planar C6 ring ligands could provide an increased number of insertion sites for Li storage. For example, the ligand H2BDC in a transition metal-based coordination compound with the general structure of [Ni(BDC)]n could accept up to eight Li+ through superlithiation (Fig. 6),21 which was confirmed by X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and solid-state 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic characterization. This superlithiation mechanism provided a high reversible capacity of over 1100 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 5  The theoretical capacities of Li2BDC, N-Li2BDC, and 2N-Li2BDC with similar molecular weights (Mw) (H2BDC = 1,4-dicarboxybenzene). Li storage sites are indicated by the dashed circles. 
 Fig. 6  The superlithiation mechanism of an anhydrous transition metal-based coordination compound upon discharging. 
Organic ligands with abundant redox-active sites and low molecular weight are desired for use as CP-based electrode materials, but in practical situations, fully using these active sites requires a judicious material design to enhance the interfacial contact between the electrode materials and the electrolyte. The coordination of electron-withdrawing atoms to metal centers could provide active sites that interact more strongly with the electrolyte. For example, a F-doped Mn-based MOF was synthesized by replacing part of the H2BDC linkers coordinated to the metal centers with F− (Fig. 7a).24 The resulting material exhibited a higher capacity than that of the original Mn-MOF because of the release of more active sites by the BDC ligand. Overall, the reversible capacity reached 927 mA h g−1, corresponding to an enhanced redox active site utilization of 55% based on the full participation of metal centers and organic linkers (Fig. 7b). The study provided an interesting strategy to achieve the theoretical capacity of coordination compounds by tuning the coordination environment of metal ions to expose the active sites of ligands.
 Fig. 7  (a) The formation of a F-doped Mn-MOF structure. (b) Reaction mechanism of the F-doped Mn-MOF electrode upon lithiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The use of synergetic redox reactions on both metal centers and organic linkers could maximize the active sites for Li storage. For example, a Cu-MOF consisting of Cu(2,7-AQDC)(DMF)·xDMF was constructed as a cathode material using redox-active 2,7-anthraquinonedicarboxylic acid (H2-2,7-AQDC) and Cu2(Ac)4 paddlewheel secondary building units with high surface area for Li storage (Fig. 8a and b).25 Two voltage plateaus at 3.4–2.4 and 2.4–1.7 V were observed in the charge–discharge curves of the Cu-MOF-based cathode (Fig. 8c), which were related to the redox reactions of metal nodes and anthraquinone groups of the linkers, respectively. The specific capacity ratio of the two discharge plateaus was about 1:2, indicating a one-electron transfer process on the metal center and two-electron uptake on the organic ligands, which was also confirmed by cyclic voltammetry measurements. In situ XANES spectroscopy analysis was used to track the valence change of Cu, revealing the stepwise reduction of the Cu2(Ac)4 paddlewheel secondary building units from Cu(II,II) to Cu(II,I) and then to the fully reduced Cu(I,I) state. This Cu-MOF-based cathode exhibited a three-electron transfer reaction with a high initial specific capacity of 147 mA h g−1, which is comparable to that of a commercial LiCoO2 cathode (148 mA h g−1). However, the MOF-based cathode displayed a capacity decay to 105 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles because of its low ionic conductivity and insufficient extraction of Li+ (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Crystal structure of a single layer of Cu-MOF. (b) Kagome lattice-type structure of the Cu-MOF and glided adjacent layers. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of the Cu-MOF. (d) Cycling performance of the Cu-MOF at 100 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
An anode material composed of a 1D Co-based CP, [Co1.5L(H2O)4]n (H3L = 4-hydroxypyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid), delivered a high reversible capacity of 431 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles because of its two-step reversible reactions (Fig. 9).20 During discharge, [Co1.5L(H2O)4]n reacted with Li to reduce Co2+, and then Li was inserted into the carboxylate carbonyl and enolate groups of the organic ligands. During charge, the reverse processes took place. The reversible reactions of both the metal center and the organic ligand with Li were well characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and cyclic voltammetry measurements. In addition to the coordination units of this coordination compound, the chain-based supramolecular network also aided the Li storage processes.
 Fig. 9  Redox mechanism of a 1D Co-based CP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The space between the coordination units, such as hydrogen bond-based networks in CPs or open channels in MOFs, can provide pathways for the effective transport of Li+ to maximize the capacity of a material.22 For example, our group studied two isostructural transition metal-based CPs [M2(pztc)(H2O)6]n (M = Co and Ni; H4pztc = pyrazine-2,3,5,6-tetracarboxylate) with 2D layered structures connected by hydrogen bonds.22 These Co(II) and Ni(II) CPs demonstrated high reversible capacities of above 500 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1 over 150 cycles. This electrochemical property was attributed to the 2D layer-based supramolecular structures connected by the coordinated water molecules via hydrogen-bonding which have no channel-size restrictions and hence benefit not only the accessible active sites but also the rapid diffusion of Li+.20,22,23
Working potential. 
High output voltage is helpful to enhance energy density, which requires cathode materials with high working potential and anode materials with low working potential. The working potentials of coordination compounds are governed by both the reactions of metal centers with Li and the electron transfer processes of the functional groups.13,40 The redox reactions of metal centers of coordination compounds are mainly alloying-type and conversion-type. Li alloying and dealloying reactions usually occur at low potentials (≤1.0 V versus Li+/Li), whereas the conversion reaction of metal centers with Li can occur over a wide potential range (0.005–3.0 V versus Li+/Li).39 Although the reaction mechanism of organic ligands is usually n-type and shows relatively low potentials (<3 V versus Li+/Li), the working potentials of organic ligands can be adjusted through modifying the molecular structure. By introducing the electron-withdrawing groups (e.g., –CN) or electron-donating groups (e.g., –NMe2) to influence the LUMO energy, the working potentials of organic ligands can be tuned.13 A lower LUMO energy implies higher electron affinity, leading to higher working potential. For example, by changing the substituents of an organic ligand from –NMe2 group to –CN group, the reduction potential was increased from 2.3 to 2.9 V.41
Coordination compounds can work as a cathode or anode, which depends on their practical working potentials. For cathode materials, it is desirable to use conversion-type metal centers with a high discharge plateau and organic ligands with electron-withdrawing groups to construct coordination compounds with high working potentials. For anode materials, it is necessary to use alloying- or conversion-type metal centers with a low discharge plateau and organic ligands with electron-donating groups to fabricate coordination compounds with low working potentials. The judicious selection and combination of metal centers and organic linkers can be used to tune the working potentials of coordination compounds to meet the requirements of specific applications.23,25,26 In addition, the relative position of active groups in coordination compounds can influence the working potential because of Coulomb interactions, as was demonstrated for the pair of para-dihydroxyterephthaloyl and ortho-dihydroxyterephthaloyl ligands (Fig. 10a).26 The working potential of the ortho compound was higher than that of the para compound because of the different Coulombic interactions between oxygen and Li, decreasing the LUMO energy level (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) The structures of para-dihydroxyterephthaloyl and ortho-dihydroxyterephthaloyl. (b) Charge–discharge profiles of the dihydroxyterephthaloyl compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Rate performance. 
According to eqn (4)–(6), high rate performance requires good conductivity of the electrode material. Expanding the π-conjugation of organic ligands is a feasible strategy to narrow energy gaps to realize high electronic conductivity.13 For example, the rate capabilities of organic Li salts displayed the order of Li2-BDC < Li2-NDC < Li4-PTC because of the extension of the aromatic groups (Fig. 11).13,27 In particular, Li4-PTC delivered a reversible capacity of 125 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at a high rate of five Li+ per hour, while the others exhibited a reversible capacity lower than 50 mA h g−1 at the same rate. In addition, the conductivity of coordination compounds could also be improved through introducing P or S atoms to the organic ligand.13
 Fig. 11  Extending the π-aromatic conjugation to increase the rate capacity of organic ligands. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Cycling stability. 
The structural integrity of the electrode materials in electrolytes and reversibility of the reaction with Li during charge and discharge processes influence the long-term cycling performance of an LIB. In 2006, the first demonstration of a MOF-based anode was reported.19 The MOF (Zn4O(BTB)2(DEF)m(H2O)n, H3BTB = 4,4,4-benzene-1,3,5-triyl-tri-benzoic acid, DEF = N,N-diethylformamide) showed an alloying reaction mechanism after the irreversible conversion mechanism during the first lithium intercalation process. The electrochemical reaction mechanism of this MOF involved the following steps: Zn4O(BTB)2(DEF)m(H2O)n + e− + Li+ → Zn + Li2O(7) DEF + H2O + e− + Li+ → Li2(DEF) + LiOH(8) Zn + Li+ + e− ↔ LiZn(9)
The irreversible conversion mechanism (eqn (7)) led to the destruction of the framework and the formation of metallic zinc, which was irreversible, thus deteriorating the cycling stability of the MOF-based anode. The decreased cycle performance was illustrated by its initial discharge capacity of 425 mA h g−1 and capacity of 105 mA h g−1 in the second cycle. For enhanced cyclability, the structural stability of coordination compounds in organic electrolytes and reversible Li storage reactions should both be considered, which can be realized by the rational design of the molecular structure of coordination compounds.
The formation of extended CPs could increase the stability of coordination compounds, which is an effective strategy to enhance cycling stability with high reversible capacity.20,23,28 For example, the specific capacity of a mononuclear complex [Ni(PBIM)2(HIPA)] (PBIM = 2-(2-pyridyl)benzimidazole, HIPA = 5-hydroxyisophthalic acid) faded from 783 mA h g−1 to 554 mA h g−1 over 150 cycles.28 In contrast, the 1D CP [Ni(PBIM)(HIPA)]n with the same coordination model retained a high capacity of 1131 mA h g−1 over 150 cycles (capacity retention of 90%) (Fig. 12). The high reversible capacity and excellent cycling stability of this 1D CP mainly resulted from the formation of the chain-based supramolecular structure. As cathode materials, Prussian blue (PB) and Prussian blue analogs (PBAs), possessing cyanide-bridged perovskite-type frameworks, usually exhibit poor cycling stability because of their structural collapse caused by the presence of structural defects and coordinated water molecules. Therefore, the cycling performance of PB and PBAs can be improved by decreasing vacancy formation. When the lattice defects and coordinated water in the PB framework were eliminated by a facile hydrolytic precipitation, the resulting FeFe(CN)6 lattice delivered a high reversible capacity of 160 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 90% over 300 cycles (Fig. 13).29
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a mononuclear complex [Ni(PBIM)2(HIPA)] and 1D CP [Ni(PBIM)(HIPA)]n. (b) Cycling stability of the mononuclear complex and 1D CP at 100 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 13  Schematic representations of PB frameworks: a defect-rich Fe3+I[Fe2+II(CN)6]0.75·□0.25·3.5H2O framework (left) and an ideal vacancy-free Fe3+I[Fe3+II(CN)6] framework (right), where □ represents a vacancy occupied by water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Incorporation of buffer materials such as a robust shell to protect coordination compounds is another efficient strategy to improve their Li storage performance. For example, a PBA, K0.14Cu1.43[Fe(CN)6]·5H2O (Fe–CN–Cu PBA), showed reversible Li+ insertion/extraction properties with a reversible capacity of ∼120 mA h g−1 (Fig. 14), but exhibited poor cycling stability because of its structural irregularity.30 To improve its stability, a PBA core@shell heterostructure with a high-capacity CuFe-PBA core and a robust NiFe-PBA shell was synthesized through interfacial coupling (Fig. 15a).31 The stable shell facilitated ion transport to the core and suppressed surface decomposition and structural degradation. As shown in Fig. 15b, the core@shell CuFePBA@NiFe-PBA cathode delivered high capacity and cycling stability over 50 cycles.
 Fig. 14  Proposed Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in the Lix(CuFe-PBA) structure and magnetic properties of materials with x = 0 and 1. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
 Fig. 15  (a) HRTEM image of core@shell CuFe-PBA@NiFe-PBA particles. (b) Cycling stability of the uncoated NiFe-PBA and core@shell CuFe-PBA@NiFe-PBA electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Optimization of morphology. 
Optimization of the morphologies of coordination compounds could effectively improve the interface contact between the electrode and the electrolyte to realize enhanced specific capacity and cycling stability. In general, by decreasing diffusion paths for ions/electrons and increasing the density of surface reaction sites, nanostructured coordination compounds generally exhibit enhanced kinetics over their bulk counterparts.32–35 For example, a hierarchical Co-based MOF (H-Co-MOF, Co2(OH)2BDC) consisting of microflowers composed of nanosheets was synthesized through a simple solvothermal method (Fig. 16a).32 As an anode material, the H-Co-MOF exhibited an ultrahigh reversible specific capacity of 1345 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, which was much higher than that of the bulk Co-MOF (810 mA h g−1) (Fig. 16b). The unique hierarchical structure of H-Co-MOF increased the contact surface area between the electrolyte and active materials and substantially shortened the diffusion distance for Li+. In another example, nanoporous Fe-MIL-88B ([Fe3O(BDC)3(H2O)2(NO3)]n) polyhedral nanorods with an average length of ∼800 nm and a width of ∼100 nm were synthesized through a solvothermal method and then studied as an anode material for LIBs (Fig. 17a).33 The assembled battery delivered a reversible capacity of 744.5 mA h g−1 without observable capacity fading after 400 cycles (Fig. 17b). This excellent cycling stability can be attributed to the high structural stability of Fe-MIL-88B polyhedral nanorods during the cycling process (Fig. 17c). It is noted that reducing the particle size of active materials can have other adverse effects such as increasing the occurrence of side reactions and reducing the energy density of the system, and hence the particle size should be optimized.7
 Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of hierarchical Co-MOF microflowers. (b) Cycling performance of H-Co-MOF and pristine Co-MOF at 100 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
 Fig. 17  (a) SEM image of Fe-MIL-88B polyhedral nanorods. (b) Cycling performance of Fe-MIL-88B polyhedral nanorods at 60 mA g−1. (c) TEM image of the Fe-MIL-88 B nanorod electrode over 100 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Elsevier. 
Other types of smart architectures with optimized morphologies, such as microspheres and nanosheets, have also been demonstrated as high-performance electrode materials.34,35 The Hu group reported a series of Co-based CPs using 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate (1,3,5-BTC) showing different morphologies of a nanorod-based laminate, hollow microspheres, and layered architecture obtained in different solvents (Fig. 18a).34 The cycling stability of these CPs showed no evident difference at 100 mA g−1. In contrast, CoBTC-EtOH could exhibit the highest reversible capacity of 473 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 over 500 cycles (Fig. 18b), which resulted from the structural stability of the morphology of monodisperse hollow microspheres. Moreover, the monodisperse hollow microspheres can not only provide fast ion and electron transportation but also accommodate the large volume variation during cycling. A Mn-based MOF with ultrathin nanosheets (Mn-UMOFNs) was synthesized by Hu and co-workers using a versatile ultrasonic approach.35 The obtained Mn-UMOFNs showed a high reversible capacity of 1187 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 and 818 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 1 A g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of almost 100%. The outstanding property resulted from the ultrathin nanosheet structure that can not only provide enough space for the absorption of Li+ but also a short Li+ diffusion distance.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of CoBTC CPs. (b) Cycling performance of CoBTC-EtOH, CoBTC-DMF, and CoBTC-DMF/EtOH at a high current density of 2 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Construction of composites. 
Combination of coordination compounds with conductive materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, and conductive nanoparticles (e.g., Cu, Ag, Au) to fabricate composite materials is an effective approach to increase the structural stability of coordination compounds to achieve long-term cycling performance at high rate.7,36,37 For example, a composite of MIL-53(Fe)@RGO was synthesized through the in situ coating of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) onto MIL-53(Fe) microcrystals.36 The reversible capacity of MIL-53(Fe)@RGO at 2 A g−1 was 300 mA h g−1, which was ten times higher than that of ∼30 mA h g−1 obtained for MIL-53(Fe). The introduction of RGO not only promoted electronic conductivity and ion transport but also activated the carboxylate groups of terephthalate acid of MIL-53(Fe) for Li storage.
In another example, a modified ZIF-67/Ag composite was synthesized by three post-synthetic modification processes: alkyl halogenation, halohydrocarbon oxidation, and silver mirror reaction (Fig. 19a).37 First, carboxyl groups were introduced onto the organic ligands of ZIF-67 through alkyl halogenation and halohydrocarbon oxidation. Then, ultrafine Ag nanoparticles with a size of about 3 nm were uniformly distributed on the external surface of the modified ZIF-67 resulting from the silver mirror reaction. Because of the strong coupling between the Ag nanoparticles and organic moieties, the resulting ZIF-67-COOH/Ag composite was endowed with more redox-active sites and higher electronic conductivity than those of the original ZIF-67, resulting in a markedly enhanced rate performance of 407 mA h g−1 at 7C (959 mA g−1) (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the post-synthetic modification processes of ZIF-67. Green dots: Ag nanoparticles. (b) Rate capability at various current rates between 0.28 and 7C with five cycles for each step (1C = 137 mA g−1). Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier. 
The encapsulation of ionic liquids (ILs) into polyoxometalate-based metal–organic frameworks (POMOFs) has also been studied to improve the cycling property of pristine POMOFs by facilitating reaction kinetics.38 As shown in Fig. 20a, using PMo10V2@MIL-100 as a host, the IL 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide was encapsulated in the mesoporous cages of MIL-100 and then reacted with PMo10V2 to fabricate IL-functionalized PMo10V2@MIL-100 crystals. ILs in POMOFs can not only provide good contact between electrolyte and electrode but also improve the electrochemical conductivity of POMOFs and restrain the formation of thick SEI films. The resulting PMo10V2-ILs@MIL-100 composite exhibited a reversible capacity of 1248 mA h g−1 with stable cycling over 100 cycles, demonstrating the positive synergistic effects of each component of this composite (Fig. 20b).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of PMo10V2@MIL-100. (b) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of PMo10V2, Mo10V2@MIL-100, ILs@MIL-100, and PMo10V2-ILs@MIL-100. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In this section, the Li storage mechanisms, design principles, and synthetic strategies of coordination compound-based electrode materials have been summarized. According to the Li storage mechanisms, the synthetic strategies mainly include three aspects: molecular design of the coordination units, morphology optimization of coordination compounds, and the construction of composites. Although coordination compounds have shown great potential as electrode materials because of their controllable structures and chemical compositions, their practical applications are still hampered by many challenges. For cathode materials, coordination compounds fall behind commercial materials like LiMn2O4 with robust crystal structures and high working potentials. However, the future application of coordination compounds with high working potentials as cathode materials could decrease the use of expensive inorganic salts and increase the cycling stability. For anode materials, although coordination compounds have demonstrated attractive specific capacity surpassing that of commercialized graphite anodes, inherent defects including poor electronic conductivity and structural stability limit their cycling and rate performance. A feasible way to enhance the conductivity of coordination compounds is construction of composites with conductive substrates. Optimization of morphology and particle size can mitigate the volume variation and particle pulverization of coordination compounds to obtain high structural stability. Therefore, the further development of coordination compounds for Li storage requires deep understanding of redox reaction mechanisms and ingenious design strategies for coordination compounds with not only abundant active sites for Li storage but also high electronic conductivity and structural stability according to the principles of coordination chemistry.

4. Coordination compound-based materials for Li+ transport
In addition to Li storage, Li+ transport between cathode and anode is strongly governed by the properties of the electrolyte. The most commonly used electrolytes are based on flammable liquid organic compounds such as ethers and carbonate esters, which have potential safety issues.42 A promising approach to obtain highly safe batteries is replacing the liquid electrolyte with a solid material. In fact, solid electrolytes with high mechanical and chemical stability, such as inorganic solid electrolytes, solid polymer electrolytes, and composite solid electrolytes, have been studied recently.42 For high-performance solid electrolytes, the following fundamental points should be considered: (1) increasing the concentration of mobile Li+ and lowering the activation barrier to obtain high ionic conductivity; (2) restricting the movement of counter anions to enhance the Li+ transference number (t+); (3) increasing the surface area of the host material to obtain good interfacial contact with electrodes to lower the interfacial resistance and enhance chemical compatibility. To further use anions in electrolytes, the construction of dual-ion batteries has been proposed, because the intercalation of anions into the host material enables the batteries to feature a high operating voltage and hence improved energy density.6
MOF-based electrolytes are promising materials for Li+ transport because of their porous nature.43–50 High ionic conductivity, large t+, and good interfacial stability could be achieved using MOFs because of their unique advantages: (1) the high surface area of MOFs offers the ability to accommodate a high density of cation hopping sites, which could minimize the activation energy for Li+ transport and thus increase Li+ conductivity; (2) the components of the frameworks, including both the metal centers and organic linkers, could be post-modified by anionic species or organic groups to immobilize anions and increase t+; (3) the highly uniform and tunable pore structures of MOFs can realize size-selective ion transportation and can afford favorable interfacial contact and chemical compatibility of the electrode material and electrolyte to suppress the formation of Li dendrites. In this section, we summarize the recent progress of MOF-based electrolytes from two main aspects, namely, the post-modification of MOFs and construction of MOF-based composites for Li+ transport (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of MOF-based electrolytes. 
4.1 Post-modification of metal–organic frameworks for use as electrolytes
The post-modification of MOFs at the metal centers, organic linkers, and pore species could influence the hopping of Li+ and confine the migration of anions, and thus improve Li+ transport properties.43–47 Two main approaches of post-modification of MOFs to enhance Li+ transport have been demonstrated: substitution of cations in the anionic framework and coordination of counter anions to open metal sites.

4.1.1 Exchanging cations in the anionic framework. 
Exchanging the cations in the pores of MOFs with Li+ is an effective way to raise the number of mobile charge carriers. For example, Fisher and co-workers demonstrated a facile synthetic strategy to fabricate an anionic Al-MOF based on tetrahedral AlO4− units and 1,4-dihydroxybenzene linkers, which allowed Li+ migration to negatively charged AlO4 tetrahedral building units under an electrostatically driven contraction effect.43 The anionic framework featured a high Li+ loading of 2.50 wt% and showed an ionic conductivity of 5.7 × 10−5 S cm−1. Very recently, Yaghi and colleagues reported a 3D MOF, MOF-688, constructed by linking ditopic amino-functionalized polyoxometalate [N(C4H9)4]3[MnMo6O18{(OCH2)3CNH2}2] with tetra-connected tetrahedral tetrakis(4-formylphenyl)methane building units through imine condensation (Fig. 22a).44 MOF-688 has an intrinsically anionic framework, with tetrabutylammonium cations in the pores. After the substitution of the cations by Li+, the post-modified MOF-688 exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 3.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 293 K. The almost complete substitution of tetrahedral tetrakis(4-formylphenyl)methane with Li+ afforded a strong single-ion conducting force to result in a high t+ of 0.87, which is much higher than that of traditional liquid electrolytes (tLi+ = 0.2–0.4). The MOF-688-based electrolyte also delivered excellent electrochemical stability when it was used in a Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 battery, operating for over 200 cycles without obvious capacity fading at room temperature (Fig. 22b).
 Fig. 22  (a) Synthesis and structure of MOF-688. (b) Selected charge and discharge profiles of the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


4.1.2 Coordination of anions to open metal sites. 
To achieve high t+, it is necessary to immobilize anions and allow Li+ to move more freely. This can be achieved in specific MOFs such as MOF-74, in which the terminal small molecules can be removed by vacuum and/or heating to generate open metal sites to allow coordination with the anions of Li salts while leaving Li+ relatively free to move along the channels. In 2011, Long et al.45 reported solid electrolytes synthesized by grafting lithium isopropoxide (LiOPr) into activated Mg2(dobdc) (dobdc4− = 1,4-dioxido-2,5-benzenedicarboxylate) followed by immersion in a 1:1 mixture of ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate containing 1 M LiBF4. Taking advantage of the coordination of Mg2+ with OPr−, the anions of LiOPr were partially immobilized to promote Li+ transport (Fig. 23). The resulting solid electrolyte exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 3.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 and a low activation barrier of 0.15 eV, which are comparable to those of liquid electrolytes.
 Fig. 23  Structure of Mg2(dobdc) (left) and schematic diagram of the modification of this MOF-based solid electrolyte (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
In 2018, Shen and colleagues investigated a series of MOFs, including HKUST-1 (Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3, H3BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid), UIO-66 (Zr6O4(OH)4(BDC)6), UIO-67 (Zr6O4(OH)4(BPDC)6, H2BPDC = biphenyl-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid), MIL-100-(Al/Cr/Fe), and MOF-5, as MOF-based electrolytes.46 Biomimetic ionic channels were formed by the coordination of the anions of the electrolyte to the open metal sites. Taking HKUST-1 as a representative example, open Cu2+ sites were generated by the removal of coordinated water molecules, allowing coordination with ClO4− of LiClO4 in propylene carbonate (Fig. 24a) to form ionic channels that enabled fast and effective Li+ transport (Fig. 24b). The authors also studied the relationship between the Li+ conduction properties and structural features (pore size and Lewis acidity of metal sites) of different MOFs. Because of its large pore size and strong Lewis acidity, the UIO-67-based electrolyte demonstrated a high ambient conductivity exceeding 10−3 S cm−1, a low activation energy of 0.21 eV, and a large t+ of 0.65, which endowed solid-state batteries with excellent rate performance and cycling stability.
 Fig. 24  (a) Structure of HKUST-1 (left) and the formation of Li+ transport channels in HKUST-1 (right). (b) Schematic illustration of Li+ transport channels in the HKUST-1 host with bound ClO4−. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Benefiting from the coordination of the anions to open metal sites, a MOF skeleton with singular Li+ as charge carriers could maximize the Li+ mobility to obtain high ionic conductivity and large t+. For example, Dincă and co-workers reported that a Cu-azolate MOF, ((CH3)2NH2)[Cu2Cl3BTDD]·(DMF)4(H2O)4.5 (H2BTDD = bis(1H-1,2,3-triazolo[4,5-b], [4′,5′-i])dibenzo-[1,4]dioxin) or MIT-20, with free dimethylammonium (DMA) cations in the tubular pores can be transformed to the neutral MIT-20d phase by removing one equivalent of DMACl (Fig. 25).47 Single-crystal X-ray diffraction analysis revealed that the structure of anionic MIT-20 was transformed to neutral MIT-20d by the formation of [Cu2Cl2BTDD]. The coordination of chloride anions to the metal centers was beneficial for the Li+ to move freely within the 1D channels. After soaking the neutral MIT-20d in propylene carbonate with LiCl, the obtained anionic MIT-20-LiCl electrolyte exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 4.8 × 10−4 S cm−1 and a large t+ of 0.66.
 Fig. 25  Schematics of the crystal structure transition of anionic MIT-20 to neutral MIT-20d. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 

4.2 Construction of metal–organic framework composites for use as electrolytes
The construction of MOF-based composites that accommodate Li-containing species such as Li salts and ILs is also an effective strategy to realize high-performance electrolytes. The mobility of large anions of Li salts or ILs can be restrained in the MOF framework by adjusting the pore size, thus facilitating the movement of Li+ in Li-containing MOF-based composites, to give a size-selective ion conductor.48,49 In addition, Li-containing MOF-based composites can be used as fillers to form composite polymer electrolytes with high ionic conductivity.50

4.2.1 Li-Containing metal–organic framework composites as size-selective ion conductors. 
By accommodating Li-containing species such as Li salts and ILs, the highly uniform and tunable pore structures of MOFs can achieve size-selective ion transport and the resulting composite can afford high interfacial stability as an electrolyte for stable LMBs.48,49 For example, the well-known stable MOF HKUST-1, which contains an intersecting 3D system with large square-shaped pores, was used to accommodate the LiTFSI (LiN(SO2CF3)2) electrolyte to realize stable Li electrodeposition under practical high-current conditions (Fig. 26a).48 The length of the anion of LiTFSI is 7.9 Å, which is close to the width of the pores of the HKUST-1 skeleton (8 Å). Density functional theory calculations revealed that the transport of TFSI− can be restricted via spatial confinement by the skeleton of HKUST-1, enabling selective Li+ transport in the electrolyte hosted in HKUST-1 (Fig. 26b). This selective ion transport facilitated a homogeneous Li+ flux with a high t+ of 0.7, thus ensuring stable Li electrodeposition to realize a high-power dendrite-free Li–metal anode. This MOF-based electrolyte was tested in a Li-Li4Ti5O12 battery, which showed an initial discharge capacity of 142 mA h g−1 and a high capacity retention of 95% after 2000 cycles at a high current density of 7 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 26  (a) A homogeneous Li+ flux facilitating uniform Li growth on the Li–metal surface. The cyan dashed rectangle indicates the ionic transport pathway provided by the MOF host. (b) Schematic illustration of the selective Li+ transport imposed by the MOF host. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier. 
In another approach, the cations and anions of ILs can be spatially restricted in the channels of MOFs to increase t+. For example, the Li-containing IL [EMIM0.8Li0.2][TFSI] (EMIM = 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium) and MOF-525(Cu) were combined to prepare a solid electrolyte (Li-IL@MOF) in which MOF-525(Cu) provided a stable 3D open framework as a host and [EMIM0.8Li0.2][TFSI] served as the Li+ conductor.49 MOF-525(Cu) was constructed by linking Zr6O4(OH)4 clusters with [5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin]Cu(II) (CuTCPP) linkers, featuring uniform pores with an aperture of ∼12 × 7 Å. The sizes of EMIM+ and TFSI− are ∼7.9 and 7.6 Å, respectively, which allowed them to be confined in the pores of MOF-525(Cu) to hinder the mobility of both EMIM+ and TFSI− (Fig. 27), leading to a high Li+ conductivity of 3.0 × 10−4 S cm−1. Because of the synergistic effect of the high ionic conductivity and nanowetted interface between LiFePO4 and Li-IL@MOF, a LiFePO4/Li-IL@MOF/Li solid cell was able to achieve a high capacity of 132 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with a high loading of 25 mg cm−1 at ambient temperature and operated over the tough operation temperature range of −20 to 150 °C with acceptable capacity performance.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustrations of the crystal structure of the Li-IL@MOF and nanowetted interfacial mechanism of the solid-state battery containing Li-IL@MOF. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 


4.2.2 Li-containing metal–organic framework composites as fillers for solid polymer electrolytes. 
Compared with inorganic solid electrolytes, solid polymer electrolytes such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)-based systems show advantages such as super interfacial contact, electrochemical stability and good processability. However, solid polymer electrolytes suffer from low ionic conductivity at room temperature because of the limited mobility of their segmental chains. The ionic conductivity of solid polymer electrolytes can be improved by adding fillers because the fillers can not only decrease the crystallinity of polymers but also increase the concentration of dissociated Li+.42 Li-Containing MOF composites can be used as functional fillers to construct composite polymer electrolytes. Moreover, the Lewis acidic properties of such fillers can improve the interactions between the fillers and anions or polymer chains, which could lower the interfacial resistance and generate good compatibility with electrodes. For example, the UIO-66/Li-IL composite can be used as a multifunctional filler for solid polymer electrolytes that takes advantage of the adsorption properties of UIO-66 (Fig. 28).50 The PEO–UIO-66/Li-IL electrolyte was synthesized by dispersing the UIO-66/Li-IL filler in the PEO matrix. The ionic conductivity of the composite electrolyte was 1.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 30 °C. Stable Li plating/stripping was maintained at a high current density of 500 mA cm−2 and 60 °C. The improved ionic conductivity and interfacial contact of the composite electrolyte over those of PEO were attributed to the suppressed PEO crystallinity in the presence of the nanostructured MOF skeleton and the IL with high ionic conductivity. A solid Li battery based on this composite electrolyte showed an initial discharge capacity of 151 mA h g−1, and a discharge capacity of 144 mA h g−1 was retained after 100 cycles at 0.5 C and a high temperature of 60 °C. These promising results suggest that further research attention should be paid to improving the room-temperature electrochemical properties of solid Li batteries using MOF/polymer composite electrolytes.
 Fig. 28  Preparation process of the UIO-66/Li-IL filler. 

5. Conclusions and outlook
The rapid development of coordination chemistry provides a platform for the study of new materials for Li storage and Li+ transport. For Li storage, effective strategies including molecular design based on metal/ligand design and morphology and particle optimization were summarized on the basis of the Li storage mechanism to provide design principles for coordination compound-based electrodes. For Li+ transport, MOFs with high surface area, porous nature, and open metal sites can be applied for Li+ transport through pore structure design, binding to open metal sites, and cation exchange.
Although elementary results obtained for coordination compound-based electrode materials for LIBs have been achieved recently, the practical application of these materials is still far from realization because of the following challenges: (1) the structural stability including the crystal structure and the reaction interface of the electrodes during long-term cycling needs to be improved, which is closely related to the thermal/chemical stability of coordination compounds. The formation of a stable SEI film is also crucial to produce a favorable reaction interface to accommodate the volume changes to achieve long-term cycling. (2) The direct utilization of coordination compounds as electrodes to obtain high rate performance is limited by their poor electronic conductivity, which could be effectively enhanced by the incorporation of conductive materials. However, the gravimetric specific capacity would suffer a corresponding decrease, so these factors need to be balanced. (3) The electrochemical processes of coordination compound-based electrodes need to be investigated in depth using advanced in situ and operando characterization methods and high-level theoretical calculations. Overall, the current results have indicated that the performance of anode materials based on coordination compounds cannot reach that of carbon-based materials. In contrast, cathode materials based on coordination compounds have more opportunities to realize high-performance Li storage because high theoretical capacity, high working potential and fast kinetics can be achieved through rational structural design at the molecular level.
Batteries incorporating Li–metal anodes and solid Li electrolytes are recognized as potential next-generation energy carriers with high energy density, long lifespan, adequate safety assurance, and light weight. Solid Li electrolytes based on porous coordination compounds, especially MOFs with a high ionic conductivity of over 1 × 10−4 S cm−1, have been considered as promising materials to suppress Li dendrite growth and promote the interfacial contact in LMBs. At present, the ionic conductivity of optimized MOF-based electrolytes at room temperature is acceptable for the application in solid LMBs. However, the research on MOF-based electrolytes is still at the initial stage, and the following factors need to be considered in their future applications: (1) the Li+ transference number has to be increased by post-modification of MOFs such as immobilizing the anions within the MOF skeletons, which is beneficial for decreasing concentration polarization to realize more effective Li+ transport; (2) the interfacial contact and chemical compatibility of electrode/electrolyte interfaces should be improved by adding specific buffer layers such as artificial SEI layers and appropriate MOFs; (3) the large interfacial resistance during Li stripping and plating needs to be lowered by increasing the contact area between the Li-based anode and the MOF-based electrolyte.
In summary, coordination compounds have shown promising applications for electrode materials and electrolytes for Li storage and Li+ transport in LIBs and LMBs. Understanding the relationships between coordination chemistry and energy chemistry will be crucial to maximize the advantages of these two fields. There are increasing opportunities for coordination compounds, especially CPs and MOFs, in the rational design and synthesis of new electrode and electrolyte materials for not only LIBs and LMBs but also other advanced electrochemical energy storage materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21622105, 21931004 and 21971123), the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (18JCJQJC47200), and the Ministry of Education of China (B12015). W. S. acknowledges the receipt of a Newton Advanced Fellowship from the Royal Society.
Notes and references
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 1053–1061 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Batten, N. R. Champness, X. M. Chen, J. Garcia-Martinez, S. Kitagawa, L. Öhrström, M. O’Keeffe, M. P. Suh and J. Reedijk, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1715–1724 CAS .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6927–6945 RSC .
Z. Liang, C. Qu, W. Guo, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 30, 1702891 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. Constable and C. E. Housecroft, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1429–1439 RSC .
H. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem, 2019, 2, 52–80 Search PubMed .
Y. Kinoshita, I. Matsubara and Y. Saito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1959, 32, 741–747 CrossRef CAS .
S. Horike, D. Umeyama and S. Kitagawa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2376–2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Z. Zhu and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607007 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang, X. Han, Z. Hu, X. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 699–728 RSC .
Z. Liang, R. Zhao, T. Qiu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100001 CrossRef .
W. D. Li, B. H. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
Z. H. Liu, Q. Yu, Y. L. Zhao, R. H. He, M. Xu, S. H. Feng, S. D. Li, L. Zhou and L. Q. Mai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 285–309 RSC .
S. X. Xia, X. S. Wu, Z. C. Zhang, Y. Cui and W. Liu, Chem, 2019, 5, 1–33 Search PubMed .
X. Li, F. Cheng, S. Zhang and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 542–547 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Yang, F. Li, F. Cheng, W. Shi, J. Chen and P. Cheng, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4935–4940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Lee, Y. Park, S. H. Kim, S. Yeon, S. K. Kwak, K. T. Lee and S. Y. Hong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4859–4866 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Li, P. Zhao, P. Ren, W. Shi and P. Cheng, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 602–608 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Shi, J. Chen and P. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6398–6406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, X. Zhou, Z. Li, J. Wang, L. Ma and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26907–26914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16112–16115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gottis, A. Barrės, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10870–10876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fédèle, F. Sauvage and M. Bécuwe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18225–18228 RSC .
J. Du, Y. Li, H. W. Liu, W. Shi, L. V. Moskaleva and P. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25863–25869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Wu, M. M. Shao, C. H. Wu, J. F. Qian, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23706–23712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okubo, D. Asakura, Y. Mizuno, T. Kudo, H. Zhou, A. Okazawa and I. Honma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6269–6273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Asakura, C. H. Li, Y. Mizuno, M. Okubo, H. S. Zhou and D. R. Talham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2793–2799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, W. Yang, J. Wang, C. Chen and M. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 13362–13367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, H. Song and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 595–603 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Lou, M. Shen, X. Hu, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, B. Hu and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15352–15360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Hu, W. Tong, W. Yan, X. Lou, M. Shen and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29829–29838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Hu, H. Jiang, J. Chang, M. Zheng, Q. Wu and Q. Dong, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 528–535 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, F. Yang, X. Fang, Y. Rui and B. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 276–285 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, A. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Huang, X. Zhu, X. Wang, L. Dong, S. Li and Y. Lan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8735–8741 RSC .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC .
R. Zhao, Z. Liang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2235–2259 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Vadehra, R. P. Maloney, M. A. Garcia-Garibay and B. Dunn, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7151–7157 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fischer, J. Roeser, T. C. Lin, R. H. DeBlock, J. Lau, B. S. Dunn, F. Hoffmann, M. Fröba and S. H. Tolbert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16683–16687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Pei, C. S. Diercks, H. Lyu, Z. Ji and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17522–17526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Wiers, M. L. Foo, N. P. Balsara and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14522–14525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shen, H. B. Wu, F. Liu, J. L. Brosmer, G. Shen, X. Wang, I. Z. Jeffrey, Q. Xiao, M. Cai, G. Wang, Y. Lu and B. Dunn, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707476 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Park, Y. Tulchinsky and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13260–13263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, Y. Sun, J. Yi, Y. He, Y. Qiao and H. Zhou, Joule, 2018, 2, 2117–2132 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, R. Tan, H. Wang, L. Yang, J. Hu, H. Chen and F. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704436 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Wu and X. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2653–2659 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00881kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Jingwei Liu
	Jingwei Liu was born in Hebei, China. She received her BSc in 2016 from Northwest University. She was then recommended as a PhD candidate to join Nankai University under the supervision of Prof. Wei Shi and Prof. Peng Cheng. Her research interest is rational design and synthesis of metal–organic frameworks for energy storage and conversion.

Daixi Xie
	Daixi Xie was born in Chongqing, China. She graduated from high school in 2017 and is currently an undergraduate student of Nankai University. Her research interest is the application of metal–organic frameworks in rechargeable batteries.

Wei Shi
	Wei Shi received his BSc and PhD in 2001 and 2006 from Nankai University under the supervision of Prof. Peng Cheng. He then joined the faculty at Nankai University and was promoted to full professor in 2015. He was a visiting scholar at the University of California, Berkeley, working with Prof. Jeffrey R. Long. He has published over 190 SCI index papers with co-authors. His current research interests are the synthesis and property studies of metal–organic frameworks for practical applications.

Peng Cheng
	Peng Cheng obtained his BSc, MSc and PhD from Nankai University in 1985, 1991 and 1994, respectively. Subsequently, he started his academic career at the same university and was appointed as a full professor in 1996. From 1997 to 1999 he worked at Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination du CNRS as a visiting professor and at Texas A&M University as a postdoctoral research fellow. Since 2007, he has been Cheung Kong professor at Nankai University, where he currently works on functional coordination polymers and molecule-based materials.

Key learning points
(1) Overview of the applications of coordination chemistry in lithium storage and lithium-ion transport.
(2) Use of coordination compounds as electrode materials for lithium storage from design principles to synthetic strategies.
(3) The design strategies of metal–organic frameworks for lithium-ion transport.
(4) Future challenges and opportunities for coordination chemistry in lithium-ion batteries and lithium–metal batteries.


 	Fig. 1  Conceptual advances of coordination compounds from discrete 0D coordination compounds to 1D, 2D, and 3D coordination polymers and 2D and 3D metal–organic frameworks.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanism of a representative LIB. (b) Relative energies of the electrolyte window Eg and electrode electrochemical potentials μA and μC. ΦA and ΦC are the work functions of the anode and cathode, respectively.	 
Ed = E × Q	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Pd = E × I	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Potential applications of coordination compounds in Li storage and Li+ transport.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration and representatives of three reaction mechanisms of electrode materials for Li storage.	 

 	Fig. 5  The theoretical capacities of Li2BDC, N-Li2BDC, and 2N-Li2BDC with similar molecular weights (Mw) (H2BDC = 1,4-dicarboxybenzene). Li storage sites are indicated by the dashed circles.	 

 	Fig. 6  The superlithiation mechanism of an anhydrous transition metal-based coordination compound upon discharging.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The formation of a F-doped Mn-MOF structure. (b) Reaction mechanism of the F-doped Mn-MOF electrode upon lithiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Crystal structure of a single layer of Cu-MOF. (b) Kagome lattice-type structure of the Cu-MOF and glided adjacent layers. (c) Charge–discharge profiles of the Cu-MOF. (d) Cycling performance of the Cu-MOF at 100 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Redox mechanism of a 1D Co-based CP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The structures of para-dihydroxyterephthaloyl and ortho-dihydroxyterephthaloyl. (b) Charge–discharge profiles of the dihydroxyterephthaloyl compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Extending the π-aromatic conjugation to increase the rate capacity of organic ligands. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd.	 
Zn4O(BTB)2(DEF)m(H2O)n + e− + Li+ → Zn + Li2O	(7)
DEF + H2O + e− + Li+ → Li2(DEF) + LiOH	(8)
Zn + Li+ + e− ↔ LiZn	(9)

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a mononuclear complex [Ni(PBIM)2(HIPA)] and 1D CP [Ni(PBIM)(HIPA)]n. (b) Cycling stability of the mononuclear complex and 1D CP at 100 mA g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representations of PB frameworks: a defect-rich Fe3+I[Fe2+II(CN)6]0.75·□0.25·3.5H2O framework (left) and an ideal vacancy-free Fe3+I[Fe3+II(CN)6] framework (right), where □ represents a vacancy occupied by water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Proposed Li+ insertion/extraction mechanism in the Lix(CuFe-PBA) structure and magnetic properties of materials with x = 0 and 1. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) HRTEM image of core@shell CuFe-PBA@NiFe-PBA particles. (b) Cycling stability of the uncoated NiFe-PBA and core@shell CuFe-PBA@NiFe-PBA electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) TEM image of hierarchical Co-MOF microflowers. (b) Cycling performance of H-Co-MOF and pristine Co-MOF at 100 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) SEM image of Fe-MIL-88B polyhedral nanorods. (b) Cycling performance of Fe-MIL-88B polyhedral nanorods at 60 mA g−1. (c) TEM image of the Fe-MIL-88 B nanorod electrode over 100 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of CoBTC CPs. (b) Cycling performance of CoBTC-EtOH, CoBTC-DMF, and CoBTC-DMF/EtOH at a high current density of 2 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the post-synthetic modification processes of ZIF-67. Green dots: Ag nanoparticles. (b) Rate capability at various current rates between 0.28 and 7C with five cycles for each step (1C = 137 mA g−1). Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of PMo10V2@MIL-100. (b) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of PMo10V2, Mo10V2@MIL-100, ILs@MIL-100, and PMo10V2-ILs@MIL-100. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic illustration of MOF-based electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Synthesis and structure of MOF-688. (b) Selected charge and discharge profiles of the Li|MOF-688|LiFePO4 cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Structure of Mg2(dobdc) (left) and schematic diagram of the modification of this MOF-based solid electrolyte (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Structure of HKUST-1 (left) and the formation of Li+ transport channels in HKUST-1 (right). (b) Schematic illustration of Li+ transport channels in the HKUST-1 host with bound ClO4−. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematics of the crystal structure transition of anionic MIT-20 to neutral MIT-20d. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) A homogeneous Li+ flux facilitating uniform Li growth on the Li–metal surface. The cyan dashed rectangle indicates the ionic transport pathway provided by the MOF host. (b) Schematic illustration of the selective Li+ transport imposed by the MOF host. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustrations of the crystal structure of the Li-IL@MOF and nanowetted interfacial mechanism of the solid-state battery containing Li-IL@MOF. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 28  Preparation process of the UIO-66/Li-IL filler.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00881k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
