Semiconductor polymeric graphitic carbon nitride photocatalysts: the “holy grail” for the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction under visible lig ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00717B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00717B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2080-2147Semiconductor polymeric graphitic carbon nitride photocatalysts: the “holy grail” for the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction under visible light

        
          
            Guangfu 
            Liao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Gong
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Haiyang 
            Gao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Guan-Jun 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Baizeng 
            Fang
          
          
        
      *e
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, PCFM Lab, GD HPPC Lab, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China. E-mail: gaohy@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Biomaterials, College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361005, China
cDepartment of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P. R. China
dState Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: ygj@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
eDepartment of Chemical & Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, 2360 East Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. E-mail: bfang@chbe.ubc.ca
Received 
      3rd March 2019
    , Accepted 25th April 2019First published on 25th April 2019AbstractSemiconductor polymeric graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) photocatalysts have attracted dramatically growing attention in the field of the visible-light-induced hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) because of their facile synthesis, easy functionalization, attractive electronic band structure, high physicochemical stability and photocatalytic activity. This review article presents a panorama of the latest advancements in the rational design and development of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4-based composite photocatalysts for HER application. Concretely, the review starts with the development history, synthetic strategy, electronic structure and physicochemical characteristics of g-C3N4 materials, followed by the rational design and engineering of various nanostructured g-C3N4 (e.g. thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4) photocatalysts for HER application. Then a series of highly efficient g-C3N4 (e.g., metal/g-C3N4, semiconductor/g-C3N4, metal organic framework/g-C3N4, carbon/g-C3N4, conducting polymer/g-C3N4, sensitizer/g-C3N4) composite photocatalysts are exemplified. Lastly, this review provides a comprehensive summary and outlook on the major challenges, opportunities, and inspiring perspectives for future research in this hot area on the basis of pioneering works. It is believed that the emerging g-C3N4-based photocatalysts will act as the “holy grail” for highly efficient photocatalytic HER under visible-light irradiation.
Guangfu Liao
Guangfu Liao received his MSc in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Hubei University in 2017. He then joined Prof. Haiyang Gao's group at Sun Yat-sen University to pursue PhD in Materials Science. His primary research is focused on Ag-based catalysts, nanocomposites, biomaterials, and coordination polymerization. He has more than 6 years of research experience in the fields of catalysis, environment and biomaterials. He has published over 20 SCI papers, and also received some awards including the Graduate Student National Scholarship, Hubei University First-class Academic Scholarship, Hubei University Outstanding Graduate & Excellent Graduation Thesis, and Sun Yat-sen University Second-class Academic Scholarship.
Yan Gong
Yan Gong was born in Anhui, China, in 1996. She received her BSc in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Fuzhou University in 2017. In 2018, she worked as a visiting scholar at Prof. Rodney. S. Ruoff's group at the IBS Center for Multidimensional Carbon Materials. Currently, she is working in Prof. Da Zhan’ research group at Xiamen University to pursue her master's degree in Materials Science. Her primary research is focused on the development of high performance graphite-like C3N4 nanosheets for visible-light-driven photocatalysis applications.
Li Zhang
Li Zhang earned his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering and Master's degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics from Hubei University in 2014 and 2017, respectively. Then he worked as a research assistant at Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 2017 to 2018, and now he is a PhD student at City University of Hong Kong. His research interests are devoted to designing and fabricating various organic/inorganic hybrid nanomaterials, and investigating their applications especially in photo-induced nanomedicine.
Haiyang Gao
Dr Haiyang Gao received his PhD in Polymer Chemistry and Physics from Sun Yat-sen University in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Qing Wu. He then worked as a lecturer in the same university. After working as a postdoctoral research fellow in 2009 at the University of California, Santa Barbara, he moved back to Sun Yat-sen University, and is currently a full professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering. His research interests mainly include organometallic catalysts, catalytic olefin polymerization and polyolefins. He has authored more than 100 peer-reviewed papers and 15 patents.
Guan-Jun Yang
Dr Guan-Jun Yang earned his PhD in Materials Science from Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTU) in 2005. He joined XJTU as a faculty in 2002, and now is a professor and director of the Center for Thermal Spray and Hybrid Materials, State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials. He has published over 200 peer-reviewed papers. He also serves as an editorial board member of several scientific journals including Journal of Materials Science and Technology. His research interests include nanomaterials and coatings/films for clean energy and environment.
Baizeng Fang
Dr Baizeng Fang earned his PhD in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, in 1997. He then worked as a JSPS research fellow (Japan), Lise Meitner scientist (Austria), and Research Professor (Korea), and is a Senior Scientist at the University of British Columbia (Canada). He has published over 100 SCI papers in high-profile journals including reviews in Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Reviews, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy & Environmental Science and Progress in Materials Science. His research interests include nanostructured materials for artificial photosynthesis and electrochemical energy storage/conversion. He also serves as an Associate Editor for RSC Advances.

Broader context
Exploitation of clean and renewable energy is a crucial strategy to satisfy the growing global energy demands and solve the environmental problems caused by the over-consumption of fossil fuels. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water splitting by solar energy has been widely recognized as a promising avenue for sustainable development. Semiconductor polymeric graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) photocatalysts have attracted dramatically growing interest in the research area of the visible-light-induced hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) because of their facile synthesis, easy functionalization, attractive electronic band structure, high physicochemical stability and particularly unique visible-light responsiveness, which are believed to be the “holy grail” for photocatalytic HER. To effectively reduce the recombination rate of charge carriers and simultaneously enhance visible-light absorption above 460 nm, a series of nanostructured g-C3N4 photocatalysts (e.g., thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4) and highly efficient g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts (e.g., metal/g-C3N4, semiconductor/g-C3N4, metal organic framework/g-C3N4, carbon/g-C3N4, etc.) have been explored. They can effectively modify the electronic band structure of g-C3N4, widen the light absorption range and facilitate the separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, leading to considerably reduced recombination rate of charge carriers, enlarging visible light harvesting and utilization, and thus significantly improving HER activity under visible-light irradiation.

1. Introduction
The exploitation of clean and renewable energy is a crucial strategy to satisfy the growing global energy demands and to solve the energy shortage problem resulting from the over-consumption of fossil fuels.1–4 With the development of science and technology, photocatalytic HER in water by solar energy has been generally regarded as a promising and sustainable strategy to generate hydrogen (H2) because solar energy and water are inexhaustible on the earth.5–10 In the past few decades, various semiconductor materials, e.g., TiO2,11 ZnO,12 Fe2O3,13 SnO2,14 ZrO2,15 Ag3PO4,16 Ag3VO4,17 Bi2WO6,18 BiVO4,19 CdS,20 NiS,21etc., have been reported for photocatalytic HER under UV and visible-light illumination. Thus far, developing highly efficient semiconductor photocatalysts for HER under UV particularly visible-light irradiation has become a hot research topic. Unfortunately, metal oxide semiconductors possess a wide band gap (e.g., TiO2 ∼ 3.2 eV, ZnO ∼ 3.4 eV, WO3 ∼ 3.2 eV, and BiVO4 ∼ 2.9 eV) (Table 1), which severely limits their photocatalytic applications because of the low utilization of solar energy. Metal sulfides, metal phosphides, and metal nitrides (e.g., CdS ∼ 2.4 eV, SnS2 ∼ 1.7 eV, Ni2P ∼ 1.0 eV, InP ∼ 1.4 eV, InN ∼ 1.1 eV, etc.) (Table 1) have also been taken into account since they possess a narrow band gap with suitable band levels for photocatalytic HER; however, photocorrosion and self-oxidation make them generally deleterious and volatile which limit their further application.22 In the development of robust visible-light-active photocatalysts for the HER, g-C3N4, a polymeric semiconductor, has gradually opened up a new field of vision in photocatalytic HER since the pioneering study in 2009 by Wang and co-workers23 on the visible-light irradiated photocatalytic HER over g-C3N4, which is regarded as a visible-light-active metal-free polymeric semiconductor with a narrow band gap (ca. 2.7 eV), an appropriate optical wavelength (ca. 460 nm), and a suitable band structure for photocatalytic HER. Moreover, it also possesses excellent thermal stability (>600 °C in air) and chemical stability (against acid, alkali, and organic solvents).24 Furthermore, g-C3N4 can be simply generated by direct pyrolysis of earth-abundant N-rich precursors, e.g., melamine,25 dicyandiamide,26 cyanamide,27 urea,28 thiourea,29 and ammonium thiocyanate,30 and it can be readily functionalized via chemical exfoliation.31 In addition, it can also be employed to construct various highly tailorable composite photocatalysts with adjustable compositions, sizes, thicknesses, pore structures, size distributions, and morphologies.32 In view of its unique advantages including facile synthesis, fascinating electronic band structure, excellent physicochemical stability, “earth-abundant” characteristic, and easy functionalization,33–35 g-C3N4 is believed to be the “holy grail” as the next generation photocatalysts for HER application. However, its practical application for photocatalytic HER is still impeded due to the existing obstacles and shortcomings including high recombination rate of charge carriers, low electrical conductivity, and the lack of visible-light absorption above 460 nm.36 Therefore, the development of modified g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with enhanced electrical conductivity, enlarged photoharvesting, reduced recombination rate and improved photocatalytic properties is essential to achieve target-specific applications. Strategies such as synthesizing thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4 based materials have been applied to improve the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 photocatalysts.37–39 In addition to the rapid development of these advanced techniques for intrinsic g-C3N4, the preparation of g-C3N4 composite heterojunctions can also improve the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts.40,41
Table 1 A summary of band gap energy of various semiconductor photocatalysts, i.e., metal oxides, metal sulfides, metal phosphides, and metal nitrides




Semiconductor
Band gap energy (eV)
Ref.




TiO2
3.2

42



ZnO
3.4

43



WO3
3.2

44



SnO2
3.8

45



Ta2O5
4.0

46



BiVO4
2.9

47



Bi2WO6
2.8

48



CdS
2.4

49



SnS2
1.7

50



In2S3
2.0

51



Ce2S3
2.1

52



Sb2S3
1.7

53



CuInS2
1.5

54



Ni2P
1.0

55



InP
1.4

56



GaP
2.3

57



Ta3N5
2.1

58



GaN
3.6

59



InN
1.1

60





Over the past few years, researchers have witnessed a booming trend in the exploration of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for HER application. There is a blowout growth in the number of published papers after the first landmark report on g-C3N4 photocatalysts for H2 production in 2009, and there have been much more publications on g-C3N4 photocatalysts for HER application during the last two years, which implies the fundamentality and attractiveness of this emerging frontier. More importantly, novel g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with high photocatalytic performance are becoming a new family of next generation visible-light-tailored photocatalysts for HER application.
Despite the dramatic growth in the number of publications on g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, it still remains a question about how to fully explore the unusual features of g-C3N4 for the fabrication of highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Thus, it is particularly important to take full advantages of the fascinating features of g-C3N4, especially the visible-light responsiveness, which can effectively improve the solar utilization efficiency. The attractive characteristics of g-C3N4 allow us to fully explore novel highly efficient visible-light-active photocatalysts, but to this end, an illustrated overview of the recent advancements and future research efforts in g-C3N4-based HER photocatalysts is highly desired.
With such a fleetly increasing number of publications in g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for HER application, especially in the past two years, it is an opportune moment to offer a comprehensive review on g-C3N4-based HER photocatalysts particularly investigated under visible-light irradiation. Up to now, although there have been many inspiring reviews on g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, a comprehensive review focusing on g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for HER is absent, particularly there is no review focusing on photocatalytic HER under visible-light irridation.22,61–71 Rational design and engineering of highly efficient g-C3N4-based HER photocatalysts are very important but were rarely addressed in these reviews. In consideration of the rapid increase in the number of papers on g-C3N4-based HER photocatalysts since 2016 and their fascinating properties particularly the high visible-light response capability, a comprehensive and updated review is highly worth considering. This review focuses mainly on the rational design and engineering of highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for HER application. Specifically, the development history, synthesis approaches, electronic structures and physicochemical characteristics of g-C3N4-based nanostructured materials will be introduced first. Then a diverse range of design and configuration strategies for nanostructured g-C3N4 (e.g., thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4) photocatalysts for HER application are elaborated. Later, a series of representative g-C3N4 (e.g., metal/g-C3N4, semiconductor/-g-C3N4, metal organic framework/g-C3N4, carbon/g-C3N4, conducting polymer/g-C3N4, sensitizer/g-C3N4) composite HER photocatalysts are exemplified. Last but not least, this review will provide advanced insights into the major challenges, opportunities, and inspiring perspectives for future researches in this hot area.
2. g-C3N4 as highly efficient photocatalysts for HER application
2.1. A brief development history of g-C3N4
The development history of g-C3N4 and its precursors could be dated back to 1834 when Liebig found melamine, melam, melem, and melon for the first time, which were deemed to be heptazine- and triazine-based molecular compounds (Scheme 1). Encouraged by this report, a yellow amorphous and undissolved compound, namely melon, was prepared via the direct pyrolysis of ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) with potassium thiocyanate (KSCN). However, melon and the other molecular compounds could not be fully characterized in that era. In 1835, Gmelin discovered potassium hydromelonate (K3C6N7NCN) by the direct pyrolysis of potassium ferricyanide (K3[Fe(CN)6]) and sulfur in a crucible.72 Unfortunately, the compositions and structures of C3N4 and K3C6N7NCN were still indistinct because of lack of advanced analytical methods and technologies. An acoplanar tri-s-triazine unit was an elementary structural unit of all polymeric derivatives, as shown by an X-ray crystallography study, which was first proposed by Pauling and Sturdivant in 1937.73 Three years later, Redemann and Lucas74 found that 2,5,8 triamino-tris-s-triazine (C126H21N175) could be an oligomeric product. However, combined with the discoveries of the predecessors, they boldly speculated that this structure did not belong to melon, because it consisted of multifarious nanostructures and sizes. In 1982, the first single crystal structure of cyameluric derivatives (C6N7H3) was proposed by Leonard and co-workers,75 which was prepared through a bottom-up assembly strategy using 2,4-diamino-1,3,5-triazine and methyl N-cyanomethanimidate as the raw materials. They confirmed a coplanar arrangement as Pauling and Sturdivant reported.
 Scheme 1  Molecular structures of C- and N-containing materials such as melamine, melam, melem, and melon synthesized from the pyrolysis of mercury(II) thiocyanate as described by Liebig. 
Although C3N4 was discovered very early, it had been forgotten for a long time because of its chemical inertness and poor solubility. Surprisingly, the research enthusiasm about C3N4 was reactivated and reinspired due to a landmark discovery by Teter and Hemley in 1996, that is the compact phase of sp3-hybridized C3N4 (namely β-C3N4) showed ultrahigh bulk rigidity and modulus, which could be as good as or even greater than that of diamond.76 Teter et al.76 found that C3N4 possessed seven phases, which were α-C3N4, β-C3N4, cubic C3N4, pseudocubic C3N4, g-h-triazine, g-otriazine, and g-h-heptazine with a band gap of ca. 5.49, 4.85, 4.30, 4.13, 2.97, 0.93, and 2.88 eV, respectively. The basic structural units to construct allotropes of g-C3N4 were confirmed to be triazine (C3N3) or tri-s-triazine (C6N7) rings (Scheme 2).24,77–81 Many studies showed that the thermal polymerization of melamine, cyanamide, dicyandiamide, or urea produced a melon polymer from the melem units, that is to say, tri-s-triazine was usually deemed to be a building unit for the construction of g-C3N4. Under such conditions, the different sizes of nitride pores and the different electronic environments of N atoms help to form various energetic phases. Among these seven phases, tri-s-triazine based g-C3N4 was energetically advantageous and it was the most robust phase of C3N4, and thus it has been widely studied in many areas, especially in the field of photocatalysis. In 2009, the landmark discovery of g-C3N4 as a metal-free polymeric semiconductor photocatalyst for HER was first proposed by Wang and co-workers.23,37 Since then the research on g-C3N4 as a highly efficient metal-free photocatalyst has attracted increasing attention.
 Scheme 2  Triazine (a) and tri-s-triazine (b) structures of g-C3N4. 
In spite of the fact that g-C3N4 has been proverbially and deeply researched, it is still not easy to engineer faultless crystalline g-C3N4 from a material structural point of view. Only a small number of studies involved highly crystalline g-C3N4, and their results are still controversial. For example, Komatsu et al.82,83 reported highly crystalline g-C3N4 and considered it to be “high-molecular-weight” melon. Schnick and co-workers84,85 portended that the chemical fabrication of high crystal packing of g-C3N4 had a great possibility for isolating and identifying the crystal structures of heptazine derivatives, melem and melam. McMillan and co-workers86 reported the conversion of dicyandiamide to a crystalline g-C3N4 imide phase under high-pressure and high-temperature conditions. Thomas's group87 prepared highly crystalline g-C3N4 through a facile self-polymerization of dicyandiamide in a salt melt of LiCl and KCl. Very recently, Xue and co-workers88 prepared highly crystalline g-C3N4 by a general and rapid microwave-assisted heating method. Hu and co-workers89 fabricated highly crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets through an “alternated cooling and heating” strategy. However, in the present stage, we still cannot obtain faultless crystalline g-C3N4 because the defect-containing polymeric g-C3N4 is much more reactive as confirmed by many studies. For most heterogeneous catalysts, crystalline perfection only helps to promote bulk properties, e.g., the graphitic structure, high thermal and chemical stability, and semiconductor electronic structure, etc. More importantly, in our opinion, deeply understanding how to prepare polymeric g-C3N4 by using various synthesis strategies, e.g., supramolecular pre-assembly strategy, microwave-assisted strategy, template-mediated strategy, etc., which can produce large pore volume and specific surface area, or even highly crystalline g-C3N4, is much more important than the exploration for single crystalline perfection.
2.2. Synthesis methods, electronic structures and physicochemical properties of g-C3N4

2.2.1. Synthesis methods. 
Since Wang and co-workers23,37 first reported g-C3N4 as a promising visible-light-tailored photocatalyst for HER in 2009, massive efforts have been made to prepare g-C3N4 mainly via pyrolysis of N-rich precursors, e.g., urea, thiourea, melamine, cyanamide, dicyandiamide, etc.90–96 For example, Chen and co-workers97 synthesized porous g-C3N4 through direct pyrolysis of urea. Li and co-workers98 synthesized a g-C3N4 photocatalyst by direct thermal treatment of low-cost melamine. Wang and co-workers99 synthesized g-C3N4 semiconductors via direct thermal polycondensation of thiourea. Melamine and melam could be polymerized via solid state reactions at high temperature and the in-planar alignment of CN heterocycles therefore resulted in 2D atomic layers that were stacked with each other by the intermolecular interaction to form a 3D architecture.100–102 Liquid precursors, cyanamide and dicyandiamide, could also be adopted to construct g-C3N4 in two steps: first condensed to melamine at 240 °C and then underwent polycondensation to yield g-C3N4.103–105 Deficiently, the photocatalytic properties of the g-C3N4 fabricated via direct pyrolysis of N-rich precursors are weak due to the fast recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.62,106,107 Therefore, new synthesis methods must be pursued to tackle this issue. Detailed descriptions about the various strategies for the construction of g-C3N4 are given below, and a comparison about the advantages and disadvantages of different methods is summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison between different methods for the construction of g-C3N4




Synthesis methods
Advantages
Disadvantages




Supramolecular pre-assembly strategy
Produced g-C3N4 with an ordered texture and controllable morphology
(i) Low efficiency, time- and cost-consuming, and sophisticated


(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively low crystallinity


Microwave-assisted heating strategy
(i) Facile, time-saving, and highly efficient
Produced g-C3N4 without an ordered texture, controllable morphology and porous structure


(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity, thinner layer, and decreased structural imperfections


Template-assisted strategy
Produced g-C3N4 with porous structure and high crystallinity
Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process


Molten salt strategy
Produced g-C3N4 with high crystallinity
Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process


Ionic liquid strategy
Produced g-C3N4 with porous structure, thinner layer, and high crystallinity
Time- and cost-consuming, complicated preparation process, and low efficiency


Chemical exfoliation strategy
(i) Facile, time-saving, and highly efficient
(i) The danger of strong acid and not eco-friendly


(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity, and thinner layer
(ii) Produced g-C3N4 without an ordered texture, controllable morphology and porous structure


Hydrothermal pretreatment strategy
(i) Facile, eco-friendly, and highly efficient
Complicated preparation process


(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity, and thinner layer


Fast flash frozen strategy
(i) Fast, high effect, and eco-friendly
Complicated preparation process and expansive equipment


(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity




2.2.1.1. Supramolecular pre-assembly strategy for g-C3N4 preparation. 
As mentioned above, g-C3N4 is usually synthesized via direct pyrolysis of the N-rich precursors, e.g., dicyanadiamide, cyanamide, melamine, urea, and thiourea at 500–600 °C in an air or inert atmosphere.61 At a high temperature, these N-rich precursors can be directly pyrolyzed into g-C3N4 accompanied by various intermediates. However, these intermediates cannot be completely dislodged from the resultant g-C3N4 systems because of incomplete polycondensation, leading to a disordered g-C3N4 structure.108,109 Therefore, it is necessary to explore new strategies to synthesize well-organized g-C3N4.
Supramolecular pre-assembly is a procedure in which molecules are arranged into stable aggregates via non-covalent bond interactions under equilibrium conditions.110,111 Among these non-covalent bond interactions hydrogen bonding is one of the most important interactions in arranging the structure of supramolecular aggregates because of its directionality and specificity.112,113 It is noteworthy that the melamine precursor can connect with triazine derivatives (e.g., cyanuric acid) to form supramolecular aggregates via hydrogen bond interactions. The obtained melamine–cyanuric acid complex can employ different linkages mainly relying on the solvent, forming a melamine–cyanuric acid complex with different morphologies.114 The adoption of melamine–cyanuric acid complexes as starting materials for the preparation of g-C3N4 was first proposed by Thomas's group115 and Shalom's group.116 Using melamine–cyanuric acid complexes as the start materials for the fabrication of g-C3N4 is much more advantageous than the traditional melamine precursor. Firstly, melamine encounters heavy distillation during the heat polycondensation process; the good news is that the organized structure of the melamine–cyanuric acid complex can reduce or even restrain the distillation process. Secondly, the supramolecular structure of the melamine–cyanuric acid complex is akin to the natural arrangement in g-C3N4 building blocks, which ensures the perfect arrangement of g-C3N4 in the self-assembly process. The above two merits provide an intact and ordered network in the obtained g-C3N4, resulting in good photocatalytic properties. Thirdly, this supramolecular pre-assembly approach is very simple and highly reproducible. The shape of the obtained melamine–cyanuric acid complex mainly depends on the used solvent, temperature, and condensation times due to the different surface energies of the hydrogen bond structures. Interestingly, g-C3N4 prepared through supramolecular aggregates can provide improved photocatalytic activity because of its enhanced structure intactness.
Although the supramolecular pre-assembly method can produce g-C3N4 with a relatively ordered structure, the solid-state reaction limits the flexibility of the reaction intermediates and causes an incomplete polycondensation with relatively low crystallinity. Therefore, it is very important to search for a new supramolecular pre-assembly approach for the rational design of g-C3N4 with enhanced crystallinity. 2,4,6-Triaminopyrimidine, as a member of the nucleobase family, is of particular interest to researchers because it possesses a higher carbon content than the commonly used g-C3N4 precursors along with unique structural characteristics. Introducing only a tiny bit of this pyrimidine moiety into the g-C3N4 structure will dramatically improve light harvesting in the visible light range. A very meaningful work was reported by Takanabe and co-workers117 to ameliorate the crystallinity of g-C3N4, who developed a two-step rearrangement strategy including supramolecular pre-assembly and ionic melt polymerization by adopting melamine and 2,4,6-triaminopyrimidine as a dopant to prepare crystalline triazine-based g-C3N4 (Fig. 1a). The prepared g-C3N4 possessed high crystallinity attributed to the incorporated pyrimidine units. Moreover, the H2 evolution rate of the prepared g-C3N4 could reach up to 8160 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 14-fold higher than that of pristine g-C3N4 (Fig. 1b). In addition, the apparent quantum efficiency was even up to 7% at 420 nm, which is the highest value for previously reported triazine-based g-C3N4 photocatalysts (Fig. 1c).117 Inspired by this idea, the 2,4-diamino-6-phenyl-1,3,5-triazine molecules were also introduced into the melamine–cyanuric acid supramolecular network (Fig. 1d). The morphology of the obtained g-C3N4 could be regulated via changing the molar ratio of cyanuric acid, melamine, and 2,4-diamino-6-phenyl-1,3,5-triazine (Fig. 1e) and the photocatalytic properties were prominently improved (Fig. 1f). The introduction of phenyl groups into the g-C3N4 structure significantly improves light harvesting in the visible light range and results in the generation of a new charge-migration path.118
 Fig. 1  (a) Scheme for the construction of the triazine-based g-C3N4 samples. (b) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of the g-C3N4 samples prepared using different methods. (c) Wavelength-dependent apparent quantum efficiency of the prepared g-C3N4 samples. (d) Hydrogen-bonded supramolecular cyanuric acid–melamine–2,4-diamino-6-phenyl-1,3,5-triazine (C–M–Mp) complex and the proposed g-C3N4 structure after calcination. (e) SEM images of the structured C–M–Mp g-C3N4 with different molar ratios after condensation at 550 °C for 4 h. (f) Plots of (C/C0) versus reaction time for the C–M–Mp g-C3N4 samples and bulk g-C3N4 sample. Here, bulk g-C3N4 was constructed by the condensation of melamine at 550 °C for 4 h. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, and from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Based on the supramolecular pre-assembly approach, some other supramolecular networks such as Cu–melamine supramolecular networks were also employed as the precursors for the preparation of g-C3N4.119 The Cu–melamine network can form a 2D supramolecular structure via hydrogen bonds and coordination bonds, which was used as a sacrificial template as well as a precursor to synthesize Cu-doped g-C3N4. The obtained Cu-doped g-C3N4 exhibited strong optical absorption from the visible-light region to the near-infrared region. In addition, it also revealed high photocatalytic activity and stability. Thus, these kinds of metal–melamine supramolecular networks have the ability to produce g-C3N4 hybrids with controllable morphologies and electronic structures, providing great potential for heterogeneous photocatalytic applications. An ameliorative work based on Cu–melamine networks was reported by Gao and co-workers,120 who presented a new and simple synthetic method for the construction of porous nanorod-type g-C3N4/CuO composites through employing a Cu–melamine supramolecular framework as a precursor, which was obtained as a blue solid by treating Cu(OAc)2 with melamine in a methanol solution. The Cu–melamine supramolecular framework can form a 3D porous structure with hexagonal pores linked by N–H⋯N self-complementary hydrogen bonds as reported by Chen et al.121 Consequently, the prepared g-C3N4/CuO composites showed excellent optical and photocatalytic properties.
2.2.1.2. Microwave-assisted heating strategy for g-C3N4 preparation. 
As we know, g-C3N4 is usually obtained via pyrolyzing the N-rich precursors at high temperature for several hours or even several days, which is time-consuming and labor-intensive.122 Moreover, the reaction atmosphere, polymerization time, and heating rate greatly influence its physicochemical and photocatalytic performance. Inspired by the microwave-assisted method for the preparation of graphene,123 a similar strategy has also been recently reported for the fabrication of g-C3N4 to overcome the defects mentioned above. The first report using the microwave-assisted heating strategy for g-C3N4 preparation was presented by Du and co-coworkers88 in 2014. They developed a rapid and facile synthetic method named “microwave-assisted heating synthesis”, which allowed the highly crystalline g-C3N4 photocatalyst to be obtained within minutes. Interestingly, the g-C3N4 prepared by this method showed ca. 1.5-fold higher photocatalytic HER activity than the g-C3N4 produced by the thermal polymerization process (550 °C for 6 h). This improved photocatalytic property could be because of the enlarged specific surface area and the efficient separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes caused by the improved crystalline quality of the C3N4.
To obtain a robust and reliable synthesis condition under microwave radiation, a liquid reaction system should be given the priority because the microwave radiation is more stable and efficient in liquid media than the common solid-state reaction system.124 Thus, multifaceted liquid phases such as aqueous solutions,125 polyols,126 and ionic liquids127 have been widely employed as reaction media during the microwave-assisted reaction to enhance the stability of microwave radiation. Inspired by this idea, Chen and co-workers128 developed a microwave-assisted molten-salt strategy to prepare an isotype heterojunction of triazine/heptazine based g-C3N4 photocatalyst using readily accessible melamine as the precursor. This synthetic strategy combined the merits of fast heating of microwave radiation and the features of KCl/LiCl molten salt, achieving large-scale and rapid fabrication of g-C3N4 photocatalysts (Fig. 2). The photocatalytic properties of the prepared isotype triazine/heptazine-based g-C3N4 heterojunctions were higher than those of the conventional pyrolysis products, and the typical apparent quantum yield was up to 10.7% at 420 nm. The remarkable enhancement of photocatalytic properties was owing to the appropriate configuration in the electronic band structures of isotype triazine/heptazine-based g-C3N4 heterojunctions, which provided effective transfer and separation of the photo-generated electron–hole pairs. The synergistic effects of microwave heating and molten-salt liquid polycondensation offer a robust and reliable platform for large-scale and rapid production of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Enlightened by this conception, combining multiple methods to achieve large-scale production of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with high catalytic activity is particularly important.
 Fig. 2  (a) Fabrication routes for g-C3N4 photocatalysts from melamine (mw-ms = microwave-assisted molten-salt process, er-ms = electric-resistance molten-salt process, er = electric-resistance heating, and mw = microwave-heating process). Comparisons of (b) polymerization times and (c) yields for various strategies. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier. 
2.2.1.3. Template-assisted strategy for g-C3N4 preparation. 
Mesoporous g-C3N4 possesses unique surface characteristics and physicochemical properties, e.g., opened crystalline pore wall and large specific surface area, rapid charge transfer and multiple scattering effects, which could improve the light harvesting ability and thus enhance its photocatalytic properties.37 For this purpose, organic or inorganic materials should be considered as hard templates to prepare porous g-C3N4. In 2009, Wang's group37 used SiO2 nanoparticles as the hard template to prepare porous g-C3N4 by direct pyrolysis of cyanamide. The prepared mesoporous g-C3N4 showed varied specific surface area from 8 to 373 m2 g−1 and a 3D interconnected framework with a semiconductor band gap of 2.7 eV. Zhao's group129 presented a facile nanocasting method for the fabrication of highly ordered mesoporous g-C3N4 nanorods with ultrahigh specific surface area (971–1124 m2 g−1), ultralarge pore volume (1.31–1.79 cm3 g−1), and ultrahigh N content (9.3–23 wt%) employing SBA-15 as the template and hexamethylenetetramine as the g-C3N4 precursor. Notably, the specific surface area, pore volume and N content depended mainly on the selected precursor and pyrolysis temperature. In addition to inorganic materials, organic materials could also be used as templates to prepare porous g-C3N4. Yan et al.130 prepared g-C3N4 with worm-like pores and a narrow pore size distribution adopting Pluronic P123 as the soft-template and melamine as the precursor. Pluronic 123 enabled an adequately steady self-assembly within the matrixes.131 The prepared mesoporous g-C3N4 not only possessed large specific surface area (up to 90 m2 g−1) but also ensured sufficient light absorption towards the maximum of solar spectrum (up to 800 nm).
In addition to the hard-template method mentioned above, the soft-template method is also highly worth considering since it is more facile and could avoid the incorporation of impurities.132,133 Zhang and co-workers131 reported a simple one-step strategy for the preparation of g-C3N4 by adopting block copolymers, nonionic surfactants, and ionic liquids as a soft template. The pore volume and specific surface area of the obtained g-C3N4 could be regulated through the template content and processing conditions and these ionic liquids endowed g-C3N4 with accessible pore networks and relatively high N contents. Chen and co-workers28 reported a convenient method to prepare g-C3N4 from urea with self-supported gas. The gas bubbles produced in the reaction process could be used as the soft-templates to help g-C3N4 form porous micro-structures. The prepared g-C3N4 could be used as a highly efficient photocatalyst, showing excellent photocatalytic properties and recyclability under visible light.
2.2.1.4. Molten salt strategy for g-C3N4 preparation. 
Inspired by the molten salt method of graphene,134 recently, a molten salt strategy has also been reported extensively for the preparation of g-C3N4 due to the extraordinary features including high electrical conductivity, good ionic mobility, negligible vapor pressure, and outstanding chemical and thermal stability.135 Usually, molten salt can act as a solvent for the preparation of various high-temperature materials, and as a “soft template” to regulate micro- and meso-porosity of the final products. In an early report, Thomas and co-workers87 presented highly crystalline g-C3N4 prepared from polymerization of dicyandiamide adopting LiCl/KCl molten salts at 380–600 °C. The resultant product from the molten salt method was found to be g-C3N4 with hexagonally arranged s-heptazine units. A similar work was reported by Lotsch and co-workers,136 who developed a novel 2D triazine-based g-C3N4via a simple one-step ionothermal synthesis approach involving LiCl/KCl molten salts and using 4-amino-2,6-dihydroxypyrimidine as the dopant due to its structural similarity to melamine and high C and O content. The prepared 2D triazine-based g-C3N4 showed substantial visible-light-induced H2 production ability, and the quantum efficiency was up to 3.4%, which was 6-fold higher than that of g-C3N4 prepared by polycondensation of precursors without molten salt.
To make full development of the molten-salt method, researchers utilized templates,137,138 various precursors139 and secondary semiconductors140 to prepare g-C3N4 based photocatalysts. Takanabe and co-workers137 reported triazine-based g-C3N4 materials with different C/N ratios obtained via adjusting the monomer composition ratio between melamine and 2,4,6-triaminopyrimidine. The preparation of the triazine-based g-C3N4 materials contained two steps: (i) solution-state dispersion of the monomers through hydrogen-bonded supramolecular aggregates, and (ii) molten-salt high-temperature polymerization. To further enhance the photocatalytic properties of the triazine-based g-C3N4, KCC-1 silica was employed as a support for the flux-assisted preparation of g-C3N4, which provided improved crystallinity and light harvesting ability. Dontsova and co-workers139,140 employed various precursors, e.g., 3,5-diamino-1,2,4-triazole and 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole-5-thiol, and secondary semiconductors, e.g., MoS2 and Co2O3, to produce g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 composites through the molten salt strategy. Both the synthesized g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 composites showed improved photocatalytic properties and visible-light absorption ability.
2.2.1.5. Ionic liquid strategy for g-C3N4 preparation. 
Different from the high melting point and viscosity of molten salts, ionic liquids are considered to be an organic salt with a melting point of below 100 °C and have relatively low viscosity.141 In addition, ionic liquids have many unique inherent advantages such as outstanding chemical and thermal stability, small vapor pressure, and the intrinsically liquid feature at room temperature, which make them ideal solvents in many research fields such as catalysis, electrochemistry, biology, petrochemical industry, etc.142–146 The development of an ionic liquid strategy for g-C3N4 preparation dates back to 2010 by Wang and co-workers.147 They adopted 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BmimBF4) ambient ionic liquid as a unique soft template and dicyandiamide (DCDA) as a precursor to prepare B- and F-containing mesoporous g-C3N4. Fascinatingly, the ratio of BmimBF4/DCDA has an important impact on the crystallinity and specific surface area of the obtained g-C3N4. The obtained g-C3N4 possessed high surface area (ca. 440 m2 g−1) and large pore volume (ca. 0.32 m3 g−1). Moreover, it also possessed high N, B, and F contents, local graphitic order, and excellent photocatalytic properties under visible light. Furthermore, g-C3N4 hybrids can also be fabricated by the ionic liquid strategy. Li and co-workers148 presented an ionic liquid system containing Fe3+ for the preparation of g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres via a green solvothermal strategy. Interestingly, ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrachlorideferrate(III) acted as the dispersing medium as well as template, which was greatly important for the construction of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres. The g-C3N4 could be tightly immobilized onto the α-Fe2O3 surface because of the excellent dispersibility of the ionic liquid, which ensured the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres to have a large specific capacitance, outstanding cycling properties and high coulombic efficiency. An analogous idea has also been adopted to synthesize Ag/AgBr/g-C3N4 hybrids.
Although ionic liquids have recently been widely used in the preparation of g-C3N4, ionic liquids containing organic cations must be kept below 350 °C, and decomposition will occur during high-temperature pyrolysis.149 In addition, the high-cost, multistep synthesis and complicated purification process of these ionic liquids also severely restrict their application.150 Watanabe and co-workers151 found that H2SO4-based protic ionic liquids and salts possessed great potential as single, low-cost, and versatile precursors for one-step facile synthesis of carbon materials in the absence of catalysts or prepolymerization. Unlike traditional ionic liquids, which are limited to only with cyano/nitrile moieties, this kind of H2SO4-based protic ionic liquids and salts can bear harsh carbonization, and they are cost-effective and easy to prepare. More importantly, direct carbonization of H2SO4-based protic ionic liquids and salts can produce intrinsic N-doped carbons with tunable N contents (up to 11.1%) and high conductivity. Inspired by these, they also reported a series of easily prepared protic ionic liquids and salts based on widely available N-containing bases and acids, which can be used as novel small-molecule precursors for the preparation of carbon materials via direct carbonization. Protonation enabled nearly all N-containing compounds to be directly carbonized to carbon materials without an additional catalyst, tedious synthesis, vacuum system, and etching step. When protic ionic liquids and salts possessed very high N contents, no C was obtained during heat treatment. Such protic ionic liquids and salts were first transformed into melon-type g-C3N4 above 500 °C. Thus, they could also be a suitable candidate for the construction of g-C3N4 by thermal polycondensation at moderate temperatures.149
2.2.1.6. Other strategies for g-C3N4 preparation. 
Despite the significant advance in liquid exfoliation of g-C3N4 prepared via adopting an ultrasound-assisted method as mentioned above, the exfoliation efficiency is still unsatisfactory. A large number of undispersed bulk g-C3N4 particles remain as sediments through centrifugation. From the practical application viewpoint, highly efficient fabrication of 2D g-C3N4 nanosheets with a unilamellar structure is highly desirable. Chemical exfoliation via redox reactions and intercalation or ion-exchange process is another widely used method for effective exfoliation of g-C3N4 owing to its unique advantages, e.g., the incorporation of guests into the interlayer gallery, functionalization on the nanosheet surface, the possibility of delamination into unilamellar nanosheets, and high exfoliation efficiency as well as the acceptable cost-effectiveness.96,152,153 Inspired by the idea of intercalating H2SO4 into the interplanar space to prepare graphite oxide,154,155 Zhu and co-workers153 prepared g-C3N4 nanosheets with a single atomic layer nanostructure via simple H2SO4 chemical exfoliation. Through an ultrasonic treatment and centrifugation, supernatant liquor containing g-C3N4 monolayer nanosheets was obtained. The prepared g-C3N4 nanosheets showed a single atomic thickness (ca. 0.4 nm) which approached the theoretical thickness of the g-C3N4 host layer (0.325 nm), indicating that single layered g-C3N4 nanosheets have been successfully prepared. More importantly, the photocatalytic H2 generation, pollutant degradation activity and photocurrent production of single layered g-C3N4 nanosheets were more outstanding when compared to the bulk g-C3N4. Motivated by H2SO4 chemical exfoliation, other common acids like HCl and HNO3, were also used for the effective exfoliation of g-C3N4. The HCl treatment activated g-C3N4 through a protonation effect that would enhance the photocatalytic properties. Moreover, HCl-treated g-C3N4 showed a higher dispersion in water than hydrothermal- or ultrasonic-treated g-C3N4.156 Exfoliation behaviour could also occur when refluxing g-C3N4 with HNO3, and the obtained g-C3N4 nanosheets showed a single atomic thickness (<1 nm).157
Sol–gel methods are also used to fabricate g-C3N4 and its nanocomposites because of their simplicity, environmental friendliness, low cost, high purity and homogeneity, and ambient processing temperature. Chang and co-workers158 reported a simple sol–gel strategy for the fabrication of g-C3N4–TiO2 nanocomposites by employing tetra-n-butyl titanate as the precursor, which underwent hydrolysis and a polycondensation reaction to form a colloid solution. The apparent rate constant of g-C3N4–TiO2 nanocomposites was as high as 1.2 × 10−2 min−1, which was 2.4-fold that of bare TiO2. The improvement could be mainly ascribed to the full-matched band gap structure with a heterojunction interface, large specific surface area, and favorable optical performance. A similar work was proposed by Sun and co-workers,159 who successfully synthesized g-C3N4/TiO2 hybrid photocatalysts by a modified sol–gel technique with varying mass ratios of g-C3N4 under facile conditions. They illustrated that the g-C3N4/TiO2 heterojunction was formed and the TiO2 nanoparticles were uniformly coated on g-C3N4 nanosheets. The g-C3N4/TiO2-80% hybrid photocatalyst showed improved visible-light photocatalytic property, which was ca. 3.5-fold compared to that of pure g-C3N4. The improvement could be ascribed to the relatively higher adsorption capacity and effective separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
As we know, ultrathin or monolayer g-C3N4 nanosheets show superior charge carrier separation and more abundant surface active sites compared to bulk g-C3N4.38,153 The preparation of ultrathin or monolayer g-C3N4 nanosheets commonly involves strong acid treatment or chemical exfoliation, and thus the preparation process is not eco-friendly. Moreover, ultrathin nanosheets suffer from serious agglomeration, leading to decreased specific surface area and a loss of reaction sites, both of them are generally harmful to photocatalytic properties. Thus, there is an urgent demand to explore an environment-friendly and highly efficient technology for the preparation of g-C3N4. Huang and co-workers160 reported a novel precursor reforming strategy for the synthesis of g-C3N4. A mild hydrothermal pretreatment of melamine in aqueous urea induced a phase transformation in melamine, yielding a novel precursor, which could prepare 3D ultrathin porous N self-doped g-C3N4 with improved photocatalytic absorption properties and excellent photocatalytic activity (Fig. 3a). In fact, the 3D ultrathin porous g-C3N4 nanostructure displays several attractive features, such as short diffusion paths of photo-induced charge carriers, improved visible light absorption, ample surface active sites for reactions, and accessible channels for reactant diffusion and adsorption. As a result, the prepared ultrathin nanosheets showed a thickness of ∼3 nm (7 or 8 layers) with mesopores, and possessed high specific surface area, narrowed band gap and more efficient charge separation when compared to pristine g-C3N4 prepared via direct melamine calcination (Fig. 3b and c). Here, an unprecedented breakthrough is highly worthy to be emphasized. A 23 times enhanced H2 evolution rate (ca. 3579 μmol h−1 g−1) (λ > 420 nm) and an apparent quantum efficiency of 27.8% at 420 ± 15 nm were obtained. The apparent quantum efficiency of 27.8% was much higher than those previously reported for ultrathin/porous/doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts (Fig. 3d–g). On the basis of the above results, it is believed that the combination of precursors’ phase transformation and the introduction of urea results in the formation of advanced 3D ultrathin porous g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, achieving highly active photocatalytic HER, which guide us to develop highly efficient photocatalysts via precursor modification.
 Fig. 3  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the formation of 3D ultrathin porous N-doped g-C3N4. (b) AFM image and the height distribution profiles of the separated layer from UM3. (c) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms for g-C3N4 and UMx, and the corresponding pore size distribution for UM3 (inset). (d) H2 evolution curves. (e) H2 evolution rates over the pure g-C3N4 and the UMx samples in the presence of Pt, and (f) wavelength-dependent apparent quantum efficiency over UM3 in the presence of Pt as a cocatalyst. (g) H2 evolution rates over the pure g-C3N4 and the UMx samples in the absence of Pt. Here, UMx represents the obtained 3D ultrathin porous N-doped g-C3N4, with x = 0, 1, 3, 6 representing the molar ratio of urea: melamine. Pure g-C3N4 was fabricated by direct melamine calcination. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Elsevier. 
Based on the knowledge that constructing porous g-C3N4 commonly involves either templates or post-treatment with bulk g-C3N4, a novel template-free precursor-surface-etching strategy was reported by Huang and co-workers161 for the preparation of porous g-C3N4 thin nanosheets. The addition of thiourea solution helped prepare porous g-C3N4 thin nanosheets, which could etch the melamine surface. In this way, the microstructure and porosity of the porous g-C3N4 thin nanosheets could be controlled by only regulating the thiourea amount. The prepared porous g-C3N4 nanosheets showed remarkably enhanced photocatalytic HER (3.3-fold enhancement) and NO removal activity (5.5-fold improvement) in contrast to the pristine bulk g-C3N4. Under visible-light illumination, the photogenerated electrons and holes were prone to recombine in the bulk g-C3N4, leading to low photocatalytic properties. But as for the porous g-C3N4 nanosheets, the photogenerated electrons and holes could easily transfer to their surface, and then participated in the redox reactions, giving rise to high photocatalytic performance.

Table 2 summarizes the merits and demerits of different methods for the construction of g-C3N4. The microwave-assisted and chemical exfoliation strategies are considered to be a class of highly efficient methods for fabricating uniform single-layered or few layered g-C3N4 nanosheets, which are promising for large scale and rapid fabrication of g-C3N4 photocatalysts. But unfortunately, there is still a long way to go before we can really achieve the single-layered g-C3N4 nanosheets because of their easily agglomerating nature. Moreover, these methods involve commonly aggressive acid treatment or chemical exfoliation, and the treatment processes are not environmentally benign. In addition, in order to produce g-C3N4 with an ordered texture, controllable morphology and high crystallinity, supramolecular pre-assembly, template-assisted, ionic liquid, and hydrothermal pretreatment strategies are highly worth considering. But they seem to be time- and cost-consuming and relatively complicated preparation processes. All in all, every method has its own advantages and disadvantages, and thus choosing a suitable approach or combining multiple methods to tailor g-C3N4 is particularly important.


2.2.2. Electronic structure. 
Commonly, g-C3N4 possesses a graphitic structure.162 However, the ground state structure of g-C3N4 is still not very clear, and clarification of the exact ground state structure remains a challenge for researchers. Generally speaking, the thermal polycondensation approach is commonly employed to synthesize g-C3N4 and X-ray diffraction patterns are applied to analyze the crystal structure of g-C3N4. However, two typical X-ray diffraction peaks at 2θ = 13.04 and 27.25° only can provide inadequate information due to low crystallinity of g-C3N4. Many researchers believe that these two peaks correspond to an in-plane ordering with a repeated distance of about 6.788 Å and graphitic interlayer distance of 3.273 Å, respectively.24,63,87 However, exact stacking positions of C and N atoms and the adjacent layers are still not clear, and thus further study is needed to clarify the stacking order and geometry of g-C3N4. Wang and co-workers163 used ab initio evolutionary searching to predict the stable crystal structure of g-C3N4 obtained via thermal polycondensation and salt-melt synthesis (SMS) method. For the g-C3N4 prepared by thermal polycondensation, off-plane distortion of heptazine units was a characteristic of the most stable structure (phases 1–3), as shown in Fig. 4a. In comparison with other layered structures, distorted phases in heptazine-based g-C3N4 were the most robust. Phase 1 had a direct band gap of 2.87 eV whereas phases 2 and 3 had indirect band gaps of 3.14 and 2.27 eV, respectively. The peripheral N atoms, Nper, and the C atoms C2 and C3 were shifted around an axis passing through the atoms Nlink, Ncen, and C1 (Fig. 4b). Its each layer consisted of heptazine units and pores, which was significantly different from typical honeycomb layered structures (e.g., graphite164 and h-BN165). Thus, g-C3N4 is more susceptible to distortion. For the g-C3N4 prepared by the SMS method, they clarified that the controversial structure of the previously reported high-crystallinity SMS phase was C6N9H3·LiCl instead of g-C3N4 (Fig. 4c and d), and C6N9H3·LiCl was a more stable high-crystallinity phase than C6N9H3·Li3Cl. Based on the predicted stable structures, a very promising reaction pathway to synthesize highly crystalline g-C3N4 from C6N9H3·LiCl was also proposed (Fig. 4e). The first step was to remove Li ions from C6N9H3·LiCl due to the small size of Li ions (∼0.76 Å). The next one was the removal of Cl− ions, which could be slightly more difficult due to their relatively larger size (∼1.81 Å). Finally, highly crystalline g-C3N4 can be formed via the heat treatment of C2N3H in an oxidizing environment accompanied by NH3 removal. A deep understanding about the crystal structure of g-C3N4 is beneficial for researchers to explore highly crystalline g-C3N4 and achieve optimal photocatalytic properties, which inspires us to make great efforts towards theoretical calculations and experimental validation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Prediction of heptazine-based g-C3N4: (i) predicted most stable configuration, phase 1; (ii) second stable distorted configuration, phase 2; (iii) most stable planar configuration, phase 3. The atoms in the middle layer of the lattices were labeled with yellow crosses. (b) Specific structure of a distorted heptazine unit (i) and probable rearrangement route from phase 2 to phase 1 (ii). The red arrows indicate the directions of movement of the atoms. (c) Predicted structures corresponding to the SMS condition: C6N9H3–LiCl. The small pink, green, and green balls represent H, Li, and Cl atoms, respectively. The atoms in the lower layer of the lattices were labeled with yellow crosses. (d) Comparison of the simulated XRD patterns of C6N9H3–LiCl with the experimental XRD patterns of the highly crystalline samples synthesized by SMS and modified SMS. (e) Proposed reaction pathway to synthesize highly crystalline g-C3N4 starting from C6N9H3·LiCl. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Other research groups also researched the electronic structure of g-C3N4. In g-C3N4, lone pair electrons of N are mainly responsible for the band structure and formation of the valence band. The reduction and oxidation potentials are related to positioning of valence and conduction bands with regard to the standard reduction potential scale of H2. As early as 2008, Wang and co-workers23 presented a DFT calculation to research the electronic structure of g-C3N4 and provided evidence that g-C3N4 possessed the potential to function as a photocatalyst for H2 production. They found that the highest occupied molecular orbital/lowest unoccupied molecular orbital band gap of a melem molecule was 3.5 eV, which was decreased to 2.6 eV for polymeric melon,166 and finally decreased to 2.1 eV for forming well-condensed g-C3N4. The wavefunction investigation showed that the valence and conduction bands were mainly driven by the N Pz orbitals and C Pz orbitals, respectively, where the photogenerated electrons and holes were separated, indicating that the oxidation and reduction sites for splitting water could take place solely in the N atom and C atom. The reaction energies were computed by ab initio thermodynamics, and the results showed that the reduction level for H+ was fully located in the centre of the bandgap, and the oxidation level was positioned slightly above the top of the valence band. This meant that the reduction process was energetically probable and the oxidation process would admit transfer of electrons and holes, but presumably with a low driving force. The electron–hole pair separation suggested independent oxidation and reduction sites for water splitting in N and C atoms.167 These calculations provided evidence that g-C3N4 had the potential to function as a photocatalyst for H2 production. Jacob and coworkers168 used the many-body Green's function method to research the electronic and optical properties of g-C3N4. The result showed that the electronic band gap of g-C3N4 was 4.24 eV, but the electronic band gap of tri-s-triazine based g-C3N4 was 5.22 eV (direct) and 4.15 eV (indirect). They also confirmed that the electronic structures of g-C3N4 in the valence and conduction bands were formed by the overlap of the 2p orbital of the N atom and the 2p orbital of the C atom together.
All in all, the 2D structure of g-C3N4 can be considered as an N atom substituted graphene framework, which possesses conjugated graphitic planes with sp2 hybridization of C and N atoms in an aromatic ring. The lone pair electron of N can form the lone pair valence band which is stabilized by the π electronic state. The mid-way band gap (2.7 eV) ensures it to absorb visible-light in a wider range, while appropriate positioning of the reduction level of the conduction band (−1.3 eV) and the oxidation level of the valence (+1.4 eV) band initiates the photocatalytic reactions.63,169


2.2.3. Physicochemical properties. 
g-C3N4, as one of the most stable allotropes in various carbon nitride structures, has been proven stable up to 600 °C or even higher by thermal gravity analysis.66 A strong endothermal peak appeared at 630 °C because of the degradation of g-C3N4, which was ca. 30 °C higher than the starting degradation temperature of the obtained g-C3N4 (600 °C). Complete decomposition of g-C3N4 occurred at 750 °C and led to no residue of g-C3N4 (Fig. 5a),98 reflecting that the g-C3N4 possessed very good thermal stability. In addition, no detectable solubility or reactivity of g-C3N4 was found in conventional solvents, e.g., H2O, C2H5OH, DMF, THF, (CH3CH2)2O, and toluene.170 In order to study the stability and durability of g-C3N4 in various solvents, g-C3N4 powder was dispersed in H2O, (CH3)2CO, C2H5OH, pyridine, acetonitrile, CH2Cl2, DMF, CH3COOH, and 0.1 M NaOH aqueous solution for 30 days. These dispersed g-C3N4 samples were subsequently dried at 80 °C for 10 h. The FTIR spectra of the immersed g-C3N4 samples were basically unaltered in contrast to those of g-C3N4 dispersions (Fig. 5b). These results confirmed that g-C3N4 showed excellent chemical stability and good durability.
 Fig. 5  (a) TG–DSC thermograms of g-C3N4 formed via heating melamine at 520 °C. (b) FT-IR of melem (prepared by heating dicyandiamide at 400 °C), melamine, and g-C3N4 before and after the protonation in 37% HCl. (c) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectrum and photoluminescence spectrum (inset) under 420 nm excitation, and (d) time-resolved photoluminescence spectrum monitored at 525 nm under 420 nm excitation at 298 K for bulk g-C3N4 (black) and mesoporous g-C3N4 (red). (e) Periodic on/off photocurrent Iph response of the mesoporous g-C3N4 electrode in 0.5 M Na2SO4 under zero bias in a standard two electrode photoelectrochemical cell. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 37, 98 and 173 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Optical properties of g-C3N4 are also very important. Usually, the optical properties of g-C3N4 are tested by UV/vis absorption and photoluminescence tests. The theoretical calculation confirmed that g-C3N4 was a typical semiconductor with a bandgap of >5 eV, mainly relying on structural or anatomic diversities.171 In fact, traditional g-C3N4 showed the typical absorption pattern of an organic semiconductor with an intensively enlarged bandgap adsorption at ∼420 nm (Fig. 5c). This result indicated that the mesoporous structure can improve the light harvesting ability of the material.37 This is because of its large specific surface area and multiple scattering effects. Time-resolved photoluminescence experiments were performed to measure the photoinduced charge separation of the recombined species, showing a lifetime of ∼5 ns even at 298 K, which provided circumstantial evidence to prove the excellent photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 (Fig. 5d). The photoluminescence signal of the mesoporous g-C3N4 was greatly suppressed. This was evidence for electron relocalization on surface terminal sites, which can promote catalytic redox functions.172 Visible-light illumination of mesoporous g-C3N4 layers decorated on fluoride–tin oxide glass plates revealed a short circuit photocurrent (Fig. 5e), but it was still rather low, mainly because of the poor contact between the substrate and the organic powder featuring grain boundaries. All of these results confirmed that g-C3N4 displayed excellent stability, good durability, and high photocatalytic activity, indicating that it can be used as promising highly efficient photocatalysts even under harsh and dreadful conditions.


2.2.4. Photocatalytic HER mechanism. 
As indicated above, g-C3N4 shows a narrow band gap energy (ca. 2.7 eV), which is considered as a promising visible-light-active metal-free polymeric semiconductor HER photocatalyst. To understand its outstanding photocatalytic performance in depth, a photocatalytic HER mechanism of g-C3N4 is fundamental and needs to be presented clearly, which will act as a strategic guide for researchers to further improve its photocatalytic properties effectively. A succinct photocatalytic HER mechanism of g-C3N4 and the corresponding photoexcited electron–hole pairs with probable decay paths are shown in Fig. 6. After the g-C3N4 photocatalyst is illuminated by visible-light, photoinduced electrons and holes are expeditiously formed. Once the photoinduced electron and hole are spatially separated, the charge carriers are in an excited state, which are subsequently transferred fleetly to the g-C3N4 surface, initiating photocatalytic HER.174 Generally, the reactive sites may be located either on the g-C3N4 or cocatalyst surface.175 Under these circumstances, the g-C3N4 plays a pivotal role in absorbing visible-light, generating photoinduced electron–hole pairs and then transferring them to the g-C3N4 or cocatalyst surface. Nevertheless, g-C3N4 is chemically active only when the photoinduced electron–hole pair is consumed simultaneously before the recombination occurs in a fraction of nanoseconds. The excitation of band gap upon light absorption and the formation of electron–hole pairs can also be fleetly accompanied by a few de-excitation pathways. The successful transfer of the photoinduced electron and hole to the reactant molecules leads to the reduction and oxidation reactions (paths 1 and 3). Unfortunately, two disadvantageous recombination processes, e.g., volume recombination (path 2) and surface recombination (path 4) may take place, which will strongly weaken its photocatalytic activity.176 In detail, when the recombination processes take place, the excited electrons and holes are reverted to the VB and CB, respectively, abreacting the energy without reacting with the adsorbed reactant molecules. Therefore, the key factor of limiting g-C3N4 catalytic performance is the recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Besides, its band gap and morphology also have enormous impacts on the catalytic performance. Up to now, tremendous attempts have been made to promote its photocatalytic efficiency by modifying its band gap and morphology or accelerating the separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes.177 A comprehensive understanding of the photocatalytic reaction mechanism is necessary for further amelioration and improvement in the photocatalytic performance, which is advantageous for guiding us to rationally design and develop highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts.
 Fig. 6  Photocatalytic HER mechanism of g-C3N4 and the corresponding photoexcited electron–hole pairs with probable decay paths. Here, CB represents the conduction band, VB represents the valence band, and Eg represents the band gap energy. 


2.2.5. Challenges and solutions. 
As the photocatalytic mechanism explained above, g-C3N4 firstly absorbs visible light, generating electron–hole pairs which then transfer to the g-C3N4 surface or to a cocatalyst to initiate the reduction and oxidation processes for the photocatalytic conversion of reactant molecules. As for a g-C3N4 photocatalyst, there are still some challenging problems, mainly including lower photocatalytic efficiency and visible-light utilization.61 In order to meet the practical application requirements, a significant enhancement of its photocatalytic performance and broader visible-light absorption are highly desired. To prepare highly active g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, several important principles are highly worth emphasizing: (i) accelerating the charge migration and separation to restrain the recombination rate, (ii) improved exposure of visible-light absorption, (iii) more active sites and enhanced reactant adsorption on the g-C3N4 surface, and (iv) enhanced photochemical stability of the photocatalysts for prolonged duration.
The design strategies for various nanostructures such as thinner, highly crystalline, porous, and element-doped g-C3N4 are constructively employed to enhance the photocatalytic properties of intrinsic g-C3N4. The large specific surface area can enhance mass transfer ability and provide more active sites, which can further enhance the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4.178 Because of the stacking of polymeric g-C3N4, its specific surface area is customarily less than 10 m2 g−1. But in theory, its specific surface area can reach 2500 m2 g−1 for ideal monolayered g-C3N4. An ultrathin thickness (ca. 2 nm, which was about 9 stacked layers) and superhigh specific surface area (ca. 384 m2 g−1) g-C3N4 nanosheet was reported in 2013,179 which achieved a H2 evolution rate of 1860 μmol h−1 g−1. Just as obviously, the formation of the porous structure is also beneficial for improving the specific surface area of g-C3N4. In addition, the existence of structural defects and intralayer hydrogen bonds in the g-C3N4 nanostructure also severely restricts its photocatalytic properties. In view of this, developing highly crystalline g-C3N4 is a reasonable protocol, which can decrease the number of structural defects and further enhance the photocatalytic properties. Heteroatom doping can also effectively ameliorate the structural defects and dominate the electronic band structure of g-C3N4 to enlarge the visible-light absorption and regulate the redox potentials to further enhance the photocatalytic properties in the visible-light region.22
Besides, the formation of g-C3N4 heterojunction composites (e.g., metal/g-C3N4, semiconductor/g-C3N4, metal organic framework/g-C3N4, carbon/g-C3N4, conducting polymer/g-C3N4, sensitizer/g-C3N4) is a compelling and feasible strategy to overcome its lower photocatalytic efficiency and visible-light utilization. This is mainly to be achieved by a built-in electric field within a space charge region to spatially separate and availably transfer the photogenerated electrons and holes.180 A common strategy is semiconductor hybridization, which is based on the band alignment between g-C3N4 and the other semiconductors, driving the photogenerated electrons and holes to transfer in the opposite directions, and further restraining the charge recombination to obtain enhanced photocatalytic activity.181 The conductive component (such as Au, Ag, graphene, and conductive polymer, etc.) can act as electronic conductive channels to efficiently separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and further improve the visible-light photocatalytic H2 generation properties of g-C3N4.182 An effective tactic for populating the conduction band of g-C3N4 with abundant electrons can be achieved by combining with suitable organic dyes, which enables the energy conversion of visible light to take place at longer wavelengths.183 Integration of MOFs with g-C3N4 can significantly improve the photocatalytic activity because of their structural and species diversities, controllable cavities and porosity, and high specific surface areas.184
In brief, in view of the lower photocatalytic efficiency and visible-light utilization of bulk g-C3N4, both intrinsic g-C3N4 (e.g., thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4) and g-C3N4 composite heterojunctions (e.g., metal/g-C3N4, semiconductor/g-C3N4, metal organic framework/g-C3N4, carbon/g-C3N4, conducting polymer/g-C3N4, sensitizer/g-C3N4) can effectively improve its photocatalytic activity. In the following sections, we will introduce and discuss in detail these highly efficient intrinsic g-C3N4 photocatalysts and g-C3N4 composite heterojunctions for the HER.

3. Design of various nanostructures of g-C3N4 for HER application
The photocatalytic HER takes place at the g-C3N4/H2O interface, and thus the photocatalytic activity strongly relies on its size, shape, nanostructure, and defects of g-C3N4.22 The regulation of the g-C3N4 mirco/nanostructure endows it with high specific surface area, affluent surface active sites, and enlarged light harvesting, all of them favor photocatalytic H2 production. The different nanostructures of g-C3N4 such as quantum dots,185 nanofibers,186 and nanosheets187 have a vital impact on its photocatalytic properties. Thus, there is still a plenty of room for improving the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 by enlarging the specific surface area. Here, four nanostructured intrinsic g-C3N4 materials designed by nanostructure engineering including thin g-C3N4 nanosheets, highly crystalline g-C3N4, doped g-C3N4, porous g-C3N4 for HER application are elaborated in detail, and their performance comparison is summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of nanostructured g-C3N4 photocatalysts for HER applicationa




Photocatalysts type
Photocatalysts
Cocatalysts
Photocatalyst mass (mg)
Reactant solution and sacrificial reagents
Light source
H2 evolution rate (μmol h−1 g−1)
Apparent quantum yield (%)
Ref.





a TEOA: triethanolamine; PTI: poly(triazine imide).





Thinner g-C3N4
g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1860
3.75 (420 nm)

179



g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (3 wt%)
10
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
8510
5.1 (420 nm)

38



Few-layered holey g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (3 wt%)
20
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1871
—

200



Ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (0.2 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1632
—

201



g-C3N4 nanoplatelets
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1365
3.6 (420 nm)

202



Foam-like holey ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (3 wt%)
20
Water (50 mL) and TEOA (6 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2860
4.0 (420 nm)

239







Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
10
Water (8.5 mL) and TEOA (1.5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1400
2.6 (420 nm)

204



Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
20
Water (17 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2025
—

106



PTI nanosheets
Pt (8 wt%)
2
Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)
3200
—

195



Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (1.5 solar simulator)
9577
9.0 (420 nm)

211



Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
10
Water (18.5 mL) and TEOA (1.5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
2000
—

88







Doped g-C3N4
B-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (180 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
1880
—

218



C-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (247.5 mL) and TEOA (27.5 mL)
UV and IR-cutoff filter (400–800 nm)
1440
14.0 (420 nm)

219



2.2 (550 nm)




P-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (80 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1596
3.6 (420 nm)

10



3D CCNS
Pt (3 wt%)
10
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp
27035
7.8 (420 nm)

220



K-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
1028
—

221



K-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
1337
—

223



Na-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
20
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
7150
—

225



Fe-Doped g-C3N4
—
100
Water (90 mL) and MeOH (10 mL)/0.05 mol H2PO4
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
536
—

226



Zn-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
200
Water (220 mL) and MeOH (50 mL)
200 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
297.5
3.2 (420 nm)

229







Porous g-C3N4
Porous g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1994
—

232



Porous g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
13
Water (255 mL) and TEOA (45 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1403
—

192



Porous and thin g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (1 wt%)
100
Water (80 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
991
—

161



Mesoporous g-C3N4
Pt (0.2 wt%)
50
Water (76 mL) and MeOH (4 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2738
—

238



Mesoporous g-C3N4
—
50
Water (50 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
3100
74.0 (400 nm)

235





3.1. Thinner g-C3N4 nanosheets for HER application
Up to now, there has already been many works highlighting the benefits for HER application by reducing the thickness of g-C3N4. Owing to the stacking of polymeric g-C3N4, its specific surface area is usually less than 10 m2 g−1. However, its theoretical specific surface area can reach 2500 m2 g−1 for ideal monolayered g-C3N4. Commonly, thinner g-C3N4 nanosheets are fabricated via an exfoliative strategy such as chemical exfoliation, ultrasonic exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation, chemical-oxidation-induced exfoliation, thermal exfoliation, and alkaline metal ion intercalation.96 A thinner free-standing g-C3N4 nanosheet was prepared by Yang and co-workers179 in 2013 by using a facile liquid-phase exfoliation strategy. Notably, the g-C3N4 nanosheets were exfoliated via ultrasonic treatment in 2-propanol, which possessed ultrathin thickness (ca. 2 nm), superhigh specific surface area (ca. 384 m2 g−1), and large aspect ratios, providing ample active sites and thus promoting the charge migration. Moreover, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of the prepared g-C3N4 nanosheets was as high as 1860 μmol h−1 g−1, which was much higher than that of bulk g-C3N4 (200 μmol h−1 g−1) and even higher than reported for highly-ordered porous g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 nanosheets synthesized via direct thermal exfoliation.188–190
It is worth emphasizing that the hydrothermal treatment can create vertical channels for directional electron transfer and generate ultrathin holey g-C3N4 nanosheets with remarkable hierarchical porosity and good hydrophilicity. Recently, a significant breakthrough was achieved by Qu and co-workers.38 A single atomic layered g-C3N4 nanosheet (a height of less than 0.5 nm) (Fig. 7b and c) was constructed through solvothermal exfoliation of mesoporous g-C3N4 synthesized by pyrolysis of a freeze-drying assembled dicyandiamide nanostructure precursor (Fig. 7a). The specific surface area of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets was about 331 m2 g−1, which was 6-fold higher compared to the bulk counterpart (∼54 m2 g−1) and 33-fold higher compared to the traditional bulk g-C3N4 (ca. 10 m2 g−1), and the pore size was mainly less than 20 nm. Such a remarkable enhancement of the specific surface area of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets could offer greater exposure of the interfacial contact and edge sites to the reactant, which was really beneficial to improve photocatalytic efficiency. In addition, the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets showed a remarkably enhanced light-harvesting ability (Fig. 7d).191 The obtained monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets showed an obvious enhancement of photocurrent with respect to the bulk samples (Fig. 7e), indicating an improved charge separation. There was a large shift in the conduction band and valence band of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets, which resulted in a superior thermodynamic driving force for photocatalytic HER (Fig. 7f). As a result, the H2 evolution rate of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets reached 8510 μmol h−1 g−1, which was higher than 2D g-C3N4 nanostructures reported previously,10,37,179,192–199 namely, 5.5-fold that of the bulk counterpart (1560 μmol h−1 g−1) and 24.3-fold that of the traditional bulk g-C3N4 (350 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 7g). To the best of our knowledge, it is the highest H2 evolution rate of all the metal-free intrinsic g-C3N4 nanosheet photocatalysts reported so far. Notably, the g-C3N4 nanosheets with a specific surface area of 331 m2 g−1 can achieve ultrahigh H2 evolution rate of 8510 μmol h−1 g−1, which inspires us to develop some new methods to further increase its specific surface area. Nowadays, there is still plenty of room for us to increase its specific surface area because its theoretical specific surface area can reach 2500 m2 g−1 for ideal monolayered g-C3N4.
 Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication process of monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets. (b) AFM image of the synthesized mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets; the inset shows the enlarged view of the rectangle area. (c) Height profiles along the lines in (b). (d) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart. The inset is the corresponding Tauc plots. (e) Fluorescence emission spectra of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart with an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. The inset shows transient photocurrents under visible-light radiation (λ > 420 nm) of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart obtained in 0.2 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 6.8). (f) The valence band spectra and electronic band structure of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart. (g) Photocatalytic activity of (i) the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanomesh, (ii) the bulk counterpart, (iii) the traditional g-C3N4 bulk under irradiation with visible light (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
As known, g-C3N4 with a layered structure is deemed to have the most potential for metal-free photocatalysts. Shi and co-workers200 reported a direct and green strategy to fabricate few-layered holey g-C3N4 nanosheets via simply introducing a piece of nickel foam over the precursors during the heating process. The prepared g-C3N4 nanosheets with unique structural advantages exhibited excellent photocatalytic HER activity, with a H2 evolution rate (ca. 1871.09 μmol h−1 g−1), which was 31-fold higher than that of bulk g-C3N4 under visible light. This outstanding photocatalytic property originated from the high specific surface area (240.34 m2 g−1) and mesoporous structure, which endowed g-C3N4 nanosheets with more active sites, efficient exciton dissociation, and prolonged charge carrier lifetime. Fang and co-workers201 presented a simple method for the construction of holey g-C3N4 nanosheets with a high crystallization network and enlarged optical absorption region through using the hydrothermal and microwave processes. The hydrothermal treatment of dicyandiamide produced the melamine–cyanaurate complex which would evolve into ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets with the abundant porous structure. And the microwave-assisted thermolysis process ensured that the prepared g-C3N4 nanosheets possess high crystallinity and the enhanced optical absorption region. The obtained g-C3N4 nanosheets showed an improved photocatalytic performance when compared to the pristine bulk g-C3N4.
As mentioned above, thinner g-C3N4 nanosheets are a thinner graphite-like 2D layered structure material with moderate conduction band and valence band levels, having great potential for HER application. Similarly, ultrathin g-C3N4 nanoplatelets would seem likely to have excellent photocatalytic properties for H2 production. Qu and coworkers202 prepared ultrathin g-C3N4 nanoplatelets via a facile, green, and highly efficient ball milling strategy. The prepared ultrathin g-C3N4 nanoplatelets with a small size (2–6 nm) and thin thickness (0.35–0.7 nm) had a higher specific surface area than bulk g-C3N4. Moreover, the obtained ultrathin g-C3N4 nanoplatelets were highly active in photocatalytic HER, with a H2 evolution rate of 1365 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 13.7 times higher than those of their bulk counterparts. The enhancement was mainly attributed to the synergistic effects resulting from the improved specific surface area, decreased thickness, and a negative shift in the conduction band accompanied by the exfoliation of bulk g-C3N4 into ultrathin g-C3N4 nanoplatelets. A variety of in-plane holes were distributed in the entire g-C3N4 layer which would generate new exposed active sites and the resulting cross-plane diffusion channels might further improve the electron transport and charge separation efficiency. As a consequence of these merits, the photocatalytic property of the prepared ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets was almost 22-fold higher than that of bulk g-C3N4 for H2 generation.
In summary, the fabrication of thinner g-C3N4 is mainly via exfoliation strategies, either microwave-assisted exfoliation or chemical exfoliation, but ideal single-layered g-C3N4 nanosheets still cannot be perfectly prepared at current levels of synthesis. Based on the fact that the few-layered g-C3N4 nanosheets display a relatively high H2 evolution rate of 8510 μmol h−1 g−1 (Table 3), we can imagine that ideal single-layered g-C3N4 nanosheets will display considerably improved photocatalytic properties. Thus, there is clearly a great need for the exploration of some advanced technologies for the synthesis of ideal single-layered g-C3N4 nanosheets.
3.2. Highly crystalline g-C3N4 for HER application
The surface characterization of g-C3N4 indicated the existence of structural defects because of inadequately reacted intermediates, containing amino and/or cyano groups.61,67 The photocatalytic properties are easily influenced by these structural defects since they commonly act as charge trap sites in photocatalytic reactions. To solve this problem, an effective method for the preparation of highly crystalline g-C3N4 to decrease the number of structural defects and intralayer hydrogen bonds is highly desired.203 The crystalline quality was found to have an important impact on photocatalytic performance.204 However, it is noteworthy that an effective technique for the construction of highly crystalline g-C3N4 is yet challenging. Melamine–cyanuric acid supramolecular aggregates were used for the construction of highly crystalline g-C3N4 with a significantly decreased number of defects through a rapid, microwave-assisted thermolysis technique. In consequence, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of the prepared highly crystalline g-C3N4 sample was 2-fold higher than that of the g-C3N4 sample prepared via direct pyrolysis of melamine–cyanuric acid supramolecular aggregates.106 In contrast to melon-type g-C3N4, poly(triazine imide) is a highly crystalline species and represents the only structurally characterized 2D g-C3N4 network, which ensures itself as an excellent model system to explore both structural effects and photocatalytic activity as a function of the exfoliation state.87,205–207 The layers consisted of imide-linked triazine units (Fig. 8a) and were stacked in an ABA-type fashion, with Li+ and Cl− situated in channels running along the stacking direction (Fig. 8b). Lotsch and co-workers prepared highly crystalline 2D g-C3N4 nanosheets via an ionothermal strategy of the layered bulk poly(triazine imide) materials and one-step liquid exfoliation (Fig. 8c). The obtained g-C3N4 nanosheets were 1–2 nm in height and afforded chemically and colloidally stable suspensions under acidic and alkaline conditions (Fig. 8d). Notably, the exfoliated poly(triazine imide) was the first structurally well-defined, crystalline 2D g-C3N4, showing high activity toward photocatalytic water splitting, which was among the highest ever observed for pristine g-C3N4, even including mesoporous “g-C3N4” (Fig. 8e and f).179,188,189 This work highlights the vital effects of morphology and specific surface area on the photocatalytic properties of pristine g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, and opens up a way as well for the deep understanding of structure–property relationships in g-C3N4 and the factors influencing the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 8  Idealized poly(triazine imide) structure (lithium/chloride intercalation omitted for clarity) viewed along the c-axis (a) and the slightly tilted b-axis (b). Diagram of the exfoliation process and product labeling (c). (d) AFM images of exfoliated poly(triazine imide) nanosheets deposited on a Si/SiO2 wafer and the corresponding height image (inset). Photocatalytic HER activity of the Pt-doped precipitates (I and II) in contrast to sonicated poly(triazine imide) and bulk poly(triazine imide) (e), and of the nanosheet suspensions compared to bulk poly(triazine imide) (f), measured in a 10 vol% TEOA/water solution for 3 h illumination with visible-light (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
As mentioned above, in order to realize highly crystalline g-C3N4, alkali-metal salt medium has been used in the process of thermal condensation.195,208–210 However, the obtained g-C3N4 was not as good as we expected, seemingly aroused by the secondary change of the g-C3N4 structure in the molten salt system, during which alkali metals would coordinate into the C–N plane of g-C3N4 and change the spatial charge distribution. Thus, it is vital to develop a facile and economic technique for the construction of g-C3N4 photocatalysts with improved crystallinity. Zhang and co-workers211 reported a novel and effective strategy for high-yield preparation of extremely high crystalline g-C3N4 photocatalysts by two-step calcination without the assistance of any additive or salt intercalation. As expected, the obtained highly crystalline g-C3N4 photocatalysts displayed a remarkably high H2 evolution rate of 9577.6 μmol h−1 g−1 under solar light illumination, which was 15.5-fold higher than that of bulk g-C3N4, and also higher than that of most of the reported crystalline g-C3N4. Moreover, an ultrahigh apparent quantum efficiency of 9.01% at 420 nm for H2 generation was also achieved.
Microwave-assisted heating synthesis is another facile and economic method for the construction of highly crystalline g-C3N4. If the method is employed to prepare highly crystalline g-C3N4 materials, the obtained nanostructures are supposed to have large specific surface area, abundant active sites, and enhanced crystallinity, thereby benefiting further improvement in photocatalytic activity. Xue and co-workers88 reported a novel preparation method, namely “microwave-assisted heating synthesis”, for the preparation of highly crystalline g-C3N4 within minutes. The prepared g-C3N4 showed enhanced photocatalytic H2 production ability with a H2 evolution rate of 2000 μmol h−1 g−1, which was about 1.5-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4 (1300 μmol h−1 g−1). The enhancement was attributed to the enhanced crystalline quality. Sun and co-workers89 reported a refined alternated cooling and heating treatment strategy for the fast preparation of highly crystalline few-layer g-C3N4 nanosheets within 10 min. The prepared ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets showed high crystallinity, narrowed band gap (∼2.62 eV), increased specific surface area (88.59 m2 g−1) and improved electron transport ability. As a result, a significant enhancement of photocatalytic properties was achieved.
In order to obtain highly crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets, combining both supramolecular pre-assembly and exfoliation strategies is commonly considered as an effective technique. However, a perfect crystalline structure of g-C3N4 is difficult to obtain at current levels. The exploration and development of perfect crystalline g-C3N4 will be a hot research topic in future because it is beneficial for us to analyze the g-C3N4 specific structure and achieve higher photocatalytic performance. A simple calcination method seems to be a better route to weaken intralayer hydrogen bond interactions, guaranteeing highly crystalline g-C3N4 nanosheets with a relatively high H2 evolution rate of 9577 μmol h−1 g−1 (Table 3). Obviously, advanced and suitable technologies for achieving perfect crystalline g-C3N4 are worth exploring in future.
3.3. Doped g-C3N4 for HER application
When g-C3N4 is employed as photocatalysts, its inefficient utilization of visible light and high recombination of the photoexcited charge carriers lead to unsatisfactory photocatalytic performance. Heteroatom doping (B,197 F,212 I,196 C,213 P,214–216 S217) can effectively ameliorate the structural defects and dominate the electronic band structure of g-C3N4 to enlarge the visible-light absorption and regulate the redox potentials to further enhance the photocatalytic properties in the visible-light region. Wang and co-workers218 developed a new type of B-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets via a simple one-pot pyrolysis strategy. A B-doping amount of 1 at% into g-C3N4 exhibited the highest photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (ca. 1880 μmol h−1 g−1) under visible-light illumination (λ > 400 nm), which was over 12-fold higher than that of pristine bulk g-C3N4. B-Doping reduced the band gap to absorb visible-light more easily and developed higher specific surface area (49.47 m2 g−1) compared to that of bulk g-C3N4 (8.24 m2 g−1), which consequently improved the photocatalytic activity dramatically. Wang and co-workers212 reported a simple fluorination route for the preparation of a novel F-doped g-C3N4 employing ammonium fluoride as a cheap fluorine source. Fluorination not only provided a modified texture but also enabled the effective regulation of the electronic band gaps. The F-doped g-C3N4 exhibited improved photocatalytic properties, namely, the H2 evolution rate of F-doped g-C3N4 was ca. 2.7-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. Zhang's group prepared a highly efficient I-doped g-C3N4 photocatalyst via ball-milling g-C3N4 with iodine. The optimized I-doped g-C3N4 sample showed a high H2 evolution rate (ca. 44.5 μmol h−1) under visible-light. Teng and co-workers219 firstly annealed a mixture of urea and NH4Cl to prepare g-C3N4 nanosheets, which was then mixed with C2H5OH and annealed to obtain aromatic C-doped g-C3N4. Annealing C2H5OH resulted in the grafting of aromatic heterocycles on the g-C3N4 nanosheets. The grafted aromatic heterocycles and doped C atoms extended the π-conjugation system in g-C3N4 to decrease the band gap and facilitated the separation of photogenerated charges. The obtained aromatic C-doped g-C3N4 could effectively photocatalyze H2 production from aqueous solution, realizing apparent quantum yields of 14% and 2.2% under 420 and 550 nm monochromatic irradiation, respectively. Qiao and co-workers10 prepared porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets via combining P doping and thermal exfoliation strategies for the first time (Fig. 9a). The obtained P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets displayed improved visible-light absorption (>557 nm), increased specific surface area (122.6 m2 g−1), shortened charge-to-surface migration length (5–8 nm) and enhanced charge mobility. As a result, an ultrahigh visible-light photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (1596 μmol h−1 g−1) and apparent quantum efficiency (3.56%) at 420 nm were obtained (Fig. 9b and c). This eminent photocatalytic property was attributed to the P-doped conjugated system and the macroporous nanosheet morphology (Fig. 8e). In particular, the empty midgap states (−0.16 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode) produced by P doping can be used to explain the improved visible-light absorption (>557 nm) (Fig. 9d), and the macroporous structure boosted the mass-transfer process and enhanced light harvesting (Fig. 9f). This work presents a facile, environment-friendly and reliable strategy to prepare highly efficient porous g-C3N4 nanosheet photocatalysts, and also paves a new way for the rational design and development of advanced g-C3N4-based photocatalysts by taking full advantage of the strong synergistic effects via simultaneously tuning and optimizing the electronic, crystallographic, surface and textural structures. Cheng and co-workers217 reported S-doped g-C3N4 with a unique electronic structure that exhibited an enhanced valence bandwidth combined with an increased conduction band minimum and a decreased absorbance. Such S-doped g-C3N4 displayed a photocatalytic H2 evolution rate ca. 7.2 and 8.0-fold higher than that of g-C3N4 under λ > 300 and 420 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 9  (a) Preparation process of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets. (b) Contrast of the photocatalytic property of different g-C3N4 samples. (c) Apparent quantum efficiency of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets at 420 nm, 460 nm, 500 nm or 540 nm. (d) Electronic band structures of different g-C3N4 samples. (e) TEM image of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets with the inset showing the high magnification TEM image, the AFM image and the corresponding height profile of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets. (f) Photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets. CN-B, bulk g-C3N4; CN-S, g-C3N4 nanosheets; PCN-B, bulk P-doped g-C3N4, PCN-S, porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets; PCN-B*, bulk P-doped g-C3N4 prepared using (NH4)2HPO4 as the P precursor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3D hierarchical self-doped g-C3N4 architectures are highly desired. This is mainly because (1) 3D hierarchical nanostructures can significantly promote the photogenerated charge separation and transfer, resulting in a much longer lifetime of the charge carriers; (2) 3D hierarchical nanostructures can produce multiple light scattering, which facilitates light harvesting; and (3) 3D nanostructures provide more exposed active catalytic sites for surface reactions, which acts as a pivotal part in shortening the charge migration distance. Inspired by this, Xu and co-workers220 prepared 3D hierarchical self-doped g-C3N4 architectures (3D CCNS) through an extremely facile hexamethylenetetramine activation approach at the bulk scale. The unique composition and structure of 3D CCNS endow it with an outstanding light absorption with a tunable band gap, high electrical conductivity, fast charge separation, and large specific surface areas with abundant reaction active sites, and thus remarkably enhanced photocatalytic H2 generation property. The optimized 3D CCNS-50 displayed an unprecedented H2 generation performance, an ultrahigh visible-light photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (27035 μmol h−1 g−1) and apparent quantum efficiency (7.8%) at 420 nm. The work also offered an extremely facile strategy toward the development of highly efficient doped-g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for large-scale production and practical applications. Interestingly, this work innovatively used hexamethylenetetramine for thermal oxidation etching of bulk g-C3N4, thus providing a promising opportunity to large-scale production of homogeneous self-modified ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets.
In addition to the non-metallic atom-doped g-C3N4 mentioned above, many metallic atom-doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts have also been studied. Among these metallic atoms, K atoms have recently been widely used as doping atoms to prepare g-C3N4.39,221–223 Yan and co-workers221 reported a simple KCl-template method to prepare K-doped g-C3N4. Because of the variable thickness of K-doped g-C3N4, it possessed superior photocatalytic activity and stability for photocatalytic HER under visible-light irradiation to pure g-C3N4. Zhang and co-workers223 prepared K-doped g-C3N4via a facile thermal polycondensation strategy employing KBr as the K source. The KBr content strongly affected the photocatalytic performance of the K-doped g-C3N4, and the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of the optimized K-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets (10 wt% KBr) was as high as 1337.2 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 5.6-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4 (239.8 μmol h−1 g−1). This is due to the narrower band gap and improved light harvesting property of K-doped g-C3N4. Similarly to K, other alkali metals such as Li and Na were also examined. A comparative research of alkali metal (Li, Na, K)-doped g-C3N4 was presented by Cao and co-workers.224 They prepared three alkali metal (Li, Na, K)-doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts by a simple high-temperature treatment strategy. All of them showed improved visible-light photocatalytic properties for HER, benefited from the improved specific surface areas, reduced band gaps for enlarged visible-light absorption, and enhanced electronic structures for efficient charge transfer. Particularly, owing to the optimal regulation of micro- and electronic-structure, the Na-doped g-C3N4 showed the most effective exploitation of the photogenerated electrons during the photocatalytic HER process. In consequence, the highest photocatalytic H2 evolution rate was achieved through the Na-doped g-C3N4 (374 μmol h−1), which was ca. 3.7-fold higher than that of pristine g-C3N4 (100 μmol h−1). Similar results have also been confirmed by Meng's group.225
Other metallic atom-doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts have also attracted wide attention in HER application. Zhou and co-workers226 presented a facile one-step pyrolysis route to prepare Fe-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets using NH4Cl as the dynamic gas template and FeCl3 as the Fe source. The doping of Fe could effectively promote the exfoliation and further increase the specific surface area, but superfluous Fe might break the nanosheet structure. The specific surface area of the optimized Fe-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets was up to 236.52 m2 g−1, which was 2.5-fold higher than that of g-C3N4 nanosheets. The H2 evolution rate of the optimized Fe-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets was as high as 536 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 1.8- and 6-fold higher than that of the pure g-C3N4 nanosheets and bulk g-C3N4, respectively. Jiang and co-workers227 fabricated a series of mesoporous Cu-doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts with Cu contents from 0.1 to 5 wt% by using CuCl2 and melamine as precursors. The embedded Cu2+ transformed the optical properties, influenced the energy band structure, and improved the electron–hole separation rate and thus enhanced the photocatalytic properties. Zhang and co-workers228 synthesized Mn-doped g-C3N4 nanoribbons via a two-step calcination approach. Mn doping facilitated the formation of ˙OH radicals from H2O2 intermediate products. In particular, the obtained Mn-doped g-C3N4 exhibited excellent photocatalytic properties for HER. The yields of H2 and O2 could reach 593.35 and 59.47 μmol g−1 after 3 h illumination. Ye and co-workers229 presented a facile soft-chemical approach to prepare Zn-doped g-C3N4. Compared with other metal atoms, Zn was easier to incorporate into g-C3N4 without destroying its graphite-like structure. The H2 evolution rate of Zn-doped g-C3N4 was as high as 297.5 μmol h−1 g−1, over 10-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. Moreover, the maximum quantum yield was up to 3.2% at 420 nm.
In fact, heteroatom doping is regarded to introduce impurities into g-C3N4, with the doping atoms either replacing lattice atoms or residing in the in-planar cave of g-C3N4, and the hybridization between the dopant orbitals and the molecular orbitals of g-C3N4 enables tuning the electronic structure and the positions of the valence band and conduction band. Many heteroatom doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts (e.g., non-metallic and metallic doped g-C3N4) have been successfully constructed; however, they have not met our expectation because most of them only achieve a moderate photocatalytic activity. A gratifying result is that the Na-doped g-C3N4 nanotubes display a relatively high H2 evolution rate of 7150 μmol h−1 g−1 (Table 3), which is mainly ascribed to Na doping and particularly the porous nanostructure of the g-C3N4 nanotubes. Thus, combining the doping technologies and the nanostructural engineering is highly worth considering in the design and development of doped g-C3N4 photocatalysts.
3.4. Porous g-C3N4 for HER application
The morphology modulation and nanostructured designing of g-C3N4, especially forming porous g-C3N4, has been proverbially illustrated as an effective route to enhance the photocatalytic properties for HER mainly via promoting light absorption, charge transfer and separation, active site exposure, and mass diffusion during the photocatalytic process.230,231 With regard to porous g-C3N4 nanosheets, the photogenerated electrons and holes can easily transfer to the g-C3N4 surface, and subsequently participate in the redox reactions to obtain a high photocatalytic property. Zhang and co-workers232 reported a facile route to prepare porous g-C3N4 with stacking nanotubes via direct pyrolysis of melamine–ammonium oxalate stacking nanosheets. The photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of porous g-C3N4 was about 1994 μmol h−1 g−1, which was about 9.5-fold higher than that of pristine g-C3N4 (210 μmol h−1 g−1). Such an improvement was mainly ascribed to the large specific surface area (91.1 m2 g−1), enhanced visible-light absorption and efficient separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes. Huang and co-workers161 presented a novel and unparalleled template-free precursor pre-treatment strategy to prepare porous g-C3N4 nanosheets for highly efficient photocatalytic reduction and oxidation reaction (Fig. 10a). The addition of thiourea solution in the hydrothermal pre-treatment process etched the surface of melamine, thus producing the porous and thin g-C3N4 nanosheets (Fig. 10b). And the specific surface area of the optimized porous g-C3N4 nanosheets was up to 44.2 m2 g−1 (Fig. 10c). The separation of photogenerated charge carriers was prominently boosted by constructing such a porous nanosheet structure (Fig. 10d). Benefited from these advantages, porous g-C3N4 nanosheets showed markedly ameliorative visible-light photocatalytic properties for HER (991 μmol h−1 g−1), which was 3.3-fold higher than that of pristine g-C3N4 (297 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 10e). This work offers a new and alternative synthesis strategy to prepare high-performance porous g-C3N4 nanosheets for photocatalytic HER application. Xu and co-workers192 prepared porous g-C3N4 nanosheets through a facile liquid exfoliation strategy. These mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets with thickness (ca. 5 nm) possessed high specific surface area and improved light absorption. These endowed them with enhanced photocatalytic properties for HER compared with pure g-C3N4.
 Fig. 10  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the synthesis, (b) SEM images, (c) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and pore size distribution curves (inset), and (d) band structure diagram of the porous g-C3N4 nanosheets. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of different g-C3N4 samples under visible-light (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As we know, specific surface area plays a critical role in photocatalytic reactions by affording more active sites.233 The most important strategy for the preparation of porous g-C3N4 with a large surface area is based on template methods, such as soft template (self-assembly)24 and hard template (nanocasting).234 Majima and co-workers235 prepared g-C3N4 with a nanosheet structure using a mixture of melamine and urea as the precursors. The use of urea created a mesoporous structure, increased the surface area and defects of N vacancies acting as trap states in g-C3N4. The obtained g-C3N4 exhibited a specific surface area of ca. 299 m2 g−1, photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of ca. 3100 μmol h−1 g−1 under λ ≥ 400 nm light irradiation, and apparent quantum efficiency of ca. 74% at λ = 400 nm. The improved photocatalytic properties were presumably because the prepared g-C3N4 possessed larger specific surface area and more mesopores to enhance the electron transfer and offer more active sites compared with pure g-C3N4.
Besides, a self-assembled supramolecular precursor, a melamine–cyanaurate acid complex, has emerged as an interesting intermediate to convert into the 3D porous nanostructures of g-C3N4.115,116 It has been reported that the melamine–cyanaurate acid complex supramolecular aggregates are usually prepared via the assembly of melamine and cyanuric acid and connected by hydrogen bonding.236 Thus, the porous g-C3N4 nanosheets prepared by the melamine–cyanaurate acid complex supramolecular aggregates possessed reduced structural defects, showing the enhanced H2 evolution rates.237 Moreover, various g-C3N4 nanostructures including ordered porous microsheets and microtubular structures could also be prepared in different organic solvents and at different precipitation temperatures. Fang and co-workers238 firstly used the hydrothermal process to transfer dicyandiamide into the melamine–cyanaurate acid-like complex, and then developed uniform 3D holey g-C3N4 nanosheets by annealing the two precursors. The H2 evolution rate of the prepared 3D holey g-C3N4 nanosheets was up to 2738 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 2.5-fold higher than that of the one obtained from the conventional melamine–cyanaurate acid complex and 15 times higher than that of bulk g-C3N4, and its apparent quantum efficiency reached 10.6% under visible-light (λ = 420 ± 15 nm).
A large specific surface area can enhance mass transfer ability and provide more active sites, which can further enhance the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4. Porosity engineering is an effective strategy to ameliorate the pore structure of g-C3N4 and enhance its specific surface area and accordingly the photocatalytic HER activity. Unfortunately, most of the reported porous g-C3N4 photocatalysts only achieve a moderate photocatalytic activity (Table 3). The unsatisfactory results are mainly because their specific surface area is still relatively small. Thus, the future work should focus on the exploration of new and advanced methods for the construction of porous g-C3N4 to meet the needs of highly efficient photocatalysts.
4. Composites of g-C3N4 as highly efficient photocatalysts for HER application
Similar to the traditional inorganic semiconductor photocatalysts (such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, GaN, etc.), g-C3N4 also suffers from several intrinsic shortcomings, e.g., rapid recombination rate of charge carriers, low electroconductivity and the lack of visible-light absorption above 460 nm.240 To obtain highly-active g-C3N4-based photocatalysts, three critical criteria must be met: (i) facilitating the charge migration and separation to restrain the recombination rate, (ii) enhancing visible-light utilization, and (iii) improving photochemical stability of the photocatalysts for prolonged duration. These criteria have gradually brought g-C3N4 composites to researchers’ attention. Usually, g-C3N4 composites can form heterojunctions and provide a series of improvements: (i) the visible-light absorption is enhanced, (ii) the existence of cocatalysts reduces the redox overpotential at the active sites, (iii) charge migration and separation is accelerated via a Schottky junction or p–n junction, and (iv) the system stability is enhanced by defending the active sites and functional groups on the semiconductor surface via appropriate surface passivation.61 In the following subsections, we will elaborate various g-C3N4-based composites for HER application. In addition, a performance comparison of highly efficient g-C3N4-based composite photocatalysts for HER application is shown in Table 4.
Table 4 Comparison of highly efficient g-C3N4-based composite photocatalysts for HER applicationa




Composite photocatalysts type
Photocatalysts
Cocatalysts
Photocatalyst mass (mg)
Reactant solution and sacrificial reagents
Light source
H2 evolution rate (μmol h−1 g−1)
Apparent quantum yield (%)
Ref.





a TEOA: triethanolamine; PTI: poly(triazine imide); GO: graphene oxide; rGO: reduced graphene oxide; MWCNTs: multi-walled carbon nanotubes; PPy: polypyrrole; P3HT: poly(3-hexylthiophene); g-PAN: graphitized polyacrylonitrile; C-PAN: tapered polyacrylonitrile-derived carbon; EY: Eosin Y; EB: Erythrosin B; Zn-tri-PcNc: highly asymmetric zinc phthalocyanine derivative; LI-4: indole-based D–π–A organic dye; MgPc: magnesium phthalocyanine; Fl: fluorescein; BP: black phosphorus; RP: red phosphorus; ER: Eosin Y and Rose Bengal.





Metal/g-C3N4
Ni@g-C3N4
—
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
500 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
168.2
—

247



Ni/g-C3N4
—
10
Water (7 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
4318
—

248



Ag/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
625
—

258



Au/g-C3N4
—
20
TEOA (10 vol%)
125 W visible-light Hg lamp
8870
—

262



Pt/g-C3N4
—
20
Water (4.5 mL) and TEOA (0.5 mL)
Xe lamp (>420 nm)
97.5
0.58 (440 nm)

264



Pd/g-C3N4
—
10
—
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
995
—

266







Bimetal/g-C3N4
AuPd/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
326
—

267



PtCo/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
960
—

270



PdAg/g-C3N4
—
10
Water (22.5 mL) and TEOA (2.5 mL)
300–1100 nm
1250
8.7 (460 nm)

271







Semiconductor/g-C3N4
Isotype g-C3N4 heterojunctions
7.68 μmol
50
Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1480
10.7 (420 nm)

128



Mesoporous isotype g-C3N4 heterojunctions
—
50
Water (80 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
116
—

279



g-C3N4 p–n homojunctions
Pt (3 wt%)
25
Water (243 mL) and TEOA (27 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
4020
—

282



g-C3N4 homojunctions
—
50
Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
125 W Hg lamp (400 nm)
1740
—

283



g-C3N4 n–n homojunctions
Pt (1.5 wt%)
20
Water (50 mL) and MeOH (50 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
780
—

285



TiO2/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (90 mL) and MeOH (30 mL)
500 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
560
—

286



TiO2@g-C3N4
—
40
Water (8 mL) and MeOH (2 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
198
—

287



SnO2-ZnO/g-C3N4
—
5
Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
2735
—

299



WO3/g-C3N4
Pt (2 wt%)
40
Water (6 mL) and TEOA (4 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
110
—

305



Cu2O@g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
300
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)
202
—

306



Cu2O/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
100
Water (162 mL) and TEOA (18 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
241
—

307



Cu2O@g-C3N4 octahedra
Pt (0.5 wt%)
300
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)
265
—

309



CoO/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
651
—

310



CeO2/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1100
—

312



CdS/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
5303
3.61 (420 nm)

316



CdS/g-C3N4
Pt (0.6 wt%)
50
Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4152
4.3 (420 nm)

181



CdS quantum dot/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
100
Water (90 mL) and MeOH (30 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
173
—

317



CdS quantum dot/g-C3N4
Pt (0.08 wt%)
5
10 mL aqueous solution of 0.1 M L-ascorbic acid
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4494
—

318



NiS/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (85 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
482
1.9 (440 nm)

319



NiS/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
150 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
82
1.4 (420 nm)

320



NiS/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (85 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)
150 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
992
—

321



NiS/g-C3N4
—
5
Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
16400
—

323









MoS2/g-C3N4
—
20
Water (90 mL) and lactic acid (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1030
2.1 (420 nm)

511



WS2/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (90 mL) and lactic acid (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
125
—

332



ZnS/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (400 mL) containing Na2S and Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
714
—

334



Ni2P/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (54 mL) and TEOA (6 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
330
4.8 (440 nm)

512



Ni2P/g-C3N4
—
40
Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
249
1.8 (420 nm)

337



Ni2P/g-C3N4
—
20
20 mL of TEOA aqueous solution
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
82.5
—

338



Ni2P/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (100 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
475
3.2 (435 nm)

339



Ni12P5/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (68 mL) and TEOA (12 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
127
—

341



Ni12P5/g-C3N4
—
60
Water (135 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
536
4.67 (420 nm)

342



NixPy/g-C3N4
—
2
Water (4 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
Xe lamp (>420 nm)
168
—

343



CoP/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (75 mL) and TEOA (25 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
—
4.3 (420 nm)

346



NiCoP/g-C3N4
—
10
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp
1643
—

348



Bi2MoO6/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
563
—

355



g-C3N4/nano-InVO4
Pt (0.6 wt%)
50
Water (160 mL) and MeOH (40 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
212
4.9 (420 nm)

356



CoTiO3/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
20
EtOH solution (10 vol%)
420 nm
858
38.4 (365 nm)

365



3.23 (420 nm)


SrTiO3/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
200
200 mL oxalic acid solution (0.025 M)
250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
440
—

366



CaIn2S4/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (80 mL) containing 0.5 M Na2S, 0.5 M Na2SO3
UV-LEDs (3 W, 420 nm)
102
—

41



CdS/g-C3N4/CuS
—
50
Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
350 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)
1151
16.5 (420 nm)

390



CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (100 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
3570
4.4 (420 nm)

391



TiO2/WO3/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (30 mL) and MeOH (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
5732
—

392



ZnO/ZnS/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (100 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
301
—

393







Metal organic framework/g-C3N4
UiO-66/g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
10
20 mL L-ascorbic acid aqueous solution (0.1 M)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
109
—

426



C-ZIF/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (270 mL) and TEOA (30 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
326
—

184



g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe)
—
70
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xenon lamp
905
—

428







Carbon/g-C3N4
GO/g-C3N4
Pt (1.5 wt%)
80
Water (60 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
451
2.6 (>400 nm)

182



rGO/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
715
—

436



rGO/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
557
—

439



Carbon dots/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (72 mL) and lactic acid (8 mL)
LEDs (3 W, 365 nm)
44
—

443



Carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4
—
10
Water (8 mL) and MeOH (2 mL)
1000 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
220
—

444



Carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
2322
—

445



Carbon nanodots/g-C3N4
Pt (0.2 wt%)
50
Water (95 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
1760
—

446



MWCNTs/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
100
Water (90 mL) and MeOH (30 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
152
—

27



MWCNTs/g-C3N4
Pt (1.2 wt%)
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
—
470
—

452



Carbon black/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
100
Water (80 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)
—
689
—

453



Carbon fiber/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (72 mL) and TEOA (8 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
1080
—

454



Carbon@g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (100 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
2580
—

456







Conductive polymer/g-C3N4
PPy/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
100
Water (100 mL) and EtOH (2 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
154
—

466



P3HT/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
300
Water (600 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
1833
2.9 (420 nm)

469



g-PAN/g-C3N4
Pt (1.5 wt%)
100
Water (270 mL) and TEOA (30 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
370
—

471



C-PAN/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
100
Water (135 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
1775
5.6 (420 nm)

473



PEDOT/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
100
Water (270 mL) and TEOA (30 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
327
—

475







Sensitizer/g-C3N4
EY-sensitized g-C3N4
—
30
Water (68 mL) and TEOA (12 mL)
250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
3850
19.4 (550 nm)

183



EY-sensitized g-C3N4
Pt (7 wt%)
100
Aqueous TEOA (80 mL; 0.79 mol L−1)
400 W Hg lamp (>420 nm)
—
18.8 (>420 nm)

513



EB-sensitized g-C3N4
—
100
Water (95 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
>420 nm
6525
33.4 (460 nm)

476



12.3 (550 nm)


EB–MoSx–g-C3N4
—
100
Aqueous TEOA (80 mL; 0.79 mol L−1)
400 W Hg lamp (>420 nm)
386
8.3 (545 nm)

477



Zn-tri-PcNc-sensitized g-C3N4
—
10
Water (10 mL) and ascorbic acid (88 mg)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
12520
1.85 (700 nm)

480



LI-4/g-C3N4/Zn-tri-PcNc
—
15
Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
24760
16.3 (420 nm)

481



7.7 (500 nm)


1.75 (700 nm)


MgPc-sensitized g-C3N4
—
100
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
500
0.07 (660 nm)

482







Other materials/g-C3N4
BP/g-C3N4
—
1.5
Water (4 mL) and MeOH (1 mL)
320 W Xe lamp (350–1800 nm)
427 (420 nm)
3.18 (420 nm)

487



101 (780 nm)
1.1 (780 nm)


RP/g-C3N4
—
10
Water (10 mL) and ascorbic acid (0.1 M)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
310
—

488



Ni(OH)2/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (72 mL) and TEOA (8 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
152
1.1 (420 nm)

489



Cu(OH)2/g-C3N4
—
100
Water (60 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
49
—

490



ER co-sensitized Co(OH)2/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
2879
33 (430 nm)

491



rGO/g-C3N4/TiO2
—
5
Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)
250 W Xe lamp (200–800 nm)
23143
—

492



g-C3N4/acetylene black/Ni(OH)2
—
50
Water (85 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
240
—

493



TiO2/In2O3@g-C3N4
—
50
Water (60 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)
UV-LEDs (3 W, 420 nm)
172
—

404



CdS/rGO/g-C3N4
—
20
Water (45 mL) and lactic acid (5 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
396
36.5 (420 nm)

494





4.1. Composites of metal and g-C3N4 for HER application
The incorporation of metal nanoparticles into/onto g-C3N4 has been used as a fascinating approach to form a metal/g-C3N4 heterojunction structure via a coherent interface.241 As is said above, the metal ions can coordinate with the lone pair electrons of N atoms of the g-C3N4 framework, forming metal-doped g-C3N4. As a supplement, here we will discuss metal/g-C3N4 composites via the introduction of metal nanoparticles into/onto g-C3N4 for HER application. Under visible-light illumination, the generated energetic electrons on metal nanoparticle surfaces due to the localized plasma resonance effect are transferred to the conduction band of g-C3N4 to realize HER. Here, metal nanoparticles act as electronic conductive channels to efficiently separate the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and to further improve the visible-light photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4.
Up to now, there have been many papers with the topic words “band bending”, but most of the works are focused on solid state physics, and rarely involve “band bending” combined with “photochemistry” or “photocatalysis”.242 Band bending was first proposed by Schottky and Mott to interpret the rectifying effect of metal–semiconductor contacts.243–245 Surface band bending is the driving force of photogenerated charge separation. The deeper the degree of surface band bending is, the better the separation efficiency.4,246 As an active transition non-noble metal, Ni plays a significant role in photocatalytic systems, which has been widely used in g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. The introduction of Ni results in a change in the surface band bending, and thus enhances the separation efficiency. Ni/g-C3N4 composites were prepared through a solvothermal strategy in the presence of melamine and acetylacetone nickel.247 Ni nanoparticles with a particle size of ca. 30 nm were found to be uniformly distributed on the 2D g-C3N4 nanosheet surface with a lattice spacing of ca. 0.209 nm, which corresponded to the (111) plane of metallic Ni. The high distribution of Ni nanoparticles on the g-C3N4 nanosheet surface was beneficial to the separation of charge carriers and effectively prohibited the recombination process, which would further improve its photocatalytic activity for H2 production.247 Another related study was presented by Dong and co-workers,248 who reported a rapid light-assisted approach to prepare Ni/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts. The Ni nanoparticles were obtained by the reduction of Ni(II) via photogenerated electrons and uniformly distributed on the electron outlet points of g-C3N4 in 30 minutes. The H2 evolution rate of the optimized Ni/g-C3N4 composites reached 4318 μmol h−1 g−1, and there is no evident loss in photocatalytic properties after 4 runs for 48 h. Moreover, the obtained Ni/g-C3N4 composites exhibited an ultrahigh H2 evolution rate (ca. 4000 μmol h−1 g−1) under natural sunlight outdoor conditions, implying that the introduction of Ni effectively restrained the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes of g-C3N4 and thus further enhanced the photocatalytic properties.
It is generally known that a Schottky barrier is constructed when metal nanoparticles are hybridized with g-C3N4, which is beneficial for charge carrier separation because of the rapid electron migration between the metal and g-C3N4.249 As a matter of fact, the fabrication of the Schottky barrier leads to the formation of electrons and holes in the metal and semiconductor, respectively.250,251 Thus, a Schottky barrier acts as an effective electron trapping site to restrain the electron–hole recombination for improving photocatalytic activity.252 Furthermore, metals, e.g., Au and Ag, possess the potential to mightily utilize visible-light due to their surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect.253–257 Recently, the fabrication of metal/g-C3N4 nanocomposite photocatalysts with well-controlled and well-defined morphologies by the metal–organic supramolecular approach has been reported, which fully integrated the SPR effect and shape-dependent optical and electronic properties. Gao and co-workers258 reported a new and facile supramolecular hydrogel approach as a self-template to fabricate porous nanofiber-type Ag/g-C3N4 nanocomposites (Fig. 11a); here, Ag–melamine supramolecular hydrogels with nanofiber structures acted as both self-templated agents and promising precursors. The prepared Ag/g-C3N4 nanofibers possess high specific surface area (26.0 m2 g−1), enlarged absorption in the visible-light region (Fig. 11b and c), and enhanced photoinduced electron–hole separation capability (Fig. 11d). The obtained porous fiber-type Ag/g-C3N4 showed high photocatalytic performance under visible-light illumination (625 μmol h−1 g−1), which was nearly 6.6-fold higher than that of pristine g-C3N4 (Fig. 11e). The introduction of Ag is beneficial to form controllable porous nanofiber nanostructures, as well as enhance the specific surface areas and the visible-light absorption, prolong the lifetime of charge carries, and accelerate the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. All of these results cause greatly improved photocatalytic properties.
 Fig. 11  (a) Preparation of porous nanofiber-like Ag/g-C3N4 from Ag–melamine supramolecular hydrogels. (b) Nitrogen sorption isotherm of fiber-type Ag/g-C3N4. (c) Solid state UV-vis diffusion reflectance spectra of Ag/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4. (d) Steady state photoluminescence spectra of Ag/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 with an excitation wavelength of 375 nm. (e) Time resolved photoluminescence decay spectra of Ag/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4, monitored at 488, 488, and 577 nm, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 258 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
As mentioned above, strong visible light absorption features and size- and shape-dependent optical and electronic properties of metal nanoparticles make an interesting case for photocatalysts by accelerating interfacial charge migration in g-C3N4–metal nanocomposites.259,260 A plasmonic photocatalyst composed of Au nanoparticles and a polar semiconductor g-C3N4 has demonstrated great potential in photocatalysis. Among various metal nanoparticles, Au nanoparticles worked as a visible-light absorber and a thermal redox active centre.261 In consideration of the advantages of Au nanoparticles, it is expected that the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 can be considerably improved after the introduction of Au nanoparticles. Parida and co-workers262 reported a simple deposition–precipitation approach for the construction of Au/g-C3N4 composites. The prepared Au/g-C3N4 composite showed an improved photocatalytic performance, e.g., the H2 evolution rate was up to 8870 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 23-fold higher than that of neat g-C3N4 (383 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 12c), indicating that the size, shape and uniform dispersion of Au nanoparticles on the g-C3N4 surface were advantageous to improve the photocatalytic activity. This enhancement was because of the synergic mechanism between the conduction band of g-C3N4 and the plasmonic band of Au nanoparticles (Fig. 12a and b). The photocatalytic mechanism of Au/g-C3N4 composites was also illustrated (Fig. 12d) and the details were given as follows. The decorated Au nanoparticles on the g-C3N4 surface were charge-polarized, actively absorbed, and scattered the visible light through the plasmonic effect. This effect increased the visible-light absorption capability of the Au/g-C3N4 composites. When visible light irradiated polar g-C3N4 semiconductor material surfaces, conduction band electrons and valence band holes were then generated, leading to the formation of a Mott–Schottky junction at the Au/g-C3N4 interface. The Fermi level of the Au existed between the conduction band maximum and valence band minimum of polar semiconductor g-C3N4, which resulted in the formation of plasmonic photocatalysts. The excited electrons from the conduction band of g-C3N4 readily migrated to the Au NPs surface, leading to the increment of electron density and thus improving their photocatalytic performance. This work provides a comprehensive enhancement mechanism of metal nanoparticles, namely, the SPR effect and size- and shape-dependent optical and electronic properties are the root of the enhancement. It is readily possible to tune the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4–metal photocatalysts through rational design and regulate the size and morphology of metal nanoparticles, further achieving the optimal photocatalytic properties.
 Fig. 12  (a) Estimated band gap energies and (b) photocurrent spectra of the Au/g-C3N4 composite and neat g-C3N4. (c) Photocatalytic HER activity of the g-C3N4 and all the Au/g-C3N4 composites and the neat g-C3N4 under visible-light illumination (λ ≥ 400 nm). (d) Mechanism of photocatalytic H2 generation and surface plasmon resonance of Au in Au/g-C3N4 composites. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The interaction between the metal and semiconductor plays an irreplaceable role in promoting the migration of the photoinduced electrons to noble metals.263 Inspired by this, Shiraishi's group264 presented the decoration of Pt nanoparticles with a diameter of <4 nm on the g-C3N4 surface via reducing H2PtCl6·6H2O at 673 K. The strong interaction between Pt and g-C3N4 generated by high temperature treatment promoted smooth migration of the photogenerated conduction band electrons to Pt nanoparticles and efficiently formed the electron–hole charge-separated state. Thus, the prepared Pt/g-C3N4 composites can be utilized as promising photocatalysts for photocatalytic HER under visible-light. Yu and co-workers265 prepared different morphologies (cubic, octahedral and spherical) Pt nanoparticles decorated on the g-C3N4 surface by using a colloidal adsorption–deposition approach. These Pt nanoparticles with different shapes possessed similar sizes (ca. 10 nm) but different exposed facets. The visible-light-guided photocatalytic activity for the Pt/g-C3N4 composites followed the order: cubic Pt/g-C3N4 < octahedral Pt/g-C3N4 < spherical Pt/g-C3N4. This is mainly attributed to the fact that the different surface atomic structures of the different exposed facets of Pt nanoparticles result in a difference in active sites and adsorption energies in photocatalytic reactions.
The surface facets of metal nanoparticles have a tremendous impact on the molecular adsorption and activation, thus, the facet design of metal cocatalysts holds the promise for adjusting the reaction selectivity in metal/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. Xiong and co-workers266 presented a solution-phase route to in situ load facet-dependent Pd nanoparticles on a 2D g-C3N4 platform. Different capping agents were used to prepare Pd and (111) facets. For example, KBr/KI and HCHO/Na2C2O4 were employed as morphology controlling agents to stabilize the Pd(100) and (111) facets, respectively. During the preparation process, the introduction of polyvinylpyrrolidone was used to prevent the Pd nanocrystals from agglomeration and facilitate the reduction of Pd precursors with its –OH end groups (Fig. 13a). It was found that the well-loaded Pd nanoparticles possessed edge lengths of 4–6 nm on the g-C3N4 nanosheets, and Pd nanoparticles with a cubic shape exposed preferential (100) facets, but (111)-faceted Pd nanocrystals showed a tetrahedral shape (Fig. 13b–e). As shown in Fig. 13f, the addition of Pd to the g-C3N4 nanosheets significantly enhanced their photocurrents, indicating that the g-C3N4–Pd Schottky junction helped to separate the photo-generated electron–hole pairs. The photoluminescence of g-C3N4 was substantially quenched with the addition of Pd (Fig. 13g). This indicated that the recombination of electrons and holes had been restrained by distilling the electrons with Pd. The prepared g-C3N4–Pd nanocubes and g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedra showed an enhanced photocatalytic property, and the H2 evolution rate was up to 39.8 and 9.7 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively, which was 23.4- and 5.7-fold higher than that of the bulk g-C3N4 (1.7 μmol h−1 g−1), respectively (Fig. 13h).
 Fig. 13  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the fabrication of Pd/g-C3N4 composites using various capping agents. TEM images of (b) g-C3N4–Pd nanocubes with Pd(100) facets and (c) g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedrons with Pd(111) facets. HRTEM images of (d) a g-C3N4–Pd nanocube and (e) a g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedron. (f) Photocurrent vs. potential responses of photoelectrodes made of Pd/g-C3N4 composites and bulk and ultrathin g-C3N4 samples, respectively, at the same g-C3N4 loading weight, measured in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under chopped visible-light (λ > 400 nm) irradiation. (g) PL emission spectra of Pd/g-C3N4 composites and bulk and ultrathin g-C3N4 samples (at the same amount of g-C3N4), respectively, excited at 360 nm. (h) H2 evolution rates observed for the g-C3N4–Pd nanocubes and g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedra. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 266 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The incorporation of metal into g-C3N4 can improve its conductivity and decrease the energy barrier of the interface reactions to further enhance photocatalytic HER activity. A relatively high H2 evolution rate of 8870 μmol h−1 g−1 was achieved by Au/g-C3N4 (Table 4), which was mainly attributed to the synergic mechanism between the conduction band minimum of g-C3N4 and the plasmonic band of Au nanoparticles. In particular, the size and size distribution of the metal nanoparticles have a huge impact on the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4. Therefore, surface functionalization of g-C3N4 to ensure the strong interaction between metal nanoparticles and g-C3N4 is a good design idea. However, in consideration of high price of metals especially noble metals, a combination of multiple components with different functions (e.g., combination of a tiny amount of metal and other components) should be an effective solution.
4.2. Composites of bimetal and g-C3N4 for HER application
Compared with monometallic nanoparticles which have advantageous charge separation to lengthen the lifetime of electron–hole pairs, bimetallic nanocrystals have a brighter prospect in photocatalytic applications because of their extraordinary structural properties and synergistic effect between metals. This is a fact that various components in the bimetallic system possess a designated function in affecting catalytic properties. Thus, bimetallic/g-C3N4 composites have great potential in the field of photocatalysts. Ge and co-workers267 reported a novel AuPd bimetallic loaded g-C3N4 prepared via an in situ chemical deposition route. The well-distributed AuPd nanocrystals created intact interfaces with g-C3N4, which helped the efficient separation of electron–hole pairs. Superoxide radicals are the main oxidative species for the AuPd/g-C3N4 composites, and the existence of AuPd nanocrystals could enhance the interfacial charge transfer and restrain the recombination of electron–hole pairs. Owing to these advantages, the 0.5 wt% AuPd/g-C3N4 composite showed the highest catalytic activity with a H2 evolution rate of 326 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 3.5- and 1.6-fold higher than those of pristine Au/g-C3N4 and Pd/g-C3N4 under visible-light irradiation.
As mentioned above, when g-C3N4 contacts metal, metal serves as an electron capture agent to restrain the recombination of electron–hole pairs due to the relatively lower Fermi levels of metal, which further improves the lifetime of charge carriers and remarkably improves the photocatalytic activity.268 In comparison with single metal, bimetallic nanoparticles exhibit greater potential in photocatalytic applications due to their unique microstructure and synergistic effect of different components. It has been illustrated that the activity, selectivity and resistance to poisoning of the metal catalysts can be significantly improved due to the existence of a second metal component.269 Inspired by the merits of bimetallic systems, a PtCo/g-C3N4 system was fabricated via an in situ chemical deposition route (Fig. 14a). The PtCo nanocrystals were uniformly distributed on the g-C3N4 nanosheets. The PtCo/g-C3N4 composites promoted electron migration from g-C3N4 to PtCo nanocrystals, resulting in the accumulation of electrons on the PtCo nanocrystal surface (Fig. 14b and c). The optimal loading content of PtCo nanocrystals was measured to be 1.0 wt% for g-C3N4 nanosheets, and the corresponding H2 evolution rate was as high as 960 μmol h−1 g−1. The improved photocatalytic mechanism is explained as follows (Fig. 14d): the binary alloy showed different structures and electronic density of states when compared to the single metals, leading to adjustable degeneration of physical and chemical properties, as well as surface states of PtCo nanocrystals. The “synergistic effect” of the alloy will affect the Fermi energy level of the PtCo alloy. The Fermi energy levels of the PtCo alloy were lower than the g-C3N4 conduction band, which made the photo-excited electrons transfer from the conduction band of g-C3N4 to the PtCo alloy surface and resulted in efficient separation of electron–hole pairs. Furthermore, for the PtCo alloy, the “synergistic effect” of Pt and Co components made the surface defects increase, and changed the Fermi energy level position. Hence, the introduction of the Co element led to more ready capture of the photo-excited electrons in the PtCo alloy, and further enhanced photocatalytic performance. For the PtCo/g-C3N4 system, the photo-generated electrons in the conduction band of the g-C3N4 transferred to the PtCo co-catalyst through contacting interfaces, endowing the conduction band electrons with higher mobility and boosting the separation of electron–hole pairs. Therefore, the recombination process of the electron–hole pairs was effectively inhibited, leading to an obvious enhancement of H2 production (Fig. 14e).270 This work provides a comprehensive and detailed enhancement mechanism of bimetallic systems, which is beneficial to guide researchers to deeply understand the enhancement mechanism and develop novel cost-effective and high performance bimetal/g-C3N4 photocatalysts.
 Fig. 14  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation route for PtCo/g-C3N4 photocatalysts (bulk and nanosheets). (b) Photovoltage and (d) phase of the surface photovoltage spectroscopy spectra of pure g-C3N4 and 1 wt% PtCo/g-C3N4. (c) Diagrammatic sketch of photo-excited electron injection from the conduction band of g-C3N4 to the PtCo nanocrystals and Pt nanoparticles, and (d) diagrammatic sketch for electron charge migration and H2 evolution mechanism under visible-light irradiation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bimetal decorated g-C3N4 photocatalysts can potentially realize highly efficient photocatalytic H2 generation because of their unique architecture, electronic structure, and synergistic effect. Nadeem and co-workers271 reported Pd–Ag bimetallic and monometallic nanoparticles coated on g-C3N4 through a simple chemical reduction approach. The prepared Pd0.7–Ag0.3/g-C3N4 composite with a total metal loading of 1 wt% displayed a H2 evolution rate of 1250 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 1.5- and 5.7-fold higher than those of Pd/g-C3N4 and Ag/g-C3N4 composites, respectively. The improvement was mainly ascribed to the inherent feature of bimetallic Pd–Ag to quench photogenerated electrons via the Schottky barrier formation mechanism. Liang and co-workers272 reported three g-C3N4 samples with Au, Pt, and Pt/Au doping, respectively, which were prepared by a traditional photodeposition approach. The photocatalytic properties of the Au/Pt co-doped g-C3N4 sample were higher than those of the Au doped g-C3N4 and Pt loaded g-C3N4 and pure g-C3N4, which was probably because of the photoabsorption properties and the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes.
In brief, the development of novel bimetal/g-C3N4 photocatalysts is beneficial for improving the photocatalytic properties with the wish of further exploration and understanding the charge carrier dynamics via effective combination of theory and experiment.
4.3. Composites of semiconductor and g-C3N4 for HER application
The development of a semiconductor–g-C3N4 heterojunction with appropriate valence band and conduction band potentials is deemed to be one of the highly efficient techniques for boosting charge migration and separation considering the space charge consumption and accumulation between two semiconductors.273 In the following subsections, various semiconductor/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts for photocatalytic HER applications are summarized and discussed.

4.3.1. Composites of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
4.3.1.1. g-C3N4/g-C3N4 isotype heterojunctions for HER application. 
The photocatalytic properties of intrinsic g-C3N4 are severely restricted due to its insufficient visible-light absorbance, slow charge transport and rapid recombination of the photo-generated charge carriers. To overcome these inherent drawbacks, forming a g-C3N4 heterojunction has become one of the most effective approaches to enhance the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4.274,275 Commonly, a g-C3N4-based heterojunction photocatalyst is obtained via using a g-C3N4 semiconductor photocatalyst and another semiconductor. This kind of semiconductor–g-C3N4 heterojunction nanocomposites will be introduced in detail in the following section. Here, we will mainly introduce g-C3N4 isotype heterojunctions. In recent years, Chen's group128 developed a microwave-assisted molten-salt strategy to prepare a triazine/heptazine based g-C3N4 isotype heterojunction by employing easily obtainable melamine as the precursor. The prepared triazine/heptazine based g-C3N4 sample exhibited a high photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (1480 μmol h−1 g−1), which was ca. 5 times higher than that of the g-C3N4 sample (300 μmol h−1 g−1) prepared by an electric-resistance molten-salt process, 15-fold higher than that of the g-C3N4 sample (95 μmol h−1 g−1) prepared by an electric-resistance heating process and 23-fold higher than that of the g-C3N4 sample (63 μmol h−1 g−1) prepared by a microwave heating process under visible-light irradiation. The synergistic effects of microwave-assisted and molten-salt liquid polymerization provided an effective route for fast and large-scale fabrication of g-C3N4/g-C3N4 isotype heterojunctions as metal-free highly efficient HER photocatalysts by employing a simple single-component precursor. Chen and co-workers276 reported a facile protonation-assisted hydrothermal method to fabricate a g-C3N4 isotype heterojunction structure via combining two different g-C3N4 samples (one prepared by protonating treatment of g-C3N4 derived from thiourea, another prepared by protonating treatment of g-C3N4 produced from urea). Protonation, as a promising functionalization strategy, not only offered g-C3N4 with better dispersion in the solvent and higher specific surface area, which was the limitation of other reported heterojunction construction methods, but also optimized the electronic band gap and improved the ionic conductivity, in turn leading to significantly enhanced photocatalytic activity.36,277,278 The prepared g-C3N4 isotype heterojunction photocatalyst exhibited improved photocatalytic properties for H2 production under visible-light illumination. This can be ascribed to the superhigh specific surface area and efficient charge separation and migration across the isotype heterojunction interface, which have been confirmed by the systematical investigations with electron paramagnetic resonance, photoluminescence and photocurrent measurements.
Considering that the band gap energies of g-C3N4 may cause a little bit of mediation using different precursors, coupling different components of g-C3N4 with a fully matched band nanostructure to form a g-C3N4/g-C3N4 isotype heterojunction showed improved photocatalytic properties. The fabrication of isotype heterojunctions between g-C3N4 and porous g-C3N4 is a recommended choice to boost the separation of electron–hole pairs across the interface for enhancing photocatalytic properties, where the porous structure is beneficial for the diffusion of reactants and products, as well as offers abundant surface active sites. Bao and co-workers279 prepared laminated mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 nanosheet isotype heterojunction photocatalysts via a template-calcination strategy using melamine and amino cyanamide as the co-precursors for the first time (Fig. 15a). The mesoporous structure endowed the as-developed g-C3N4/g-C3N4 material with a large specific surface area. Because the conduction band position of g-C3N4 is higher than that of mesoporous g-C3N4, in the process of photocatalytic HER, the photogenerated electrons tend to migrate from the conduction band of the g-C3N4 to mesoporous g-C3N4, which is beneficial to accelerate the separation of photogenerated charge carriers and decrease their recombination rates (Fig. 15b). A significantly enhanced H2 production rate was achieved over the mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 nanosheet isotype heterojunction (115.6 μmol h−1 g−1), which was approximately 6.5-fold higher than that of bare g-C3N4 (17.8 μmol h−1 g−1), and 1.7-fold higher relative to that of mesoporous g-C3N4 (68 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 15c). The stability of the mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 photocatalyst was tested under irradiation for 25 h, and no obvious loss in H2 evolution activity was observed after five cycling experiments, implying high stability (Fig. 15d). By combining the isotype heterojunction with the mesoporous structure, a significant improvement in photocatalytic properties is achieved, which inspires us to explore an effective combination of multiple enhancement strategies, greatly improving visible-light harvesting and enhancing photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 15  (a) Fabrication process and (b) transfer mechanism of the photogenerated electron–hole in a mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 nanosheet isotype heterojunction. CB, conduction band; VB, valence band. (c) The photocatalytic H2 evolution of different g-C3N4 samples, and (d) the recyclability tests of the mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 nanosheet isotype heterojunction. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 279 with permission from Elsevier. 
4.3.1.2. g-C3N4/g-C3N4 homojunctions for HER application. 
Because heterojunction-based photocatalysts are commonly fabricated by using different types of semiconductors, it is very difficult to employ them in practical application since the formation of heterojunctions is not only governed by the position of respective energy bands but drastically affected by their crystal structures, morphologies, light absorption performances and surface/interface/bulk properties of the individual semiconductors. In this case, the formation of homojunction photocatalysts composed of the same semiconductor materials exhibits more advantages than heterojunction based photocatalysts.188,280 Classically, g-C3N4 is a representative n-type material without terminal electron donor amine groups in the structure. The replacement of electron acceptor cyano groups with terminal amine can convert n-type g-C3N4 to p-type g-C3N4. In comparison with heterojunction photocatalysts, the homojunction photocatalysts, composed of the same semiconductor materials, exhibit better application value due to their unique crystal structures and surface/interface characteristics. Moreover, the composition identity on both sides of the interface in such homojunctions could provide a continuous band bending, and thus it is more conducive to accelerate charge transfer and carrier separation.281 Inspired by this, Ye and coworkers282 prepared a defect-modified g-C3N4 (DCN) p–n homojunction by treatment of g-C3N4 with NaBH4 (Fig. 16a). Here, the cyano terminal CN groups, acting as the electron acceptors, were introduced into the DCN nanosheet edges, which endowed the p–n homojunction with n- and p-type conductivity, and as a result, p–n homojunctions were formed. This homojunction nanostructure was demonstrated to accelerate the charge migration and separation (Fig. 16d–g), and led to a 5-fold improved photocatalytic property and excellent stability (Fig. 16b and c). Martha and co-workers283 developed a novel, one step biomediated synthetic path for the preparation of exfoliated g-C3N4 p–n homojunctions from melamine by a simple thermal condensation method. With a well-exfoliated layered nanosheet structure, the g-C3N4 exhibited exceptional physical properties such as superhigh intrinsic carrier mobility and obvious transformations in the energy band structure in virtue of weak van der Waals forces between C3N4 layers. The electron acceptor (–CN) groups were easily introduced to the edges of g-C3N4, which helped the in situ construction of p–n homojunctions. The exfoliated g-C3N4 homojunction showed significantly improved photocatalytic H2 production ability with a H2 evolution rate of 1740 μmol h−1 g−1 in contrast to those prepared through other conventional routes, because of the unique structural advantages, faster electron transfer, higher light harvesting, lower recombination rate of charge carriers and highly available reaction sites during the photocatalytic reaction. This work offers a defect-induced self-functionalization approach to build such a homojunction without adding any extra materials or elements, as well as displays a promising strategy for precise band engineering of g-C3N4 and related polymer semiconductors, and a new insight into the production of novel structures of these materials for more efficient photocatalytic HER applications.
 Fig. 16  (a) Illustration of the preparation process of DCN. The possible structures for CN and DCN are shown (gray, cyan, and white balls correspond to C, N, and H atoms, respectively). (b) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate for CN and all DCN samples under visible-light irradiation. (c) Time courses of H2 evolution for the DCN-200 photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation with pristine CN as the reference. (d) Room-temperature electron paramagnetic resonance spectra for CN, DCN-200, and DCN-350 measured with and without light irradiation. (e) Photoluminescence spectra excited at 360 nm for CN and DCN samples. (f) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and (g) transient photocurrents (λ > 420 nm) for CN and DCN-200 (CN represents the g-C3N4, DCN represents the defect-modified g-C3N4, DCN-200 represents the defect-modified g-C3N4 prepared at 200 °C). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In principle, a supramolecular complex can be obtained using melamine and other precursors to achieve an unprecedentedly intimate g-C3N4/g-C3N4 homojunction structure under hydrothermal conditions. Dong and co-workers284 prepared a g-C3N4/g-C3N4 metal-free homojunction via calcining the supramolecular precursor self-assembly with hydrothermal melamine and dicyandiamide. The prepared g-C3N4/g-C3N4 metal-free homojunction possessed a nanomesh morphology with a large specific surface area, and the in situ formation of the homojunction created abundant interface contacts, which improved the charge transfer ability and thus improved its photocatalytic properties. Zhou and co-workers285 prepared a novel g-C3N4/g-C3N4 n–n homojunction by in situ annealing two different precursors. The as-developed n–n homojunction showed a superior photocatalytic performance to its individual g-C3N4 counterparts. The enhanced photocatalytic property was explained by the synergistic effects between the two g-C3N4 in the homogeneous nanostructures, where a better charge separation was achieved in the g-C3N4/g-C3N4 n–n homojunction. Interestingly, this study broadened the meaning of synergistic effects and demonstrated that synergistic effects can be achieved by using the same materials of the same phase which were made by different methods. Liu's group firstly prepared g-C3N4 nanosheet (CNNS) colloids from liquid exfoliation of g-C3N4 in alkali solution that was denoted as le-CNNS, and employed the chemical blowing route to obtain the bottom-up CNNS marked as cb-CNNS. These two kinds of g-C3N4 were subsequently coupled to form a le-CNNS/cb-CNNS homojunction photocatalyst. This homojunction photocatalyst showed higher photocatalytic properties than those of the two individual CNNS materials, as well as the bulk g-C3N4. Furthermore, this composite possessed high stability because of the π–π interactions and the possible hydrogen-bonding interactions between le-CNNS and cb-CNNS.
The aforementioned attempts successfully fabricated g-C3N4/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts, offering an alternative and smart strategy to solve the inherent defects of intrinsic g-C3N4 without depending on external semiconductors for achieving highly efficient photocatalytic HER. The g-C3N4/g-C3N4 hybrids seem to have great potential to be developed easily on a large scale because of the highly abundant precursors of g-C3N4 and relatively low cost and toxicity. Although all the reported g-C3N4/g-C3N4 photocatalysts only show a moderate photocatalytic activity (Table 4), further exploration of novel g-C3N4/g-C3N4 photocatalysts with considerably improved photocatalytic properties has very important practical value.


4.3.2. Composites of metal oxide semiconductors and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
The exploration of a semiconductor heterojunction by combining two different semiconductor photocatalysts with suitable valence band and conduction band potentials is considered to be one of the most effective strategies for accelerating charge transfer and separation by taking full consideration with the space charge exhaustion and accumulation between two semiconductors. Up to now, many researchers have reported various metal oxide semiconductor/g-C3N4 heterojunctions for photocatalytic HER application. It is reported that TiO2 is a promising candidate to form heterojunctions with g-C3N4. In general, integrating TiO2 with g-C3N4 is considered to be the most feasible strategy to expand its spectral scope to visible light as well as to restrain the recombination process, thus resulting in improved performance. Qu and co-workers286 reported a photocatalyst consisting of g-C3N4 and TiO2, which was prepared through a facile approach by calcining a mixture of melamine and TiO2 precursor. The prepared TiO2/g-C3N4 composite showed improved photocatalytic properties, and its H2 evolution rate reached 1119 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 5-fold enhancement when compared to bare TiO2 or pure g-C3N4. The improved photocatalytic performance was in virtue of the advantageous structure derived from the heat treatment and the synergic and promoted interaction. Although many efforts have been devoted to designing TiO2/g-C3N4 composites, the photocatalytic properties of TiO2/g-C3N4 are still severely restricted because of its sluggish charge transfer kinetics. It is a reliable fact that the efficiency of charge transfer across the interface is the crucial factor for restraining the charge recombination. Thus, tuning and engineering the interface properties is of great importance. The design and development of new mesoporous TiO2/g-C3N4 composites is of great importance to achieve better performance. Han and co-workers287 reported mesoporous TiO2@g-C3N4 hollow core@shell heterojunction photocatalysts constructed by in situ calcining and growing cyanamide on the surface of TiO2 and using SiO2 as the template for the first time (Fig. 17a). Such an in situ growth approach is considered to be able to increase the close contact interaction between TiO2 and g-C3N4 nanosheets, and shorten the diffusion distance of photogenerated charge carriers from the interface to the surface. TiO2 hollow nanospheres and g-C3N4 nanosheets were observed to be closely attached, and two crystal lattice fringes of 0.35 and 0.32 nm were clearly observed, which matched well with the (101) planes of TiO2 and (002) planes of g-C3N4.288 The specific surface area of the mesoporous TiO2@g-C3N4 was 71.65 m2 g−1, which was higher than those of the pure SiO2 nanospheres (22.38 m2 g−1), pure TiO2 hollow nanospheres (65.72 m2 g−1), and SiO2@TiO2 nanospheres (36.38 m2 g−1). Moreover, the prepared mesoporous TiO2@g-C3N4 showed improved photocatalytic properties, namely, the H2 evolution rate was up to 197.5 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 21.35- and 21.94-fold higher than those of pure g-C3N4 and pure TiO2 hollow nanospheres (Fig. 17b). The fast charge transfer took place on the TiO2/g-C3N4 interface, which was caused by large interfacial area, as photoluminescence, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, and photoelectric current measurement results illustrated (Fig. 17c–e). It is worth emphasizing that the heterojunction interface between TiO2 and hollow g-C3N4 offers a much faster path for charge transfer due to its unique hollow nanostructure.
 Fig. 17  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the fabrication, (b) photocatalytic H2 evolution rate, (c) photoluminescence spectrum, and (d) Nyquist plots and (e) transient photocurrent responses of the as-prepared samples. (All the data represent mean ± SD, n = 3/treatment.) Here, HT, SiO2@TiO2 nanospheres; HTCN, mesoporous TiO2@g-C3N4 hollow spheres; C–T, TiO2/g-C3N4 prepared by using the method reported by Jiang and co-workers.291 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from Elsevier. 
The size, shape, and nanostructures of TiO2 have huge impacts on the photocatalytic properties of TiO2/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. A series of TiO2 nanostructures, e.g., 0D nanoparticles, 1D nanowires, 2D nanosheets, and 3D mesoporous crystals, are easily decorated on the g-C3N4 surface as an anchoring site via a seed-induced solvothermal method.289 Xie and co-workers290 reported g-C3N4 compounded with hierarchical TiO2 yolk–shell spheres through a solvothermal approach blending the prepared g-C3N4 with the precursor of the TiO2 yolk–shell spheres in DMF. The incorporation of DMF ensured the TiO2 yolk–shell spheres to be uniformly distributed on the g-C3N4 surface, thus enhancing their specific surface area. The perfect TiO2/g-C3N4 interface would be propitious for the separation of photogenerated charges. TiO2 yolk–shell nanostructures with a relatively high specific surface area could offer abundant active reaction sites and increase their light absorption. In view of this, the prepared TiO2/g-C3N4 composites possessed improved photocatalytic properties when compared to pure TiO2 and g-C3N4. Notably, TiO2 loaded on the g-C3N4 surface plays two significant roles: (i) the improvement of charge separation derived from the TiO2/g-C3N4 heterojunction promotes the efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and (ii) TiO2 structures can provide abundant active reaction sites and improve light harvesting properties, which contributes to the efficient utilization of the light source and thus increases the quantity of photogenerated electron–hole pairs available to participate in the photocatalytic HER.
Apart from frequently reported TiO2, ZnO is another important metal oxide with a band gap of ca. 3.2 eV and is an appropriate alternative to TiO2, which can also be effectively coupled with g-C3N4.292–295 Zhu and co-workers295 reported a significant improvement in the photocurrent of the ZnO/g-C3N4 composites under visible-light irradiation (λ > 450 nm), resulting from the effective separation of the photogenerated charge carriers originated from the synergistic effect of g-C3N4 and ZnO. The optimum synergistic effect of the ZnO/g-C3N4 composites was observed at a weight ratio of 3%, corresponding to a monolayered dispersion of g-C3N4 on the ZnO surface. The improved visible-light photocatalytic properties were attributed to the heterojunction interfaces and the core–shell nanostructure governed by the full-matched lattice and energy level between the g-C3N4 shell and the ZnO core. The excited electrons on g-C3N4 could directly move into the conduction band of ZnO, endowing the ZnO/g-C3N4 composites with evidently improved photocatalytic properties.296 The N-doped ZnO showed a much stronger visible light absorption thus achieving an improvement in the photocatalytic performance in contrast to pure ZnO.297 Krishnan and co-workers298 prepared 2D N-doped ZnO/g-C3N4 nanosheet heterojunctions and explored their photocatalytic HER properties. The optimal photocatalytic HER performance was achieved with 30 wt% of g-C3N4 nanosheets (18836 μmol h−1 g−1). The ultrahigh HER yield was mainly because of the presence of 2D–2D interfacial contact. This face-to-face contact surface was beneficial for the effective separation of the photogenerated charge carriers in space, thus facilitating H2 production. To obtain monolayered g-C3N4 with weak van der Waals forces between the adjacent layers, Vattikuti's group299 established a synthetic procedure for the construction of ternary SnO2–ZnO/g-C3N4 heterostructured hybrids, in which SnO2–ZnO quantum dots were immobilized on g-C3N4 nanosheets via a facile in situ co-pyrolysis approach. In this architecture, SnO2/ZnO quantum dots were used as spacers between the g-C3N4 layers, forming a three-dimensional conductive network that facilitated fast electron and hole transport. In addition, the as-designed heterostructures also provided a porous structure that may inhibit the recombination of the photoinduced electrons and holes. The prepared SnO2–ZnO/g-C3N4 composites possessed a high H2 evolution rate (2734.72 μmol h−1 g−1), which was 1.06- and 2.27-fold higher than those of the binary ZnO/g-C3N4 composites and pristine g-C3N4 photocatalyst.
Compared with UV-active TiO2 and ZnO semiconductors, WO3 possesses a relatively lower band gap (2.6–2.8 eV), located in the visible-light region, and thus increases its potential for HER applications under visible light.300,301 In 2014, Chen's group302 reported the separation mechanisms of the photogenerated electrons and holes for the WO3/g-C3N4 composites. The WO3/g-C3N4 composites with different components of g-C3N4 or WO3 were prepared via a ball milling and heat treatment strategy. When the main component of the WO3/g-C3N4 composites was WO3, the photogenerated electrons and holes migrated in the common band–band mode. The photocatalytic activity was not significantly improved. But when the main component of the WO3/g-C3N4 composites was g-C3N4, the transport of the photogenerated electrons and holes showed a typical Z-scheme feature, and the photocatalytic properties of the WO3/g-C3N4 composites were increased greatly. A host–guest concept has been recently rationally employed via embedding the guest WO3 nanocuboids in the host g-C3N4 to achieve materials integration with an intimate interfacial contact.303 The more positive band edges and the higher electron mobility of metal oxides are expected to synchronously enable a rapid electron injection into the valence band of g-C3N4, and thus significantly delay the fast recombination kinetics and improve the photocatalytic properties. Inspired by this, Gu and co-workers304 designed a host–guest architecture through partial intercalation of the WO3 nanocuboids (guest) within g-C3N4 (host) featuring their simultaneous exposure to light illumination. The prepared WO3/g-C3N4 composites showed significantly improved photocatalytic properties, with a high H2 evolution rate (3120 μmol h−1 g−1), which was 7.1-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4 (Fig. 18a). The well-defined WO3/g-C3N4 interfaces were clearly found via spherical aberration-corrected STEM, and both the in-plane and interlayer structures of g-C3N4 were directly imaged at atomic scale (Fig. 18b and c). The internal electric field and the covalent W–O–N–(C)2 interaction provided the driving force and the direct pathway, respectively, for achieving direct Z-scheme electron transfer from WO3 to g-C3N4 at the interface (Fig. 18d and e). Under simulated light excitation, this atomically defined junction led to a rapid electron injection from WO3 into g-C3N4 (Fig. 18f). Fig. 18g–j confirmed that the WO3/g-C3N4 composites possessed more excited electrons with extended lifetime that were available for heterogeneous photocatalytic HER. This Z-scheme host–guest architectural design enables more efficient utilization of the excited electrons in g-C3N4 with high reducing power for photocatalytic HER, which offers a new insight into the rational design of g-C3N4-based Z-scheme photocatalysts for more efficient solar energy utilization. Katsumata and co-workers305 prepared WO3/g-C3N4 composites through a simple calcination approach. The highest photocatalytic activity was achieved for 10 wt% WO3/g-C3N4 composites at H2 evolution rate of 110 μmol h−1 g−1, over 2-fold that of pure g-C3N4. The improved photocatalytic property could be ascribed to the Z-scheme mechanism, resulting in the efficient charge separation.
 Fig. 18  (a) Comparison of average photocatalytic H2 evolution rates of the WO3/g-C3N4 composites and pure samples loaded with 1 wt% Pt co-catalyst for the first three hours under simulated solar irradiation. Spherical aberration-corrected STEM images of the well-defined WO3/g-C3N4 interface in the WO3/g-C3N4 composites, revealing both the (b) in-plane and (c) interlayer structure of g-C3N4 (scale bars, 2 nm). (d) Diagrammatic sketch of the atomically defined junction at the WO3/g-C3N4 interface and the internal electric field from g-C3N4 (+) to WO3 (−). (e) Energy band diagram between WO3 and g-C3N4 with inverse band bending and internal electric field at interface. (f) Schematic illustration of the function mechanism of WO3/g-C3N4 composites at multiple length scales. (g) Photoluminescence spectrum of pure g-C3N4, WO3/g-C3N4 and pristine WO3 (inset). (h) Time-resolved fluorescence decay profiles of pure g-C3N4 and WO3/g-C3N4 excited at the wavelength of 320 nm; (i) transient photocurrent response and (j) electrochemical impedance spectra of pure g-C3N4 and WO3/g-C3N4 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 304 with permission from Elsevier. 
Besides that, Cu2O nanoparticles modified g-C3N4 photocatalysts have also recently been studied for HER application. Cu2O show a relatively lower direct band gap of 2.0 eV, increasing its potential for HER applications under visible light. The g-C3N4 with a thickness of ca. 2.5 nm was successfully decorated onto the surface of Cu2O nanospheres with a uniform diameter (ca. 200 nm). The prepared g-C3N4-coated Cu2O nanospheres possessed significantly improved photocatalytic activity for HER application in contrast to that of pure Cu2O and g-C3N4, respectively, reaching an the optimal H2 evolution rate (202.29 μmol h−1 g−1) at a g-C3N4 content of 5 wt%.306 Guo and co-workers307 reported Cu2O nanoparticles were uniformly coated on g-C3N4 surface through a one-pot in situ reduction method. The Cu2O nanoparticles with a narrow size range (3–7 nm) were well-decorated on g-C3N4 surface. With the introduction of Cu2O into g-C3N4, an electric field was formed. The conduction band of Cu2O was 1.11 eV, which was higher than g-C3N4, and ensuring a strong driving force for the electrons to be readily transformed from Cu2O to g-C3N4. In consequence, the well-matched energy levels promoted the formation of p–n heterojunction for boosting charge migration, and the photocatalytic activity was further improved. The Cu2O octahedra formed fully with (111) facets were more efficient for photocatalysis reactions than the nanospheres due to the (111) facets of Cu2O contained surface copper atoms with dangling bonds.308 Cui and co-workers309 prepared core@shell structured Cu2O@g-C3N4 octahedra photocatalyst through a combined solvothermal and chemisorption strategy. The prepared Cu2O@g-C3N4 composite possessed a high H2 evolution rate (365 μmol h−1 g−1), more than 4-fold that of the pure Cu2O crystals. The enhanced photocatalytic property could be ascribed to the effective separation and fast migration of the photogenerated charges resulted from exposed Cu2O facets.
Besides the above metal oxides, earth-abundant CoO was also used to develop g-C3N4 composites for the improved photocatalytic property. Mao and co-workers310 designed a novel g-C3N4/CoO nanocomposite by a simple thermal-annealing approach under Ar atmosphere. The prepared g-C3N4/CoO composite showed more efficient visible light absorption than pure g-C3N4, leading to a better photocatalytic property for HER. The optimum H2 evolution rate under visible-light irradiation for the g-C3N4/CoO composite was as high as 651.3 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 3-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. This enhancement was the result of the synergistic effect of the g-C3N4/CoO junction or interface. Liu and co-workers311 prepared CoO/g-C3N4 composites through a one-step thermal decomposition route. Interestingly, the optimal photocatalytic activity was obtained with a Co content of 10%, showing a highest H2 evolution rate of 0.46 μmol h−1 and O2 evolution rate of 0.21 μmol h−1 under visible-light illumination without adding any sacrificial reagents, which was very close to a stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. The eminent photocatalytic property of the CoO/g-C3N4 composites was mainly because of the efficient charge separation and fast decomposition.
Much attention has been paid to the crystal-plane-dependent interactions in CeO2-based photocatalysts for photocatalytic HER. Wan and co-workers312 prepared CeO2/g-C3N4 composites with tunable CeO2 crystal planes (110), (100), and (111). The CeO2(110)/g-C3N4 composites possessed much stronger interaction at interface, causing faster separation of electron–hole pairs, more Ce3+ species, and better photocatalytic property for H2 evolution. Kang and co-workers313 designed amorphous NiO/g-C3N4 as a photocatalyst, which can achieve efficient visible-light-governed overall H2 production without any sacrificial agent. The obtained NiO/g-C3N4 photocatalyst displayed the optimal photocatalytic HER property, with a H2 evolution rate of 1.41 μmol h−1 and O2 evolution rate of 0.71 μmol h−1, the stoichiometric ratio is very close to 2:1. The visible-light-guided photocatalytic property of the NiO/g-C3N4 originated from the amorphous NiO as the co-catalyst, being able to promote the photoinduced electron–hole pair separation, offer active sites and help to decompose the generated H2O2. Searching new types of 2D/2D Z-scheme heterojunctions to further enhance photocatalytic property is still a challenging task. Yu and co-workers40 reported 2D/2D g-C3N4/MnO2 composites prepared through in situ growing MnO2 nanosheets on exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets surface using a simple solution deposition approach. The prepared g-C3N4/MnO2 photocatalysts showed greatly improved photocatalytic property in contrast to that of the individual g-C3N4 or MnO2 component. This enhancement was due to the photoinduced electrons in MnO2 combined efficiently with the holes in g-C3N4.


4.3.3. Composites of metal sulfide semiconductor and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
Recently, the exploitation of g-C3N4 hybridized with a low band gap metal sulfide semiconductor photocatalyst has attracted more attention.314 CdS possesses a band gap of 2.4 eV, ensuring the absorption of visible light up to 520 nm. The highly matched energy levels of g-C3N4 and CdS, being beneficial for the construction of heterostructures, will ease the charge migration transfer upon light irradiation.315 Yu and co-workers316 synthesized a heterostructured g-C3N4/CdS photocatalyst with homogeneous dispersion and strong coupling interface through a simple in situ high-temperature self-transformation strategy employing melamine–CdS composite as the precursor. The g-C3N4 nanoparticles (5–30 nm) were grafted on CdS surface with densely contacted interfaces, which led to an enhanced photocatalytic activity. When the amount of g-C3N4 was 1 wt%, the obtained g-C3N4/CdS exhibited the highest H2 evolution rate (5303 mol h−1 g−1), which was 2.5-fold higher than that of pure CdS. In the g-C3N4/CdS composites, the g-C3N4 worked as an effective hole-migration cocatalyst to boost the fast migration of the photogenerated holes from the CdS surface, resulting in the highly efficient separation of the photogenerated charges in CdS. Two major issues need to be solved in CdS/g-C3N4 hybrids. CdS seriously suffers from photocorrosion that S2− in CdS tends to be self-oxidized under strong visible light radiation and their corresponding speedy photoexcited charge carriers tend to be recombined. In order to overcome these issues, protecting CdS from low efficiency and photocorrosion via coating g-C3N4 to form core/shell or yolk/shell nanostructures has proven to be a good strategy. Zhang et al.181 prepared CdS/g-C3N4 core/shell nanowires by a combined solvothermal and chemisorption strategy (Fig. 19a). g-C3N4 was easily to be exfoliated into thinner nanosheets via a simple ultrasonic method and then self-assembly-coated on CdS nanowires to form a core/shell nanostructure with intimate contact. The exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets were successfully decorated on the lateral surface of CdS nanowires to achieve a minimum surface energy, and the core/shell structures can be also clearly observed. The specific surface area of the obtained CdS/g-C3N4 sample was up to 13.6 m2 g−1 (Fig. 19b). The optimal photocatalytic property of the CdS/g-C3N4 sample was achieved at 2 wt% g-C3N4 content, and the H2 evolution rate was up to 4152 μmol h−1 g−1 with an apparent quantum efficiency of 4.3% at 420 nm (Fig. 19c). After running 4 times, there was no obvious loss observed in the H2 evolution rate (Fig. 19d). The eminent photocatalytic activity and stability was probably because of the synergic effect between g-C3N4 and CdS originated from their highly matched overlapping band structures, which can effectively boost the charge separation and migration corrosive holes from CdS to g-C3N4 (Fig. 19e–g). This work provides a new solution for enhancing the photocatalytic property of CdS/g-C3N4 hybrids.
 Fig. 19  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the formation process (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of CdS/g-C3N4 core/shell structure. (d) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distributions (the inset) calculated by the BJH method for pristine CdS nanowires and different CdS/g-C3N4 samples. (e) Comparison of photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of pristine CdS nanowires and different CdS/g-C3N4 samples from mixed 0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3 aqueous solutions. (f) Time course of photocatalytic H2 production for CdS/g-C3N4 sample. Diagrammatic sketch of (g) the energy-level configuration and the photogenerated charge migration process between g-C3N4 and CdS, (h) the photocatalytic process on a CdS nanowire with a thin and unclosed g-C3N4 shell, and (i) a CdS nanowire with a dense and closed g-C3N4 shell. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
CdS quantum dots can also be introduced onto g-C3N4 surface with different morphologies for HER application. In an early study, Feng and co-workers317 hybridized g-C3N4 nanosheets with CdS quantum dots with diameters of 2–5 nm by a chemical impregnation strategy. After the introduction of CdS quantum dots, the obtained CdS quantum dots/g-C3N4 showed a shift of the absorption edge of g-C3N4 to higher wavelengths in visible-light region because of the chemical interaction between g-C3N4 and CdS quantum dots. The optimal H2 evolution rate of the obtained CdS quantum dots/g-C3N4 reached 172.7 μmol h−1 g−1, which was approximately 9 times than pure g-C3N4. Notably, severe agglomeration of the CdS nanoparticles (>100 nm) was found without the g-C3N4 nanosheets as the supports. Well distributed small CdS quantum dots (∼5 nm) on g-C3N4 nanosheets can be obtained via a solvothermal approach. The obtained CdS/g-C3N4 nanocomposites showed evidently improved photocatalytic property with the H2 evolution rate of 4494 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 115-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. The enhancement was mainly because of the interfacial migration of the photogenerated electrons and holes, resulting in effective charge separation on the both components.318
Apart from the CdS modification, NiS/g-C3N4 composites have also received a wide attention. Depositing NiS nanoparticles on the g-C3N4 nanosheets via a hydrothermal treatment by employing Ni(CH3COO)2 and CH3CSNH2 as the raw materials, the absorption edge of g-C3N4 did not occur red shift, confirming that all elements (i.e., Ni and S) was not doped into the N pots of g-C3N4 frameworks. Thus, NiS can serve as an active cocatalyst site for the storage of photogenerated electrons from the g-C3N4. This NiS/g-C3N4 photocatalyst exhibited high H2 evolution rate (482 μmol h−1 g−1), exceeding 241-fold compared to that of pure g-C3N4.319 A similar hydrothermal treatment process was also performed for the construction of NiS/g-C3N4 composites by Yang's group.320 The ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets (∼ 3.4 nm) were prepared via a convenient liquid exfoliation approach and adopted as 2D matrixes for the decoration of NiS nanoparticles. In the NiS/g-C3N4 composites, the ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets served as a visible-light-responsive semiconductor, and the NiS nanoparticles acted as a noble-metal-free cocatalyst. The obtained NiS/g-C3N4 composites showed an improved photocatalytic performance for HER compared to g-C3N4 and exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets. Recently, excellent photocatalytic activities have been frequently reported when employing NiS/g-C3N4 composites as a photocatalyst for HER application. The H2 evolution rate of the NiS/g-C3N4 composites was reported to be as high as 992 μmol h−1 g−1 by Li's group,321 and 3429 μmol h−1 g−1 by M. Mohamed's group,322 respectively. The NiS/g-C3N4 composite with the highest H2 evolution rate was reported by Dong and co-workers,323 which reached 16400 μmol h−1 g−1, ca. 2500-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. For all we know, it is the highest H2 evolution rate of all g-C3N4-based photocatalysts reported so far. Moreover, the photocatalytic activity had no obvious loss after 40 h. In addition, the H2 evolution rate of the NiS/g-C3N4 composite reached 28300 μmol g−1 during 7 h under solar radiation. This unprecedented enhancement could be in virtue of the effective separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
2D MoS2 has recently become an ideal cocatalyst because of its low cost, robustness, and high activity.324,325 MoS2 has a similar structure to graphite, and it possesses a layered crystal structure consisting of S–Mo–S “sandwiches” hung together via van der Waals force. The fact that g-C3N4 and MoS2 possess analogous layered structures should minimize the lattice mismatch and boost the planar growth of MoS2 slabs along with the g-C3N4 surface.326 Wang and co-workers327 reported the fabrication of earth-abundant 2D/2D layered MoS2/g-C3N4 heterojunctions through an impregnation–sulfidation approach, which can raise the accessible area around the planar interface of the MoS2 and g-C3N4 layers and reduce the barriers for electron migration through the co-catalyst, thus further facilitate fast electron transfer across the interface by the electron tunneling effect. Moreover, the intrinsic band structures of g-C3N4 and MoS2 provided the possibility of the directional migration of the photogenerated electrons from g-C3N4 to MoS2. Thus, the photocatalytic HER property of g-C3N4 under visible-light was considerably enhanced via growing thin-layered MoS2 on the g-C3N4 surface. In addition, an in-depth understanding of the interface interaction and charge migration of MoS2/g-C3N4 is also very important. Li and co-workers328 extensively studied the MoS2/g-C3N4 interface region to explore the fundamental mechanism of photocatalytic improvement. The conduction band minimum and valence band maximum of the g-C3N4 monolayer were ca. 0.83 eV and 0.15 eV, respectively, which were higher than those of MoS2 nanosheets, resulting in the construction of a Type II heterojunction system. The predicted Type-II heterojunction structure ensured that the photogenerated electrons easily migrate from the monolayer g-C3N4 to the MoS2 nanosheet. The charge migration between MoS2 and g-C3N4 caused a polarized field within the MoS2/g-C3N4 interface region, which would be beneficial to the separation of photogenerated carriers. Moreover, the calculated optical absorption curves confirmed that the MoS2/g-C3N4 composites were also an excellent light-harvesting semiconductor. Thus, the MoS2/g-C3N4 composites exhibited improved photocatalytic properties. Han and co-workers329 prepared MoS2/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalysts via a facile in situ ion exchange strategy. Well-distributed MoS2 quantum dots with steerable size and a high loading were grown on the g-C3N4 nanosheet surface. MoS2 improved its redox activity in photocatalytic HER, and the compact heterojunction facilitated the separation of photoinduced charge carriers, which led to highly efficient photocatalytic H2 production for the prepared MoS2/g-C3N4 composites. The H2 evolution rate of the MoS2/g-C3N4 composite was up to 142 μmol h−1 g−1, which was approximately 7.4 and 9.5 times higher than those of single MoS2 and g-C3N4.
Although the combined photocatalytic mechanism for MoS2/g-C3N4 outperformed the simple individual mechanisms of MoS2 and g-C3N4, it is hard to recycle and classify a multicomponent compound from a solution. Thus, a method for the effective recycling of coupled MoS2/g-C3N4 photocatalysts is highly worth considering. Magnetic iron oxide, especially Fe3O4 and Fe2O3, have been widely used as promising oxide supports for constructing magnetically recoverable g-C3N4-based composite photocatalysts owing to their easy preparation, abundant active surface, and magnetic separability nature.330 Lu and co-workers331 synthesized a magnetically recoverable MoS2/g-C3N4 photocatalyst coupled with Fe3O4@SiO2 microspheres via an efficient and adoptable method (Fig. 20a). The microspheres were composed of a Fe3O4@SiO2 and a MoS2/g-C3N4 heterostructure, and the internal planar distances corresponding to the (002) plane of g-C3N4 and the (113) plane of MoS2 were ∼0.323 nm and ∼0.62 nm, respectively (Fig. 20b and c). The prepared Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4 composites showed an extended light response range, intimate contact interface, improved separation speed of carriers, and higher photocurrent density (Fig. 20d and e). Specifically, a H2 evolution rate of 110.72 μmol h−1 g−1 was measured with Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4 under visible-light, which was approximately 11.1- and 4.1-fold higher than those of pure g-C3N4 and Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2. This is mainly because of the unique transfer system of the MoS2/g-C3N4 Z-scheme photocatalysts with photogenerated electrons migrating into the valence band of g-C3N4 again from the conduction band of MoS2. In addition, it also shows good recoverability and photoactivity as a promising multifunctional photocatalyst (Fig. 20f).
 Fig. 20  (a) Diagrammatic sketch, (b) TEM image and (c) HRTEM image of Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4 microspheres. (d) Nyquist impedance spectroscopy of curves, plots i–iv: Fe3O4, Fe3O4@SiO2, MoS2, g-C3N4, Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2, and Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4, respectively. (e) Surface photocurrent curves: (i) Fe3O4, (ii) Fe3O4@SiO2, (iii) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2, and (iv) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4. (f) Stable H2 generation from water under visible-light irradiation using (i) MoS2, (ii) g-C3N4, (iii) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2, (iv) MoS2/g-C3N4, and (v) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 331 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Other metal sulfide semiconductors have also been employed to modify g-C3N4. For example, Hou and co-workers332 prepared 2D/2D WS2/g-C3N4 heterojunctions via loading thin-layered WS2 on the g-C3N4 surface to form intact junctions to improve the electron tunneling effect. The prepared WS2/g-C3N4 displayed improved photocatalytic properties, and the H2 evolution rate reached the optimum when the loading amount of WS2 was about 0.3 at%. The improvement was mainly ascribed to the thin-layered WS2/g-C3N4 junctions. Zhang's group333 reported an ultrasonic dispersion strategy to prepare 2D/2D Sn2S2/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalysts via coupling g-C3N4 nanosheets with the ultrathin hexagonal SnS2 (4–8 nm) nanosheets. The aggregation of SnS2 nanosheets could readily be found because of the high surface energy. With the aid of ultrasonication, highly-dispersed SnS2 nanosheets were decorated horizontally on the g-C3N4 surface. The prepared SnS2/g-C3N4 showed improved photocatalytic properties and reached the highest H2 evolution rate when the loading amount of SnS2 was about 5 wt%. Zou and co-workers334 reported an integrated design and synthesis of ZnS/g-C3N4 heterostructure with affluent zinc vacancy defects on the ZnS surface to emphasize the synergistic promotion on charge separation. The prepared ZnS/g-C3N4 heterojunction displayed a high photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (713.68 μmol h−1 g−1), over 30-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. This improved photocatalytic property could be because of the ZnS/g-C3N4 intimate interfacial contact, which increased the light-absorbing capacity and charge separation efficiency of the ZnS/g-C3N4 heterojunction.


4.3.4. Composites of metal phosphide semiconductors and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
Nickel phosphide semiconductors consisting of inexpensive and earth-abundant elements have received growing interest due to their unique optical and electrical properties, which endow them with great potential in HER application.335 Very recently, Ni2P nanocrystals composited as co-catalysts with g-C3N4 semiconductor photocatalysts for H2 production have attracted increasing attention. The first example of Ni2P/g-C3N4 composites for HER application was reported by Driess and co-cworkers.336 In the Ni2P/g-C3N4 composites, the Ni2P acted as an eminent co-catalyst for highly efficient photocatalytic HER under visible-light. This integrated system showed a higher catalytic property than the physical mixture of Ni2P and g-C3N4 or Ni2P on g-C3N4 under identical conditions. An and co-workers337 prepared a Ni2P/g-C3N4 lamellar composite photocatalyst through a one-pot hydrothermal method by in situ anchoring Ni2P nanocrystals onto the exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets using red phosphorus as a “green”, cheap and easy-to-handle precursor. The obtained Ni2P/g-C3N4 composite displayed an improved photocatalytic property for HER with a H2 evolution rate of 362.4 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 22-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. A similar work was also reported by Lin and co-workers.338 Ni2P was loaded onto g-C3N4via a facile annealing of a mixture of NiCl2, NaH2PO2 and g-C3N4 in an Ar atmosphere. The charge migration from the photo-excited g-C3N4 to Ni2P was enhanced. As a result, the H2 evolution rate over the Ni2P/g-C3N4 was up to 82.5 μmol h−1 g−1, which was higher than that of the Pt-loaded g-C3N4. The improvement was mainly attributed to efficient charge migration from the photo-excited g-C3N4 to Ni2P, which restrained the recombination of electron–hole pairs in g-C3N4. Chen's group339 used a solution-phase approach to prepare highly monodisperse 0D Ni2P nanoparticles, which were then loaded on 2D porous g-C3N4 nanosheets through a facile self-assembly strategy to fabricate the intimate 0D–2D heterojunction interface. When the Ni2P amount was 3.5 wt%, the Ni2P/g-C3N4 composite exhibited a high H2 evolution rate of 474.7 μmol h−1 g−1 and an apparent quantum yield of 3.2% at 435 nm, which surpassed most of the reported noble-metal-free co-catalyst-modified g-C3N4 photocatalysts. The outstanding photocatalytic performance was ascribed to the important role of Ni2P as an excellent reduction co-catalyst to restrain the recombination of charge carriers from g-C3N4 and offer good electrical conductivity as well.
Ni12P5 nanoparticles as non-precious earth-abundant photocatalysts have been extensively applied as promising cocatalysts for significantly accelerating the photocatalytic H2 production over g-C3N4, which can effectively enhance their photocatalytic performances.340 Li and co-workers341 prepared Ni12P5 modified g-C3N4 nanosheet (Ni12P5/g-C3N4) composites via a simple grinding method. Ni12P5 nanoparticles were uniformly decorated on the g-C3N4 nanosheet surface. The maximum photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of Ni12P5/g-C3N4 composites was up to 126.61 μmol h−1 g−1, exceeding 269.4-fold that of pure g-C3N4. The Ni12P5 nanoparticles decorated on the g-C3N4 surface could serve as important active sites to promote separation of the photoexcited electrons and holes, and thus boost the H2 generation. Han and co-workers342 synthesized Ni12P5 colloidal nanoparticles, and coupled them with 2D porous g-C3N4 nanosheets via a facile solution-phase self-assembly strategy under continuous ultrasonication. The Ni12P5 nanoparticles with high purity and good crystallinity were uniformly embedded into the porous g-C3N4 nanosheets, thus boosting the separation and migration of the photogenerated charge carriers. The obtained Ni12P5/g-C3N4 composite displayed an excellent H2 evolution activity of 535.7 μmol h−1 g−1, which was higher than that previously reported for the Ni12P5/g-C3N4 composites prepared by a mechanical blending approach.341 Among all transition metal phosphides, nickel phosphides, e.g., Ni3P, Ni12P5, and Ni2P, have received growing interest for constructing NixPy/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts due to their facile fabrication approaches and various crystal structures; thus, a detailed discussion about the influence of the different phases of NixPy on photocatalytic performance is of great importance. Majima and co-workers343 prepared three different phases of NixPy (Ni2P, Ni12P5, and Ni3P) as cocatalysts to be hybridized with g-C3N4. The NixPy nanoparticles with an average particle size of ca. 150–250 nm were uniformly loaded on the g-C3N4 surface (Fig. 21a–f). Commonly, there are three important factors in favor of enhancement of photocatalytic activity, including improved light absorption, effective charge carrier separation, and fast charge migration to the interface, all of them can be realized by the introduction of NixPy to g-C3N4 (Fig. 21g–i). Consequently, the prepared NixPy/g-C3N4 composites, especially Ni2P/g-C3N4 composites, showed excellent photocatalytic activity and stability, and the highest HER activity was achieved by Ni2P/g-C3N4 (168 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 21j and k). The introduction of NixPy accelerated the migration and separation of the photoexcited electrons of g-C3N4, leading to an enhanced photocatalytic property in HER (Fig. 21l). In the NixPy system, Ni and P have a partial positive charge (δ+) and a partial negative charge (δ−), respectively, which implies that the electron density of P is higher than that of Ni.344 The P sites in NixPy play an important role as the H+ acceptor and the delivery site for H, which is beneficial for the subsequent H2 production. Among these three different NixPy compounds, Ni2P possesses the highest ratio of P atoms in contrast to Ni12P5 and Ni3P, indicating that Ni2P could provide more H+ acceptor centers and active sites,345 and thus the Ni2P/g-C3N4 composites have shown the highest photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 21  TEM (a, c and e) and HRTEM (b, d and f) images of Ni2P/g-C3N4, Ni12P5/g-C3N4, and Ni3P/g-C3N4; UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (g) and photoluminescence (h) of g-C3N4 and NixPy/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy); time profiles of normalized transient absorption for g-C3N4 and NixPy/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy) with 420 nm laser irradiation (i); photocatalytic H2 generation rates for g-C3N4, Pt/g-C3N4, and NixPy/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy) (j); recycle of H2 generation on Ni2P/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy) (k) and schematic diagram of photocatalytic H2 generation for the NixPy/g-C3N4 hybrid (l). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 343 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In addition to NixPy, other earth-abundant metal phosphides have also been utilized to prepare g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Li and co-workers346 prepared CoP/g-C3N4 hybrids via in situ 2D/2D assembly between ultrathin CoP and g-C3N4 nanosheets. The design of a 2D/2D CoP/g-C3N4 interface enlarged the Schottky effect and shortened the transmission distance of the photo-generated charges. As a result, a remarkable improvement of the photocatalytic activity and stability could be achieved. Xu and co-workers347 prepared a novel CoP/g-C3N4 photocatalyst by low-cost precursors. It was found that the unique P(δ−)–Co(δ+)–N(δ−) surface bonding states in the as-prepared photocatalyst resulted in superior photocatalytic H2 generation activity (1924 μmol h−1 g−1) to the noble metal Pt-decorated g-C3N4 photocatalyst (646 μmol h−1 g−1). The quantum efficiency of 12.4% at 420 nm was also higher than that reported for the other transition metal cocatalyst-loaded g-C3N4 photocatalysts. Xie and co-workers348 prepared NiCoP/g-C3N4 composites via a facile one-pot approach. NiCoP nanoparticles (∼10 nm) were well coated on the g-C3N4 surface, forming inorganic/polymer junctions. Importantly, NiCoP/g-C3N4 composites exhibited an ultrahigh H2 evolution rate of 1643 μmol h−1 g−1, which was about 21-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. The outstanding photocatalytic property was probably because of the combined effects of the enhanced separation efficiency and effective charge transfer efficiency.


4.3.5. Composites of complex compound semiconductors and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
As we know, a complex compound consists of at least 3 elements. The incorporation of a complex compound into light-absorbing semiconductor photocatalysts is believed to be a promising technique for improving photoredox reactions, especially for the HER because of the efficient charge separation.349–351 Generally speaking, the complex compounds are easily decorated on the g-C3N4 surface by physical and chemical adsorption. The transfer of electrons is viable from the photoexcited semiconductors to the molecular cocatalysts to delay the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
An Aurivillius-based semiconductor photocatalyst has attracted much interest as an ideal candidate for the engineering of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts.352,353 The g-C3N4/Bi2WO6 and g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6 heterojunctions, following a typical heterojunction charge transfer mechanism, have shown relatively weak potential for H2 generation. DFT calculation indicated that the charge migration at the interface of the heterostructure resulted in a built-in potential, which benefited the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. The g-C3N4/Bi2WO6(010) heterostructure with more negative adhesion energy (−1.10 eV Å−2) was predicted to have a better adsorptive ability and could form more easily when compared to the g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6(010) interface (−1.16 eV Å−2). Therefore, the g-C3N4 interaction with Bi2MoO6 was stronger than that with Bi2WO6, which resulted in a better photocatalytic performance.354 Inspired by this, Fan and co-workers355 prepared g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6 heterojunctions via an in situ solvothermal method. The exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets provided large specific surface area and shortened the diffusion distance of photogenerated charges, enhancing the photocatalytic property as well as profiting the sufficient interaction with Bi2MoO6. Moreover, the intimate contact of Bi2MoO6 and g-C3N4 nanosheets facilitated the migration and separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Remarkably, 20%-g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6 composite exhibited the optimal photocatalytic property with a H2 evolution rate of 563.4 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 3.84- and 32.19-fold higher than those of g-C3N4 and Bi2MoO6. Shi and co-workers356 prepared g-C3N4/InVO4 heterojunction-type photocatalysts through in situ growth of InVO4 nanoparticles onto the g-C3N4 nanosheet surface by a simple hydrothermal route. The InVO4 nanoparticles (∼20 nm) coated uniformly on the g-C3N4 nanosheet surface. The intimate interface boosted the charge migration and restrained the recombination rate of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which effectively enhanced the photocatalytic property. The prepared g-C3N4/InVO4 photocatalyst exhibited excellent photocatalytic property, namely, its H2 evolution rate was up to 212 μmol h−1 g−1 and apparent quantum efficiency was as high as 4.9% at 420 nm.
BiOX (X = Cl, Br and I) possesses a layered structure and indirect transition band gaps which can provide an enormous region to polarize the atoms and orbitals, and the internal static electric fields are perpendicular to the [Bi2O2] slabs and halogen anionic slabs in the BiOX structure.357,358 By now several significant studies on the construction of BiOX/g-C3N4 for HER application have been presented. Among these BiOX compounds, BiOBr with a moderate band gap (∼2.75 eV) shows strong visible-light response and high chemical stability. Zan and co-workers359 synthesized BiOBr–g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts via a one-step chemical bath approach at low temperature. The obtained BiOBr–g-C3N4 composites exhibited improved photocatalytic performance compared to pure g-C3N4 and BiOBr. The interaction between BiOBr and g-C3N4 was embodied by the facets coupling between BiOBr-(001) and g-C3N4-(002), and the photoinduced charge migration between these two facets led to efficient charge separation. BiOCl is a white colored semiconductor with a band gap energy of ∼3.4 eV and a high recombination rate of photo-generated carriers. Therefore, it is necessary for BiOCl to find a suitable narrow-band-gap semiconductor as a photosensitizer. Shen and co-workers360 reported novel g-C3N4/BiOCl composite photocatalysts with controllable mass ratios of g-C3N4 to BiOCl, which were fabricated via direct hydrolysis of NaBiO3 and g-C3N4, through which BiOCl was loaded onto g-C3N4. The prepared g-C3N4/BiOCl photocatalysts displayed higher photocatalytic properties than pure BiOCl and g-C3N4. The enhancement was in virtue of the effective separation of electron–hole pairs in the g-C3N4/BiOCl interface.361 BiOI is a fascinating p-type semiconductor with the smallest band gap (1.7–1.8 eV), showing the highest absorption in the visible-light region compared to BiOBr and BiOCl.362 Yao and co-workers363 prepared a series of Z-scheme BiOI/g-C3N4 photocatalysts via a simple deposition approach. The optimal 7.4-BiOI/g-C3N4 composite was confirmed to be an ideal photocatalyst for H2 production and showed better photocatalytic properties than pure BiOI and g-C3N4 under visible-light (λ > 400 nm). The improved photocatalytic activity was ascribed to the efficient separation of the photogenerated charge carriers.
CoTiO3, a typical ABO3 perovskite oxide, is a semiconductor with a narrow band gap (Eg = 2.25 eV), appropriate electronic band structure, large absorption coefficient, high carrier mobility, and high stability. Moreover, CoTiO3 possesses appropriate band edges (ECB = 0.1 eV, EVB = 2.35 eV), which match well with g-C3N4 (ECB = −1.3 eV, EVB = 1.4 eV) to form a direct Z-scheme photocatalytic system.364 A direct Z-scheme photocatalyst consisting of 1D CoTiO3 rods and 2D g-C3N4 nanosheets was successfully prepared via calcining the mixture of preformed CoTiO3 and urea (Fig. 22a). g-C3N4 was uniformly decorated on the CoTiO3 rod surface, forming an intimate two-phase contacting layer, which was beneficial to rapid electron transfer (Fig. 22b). Moreover, the crystal lattice spacing (ca. 0.27 nm) along with the interface was well-matched with the (104) facet of the high-crystalline CoTiO3, indicating that intimate junctions were obtained between the (104) plane of CoTiO3 and g-C3N4 (Fig. 22c). The molecular interaction between perovskite CoTiO3 and tri-s-triazine g-C3N4 was confirmed to be some chemical bonds, e.g., Co–O–N or Ti–O–N (Fig. 22d). The 0.15% CoTiO3/g-C3N4 composite exhibited the optimal photocatalytic property with a H2 evolution rate of ca. 858 μmol h−1 g−1 and quantum efficiency of 38.4% at 365 nm, and 3.23% at 420 ± 20 nm (Fig. 22e). These enhancements were mainly because of the synergistic effect of CoTiO3 and g-C3N4 related to the fabrication of heterojunctions on the solid–solid contact interface. It could be explained very well by Z-scheme mechanisms. The electrons generated from the conduction band of CoTiO3 could transfer to the valence band of g-C3N4 through a solid–solid heterointerface, subsequently recombine with the local holes, consequently boosting the separation of the photogenerated electrons from the conduction band of g-C3N4. Meanwhile, the photogenerated holes on the CoTiO3 surface could be rapidly shifted and consumed by sacrificial ethanol, which would boost the charge separation and thus enhance photocatalytic properties (Fig. 22f).365 This study focuses mainly on the direct solid-state Z-scheme CoTiO3/g-C3N4, which offers very useful guidance role for further development of novel heterojunction perovskite/g-C3N4 photocatalytic systems.
 Fig. 22  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the preparation of CoTiO3/g-C3N4 composites. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images of the CoTiO3/g-C3N4 composites. (d) Schematic illustration of molecular interaction between perovskite CoTiO3 and tri-s-triazine g-C3N4via the formation of chemical bonds. (e) Photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution with different ratios of CoTiO3/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. (f) Schematic illustration of traditional heterojunction-type (i) and direct Z-scheme (ii) mechanisms for charge carrier separation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 365 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In addition to CoTiO3, other ABO3 perovskite oxide materials such as SrTiO3 with a band gap of 3.2 eV can also well match g-C3N4 to form SrTiO3/g-C3N4 composites. Irvine and co-workers366 prepared SrTiO3/g-C3N4 composites through a simple synthetic method that allowed close interfacial connections between SrTiO3 crystalline and g-C3N4. The prepared SrTiO3/g-C3N4 composite exhibited a high H2 evolution rate (440 μmol h−1 g−1) under visible-light irradiation, which was higher than that of the traditional anion doped SrTiO3 or physical blends of g-C3N4 and SrTiO3. The enhancement could be because of the compact interfacial interaction between g-C3N4 and SrTiO3 where the photo-generated electron and holes could be rapidly separated.
As a typical ternary metal sulfide, cubic CaIn2S4 material has been employed to construct a 2D heterojunction photocatalyst with g-C3N4 because of its appropriate band gap, good activity, and outstanding stability.367,368 The formed 2D heterostructure of the nanocomposite photocatalyst could not only improve the interfacial contact area between CaIn2S4 and g-C3N4 but also facilitate separation of charge carriers. In consequence, the prepared CaIn2S4/g-C3N4 composite exhibited improved photocatalytic H2 generation activity, e.g., its H2 evolution rate was 102 μmol h−1 g−1, 3-fold higher than that of pristine CaIn2S4. The improved photocatalytic property of the CaIn2S4/g-C3N4 composite mainly resulted from the improved charge separation efficiency.41 Many other complex compound modified g-C3N4 materials have also been reported recently, for example, BiPO4/g-C3N4,369 Bi2O2CO3/g-C3N4,370 Bi5Nb3O15/g-C3N4,371 Bi5O7I/g-C3N4,372 Bi4O5I2/g-C3N4,373 Bi2Fe4O9/g-C3N4,374 SmVO4/g-C3N4,375 ZnFe2O4/g-C3N4,376 MnTiO3/g-C3N4,377 BiFeO3/g-C3N4,378 CeVO4/g-C3N4,379 Ag3PO4/g-C3N4,380 Ag2WO4/g-C3N4,381 Ag2CrO4/g-C3N4,382 and most of them showed enhanced photocatalytic activity.


4.3.6. Composites of other semiconductor and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
In addition to all the composites mentioned above, AgX-based (X = Cl, Br and I) photocatalysts have also been reported as a promising candidate to construct AgX/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalysts. Li and co-workers383 fabricated a series of visible-light-driven AgX/g-C3N4 (X = Br, I) composites via a simple water bath approach. Small-sized AgX nanoparticles (∼10 nm) were uniformly distributed on the g-C3N4 surface to form AgX/g-C3N4 heterostructures. After the incorporation of AgX nanoparticles onto g-C3N4, the photocurrents of the AgBr/g-C3N4 and AgI/g-C3N4 composites were observed to be increased to 21- and 8-fold compared with pure g-C3N4, respectively. As a result, the obtained AgX/g-C3N4 composites showed higher photocatalytic property than the pure g-C3N4 and AgX nanoparticles. The improvement was ascribed to the surface plasmon resonance effect produced from Ag and the AgX/g-C3N4 heterojunction structure for boosting the charge migration and separation.384
The improved photocatalytic activity has been achieved by combining Ag with AgX,385,386 and the obtained Ag/AgX composites are promising candidates for the construction of Ag/AgX/g-C3N4 heterojunction photocatalysts. Li and co-workers156 prepared a highly efficient Ag@AgCl/g-C3N4 plasmonic photocatalyst via an in situ ion exchange strategy between the exfoliated g-C3N4 nanosheets with porous 2D morphology and AgNO3. The obtained Ag@AgCl/g-C3N4 composites showed an improved photocatalytic property compared to g-C3N4 and Ag@AgCl. This result indicated that a combination of the synergistic effect of appropriate size plasmonic Ag@AgCl and strong coupling effect between the Ag@AgCl nanoparticles and the exfoliated porous g-C3N4 nanosheets showed an excellent visible-light response and rapid separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, thus evidently enhancing the photocatalytic activity. Guo and co-workers387 prepared a series of Ag@AgBr grafted g-C3N4 (Ag@AgBr/g-C3N4) plasmonic photocatalysts through a deposition–precipitation approach. Improved photocatalytic properties were achieved for Ag@AgBr/g-C3N4 compared to pure g-C3N4 and Ag@AgBr because of the high visible-light adsorption efficiency and Z-scheme structures, which kept the photogenerated electrons and holes with high reduction and oxidation ability.
As we know, the coupling of g-C3N4 with semiconductors enables an efficient improvement in the separation of charge carriers by the mutual transfer of carriers in the composites through a heterojunction-transfer mechanism or a Z-scheme mechanism.388,389 Thus, ternary g-C3N4-based heterojunction photocatalysts will possess more potential applications due to their synergistic effects. Xiang and co-workers390 fabricated a series of ternary CdS/g-C3N4/CuS composite photocatalysts through a convenient low-temperature solid-state route. The prepared ternary CdS/g-C3N4/CuS composites showed improved visible-light-governed photocatalytic properties with a H2 evolution rate of 1151.2 mol h−1 g−1 and apparent quantum efficiency of 16.5% at 420 nm. The improved photocatalytic properties were attributed to the heterojunctions and the synergistic effect of CuS, CdS, and g-C3N4 in the acceleration of the charge separation and mobility.
Song and co-workers391 prepared CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructures through ion exchange between CdS and Cu+ combined with ultrasonication-assisted self-assembly of CdS/Cu7S4 and g-C3N4 (Fig. 23a). The addition of g-C3N4 increased the light utilization of the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructure in the visible and near-infrared light region, which further improved the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 23b). The CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 composite showed the largest specific surface area (ca. 37 m2 g−1) because of the addition of g-C3N4, which can offer more active sites and facilitate the charge carrier transport (Fig. 23c). By regulating the content of Cu7S4, the H2 evolution rate on CdS/Cu7S4 nanocomposites can be effectively tuned (Fig. 23d). The H2 evolution rate was markedly enhanced with the introduction of Cu7S4 as a co-catalyst, reaching a value as high as 1930 μmol g−1 h−1. More importantly, the H2 evolution rate and photochemical stability of the CdS/Cu7S4 composites were greatly enhanced after coupling with the g-C3N4 nanosheets, and the maximum H2 evolution rate reached 3570 μmol g−1 h−1 over the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructure (Fig. 23e and g). In addition, the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructure showed the highest photocurrent density, suggesting that the construction of the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterojunctions can effectively strengthen the electron–hole separation and further enhance the photocatalytic activity (Fig. 23f). The major reason for the high carrier density of the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructure was that the existence of Cu7S4 and g-C3N4 in the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 could availably improve the charge migration and dramatically restrain the electron–hole recombination (Fig. 23h). The photogenerated electrons produced from the conduction band of g-C3N4 could be directly migrated to the conduction band of CdS, and then to the conduction band of Cu7S4. The separation of electron–hole pairs could be boosted because of the formed p–n junction between CdS and Cu7S4. Furthermore, after g-C3N4 was introduced to the system, it could bring more heterojunction spots and utilize more solar light, which greatly increased the charge carrier lifetime to protect CdS and Cu7S4 from possible photocorrosion (Fig. 23i). All results encourage us for the rational design and exploration of multiple component g-C3N4-based heterostructures with widened light absorption, which may pave new avenues for further accelerating the photocatalytic research studies.
 Fig. 23  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the construction of CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructures. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (c) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of CdS, CdS/Cu7S4 and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructures. (d) Photocatalytic H2 generation activity of CdS/Cu7S4 with different molar ratios of Cd to Cu (with and without g-C3N4). (e) Photocatalytic HER activity of the different catalysts under visible-light irradiation (>420 nm). (f) Photocurrent responses for CdS (black), CdS/Cu7S4 (red) and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructures (blue). (g) Cycling hydrogen evolution property of CdS/Cu7S4 (red) and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructure (blue) for 15 h. (h) Mott–Schottky plots of CdS, CdS/Cu7S4 and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructures, and (i) schematic illustration of the possible visible-light photocatalytic charge transfer and H2 evolution processes in the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructure. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 391 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Yang and co-workers392 reported a robust and highly efficient visible-light-guided photocatalyst, namely mesoporous TiO2/WO3/g-C3N4 ternary hybrid nanofibers, prepared by a foaming-assisted electrospinning strategy followed by a solution dipping strategy. The prepared TiO2/WO3/g-C3N4 hybrid fibers, without the noble-metal assistance, exhibited an ultrahigh H2 evolution rate (5732 μmol h−1 g−1), which was considerably improved compared to those of pure TiO2 (86 μmol h−1 g−1), pure g-C3N4 (1550 μmol h−1 g−1), TiO2/WO3 (438 μmol h−1 g−1), TiO2/g-C3N4 (3386 μmol h−1 g−1) and P25 (350 μmol h−1 g−1). The significantly improved photocatalytic property could be because of the WO3/g-C3N4 Z-scheme system and the built-in electric field caused by the heterojunctions formed between the g-C3N4 and TiO2 interfaces, resulting in the improved space separation and transfer of the photo-induced charge carriers. Wu and co-workers393 fabricated a series of novel ZnO/ZnS/g-C3N4 ternary composites with double Z-scheme heterojunctions through a facile two-step chemical conversion route. The spherical ZnS nanoparticles were well-loaded onto the ZnO nanoflower surface. After that, the ZnO/ZnS composites were further hybridized with g-C3N4 nanosheets by the static electric attraction. The prepared ZnO/ZnS/g-C3N4 displayed the optimum photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of 301 μmol h−1 g−1 under solar light illumination. The higher photocatalytic property of the ZnO/ZnS/g-C3N4 composite was probably because of the multi-step charge migration and effective electron–hole separation in the double Z-scheme system.
Many other semiconductor/g-C3N4 nanocomposite heterojunction photocatalysts have also been reported recently. For example, g-C3N4/Al2O3,394 g-C3N4/Ag2SO4,395 g-C3N4/Bi4O5I2,373 g-C3N4/Bi5O7I,372 DyVO4/g-C3N4,396 g-C3N4/Ag2VO2PO4,397 Mn0.8Cd0.2S/g-C3N4,398 CdLa2S4/g-C3N4,399 LaFeO3/g-C3N4,400 g-C3N4/Cu3B2O6,401 NiS/MoS2/g-C3N4,402 Co3O4/Fe3O4/g-C3N4,403 TiO2/In2O3@g-C3N4,404 g-C3N4/Al2O3/ZnO,405 WO3/g-C3N4/CoOx,406 g-C3N4/Fe3O4/Ag2CrO4,407 g-C3N4/ZnO/AgCl,408 g-C3N4/Fe3O4/AgI,409 g-C3N4/Ca2Nb2TaO10,410 g-C3N4/Cu3P,411 Ag2S/g-C3N4,412 Ag/AgVO3/C3N4,413 g-C3N4/Ag/MoS2,414 ZnO/g-C3N4/MoS2,415 BiOCl/g-C3N4/Cu2O/Fe3O4,416 g-C3N4/Fe3O4/AgI/Bi2S3,417etc. Some of them have been investigated for photocatalytic applications.
The development of a semiconductor–g-C3N4 heterojunction with appropriate valence band and conduction band potentials is considered to be one of the most commonly used strategies for boosting charge migration and separation to further enhance the photocatalytic properties. Semiconductor–g-C3N4 hybrids show an outstanding photocatalytic HER performance (e.g., 16400 μmol h−1 g−1 for the NiS/g-C3N4 and 18836 μmol h−1 g−1 for the N-doped ZnO/g-C3N4 nanosheets) (Table 4) and relatively low cost, but unfortunately, semiconductors particularly those containing heavy metal elements potentially cause environmental pollutions and biological hazards. In a comprehensive consideration of the catalytic efficiency and cost, an effective combination of multiple components with different functions is supposed to greatly improve catalytic efficiency and simultaneously reduce the cost.

4.4. Composites of metal organic frameworks and g-C3N4 for HER application
Metal organic framework (MOF) is a new type of crystalline organic–inorganic complex with uniform pore structures, high stability and tunable metrics, and one kind of potential low-bandgap materials.418–420 Unlike many other materials, MOFs benefit from a high surface area, controllable pore size and tunable light harvesting capacity.421–424 Up to now, researchers have paid much attention to the integration of MOFs with g-C3N4 because of their structural and species diversities, controllable cavities and porosity, and high specific surface areas.184,425 Yuan and co-workers426 prepared a novel highly active composite photocatalyst UiO-66/g-C3N4 by hybridizing Zr-containing MOFs (UiO-66) and g-C3N4via a thermal annealing process. Through coupling UiO-66 with g-C3N4, the photocatalytic HER property was greatly improved. The optimal H2 evolution rate of the UiO-66/g-C3N4 was up to 14110 μmol h−1 g−1, 17-fold that of pure g-C3N4 (800 μmol h−1 g−1). The improvement was because of the efficient interfacial charge migration from photoexcited g-C3N4 to UiO-66. Besides, the high content of g-C3N4 endowed the UiO-66/g-C3N4 composites with the “quasi-polymeric nature,” which was different from the reported heterostructures.
The carbon nanostructure derived from zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) can form an intimate contact with g-C3N4 and possess large specific surface area, which serves as an electron acceptor for promoting the separation of photogenerated charge carriers, and as an effective cocatalyst to improve photocatalytic properties. A thermal condensation process was used for the preparation of C-ZIF/g-C3N4 photocatalysts, in which a ZIF-8 and melamine were employed as the starting materials (Fig. 24a). Prolonged ultrasonication could not detach the ZIF-8 nanoparticles from the g-C3N4 nanosheets, suggesting the construction of an intimate interface, which benefited the charge separation in photocatalysis (Fig. 24b). The photoluminescence emission intensity for the C-ZIF/g-C3N4 photocatalysts remarkably decreased with increasing C-ZIF contents, implying an enhanced charge carrier separation efficiency in the C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites (Fig. 24c), and the radiative lifetime for charge carriers was effectively elongated by compositing a small amount of C-ZIF onto g-C3N4 (Fig. 24d); all of these were beneficial for photocatalytic HER. All C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites without the Pt co-catalyst exhibited much enhanced H2 production activity and good stability. Among them, the 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composite displayed the highest H2 evolution rate (326 μmol h−1 g−1), which was ca. 36.2-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4, and even 2.8-fold higher than that of the Pt loaded g-C3N4 (Fig. 24e and f). This enhancement was mainly put down to the improved charge separation and migration ability (Fig. 24g–j). Under visible light irradiation, g-C3N4 absorbed photons to produce electrons from its valence band to the conduction band. The electrons in the conduction band of g-C3N4 fleetly migrate to C-ZIF to perform photocatalytic HER due to the role of electron acceptor and cocatalyst of C-ZIF. This work offers an effective approach for the exploration of metal-free, all carbon-based g-C3N4 photocatalysts for photocatalytic HER.184
 Fig. 24  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation of C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites. (b) TEM images of 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites, the red dashed circles indicated the C-ZIF nanoparticles grown on g-C3N4 nanosheets. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of pure g-C3N4 and C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites with different C-ZIF contents. (d) Time-resolved fluorescence decay spectra of pure g-C3N4 and the 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composite. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of pure g-C3N4, 3 wt% Pt/g-C3N4, and C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites with different C-ZIF contents. (f) Photocatalytic HER as a function of reaction time in 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution without loading the Pt co-catalyst under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). (g) The polarization curves of various catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (h) Photoluminescence spectra of g-C3N4, Pt/g-C3N4, and 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites under 375 nm excitation at room temperature. (i) Schematic illustration showing the mechanism of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution for C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm), and (j) Nyquist plots obtained at an AC voltage with an amplitude of 5 mV over the frequency range from 105 to 10−1 Hz for g-C3N4 and 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 electrodes in 0.5 mol L−1 Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
MIL is a highly porous and crystalline titanium dicarboxylate with high thermal stability and photochemical property, owning large surface area and accessible pore diameters. This material not only possesses high density of the immobilized Ti sites within porous MOFs, but also can be used to synthesize isostructural MOFs with improved photocatalytic properties by the incorporation of organic ligands.427 Han and co-workers428 presented a facile grinding strategy for the production of a g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe) composite, which displayed great potential as a highly efficient photocatalyst for HER under simulated visible-light illumination. The introduction of MIL-53(Fe) into g-C3N4 could evidently improve photocatalytic activity, which was probably because of the charge spatial separation between g-C3N4 and MIL-53(Fe). In consequence, the highest H2 evolution rate of 905 μmol h−1 g−1 was obtained for the g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe)-0.5 composite, 335- and 47-fold higher than those of pure MIL-53(Fe) (2.7 μmol h−1 g−1) and g-C3N4 (19.3 μmol h−1 g−1), respectively.
Usually, MOFs possess a high surface area, controllable pore size and tunable light harvesting capacity, and thus seem to be an ideal material to combine with g-C3N4 to achieve highly efficient photocatalytic HER with enhanced visible-light utilization efficiency. However, up to now, only a few works have been reported and relatively low photocatalytic activities have been achieved (Table 4). Thus, there's still a lot of room for designing and synthesizing novel MOFs/g-C3N4 hybrids with greatly improved photocatalytic performance. Based on this fact, it is believed that the MOFs/g-C3N4 hybrids have great potential for large-scale production in the near future.
4.5. Composites of carbon and g-C3N4 for HER application
Carbon materials with π-conjugated structures, e.g., graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon dots, ordered mesoporous carbon, activated carbon, etc., have been used as promising substrates and reductive cocatalysts to integrate with photoactive nanostructures to restrain the reorganization of electron–hole pairs generated by light due to their unique structural, optical and electronic features.429 Different kinds of carbon/g-C3N4 composites are elaborated in the following subsection.

4.5.1. Composites of graphene and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
Graphene, a honeycomb nanostructured 2D macromolecular nanosheet of carbon atoms, has achieved great attraction because of the excellent mechanical, thermal, optical, and electrical properties, especially optical and electrical features, which restrain the reorganization of light-generated electron–hole pairs and enhance photocatalytic properties.430,431 Thus, graphene/g-C3N4 composites have received growing attention in photocatalytic HER application. The first example of graphene/g-C3N4 composites as photocatalysts for HER application was reported by Jaroniec and co-workers,182 who prepared graphene/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts via an impregnation chemical reduction approach involving polycondensation of melamine with graphene oxide (GO) and N2H4·H2O at 550 °C under N2 protection. After graphene nanosheets were produced, g-C3N4 was loaded on the surface to form layered composites. The graphene nanosheets here served as electronic conductive pathways and could be used for efficient separation of the photogenerated current carrier, thus further improved the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 for HER. The optimal photocatalytic activity was achieved by adding 1.0 wt% graphene with a much higher H2 evolution rate (451 μmol h−1 g−1) compared to pure g-C3N4 (147 μmol h−1 g−1).
An enhanced visible light absorption was achieved after loading GO on the g-C3N4 surface, and the photoluminescence spectra indicated that g-C3N4/GO possessed higher photo-induced charge separation efficiency than pure g-C3N4. Therefore, the g-C3N4/GO composites could obtain a prominent improvement of photocatalytic activity with visible-light irradiation.432 In addition, g-C3N4/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) composites were readily regulated through simply changing the rGO dosage, and a suitable rGO portion in the composites could improve the oxidation ability due to the existence of a significant positively-shifted valence band edge potential.433 The g-C3N4 band structure could also be regulated, e.g., shifted from “n-type” to “p-type” via the introduction of rGO (≤1 wt%).434 However, there is an important factor which needs to be known, namely, what are the roles of the O atoms in GO and rGO in the photocatalytic reactions? To answer this question, Huang and co-workers435 systematically explored the interplay between g-C3N4 and rGO using large-scale ab initio calculations. The sp2-bonded C and N atoms formed the graphitic planes which were stacked in a staggered fashion to generate a laminar structured g-C3N4. In contrast to single g-C3N4 monolayer, g-C3N4/rGO composites possessed significantly decreased band gap, and more dispersive levels near the Fermi level at a higher O concentration, which indicated that the effective mass of the carrier became smaller. Most importantly, a Type-II, staggered band alignment could be acquired at the g-C3N4/rGO interface, and the active sites of negatively charged O atoms in the rGO resulted in high photocatalytic HER activity. Thus, the O atoms were believed to play considerably significant roles in the g-C3N4/rGO composites.
Usually, the preparation strategy of graphene/g-C3N4 composites involved a strong ultrasonic exfoliation process for g-C3N4 and graphene, a protonation process for g-C3N4 by acid pretreatment, a heating reaction for the electrostatic self-assembly of protonated g-C3N4 and GO, and a reduction reaction of GO to form graphene/g-C3N4 composites.437,438 The entire process was complex, possessed low yields and high energy costs, and the size of the protonated g-C3N4 was still too large. Fan's group439 fabricated porous protonated graphitic carbon nitride/rGO (pPCN/rGO) composites by an acidic cutting and hydrothermal method. The holey structure not only accelerated photo-induced charge transfer, but also endowed the pPCN with more exposure of the active sites. Compared to the pure pPCN and rGO, the prepared pPCN-5 wt%/rGO composite possessed significantly improved photocatalytic performance with H2 evolution rate up to 557 μmol h−1 g−1 when exposed to visible-light. Based on this study, a novel H2SO4-assisted dissolution–precipitation strategy was also applied to prepare pPCN/rGO composites. Bulk g-C3N4 was firstly dissolved in concentrated H2SO4 without destroying its structure, which not only provided positive polarity on the surface but promoted the exfoliation of g-C3N4 from bulk to ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets directly. Then, the dissolved protonated g-C3N4 was composited with rGO dispersion liquid with molecular level contact by electrostatic self-assembly (Fig. 25a). The thin pPCN nanosheets grown on the large layered RGO nanosheets formed layered pPCN/RGO composites with an intimate 2D/2D interfacial contact (Fig. 25b). The PCN/2 wt% rGO composite showed the highest ratio of surface to volume, which was 1.28 and 5.37 times higher than those of pPCN and CN, respectively (Fig. 25c). The prepared PCN/rGO composites showed smaller charge migratory resistance and more effective charge separation than those of pPCN and CN (Fig. 25d–g). The pPCN/2 wt% rGO composite possessed the highest H2 evolution rate (715 μmol h−1 g−1), which was approximately 2.6 and 13-fold higher than those of pPCN (278 μmol h−1 g−1) and CN (55.6 μmol h−1 g−1), respectively (Fig. 25h). Combined with the large specific surface area and improved light absorption properties, the pPCN/rGO heterojunction showed a remarkable improvement in photocatalytic HER performance (Fig. 25i).436 As is known to us, the dissolution of g-C3N4 still remains a challenge, and this work offers a novel dissolution–precipitation strategy for the construction of g-C3N4-based heterojunctions, which can achieve exfoliation and simultaneous protonation. In addition, this strategy is highly efficient with low energy consumption and easy operation.
 Fig. 25  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the synthesis route of pPCN and pPCN/rGO samples through a dissolution-electrostatic self-assembly precipitation method. (b) TEM images of the pPCN/rGO nanocomposite. (c) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the as-prepared samples. (d) Photoluminescence spectra, (e) time resolved fluorescence decay spectra, (f) transient photocurrent responses and (g) Nyquist plots for CN, pPCN and pPCN/2 wt% rGO samples. (h) Photocatalytic H2 generation performance of the different samples and stable H2 evolution by the pPCN/2 wt% rGO under irradiation with visible-light (λ > 420 nm). (i) Proposed photocatalytic H2 generation mechanisms over the pPCN/rGO heterojunction under visible-light illumination. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 436 with permission from Elsevier. 


4.5.2. Composites of carbon dots and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
Carbon nanodots (CDs), a new kind of carbon materials with a diameter of <10 nm, have obtained growing attention because of their outstanding optical and electronic performances.440 When CDs were combined with g-C3N4, CDs could serve as effective electron-transfer materials to transfer the photo-generated electrons in g-C3N4 and reduce H2O to H2 due to their suitable LUMO position, which was lower than g-C3N4 but higher than the potential position of the normal hydrogen electrode according to theoretical calculations.441 The first example of CDs/g-C3N4 composites as photocatalysts for HER application was reported by Kang and co-workers.442 CDs/g-C3N4 could photocatalyze H2O to H2 and O2 when irradiated with visible-light. In the CDs/g-C3N4 composite, g-C3N4 acted for photocatalysis, and CDs functioned for chemical catalysis and increased the light absorbance, quantum efficiency and solar energy conversion efficiency. As a result, the as-developed CDs/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst exhibited high quantum efficiency (16%, 6.29% and 4.42% for λ = 420 ± 20 nm, 580 ± 15 nm and 600 ± 10 nm, respectively) and overall solar energy conversion efficiency (>2.0%). Moreover, the prepared CDs/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst maintained a high rate of H2 and O2 generation (for λ > 420 nm) with moderate stability after 200 cycles and used over 200 days. Yu and co-workers443 reported a facile hydrothermal method to prepare CDs/g-C3N4 photocatalysts with CDs uniformly and steadily loaded on the g-C3N4 surface in the presence of L-ascorbic acid and g-C3N4. The prepared CDs/g-C3N4 photocatalysts exhibited better photocatalytic properties towards H2 generation under UV light illumination than pure g-C3N4, which was probably attributed to the fast interfacial charge migration.
Carbon quantum dots (CQDs) with steerable size and band gap, affluent hydrophilic surface groups and durable stability can serve as an active component in CQDs/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts. Tang and co-workers444 reported an example of NIR-light-driven metal-free photocatalytic H2 generation via integrating g-C3N4 nanosheets with CQDs into a heterostructure (CQDs/g-C3N4) via a facile one-step hydrothermal strategy. An appropriate amount of electron withdrawing CQDs anchored onto g-C3N4 nanosheets can effectively facilitate energy and charge migration by forming electronic coupling on the basis of the cascade energy alignments and the built-in electric field between the intimately contacted g-C3N4 and CQDs with similar graphitic structures. In consequence, the H2 evolution rates of CQDs/g-C3N4 were greatly enhanced in both UV-vis and visible regions, achieving a NIR induced H2 production with a rate of 6.76 μmol h−1 g−1 without any co-catalysts under 808 nm irradiation. Zhang and co-workers445 prepared CQDs/g-C3N4 composites through a facile solvothermal reaction in ethanol. The prepared CQDs/g-C3N4 composite exhibited an improved photocatalytic property with a H2 evolution rate of 2322 μmol h−1 g−1, which was thrice the value of the pure g-C3N4 nanosheets (756 μmol h−1 g−1). The CQDs were beneficial to trap electrons and boost the separation of the photo-induced electron–hole pairs of g-C3N4 nanosheets. In fact, a Type-II van der Waals heterojunction could be formed between CQDs and g-C3N4, in which CQDs also acted as a spectral sensitizer, which was confirmed by theoretical calculation.441 Fang and co-workers446 prepared CQDs/g-C3N4 composites via a similar method. The ultrathin 2D structured g-C3N4 nanosheets possessed a series of hollow spherical structures, and CQDs were well dispersed and uniformly anchored into the g-C3N4 nanosheet network via π–π stacking interactions. The prepared CQDs/g-C3N4 composites showed an enhanced photocatalytic property with a H2 evolution rate of 88.1 μmol h−1 g−1, which was 5.14-fold higher than that of the g-C3N4 nanosheets (9 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 26a and b). This enhancement was because of the fact that the incorporation of CQDs into the g-C3N4 nanosheet texture could effectively facilitate the photo-induced charge transfer and separation, leading to the obviously enhanced photocatalytic HER (Fig. 26c and d). Here, a tentative and comprehensive mechanism for enhancing photocatalytic performance was first proposed (Fig. 26e). Firstly, under visible-light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons excited from g-C3N4 nanosheets could be shuttled freely to the conducting texture of the CQD (served as electron acceptor), thus efficiently slowing the recombination and prolonging the electron–hole pairs lifetime. Secondly, the π–π conjugation CQDs were used as a photosensitizer to sensitize g-C3N4 nanosheets and donate the electrons to the conduction band of g-C3N4 nanosheets, leading to an extended visible-light response region for photocatalytic HER. Thirdly, CQDs with upconversion photoluminescence properties could absorb a longer wavelength visible-light and then emit a shorter wavelength light, resulting in more charge carriers formed by the excited g-C3N4 nanosheets. This advanced enhancement mechanism about CQDs/g-C3N4 composites provides us with a new understanding about the role of CQDs and g-C3N4. A theoretical calculation result can be good assistant evidence to explain why or how, and thus, an effective integration of theoretical calculation and experimental results is highly worth considering in future work.
 Fig. 26  (a) Photocatalytic HER activity of different g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. (b) H2 evolution rate under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) for the CQDs/g-C3N4 composites with different CQD contents. (c) Periodic ON/OFF photocurrent response in 0.25 M Na2S/0.35 M Na2SO3 electrolyte under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl electrode. (d) Nyquist plots in the dark and (e) schematic illustration for the photocatalytic process of CQDs/g-C3N4 photocatalysts under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 446 with permission from Elsevier. 


4.5.3. Composites of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are nanoscale-sized tubes consisting of seamless cylindrical graphitic sheets with strong mechanical properties, low density, and remarkable thermal stability,447,448 and sp2 hybrid carbon atoms provide perfect conditions for electron transfer, which results in a high conductivity.449 The introduction of MWCNTs may change the g-C3N4 band gap and facilitate visible-light harvesting, thus further improving photocatalytic performance. Inspired by this idea, Wang and co-workers450 fabricated various MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composites via direct thermal polymerization of cyanamide with appropriate amounts of MWCNTs, which provided good thermal stability for the obtained composites. The g-C3N4 was uniformly coated on the MWCNT surface. The prepared MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composites showed an enhanced photocatalytic property when compared to pure MWCNTs and g-C3N4. Ge and co-workers27 constructed various MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composites via a facile heating approach. The optimal H2 evolution rate of 75.8 μmol h−1 g−1 was achieved with a MWCNT content of 2.0 wt%, which was ca. 3.7 times that of pure g-C3N4 (20.3 μmol h−1 g−1). The MWCNTs possessed higher electron capture capability and could promote electron migration from g-C3N4 to their surface, thus resulting in an improved photocatalytic performance. Ogale and co-workers451 reported a dramatic 100% improvement for the optimum 0.5 wt% MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composite. Their study revealed that besides the charge migration effects, the morphological change in MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composites also played a significant role in the photocatalytic properties. Chen and co-workers452 reported hybrid MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composites using cyanamide as a precursor. The optimal MWCNT content was determined to be 0.2 wt% in the MWCNTs/g-C3N4 composites with H2 evolution rate at 394 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 2.4-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4 (164 μmol h−1 g−1). The improvement was mainly due to the MWCNTs/g-C3N4 intimate interactions that enhanced the charge transfer effect. The introduction of MWCNTs was beneficial to promote electron–hole separation on the excited g-C3N4via extending the charge carrier lifetimes.


4.5.4. Composites of other carbon forms and g-C3N4 for HER application. 
Carbon black is a form of paracrystalline carbon with a high ratio of surface area to volume. The particle size of carbon black can be tuned from 5 nm to hundreds of nanometers, indicating that it is easy to disperse carbon black with a small particle size on the g-C3N4 surface for a uniform distribution and large contact area. Yan and co-workers453 reported conductive carbon black/g-C3N4 composites with carbon black nanoparticles uniformly dispersed on g-C3N4 surface using a simple one-step molten salt route. The carbon black nanoparticles acted as conductive pathways to effectively facilitate the separation and transfer of the photo-induced charge carriers, and thus enhancing the photocatalytic properties under visible light irradiation. The carbon black/g-C3N4 composite showed an improved photocatalytic property with ca. 4.2-fold higher H2 evolution rate (689 μmol h−1 g−1) than the pristine g-C3N4 intercalation compound (163 μmol h−1 g−1).
Among all carbon materials, the physicochemical properties of 1D carbon fibers (CFs) and MWCNTs are alike, but the former can be easily synthesized from a few of inexpensive polymers via an electrospinning technique, being more consistent with the requirement of low cost compared to the MWCNTs. Huang and co-workers454 reported a CFs/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst fabricated via a facile two-step strategy including electrospinning and a subsequent calcination route. The introduced CFs formed intimate interactions with g-C3N4 to effectively increase the photocatalytic HER activity with the optimal value of 1080 μmol h−1 g−1 when the composite photocatalyst was exposed to visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm), which was ca. 4.6-fold the value of pure g-C3N4.
Although considerable efforts have been made to functionalize g-C3N4 with various carbon materials to enhance its electronic and photoelectrochemical performance, only a few works are reported to assemble g-C3N4 into unique architectures toward highly efficient photocatalytic applications.455 The core–shell architecture of carbon@g-C3N4 is a classical example, which offers a large accessible specific surface area, various electron transport channels, and short mass diffusion distances. All of these features are beneficial to charge separation and migration, and thus accelerate the photoelectrochemical process. Fan and co-workers456 fabricated a special core–shell architectured carbon spheres/g-C3N4via a one-step electrostatic self-assembly route (Fig. 27a). The chemical protonation of g-C3N4 solids with strong oxidizing acids (such as HNO3) was an efficient strategy to prepare highly stable and flexible g-C3N4 colloids, which could be coated onto the surface of carbon spheres with a thickness of ∼3 nm and a diameter of ∼200 nm via electrostatic adsorption (Fig. 27b and c). The obtained carbon@g-C3N4 showed high mechanical stability with broadened light absorption and enhanced conductivity for charge transport. Thus, the carbon@g-C3N4 photocatalysts possessed a markedly enhanced photocatalytic property with a high H2 evolution rate up to 2588.4 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 7.93-fold that of pure g-C3N4 (326.4 μmol h−1 g−1) (Fig. 27d and e). This outstanding photocatalytic performance could be mainly attributed to the narrower gap sp2 carbon cluster embedded in carbon spheres, the promoted charge-carrier transport capability, prolonged electron lifetime, and lower recombination of electron–hole pairs. In the photocatalytic process, the photo-induced electrons were injected into the g-C3N4 conduction band, and reacted with H+ ions of the adsorbed molecular water. In addition, the photo-induced electrons were generated from the valence band to the conduction band of g-C3N4 by the excitation of the high-energy photons. The photogenerated electrons formed in the space-charge regions were transferred to the carbon spheres, and the holes remained on g-C3N4 to participate in the redox reaction (Fig. 27f and g). The high flexibility and compatibility of the g-C3N4 colloidal solution open up a new avenue to load polymeric semiconductors on desired functionalized carbon materials.
 Fig. 27  (a) Diagrammatic sketches of (i) the depolymerization–repolymerization process of g-C3N4, and (ii) the fabrication process of the carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalysts. (b) TEM and (c) HR-TEM images of carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalysts. (d) Stability test of H2 generation of pristine g-C3N4 and carbon@g-C3N4 photocatalysts. (e) H2 production over pristine g-C3N4, carbon@g-C3N4, and carbon sphere photocatalysts. (f) Electron–hole pairs in the carbon spheres are generated under visible-light illumination. Based on the relevant position of the band, the electrons inject into g-C3N4, and (g) carbon spheres as an electron sink to scavenge away the electrons, thus hindering the recombination of electron–hole pairs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 456 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Yu and co-workers457 reported novel amorphous carbon/g-C3N4 composites fabricated by simple one-step pyrolysis of glucose and urea precursors. Through accurately regulating the weight ratio of precursors, the amorphous carbon/g-C3N4 composites displayed an enhanced photocatalytic property. The optimal photocatalytic H2 evolution rate was as high as 212.8 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 10-fold the value of pure g-C3N4 (20.9 μmol h−1 g−1). The amorphous carbon/g-C3N4 intimate interface played a crucial role in lengthening the lifetime of charge carriers and boosting the charge transfer, which was beneficial for improving the photocatalytic property. In addition, the significantly improved photocatalytic property was probably because of the enhanced visible-light utilization and expanded specific surface area.
In brief, interface engineering is of great importance to optimize the charge transfer and separation across the heterojunction formed between the carbon materials and g-C3N4 to restrain the electron–hole recombination. However, there is always an issue involving the optimum loading of carbon to be incorporated in the g-C3N4-based hybrid systems in order to reduce the negative effect resulting from excessive carbon. Consequently, optimizing the g-C3N4-based hybrid nanostructures with the modification of an appropriate amount of carbon is very important. That is to say, researchers should design individual material components to the heterointerface construction and optimization process for considerably enhanced photocatalytic HER activity.

4.6. Composites of conductive polymers and g-C3N4 for HER application
A conductive polymer (CP) is deemed to be one of the most important organic semiconductors with strong visible-light absorption and perfect π-conjugated electronic systems.458 A combination of the aromatic-based conjugated system with the π-electronic structures of the CP favors coupling g-C3N4 with CPs to obtain heterojunctions and further improve photocatalytic activity. Up to now, some extensively reported CPs, e.g., polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), graphitized polyacrylonitrile (g-PAN), poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), have been frequently combined with g-C3N4 as photocatalysts.
PANI is one of the most widely studied CPs, owning many excellent advantages such as low toxicity, high chemical stability, outstanding electron and hole conducting properties, excellent corrosion resistance and low cost.459–461 Thus, it is speculated that the combination of the g-C3N4 photocatalyst with PANI should be ideal for improving visible-light photocatalytic activity. Ge and co-workers462 prepared PANI/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts through “in situ” oxidation polymerization of aniline monomer with g-C3N4 powder. The PANI/g-C3N4 composite displayed evidently enhanced photocatalytic performance compared with pure g-C3N4. The enhancement was because of the effective electron–hole separation. A hierarchical nanocomposite of PANI nanorods decorated on g-C3N4 nanosheets was successfully prepared through dilute polymerization under −20 °C. The prepared PANI/g-C3N4 hierarchical nanocomposite showed higher photocatalytic performance than pure g-C3N4 and PANI under visible-light illumination. The enhancement was because of the effective separation of the photogenerated charge, the large specific surface area and the energy band structure.463 Inspired by this, Zhu and co-workers464 prepared PANI/g-C3N4 composite hydrogels with 3D hierarchical nanostructure through in situ oxidation polymerization. The 3D hierarchical structure was robust and stable, ensuring the composite hydrogels easy to separate and recycle. Moreover, it possessed high photocatalytic performance because of the excellent interfacial charge separation and photoelectrochemical properties.
PPy is a typical CP with a band gap of 2.2–2.4 eV,465 high conductivity, stability in the oxidized state and attractive redox properties. The incorporation of monodisperse PPy nanoparticles onto g-C3N4 nanosheets can form surface junctions to increase the number of photo-generated electrons on g-C3N4. As early as 2013, Chen and co-workers466 reported dramatically improved photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 for photocatalytic HER from pure water by decorating highly dispersed conductive PPy nanoparticles. For the g-C3N4 loaded with 1.5 wt% PPy nanoparticles, the H2 evolution rate can increase up to 50-fold. This enhancement was attributed to the surface junction, which increased the number of photoinduced electrons and facilitated electron migration to the interface. Fu and co-workers467 prepared PPy/g-C3N4 composites using an in situ polymerization method. Because of the high conductivity, the PPy served as a transport channel for electrons to move onto the g-C3N4 surface, thus restraining the recombination of the photogenerated carriers of g-C3N4 and improving the photocatalytic properties.
P3HT is a CP with a band gap of 1.9–2.1 eV, a higher charge carrier mobility, dissolubility, processability and long-term stability.468 The incorporation of monodisperse P3HT nanoparticles onto g-C3N4 nanosheets can also form surface junctions to increase the number of photo-generated electrons on g-C3N4. Yan and co-workers469 fabricated a polymer composite of g-C3N4 and P3HT for photocatalytic HER from an aqueous solution containing Na2S and using Na2SO3 as the electron donors. The prepared P3HT/g-C3N4 composite showed an enhanced activity with a H2 evolution rate of ca. 11200 μmol h−1, 300-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. The efficient charge migration between g-C3N4 and P3HT resulted in improved photocatalytic properties. Zhou and co-workers470 prepared P3HT/g-C3N4 photocatalysts by assembling p-type P3HT particles on n-type g-C3N4 nanoplates through a ball milling approach. The prepared P3HT/g-C3N4 photocatalysts displayed improved photocatalytic properties. The formation of the P3HT/g-C3N4 heterojunction interface improved the separation efficiency of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and finally led to the improvement of photocatalytic properties.
Polyacrylonitrile (PAN) is a cheap polymeric material, owning unique conjugated structures after heat treatment. When PAN is heated above 600 °C, “graphitization” takes place and graphitized PAN (g-PAN) is formed, which has a layered graphite-like nanosheet structure. The graphite-like network structure of g-PAN is propitious to the rapid charge migration, and a combination of g-PAN with layered g-C3N4 nanosheets offers attractive photocatalytic properties. Chen and co-workers471 reported novel composites consisting of g-PAN nanosheets loaded on layered g-C3N4 nanosheets prepared by a simple one-step pyrolysis of PAN and melamine. The g-PAN nanosheets acted as effective electron migration pathways to boost charge carrier separation in the PAN/g-C3N4 composites. As a result, the 5.0 wt% g-PAN/g-C3N4 composite demonstrated the optimal H2 evolution rate of 370 μmol h−1 g−1, over 3.8-fold that of pristine g-C3N4. Designing and developing hollow g-C3N4-based heterojunction nanostructures is propitious to mass transport in photocatalysts, the enlargement of specific surface area, and the charge carrier separation.472 Usually, hollow g-C3N4 nanostructures can be fabricated via the hard-templating and self-assembled supermolecular methods. However, these approaches suffer from poor structural and morphological controllability. Liu and co-workers473 reported tapered hollow PAN-derived carbon (C-PAN)/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes prepared through a convenient sulfur-mediated self-templating approach by direct pyrolysis of PAN, melamine, and sulfur (Fig. 28a). Its structure and morphology can be easily tuned only by adjusting the calcination temperature, and adding sulfur in the melamine precursor system is beneficial for the formation of hollow structures. The valence band potential of g-C3N4 was more positive than that of the C-PAN, in accordance with the results of Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. 28b and c), suggesting that the photogenerated electrons could migrate from g-C3N4 to C-PAN, promoting the separation of photogenerated charge carriers (Fig. 28d). The average lifetimes for the g-C3N4 and 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes were computed to be 7.06 and 8.08 ns, respectively, suggesting that the average lifetime of the C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes was lengthened (Fig. 28e). All C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes exhibited improved photocatalytic HER activity, among which the 5 wt% CPAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes reached the optimum H2 evolution rate (1775 μmol h−1 g−1), 16.7-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4, and even 4.7-fold higher than that of the C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanosheets prepared without sulfur (Fig. 28f). After 15 h of successive illumination, the 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes still showed excellent stability and without evident loss in the photocatalytic properties (Fig. 28g). This work offers a new and facile route to develop hollow g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with superior photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 28  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the construction of C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (b) Mott–Schottky plots of (1) g-C3N4, (2) 3 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, (3) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, and (4) 10 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (c) Diagrammatic sketch of the electronic band structure of the g-C3N4 and C-PAN composites. (d) Photoluminescenc spectra of (1) g-C3N4, (2) 3 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, (3) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, and (4) 10 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (e) Time-resolved fluorescence decay spectra of (1) pure g-C3N4 and (2) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (f) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of (1) pure g-C3N4, (2) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 prepared without sulfur in the precursor, (3) sulfur-mediated g-C3N4, and (4) 3 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, (5) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, and (6) 10 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes, and (g) photocatalytic H2 generation as a function of reaction time for (1) pure g-C3N4 and (2) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes in 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution under visible-light illumination (λ > 400 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 473 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
PEDOT is considered to be a promising conducting polymer in optoelectronic devices due to its high electrical conductivity and thermal stability, and good transparency in the visible-light range.474 The introduction of PEDOT can increase the number of photo-generated electrons, and thus improving photocatalytic properties. A new-style g-C3N4-based composite photocatalyst was obtained via co-loading PEDOT as a hole transport pathway and Pt as an electron trap on g-C3N4. The obtained g-C3N4–PEDOT–Pt composite exhibited greatly improved photocatalytic activity for visible-light-guided photocatalytic HER with a H2 evolution rate of ca. 327 μmol h−1 g−1 due to the spatial separation of the reduction and oxidation reaction sites.475
Commonly, CP serves as an electron migration channel for improving the charge transport ability, and also effectively prolonging the lifetime of charge carriers. To date, only a few CP/g-C3N4 hybrids have been investigated for photocatalytic HER under visible light, and relatively low activities have been reported (Table 4). However, it is still believed that there's a large room for performance improvement by rationally designing and engineering novel CP/g-C3N4 hybrids with tailored nanostructures.
4.7. Composites of sensitizers and g-C3N4 for HER application
As reported above, several strategies, such as forming thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4 to boost the separation of photogenerated charge carriers and incorporation of metals, semiconductors, carbons, conductive polymers to form heterojunctions, have been employed to improve photocatalytic performance. Despite the above-mentioned efforts, g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with a significantly enlarged visible-light absorption still remains a challenge. To further widen the range of visible-light absorption, sensitization is another attractive strategy for highly efficient capture of solar energy. As early as 2012, Eosin Y (EY), as a typical xanthene dye, has been used as a sensitizer and matrix to prepare EY-sensitized mesoporous g-C3N4,183 and the photoresponse of the mesoporous g-C3N4 can be effectively enlarged up to ca. 600 nm. The mesoporous g-C3N4 with large specific surface area and porous structure can effectively promote EY molecules assembled on the g-C3N4 surface, thus further improving the photocatalytic properties due to the enhanced light harvesting. In consequence, this sensitized photocatalyst demonstrated excellent photocatalytic properties for HER under visible-light irradiation, with the absorption range expanded up to ca. 600 nm. The apparent quantum efficiency was as high as 19.4% under 550 nm irradiation.
Erythrosin B (EB) is another typical xanthene dye, which has been proven to be an excellent sensitizer for the construction of EB-sensitized g-C3N4.476,477 Xu and co-workers476 firstly prepared well-dispersed Pt nanoparticles (∼3 nm) coated on g-C3N4 nanosheets by a chemical reduction method. The prepared Pt/g-C3N4 sample exhibited a high H2 evolution rate (451 μmol h−1 g−1). Surprisingly, through simply introducing an inexpensive dye EB in the photoreaction suspension, an considerably improved H2 evolution rate (6525 μmol h−1 g−1) was achieved; this is due to the efficient electron migration from the excited EB to the conduction band of g-C3N4. EB-sensitized MoSx–g-C3N4 was fabricated through an in situ photoreduction approach. The obtained EB-sensitized MoSx–g-C3N4 showed higher photocatalytic activity and stability than the EB-sensitized g-C3N4 and EB-sensitized MoSx. The highest H2 evolution rate reached 257.25 μmol h−1g−1, and the highest apparent quantum yield was up to 8.3% at 545 nm. The enhancement was attributed to the fact that the MoSx acted as a promosing cocatalyst which facilitated the efficient electron migration between the photoexcited EB, g-C3N4 and MoSx.477
Zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) is a type of chromophore well known for its intrinsic absorption in the UV/blue and the red/near IR spectral regions.478 Moreover, ZnPc possesses excellent photochemical and thermal stability and appropriate redox properties, which make them ideal sensitizers for the sensitization of semiconductors, e.g., g-C3N4. When ZnPc was coupled with g-C3N4, the photocatalytic properties and apparent quantum yield of the ZnPc/g-C3N4 were greatly enhanced.479 Moreover, the outstanding photochemical/thermal stabilities and appropriate redox properties of ZnPc also make ZnPc attractive as a dye for the sensitization of relatively wide-band-gap g-C3N4. Peng's group480 developed Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 composites using the highly asymmetric Zn-tri-PcNc (a zinc ZnPc derivatives) (Fig. 29a) as a sensitizer of g-C3N4. Dynamic time-resolved photoluminescence spectra analyses indicatd that the photogenerated electrons of the excited Zn-tri-PcNc can be efficiently transferred to g-C3N4 (Fig. 29b). Moreover, it was found that chenodeoxycholic acid as a co-adsorbent with Zn-tri-PcNc could improve the electron injection efficiency and restrain the charge recombination (Fig. 29c and d), and further led to significantly promoted photocatalytic H2 production (Fig. 29e and f). Importantly, the Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 with chenodeoxycholic acid as the co-adsorbent showed a H2 evolution rate of 12520 μmol h−1 g−1 with a turnover number of ∼5008 h−1 under visible-light irradiation (Fig. 29f); moreover, a considerably high apparent quantum yield (1.85%) at 700 nm was achieved (Fig. 29g). The improved photoactivity for H2 production originated from the excitation of Zn-tri-PcNc, enabling the photogenerated electrons to be injected into the conduction band of g-C3N4 and further trapped by the co-catalyst Pt for H2 production. Simultaneously, the oxidized Zn-tri-PcNc were regenerated by accepting electrons from the sacrificial reagent and then re-excited by light irradiation (Fig. 29h). Based on this sensitizer, they also used indole-based D–π–A organic dye (LI-4) and Zn-tri-PcNc as the co-sensitizers to prepare co-sensitized g-C3N4. The prepared co-sensitized g-C3N4 showed extremely high H2 production activity (24760 μmol h−1 g−1) under visible/near-infrared light irradiation. Moreover, the prepared co-sensitized g-C3N4 catalysts also exhibited a wide visible/near infrared light responsive range (400–800 nm) with pretty high apparent quantum yields of 16.3, 7.7, and 1.75% under 420, 500, and 700 nm monochromatic light irradiation, respectively.481 The proposed photocatalytic HER mechanism over Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 was given as follows. In brief, the excitation of Zn-tri-PcNc was adsorbed on g-C3N4, and the photogenerated electrons were subsequently injected into the conduction band of g-C3N4 and further trapped by the loaded co-catalyst Pt for H2 generation. Meanwhile, the oxidized Zn-tri-PcNc would be regenerated via accepting electron from the sacrificial reagent and then re-excited via visible light illumination. This study displays the promising application of phthalocyanine derivatives/g-C3N4 in photocatalytic HER for more efficiently utilizing the solar light with wavelength up to 600 nm or even 700 nm, which is unprecedented. Such outstanding photocatalytic properties and enlarged visible-light absorption ensure Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 has great potential for large scale industrial application.
 Fig. 29  (a) Structures of zinc phthalocyanine derivative (Zn-tri-PcNc). (b) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectroscopy spectra of g-C3N4 and Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 (above) and UV-vis spectra of 10 μM Zn-tri-PcNc solution and the desorbed solution of Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 (below). (c) Effects of chenodeoxycholic acid on the time-resolved fluorescence decay of the Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 film (above) or Zn-tri–PcNc solution with/without adding g-C3N4 (below). Excitation and detection wavelengths are 377 and 711 nm, respectively. (d) Effects of coabsorbent chenodeoxycholic acid on the transient photocurrent behaviors under optimal photoreaction conditions and λ ≥ 500 nm light irradiation. (e) Effects of Zn-tri-PcNc and chenodeoxycholic acid amount on the photoactivity for H2 production over Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4. (f) The photocatalytic activity of Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 under the optimal photoreaction conditions and λ ≥ 500 nm light irradiation. (g) Comparison of diffuse reflectance absorption spectra and apparent quantum yield values of g-C3N4 and Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 under optimal photoreaction conditions and different monochromatic light irradiation and (h) proposed photocatalytic HER mechanism of the Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 system. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 480 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Similar to ZnPc, magnesium phthalocyanine (MgPc) can also be used as a sensitizer for the sensitization of semiconductor g-C3N4 due to its high chemical stability, absorption of light around ca. 670 nm, and structural similarity to g-C3N4. Both MgPc and g-C3N4 contain planar layers with π electron conjugation, and are mainly composed of C and N, and thus establish strong interactions with each other. In addition, the oxidation potential of the photogenerated hole of g-C3N4 is insufficient to oxidize the hydroxyl group to hydroxyl radicals, making g-C3N4 a particularly suitable photocatalyst for hosting organic dye molecules to ensure stable sensitization under full solar spectrum.188 Domen and co-workers482 prepared a MgPc/Pt/g-C3N4 sample (MgPc as the sensitizer and Pt as the cocatalyst) by a simple process. The prepared MgPc/Pt/g-C3N4 sample showed stable photocatalytic H2 evolution activity with sacrificial reagents (triethanolamine), even under irradiation at wavelengths >600 nm. To further enhance the photocatalytic properties, smooth charge migration of the excited electrons from the dye to the photocatalyst and eventually to the cocatalyst was crucial.
Fluorescein (FL), a xanthene dye, has appropriate excitation and emission wavelengths in the visible region, and a high fluorescence quantum yield in aqueous solution. Moreover, the electron transfer rate from the LUMO of FL to g-C3N4 is higher than that from other dyes.483 Thus, FL has great potential to work as a photosensitizer to enhance the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4. Zeng and co-workers484 reported a Ag/g-C3N4 composite with a Ag loading of 3 wt% possessing the optimum photocatalytic activity, 3.6-fold higher than that of pure g-C3N4. Surprisingly, when FL was employed as a photosensitizer, the H2 evolution rate shot up to 2014.20 μmol h−1 g−1, over 4.8-fold that of the 3 wt% Ag/g-C3N4 composites. The enhanced photocatalytic activity was in virtue of the synergistic effect between the components as well as the appropriate loading amount of Ag.
It is well known that dye sensitization is an attractive technique to increase the visible-light utilization of g-C3N4 and improve the photocatalytic H2 generation property under visible-light irradiation. Most of the previous works are focused on how to promote the photocatalytic HER activity of g-C3N4 sensitized with dyes under visible light illumination, but the interaction dynamics between g-C3N4 and sensitizer dye is rarely reported. Yu and co-workers485 chose four normally used xanthene dyes, e.g., fluorescein, dibromofluorescein, eosin Y, and erythrosine B (Fig. 30a) to prepare dye-sensitized g-C3N4 composites. The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energy of all selected xanthene dyes was higher than that of the g-C3N4 conduction band energy, and thus, the electron could easily migrate from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the photoexcited xanthene dye to the conduction band of g-C3N4. It was also found that fluorescence decays of their corresponding dye–SiO2 composites were obviously slower than those of their corresponding dye-sensitized-C3N4 composites (Fig. 30c and e), but almost identical to those of their saturated dye aqueous solutions (Fig. 30b) and the maximal adsorption amount of dye–SiO2 composites was quite similar to that of dye-sensitized-g-C3N4 (Fig. 30d), suggesting the electron transfer from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the photoexcited xanthene dye to the conduction band of g-C3N4. Moreover, the electron on the highest occupied molecular orbital of each selected xanthene dye can transfer to the valence band of photoexcited g-C3N4 on the basis of the prediction from their energy level location, which can prolong the lifetime of the electron on the conduction band of the photoexcited g-C3N4 thus improving photocatalytic performance (Fig. 30f). This study is vital for researchers to deeply understand the fundamental aspects in xanthene dye-sensitized-g-C3N4 photocatalytic systems.
 Fig. 30  (a) Molecular structures of fluorescein, dibromofluorescein, eosin Y, erythrosine B, and g-C3N4. (b) Fluorescence decays of their corresponding saturated dye aqueous solutions, and (c) their corresponding dye-sensitized g-C3N4 composites. (d) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of fluorescein–SiO2, dibromofluorescein–SiO2, eosin Y–SiO2, and erythrosine B–SiO2 composites. (e) Fluorescence decays of their corresponding dye–SiO2 composites, and (f) fluorescence decays of g-C3N4 in g-C3N4 alone, fluorescein–g-C3N4, dibromofluorescein–g-C3N4, eosin Y–g-C3N4, and erythrosine B–g-C3N4 composites. Excitation wavelength, 395 nm; detection wavelength, 470 nm. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 485 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Sensitizer/g-C3N4 composites have revealed the highest H2 evolution rate (e.g., 24760 μmol h−1 g−1 reported for the LI-4/g-C3N4/Zn-tri-PcNc) among all reported g-C3N4-based photocatalysts (Table 4). Moreover, enlarged visible-light absorption ensures that they have great potential for large scale industrial application. However, it seems to be detrimental to soil and water sources if the sensitizer is used in a large quantity. In addition, the synthesis of the sensitizer is generally complicated and time consuming, resulting in high cost. In the process of developing sensitizer/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts, not only should we consider the photocatalytic activity, stability and visible-light utilization efficiency, but also take into account the production and environmental costs. Due to the great potential for practical photocatalytic HER application, future work should focus on the design and development of new-style sensitizers with low cost and toxicity and simple synthesis as well.
4.8. Composites of other materials and g-C3N4 for HER application
As one of the allotropes of phosphorus (P), 2D black phosphorus (BP) has obtained growing attention in photoelectric applications since the first report on field-effect transistors in 2014.486 This new-style 2D material possesses different direct band gaps in monolayer, few-layer and bulk forms, from ca. 2.1 eV for monolayer BP to ca. 0.3 eV for bulk BP. The direct-band-gap features enable BP to act as an efficient photocatalyst with broadband solar absorption. Inspired by this, Majima and co-workers487 reported binary BP/g-C3N4 nanohybrids composed of BP nanoflakes and g-C3N4 nanosheets, which were first utilized as a metal-free photocatalyst. The BP nanoflakes were fixed on the g-C3N4 nanosheet surface (Fig. 31a), which made the absorption for g-C3N4 to exhibit strong absorption in the visible or even near-infrared region (Fig. 31b). The BP/g-C3N4 nanohybrids reached the optimum H2 evolution rate of 1.93 μmol for 3 h under visible-light illumination (λ > 420 nm) without any cocatalyst, and still generated 0.46 μmol H2 for 3 h (λ > 780 nm) (Fig. 31c and d). The decay lifetime of the BP/g-C3N4 was longer than that of BP, indicating that the P–N coordinate bond at the interface acted as the trap site of electrons for HER (Fig. 31e–g). The improved photocatalytic property was owing to the strong BP/g-C3N4 interfacial interaction and efficient charge migration at the interface, inhibiting the recombination of photogenerated charges (Fig. 31h). A type I heterojunction existed in their interface when BP was loaded on the g-C3N4 surface. In this system, under visible light irradiation, g-C3N4 was excited to produce electrons and holes. Then, BP acted as an electron acceptor from adjacent g-C3N4, which was beneficial for restraining the recombination of the photogenerated charges. These results display the advantages of BP/g-C3N4 nanohybrids as a metal-free photocatalyst with broad absorption in the visible and NIR region in developing a new energy conversion system. Similarly, another allotrope of P, red phosphorus (RP), has also been investigated as a promising semiconductor for the fabrication of g-C3N4 composites.488 The decoration of g-C3N4 onto the RP surface resulted in a considerably enhanced photocatalytic property, and the corresponding H2 evolution rate was as high as 310 μmol h−1 g−1, 10-fold higher than that of RP. The improvement was because of the effective separation of the photogenerated electrons and holes over the RP/g-C3N4 heterojunction.
 Fig. 31  (a) TEM image of BP/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of g-C3N4, BP, and BP/g-C3N4. (c) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate on different catalysts (λ > 420 nm). (d) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate on the BP/g-C3N4 (λ > 780 nm). (e) Time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopic plots for BP and (f) BP/g-C3N4 after irradiation with a 780 nm laser flash. (g) Time profiles of normalized transient absorption at 950 nm, and (h) proposed diagrammatic sketch for the visible and near infrared light activated photocatalytic HER employing BP/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 487 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Some transition metal hydroxides were also examined as economical co-catalysts of g-C3N4 for photocatalytic HER from water. Yu and co-workers489 prepared Ni(OH)2-modified-g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts through a facile precipitation strategy employing g-C3N4 as the support and Ni(NO3)2 as the precursor. Ni(OH)2 was found to be an efficient co-catalyst for the photocatalytic HER. With the optimal Ni(OH)2 loading of 0.5 mol%, the Ni(OH)2/g-C3N4 composite revealed a H2 evolution rate of 152 μmol h−1 g−1 and an apparent quantum efficiency of 1.1% at 420 nm. Zhou and co-workers490 reported a facile method for the preparation of Cu(OH)2/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts. The obtained Cu(OH)2/g-C3N4 sample showed evidently improved photocatalytic properties, and the optimal Cu(OH)2 loading content was examined to be 0.34 mol%, showing a H2 evolution rate of 48.7 μmol h−1 g−1, which was more than 16.5-fold that of pure g-C3N4. The enhancement was ascribed to the existence of Cu(OH)2 clusters on porous g-C3N4 surface, which effectively promoted the visible-light absorption and separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Lu and co-workers491 prepared non-noble metal oxide Co(OH)2 nanoparticles uniformly decorated on g-C3N4 by an in situ chemical deposition approach as a co-catalyst for HER application. After being co-sensitized by Eosin Y and Rose Bengal dyes, this photocatalyst showed a relatively low onset potential (0.26 V) for HER. The g-C3N4 offered a large specific surface area and nanoporous structure for the restricted growth of Co(OH)2 nanoparticles, as well as largely boosted Eosin Y and Rose Bengal molecules assembled on its surface, which facilitated the charge migration from the dye to the co-catalyst, and thus improved the photocatalytic activity.
Over the last few years, ternary or even multicomponent g-C3N4-based heterojunction photocatalysts have also been widely studied for HER application. Neppolian and co-workers492 fabricated rGO decorated g-C3N4–TiO2 ternary hybrid layered photocatalysts by an ultrasound-assisted wet impregnation strategy with different mass ratios of g-C3N4 to TiO2. The optical band gap of the g-C3N4–TiO2/rGO composite was observed to be red shifted to 2.56 eV from 2.70 eV for bare g-C3N4. Moreover, the g-C3N4–TiO2/rGO composite showed an improved photocatalytic property with a H2 evolution rate of 13143 μmol h−1 g−1, which was ca. 78- and 2.5-fold higher than those of g-C3N4 and TiO2, respectively. The enhancement could be attributed to the improved visible-light absorption and an effective separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs at the g-C3N4–TiO2/rGO interface. Li and co-workers493 prepared a g-C3N4/acetylene black/Ni(OH)2 ternary composite photocatalyst with dual robust electron co-catalysts employing a simple two-step method: ultrasonic dispersion treatment and a subsequent precipitation process. The g-C3N4/0.5%-acetylene black/1.0%-Ni(OH)2 composite showed the highest H2 evolution rate (240 μmol h−1 g−1) under visible-light irradiation, which was 320-, 100- and 3.31-fold higher than those of pure g-C3N4, g-C3N4–0.5% acetylene black and g-C3N4–1.0% Ni(OH)2, respectively. It was found that the synergistic effect between the robust acetylene black and Ni(OH)2 as dual electron co-catalysts on the g-C3N4 surface could effectively boost the separation of the photo-generated electron–hole pairs and improve the H2 production activity.
Xie and co-workers404 prepared a TiO2/In2O3@g-C3N4 ternary hybrid via a facile solvothermal strategy. The H2 evolution rate of the prepared TiO2/In2O3@g-C3N4 ternary composite was found to be ca. 48-fold that of pure g-C3N4. The enhancement was mainly ascribed to the interfacial migration of the photogenerated electrons and holes between TiO2, In2O3 and g-C3N4, resulting in effective charge separation on these semiconductors. Selvam and co-workers494 reported a novel ternary CdS/rGO/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst through a hydrothermal process. A remarkably improved H2 evolution rate (676.5 μmol h−1 g−1) was obtained for the Z-scheme CdS/rGO/g-C3N4 composite, which was 8.6 times that of pure g-C3N4.
Besides the above ternary nanocomposites, substantial efforts have also been made to search for other candidates through hybridizing with g-C3N4 to form multicomponent heterojunction systems. For example, graphene/g-C3N4/P3HT,495 Ag/Ag2O/g-C3N4,496 Ag/AgVO3/g-C3N4,413 g-C3N4/MWCNT/NiS,497 g-C3N4/N-doped graphene/MoS2,498 g-C3N4/N-doped graphene/NiFe,499 g-C3N4/rGO/S8,500 Au/g-C3N4/Fe2O3,501 Ag/Fe3O4/g-C3N4,502 g-C3N4/ZnO/AgCl,408 g-C3N4/RGO/Bi2WO6,18 ZnCr2O4@ZnO/g-C3N4,503 BiPO4/TiO2/g-C3N4,504 (C16H33(CH3)3N)4W10O32/g-C3N4/rGO,505 RuO2/C3N4@rGO,506 g-C3N4/SiO2–Au,507 GQDs/PANI/g-C3N4,508 PANI/g-C3N4/TiO2,509 g-C3N4/C@Bi2MoO6,510 g-C3N4/Bi2O2CO3/CoFe2O4,370 and many more. All of them have been investigated as a highly efficient visible-light photocatalyst with enhanced charge migration and separation for photocatalytic HER. It is believed that an effective combination of multiple components with different functions will greatly improve visible-light harvesting and facilitate the separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and accordingly high HER performance.
5. Conclusions and outlook
Polymeric g-C3N4 as a semiconductor is the “holy grail” as the next generation visible-light-induced photocatalysts for HER application because of its facile synthesis, attractive electronic band structure, high physicochemical stability, and “earth-abundant” feature. The research hotspots in the field of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts are focused on the design and development of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with remarkably improved photocatalytic properties and visible-light utilization. Usually, the improvement of the photocatalytic properties and visible-light utilization of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts can be achieved by three important criteria: (i) enlarging the light absorption toward the visible-light region or even near-infrared region, (ii) impeding the recombination rate of the photoinduced charge carriers, and (iii) increasing the amount of adsorbed reactant species on the photocatalyst surface. Inspired by these principles, strategies such as forming thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4 have been used to enhance the photocatalytic properties of g-C3N4 photocatalysts. Apart from the rapid development of these promoted techniques on intrinsic g-C3N4, the formation of g-C3N4 composite heterojunctions can also ameliorate the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts.
Although many groundbreaking results have been reported so far, the studies in this hot area are still in an initial stage and further developments are evidently required. Remarkably, the reported g-C3N4-based photocatalysts still suffer from relatively low photocatalytic efficiency and visible-light utilization, which are far from the needs of practical application. Therefore, it is vital for the rational design and development of novel g-C3N4-based photocatalysts to further cater to the practical demands. Here, some new challenges and insights are discussed in the following aspects:
(i) A more comprehensive understanding of the photocatalytic reaction mechanism is necessary for further amelioration and improvement in the photocatalytic performance, which is advantageous for guiding us to rationally design and develop highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Besides the widely accepted charge carrier transfer mechanism, the thermodynamics and kinetics of surface catalytic reactions also need more comprehensive investigations. Some new characterization techniques and theoretical calculations may serve as extremely useful tools toward this purpose, which may significantly deepen our understanding on the structure–activity relationship of the g-C3N4-based photocatalysts.
(ii) Modifications of the surface/textural properties and bandgap configuration of intrinsic g-C3N4 still require further exploration to achieve the optimized optical and photocatalytic performances. The specific surface area of all reported g-C3N4 nanosheets is still much smaller than the theoretical value (2500 m2 g−1) of ideal monolayer g-C3N4, and a perfectly crystalline structure of g-C3N4 is hard to obtain. Monolayered g-C3N4 nanosheets and perfectly crystalline g-C3N4 are expected to be two hot research topics in future because they are beneficial for us to analyze their specific structure and achieve the optimal photocatalytic performance.
(iii) In addition to specific surface area, a 3D hierarchical architecture composed of large mesopores connected with macropores is also very important for g-C3N4 to achieve high photocatalytic activity. Macropores can serve as an efficient light-transfer path to introduce incident photon flux into the connected inner mesopores, enabling light to penetrate deeply inside the photocatalyst. As a result, light absorption, reflection and scattering within a hierarchical nanostructure would greatly increase the light-activated surface area. The interconnected macropores and large mesopores not only facilitate mass transport, but also have a multiple-reflection effect on incident light, resulting in enhanced multilight scattering and light harvesting under visible light irradiation, and accordingly considerably improved photocatalytic performance. Therefore, some synthesis strategies which can create a 3D hierarchical nanostructure for g-C3N4-based photocatalysts are highly desired.
(iv) g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts still require further exploration to achieve better photocatalytic performance and visible-light utilization, lower fabrication cost and little-to-no pollution to the environment. Therefore, in the process of developing g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts, not only should we consider the photocatalytic activity, stability and visible-light utilization efficiency, but also take into account the production and environmental costs (a detailed discussion is given below).
(v) There is a very interesting phenomenon, that is, almost all studies about g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for HER are focused on the design and development of novel g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with high efficiency and stability. In these studies, the enhancement mechanism is nearly identical, namely, efficient separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Although this is correct, it is not in-depth and specific enough. Some physical and theoretically calculated technologies are encouraged to be used in this field. The exploration of the essence of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts through theoretical computation and modeling could further guide us to rationally design highly efficient HER photocatalysts, and thus is also particularly important.
(vi) To further enhance the photocatalytic efficiency of highly efficient g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for large scale photocatalytic HER application, photoreactor engineering is particularly important and highly desired. When a novel photoreactor (e.g., fluidized bed photoreactor) is used for a photocatalytic process, it can provide improved mass transfer, outstanding radiation distribution, and enhanced photocatalyst surface area-to-volume ratio. Through maximising mass transfer and visible light utilization, such novel fluidized photoreactors can significantly improve the photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts by eliminating the limitation in the photocatalytic efficiency in traditional photoreactors.514 Up to now, there have been only a few publications that explore novel photoreactors for g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Therefore, there is a great necessity for engineering photoreactors to realize large scale industrial photocatalytic HER application.
(vii) Another urgent and important issue needed to be addressed is the inconsistency of photocatalytic performance tests, such as the different usage amounts of photocatalysts, cocatalysts and sacrificial reagents, and the different types of cocatalysts, sacrificial reagents and light sources, etc. (see Tables 3 and 4), which makes it virtually impossible to compare fairly the photocatalytic performance of various g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. Thus, standardization of photocatalytic performance tests is also highly worth considering.
In a comprehensive consideration of the catalytic efficiency and fabrication cost, here, we summarize and compare a series of representative g-C3N4-based photocatalysts to obtain some new views and insights. Among the representative g-C3N4-based photocatalysts (Table 5), sensitizer/g-C3N4 has shown the highest H2 evolution rate (e.g., 24760 μmol h−1 g−1 reported for the LI-4/g-C3N4/Zn-tri-PcNc).481 Moreover, enlarged visible-light absorption ensures that they have great potential for large scale industrial application. However, it seems to be detrimental to soil and water sources if the sensitizer is used in a large quantity. In addition, the synthesis of the sensitizer is generally complicated and time consuming, resulting in high cost. Semiconductors may be a better choice because of their wide variety, outstanding HER performance (e.g., 16400 μmol h−1 g−1 for NiS/g-C3N4323 and 18836 μmol h−1 g−1 for N-doped ZnO/g-C3N4 nanosheets298) and relatively low cost, but similarly, semiconductors particularly those containing heavy metal elements potentially cause environmental pollutions and biological hazards. Although nanostructured intrinsic g-C3N4 has revealed a moderate H2 evolution rate (e.g., 9577 μmol h−1 g−1 reported for the highly crystalline g-C3N4),211 which is about one-third of the highest one (e.g., 27035 μmol h−1 g−1),220 the relatively harsh synthetic conditions severely limit its application. Very recently, an enlightening g-C3N4-based photocatalyst was reported by Neppolian's group,492 who combined low-cost, nontoxic, photoactive and photostable TiO2 and graphene with a large surface area and high electron mobility to prepare rGO/g-C3N4/TiO2, which possessed very high H2 evolution rate (e.g., 23143 μmol h−1 g−1). Therefore, it is believed that an effective combination of multiple components with different functions will greatly improve visible-light harvesting and facilitate the separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and accordingly high HER performance. In addition, surface functionalization of g-C3N4 is also highly worth considering because it can regulate the surface charge with specific surface groups to strengthen the anchoring ability of g-C3N4, with a view to reduce nanoparticle aggregation and thus achieving higher catalytic activity and stability. Surely, 3D hierarchical self-doped g-C3N4 architectures also achieve an ultrahigh H2 evolution rate (27035 μmol h−1 g−1) and apparent quantum efficiency (7.8%) at 420 nm. This is mainly because: (1) 3D hierarchical nanostructures can significantly promote the photogenerated charge separation and transfer, resulting in a much longer lifetime of the charge carriers; (2) 3D hierarchical nanostructures can produce multiple light scattering, which facilitates light harvesting; and (3) 3D nanostructures provide more exposed active catalytic sites for surface reactions, which acts as a pivotal part in shortening the charge migration distance. Moreover, extremely facile hexamethylenetetramine activation strategy also ensures it have a great potential for a large scale industrial application. Thus, 3D hierarchical g-C3N4 nanostructures are highly desired for catering to the actual production demand in the future work.
Table 5 Comparison of representative g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with ultrahigh HER activity (H2 evolution rate > 2000 μmol h−1 g−1) under visible lighta




Photocatalyst type
Photocatalyst
Cocatalyst
Photocatalyst mass (mg)
Reactant solution and sacrificial reagents
Light source
H2 evolution rate (μmol h−1 g−1)
Apparent quantum yield (%)
Ref.





a TEOA: triethanolamine; PTI: poly(triazine imide).





Thinner g-C3N4
g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (3 wt%)
10
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
8510
5.1 (420 nm)

38



Foam-like holey ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets
Pt (3 wt%)
20
Water (50 mL) and TEOA (6 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2860
4.0 (420 nm)

239







Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
20
Water (17 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2025
—

106



PTI nanosheets
Pt (8 wt%)
2
Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)
3200
—

195



Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (1.5 solar simulator)
9577
9.0 (420 nm)

211



Highly crystalline g-C3N4
Pt (0.5 wt%)
10
Water (18.5 mL) and TEOA (1.5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
2000
—

88







Doped g-C3N4
Na-Doped g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
20
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
7150
—

225



3D CCNS
Pt (3 wt%)
10
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp
27035
7.8 (420 nm)

220







Porous g-C3N4
Mesoporous g-C3N4
Pt (0.2 wt%)
50
Water (76 mL) and MeOH (4 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2738
—

238



Mesoporous g-C3N4
—
50
Water (50 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
3100
74.0 (400 nm)

235







Metal/g-C3N4
Ni/g-C3N4
—
10
Water (7 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
4318
—

248



Ag/g-C3N4
—
5
Water (63 mL) and TEOA (7 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)
2014
—

484



Au/g-C3N4
—
20
TEOA (10 vol%)
125 W visible-light Hg lamp
8870
—

262







Semiconductor/g-C3N4
g-C3N4 p–n homojunctions
Pt (3 wt%)
25
Water (243 mL) and TEOA (27 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
4020
—

282



N-Doped ZnO/g-C3N4 nanosheets
—
5
Water (50 mL) containing 0.3 M Na2S, 0.3 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
18836
—

298



SnO2–ZnO/g-C3N4
—
5
Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
2735
—

299



CdS/g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
5303
3.61 (420 nm)

316



CdS/g-C3N4
Pt (0.6 wt%)
50
Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4152
4.3 (420 nm)

181



CdS quantum dot/g-C3N4
Pt (0.08 wt%)
5
10 mL aqueous solution of 0.1 M L-ascorbic acid
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
4494
—

318



NiS/g-C3N4
—
5
Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
16400
—

323



CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (100 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
3570
4.4 (420 nm)

391



TiO2/WO3/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (30 mL) and MeOH (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)
5732
—

392







Carbon/g-C3N4
Carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4
Pt (3 wt%)
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
2322
—

445



Carbon@g-C3N4
Pt (1 wt%)
50
Water (100 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3
300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
2580
—

456







Sensitizer/g-C3N4
EY-sensitized g-C3N4
—
30
Water (68 mL) and TEOA (12 mL)
250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
3850
19.4 (550 nm)

183



EB-sensitized g-C3N4
—
100
Water (95 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)
>420 nm
6525
33.4 (460 nm)

476



12.3 (550 nm)




Zn-tri-PcNc-sensitized g-C3N4
—
10
Water (10 mL) and ascorbic acid (88 mg)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
12520
1.85 (700 nm)

480



LI-4/g-C3N4/Zn-tri-PcNc
—
15
Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)
300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)
24760
16.3 (420 nm)

481



7.7 (500 nm)


1.75 (700 nm)






Other materials/g-C3N4
ER co-sensitized Co(OH)2/g-C3N4
—
50
Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)
350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)
2879
33 (430 nm)

491



rGO/g-C3N4/TiO2
—
5
Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)
250 W Xe lamp (200–800 nm)
23143
—

492





With an eye to the future, a great number of opportunities and challenges are presented for this booming and hot field. We believe that this review article will be able to provide a strategic guide to reasonably design and develop novel g-C3N4-based photocatalysts with high activity, stability and visible-light utilization efficiency, environmental friendliness and low-cost for visible-light photocatalytic HER application. It is believed that enlarging the knowledge on fundamental aspects through more physicochemical theoretical research studies combined with experimental results will energetically bring new discoveries in materials science and technologies. Therefore, with more research findings in g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for HER application obtained from various fields, the bottleneck and issues will be fully addressed. There is no doubt that the emerging g-C3N4-based photocatalysts will be regarded as the “holy grail” for achieving highly efficient photocatalytic H2 generation under visible-light.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21674130, 51873234) and the National Program for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals. The authors also acknowledge Prof. Da Zhan from Xiamen University for the helpful discussion about new views on g-C3N4-based photocatalysts.
References
M. Child, O. Koskinen, L. Linnanen and C. Breyer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 91, 321–334 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Wang, W. Long, L. Wang, R. Yuan, A. Ignaszak, B. Fang and D. P. Wilkinson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 258–275 RSC .
Z. Wei, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, W. Yao, H. Tan and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2581–2589 RSC .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201–5241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Reilly, B. Fang, F. Taghipour and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Catal., 2017, 353, 63–73 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Q. Chu, Z. Wu, Q. Chen, S.-Q. Fan, G.-J. Yang and B. Fang, J. Catal., 2015, 325, 118–127 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wang, G. Chang, Q. Chen, G. J. Yang, S. Q. Fan and B. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 685–688 RSC .
S.-C. Yang, G. Chang, G.-J. Yang, Y.-J. Wang and B. Fang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 228–233 RSC .
J. Ran, T. Y. Ma, G. Gao, X.-W. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3708–3717 RSC .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. L. Waters, P. Kung, S. M. Kim, J. T. Kelly, L. E. McNamara, N. I. Hammer, B. C. Pemberton, R. H. Schmehl, A. Gupta and S. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 381–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Liu, B.-H. Wu, Y.-T. Lai, N.-H. Tai, T.-P. Perng and L.-J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Xiao, D. Liu, S. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Hao and W. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2037–2046 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, S. Li, Y. Qiu, H. Hu, X. Li, C. Li, J. Gao and W. Tang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 666–672 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ran, J. G. McEvoy and Z. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 74, 140–150 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ma, J. Wu, M. Gao, Y. Xin, T. Ma and Y. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 290, 136–146 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, X. Chen, H. He, X. Zhou, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703119 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yu, Y. Yu, P. Zhou, W. Xiao and B. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, W. Shen, Z. Sun, C. Yang, P. Zhang and L. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 290, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liang, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2897–2902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, Y. Xia, K. Lv, Q. Li, J. Sun and M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 185, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge and C. Han, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 117–118, 268–274 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Zhang, Z. Wang, G. Dawson and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14398 RSC .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. Liu, B. Cheng, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 44–52 CAS .
Y. Cui, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, J. Huang, P. Liu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13032 RSC .
F. Cheng, H. Wang and X. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7176–7179 RSC .
J. Wen, J. Xie, X. Chen and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 72–123 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2298–2321 RSC .
Y. Lv, S. Chen, Y. Shen, J. Ji, Q. Zhou, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2801–2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Lv, Y. Shen, J. Ji, Q. Zhou, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6887–6894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ye, J.-X. Li, Z.-J. Li, X.-B. Li, X.-B. Fan, L.-P. Zhang, B. Chen, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6973–6979 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, B. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2745–2751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiong, W. Cen, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2462–2472 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xia, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 6, 965–973 CrossRef .
D. Jiang, J. Li, C. Xing, Z. Zhang, S. Meng and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19234–19242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Takahashi, K. Tsukigi, T. Uchino and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 388, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Sernelius, K. F. Berggren, Z. C. Jin, I. Hamberg and C. G. Granqvist, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 10244–10248 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rougier, F. Portemer, A. Quédé and M. El Marssi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 153, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Bagheri-Mohagheghi, N. Shahtahmasebi, M. R. Alinejad, A. Youssefi and M. Shokooh-Saremi, Phys. B, 2008, 403, 2431–2437 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781 RSC .
L. Wu, J. Bi, Z. Li, X. Wang and X. Fu, Catal. Today, 2008, 131, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
J. Camassel, M. Schlüter, S. Kohn, J. P. Voitchovsky, Y. R. Shen and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1976, 75, 303–314 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 62, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Fu and Y. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 275, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Salem, M. S. Selim and A. M. Salem, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2001, 34, 12–17 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klenk, J. Klaer, R. Scheer, M. C. Lux-Steiner, I. Luck, N. Meyer and U. Rühle, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharon, G. Tamizhmani, C. Levy-Clement and J. Rioux, Sol. Cells, 1989, 26, 303–312 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cohen, L. Kronik, A. Shanzer, D. Cahen, A. Liu, Y. Rosenwaks, J. K. Lorenz and A. B. Ellis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 10545–10553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 66, 6030–6040 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Fang, E. Orhan, G. A. de Wijs, H. T. Hintzen, R. A. de Groot, R. Marchand, J. Y. Saillard and G. de With, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1248–1252 RSC .
S. Bloom, G. Harbeke, E. Meier and I. B. Ortenburger, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1974, 66, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
T. Inushima, V. V. Mamutin, V. A. Vekshin, S. V. Ivanov, T. Sakon, M. Motokawa and S. Ohoya, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 227-228, 481–485 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M.-Z. Wu and Y.-P. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sudhaik, P. Raizada, P. Shandilya, D.-Y. Jeong, J.-H. Lim and P. Singh, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 67, 28–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
T. Di, Q. Xu, W. Ho, H. Tang, Q. Xiang and J. Yu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1394–1411 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1596–1606 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, P. Xiao, H. Li and S. A. Carabineiro, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16449–16465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Patnaik, S. Martha and K. M. Parida, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 46929–46951 RSC .
J. Liu, H. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2308–2326 RSC .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717 RSC .
D. Masih, Y. Ma and S. Rohani, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 206, 556–588 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gmelin, Ann. Pharm., 1835, 15, 252–258 CrossRef .
L. Pauling and J. H. Sturdivant, PNAS, 1937, 23, 615–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Redemann and H. J. Lucas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1940, 62, 842–846 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Hosmane, M. A. Rossman and N. J. Leonard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 5497–5499 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Teter and R. J. Hemley, Science, 1996, 271, 53–55 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miyamoto, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Solid State Commun., 1997, 102, 605–608 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Liu and R. M. Wentzcovitch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 10362–10365 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Lowther, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 11683–11686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ortega and O. F. Sankey, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 2624–2627 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zambon, J. M. Mouesca, C. Gheorghiu, P. A. Bayle, J. Pecaut, M. Claeys-Bruno, S. Gambarelli and L. Dubois, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 945–950 RSC .
T. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 802–803 RSC .
T. Komatsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 799–801 RSC .
B. Jurgens, E. Irran, J. Senker, P. Kroll, H. Muller and W. Schnick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10288–10300 CrossRef PubMed .
B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. –
Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4956–4968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Horvath-Bordon, R. Riedel, P. F. McMillan, P. Kroll, G. Miehe, P. A. van Aken, A. Zerr, P. Hoppe, O. Shebanova, I. McLaren, S. Lauterbach, E. Kroke and R. Boehler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 119, 1498–1502 CrossRef .
M. J. Bojdys, J. O. Muller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8177–8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-S. Yin, S.-W. Cao, L.-N. Gu, G.-S. Xu, P. Du, H. Chai, Y.-S. Liao and C. Xue, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4663–4668 RSC .
S. Kang, L. Zhang, M. He, Y. Zheng, L. Cui, D. Sun and B. Hu, Carbon, 2018, 137, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Su, J. Sun, J. Wang, Z. Yang, W. Cheng and S. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1556 RSC .
Z. Zhou, J. Wang, J. Yu, Y. Shen, Y. Li, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2179–2182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, P. Sun, B. Fan, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7801–7807 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Xie, F. Nawaz, S. Jin, F. Duan, M. Li and H. Cao, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 420–428 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tong, D. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Nan, F. Ding, Y. Shen and Z. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1103–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, N. Chen, J. Zhang and L. Qu, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 832–850 RSC .
X. Dong and F. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23642–23652 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8083 RSC .
J. Li, C. Cao and H. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 115605 CrossRef .
B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1891–1900 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Pham and E. W. Shin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 447, 757–766 CrossRef CAS .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1455 RSC .
D. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Du, G. Yang, T. Ren and H. Ding, Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 41–48 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, C. Xue, X. Yan, G. Yang, G. Yang and B. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 357, 346–355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Li, Y. Yuan, L. Li, M. Zhang, C. Zhou and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14693–14697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, Z. Zhao, T. Xiong, Z. Ni, W. Zhang, Y. Sun and W. K. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11392–11401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1735–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, H. Ou, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3921–3931 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kudernac, S. Lei, J. A. Elemans and S. De Feyter, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 402–421 RSC .
D. C. Sherrington and K. A. Taskinen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 83–93 RSC .
S. Lena, S. Masiero, S. Pieraccini and G. P. Spada, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 7792–7806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sevim, A. Sorrenti, C. Franco, S. Furukawa, S. Pane, A. J. deMello and J. Puigmarti-Luis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3788–3803 RSC .
J. P. Mathias, E. E. Simanek, J. A. Zerkowski, C. T. Seto and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 4316–4325 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Jun, E. Z. Lee, X. Wang, W. H. Hong, G. D. Stucky and A. Thomas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3661–3667 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shalom, S. Inal, C. Fettkenhauer, D. Neher and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7118–7121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bhunia, K. Yamauchi and K. Takanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11001–11005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ishida, L. Chabanne, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 447–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, J. Wang, X. Qian, Y. Dong, H. Xu, R. Song, C. Yan, H. Zhu, Q. Zhong, G. Qian and J. Yao, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 228, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Xu, X. Qian, Y. Dong, J. Gao, G. Qian and J. Yao, Chem. – Asian J., 2015, 10, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, C.-W. Yeh and J.-D. Chen, Polyhedron, 2006, 25, 1307–1312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Y. Xie, C. Li, J.-H. Kim, K. Tang and H. Cao, Catal. Today, 2018, 307, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, J. Dong, C. Wan, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, H. Liu, K. Zang, J. Luo, S. Zhao, W. Hu, W. Yan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802146 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Zhu and F. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6462–6555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, D. Chen, M. Hu, H. Shi, D. Yang, B. Fan, G. Shao, R. Zhang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18867–18874 RSC .
Z. Xuan, Y. Shiyue, L. Yumei, W. Zuoshan and L. Weifeng, Mater. Lett., 2015, 145, 23–26 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, H. Shen, R. von Hagen, J. Pan, L. Belkoura and S. Mathur, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6509–6511 RSC .
H. Liu, D. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Jing and R. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 300–313 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, Y. Dai, J. Lin and G. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3151–3161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3430–3432 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and Y. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 435–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu, S. Guo, X. Li and M. Zhang, Mater. Technol., 2014, 29, 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aijaz, N. Fujiwara and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6790–6793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Small, 2014, 10, 193–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dupont, R. F. de Souza and P. A. Z. Suarez, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3667–3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schwinghammer, B. Tuffy, M. B. Mesch, E. Wirnhier, C. Martineau, F. Taulelle, W. Schnick, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2435–2439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bhunia, S. Melissen, M. R. Parida, P. Sarawade, J.-M. Basset, D. H. Anjum, O. F. Mohammed, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8237–8247 CrossRef CAS .
F.-T. Li, Y.-B. Xue, B. Li, Y.-J. Hao, X.-J. Wang, R.-H. Liu and J. Zhao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 19540–19549 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dontsova, S. Pronkin, M. Wehle, Z. Chen, C. Fettkenhauer, G. Clavel and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5170–5179 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dontsova, C. Fettkenhauer, V. Papaefthimiou, J. Schmidt and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 772–778 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wasserscheid and W. Keim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3772–3789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Parvulescu and C. Hardacre, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2615–2665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. van Rantwijk and R. A. Sheldon, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2757–2785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hapiot and C. Lagrost, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2238–2264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Plechkova and K. R. Seddon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 123–150 RSC .
A. S. Amarasekara, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 6133–6183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Antonietti and H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3356–3359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, J. Xia, H. Xu, S. Yin, K. Wang, L. Huang, L. Wang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2915–2926 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wooster, K. M. Johanson, K. J. Fraser, D. R. MacFarlane and J. L. Scott, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 691 RSC .
S. Zhang, M. S. Miran, A. Ikoma, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1690–1693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Seo, Y. W. Jun, S. W. Park, H. Nah, T. Moon, B. Park, J. G. Kim, Y. J. Kim and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8828–8831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Shi and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14766 RSC .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 73 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22116–22125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-S. Lin, Z.-X. Cong, J. Li, K.-M. Ke, S.-S. Guo, H.-H. Yang and G.-N. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1031 RSC .
F. Chang, J. Zhang, Y. Xie, J. Chen, C. Li, J. Wang, J. Luo, B. Deng and X. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 311, 574–581 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Z. Sun, Y. Xue, G. Yao and S. Zheng, Adv. Powder Technol., 2016, 27, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tian, Y. Zhang, X. Li, K. Xiao, X. Du, F. Dong, G. I. N. Waterhouse, T. Zhang and H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, K. Xiao, N. Tian, F. Dong, T. Zhang, X. Du and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17452–17463 RSC .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893 RSC .
J. Wang, D. Hao, J. Ye and N. Umezawa, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2694–2707 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, L. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3209–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. V. Lotsch, M. Doblinger, J. Sehnert, L. Seyfarth, J. Senker, O. Oeckler and W. Schnick, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4969–4980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Pan, G. Chai, M. Liang, G. Dong, Q. Zhang and J. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1943 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wei and T. Jacob, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 085202 CrossRef .
W. Che, W. Cheng, T. Yao, F. Tang, W. Liu, H. Su, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, J. Liu, F. Hu, Z. Pan, Z. Sun and S. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3021–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Gillan, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3906–3912 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deifallah, P. F. McMillan and F. Corà, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5447–5453 CrossRef CAS .
F. Goettmann, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2717–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 50–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 663–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, L. Ye, S. Yue, B. Wang, W. Wang, H. Y. Yip and P. K. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7715–7727 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, Y. Zhang, Q. Pan and J. Qiu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 20, 33–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Xu, R. Zong and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, Z. Fang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Min and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19644–19652 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Yu, L. Li, S. Hao and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3822–3827 RSC .
Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Y. Li, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12480–12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Shen, Q. Zhou, J. Wang, A. Liu, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9036–9043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, J. Wen, Y. Shen, Y. Lv, Y. Chen, S. Liu, H. Ma and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11698–11701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, J. D. Epping, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y.-S. Jun, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4093–4095 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chingin, R. H. Perry, S. D. Chambreau, G. L. Vaghjiani and R. N. Zare, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8634–8637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, B. Wang, Y. Zhao, C. Hu and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 11595–11599 CrossRef .
J. Hong, S. Yin, Y. Pan, J. Han, T. Zhou and R. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14984–14990 RSC .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885–6892 CrossRef CAS .
P. Niu, L. Zhang, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4763–4770 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schwinghammer, M. B. Mesch, V. Duppel, C. Ziegler, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1730–1733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, C. Hu, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4612–4619 RSC .
Z. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 1779–1782 CrossRef .
Y. Kang, Y. Yang, L. C. Yin, X. Kang, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4572–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, T. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Meng, D. Hao, K. Chang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13561–13565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fang, Y. Hong, D. Li, B. Luo, B. Mao and W. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20521–20529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Yang, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, F. Zhao, C. Hu, L. Lv, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1718–1728 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Shen, Y. Li, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 12449–12454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, W.-T. Xu, L.-S. Yin, S.-W. Cao, Y.-S. Liao, Y.-Q. Tng and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13159–13163 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wirnhier, M. Doblinger, D. Gunzelmann, J. Senker, B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 3213–3221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Chong, J. T. A. Jones, Y. Z. Khimyak, A. I. Cooper, A. Thomas, M. Antonietti and M. J. Bojdys, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1102–1107 RSC .
M. J. Bojdys, N. Severin, J. P. Rabe, A. I. Cooper, A. Thomas and M. Antonietti, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2013, 34, 850–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, S. Yan, J. Wang, Y. A. Huang, P. Wang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18077–18084 RSC .
H. Ou, L. Lin, Y. Zheng, P. Yang, Y. Fang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700008 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhou, P. Yang, R. Yuan, A. M. Asiri, M. Wakeel and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4451–4456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Iqbal, B. Qiu, Q. Zhu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 306–313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Di, M. Antonietti, H. Li, X. Chen and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5119–5121 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6178–6180 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, J. Ye and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6294–6295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, L. Ma, J. You, F. Li, Z. Fan, F. Wang, D. Liu and J. Gui, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21657–21663 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Guan, Y. Jiang, T. Hou and X. Mu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 3485–3491 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thaweesak, S. Wang, M. Lyu, M. Xiao, P. Peerakiatkhajohn and L. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10714–10720 RSC .
P.-K. Chuang, K.-H. Wu, T.-F. Yeh and H. Teng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5989–5997 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, R. Cao, S. Zhang, H. Yang and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2050–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, J. M. Yan, X. N. Tang, M. Zhao and Q. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2654–2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, X. Bai, D. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. Fang, Y. Zhou, S. Yuan, C. Zhang and W. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 440, 258–265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, S. Cao, C. Hu and C. Chen, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1981–1989 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, N. Ding, M. Hashimoto, K. Iwasaki, N. Chikamori, K. Nakata, Y. Xu, J. Shi, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, A. Fujishima and Q. Meng, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2295–2309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Y. Wang, S. Zhou, W. Lin and Y. Kong, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1708–1715 CrossRef CAS .
S. Le, T. Jiang, Q. Zhao, X. Liu, Y. Li, B. Fang and M. Gong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38811–38819 RSC .
J.-C. Wang, C.-X. Cui, Q.-Q. Kong, C.-Y. Ren, Z. Li, L. Qu, Y. Zhang and K. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8754–8761 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yue, Q. Li, H. Iwai, T. Kako and J. Ye, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 034401 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, Y. Zhang and Z. Schnepp, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14081–14092 RSC .
J. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Shen, Z. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Li, W. Wei, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5126–5131 RSC .
K. Li, X. Xie and W.-D. Zhang, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 2128–2135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Groenewolt and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ruan, S. Kim, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 638–646 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Bielejewska, C. E. Marjo, L. J. Prins, P. Timmerman, F. de Jong and D. N. Reinhoudt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7518–7533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, H. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Yang, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 8546–8550 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Yang, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 450, 46–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, R. Jin, Y. Xing, J. Li, S. Song, X. Liu, M. Li and R. Jin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601273 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10119–10126 RSC .
M. Fan, C. Song, T. Chen, X. Yan, D. Xu, W. Gu, W. Shi and L. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34633–34640 RSC .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Jr., Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Schottky, Z. Phys., 1939, 113, 367–414 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Mott, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 2008, 34, 568 CrossRef .
N. F. Mott, Proc. R. Soc. A, 1939, 171, 27–38 Search PubMed .
M. McEllistrem, G. Haase, D. Chen and R. J. Hamers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 2471–2474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bi, D. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Lin, D. Wang and T. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 29899–29905 RSC .
L. Kong, Y. Dong, P. Jiang, G. Wang, H. Zhang and N. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9998–10007 RSC .
X. H. Li and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6593–6604 RSC .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11439–11446 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Card and E. S. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 51–53 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
X. Chen, Z. Zheng, X. Ke, E. Jaatinen, T. Xie, D. Wang, C. Guo, J. Zhao and H. Zhu, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 414 RSC .
G. Liao, J. Chen, W. Zeng, C. Yu, C. Yi and Z. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 25935–25944 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liao, Q. Li, W. Zhao, Q. Pang, H. Gao and Z. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 549, 102–111 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liao, W. Zhao, Q. Li, Q. Pang and Z. Xu, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 1631–1634 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liao, J. Fang, Q. Li, S. Li, Z. Xu and B. Fang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7062–7096 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Cong, H. Xu, J. Wang, H. Liu, M. Liang, J. Gao, Q. Ni and J. Yao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10633–10639 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ghosh and T. Pal, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4797–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, F. Scotognella and L. Manna, Phys. Rep., 2017, 674, 1–52 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Silva, R. Juarez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. Garcia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Samanta, S. Martha and K. Parida, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1453–1462 CAS .
Y. Shiraishi, H. Sakamoto, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa and T. Hirai, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9287–9297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shiraishi, Y. Kofuji, S. Kanazawa, H. Sakamoto, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15255–15258 RSC .
S. Cao, J. Jiang, B. Zhu and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 19457–19463 RSC .
S. Bai, X. Wang, C. Hu, M. Xie, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6094–6097 RSC .
C. Han, L. Wu, L. Ge, Y. Li and Z. Zhao, Carbon, 2015, 92, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Yang, N. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Huang and Z. Kang, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4559–4565 RSC .
B. T. Sneed, A. P. Young, D. Jalalpoor, M. C. Golden, S. Mao, Y. Jiang, Y. Wang and C. K. Tsung, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7239–7250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, Y. Lu, J. Zhang, L. Ge, Y. Li, C. Chen, Y. Xin, L. Wu and S. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23274–23282 RSC .
I. Majeed, U. Manzoor, F. K. Kanodarwala, M. A. Nadeem, E. Hussain, H. Ali, A. Badshah, J. A. Stride and M. A. Nadeem, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 1183–1193 RSC .
S. Liang, Y. Xia, S. Zhu, S. Zheng, Y. He, J. Bi, M. Liu and L. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Rathi, H. Kmentová, A. Naldoni, A. Goswami, M. B. Gawande, R. S. Varma, Š. Kment and R. Zbořil, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 2526–2535 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2978–2981 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Zhan, J. Wang, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 437–440 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, M. Yuan, H. Lv, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Chen and X. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 6970–6978 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, G. Zou, Z. Wang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8701–8706 RSC .
T. Y. Ma, Y. Tang, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2014, 10, 2382–2389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, Z. Xing, J. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Wu, J. Cui, J. Kuang, J. Yin and W. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 25969–25979 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9547–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, G. Zhao, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, H. Pang, H. Zhang, D. Hao, X. Meng, P. Li, T. Kako and J. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6822–6829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martha, S. Mansingh, K. M. Parida and A. Thirumurugan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1641–1653 RSC .
C. Liu, X. Dong, Y. Hao, X. Wang, H. Ma and X. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 11872–11880 RSC .
M. Zhou, Z. Hou, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Gao and X. Chen, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 317–323 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Huang, H. Xie and A. Qu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 6354–6363 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guo, Y. Zeng, H. Li, X. Xu, H. Yu and X. Han, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 353, 80–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, S. Gao, Q. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai and J. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9023–9030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, D. He, Q. An and G. Cao, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 292, 79–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, C. Zhu, W. Wan, K. Qian and J. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1806–1818 RSC .
Y. Jiang, F. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Hong, P. Liu and L. Ni, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 41, 130–140 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Sun, Y. P. Yuan, L. G. Qiu, X. Jiang, A. J. Xie, Y. H. Shen and J. F. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 6756–6763 RSC .
J. Li, M. Zhou, Z. Ye, H. Wang, C. Ma, P. Huo and Y. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91177–91189 RSC .
W. Liu, M. Wang, C. Xu and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 209, 386–393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Shi, J. Lin and Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2922 RSC .
D. Chen, K. Wang, D. Xiang, R. Zong, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 554–561 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, V. Sharma, K. Bhattacharyya and V. Krishnan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1093–1106 RSC .
S. Kumar, N. L. Reddy, A. Kumar, M. V. Shankar and V. Krishnan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 3988–4002 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. P. Vattikuti, P. A. K. Reddy, J. Shim and C. Byon, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 7587–7602 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, L. Li, Y. Zuo, H. Lin, G. Li and X. Guan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13646 RSC .
L. Huang, H. Xu, Y. Li, H. Li, X. Cheng, J. Xia, Y. Xu and G. Cai, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 8606–8616 RSC .
S. Chen, Y. Hu, S. Meng and X. Fu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150–151, 564–573 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kondofersky, H. K. Dunn, A. Muller, B. Mandlmeier, J. M. Feckl, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, C. Scheu, L. M. Peter and T. Bein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4623–4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, J. Chen, T. Shang, L. Chen, L. Gu and T. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 693–704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katsumata, Y. Tachi, T. Suzuki and S. Kaneco, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21405–21409 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. Qi, J. Hu, W. An, S. Lin, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Mater. Lett., 2015, 158, 278–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. Shen, P. Guo, M. Wang, P. Wu, X. Wang and L. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 152–153, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Deng, T. Zhang, D. Gao and A.-W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5073–5079 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Qi, J. Hu, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 1146–1154 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mao, J. Chen, Y. Yang, D. Wang, L. Bie and B. D. Fahlman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12427–12435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Han, H. Wang, S. Zhao, L. Hu, H. Huang and Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 1691–1696 RSC .
W. Zou, B. Deng, X. Hu, Y. Zhou, Y. Pu, S. Yu, K. Ma, J. Sun, H. Wan and L. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, C. a. Liu, C. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Dou, W. Shi, M. Shao, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1646–1652 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. Yan and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28255–28264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, M. Xie, S. Meng, X. Fu and S. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158–159, 382–390 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, F. Chen, F. Chen and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, F. Zuo, J. Liu, Q. Ma, C. Wang, D. Sun, L. Bartels and P. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13708–13714 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Cao, Y.-P. Yuan, J. Fang, M. M. Shahjamali, F. Y. C. Boey, J. Barber, S. C. Joachim Loo and C. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1258–1266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2263–2268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, D. Chu, M. Zhu, Y. Du and P. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17355–17361 RSC .
J. Wen, X. Li, H. Li, S. Ma, K. He, Y. Xu, Y. Fang, W. Liu and Q. Gao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 204–212 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kadi, R. M. Mohamed, A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, Appl. Nanosci., 2018, 8, 1587–1596 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, H. Zhang, G. Cui, Y. Dong, G. Wang, P. Jiang, X. Wu and N. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 284–290 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pramoda, U. Gupta, M. Chhetri, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. K. Pati and C. N. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10664–10672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, K. Zhang, H. Lin, X. Li, H. C. Chan, L. Yang and Q. Gao, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2357–2366 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Lunt, K. Sun, M. Kröger, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 064114 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, A. B. Laursen, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 125, 3709–3713 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Guan, J. Huang, Q. Li and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7960–7966 RSC .
M. Wang, P. Ju, Y. Zhao, J. Li, X. Han and Z. Hao, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 910–917 RSC .
V. Polshettiwar, R. Luque, A. Fihri, H. Zhu, M. Bouhrara and J. M. Basset, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3036–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lu, H. Fan, K. K. Kondamareddy, H. Yu, A. Wang, H. Hao, M. Li and J. Shen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9903–9911 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 156–157, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Huang, M. Zhang, Q. Yuan and B. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, J. Zhou, Z. Cui, Y. Wang, Y. Wang and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 229, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L. A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
A. Indra, A. Acharjya, P. W. Menezes, C. Merschjann, D. Hollmann, M. Schwarze, M. Aktas, A. Friedrich, S. Lochbrunner, A. Thomas and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 1675–1679 CrossRef .
W. Wang, T. An, G. Li, D. Xia, H. Zhao, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 570–580 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ye, X. Liu, J. Iocozzia, Y. Yuan, L. Gu, G. Xu and Z. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8493–8498 RSC .
D. Zeng, W. Xu, W.-J. Ong, J. Xu, H. Ren, Y. Chen, H. Zheng and D.-L. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, H. Meng and C. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8121–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wen, J. Xie, R. Shen, X. Li, X. Luo, H. Zhang, A. Zhang and G. Bi, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1794–1802 RSC .
D. Zeng, W.-J. Ong, H. Zheng, M. Wu, Y. Chen, D.-L. Peng and M.-Y. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16171–16178 RSC .
Z. Sun, M. Zhu, M. Fujitsuka, A. Wang, C. Shi and T. Majima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30583–30590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, S. Sun, P. Jiang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 315, 296–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Liu, J. Zhao, K. Yang, J. Liang, D. Liu, W. Hu, D. Liu, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1656–1665 RSC .
X. J. Wang, X. Tian, Y. J. Sun, J. Y. Zhu, F. T. Li, H. Y. Mu and J. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12315–12321 RSC .
C. Li, Y. Du, D. Wang, S. Yin, W. Tu, Z. Chen, M. Kraft, G. Chen and R. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604328 CrossRef .
L. Bi, X. Gao, L. Zhang, D. Wang, X. Zou and T. Xie, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 276–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, A. J. Ward, A. F. Masters and T. Maschmeyer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7345–7350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Bai, C. Pan, J. He and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11568 RSC .
Z. Yang, M. Shen, K. Dai, X. Zhang and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 430, 505–514 CrossRef CAS .
F. Opoku, K. K. Govender, C. G. C. E. V. Sittert and P. P. Govender, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 487–498 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Yin, E. Liu, Y. Ma, J. Wan, J. Fan and X. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 321, 183–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hu, F. Cai, T. Chen, M. Fan, C. Song, X. Yan and W. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18247–18256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shang, W. Hao, X. Lv, T. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Du, S. Dou, T. Xie, D. Wang and J. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 954–961 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, L. Zhu, S. Wang, X. Chu and L. Yue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5083–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, J. Liu, Z. Jiang, T. Peng and L. Zan, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 1–7 CAS .
S. Shi, M. A. Gondal, A. A. Al-Saadi, R. Fajgar, J. Kupcik, X. Chang, K. Shen, Q. Xu and Z. S. Seddigi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 416, 212–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, J. Zhang, Y. Wang and F. Ren, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 435, 1351–1360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, W. Cao, Y. Su, Y. Wang and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111–112, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Wang, H. C. Yao, Z. Y. Fan, L. Zhang, J. S. Wang, S. Q. Zang and Z. J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3765–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Pei, Z. Zheng, Y. Yuan, T. Xie, J. Yang, S. Chen, J. Wang, E. R. Waclawik and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18045–18052 RSC .
R. Ye, H. Fang, Y. Z. Zheng, N. Li, Y. Wang and X. Tao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13879–13889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, G. Liu, C. Randorn and J. T. S. Irvine, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 13501–13507 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, W. Yan, S. Sun, J. Bao and C. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12877–12884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, B. Hong, Z. Luo, S. Sun, J. Bao and C. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27690–27697 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Yang, J. Zhou, D. Li, X. Zhou, C. Ge and Y. Fang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 241, 344–351 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Sharma, A. A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, M. Naushad, A. A. Ghfar, C. Guo and F. J. Stadler, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 339, 393–410 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Guo, W. Guo, M. Wang, Y. Guo and M. Huo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 261, 235–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Huang, X. Du, T. Zhang, N. Tian, Y. Guo and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17156–17165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Ye, L. Wang, X. Shi, P. Wang, W. Bai and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, S. Liu, T. He, X. Liu, Q. Deng, Y. Mao and S. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 104, 104–111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, L. Zhao, Y. He, J. Cai, M. Luo and J. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 129, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patnaik, K. K. Das, A. Mohanty and K. Parida, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Zhang, J. Luo, Z. Feng and J. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 998–1007 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ouyang, X. Tu, Z. Fu, W. Wang, S. Fu, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 106, 43–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, H. Wang and X. Wang, Solid State Commun., 2018, 269, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, W. Zhang, L. Chen and H. Deng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 487, 410–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, P. Xia, Y. Li, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, B. Cheng, W. Wang, C. Jiang and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 231, 368–380 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, J. Yan, Y. Xu, Y. Song, H. Li, J. Xia, C. Huang and H. Wan, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 129, 182–193 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 530–543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, Z. Jiang, G. Xing, A. Li, P. D. Kanhere, Y. Zhang, T. C. Sum, S. Li, X. Chen, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2932–2940 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, Q. Tang, Q. Li, W. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Cao and M. Ma, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 251–254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Guo, Y. Guo, Y. Zhao, X. Yuan and Y. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 271, 150–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Katsumata, T. Sakai, T. Suzuki and S. Kaneco, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 8018–8025 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, J. Hou, O. Takeda, X.-M. Guo and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11006–11013 RSC .
F. Cheng, H. Yin and Q. Xiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chu, X. Han, Z. Yu, Y. Du, B. Song and P. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20404–20411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hou, F. Gao, L. Wang, M. Shang, Z. Yang, J. Zheng and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6276–6281 RSC .
Z. Dong, Y. Wu, N. Thirugnanam and G. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 430, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Li, S. J. Liu, Y. B. Xue, X. J. Wang, Y. J. Hao, J. Zhao, R. H. Liu and D. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10149–10159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Akhundi and A. Habibi-Yangjeh, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 482, 165–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, J. Cai, T. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Yi, M. Luo and L. Zhao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 14729–14737 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Shao, D. Zhang, X. Pu, Y. Tang, J. Yin, B. Ge and W. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 195, 332–338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Xu, Z. Zhang and D. Ao, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Xu, Z. Zhang and D. Ao, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 192, 234–241 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, X. Zhou, X. Ning, L. Zhan, M. Kong, K. Tan, J. Li and Z. Lin, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 102, 353–361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, F. Wang, K. Yu, J. Shao, L. Peng and Q. Zeng, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 520, 409–419 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, G. Xu, D. Wang, J. Lv, Z. Zheng and Y. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 341, 10–19 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hu, Y. Liu, Z.-W. Wang, Y. Song, M. Wang, Z. Zhang and C.-S. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 694–707 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, D. Jiang, Z. Yan, D. Liu, K. Qian and J. Xie, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170–171, 195–205 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Liu, F.-T. Li, Y.-L. Li, Y.-J. Hao, X.-J. Wang, B. Li and R.-H. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 212, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. P. Dagg, J. Liu and P. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5043–5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Habibi-Yangjeh and A. Akhundi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 415, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akhundi and A. Habibi-Yangjeh, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akhundi and A. Habibi-Yangjeh, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 174, 59–69 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thaweesak, M. Lyu, P. Peerakiatkhajohn, T. Butburee, B. Luo, H. Chen and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shen, J. Xie, X. Lu, X. Chen and X. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 4026–4036 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, L. Chen, J. Xie and M. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 4878–4885 RSC .
W. Zhao, Y. Guo, S. Wang, H. He, C. Sun and S. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 335–343 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, H. Wang, X. Zhao, K. K. Kondamareddy, J. Ding, C. Li and P. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1436–1445 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Jo, J. Y. Lee and N. C. S. Selvam, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 289, 306–318 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar, G. Sharma, A. A. H. Al-Muhtaseb, M. Naushad, A. A. Ghfar and F. J. Stadler, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 462–478 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akhundi and A. Habibi-Yangjeh, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 106572–106583 RSC .
S. Wuttke, M. Lismont, A. Escudero, B. Rungtaweevoranit and W. J. Parak, Biomaterials, 2017, 123, 172–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Assi, G. Mouchaham, N. Steunou, T. Devic and C. Serre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3431–3452 RSC .
P. Xu and G. Liao, Materials, 2018, 11, 1616 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Usman, S. Mendiratta and K. L. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605071 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liang, F. Jing, L. Shen, N. Qin and L. Wu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3237–3249 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ke, L. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1834–1846 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
J. Hong, C. Chen, F. E. Bedoya, G. H. Kelsall, D. O'Hare and C. Petit, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 5042–5051 RSC .
R. Wang, L. Gu, J. Zhou, X. Liu, F. Teng, C. Li, Y. Shen and Y. Yuan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500037 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bai, J. Bi, J. Wu, H. Meng, Y. Xu, Y. Han and X. Zhang, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4597 CrossRef .
S. Patnaik, S. Martha, S. Acharya and K. M. Parida, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 336–347 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2721–2726 RSC .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, P. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Li and H. Zhao, Small, 2013, 9, 3336–3344 CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4517 RSC .
L. Xu, W.-Q. Huang, L.-L. Wang, Z.-A. Tian, W. Hu, Y. Ma, X. Wang, A. Pan and G.-F. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1612–1621 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, C. Pu, R. Wang, E. Liu, X. Du, X. Bai, J. Fan and X. Hu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 7007–7019 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, W. Zhang, J. Bai, G. Lu, L. Zhang and G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25695–25702 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai, S.-T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 757–770 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pu, J. Wan, E. Liu, Y. Yin, J. Li, Y. Ma, J. Fan and X. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 399, 139–150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Chen, N. Li, J. Tian, K. Li, J. Jiang, J. Liu, Q. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3523–3532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, F. Ma, Y. Jiao, E. Waclawik and A. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31140–31144 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Cheng, H. Yu and J. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 6417–6424 RSC .
X. Xia, N. Deng, G. Cui, J. Xie, X. Shi, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, W. Wang and B. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10899–10902 RSC .
K. Li, F.-Y. Su and W.-D. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 375, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, T. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 248–258 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan and S. lijima, Nature, 1993, 361, 333–334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1–2 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bachtold, M. Henny, C. Terrier, C. Strunk, C. Schönenberger, J. P. Salvetat, J. M. Bonard and L. Forró, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 274–276 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, J. Wang, Z. Wei, P. Zhang, H. Li and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Suryawanshi, P. Dhanasekaran, D. Mhamane, S. Kelkar, S. Patil, N. Gupta and S. Ogale, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9584–9589 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Li, Z. Hong, B. Shen, B. Lin and B. Gao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8106–8113 RSC .
Z. Wu, H. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 12013–12017 RSC .
J. Zhang and F. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pei, J. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12205–12211 RSC .
L. Ma, H. Fan, K. Fu, S. Lei, Q. Hu, H. Huang and G. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7093–7103 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and G. Liu, Carbon, 2017, 118, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 268–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, Q. Li and Z. Xu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2019, 126, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, J. Deng, L. Qiu, X. Fang and H. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1139–1159 RSC .
G. Liao, Y. Gong, C. Yi and Z. Xu, Chin. J. Chem., 2017, 35, 1157–1164 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, C. Han and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11843 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Zhao, M. Zeng, J. Li, J. Xu and X. Wang, Catal. Today, 2014, 224, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, W. Luo, R. Zong, W. Yao, Z. Li and Y. Zhu, Small, 2016, 12, 4370–4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Oh, H. Woo Rhee, C. Lee, Y. Chul Kim, J. Kyeong Kim and J.-W. Yu, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2005, 5, 55–58 CrossRef .
Y. Sui, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Tian and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9150–9155 RSC .
H. Han, M. Fu, Y. Li, W. Guan, P. Lu and X. Hu, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 831–840 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Saunders and M. L. Turner, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 138, 1–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan and Y. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4168–4170 RSC .
X. Bai, C. Sun, S. Wu and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2741–2747 RSC .
F. He, G. Chen, Y. Yu, S. Hao, Y. Zhou and Y. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7171–7179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Xiao, J. Miao, H. B. Tao, S. F. Hung, H. Y. Wang, H. B. Yang, J. Chen, R. Chen and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2115–2131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, G. Chen, J. Miao, Z. Wang, D. Su, S. Liu, W. Cai, L. Zhang, S. Hao and B. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 969–975 CrossRef CAS .
A. de Izarra, S. Park, J. Lee, Y. Lansac and Y. H. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5375–5384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xing, Z. Chen, X. Zong and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6762–6764 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Hong, W. Zhang and R. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1703 RSC .
J. Xu, Y. Li and S. Peng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 353–362 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, B. Sun and X. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 9497–9505 RSC .
Q. Liang, M. Zhang, C. Liu, S. Xu and Z. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 519, 107–115 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Yu, C. Zhuang, T. Peng, R. Li and X. Li, ACS Catal., 2013, 4, 162–170 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, T. Peng, L. Yu, R. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 504–510 CrossRef .
K. Takanabe, K. Kamata, X. Wang, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13020–13025 RSC .
M.-C. Rosu, R.-C. Suciu, M. D. Lazar and I. Bratu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, J. Huo, P. Zhang, J. Zeng, T. Wang and H. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2249–2259 RSC .
H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Lu and A. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21868–21874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, S.-W. Cao, Y.-S. Liao, L.-S. Yin and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 164–168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, S. Wang, B. Cheng, Z. Lin and F. Huang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1782 RSC .
X. Zhou, Z. Luo, P. Tao, B. Jin, Z. Wu and Y. Huang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 143, 1462–1468 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Wu and G. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 188, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Hafeez, S. K. Lakhera, S. Bellamkonda, G. R. Rao, M. V. Shankar, D. W. Bahnemann and B. Neppolian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 3892–3904 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bi, J. Wen, X. Li, W. Liu, J. Xie, Y. Fang and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 31497–31506 RSC .
W.-K. Jo and N. C. S. Selvam, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 913–924 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gawande and S. R. Thakare, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1759–1763 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang and J. Xie, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 3186–3197 RSC .
J. Wen, J. Xie, Z. Yang, R. Shen, H. Li, X. Luo, X. Chen and X. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 2224–2236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6291–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Feng and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2268–2277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. C. Yu, D. Xia, P. K. Wong and Y. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 8724–8732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Pawar, Y. Pyo, S. H. Ahn and C. S. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176–177, 654–666 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, Z. Lu, D. Wang, X. Tang, Y. Yan, W. Shi, Y. Wang, N. Gao, X. Yao and H. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 182, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patnaik, D. P. Sahoo, L. Mohapatra, S. Martha and K. Parida, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 1687–1701 CrossRef CAS .
S. Obregón, Y. Zhang and G. Colón, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 96–103 CrossRef .
X. Yang, F. Qian, Y. Wang, M. Li, J. Lu, Y. Li and M. Bao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 283–296 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Ding, C. Li, B. Li, D. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Cai, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4982–4991 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, G. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, X. Jiang and Y. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 15699–15707 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Yang, X. Jian, H. Dai, X. Song and Z. Liang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 209, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, C. Wang and L. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 6114–6123 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, J. Wu, Y. Mi, Q. Chen, D. Ma and C. Chai, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 183, 54–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, A. B. Laursen, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Wang, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3621–3625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Indra, A. Acharjya, P. W. Menezes, C. Merschjann, D. Hollmann, M. Schwarze, M. Aktas, A. Friedrich, S. Lochbrunner, A. Thomas and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1653–1657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Li, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7657–7665 RSC .
N. Skillen, M. Adams, C. McCullagh, S. Y. Ryu, F. Fina, M. R. Hoffmann, J. T. S. Irvine and P. K. J. Robertson, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 286, 610–621 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Guangfu Liao
	Guangfu Liao received his MSc in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Hubei University in 2017. He then joined Prof. Haiyang Gao's group at Sun Yat-sen University to pursue PhD in Materials Science. His primary research is focused on Ag-based catalysts, nanocomposites, biomaterials, and coordination polymerization. He has more than 6 years of research experience in the fields of catalysis, environment and biomaterials. He has published over 20 SCI papers, and also received some awards including the Graduate Student National Scholarship, Hubei University First-class Academic Scholarship, Hubei University Outstanding Graduate & Excellent Graduation Thesis, and Sun Yat-sen University Second-class Academic Scholarship.

Yan Gong
	Yan Gong was born in Anhui, China, in 1996. She received her BSc in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering from Fuzhou University in 2017. In 2018, she worked as a visiting scholar at Prof. Rodney. S. Ruoff's group at the IBS Center for Multidimensional Carbon Materials. Currently, she is working in Prof. Da Zhan’ research group at Xiamen University to pursue her master's degree in Materials Science. Her primary research is focused on the development of high performance graphite-like C3N4 nanosheets for visible-light-driven photocatalysis applications.

Li Zhang
	Li Zhang earned his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering and Master's degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics from Hubei University in 2014 and 2017, respectively. Then he worked as a research assistant at Hong Kong Polytechnic University from 2017 to 2018, and now he is a PhD student at City University of Hong Kong. His research interests are devoted to designing and fabricating various organic/inorganic hybrid nanomaterials, and investigating their applications especially in photo-induced nanomedicine.

Haiyang Gao
	Dr Haiyang Gao received his PhD in Polymer Chemistry and Physics from Sun Yat-sen University in 2005 under the supervision of Prof. Qing Wu. He then worked as a lecturer in the same university. After working as a postdoctoral research fellow in 2009 at the University of California, Santa Barbara, he moved back to Sun Yat-sen University, and is currently a full professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering. His research interests mainly include organometallic catalysts, catalytic olefin polymerization and polyolefins. He has authored more than 100 peer-reviewed papers and 15 patents.

Guan-Jun Yang
	Dr Guan-Jun Yang earned his PhD in Materials Science from Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTU) in 2005. He joined XJTU as a faculty in 2002, and now is a professor and director of the Center for Thermal Spray and Hybrid Materials, State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials. He has published over 200 peer-reviewed papers. He also serves as an editorial board member of several scientific journals including Journal of Materials Science and Technology. His research interests include nanomaterials and coatings/films for clean energy and environment.

Baizeng Fang
	Dr Baizeng Fang earned his PhD in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, in 1997. He then worked as a JSPS research fellow (Japan), Lise Meitner scientist (Austria), and Research Professor (Korea), and is a Senior Scientist at the University of British Columbia (Canada). He has published over 100 SCI papers in high-profile journals including reviews in Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Reviews, Chemical Society Reviews, Energy & Environmental Science and Progress in Materials Science. His research interests include nanostructured materials for artificial photosynthesis and electrochemical energy storage/conversion. He also serves as an Associate Editor for RSC Advances.

Broader context
Exploitation of clean and renewable energy is a crucial strategy to satisfy the growing global energy demands and solve the environmental problems caused by the over-consumption of fossil fuels. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water splitting by solar energy has been widely recognized as a promising avenue for sustainable development. Semiconductor polymeric graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) photocatalysts have attracted dramatically growing interest in the research area of the visible-light-induced hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) because of their facile synthesis, easy functionalization, attractive electronic band structure, high physicochemical stability and particularly unique visible-light responsiveness, which are believed to be the “holy grail” for photocatalytic HER. To effectively reduce the recombination rate of charge carriers and simultaneously enhance visible-light absorption above 460 nm, a series of nanostructured g-C3N4 photocatalysts (e.g., thinner, highly crystalline, doped, and porous g-C3N4) and highly efficient g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts (e.g., metal/g-C3N4, semiconductor/g-C3N4, metal organic framework/g-C3N4, carbon/g-C3N4, etc.) have been explored. They can effectively modify the electronic band structure of g-C3N4, widen the light absorption range and facilitate the separation of photo-generated electron–hole pairs, leading to considerably reduced recombination rate of charge carriers, enlarging visible light harvesting and utilization, and thus significantly improving HER activity under visible-light irradiation.


TiO2	3.2	
42

ZnO	3.4	
43

WO3	3.2	
44

SnO2	3.8	
45

Ta2O5	4.0	
46

BiVO4	2.9	
47

Bi2WO6	2.8	
48

CdS	2.4	
49

SnS2	1.7	
50

In2S3	2.0	
51

Ce2S3	2.1	
52

Sb2S3	1.7	
53

CuInS2	1.5	
54

Ni2P	1.0	
55

InP	1.4	
56

GaP	2.3	
57

Ta3N5	2.1	
58

GaN	3.6	
59

InN	1.1	
60


 	Scheme 1  Molecular structures of C- and N-containing materials such as melamine, melam, melem, and melon synthesized from the pyrolysis of mercury(II) thiocyanate as described by Liebig.	 

 	Scheme 2  Triazine (a) and tri-s-triazine (b) structures of g-C3N4.	 

Supramolecular pre-assembly strategy	Produced g-C3N4 with an ordered texture and controllable morphology	(i) Low efficiency, time- and cost-consuming, and sophisticated
(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively low crystallinity
Microwave-assisted heating strategy	(i) Facile, time-saving, and highly efficient	Produced g-C3N4 without an ordered texture, controllable morphology and porous structure
(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity, thinner layer, and decreased structural imperfections
Template-assisted strategy	Produced g-C3N4 with porous structure and high crystallinity	Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process
Molten salt strategy	Produced g-C3N4 with high crystallinity	Time- and cost-consuming and complicated preparation process
Ionic liquid strategy	Produced g-C3N4 with porous structure, thinner layer, and high crystallinity	Time- and cost-consuming, complicated preparation process, and low efficiency
Chemical exfoliation strategy	(i) Facile, time-saving, and highly efficient	(i) The danger of strong acid and not eco-friendly
(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity, and thinner layer	(ii) Produced g-C3N4 without an ordered texture, controllable morphology and porous structure
Hydrothermal pretreatment strategy	(i) Facile, eco-friendly, and highly efficient	Complicated preparation process
(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity, and thinner layer
Fast flash frozen strategy	(i) Fast, high effect, and eco-friendly	Complicated preparation process and expansive equipment
(ii) Produced g-C3N4 with a relatively high crystallinity

 	Fig. 1  (a) Scheme for the construction of the triazine-based g-C3N4 samples. (b) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of the g-C3N4 samples prepared using different methods. (c) Wavelength-dependent apparent quantum efficiency of the prepared g-C3N4 samples. (d) Hydrogen-bonded supramolecular cyanuric acid–melamine–2,4-diamino-6-phenyl-1,3,5-triazine (C–M–Mp) complex and the proposed g-C3N4 structure after calcination. (e) SEM images of the structured C–M–Mp g-C3N4 with different molar ratios after condensation at 550 °C for 4 h. (f) Plots of (C/C0) versus reaction time for the C–M–Mp g-C3N4 samples and bulk g-C3N4 sample. Here, bulk g-C3N4 was constructed by the condensation of melamine at 550 °C for 4 h. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, and from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Fabrication routes for g-C3N4 photocatalysts from melamine (mw-ms = microwave-assisted molten-salt process, er-ms = electric-resistance molten-salt process, er = electric-resistance heating, and mw = microwave-heating process). Comparisons of (b) polymerization times and (c) yields for various strategies. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the formation of 3D ultrathin porous N-doped g-C3N4. (b) AFM image and the height distribution profiles of the separated layer from UM3. (c) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms for g-C3N4 and UMx, and the corresponding pore size distribution for UM3 (inset). (d) H2 evolution curves. (e) H2 evolution rates over the pure g-C3N4 and the UMx samples in the presence of Pt, and (f) wavelength-dependent apparent quantum efficiency over UM3 in the presence of Pt as a cocatalyst. (g) H2 evolution rates over the pure g-C3N4 and the UMx samples in the absence of Pt. Here, UMx represents the obtained 3D ultrathin porous N-doped g-C3N4, with x = 0, 1, 3, 6 representing the molar ratio of urea: melamine. Pure g-C3N4 was fabricated by direct melamine calcination. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Prediction of heptazine-based g-C3N4: (i) predicted most stable configuration, phase 1; (ii) second stable distorted configuration, phase 2; (iii) most stable planar configuration, phase 3. The atoms in the middle layer of the lattices were labeled with yellow crosses. (b) Specific structure of a distorted heptazine unit (i) and probable rearrangement route from phase 2 to phase 1 (ii). The red arrows indicate the directions of movement of the atoms. (c) Predicted structures corresponding to the SMS condition: C6N9H3–LiCl. The small pink, green, and green balls represent H, Li, and Cl atoms, respectively. The atoms in the lower layer of the lattices were labeled with yellow crosses. (d) Comparison of the simulated XRD patterns of C6N9H3–LiCl with the experimental XRD patterns of the highly crystalline samples synthesized by SMS and modified SMS. (e) Proposed reaction pathway to synthesize highly crystalline g-C3N4 starting from C6N9H3·LiCl. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TG–DSC thermograms of g-C3N4 formed via heating melamine at 520 °C. (b) FT-IR of melem (prepared by heating dicyandiamide at 400 °C), melamine, and g-C3N4 before and after the protonation in 37% HCl. (c) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectrum and photoluminescence spectrum (inset) under 420 nm excitation, and (d) time-resolved photoluminescence spectrum monitored at 525 nm under 420 nm excitation at 298 K for bulk g-C3N4 (black) and mesoporous g-C3N4 (red). (e) Periodic on/off photocurrent Iph response of the mesoporous g-C3N4 electrode in 0.5 M Na2SO4 under zero bias in a standard two electrode photoelectrochemical cell. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 37, 98 and 173 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocatalytic HER mechanism of g-C3N4 and the corresponding photoexcited electron–hole pairs with probable decay paths. Here, CB represents the conduction band, VB represents the valence band, and Eg represents the band gap energy.	 


Thinner g-C3N4	g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1860	3.75 (420 nm)	
179

g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (3 wt%)	10	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	8510	5.1 (420 nm)	
38

Few-layered holey g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (3 wt%)	20	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1871	—	
200

Ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (0.2 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1632	—	
201

g-C3N4 nanoplatelets	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1365	3.6 (420 nm)	
202

Foam-like holey ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (3 wt%)	20	Water (50 mL) and TEOA (6 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2860	4.0 (420 nm)	
239



Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	10	Water (8.5 mL) and TEOA (1.5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1400	2.6 (420 nm)	
204

Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	20	Water (17 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2025	—	
106

PTI nanosheets	Pt (8 wt%)	2	Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)	3200	—	
195

Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (1.5 solar simulator)	9577	9.0 (420 nm)	
211

Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	10	Water (18.5 mL) and TEOA (1.5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	2000	—	
88



Doped g-C3N4	B-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (180 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	1880	—	
218

C-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (247.5 mL) and TEOA (27.5 mL)	UV and IR-cutoff filter (400–800 nm)	1440	14.0 (420 nm)	
219

2.2 (550 nm)	

P-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (80 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1596	3.6 (420 nm)	
10

3D CCNS	Pt (3 wt%)	10	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp	27035	7.8 (420 nm)	
220

K-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	1028	—	
221

K-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	1337	—	
223

Na-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	20	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	7150	—	
225

Fe-Doped g-C3N4	—	100	Water (90 mL) and MeOH (10 mL)/0.05 mol H2PO4	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	536	—	
226

Zn-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	200	Water (220 mL) and MeOH (50 mL)	200 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	297.5	3.2 (420 nm)	
229



Porous g-C3N4	Porous g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1994	—	
232

Porous g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	13	Water (255 mL) and TEOA (45 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1403	—	
192

Porous and thin g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (1 wt%)	100	Water (80 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	991	—	
161

Mesoporous g-C3N4	Pt (0.2 wt%)	50	Water (76 mL) and MeOH (4 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2738	—	
238

Mesoporous g-C3N4	—	50	Water (50 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	3100	74.0 (400 nm)	
235


 	Fig. 7  (a) Fabrication process of monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets. (b) AFM image of the synthesized mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets; the inset shows the enlarged view of the rectangle area. (c) Height profiles along the lines in (b). (d) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart. The inset is the corresponding Tauc plots. (e) Fluorescence emission spectra of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart with an excitation wavelength of 400 nm. The inset shows transient photocurrents under visible-light radiation (λ > 420 nm) of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart obtained in 0.2 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 6.8). (f) The valence band spectra and electronic band structure of the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanosheets and the bulk counterpart. (g) Photocatalytic activity of (i) the monolayer mesoporous g-C3N4 nanomesh, (ii) the bulk counterpart, (iii) the traditional g-C3N4 bulk under irradiation with visible light (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Idealized poly(triazine imide) structure (lithium/chloride intercalation omitted for clarity) viewed along the c-axis (a) and the slightly tilted b-axis (b). Diagram of the exfoliation process and product labeling (c). (d) AFM images of exfoliated poly(triazine imide) nanosheets deposited on a Si/SiO2 wafer and the corresponding height image (inset). Photocatalytic HER activity of the Pt-doped precipitates (I and II) in contrast to sonicated poly(triazine imide) and bulk poly(triazine imide) (e), and of the nanosheet suspensions compared to bulk poly(triazine imide) (f), measured in a 10 vol% TEOA/water solution for 3 h illumination with visible-light (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Preparation process of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets. (b) Contrast of the photocatalytic property of different g-C3N4 samples. (c) Apparent quantum efficiency of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets at 420 nm, 460 nm, 500 nm or 540 nm. (d) Electronic band structures of different g-C3N4 samples. (e) TEM image of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets with the inset showing the high magnification TEM image, the AFM image and the corresponding height profile of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets. (f) Photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism of porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets. CN-B, bulk g-C3N4; CN-S, g-C3N4 nanosheets; PCN-B, bulk P-doped g-C3N4, PCN-S, porous P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets; PCN-B*, bulk P-doped g-C3N4 prepared using (NH4)2HPO4 as the P precursor. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the synthesis, (b) SEM images, (c) nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and pore size distribution curves (inset), and (d) band structure diagram of the porous g-C3N4 nanosheets. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of different g-C3N4 samples under visible-light (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Metal/g-C3N4	Ni@g-C3N4	—	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	500 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	168.2	—	
247

Ni/g-C3N4	—	10	Water (7 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	4318	—	
248

Ag/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	625	—	
258

Au/g-C3N4	—	20	TEOA (10 vol%)	125 W visible-light Hg lamp	8870	—	
262

Pt/g-C3N4	—	20	Water (4.5 mL) and TEOA (0.5 mL)	Xe lamp (>420 nm)	97.5	0.58 (440 nm)	
264

Pd/g-C3N4	—	10	—	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	995	—	
266



Bimetal/g-C3N4	AuPd/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	326	—	
267

PtCo/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	960	—	
270

PdAg/g-C3N4	—	10	Water (22.5 mL) and TEOA (2.5 mL)	300–1100 nm	1250	8.7 (460 nm)	
271



Semiconductor/g-C3N4	Isotype g-C3N4 heterojunctions	7.68 μmol	50	Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1480	10.7 (420 nm)	
128

Mesoporous isotype g-C3N4 heterojunctions	—	50	Water (80 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	116	—	
279

g-C3N4 p–n homojunctions	Pt (3 wt%)	25	Water (243 mL) and TEOA (27 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	4020	—	
282

g-C3N4 homojunctions	—	50	Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	125 W Hg lamp (400 nm)	1740	—	
283

g-C3N4 n–n homojunctions	Pt (1.5 wt%)	20	Water (50 mL) and MeOH (50 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	780	—	
285

TiO2/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (90 mL) and MeOH (30 mL)	500 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	560	—	
286

TiO2@g-C3N4	—	40	Water (8 mL) and MeOH (2 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	198	—	
287

SnO2-ZnO/g-C3N4	—	5	Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	2735	—	
299

WO3/g-C3N4	Pt (2 wt%)	40	Water (6 mL) and TEOA (4 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	110	—	
305

Cu2O@g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	300	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)	202	—	
306

Cu2O/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	100	Water (162 mL) and TEOA (18 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	241	—	
307

Cu2O@g-C3N4 octahedra	Pt (0.5 wt%)	300	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)	265	—	
309

CoO/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	651	—	
310

CeO2/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1100	—	
312

CdS/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	5303	3.61 (420 nm)	
316

CdS/g-C3N4	Pt (0.6 wt%)	50	Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4152	4.3 (420 nm)	
181

CdS quantum dot/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	100	Water (90 mL) and MeOH (30 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	173	—	
317

CdS quantum dot/g-C3N4	Pt (0.08 wt%)	5	10 mL aqueous solution of 0.1 M L-ascorbic acid	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4494	—	
318

NiS/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (85 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	482	1.9 (440 nm)	
319

NiS/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	150 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	82	1.4 (420 nm)	
320

NiS/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (85 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)	150 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	992	—	
321

NiS/g-C3N4	—	5	Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	16400	—	
323




	MoS2/g-C3N4	—	20	Water (90 mL) and lactic acid (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1030	2.1 (420 nm)	
511

WS2/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (90 mL) and lactic acid (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	125	—	
332

ZnS/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (400 mL) containing Na2S and Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	714	—	
334

Ni2P/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (54 mL) and TEOA (6 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	330	4.8 (440 nm)	
512

Ni2P/g-C3N4	—	40	Water (45 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	249	1.8 (420 nm)	
337

Ni2P/g-C3N4	—	20	20 mL of TEOA aqueous solution	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	82.5	—	
338

Ni2P/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (100 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	475	3.2 (435 nm)	
339

Ni12P5/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (68 mL) and TEOA (12 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	127	—	
341

Ni12P5/g-C3N4	—	60	Water (135 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	536	4.67 (420 nm)	
342

NixPy/g-C3N4	—	2	Water (4 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	Xe lamp (>420 nm)	168	—	
343

CoP/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (75 mL) and TEOA (25 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	—	4.3 (420 nm)	
346

NiCoP/g-C3N4	—	10	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp	1643	—	
348

Bi2MoO6/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	563	—	
355

g-C3N4/nano-InVO4	Pt (0.6 wt%)	50	Water (160 mL) and MeOH (40 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	212	4.9 (420 nm)	
356

CoTiO3/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	20	EtOH solution (10 vol%)	420 nm	858	38.4 (365 nm)	
365

3.23 (420 nm)
SrTiO3/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	200	200 mL oxalic acid solution (0.025 M)	250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	440	—	
366

CaIn2S4/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (80 mL) containing 0.5 M Na2S, 0.5 M Na2SO3	UV-LEDs (3 W, 420 nm)	102	—	
41

CdS/g-C3N4/CuS	—	50	Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	350 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)	1151	16.5 (420 nm)	
390

CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (100 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	3570	4.4 (420 nm)	
391

TiO2/WO3/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (30 mL) and MeOH (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	5732	—	
392

ZnO/ZnS/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (100 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	301	—	
393



Metal organic framework/g-C3N4	UiO-66/g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	10	20 mL L-ascorbic acid aqueous solution (0.1 M)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	109	—	
426

C-ZIF/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (270 mL) and TEOA (30 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	326	—	
184

g-C3N4/MIL-53(Fe)	—	70	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xenon lamp	905	—	
428



Carbon/g-C3N4	GO/g-C3N4	Pt (1.5 wt%)	80	Water (60 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	451	2.6 (>400 nm)	
182

rGO/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	715	—	
436

rGO/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	557	—	
439

Carbon dots/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (72 mL) and lactic acid (8 mL)	LEDs (3 W, 365 nm)	44	—	
443

Carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4	—	10	Water (8 mL) and MeOH (2 mL)	1000 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	220	—	
444

Carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	2322	—	
445

Carbon nanodots/g-C3N4	Pt (0.2 wt%)	50	Water (95 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	1760	—	
446

MWCNTs/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	100	Water (90 mL) and MeOH (30 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	152	—	
27

MWCNTs/g-C3N4	Pt (1.2 wt%)	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	—	470	—	
452

Carbon black/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	100	Water (80 mL) and TEOA (20 mL)	—	689	—	
453

Carbon fiber/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (72 mL) and TEOA (8 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	1080	—	
454

Carbon@g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (100 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	2580	—	
456



Conductive polymer/g-C3N4	PPy/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	100	Water (100 mL) and EtOH (2 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	154	—	
466

P3HT/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	300	Water (600 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	1833	2.9 (420 nm)	
469

g-PAN/g-C3N4	Pt (1.5 wt%)	100	Water (270 mL) and TEOA (30 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	370	—	
471

C-PAN/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	100	Water (135 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	1775	5.6 (420 nm)	
473

PEDOT/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	100	Water (270 mL) and TEOA (30 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	327	—	
475



Sensitizer/g-C3N4	EY-sensitized g-C3N4	—	30	Water (68 mL) and TEOA (12 mL)	250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	3850	19.4 (550 nm)	
183

EY-sensitized g-C3N4	Pt (7 wt%)	100	Aqueous TEOA (80 mL; 0.79 mol L−1)	400 W Hg lamp (>420 nm)	—	18.8 (>420 nm)	
513

EB-sensitized g-C3N4	—	100	Water (95 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	>420 nm	6525	33.4 (460 nm)	
476

12.3 (550 nm)
EB–MoSx–g-C3N4	—	100	Aqueous TEOA (80 mL; 0.79 mol L−1)	400 W Hg lamp (>420 nm)	386	8.3 (545 nm)	
477

Zn-tri-PcNc-sensitized g-C3N4	—	10	Water (10 mL) and ascorbic acid (88 mg)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	12520	1.85 (700 nm)	
480

LI-4/g-C3N4/Zn-tri-PcNc	—	15	Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	24760	16.3 (420 nm)	
481

7.7 (500 nm)
1.75 (700 nm)
MgPc-sensitized g-C3N4	—	100	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	500	0.07 (660 nm)	
482



Other materials/g-C3N4	BP/g-C3N4	—	1.5	Water (4 mL) and MeOH (1 mL)	320 W Xe lamp (350–1800 nm)	427 (420 nm)	3.18 (420 nm)	
487

101 (780 nm)	1.1 (780 nm)
RP/g-C3N4	—	10	Water (10 mL) and ascorbic acid (0.1 M)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	310	—	
488

Ni(OH)2/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (72 mL) and TEOA (8 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	152	1.1 (420 nm)	
489

Cu(OH)2/g-C3N4	—	100	Water (60 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	49	—	
490

ER co-sensitized Co(OH)2/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	2879	33 (430 nm)	
491

rGO/g-C3N4/TiO2	—	5	Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)	250 W Xe lamp (200–800 nm)	23143	—	
492

g-C3N4/acetylene black/Ni(OH)2	—	50	Water (85 mL) and TEOA (15 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	240	—	
493

TiO2/In2O3@g-C3N4	—	50	Water (60 mL) and MeOH (20 mL)	UV-LEDs (3 W, 420 nm)	172	—	
404

CdS/rGO/g-C3N4	—	20	Water (45 mL) and lactic acid (5 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	396	36.5 (420 nm)	
494


 	Fig. 11  (a) Preparation of porous nanofiber-like Ag/g-C3N4 from Ag–melamine supramolecular hydrogels. (b) Nitrogen sorption isotherm of fiber-type Ag/g-C3N4. (c) Solid state UV-vis diffusion reflectance spectra of Ag/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4. (d) Steady state photoluminescence spectra of Ag/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4 with an excitation wavelength of 375 nm. (e) Time resolved photoluminescence decay spectra of Ag/g-C3N4 and g-C3N4, monitored at 488, 488, and 577 nm, respectively. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 258 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Estimated band gap energies and (b) photocurrent spectra of the Au/g-C3N4 composite and neat g-C3N4. (c) Photocatalytic HER activity of the g-C3N4 and all the Au/g-C3N4 composites and the neat g-C3N4 under visible-light illumination (λ ≥ 400 nm). (d) Mechanism of photocatalytic H2 generation and surface plasmon resonance of Au in Au/g-C3N4 composites. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the fabrication of Pd/g-C3N4 composites using various capping agents. TEM images of (b) g-C3N4–Pd nanocubes with Pd(100) facets and (c) g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedrons with Pd(111) facets. HRTEM images of (d) a g-C3N4–Pd nanocube and (e) a g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedron. (f) Photocurrent vs. potential responses of photoelectrodes made of Pd/g-C3N4 composites and bulk and ultrathin g-C3N4 samples, respectively, at the same g-C3N4 loading weight, measured in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under chopped visible-light (λ > 400 nm) irradiation. (g) PL emission spectra of Pd/g-C3N4 composites and bulk and ultrathin g-C3N4 samples (at the same amount of g-C3N4), respectively, excited at 360 nm. (h) H2 evolution rates observed for the g-C3N4–Pd nanocubes and g-C3N4–Pd nanotetrahedra. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 266 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation route for PtCo/g-C3N4 photocatalysts (bulk and nanosheets). (b) Photovoltage and (d) phase of the surface photovoltage spectroscopy spectra of pure g-C3N4 and 1 wt% PtCo/g-C3N4. (c) Diagrammatic sketch of photo-excited electron injection from the conduction band of g-C3N4 to the PtCo nanocrystals and Pt nanoparticles, and (d) diagrammatic sketch for electron charge migration and H2 evolution mechanism under visible-light irradiation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Fabrication process and (b) transfer mechanism of the photogenerated electron–hole in a mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 nanosheet isotype heterojunction. CB, conduction band; VB, valence band. (c) The photocatalytic H2 evolution of different g-C3N4 samples, and (d) the recyclability tests of the mesoporous g-C3N4/g-C3N4 nanosheet isotype heterojunction. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 279 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Illustration of the preparation process of DCN. The possible structures for CN and DCN are shown (gray, cyan, and white balls correspond to C, N, and H atoms, respectively). (b) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate for CN and all DCN samples under visible-light irradiation. (c) Time courses of H2 evolution for the DCN-200 photocatalyst under visible-light irradiation with pristine CN as the reference. (d) Room-temperature electron paramagnetic resonance spectra for CN, DCN-200, and DCN-350 measured with and without light irradiation. (e) Photoluminescence spectra excited at 360 nm for CN and DCN samples. (f) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and (g) transient photocurrents (λ > 420 nm) for CN and DCN-200 (CN represents the g-C3N4, DCN represents the defect-modified g-C3N4, DCN-200 represents the defect-modified g-C3N4 prepared at 200 °C). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the fabrication, (b) photocatalytic H2 evolution rate, (c) photoluminescence spectrum, and (d) Nyquist plots and (e) transient photocurrent responses of the as-prepared samples. (All the data represent mean ± SD, n = 3/treatment.) Here, HT, SiO2@TiO2 nanospheres; HTCN, mesoporous TiO2@g-C3N4 hollow spheres; C–T, TiO2/g-C3N4 prepared by using the method reported by Jiang and co-workers.291 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Comparison of average photocatalytic H2 evolution rates of the WO3/g-C3N4 composites and pure samples loaded with 1 wt% Pt co-catalyst for the first three hours under simulated solar irradiation. Spherical aberration-corrected STEM images of the well-defined WO3/g-C3N4 interface in the WO3/g-C3N4 composites, revealing both the (b) in-plane and (c) interlayer structure of g-C3N4 (scale bars, 2 nm). (d) Diagrammatic sketch of the atomically defined junction at the WO3/g-C3N4 interface and the internal electric field from g-C3N4 (+) to WO3 (−). (e) Energy band diagram between WO3 and g-C3N4 with inverse band bending and internal electric field at interface. (f) Schematic illustration of the function mechanism of WO3/g-C3N4 composites at multiple length scales. (g) Photoluminescence spectrum of pure g-C3N4, WO3/g-C3N4 and pristine WO3 (inset). (h) Time-resolved fluorescence decay profiles of pure g-C3N4 and WO3/g-C3N4 excited at the wavelength of 320 nm; (i) transient photocurrent response and (j) electrochemical impedance spectra of pure g-C3N4 and WO3/g-C3N4 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 304 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the formation process (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of CdS/g-C3N4 core/shell structure. (d) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and the corresponding pore size distributions (the inset) calculated by the BJH method for pristine CdS nanowires and different CdS/g-C3N4 samples. (e) Comparison of photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of pristine CdS nanowires and different CdS/g-C3N4 samples from mixed 0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3 aqueous solutions. (f) Time course of photocatalytic H2 production for CdS/g-C3N4 sample. Diagrammatic sketch of (g) the energy-level configuration and the photogenerated charge migration process between g-C3N4 and CdS, (h) the photocatalytic process on a CdS nanowire with a thin and unclosed g-C3N4 shell, and (i) a CdS nanowire with a dense and closed g-C3N4 shell. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Diagrammatic sketch, (b) TEM image and (c) HRTEM image of Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4 microspheres. (d) Nyquist impedance spectroscopy of curves, plots i–iv: Fe3O4, Fe3O4@SiO2, MoS2, g-C3N4, Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2, and Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4, respectively. (e) Surface photocurrent curves: (i) Fe3O4, (ii) Fe3O4@SiO2, (iii) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2, and (iv) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4. (f) Stable H2 generation from water under visible-light irradiation using (i) MoS2, (ii) g-C3N4, (iii) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2, (iv) MoS2/g-C3N4, and (v) Fe3O4@SiO2@MoS2/g-C3N4. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 331 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  TEM (a, c and e) and HRTEM (b, d and f) images of Ni2P/g-C3N4, Ni12P5/g-C3N4, and Ni3P/g-C3N4; UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (g) and photoluminescence (h) of g-C3N4 and NixPy/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy); time profiles of normalized transient absorption for g-C3N4 and NixPy/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy) with 420 nm laser irradiation (i); photocatalytic H2 generation rates for g-C3N4, Pt/g-C3N4, and NixPy/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy) (j); recycle of H2 generation on Ni2P/g-C3N4 (5 wt% NixPy) (k) and schematic diagram of photocatalytic H2 generation for the NixPy/g-C3N4 hybrid (l). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 343 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the preparation of CoTiO3/g-C3N4 composites. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images of the CoTiO3/g-C3N4 composites. (d) Schematic illustration of molecular interaction between perovskite CoTiO3 and tri-s-triazine g-C3N4via the formation of chemical bonds. (e) Photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution with different ratios of CoTiO3/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. (f) Schematic illustration of traditional heterojunction-type (i) and direct Z-scheme (ii) mechanisms for charge carrier separation. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 365 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the construction of CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructures. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (c) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of CdS, CdS/Cu7S4 and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructures. (d) Photocatalytic H2 generation activity of CdS/Cu7S4 with different molar ratios of Cd to Cu (with and without g-C3N4). (e) Photocatalytic HER activity of the different catalysts under visible-light irradiation (>420 nm). (f) Photocurrent responses for CdS (black), CdS/Cu7S4 (red) and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructures (blue). (g) Cycling hydrogen evolution property of CdS/Cu7S4 (red) and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructure (blue) for 15 h. (h) Mott–Schottky plots of CdS, CdS/Cu7S4 and CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 heterostructures, and (i) schematic illustration of the possible visible-light photocatalytic charge transfer and H2 evolution processes in the CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4 ternary heterostructure. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 391 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Diagrammatic sketch of the preparation of C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites. (b) TEM images of 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites, the red dashed circles indicated the C-ZIF nanoparticles grown on g-C3N4 nanosheets. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of pure g-C3N4 and C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites with different C-ZIF contents. (d) Time-resolved fluorescence decay spectra of pure g-C3N4 and the 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composite. (e) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of pure g-C3N4, 3 wt% Pt/g-C3N4, and C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites with different C-ZIF contents. (f) Photocatalytic HER as a function of reaction time in 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution without loading the Pt co-catalyst under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). (g) The polarization curves of various catalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a sweep rate of 5 mV s−1. (h) Photoluminescence spectra of g-C3N4, Pt/g-C3N4, and 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites under 375 nm excitation at room temperature. (i) Schematic illustration showing the mechanism of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution for C-ZIF/g-C3N4 composites under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm), and (j) Nyquist plots obtained at an AC voltage with an amplitude of 5 mV over the frequency range from 105 to 10−1 Hz for g-C3N4 and 1 wt% C-ZIF/g-C3N4 electrodes in 0.5 mol L−1 Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 184 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the synthesis route of pPCN and pPCN/rGO samples through a dissolution-electrostatic self-assembly precipitation method. (b) TEM images of the pPCN/rGO nanocomposite. (c) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the as-prepared samples. (d) Photoluminescence spectra, (e) time resolved fluorescence decay spectra, (f) transient photocurrent responses and (g) Nyquist plots for CN, pPCN and pPCN/2 wt% rGO samples. (h) Photocatalytic H2 generation performance of the different samples and stable H2 evolution by the pPCN/2 wt% rGO under irradiation with visible-light (λ > 420 nm). (i) Proposed photocatalytic H2 generation mechanisms over the pPCN/rGO heterojunction under visible-light illumination. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 436 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Photocatalytic HER activity of different g-C3N4-based photocatalysts. (b) H2 evolution rate under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) for the CQDs/g-C3N4 composites with different CQD contents. (c) Periodic ON/OFF photocurrent response in 0.25 M Na2S/0.35 M Na2SO3 electrolyte under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) at 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl electrode. (d) Nyquist plots in the dark and (e) schematic illustration for the photocatalytic process of CQDs/g-C3N4 photocatalysts under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 446 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Diagrammatic sketches of (i) the depolymerization–repolymerization process of g-C3N4, and (ii) the fabrication process of the carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalysts. (b) TEM and (c) HR-TEM images of carbon@g-C3N4 core–shell photocatalysts. (d) Stability test of H2 generation of pristine g-C3N4 and carbon@g-C3N4 photocatalysts. (e) H2 production over pristine g-C3N4, carbon@g-C3N4, and carbon sphere photocatalysts. (f) Electron–hole pairs in the carbon spheres are generated under visible-light illumination. Based on the relevant position of the band, the electrons inject into g-C3N4, and (g) carbon spheres as an electron sink to scavenge away the electrons, thus hindering the recombination of electron–hole pairs. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 456 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Diagrammatic sketch for the construction of C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (b) Mott–Schottky plots of (1) g-C3N4, (2) 3 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, (3) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, and (4) 10 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (c) Diagrammatic sketch of the electronic band structure of the g-C3N4 and C-PAN composites. (d) Photoluminescenc spectra of (1) g-C3N4, (2) 3 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, (3) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, and (4) 10 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (e) Time-resolved fluorescence decay spectra of (1) pure g-C3N4 and (2) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes. (f) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate of (1) pure g-C3N4, (2) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 prepared without sulfur in the precursor, (3) sulfur-mediated g-C3N4, and (4) 3 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, (5) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4, and (6) 10 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes, and (g) photocatalytic H2 generation as a function of reaction time for (1) pure g-C3N4 and (2) 5 wt% C-PAN/g-C3N4 composite nanotubes in 10 vol% TEOA aqueous solution under visible-light illumination (λ > 400 nm). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 473 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Structures of zinc phthalocyanine derivative (Zn-tri-PcNc). (b) Diffuse reflectance absorption spectroscopy spectra of g-C3N4 and Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 (above) and UV-vis spectra of 10 μM Zn-tri-PcNc solution and the desorbed solution of Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 (below). (c) Effects of chenodeoxycholic acid on the time-resolved fluorescence decay of the Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 film (above) or Zn-tri–PcNc solution with/without adding g-C3N4 (below). Excitation and detection wavelengths are 377 and 711 nm, respectively. (d) Effects of coabsorbent chenodeoxycholic acid on the transient photocurrent behaviors under optimal photoreaction conditions and λ ≥ 500 nm light irradiation. (e) Effects of Zn-tri-PcNc and chenodeoxycholic acid amount on the photoactivity for H2 production over Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4. (f) The photocatalytic activity of Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 under the optimal photoreaction conditions and λ ≥ 500 nm light irradiation. (g) Comparison of diffuse reflectance absorption spectra and apparent quantum yield values of g-C3N4 and Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 under optimal photoreaction conditions and different monochromatic light irradiation and (h) proposed photocatalytic HER mechanism of the Zn-tri-PcNc/g-C3N4 system. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 480 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Molecular structures of fluorescein, dibromofluorescein, eosin Y, erythrosine B, and g-C3N4. (b) Fluorescence decays of their corresponding saturated dye aqueous solutions, and (c) their corresponding dye-sensitized g-C3N4 composites. (d) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of fluorescein–SiO2, dibromofluorescein–SiO2, eosin Y–SiO2, and erythrosine B–SiO2 composites. (e) Fluorescence decays of their corresponding dye–SiO2 composites, and (f) fluorescence decays of g-C3N4 in g-C3N4 alone, fluorescein–g-C3N4, dibromofluorescein–g-C3N4, eosin Y–g-C3N4, and erythrosine B–g-C3N4 composites. Excitation wavelength, 395 nm; detection wavelength, 470 nm. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 485 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) TEM image of BP/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. (b) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of g-C3N4, BP, and BP/g-C3N4. (c) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate on different catalysts (λ > 420 nm). (d) Photocatalytic H2 evolution rate on the BP/g-C3N4 (λ > 780 nm). (e) Time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectroscopic plots for BP and (f) BP/g-C3N4 after irradiation with a 780 nm laser flash. (g) Time profiles of normalized transient absorption at 950 nm, and (h) proposed diagrammatic sketch for the visible and near infrared light activated photocatalytic HER employing BP/g-C3N4 photocatalysts. This figure has been reproduced from ref. 487 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 


Thinner g-C3N4	g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (3 wt%)	10	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	8510	5.1 (420 nm)	
38

Foam-like holey ultrathin g-C3N4 nanosheets	Pt (3 wt%)	20	Water (50 mL) and TEOA (6 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2860	4.0 (420 nm)	
239



Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	20	Water (17 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2025	—	
106

PTI nanosheets	Pt (8 wt%)	2	Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (<420 nm)	3200	—	
195

Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (1.5 solar simulator)	9577	9.0 (420 nm)	
211

Highly crystalline g-C3N4	Pt (0.5 wt%)	10	Water (18.5 mL) and TEOA (1.5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	2000	—	
88



Doped g-C3N4	Na-Doped g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	20	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	7150	—	
225

3D CCNS	Pt (3 wt%)	10	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp	27035	7.8 (420 nm)	
220



Porous g-C3N4	Mesoporous g-C3N4	Pt (0.2 wt%)	50	Water (76 mL) and MeOH (4 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2738	—	
238

Mesoporous g-C3N4	—	50	Water (50 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	3100	74.0 (400 nm)	
235



Metal/g-C3N4	Ni/g-C3N4	—	10	Water (7 mL) and TEOA (3 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	4318	—	
248

Ag/g-C3N4	—	5	Water (63 mL) and TEOA (7 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (420 nm)	2014	—	
484

Au/g-C3N4	—	20	TEOA (10 vol%)	125 W visible-light Hg lamp	8870	—	
262



Semiconductor/g-C3N4	g-C3N4 p–n homojunctions	Pt (3 wt%)	25	Water (243 mL) and TEOA (27 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	4020	—	
282

N-Doped ZnO/g-C3N4 nanosheets	—	5	Water (50 mL) containing 0.3 M Na2S, 0.3 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	18836	—	
298

SnO2–ZnO/g-C3N4	—	5	Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	2735	—	
299

CdS/g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	350 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	5303	3.61 (420 nm)	
316

CdS/g-C3N4	Pt (0.6 wt%)	50	Water (80 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4152	4.3 (420 nm)	
181

CdS quantum dot/g-C3N4	Pt (0.08 wt%)	5	10 mL aqueous solution of 0.1 M L-ascorbic acid	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	4494	—	
318

NiS/g-C3N4	—	5	Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	16400	—	
323

CdS/Cu7S4/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (100 mL) containing 0.35 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	3570	4.4 (420 nm)	
391

TiO2/WO3/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (30 mL) and MeOH (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (400 nm)	5732	—	
392



Carbon/g-C3N4	Carbon quantum dots/g-C3N4	Pt (3 wt%)	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	2322	—	
445

Carbon@g-C3N4	Pt (1 wt%)	50	Water (100 mL) containing 0.25 M Na2S, 0.25 M Na2SO3	300 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	2580	—	
456



Sensitizer/g-C3N4	EY-sensitized g-C3N4	—	30	Water (68 mL) and TEOA (12 mL)	250 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	3850	19.4 (550 nm)	
183

EB-sensitized g-C3N4	—	100	Water (95 mL) and TEOA (5 mL)	>420 nm	6525	33.4 (460 nm)	
476

12.3 (550 nm)	

Zn-tri-PcNc-sensitized g-C3N4	—	10	Water (10 mL) and ascorbic acid (88 mg)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	12520	1.85 (700 nm)	
480

LI-4/g-C3N4/Zn-tri-PcNc	—	15	Water (9 mL) and TEOA (1 mL)	300 W Xe lamp (>420 nm)	24760	16.3 (420 nm)	
481

7.7 (500 nm)
1.75 (700 nm)


Other materials/g-C3N4	ER co-sensitized Co(OH)2/g-C3N4	—	50	Water (90 mL) and TEOA (10 mL)	350 W Xe lamp (>400 nm)	2879	33 (430 nm)	
491

rGO/g-C3N4/TiO2	—	5	Water (47.5 mL) and glycerol (2.5 mL)	250 W Xe lamp (200–800 nm)	23143	—	
492


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
