Advances and challenges of green materials for electronics and energy storage applications: from design to end-of-life recovery  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA07246A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA07246A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20546-20563Advances and challenges of green materials for electronics and energy storage applications: from design to end-of-life recovery

        
          
            Mengyao 
            Gao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chien-Chung 
            Shih
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shu-Yuan 
            Pan
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chu-Chen 
            Chueh
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Wen-Chang 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei City, Taiwan 106, Republic of China. E-mail: chenwc@ntu.edu.tw
bAdvanced Research Center for Green Materials Science & Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan, Republic of China
cCarbon Cycle Research Center, National Taiwan University, Taipei City, Taiwan 106, Republic of China
Received 
      27th July 2018
    , Accepted 8th October 2018First published on 8th October 2018AbstractHarnessing biomass to fabricate electronic devices has lately drawn significant research attention because it not only represents a promising strategy for making materials but is also beneficial for the sustainable development of technologies. Numerous recent studies have demonstrated that green materials are promising candidates for synthesizing high-performance materials, such as biopolymers and hierarchical porous carbons. To catch up with this emerging tide, we have here compiled a comprehensive overview of state-of-the-art green materials, with a specific emphasis on recent progress in biodegradable polymeric materials and biomass-based carbon materials, together with their electronics and energy storage applications. Besides, we also assess the performance of end-of-life electronics recycling to highlight the merits of integrating green design with resource recovery.Mengyao GaoDr Mengyao Gao is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU). She received her PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2016. Prior to joining NTU, she worked as a visiting scholar in the Chemical Science and Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. She also had working experience at LAUSDEO Corp., Taiwan, in R&D of rechargeable batteries. Her research is mainly focused on green energy, biomass-based porous carbon materials, the design and fabrication of nanomaterials, and electrochemical energy storage, especially lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, and stretchable devices.Chien-Chung ShihDr Chien-Chung Shih is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU). He received his BS and MS in Chemical Engineering from Chung Yuan Christian University in 2009 and 2011, respectively. He then joined Prof. Wen-Chang Chen's group at National Taiwan University and received his PhD in 2016. His research interests include nanostructured materials, transistor-type memories, and stretchable electronic devices.Shu-Yuan PanDr Shu-Yuan Pan is a Research Associate in the Carbon Cycle Research Center (CCRC), National Taiwan University (NTU). He received his PhD in Environmental Engineering from NTU in 2016. He was named a Green Talent of the Year (2013) by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany. He worked as a visiting scholar at RWTH Aachen University, Germany, in 2014, and Argonne National Laboratory, USA, in 2015. He is a Professional Engineer in environmental engineering licensed in Taiwan. Among his current interests are sustainable development, green technology, the mineralization and utilization of CO2, energy-efficient desalination, and life cycle assessment.Chu-Chen ChuehDr Chu-Chen Chueh received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2010 and then conducted postdoctoral research at the University of Washington from 2011 to 2016. He joined NTU as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering in 2017. His research is focused on organic/hybrid semiconductors and their applications in memories, light-emitting diodes, transistors, and solar cells. He has coauthored over 110 papers in the area of organic/hybrid optoelectronics.Wen-Chang ChenDr Wen-Chang Chen is Dean of the College of Engineering, Director of the Advanced Research Center of Green Materials Science and Technology, and Distinguished Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and the Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering at National Taiwan University (NTU). He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Rochester in 1993 and then served as a research scientist at the Industrial Technology Research Institute of Taiwan from 1993 to 1996. He joined NTU as an Associate Professor in 1996 and was promoted to a full professor in 2000. His current research activities include electronic and optoelectronic polymers, block copolymers, and hybrid materials. He has coauthored 350 refereed articles and holds 47 issued patents.
1. Introduction
The use of earth-abundant resources to synthesize high-performance materials has become an emerging trend in both academic research and practical applications in industry because of their cost-effective and eco-friendly properties.1,2 Numerous nature-derived species have been proven to be reliable resources for the preparation of multifunctional materials. Furthermore, according to the intrinsic structures of these natural materials, specific functional materials can be tailored and prepared. For example, hierarchical porous carbons (HPCs) with well-defined pore dimensions and three-dimensional (3D) configurations have received tremendous attention. Different HPCs such as those with macropores (>50 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm), and micropores (<2 nm) can accordingly be prepared by controlling the pore size. Owing to their good electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, and excellent chemical stability, HPCs have been widely used in the field of electrochemical energy storage to enable high-speed nanotechnologies.
On the other hand, the transition to a green economy is critically dependent on the development of sustainable electronic components and energy supply systems.3 Within this framework, thin-film transistors (TFTs) play pivotal roles in electronic circuits, whereas electrochemical energy storage technology plays essential roles in stationary power generation plants, smart grids, electric vehicles, and portable electronics. For instance, rechargeable batteries, such as lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and supercapacitors (SCs), are considered to be among the most efficient energy storage devices developed to date. However, these technologies still suffer from several obstacles such as low energy density, high costs, and safety concerns that hinder their widespread application in our daily life. To address these issues, breakthroughs in the design of the materials used in the key components, including electrodes, semiconductors, electrolytes, and separators, are imperative to improve the performance and reduce the costs of electronic devices and rechargeable batteries.
Biomass with diverse physicochemical properties is considered to be a sustainable and renewable resource for synthesizing high-performance materials. For example, the abovementioned HPCs are suitable for the synthesis of electrodes because they have high availability, large specific surface areas, and adjustable microstructures. According to similar principles, extensive efforts have recently been made to synthesize high-performance materials from biomass for electronics and energy storage applications. Taking electrochemical energy storage technology as an example, the incredible structures found in biomass can facilitate the performance and stability of devices. For example, fish scales possess an overlapping plywood structure of stratified lamellae, which could not only promote the transfer of ions in electrolytes but also prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles.4 Similarly, the hollow carbon nanofibers derived from crab shells have a unique Bouligand structure and are thereby able to encapsulate sulfur in the cathode of lithium–sulfur batteries.5 As a result, the replacement of non-renewable components of electrochemical energy devices, such as separators and binders, is regarded as a promising approach for the valorization of biomass. Moreover, researchers have proposed a green and cost-effective way to obtain graphene oxide flakes from zinc carbon or pencil cores via electrochemical exfoliation. They exhibited good electrocatalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reaction.6,7
On the basis of these encouraging achievements, we here survey recent advances in green materials, including biodegradable polymeric materials and biomass-based carbon materials, in electronics and energy storage applications. In this review, we comprehensively summarize the design and synthesis of biomaterials for high-performance TFTs, supercapacitors, and rechargeable batteries. We first discuss the preparation of nature-derived polymers, biodegradable polymeric materials, and biomass-based materials and the wonderful future prospects for producing nanostructured HPC materials, followed by a brief overview of their electronics and energy storage applications. Finally, we illustrate the concept of end-of-life electronics recycling to highlight the merits of integrating green design with the recovery of resources. Note that the implementation of green design for end-of-life considerations is an imperative element for minimizing lifecycle costs and maximizing the efficiency of the use of resources and energy.
2. Types of green material
2.1 Biodegradable polymeric materials
Currently, most electronic devices are made from non-decomposable materials, some of which are even poisonous. Their rapid consumption and waste has gradually appeared as a major concern worldwide.8–11 To address these issues, the development of green electronics using biodegradable polymers has emerged as a new class of technologies. It is worthwhile to note that biodegradable polymers have been extensively used in medical devices, such as carriers for controlling drug release and scaffolds for tissue engineering.12,13 The integration of biodegradable materials with high-performance electronics can physically enable the disassembly of electronic devices after their use or disposal.14,15 In principle, biodegradable polymers can be categorized into two types: (i) synthetic polymers and (ii) naturally derived polymers, such as plant-based polysaccharides (e.g., starch, cellulose, alginate, and dextran) and animal-derived materials (e.g., proteins, silk, chitosan, and collagen). Naturally derived polymers have been commonly employed for transistor and energy storage applications owing to their intrinsic enzymatic degradability. Here, we review recent advances in their applications in transistor devices, supercapacitors and batteries in terms of substrates, dielectric layers, semiconductors, conductors and electrodes, as well as technologies and devices, in the next section.
Biomass-derived porous materials containing ordered well-distributed pores have been recently investigated. For instance, alginate from marine brown algae has recently been used in the immobilization of enzymes/proteins and has served as a template for fabricating nanostructured semiconductors. Notably, owing to the abundant carboxyl and hydroxyl groups in the polymeric carbon matrix and the associated presence of negatively charged glucuronic and mannuronic units, alginate is particularly suitable for serving as a template in an aqueous phase. When the functional groups are transformed into CO/CO2 and H2O, the polymeric matrix could be converted into carbon after carbonization.
Gelatin is another promising material for the fabrication of porous carbons and is derived from collagen obtained from various animal body parts, such as pig skin, bovine hides, pork, and cattle bones. Normally, there are two types of gelatin: (i) the form obtained by acid pretreatment, namely, type A (isoelectric point at a pH of ∼8–9) and (ii) the form of which the preparation involves treatment with alkali, namely, type B (isoelectric point at a pH of ∼4–5).16 This eco-friendly material has become a promising candidate for energy storage devices and TFTs owing to its unique properties, as follows. Firstly, gelatin with its functional groups, i.e., COOH and NH2, possesses hydrophilic properties but is not soluble in an organic electrolyte and can disperse active materials uniformly. Secondly, gelatin solutions with high viscosity could act as adhesive agents and bind active materials and conductive media together on an electrode.
2.2 Biomass-based carbon materials
Fossil-based sources of carbon are limited and unsustainable. Therefore, abundant and renewable biomass is urgently needed for the preparation of activated carbons (ACs). Biomass has attracted increasing attention as it represents a promising strategy for making materials with natural structures that have 3D configurations and multifunctional groups. The estimated production of biomass worldwide is ∼146 billion metric tons a year.17 Biomass is based on carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, and the applicability of a particular type depends on the physical and chemical properties of the macromolecules. It could be transformed into ACs via pre-carbonization followed by activation.18
It is important to note that biomass-based ACs are eco-friendly and have many allotropes, i.e., graphite, diamond, fullerenes, and nanotubes, which are suitable for fabricating highly polarizable carbon electrodes. However, the electrical conductivity of the resulting carbon electrodes is largely dependent on the characteristics of the feedstock (e.g., microtexture and heteroatoms) and the types of synthetic method (e.g., activation, thermal treatment and hybridization). In addition, its amphoteric character with diverse electrochemical properties implies that this element could range from a donor to an acceptor state.

2.2.1 Biomass-derived nitrogen-doped ACs. 
Modification with heteroatoms, e.g., boron, phosphorus, iodine, fluorine, and nitrogen, has brought about the most attention over the last few years. Among these dopants, doping with nitrogen (N) could effectively tailor the properties of carbon materials for different types of application.19 This is mainly attributed to three specific reasons: firstly, N-doped carbon materials exhibit a substantially increased specific capacity because the electronegativity of nitrogen (3.5) is higher than that of carbon (3.0). Secondly, the similar atomic radii of the nitrogen atom and carbon atom could prevent a significant lattice mismatch. Thirdly, doping N atoms into a C framework could generate n-type conduction behavior because N atoms introduce donor states near the Fermi level. In addition, N sites at the surface of a carbon material could promote charge transfer across the interface of the electrode and electrolyte. These properties enable C–N structures to be widely used in multiple types of nanoelectronic device.20
Two approaches are commonly used for the preparation of N-doped carbon: (1) in situ doping, namely, carbonization of nitrogen-rich precursors or a mixture of carbon precursors and nitrogen-rich precursors and (2) ex situ doping, namely, post-treatment of carbons with nitrogen-based reagents. Owing to its high contents of carbon/nitrogen species, biomass is suitable for these approaches for fabricating N-doped carbon. For example, Chen et al.21 used gelatin to serve as a source of both C and N while using Mg(NO3)2·6H2O and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O as dual templates. Similarly, Xu et al.22 used gelatin for preparing porous carbon under an inert atmosphere with activation by NaOH at 600 °C for 1 h.
Owing to its abundant hydroxyl groups and amine groups, chitosan, which is the second most abundant natural source of organic nitrogen after proteins, has also been employed to fabricate N-doped carbons. Besides, it has been found that chitosan could minimize the loss of polysulfides into the electrolyte because of its hydrophilic properties and high affinity.23 Fan et al.24 produced N-containing microporous carbon materials from chitosan by activation with K2CO3 and carbonization, whereas Titirici et al.25 utilized chitosan and D(+)-glucosamine hydrochloride as precursors of N-doped carbon. Polysaccharide-derived N-containing hydrothermal carbon has been prepared by Zhao et al.26via carbonization and activation with KOH. Shrimp shells (Fig. 1), which consist of chitin (poly-β(1,4)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine), have been considered to be a promising candidate as a source of N-rich precursors. Porous carbons containing micropores, mesopores, and micro/mesopores can accordingly be prepared by simultaneous carbonization and activation by KOH coupled with the removal of CaCO3.27,28
 Fig. 1  Synthesis of N-doped activated carbon derived from shrimp shells, including demineralization, deproteination, deacetylation, and activation processes. Adapted from ref. 29. 

Table 1 presents the characteristics of porous carbons derived from different biomass feedstocks. After appropriate activation, the specific surface area (SSA) of biomass-derived carbon could reach ∼3010 m2 g−1. In contrast, without the activation stage, the SSA of porous carbon derived from biomass would be in the range between 30 and 1540 m2 g−1. Because biomass contains nitrogen element, biomass-derived porous carbon contains various types of nitrogenous functional groups, such as pyrrolic, pyridone, and quaternary nitrogen.
Table 1 Characteristics of biomass-derived porous carbons prepared by various types of activation method




Source
Activating agent
Nitrogen content
Functional groups
SSA (m2 g−1)




Gelatin22
NaOH
0.88 at%
Pyrrolic/pyridone, quaternary
3012


Gelatin21
Mg(NO3)2·6H2O, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O
2.12 at%
Pyridine, pyrrolic/pyridone, quaternary
1518


Chitosan24
K2CO3
1.80 wt%
Pyridine, pyridone/pyrrolic
2567


Chitosan and D(+)-glucosamine25
—
6.8 wt%
Pyrrolic/pyridone
∼30–50


Polysaccharide26
KOH
2.3 wt%
NR
598


Enoki mushroom38
—
3.43 wt%
Nitrile/graphitic, pyrrolic/oxidized
380


Polydopamine33
—
—
—
1538


Shrimp shell27
KOH
6.67 wt%
NR
1917


Glucose and glucosamine31
—
4.94 wt%
Pyridinic/pyrrolic/quaternary/oxidized nitrogen
327




Red blood cells, which contain abundant hemoproteins and amino acids, are another attractive class of material for fabricating N-doped carbons. However, most of them are thrown away (considered as waste) in our daily life. For instance, boiled pig blood contains ∼19 wt% blood protein. As shown in Fig. 2, N-modified carbon-based catalysts30 have been prepared by pyrolysis at high temperatures. It was observed that the iron element present in pig blood could facilitate the partial transformation of oxidized N into planar N.
 Fig. 2  Synthesis of N-containing carbon nanospheres from blood proteins. Adapted from ref. 30. 
In addition, Zhan et al.31 recently converted biomass (glucose and glucosamine) into N-doped hollow carbon nanospheres (N-HCSs) by an aerosol-assisted process. As shown in Fig. 3, the amino groups of glucosamine would trigger the coassembly of glucose and glucosamine and thereby generate hollow 3D structures. The specific surface area and total pore volume of N-HCSs were found to be 327 m2 g−1 and 0.13 cm3 g−1, respectively. An investigation of the nitrogen bonding revealed four peaks, namely, those of pyridinic nitrogen, pyrrolic nitrogen, quaternary nitrogen, and oxidized nitrogen.
 Fig. 3  Use of glucose and glucosamine to obtain N-doped carbon spheres. Adapted from ref. 31. 


2.2.2 Green materials-based carbons with 3D configurations. 
Animal bones and scales, as abundant sources of biomass, have also been utilized to prepare HPCs in a facile and sustainable manner. Note that most of the current preparation of HPCs uses the hard-templating method, for which hierarchically nanostructured silica, a metal–organic framework, or diatomite is employed as the template, followed by carbonization of the mixture, and then the template is removed. However, most biomass-based HPCs can be simply fabricated via self-templating. For example, porous carbon was obtained from corn straw by hydrothermal carbonization and activation by KOH. The as-prepared 3D hierarchical materials possessed specific surface areas in the range of 1290–1660 m2 g−1 with an electrical conductivity in the range of 4.0–5.4 S cm−1.32 Zhou et al.33 also prepared N-doped carbon spheres via the pyrolysis of a polydopamine precursor, followed by dissolution of the silica support using hydrofluoric acid. The results indicated that the precursor could be uniformly deposited onto and/or into a porous template of silica nanoparticles and form hollow carbon spheres with mesoporous shells.

Fig. 4 illustrates the conversion of fish scales4 into a porous carbon scaffold. As is known, fish scales comprise organic collagen fibers and inorganic calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite, of which the organic component can be transferred to the carbon matrix while the mineral phase acts as a natural template for forming a hierarchical porous structure. Fish scales possess a layer-by-layer structure, which could be obtained after carbonization and activation. It not only promotes ion transport but also prevents the aggregation of nanoparticles.34
 Fig. 4  Microstructure of fish scales after carbonization, activation, and acid washing. Adapted from ref. 4. 
Besides fish scales, crab shells, which mainly consist of calcium carbonate, magnesium carbonate, protein, and chitin, are also a good resource for HPCs. Xia et al.35 proposed a combined template comprising an organic resol surfactant and a crab shell for preparing mesoporous carbon nanofiber arrays (MCNAs). As depicted in Fig. 5, the crab shell serves as a hard template to generate the nanofiber arrays, while a triblock copolymer (i.e., Pluronic P123) is used as a soft template for organizing the mesopores.
 Fig. 5  Preparation of highly ordered mesoporous carbon nanofiber arrays. Adapted from ref. 35. 
Pig bones consist of both organic (i.e., collagen fibers) and inorganic (i.e., apatite, which is well dispersed in the organic component) components.36 The organic component is a carbon source, whereas the apatite acts as a natural template for the 3D structure. As shown in Fig. 6, pig-bone-based hierarchical porous carbon (BHPC) can be successfully obtained after activation by KOH, carbonization and washing with HNO3. The BET surface area and pore volume of BHPC carbonized at 850 °C are ∼2160 m2 g−1 and 2.26 cm3 g−1, respectively.36 Pig bone has also been converted into layer-by-layer graphite by Gao et al.37 Collagen can serve as a carbon precursor owing to its high carbon content (∼50 wt%).
 Fig. 6  Carbonization and activation of pig bones for preparing BHPC. 
The layer-by-layer structure of pig bones is also beneficial for forming the structure of graphite. The as-obtained graphite has a large interplanar distance of 0.357 nm, which is slightly larger than the value (0.335 nm) for normal graphite.
We briefly summarize the characteristics of various biomass sources of HPCs, including their SSA, total pore volume, and micropore volume, in Table 2. As shown, biomass-based porous carbon possesses a large specific surface area of greater than 1200 m2 g−1. In particular, the specific surface area of fish-scale-based carbon could reach ∼2730 m2 g−1. The total pore volume of biomass-based porous carbon ranges from 0.82 to 4.30 cm3 g−1, whereas the volume of the micropore portion is about 0.71–0.77 cm3 g−1.
Table 2 Characterization of various biomass sources of HPCs




Source
SSA (m2 g−1)
Total pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Micropore volume (cm3 g−1)




Fish scales34
2732
1.69
0.71


Pig bones36
2157
2.26
0.77


Shrimp shells29
1917
0.82
—


Polydopamine33
1538
2.02
—


Crab shells35
1270
4.30
—


Lotus39
1015
0.82
0.43




To pursue a sustainable and cost-effective route for preparing nanostructured battery electrode materials, Cui et al.5 introduced and examined stone crab shells as a biotemplate for fabricating hollow carbon nanofibers (Fig. 7). The crab shells have a Bouligand structure that consists of highly mineralized chitin–protein fibers. Notably, the prepared nanofibers could encapsulate sulfur and silicon to form cathodes and anodes for LIBs.
 Fig. 7  Fabrication of electrode materials using a nanostructure of stone crab shells as a biotemplate. Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) a stone crab shell, (b) a stone crab shell template, and (c) the powder of the stone crab shell template. (d) Diameter distribution of the nanoscale channels of the biotemplate (i.e., the stone crab shell). (e) Fabrication of hollow carbon nanofiber arrays and the mechanism of encapsulating sulfur or silicon electrode materials based on the template. Adapted from ref. 5. 
Fungus, which is rich in chitin, has also been utilized by Fan et al. to prepare 3D porous graphene-like carbon (PGC) by activation with KOH, as shown in Fig. 8. The layer-stacked graphene-like carbon derived from cell walls of fungus possesses a hierarchically interconnected porous framework. The specific surface area and bulk density of the prepared HPC were found to be ∼1100 m2 g−1 and ∼0.96 g cm−3, respectively.40 The PGC that was obtained possessed an interconnected porous system, according to an HRTEM image.
 Fig. 8  Photo of (a) natural fungus and (b) dried fungus in a Petri dish (bottom) and swollen fungus after a hydrothermal process (top). SEM images of (c) freeze-dried fungus after a hydrothermal process in 0.1 M KOH and (d) the obtained densely porous layer-stacked carbon material. Elemental mapping of (e) carbon and (f) oxygen atoms in the porous layer-stacked carbon. (g) HRTEM image of porous layer-stacked carbon. Adapted from ref. 40. 

3. Applications of green materials in electronics
3.1 Thin-film transistors (TFTs)
Flexible electronic devices using plastic materials have come a long way over the past decade.41–45 As mentioned earlier, most of them are usually made from non-decomposable and poisonous inorganic materials. In this regard, electronic systems that consist of renewable or biodegradable polymers are highly required for the development of eco-friendly, low-cost, and robust devices. Hence, natural biomaterials that possess attractive properties for realizing this goal have been vigorously investigated for the fabrication of novel biosustainable electronic devices in recent years, such as organic TFTs, modern displays, light-emitting devices, and photovoltaic cells.46–48 Among these, TFTs have been the most widely investigated because they not only function as essential active addressing elements for improving signal collection but also serve as fundamental building blocks for constructing more complex integrated circuits such as transistor memories,49,50 electronic paper,51 active sensory devices,52 and radio frequency identification cards.53 Therefore, in this section, we will discuss recent advances in the use of biodegradable materials in TFTs, including substrates, dielectric layers, and semiconducting layers.

3.1.1 Substrates. 
In a typical transistor device, the bottom substrate that supports the device generally possesses micrometer-scale thickness and is much thicker than the dielectric layer, semiconductors, and electrodes (usually hundreds of nanometers). Thus, the overall degradation behavior of a transistor device is almost dominated by the substrate that is employed. Apparently, the utilization of substrates with the desired degradation properties is a prerequisite for producing biodegradable devices. The key challenge in the use of biodegradable materials as the substrate lies in the requirements for robust chemical resistance and temperature stability to accommodate different fabrication processes such as spin coating, photolithography, and etching processes because, during the fabrication processes, the substrate needs to be exposed to high temperatures or harsh chemical solvents. The most straightforward way is to separate the deposition, etching, and lithographic processes used for the electronic components from the biodegradable substrate. Hence, the transfer printing method is the most widely adopted method for addressing this issue to date. In principle, a temporary substrate is first used to fabricate the device stack, and afterward the completed device stack is transferred from the temporary substrate to the target substrate with an elastomer stamp. This process involves a sacrificial layer for patterning devices on silicon (as a temporary substrate) and an anti-etching covering layer on top. By etching the top layer, the sacrificial layer would be exposed for dissolution, which would thereby enable the device to be retrieved with an elastomer stamp for transfer to the biodegradable substrate. Similar strategies have also been proposed for transient silicon-based devices on polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA), polycaprolactone (PCL), PVA, silk, and cellulose. For example, Rogers et al.14 demonstrated an array of transient CMOS inverters on a PLGA film by using the transfer printing fabrication process. As shown in Fig. 9, magnesium, which can be hydrolyzed in water, was chosen as the electrode, whereas SiO2 and Si were used for the dielectric layers and semiconductors because they can be dissolved in phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH 7.4) at physiological temperatures. Very intriguingly, they demonstrated comparable device performance before and after transfer to the degradable substrate. Although the transfer printing method has been successfully employed for fabricating biodegradable devices, the direct fabrication method (onto the substrate) is still preferred owing to its easy scalability. Therefore, the exploitation of biodegradable substrates with the ability to be integrated into devices becomes essential. Wood-derived cellulose exhibits several advantages, such as being flexible, transparent, and stable at high temperatures, and has thereby attracted significant research attention. Cellulose substrates would degrade slowly over a few months in the presence of natural fungi, which indicates their promising potential for consumer electronics with a reduced environmental footprint. However, the major drawbacks associated with cellulose/paper substrates lie in their inferior surface morphologies. The surface roughness of commercial-grade printer paper made from plants reaches a few micrometers, which is ∼103–104 times greater than the values for Si/SiO2 wafers and regular polymer substrates. A rough dielectric surface would unavoidably hinder the diffusion of semiconductor molecules deposited on the surface, which would lead to smaller grains and fewer crystalline domains in the semiconducting layer. To overcome this issue, additional planarization layers are introduced to flatten the surface to the sub-nanometer scale. For example, Fujisaki et al.54 fabricated flexible organic TFTs based on wood-based cellulose nanofibers (nanopaper), in which a crosslinkable olefin-type polymer (∼2 μm) was employed as a surface planarization layer for the cellulose nanofibers (Fig. 9(b)). Benefiting from the flattened cellulose surface, the solution-deposited organic semiconducting film on the paper possessed sufficient crystalline domains and exhibited a high hole mobility of ∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagrams of the transfer of devices fabricated on temporary silicon substrates to a final biodegradable (PLGA) substrate, which could be applied to many kinds of substrate material. Adapted from ref. 14. (b) Schematic illustration and cross-section of fabricated TFT based on a nanopaper-based OTFT array, where the nanopaper was covered with a 2 μm olefin-type polymer layer. Adapted from ref. 54. (c) Schematic diagram of fabrication of a TFT using starch paper. Adapted from ref. 55. 
Recently, Jeong et al.55 utilized starch paper as a biodegradable substrate to fabricate TFTs without using any planarization layers. Starch is a polysaccharide with a granular structure that consists of two D-glucose polymers and at least two hydroxyl groups per repeating unit. It is a relatively inexpensive, abundant, and renewable material; however, its mechanical properties are not strong enough for it to serve as a substrate. For this purpose, the addition of PVA and crosslinkers to starch molecules can effectively compensate for their brittle nature when pristine to improve their overall mechanical strength while maintaining their flexibility. The starch paper possessed an intrinsically smooth surface with a low surface roughness of ∼1.59 nm. Fig. 9(c) shows the surface morphology of the vacuum-deposited Ag gate electrodes and the sequentially grown Parylene C dielectric layers. As shown, the surface roughness only slightly increased to ∼3.15 and ∼5.73 nm after the deposition of the Ag electrodes and Parylene C dielectric layers, respectively. Consequently, the transistor fabricated using this biodegradable substrate displayed comparable performance (0.37 cm2 V−1 s−1) to that of a regular device using a wafer as the substrate.
Animal-derived biodegradable materials, such as silkworm silk,56 are another promising class of material suitable for preparing substrates. They have been extensively investigated as enzymatically degradable biomaterials. Silk, which is a polypeptide, mainly comprises two types of protein: (i) fibroin and (ii) sericin. Fibroin is primarily composed of glycine, serine, and alanine, which enable the formation of inter-chain hydrogen bonds to ensure that the mechanical robustness of silk fibers is sufficient. Notably, silk is fully bioresorbable and has been proven to generate no immune response; therefore, it can be safely implanted into the body. Electronic devices can also be fabricated on silk by the transfer printing method. Therefore, silk could be considered to be a bioresorbable carrier for the in vivo introduction of electronic elements.57,58 It is noted that an ultrathin electronic sensor array has been successfully fabricated on silk. Then, the fabricated silk could be placed in vivo onto exposed brain tissue. The implanted silk was safely dissolved and resorbed, which enabled the conformal coating of the sensor array on the folded brain tissue.


3.1.2 Dielectric layer. 
In a transistor, the insulating dielectric layer plays an important function, as it can be polarized under an external electric field and separate the gate electrode from the semiconductor.59 In principle, the dielectric constant (k) is the main parameter for evaluating the properties of a dielectric and is directly proportional to the capacitance. The value of k depends on the number of constituent polarizable groups, which is related to the oscillating electric field that is attributed to the time dependence of various polarization mechanisms. A dielectric layer with a high k value is beneficial for preventing significant leakage current and enabling low-voltage operation. The properties of the dielectric layer critically influence the resulting performance of derived TFTs owing to its dependence on several key factors, e.g., the induced electric field, operating voltage, current leakage, and charge mobility.
Polymeric insulators are considered to be preferable gate dielectric materials because of their several advantages over inorganic materials, such as greater flexibility, more hydrophilic features, facile solution processability, and low cost. On this basis, numerous biodegradable polymeric materials have been employed as the dielectric layer. Actually, some materials used to fabricate substrates that we mentioned in the previous section, such as cellulose and silk, can also be employed to fabricate the dielectric layer. The related recent progress in this respect will be introduced here.
In 2013, Petritz et al.60 first utilized a cellulose/Al2O3 hybrid film as a high-k dielectric layer for TFT applications. The cellulose film was prepared by desilylation of trimethylsilylcellulose, and its thickness was significantly reduced to 16 nm via desilylation. The k value of the hybrid film was ∼8.4, whereas its resulting leakage current density was of the order of 10−6 A cm−2 up to an electric field of 1 MV cm−1. Consequently, the derived device exhibited respectable performance with hysteresis-free characteristics and low leakage currents for both p- and n-channel operation.
Silk fibroin is also a promising natural dielectric and exhibits an areal capacitance of 17.5 nF cm−2 and a k value of ∼6.1 at 20 Hz. As shown in Fig. 10(a), Wang et al.56 demonstrated a flexible TFT by using a silk dielectric. Impressively, the fabricated pentacene-based TFT delivered a high mobility of 23.2 cm2 V−1 s−1, which approached the theoretical mobility of bulk single-crystal pentacene. The silk fibroin film promoted the orthorhombic phase of the pentacene layer prepared by thermal evaporation, as illustrated in Fig. 10(c), which acted as the main pathway for carrier transport. The results highlight that this natural polymer can not only endow a device with degradability but also enhance the performance of the device by its unique structure.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of a pentacene TFT with silk fibroin as the gate dielectric. GIXRD patterns showing the (001) peak of (b) the orthorhombic phase of pentacene (25 nm) and (c) the thin-film phase of pentacene (70 nm). (d) Modes of growth of pentacene on SiO2 and silk fibroin. (e) Structure of an OFET fabricated with albumen dielectrics. Adapted from ref. 56 and 61. 
Another protein-based material that has been investigated as a dielectric is albumen. Chang et al.61 demonstrated that albumen extracted from chicken eggs could be directly used for TFT applications (Fig. 10(b)), in which the dielectric layer was prepared from a spin-coated albumen film by simple thermal treatment. Notably, irreversible thermal denaturation via the formation of disulfide bonds between two protein molecules occurred during the heat treatment, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The disulfide bonds were formed between cysteine residues and involved one amino acid with one thiol group located in different chains of the protein molecule. The leakage current of the TFT was further reduced after this crosslinking process. Finally, the derived pentacene- and C60-based TFTs delivered a hole mobility of 0.09 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of 0.13 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.
Recently, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which is the building block of life on earth, has also attracted much research interest, as it could not only be extracted in large amounts from waste products of the fishing industry but also be produced on an industrial scale. Furthermore, the mechanical properties of DNA could be manipulated by altering its water content or chemical crosslinking.62,63 Besides its exploitation as a biodegradable substrate for flexible electronic devices, gate dielectrics based on DNA have also been investigated lately. A dielectric layer was fabricated from a DNA solution with the cationic surfactant hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTMA) via spin coating.64,65 However, a TFT fabricated using the DNA–CTMA dielectric exhibited severe device hysteresis due to the presence of mobile ionic impurities. This hysteresis was reduced by limiting the ion mobility by crosslinking DNA–CTMA with poly(phenyl isocyanate-co-formaldehyde), but the overall areal capacitance decreased to only 0.8 nF cm−2.64 The alternative to addressing the hysteresis involves the direct use of DNA nucleobases, which could be simply purified and vacuum-deposited to form a high-quality thin film (2.5 nm). Vacuum-deposited thin films of guanine and cytosine displayed high areal capacitances of ∼9.25 nF cm−2 and ∼13.8 nF cm−2, respectively.66
The abovementioned combinations of natural substrates and dielectrics clearly indicate that diverse functional materials that can be sufficiently integrated into electronic devices can be developed or obtained from nature, which not only offers great advantages in terms of biocompatible and biodegradable applications but also provides significant economic benefits.


3.1.3 Semiconducting layer. 
In comparison with degradable insulators, degradable natural materials with strong semiconducting properties remain rare. Thus far, the most famous system consists of carotenoids, such as β-carotene, which comprise linear π-conjugated molecules and have been used as hole-transporting semiconductors.66,67 A TFT made from fully natural materials was recently demonstrated by using β-carotene as the active channel, in which a natural gate insulator based on glucose and a biodegradable plastic substrate were employed. This device delivered an impressive hole mobility of up to 4 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. When indanthrene yellow G and indanthrene brilliant orange RF were used as the semiconductors, guanine/adenine as the gate dielectric, and caramelized glucose as the substrate, the derived TFT exhibited a mobility of 1.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1.66
Indigo dye, which was one of the earliest reported natural conjugated compounds, is the most widely mass-produced dyestuff worldwide. It possesses a band gap of 1.7 eV and balanced electron and hole mobilities of the order of 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1.68 Natural indigo derivatives are biodegradable, nontoxic, and thermally and (photo)chemically stable owing to intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the amine hydrogens and carbonyl groups. This hydrogen bonding, together with the high molecular planarity, results in tight π-stacking between neighboring molecules with a small interplanar spacing of ∼3.4 Å.68 The excellent charge-transporting properties of indigoid dyes can thus be attributed to the strong intermolecular interactions due to π-stacking reinforced by hydrogen bonding.
Biodegradability can be introduced into synthetic polymers via commonly hydrolyzable linkages, such as ester, imide and urethane bonds. Recently, Bao et al.69 reported a totally disintegrable semiconducting polymer obtained by using reversible imine bonds as conjugated linkages between DPP and p-phenylenediamine moieties (Fig. 11(a)). The DPP-based polymer retained the semiconducting properties due to its conjugated backbone and thus exhibited a high hole mobility of 0.34 cm2 V−1 s−1 when spin-coated on a silane-modified SiO2 dielectric. Notably, the imine bonds degraded under acidic conditions (e.g., pH = 4.6), whereupon the resulting by-products were identified as the aldehyde and amine precursors. Consequently, a fully degradable TFT was fabricated by using the DPP-based polymer as the semiconductor, cellulose as the substrate, Al2O3 as the dielectric, and Fe as the electrodes. The device fully disintegrated after 30 days, as shown in Fig. 11(c). This research indicates a new direction for producing synthetic semiconductors with degradability achieved via imine linkages in the conjugated backbone.
 Fig. 11  (a) Flexible device using disintegrable polymers as an active substrate. The bottom scheme illustrates the synthesis of the disintegrable PDPP-PD using imine chemistry. (b) Schematic of the materials and device structure used for totally disintegrable electronics and the transfer characteristic using Fe as the gate and source-drain electrodes. (c) Device in various stages of disintegration. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. 

3.2 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (SCs) are currently considered to be among the most promising energy storage devices owing to their good electrochemical performance, long cycle life, and high power density. In general, SCs can be classified into two types: (i) electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and (ii) pseudocapacitors. EDLCs store electrical energy by electrostatically accumulating ionic charges at the interfaces of the electrical double layer between the electrolyte and electrode (such as a carbon material). Pseudocapacitors store electrical energy by rapid and reversible faradic redox reactions that occur at the surface of the electrodes (such as a transition metal oxide or conducting polymer). In SCs, the use of HPCs as the electrodes could not only shorten the ion pathways but also ensure conductive networks. The macro/mesopores of HPCs are beneficial for ion transport, and the micropores could increase the capacitance, although the rate capability may decrease.71 In addition, sufficient porosity with N-doping could achieve good electrochemical performance in SCs.72 However, commercially available carbons with 3D structures are quite rare.
In this regard, the examination of natural materials for preparing HPCs has attracted significant research attention. For example, 3D flexible carbonaceous gels (CGs) derived from watermelons were used as a carbon source by Wu et al.70 The as-prepared material not only facilitated ion transport but also increased the conductivity, which led to excellent electrochemical performance. The capacitance retention remained at 96% after 1000 charge/discharge cycles, as shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Watermelon-derived carbonaceous gels for SCs.70 
N-doped porous carbon that was obtained from potato waste residues and exhibited a specific surface area of 1052 m2 g−1 was prepared by Lei et al.,73 for which zinc chloride (ZnCl2) and melamine were used as the activating agent and nitrogen-doping agent, respectively. The specific capacitance was maintained at 255 F g−1 in a 2 M KOH electrolyte with a coulombic efficiency of 93.7% at a current rate of 5 A g−1 over 5000 cycles. Moreover, an HPC prepared from lotus with an SSA of 1015 m2 g−1 has been reported by Li et al.39 As shown in Fig. 13, the polymeric cellulose units in lotus created the pore structure, and the gases (H2O, CO2) generated from the OH and COOH functional groups exfoliated the active carbon to give a larger specific surface area. The specific capacitance of a prepared graphene-like carbon electrode was 340 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, and the capacity retention remained at 98% after 10000 cycles.
 Fig. 13  Mechanisms of enhanced electrochemical behavior of graphene-like activated carbon (the arrows indicate the pathways of ion transport in C–H2O, C–H2O2, C–HAc, and C–H2O2/HAc). Adapted from ref. 39. 
3.3 Rechargeable batteries
The goal for electric vehicles of a calendar life of 15 years with an operating temperature range of the battery of −30 to 52 °C has recently been proposed by the United States Advanced Battery Consortium (USABC).1 To achieve this, the development of rechargeable batteries with high energy and power densities becomes essential and the design of new electrode materials thus becomes imperative.74–76 In this section, we will illustrate the recent progress in green materials for rechargeable batteries, such as lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium–sulfur batteries (LiSBs), and sodium-ion batteries (SIBs).

3.3.1 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). 
Continuous developments in high-power battery technologies have been made in order to meet performance and cost goals for 2020 (see Energy Storage System Goals). Nascent LIBs have dominated the battery market for portable electronics since 1990. Biomass-based materials have exhibited good electrochemical performance for LIBs. For example, rice straw can be used for preparing porous carbon with a large specific surface area of up to 2950 m2 g−1.77 The hierarchical porous networks with abundant macroporous channels and sufficient micropores could provide pathways for the easy accessibility of electrolytes and fast transport of Li+. Gelatin was also introduced to prepare nanosized LiFePO4/C particles via a sol–gel procedure.78 In this case, gelatin acts as both the dispersing agent and the carbon precursor for the preparation of LiFePO4/C particles owing to its excellent dispersion capability and high carbon content. The gelatin-based sol–gel procedure is simple without any additives. When cooling, the gelatin sol is converted into a gel, which is beneficial for ensuring that the as-synthesized particles are on the nanoscale. It would also promote the crystallization of LiFePO4 owing to the existence of functional groups (such as –COOH and –NH2) on its molecular chain. An LiFePO4/C cathode exhibited excellent cycling performance with a capacity retention of ∼95% at 0.2C after 100 cycles. A nanocomposite cathode could reach a discharge capacity of 128 mA h g−1 at 5C.


3.3.2 Lithium–sulfur batteries (LiSBs). 
LiSBs are promising candidates for electric vehicles and electrical grid applications. In theory, an LiSB possesses a high specific capacity (e.g., 1672 mA h g−1) and energy density (e.g., 2600 W h kg−1). Biomass-based porous carbon has also contributed to the recent advances in LiSBs. For example, fish-scale-based porous carbon has been proved to be a promising candidate for energy storage. When it was employed as the active material in SCs, the specific capacitance reached 168 F g−1 at a current rate of 0.05 A g−1. The specific capacitance was maintained at 130 F g−1 even at a high current rate of 40 A g−1.4 Given its large specific surface area and good conductivity, an HPC derived from fish scales has been introduced as an inhibitor to capture the polysulfides produced in LiSBs.79 An asymmetric electrode was fabricated by coating a layer of fish-scale-based porous carbon on the cathode to trap the polysulfides produced during the discharge–charge cycle. The initial specific capacity was about 1430 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of ∼81% after 50 cycles at 1C, and a reversible capacity of ∼990 mA h g−1 was retained after 100 cycles with a coulombic efficiency of >98%. To further inhibit the polysulfides from dissolving in the electrolyte, a fish-scale-based porous carbon has been employed to prepare a porous nanocomposite of sulfur/carbon,80,81 and sulfur could be loaded into the fish-scale-based porous carbon by heating at 155 °C. The porous nanocomposite could accommodate the volume expansion of sulfur particles and adsorb the polysulfide produced during the reactions and was thereby beneficial for prolonging the cycle life. The resulting nanocomposite exhibited a high specific capacity of 1039 mA h g−1 at 1C for the first cycle, and the reversible capacity remained at 1023 mA h g−1 after 70 cycles (Fig. 14). Crab-shell-based hollow nanofibers have also been shown to be a good host for loading sulfur. Fig. 15(a) shows the uniform nanochannel array structures of an as-prepared carbon/sulfur composite, which indicates the full incorporation of sulfur into the hollow carbon nanofibers. The first plateau in the charge–discharge curves (Fig. 15(d)) corresponds to the formation of long-chain polysulfides (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8) from sulfur element at 2.0–2.4 V, whereas the second plateau is attributed to the conversion of polysulfides to Li2S2 and then to Li2S around 2.0 V. A reversible capacity of ∼810 mA h g−1 was still retained after 200 cycles. The flat second plateau indicates the uniform deposition of solid Li2S2 or Li2S on the surface of carbon without a significant kinetic barrier. The cycling performance (Fig. 15(e)) revealed that the capacity of the cell at C/5 remained at 880 mA h g−1 after 100 discharge/charge cycles, which corresponded to a capacity retention of 71%.
 Fig. 14  Preparation of fish-scale-based porous carbon and its applications in SCs and LiSBs. 
 Fig. 15  Properties and performance of sulfur encapsulated by crab-shell-templated carbon and used as an electrode in LIBs. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of sulfur encapsulated by crab-shell-templated carbon, indicating nanochannel structures. (c) EDX analysis reveals the presence of sulfur and carbon elements in the sulfur electrode. (d) Discharge/charge voltage profiles of the electrode at different rates. (e) Specific capacity and coulombic efficiency at different cycle numbers. (f) Rate capability of the crab-shell-templated sulfur electrode on discharge. Adapted from ref. 5. 
Polydopamine-coated hollow carbon/sulfur has also been prepared for LiSBs, as shown in Fig. 16.33 The N-doped hollow carbon both acted as a conductive shell and controlled the size of the sulfur core, whereas the polymer coating confined the sulfur and polysulfide components inside the shell. In addition, the introduction of nitrogen element effectively coordinated and immobilized the lithium polysulfides. The specific capacity of an LiSB was found to be ∼900 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 150 cycles, whereas it was ∼630 mA h g−1 at 0.6C after 600 cycles.
 Fig. 16  Polydopamine-coated hollow carbon–sulfur used for LiSBs and its electrochemical performance. Adapted from ref. 33. 


3.3.3 Sodium-ion batteries (SIBs). 
Sodium, which is below lithium in the periodic table, has similar physical and chemical properties to lithium, and hence SIBs have also attracted extensive research attention. However, the commercially used anode, which comprises graphite materials, exhibits poor sodium storage performance in SIBs because only a limited number of sodium ions can be intercalated into graphite (about NaC70). Hard carbon has been proved to be a promising alternative to graphite electrodes because of its relatively high specific capacity and availability. For example, sucrose82 has been used to produce amorphous monodisperse hard carbon spherules (HCSs) for the anode of SIBs. Carbonized HCSs exhibited a plateau capacity of 220 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of ∼93% after 100 charge/discharge cycles. In addition, HCSs were utilized in full cells with P2-Na2/3Ni1/3Mn2/3O2 as the positive electrode. The operating voltage of the full cell was 3.5 V with a specific capacity of >300 mA h g−1 and an initial coulombic efficiency of ∼76%. Porous carbon materials were fabricated via the pyrolysis of H3PO4-treated pomelo peels at 700 °C under an N2 atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 17.83 The hard carbon that was obtained possessed a 3D porous structure with a specific surface area of ∼1270 m2 g−1. The porous hard carbon was used as the anode in SIBs, which exhibited a specific capacity of ∼180 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 200 mA g−1 after 220 cycles. Hard carbon derived from apple biowaste was employed as the anode in an SIB after carbonization and activation by phosphoric acid. An anode made from this material displayed stable capacity over 1000 cycles at 5C. It also exhibited good rate performance.84
 Fig. 17  Porous carbon derived from pomelo peel and its use in the anode of SIBs. Adapted from ref. 83. 
The mechanisms of the storage of sodium by porous hard carbon include (i) the intercalation of sodium ions into disordered graphene layers, (ii) redox reactions of the surface functional groups (e.g., O-containing groups), and (iii) the storage of sodium ions within nanoscale pores.
Interestingly, biomass-derived carbon materials could be effectively employed in many fields, depending on their preparation method, as portrayed in Fig. 18. For example, broad beans (SBs), which are abundant in amino acids and vitamins, have been employed as electrode materials in energy storage devices after carbonization and chemical activation of the SBs in an inert gas.85 SBs are rich in protein and can be used as a source of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur elements. The specific capacitance of SBs-based porous carbon in SCs was approximately 202 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. Similarly, in the case of SIBs, the initial discharge capacity was ∼466 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1. The use of carbon nanoparticles derived from coconut oil as anodes in LIBs and SIBs has been reported.86 The as-prepared carbon electrodes exhibited a capacity of 277 mA h g−1 in SIBs and ∼741 mA h g−1 in LIBs at a current rate of 100 mA g−1.
 Fig. 18  The incineration of biomass-based materials could lead to the greenhouse effect and other forms of pollution, whereas the appropriate treatment of biomass-based materials could establish a waste-to-resource supply chain, e.g., applications in supercapacitors and batteries. 

4. From end-of-life electronics to green materials
Recently,87 a conceptual framework was proposed and the role of a circular economy in establishing a green supply chain for resources was evaluated. In a circular economic system, a closed loop of biological (restorative) and technical (regenerative) material flows exists to enable sustainable production and consumption. In previous sections, we have reviewed various types of biological material (Section 2) and their performance in electronics and energy storage applications (Section 3). In this section, we will focus on the valorization of various technical wastes (or wastes defined as technical materials) to build up a waste-to-nanomaterial supply chain for scarce and critical materials. When confronted with the existing environmental problems and resource scarcity, the promotion of a circular economic system could decouple economic growth from environmental degradation by building a resource-saving society.
4.1 Types of available end-of-life electronics
The market for electronic devices has experienced exponential growth driven by changes in consumer habits and rapid technological developments.88 This has inevitably led to an increase in the production of end-of-life electronics (i.e., electronic wastes or e-wastes), such as cell phones,89 personal computers/tablets,89 hard disk drives,90 screens (e.g., liquid-crystal displays),91 and robotic vacuum cleaners.92 These e-wastes typically comprise printed circuit boards,93 rechargeable batteries,94,95 lamps,91 and vibrators.96 The amount of e-waste generated globally was more than 50 million tons in 2016,93 and this figure is expected to grow by 10% every year.97 Apart from consumer electronic products, available technical wastes could originate from manufacturing industries, e.g., non-biodegradable synthetic polymers (one of the major components of industrial solid wastes). The US Department of Energy has classified rare earth elements as critical elements for national energy security.98 End-of-life electronics usually contain numerous types of rare earth element, such as Nd, Dy, Tb, Y, and Gd. Other elements, such as Ce, La, and Pr, are deemed near-critical.99 Therefore, the valorization of end-of-life electronics possesses enormous potential as an alternative source of critical metals and valuable materials. The growing demand for the valorization of end-of-life electronics is also driven by more stringent environmental regulations.100 Nguyen et al.90 estimated that the recovery of rare earth elements from US hard disk drives could meet up to 5.2% of the demand of the rest of the world, excluding China, for Nd magnets. Rechargeable batteries also contain precious metals, such as Pb, Li, Cd, and Ni. Similarly, ∼22% of the Hg element produced worldwide annually is used in the electronics industry.93
4.2 Core technologies: dismantling, preprocessing, extraction and resynthesis
A typical valorization chain for end-of-life electronics consists of three main stages, namely, collection, processing, and refining. The collection system should be cost-effective to maximize the profits of the entire valorization chain for recovering valuable components from e-wastes. After the collection of e-wastes, two main approaches for the processing of technical wastes are widely recognized: (i) waste-to-energy (WTE)87 and (ii) waste-to-resource (WTR).3 The WTE approach can be achieved by several technologies, such as incineration (or combustion), gasification, digestion, and fermentation. In Australia, residues from waste recovery processes are further treated via WTE technologies.101 The WTR approach involves a number of demanufacturing processes (e.g., dismantling) and pretreatment steps, such as physical pretreatment (e.g., shredding, grinding, and milling) and chemical pretreatment (e.g., hydrolysis by a strong acid). As good engineering practice in the WTR approach, e-wastes with high-value-added materials are manually processed for the recovery of valuable components. Then, the remainder is sent for generalized treatment procedures, such as mechanical shredding and separation.102 For instance, the best strategy for the treatment of plastic-rich waste products comprises the recovery of high-grade plastic components, in contrast to other disposal routes.103 This could be achieved by selective dismantling of the plastic-rich products.104
After dismantling, preprocessing focuses on the separation of ferrous metals, nonferrous metals, precious metals, and polymers. The separation of materials is typically achieved by physical methods based on density (gravity), magnetic, electrostatic, visual, or other characteristics. The key design issues that affect the recovery of materials in preprocessing include (1) unsuitable product design, e.g., ‘birdnest’ wiring; (2) improper use of connectors, e.g., too many screws; (3) the positioning of key components, e.g., the removal of batteries and PCBs before shredding; and (4) the compatibility and poor separability of materials, e.g., composites of plastic and steel formed by weaving or using glue.92 After preprocessing by separation, suitable pretreatment of technical wastes is an essential step for producing nanomaterials and ensuring performance in subsequent applications. For instance,105 ball milling was employed for the recycling and synthesis of Zn nanoparticles from waste tires in the rubber industry.
After physical separation, chemical methods are employed to extract precious metals or recycle non-metal fractions from e-wastes. The drive to extract valuable metals, such as Au, Ag, Pd, and Cu, from e-wastes has gained great attention recently.93,106 Metal extraction techniques include pyrometallurgical (metals are melted by heat), hydrometallurgical (metals are leached by a liquid), bioleaching (metals are dissolved by microorganisms), and electrochemical methods. Pyrometallurgy is the traditional approach for the recovery of metals from e-wastes; however, it is an energy-intensive and high-cost process. The selective recovery of individual metals is also challenging to achieve by traditional pyrometallurgy. Ghosh et al.107 suggested that hydrometallurgical processes should be more efficient and eco-friendly than other recovery processes, such as physical separation and pyrometallurgical processes. For instance, Li ions could be extracted within 0.5 h from spent cobalt-rich LiNi1−yCoyO2 (0.5 ≤ y ≤ 1).108 However, hydrometallurgical processes also suffer from several drawbacks during the recovery processes, e.g., reductive leaching, solvent extraction, and selective precipitation.109 For the bioleaching of e-wastes, the influence of toxic ingredients on the growth of microorganisms and slow reaction rates are considered to be the major technical issues.110
Diaz et al.98 proposed a comprehensive system for the recovery of critical metals and valuable materials from e-wastes via an electrochemical approach, as depicted in Fig. 19(a). The proposed electrochemical system, as shown in Fig. 19(b), includes two stages for the recycling of metals: (i) dissolution of Cu, Sn, Ag, and Nd-Fe-B magnet materials using a 1 M H2SO4 and 0.2 M FeSO4 electrolyte and (ii) dissolution of Pd and Au using Cl2 generated from HCl. This approach can ensure that smaller amounts of noble metals are dissolved with Fe3+ in the acidic sulfate and is followed by enhanced dissolution using Cl2. The results indicated that a recovery rate of 97.2% could be achieved for both Cu and Ag ions.99
 Fig. 19  (a) Comprehensive recovery processes for recovering valuable and critical materials from e-wastes based on an electrochemical approach. Acronym: REE (rare earth elements). Adapted from ref. 98. (b) Example of an electrochemical (EC) system for recycling metals from e-wastes. Adapted from ref. 99. 
Recovered metals with high purity would then undergo a variety of nanomaterial synthesis processes (resynthesis), such as chemical/thermal activation, solvent thermal treatment, electric arc discharge, vacuum evaporation, inert gas condensation, and sodium borohydride reduction. The resynthesis processes used for waste-derived nanoparticles do not exhibit great differences from these procedures as illustrated in the previous sections. Note that temperature exhibits significant effects on the properties of the synthesized nanomaterials (e.g., size and shape). Both the particle size distribution and the pore size of nanostructured materials are essential for determining their potential uses. Waste-derived nanomaterials have been effectively used in numerous fields, such as alternative fluorescent materials, catalysts in wastewater treatment plants, and carbon nanodots and/or CNTs in biomedical devices and sensors.
4.3 Environmental benefits and costs: a circular economy
The improper disposal of hazardous wastes (such as end-of-life electronics) would result in severe environmental impacts because they are usually toxic, flammable, corrosive, highly reactive, infectious, or radioactive. However, landfill and incineration are still the main methods of disposal for end-of-life electronics.111 On the other hand, the production of nanomaterials typically requires more energy and natural resources than conventional environmentally benign technologies.112 The circular economic system for waste-derived nanomaterials involves broad system boundaries, including the extraction, manufacture, and transport of raw materials, the use of products, and the end-of-life stage. We usually refer to this concept as the life cycle of a product, as shown in Fig. 20. In a conventional linear economic system (indicated by the black arrows), the materials and resources used for the manufacture of a product are obtained directly from the environment, including air, water, land/soil, energy, minerals, and the biosphere. This model of manufacturing is typically not considered to be a sustainable approach to the use of materials and resources. In contrast, the circular economic model (indicated by the yellow arrows) emphasizes the recovery of useful materials and resources from end-of-life products. Several studies of life cycle assessments have revealed that, in comparison with low-grade primary resources, the recycling of end-of-life LIBs should be preferable because it eliminates a number of unit processes, such as beneficiation and the recovery of primary resources.108 This could be easily achieved via an urban mining system to achieve the sustainable management of materials.113,114 Green electronics has been defined as the design of electronics that considers environmental sustainability and industrial ecology. That said, green electronics should encompass a cross-disciplinary science that focuses on the principles and applications of green technologies and engineering. The Ecodesign Directives115 recommended a comprehensive approach to product design to improve the environmental performance of products. In other words, a green product design should consider the life cycle of products, including the product end of life. For long-term sustainability, an effective integrated waste management system should primarily consider the 6R principles, i.e., reduce, reuse, recycle, recovery of energy, reclamation of land, and redesign. The sustainable management of materials can be achieved using green technologies that are cost-effective in comparison with the extraction of raw materials from natural ores.116 An economic evaluation was performed for an electrochemical process for the recovery of materials and critical metals, such as Cu, Au, and Ag, from e-waste. The results indicated that the electrochemical recovery process could reduce the costs of waste processing from 12.8 to 9.0 USD per kg waste, in comparison with the traditional route of black copper smelting.116
 Fig. 20  Life cycle of electrical and electronic equipment. The black arrows indicate a conventional linear economy of manufacturing, whereas the yellow dashed arrows represent a circular economic model directed toward sustainable development. 
The existing legal frameworks and available technologies are not necessarily appropriate for effectively handling e-wastes containing nanomaterials. Academic communities should identify unaddressed areas in the achievement of a safe, secure and sustainable (3S) approach to recycling. In particular, nanoparticle wastes do not behave in the same way as conventional solid wastes and thus exhibit adverse impacts on the environment and human health. Nanoparticles can enter the human body via dermal contact, inhalation, ingestion, and/or injection. However, the potential harmful effects of exposure to nanoparticles on human health are not yet fully understood. Jia et al.117 found that carbon nanotubes caused cell degeneration, necrosis, and apoptosis in macrophage cell lines. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop research programs related to nanotoxicology.
5. Perspectives and prospects
5.1 Design and synthesis of high-performance biomaterials
As revealed in this review, materials play a critical role in the fields of electronic devices and energy storage. A recent shift to harnessing renewable biomass as a feedstock for energy materials has been increasingly observed. Biomass derived from food waste, industry, and nature via green processes could not only increase the cost-competitiveness of energy supply markets but also reduce environmental impacts in the form of the carbon footprints of chemicals, fossil-based fuels and materials to fulfill the goals of sustainable development. Overall, biomass-derived materials could achieve high performance in large-scale manufacturing with low feedstock costs via the appropriate modification of the structure and physicochemical properties of individual building blocks.
Therefore, the rational design of high-performance biomaterials becomes important, and the associated synthetic routes should also be carefully revised to provide better biocompatibility. Looking to the future, substantial progress in the integration of the principles of green chemistry into the synthesis and manufacture of biomaterials should be made. For instance, the replacement of hazardous reagents by cleaner alternatives in the manufacture of energy materials should be particularly considered.
5.2 Future green electronics and energy applications
New energy technology is in high demand because it can provide a driving range of hundreds of miles for cars instead of tens of miles, enable charging in tens of minutes instead of hours, and store electricity and release it to the grid at costs comparable to those of natural-gas generation. Future green electronics should involve innovative concepts for charge transport on the molecular scale as well as charge storage at the associated interfaces, e.g., the electrode/electrolyte interface in the case of a battery. This could be achieved by the rational design of nanoscale materials that underpin the fundamentals of the physicochemical processes that occur at this complex interface. To meet the requirements of future electronics and energy storage, the interdisciplinary integration of chemical engineering, electrochemistry, materials science, and environmental engineering is necessary.
From the point of view of environmental engineering, the definition of a “green” technology includes four criteria: (1) high efficiency, (2) low cost, (3) no generation of secondary pollutants, and (4) the implementation of the recovery of energy and resources. Paradigm shifts from conventional process efficiency (e.g., yield) to resource efficiency should be advocated for the future manufacture of energy materials. This represents the implementation of the concept of green chemistry, which comprises the prevention of primary pollution rather than end-of-pipe waste treatment. The development of green processing technologies for both raw materials and end-of-life electronics, such as microbial corrosion, should be considered as priority directions for research.
5.3 Sustainable management of materials for a circular economy
Besides a comprehensive summary of the recent development of bio-based materials for electronics and energy applications, we have also provided an insight for assessing the performance of end-of-life electronics recycling and supporting the integration of green design with the recovery of resources from end-of-life electronics. A systematic approach to the more efficient and productive utilization of materials over their life cycles provides opportunities to achieve the sustainable management of materials. The valorization of end-of-life electronics as a feedstock is attractive because they are readily available and inexpensive. In addition, the valorization of waste-derived nanomaterials is versatile, e.g., ranging from bioimaging and biosensing to pollution control and environmental remediation. Although it is still a major challenge, the practical implementation of the concept of ‘design for end of life’ remains an imperative factor for minimizing life cycle costs and maximizing the efficiency of the use of resources and energy.
There will be strong economic incentives for the energy and materials industries to integrate green chemistry into the entire process of the development and manufacturing life cycle. Moreover, the transition from a conventional linear economy to a circular economy by developing new economic indicators that take resource efficiency and material circularity (recycling) into account is urgently needed. Looking to the future, one should focus on the application of the principles of green chemistry in advancing the energy and materials industries towards a circular economy.
Abbreviations

ACActivated carbon
HPCHierarchical porous carbon
SSASpecific surface area
LiSBLithium–sulfur battery
LIBLithium-ion battery
SCSupercapacitor
CGCarbonaceous gel
TFTThin-film transistor
OTFTOrganic thin-film transistor
3SSafe, secure and sustainable
WTEWaste-to-energy
WTRWaste-to-resource
HCSHard carbon spherule
USABCUnited States advanced battery consortium
SIBSodium-ion battery
EDLCElectrical double-layer capacitor
PANPolyacrylonitrile

Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the “Advanced Research Center for Green Materials Science and Technology” from the Featured Area Research Center Program within the framework of the Higher Education Sprout Project of the Ministry of Education (107L9006) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (MOST 107-3017-F-002-001, 106-2119-M-002-007).
Notes and references
Y. Yao and F. Wu, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 91–103 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. Yu, S.-Y. Lee, T. Wei, J. Li and Z. Fan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2837–2872 RSC .
J. Li, S. Y. Pan, H. Kim, J. H. Linn and P. C. Chiang, J. Environ. Manage., 2015, 162, 158–170 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Huang and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4773 RSC .
H. Yao, G. Zheng, W. Li, M. T. McDowell, Z. Seh, N. Liu, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3385–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, C. K. Poh, D. Zhan, L. Lai, S. H. Lim, L. Wang, X. Liu, N. Gopal Sahoo, C. Li, Z. Shen and J. Lin, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 377–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Yang, S. G. Zhen, C. K. Poh, A. Chaurasia, J. Luo, X. Wu, E. K. L. Yeow, N. G. Sahoo, J. Lin and Z. Shen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11745–11750 RSC .
M. Irimia-Vladu, E. D. Głowacki, G. Voss, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 340–346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, W. Luo, P. N. Ciesielski, Z. Fang, J. Y. Zhu, G. Henriksson, M. E. Himmel and L. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9305–9374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Feig, H. Tran and Z. Bao, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 337–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, R. Hou, S. Zaman, B. Y. Xia and H. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3913–3918 RSC .
H. K. Makadia and S. J. Siegel, Polymers, 2011, 3, 1377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Woodruff and D. W. Hutmacher, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1217–1256 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Hwang, J.-K. Song, X. Huang, H. Cheng, S.-K. Kang, B. H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, S. Yu, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3905–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Fu, Z. Wang, J. Dai, M. Carter and L. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3527–3539 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gómez-Guillén, B. Giménez, M. E. López-Caballero and M. P. Montero, Food Hydrocolloids, 2011, 25, 1813–1827 CrossRef .
A. Demirbaş, Energy Convers. Manage., 2001, 42, 1357–1378 CrossRef .
M. Gao, S.-Y. Pan, W.-C. Chen and P.-C. Chiang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 58–79 CrossRef .
K. N. Wood, R. O'Hayre and S. Pylypenko, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1212–1249 RSC .
Y. Mao, H. Duan, B. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Hu, C. Zhao, Z. Wang, L. Chen and Y. Yang, Energy
Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7950–7955 RSC .
X. Y. Chen, C. Chen, Z. J. Zhang and D. H. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10903–10911 RSC .
B. Xu, S. Hou, G. Cao, F. Wu and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19088–19093 RSC .
Y. Chen, N. Liu, H. Shao, W. Wang, M. Gao, C. Li, H. Zhang, A. Wang and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15235–15240 RSC .
X. Fan, L. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Shu and J. Shi, Carbon, 2013, 61, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, N. Baccile, S. Gross, Y. Zhang, W. Wei, Y. Sun, M. Antonietti and M.-M. Titirici, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3778–3787 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Z. Fan, M. Q. Zhou, H. Guan, S. Qiao, M. Antonietti and M. M. Titirici, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5202–5206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qu, S. Lv, X. Peng, S. Tian, J. Wang and F. Gao, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 671, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, J. Qu, C. Geng, G. Shao and M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7445–7452 RSC .
F. Gao, J. Qu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang and J. Qiu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 1134–1141 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, W. Liao, Z. Li and C. Chen, Carbon, 2015, 85, 279–288 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qu, X. Zhang, J. Zhan, W. Sun, Z. Si and H. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 7380–7389 CrossRef CAS .
N. Guo, M. Li, X. Sun, F. Wang and R. Yang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2595–2602 RSC .
W. Zhou, X. Xiao, M. Cai and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5250–5256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, C. Su, M. He, T. Glossmann, A. Hintennach, Z. Feng, Y. Huang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6725–6733 RSC .
H.-J. Liu, X.-M. Wang, W.-J. Cui, Y.-Q. Dou, D.-Y. Zhao and Y.-Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4223–4230 RSC .
S. Wei, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Y. Xia and Z. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 736–740 RSC .
M. Gao, N. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Guan, W. Wang, H. Zhang, F. Wang and Y. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12118–12121 RSC .
C. Guo, W. Liao, Z. Li, L. Sun and C. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15990–15998 RSC .
S.-Y. Lu, M. Jin, Y. Zhang, Y.-B. Niu, J.-C. Gao and C.-M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702545 CrossRef .
C. Long, X. Chen, L. Jiang, L. Zhi and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 141–151 CrossRef CAS .
L. Caizhi, Z. Meng, Y. M. Yu, H. Tao, L. Li and Y. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7493–7527 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Xu, D. Chen and G. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 161–192 RSC .
C. C. Shih, W. Y. Lee and W. C. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 294–308 RSC .
T. W. Kelley, P. F. Baude, C. Gerlach, D. E. Ender, D. Muyres, M. A. Haase, D. E. Vogel and S. D. Theiss, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4413–4422 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Dong, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Barr, J. A. Rowehl, R. R. Lunt, J. Xu, A. Wang, C. M. Boyce, S. G. Im, V. Bulović and K. K. Gleason, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3500–3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Masaya and Y. Hiroyuki, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1849–1852 CrossRef .
C. J. Bettinger and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 651–655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Shih, Y.-C. Chiu, W.-Y. Lee, J.-Y. Chen and W.-C. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1511–1519 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Chang, C. Lu, C.-L. Liu and W.-C. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 27–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Hammock, A. Chortos, B. C. K. Tee, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5997–6038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Kato, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 9966–9970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dodabalapur, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yoshihide, K. Hirotaka, N. Yoshiki, N. Mitsuru, T. Hiroshi, Y. Toshihiro, K. Taiichiro, N. Masaya and S. Naoki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1657–1663 CrossRef .
J. Heejeong, B. Seolhee, H. Singu, J. Hayeong, K. S. Hyun and L. H. Sung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704433 CrossRef .
C.-H. Wang, C.-Y. Hsieh and J.-C. Hwang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1630–1634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y.-S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, Y.-S. Kim, J. Amsden, B. Panilaitis, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, M. R. Zakin and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 133701 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Veres, S. Ogier, G. Lloyd and D. de Leeuw, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4543–4555 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petritz, A. Wolfberger, A. Fian, M. Irimia-Vladu, A. Haase, H. Gold, T. Rothländer, T. Griesser and B. Stadlober, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 153303 CrossRef .
J. W. Chang, C. G. Wang, C. Y. Huang, T. D. Tsai, T. F. Guo and T. C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4077–4081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Shih, C.-Y. Chung, J.-Y. Lam, H.-C. Wu, Y. Morimitsu, H. Matsuno, K. Tanaka and W.-C. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13463–13466 RSC .
J. Zhan, H. Matsuno, H. Masunaga, H. Ogawa and K. Tanaka, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e92 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yumusak, T. B. Singh, N. S. Sariciftci and J. G. Grote, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 263304 CrossRef .
L. Wang, J. Yoshida, N. Ogata, S. Sasaki and T. Kajiyama, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1273–1281 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irimia-Vladu, P. A. Troshin, M. Reisinger, L. Shmygleva, Y. Kanbur, G. Schwabegger, M. Bodea, R. Schwödiauer, A. Mumyatov, J. W. Fergus, V. F. Razumov, H. Sitter, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4069–4076 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irimia-Vladu, P. A. Troshin, M. Reisinger, G. Schwabegger, M. Ullah, R. Schwoediauer, A. Mumyatov, M. Bodea, J. W. Fergus, V. F. Razumov, H. Sitter, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1974–1990 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irimia-Vladu, E. D. Głowacki, P. A. Troshin, G. Schwabegger, L. Leonat, D. K. Susarova, O. Krystal, M. Ullah, Y. Kanbur, M. A. Bodea, V. F. Razumov, H. Sitter, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 375–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, M. Guan, J. Liu, H.-C. Lin, R. Pfattner, L. Shaw, A. F. McGuire, T.-C. Huang, L. Shao, K.-T. Cheng, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 5107–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Wu, T. Wen, H.-L. Guo, S. Yang, X. Wang and A.-W. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3589–3597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Liu, M. Li, M. Yu, Y. Luo, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3097–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miao, J. Pan, T. He, Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia and X. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 10947–10961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ma, Q. Yang, K. Sun, H. Peng, F. Ran, X. Zhao and Z. Lei, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 197, 137–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, Y. Y. Xu, H. Yang, Z. Dong, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700691 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Chen, I. Balla, N. S. Luu and M. C. Hersam, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2026–2034 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, K.-X. Wang, G.-D. Li and J.-S. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 130–133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, N. Liu, Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Yu and Y. Huang, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 258, 8–12 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. Li, N. Liu, Y. Chen, W. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 149, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Li, W. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Gao, X. Xiong, A. Wang, K. Yuan, Y. Huang and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3334–3339 RSC .
M. Gao, X. Xiong, W. Wang, S. Zhao, C. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 1149–1155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Xu, X. Wu, J. Yu, Y. Wang, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 71–77 RSC .
K.-l. Hong, L. Qie, R. Zeng, Z.-q. Yi, W. Zhang, D. Wang, W. Yin, C. Wu, Q.-j. Fan, W.-x. Zhang and Y.-h. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12733–12738 RSC .
L. Wu, D. Buchholz, C. Vaalma, G. A. Giffin and S. Passerini, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 3, 292–298 CrossRef .
G. Xu, J. Han, B. Ding, P. Nie, J. Pan, H. Dou, H. Li and X. Zhang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1668–1674 RSC .
R. R. Gaddam, D. Yang, R. Narayan, K. Raju, N. A. Kumar and X. S. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Pan, M. A. Du, I. T. Huang, I. H. Liu, E. E. Chang and P.-C. Chiang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 108, 409–421 CrossRef .
R. Geyer and V. Doctori Blass, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2010, 47, 515–525 CrossRef .

          T. E. Lister, L. A. Diaz, G. G. Clark and P. Keller, Process Development for the Recovery of Critical Materials from Electronic Waste, Idaho National Laboratory,  2016 Search PubMed .
R. T. Nguyen, L. A. Diaz, D. D. Imholte and T. E. Lister, JOM, 2017, 69, 1546–1552 CrossRef CAS .

          C. P. Baldé, F. Wang, R. Kuehr and J. Huisman, The global e-waste monitor, United Nations University,  2015 Search PubMed .
K. Parajuly, K. Habib, C. Cimpan, G. Liu and H. Wenzel, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 137, 652–666 CrossRef .
M. Kaya, Waste Manag., 2016, 57, 64–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Ma, C. Luo and T. Zhou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 326, 77–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gu, J. Guo, X. Yao, P. A. Summers, S. D. Widijatmoko and P. Hall, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 161, 765–780 CrossRef .
T. E. Lister, P. Wang and A. Anderko, Hydrometallurgy, 2014, 149, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Sakunda, personal communication.
L. A. Diaz, T. E. Lister, J. A. Parkman and G. G. Clark, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 125, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Lister, P. Wang and A. Anderko, Hydrometallurgy, 2014, 149, 228–237 CrossRef CAS .

          R. V. Percival, C. H. Schroeder, A. S. Miller and J. P. Leape, Environmental regulation: Law, science, and policy, Wolters Kluwer Law & Business,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. Demetrious, K. Verghese, P. Stasinopoulos and E. Crossin, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2018, 136, 33–45 CrossRef .
P. Chancerel, T. Bolland and V. S. Rotter, Waste Manage. Res., 2011, 29, 309–317 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Wager and R. Hischier, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 529, 158–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rios, J. A. Stuart and E. Grant, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 5463–5470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Moghaddasi, A. H. Khoshgoftarmanesh, F. Karimzadeh and R. L. Chaney, Sci. Hortic., 2013, 160, 398–403 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Hageluken, presented in part at the 2006 IEEE International Symposium,  May 8–11, 2006 Search PubMed .
B. Ghosh, M. K. Ghosh, P. Parhi, P. S. Mukherjee and B. K. Mishra, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 94, 5–19 CrossRef CAS .
B. Swain, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 172, 388–403 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Chen, T. Zhou, D. Liu, H. Hu and S. Fan, Waste Manag., 2015, 38, 349–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiang, P. Wu, N. Zhu, T. Zhang, W. Liu, J. Wu and P. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 184, 812–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. S. Williams, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2006, 47, 195–208 CrossRef .
E. G. Hertwich, T. Gibon, E. A. Bouman, A. Arvesen, S. Suh, G. A. Heath, J. D. Bergesen, A. Ramirez, M. I. Vega and L. Shi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 6277–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-C. Chen, K.-H. Liu and H.-w. Ma, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 150, 16–25 CrossRef .

          W. S. Young, in Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, Elsevier Science Ltd.,  2001, pp. 3645–3650 Search PubMed .

          European Parliament, A framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products (recast), Official J. Eur. Union.,  2009 Search PubMed .
L. A. Diaz and T. E. Lister, Waste Manag., 2018, 74, 384–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jia, H. Wang, L. Yan, X. Wang, R. Pei, T. Yan, Y. Zhao and X. Guo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1378–1383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Mengyao Gao	Dr Mengyao Gao is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU). She received her PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2016. Prior to joining NTU, she worked as a visiting scholar in the Chemical Science and Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. She also had working experience at LAUSDEO Corp., Taiwan, in R&D of rechargeable batteries. Her research is mainly focused on green energy, biomass-based porous carbon materials, the design and fabrication of nanomaterials, and electrochemical energy storage, especially lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, and stretchable devices.
Chien-Chung Shih	Dr Chien-Chung Shih is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University (NTU). He received his BS and MS in Chemical Engineering from Chung Yuan Christian University in 2009 and 2011, respectively. He then joined Prof. Wen-Chang Chen's group at National Taiwan University and received his PhD in 2016. His research interests include nanostructured materials, transistor-type memories, and stretchable electronic devices.
Shu-Yuan Pan	Dr Shu-Yuan Pan is a Research Associate in the Carbon Cycle Research Center (CCRC), National Taiwan University (NTU). He received his PhD in Environmental Engineering from NTU in 2016. He was named a Green Talent of the Year (2013) by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany. He worked as a visiting scholar at RWTH Aachen University, Germany, in 2014, and Argonne National Laboratory, USA, in 2015. He is a Professional Engineer in environmental engineering licensed in Taiwan. Among his current interests are sustainable development, green technology, the mineralization and utilization of CO2, energy-efficient desalination, and life cycle assessment.
Chu-Chen Chueh	Dr Chu-Chen Chueh received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from National Taiwan University (NTU) in 2010 and then conducted postdoctoral research at the University of Washington from 2011 to 2016. He joined NTU as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering in 2017. His research is focused on organic/hybrid semiconductors and their applications in memories, light-emitting diodes, transistors, and solar cells. He has coauthored over 110 papers in the area of organic/hybrid optoelectronics.
Wen-Chang Chen	Dr Wen-Chang Chen is Dean of the College of Engineering, Director of the Advanced Research Center of Green Materials Science and Technology, and Distinguished Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and the Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering at National Taiwan University (NTU). He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Rochester in 1993 and then served as a research scientist at the Industrial Technology Research Institute of Taiwan from 1993 to 1996. He joined NTU as an Associate Professor in 1996 and was promoted to a full professor in 2000. His current research activities include electronic and optoelectronic polymers, block copolymers, and hybrid materials. He has coauthored 350 refereed articles and holds 47 issued patents.

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis of N-doped activated carbon derived from shrimp shells, including demineralization, deproteination, deacetylation, and activation processes. Adapted from ref. 29.	 

Gelatin22	NaOH	0.88 at%	Pyrrolic/pyridone, quaternary	3012
Gelatin21	Mg(NO3)2·6H2O, Zn(NO3)2·6H2O	2.12 at%	Pyridine, pyrrolic/pyridone, quaternary	1518
Chitosan24	K2CO3	1.80 wt%	Pyridine, pyridone/pyrrolic	2567
Chitosan and D(+)-glucosamine25	—	6.8 wt%	Pyrrolic/pyridone	∼30–50
Polysaccharide26	KOH	2.3 wt%	NR	598
Enoki mushroom38	—	3.43 wt%	Nitrile/graphitic, pyrrolic/oxidized	380
Polydopamine33	—	—	—	1538
Shrimp shell27	KOH	6.67 wt%	NR	1917
Glucose and glucosamine31	—	4.94 wt%	Pyridinic/pyrrolic/quaternary/oxidized nitrogen	327

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis of N-containing carbon nanospheres from blood proteins. Adapted from ref. 30.	 

 	Fig. 3  Use of glucose and glucosamine to obtain N-doped carbon spheres. Adapted from ref. 31.	 

 	Fig. 4  Microstructure of fish scales after carbonization, activation, and acid washing. Adapted from ref. 4.	 

 	Fig. 5  Preparation of highly ordered mesoporous carbon nanofiber arrays. Adapted from ref. 35.	 

 	Fig. 6  Carbonization and activation of pig bones for preparing BHPC.	 

Fish scales34	2732	1.69	0.71
Pig bones36	2157	2.26	0.77
Shrimp shells29	1917	0.82	—
Polydopamine33	1538	2.02	—
Crab shells35	1270	4.30	—
Lotus39	1015	0.82	0.43

 	Fig. 7  Fabrication of electrode materials using a nanostructure of stone crab shells as a biotemplate. Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) a stone crab shell, (b) a stone crab shell template, and (c) the powder of the stone crab shell template. (d) Diameter distribution of the nanoscale channels of the biotemplate (i.e., the stone crab shell). (e) Fabrication of hollow carbon nanofiber arrays and the mechanism of encapsulating sulfur or silicon electrode materials based on the template. Adapted from ref. 5.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photo of (a) natural fungus and (b) dried fungus in a Petri dish (bottom) and swollen fungus after a hydrothermal process (top). SEM images of (c) freeze-dried fungus after a hydrothermal process in 0.1 M KOH and (d) the obtained densely porous layer-stacked carbon material. Elemental mapping of (e) carbon and (f) oxygen atoms in the porous layer-stacked carbon. (g) HRTEM image of porous layer-stacked carbon. Adapted from ref. 40.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagrams of the transfer of devices fabricated on temporary silicon substrates to a final biodegradable (PLGA) substrate, which could be applied to many kinds of substrate material. Adapted from ref. 14. (b) Schematic illustration and cross-section of fabricated TFT based on a nanopaper-based OTFT array, where the nanopaper was covered with a 2 μm olefin-type polymer layer. Adapted from ref. 54. (c) Schematic diagram of fabrication of a TFT using starch paper. Adapted from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of a pentacene TFT with silk fibroin as the gate dielectric. GIXRD patterns showing the (001) peak of (b) the orthorhombic phase of pentacene (25 nm) and (c) the thin-film phase of pentacene (70 nm). (d) Modes of growth of pentacene on SiO2 and silk fibroin. (e) Structure of an OFET fabricated with albumen dielectrics. Adapted from ref. 56 and 61.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Flexible device using disintegrable polymers as an active substrate. The bottom scheme illustrates the synthesis of the disintegrable PDPP-PD using imine chemistry. (b) Schematic of the materials and device structure used for totally disintegrable electronics and the transfer characteristic using Fe as the gate and source-drain electrodes. (c) Device in various stages of disintegration. Adapted with permission from ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 12  Watermelon-derived carbonaceous gels for SCs.70	 

 	Fig. 13  Mechanisms of enhanced electrochemical behavior of graphene-like activated carbon (the arrows indicate the pathways of ion transport in C–H2O, C–H2O2, C–HAc, and C–H2O2/HAc). Adapted from ref. 39.	 

 	Fig. 14  Preparation of fish-scale-based porous carbon and its applications in SCs and LiSBs.	 

 	Fig. 15  Properties and performance of sulfur encapsulated by crab-shell-templated carbon and used as an electrode in LIBs. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of sulfur encapsulated by crab-shell-templated carbon, indicating nanochannel structures. (c) EDX analysis reveals the presence of sulfur and carbon elements in the sulfur electrode. (d) Discharge/charge voltage profiles of the electrode at different rates. (e) Specific capacity and coulombic efficiency at different cycle numbers. (f) Rate capability of the crab-shell-templated sulfur electrode on discharge. Adapted from ref. 5.	 

 	Fig. 16  Polydopamine-coated hollow carbon–sulfur used for LiSBs and its electrochemical performance. Adapted from ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 17  Porous carbon derived from pomelo peel and its use in the anode of SIBs. Adapted from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 18  The incineration of biomass-based materials could lead to the greenhouse effect and other forms of pollution, whereas the appropriate treatment of biomass-based materials could establish a waste-to-resource supply chain, e.g., applications in supercapacitors and batteries.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Comprehensive recovery processes for recovering valuable and critical materials from e-wastes based on an electrochemical approach. Acronym: REE (rare earth elements). Adapted from ref. 98. (b) Example of an electrochemical (EC) system for recycling metals from e-wastes. Adapted from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 20  Life cycle of electrical and electronic equipment. The black arrows indicate a conventional linear economy of manufacturing, whereas the yellow dashed arrows represent a circular economic model directed toward sustainable development.	 
AC	Activated carbon
HPC	Hierarchical porous carbon
SSA	Specific surface area
LiSB	Lithium–sulfur battery
LIB	Lithium-ion battery
SC	Supercapacitor
CG	Carbonaceous gel
TFT	Thin-film transistor
OTFT	Organic thin-film transistor
3S	Safe, secure and sustainable
WTE	Waste-to-energy
WTR	Waste-to-resource
HCS	Hard carbon spherule
USABC	United States advanced battery consortium
SIB	Sodium-ion battery
EDLC	Electrical double-layer capacitor
PAN	Polyacrylonitrile

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
