Side chain effect on conjugated polymer/fullerene interfaces in organic solar cells: a DFT study   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP04511B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP04511B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 23978-23995Side chain effect on conjugated polymer/fullerene interfaces in organic solar cells: a DFT study†

        
          
            Sarah A. 
            Ayoub
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jolanta B. 
            Lagowski
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Physics, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: sayoub@kau.edu.sa
bDepartment of Physics of Physical Oceanography, Memorial University, St. John's, NL A1B 3X7, Canada. E-mail: jolantal@mun.ca
Received 
      14th August 2019
    , Accepted 8th October 2019First published on 23rd October 2019AbstractConsiderable experimental research has been conducted on the influence of polymer alkyl side chains on the performance of bulk heterojunction organic solar cells. However, greater insight into the role of alkyl side chains in the polymer/fullerene interfacial regions is still needed. Using the dispersion-corrected density functional theory, we investigate the effect of alkyl side chains on the binding energies and electronic structures of various molecular pairings of fullerenes and monomers of organic copolymers (e.g. a pair of PC71BM and a monomer of copolymer PTB7 based on the thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene repeat unit, PCBM and a copolymer PCDTBT based on 2,7-carbazole/dithienyl-2,1,3-benzothiazole and PC71BM and a copolymer PffBT4T-2OD based on difluorobenzothiadiazole/quaterthiophene). We find that the trends of the magnitudes of the binding energies vary with the lengths, types (branched or linear), and branching positions of alkyl side chains. Whenever possible, these results are compared with the efficiency trends of the corresponding organic solar cells. With the help of this comparison optimal side chain arrangements in bulk heterogeneous organic solar cells are identified. It is expected that these insights will aid in the production of more efficient organic photovoltaics.
1 Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted considerable attention in the past decade due to their superior advantages over inorganic solar cells, such as flexibility, non-toxicity, and low cost of materials.1 The interface between polymers and fullerenes in the active layer is critical for the operation of bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs. It is widely accepted that the processes of exciton dissociation, charge separation, and charge recombination are controlled by the polymer/fullerene interfaces.2–4 A large effort has been made on synthesizing hundreds of materials for OSCs to increase the power conversion efficiency (PCE), which currently reached above 14%.5 However, many systems that include some promising materials’ properties (such as the strong absorption and high hole mobility) yield low or moderate PCEs.6 The potential problem of not obtaining the expected high PCEs for these systems is the fact that it is still poorly understood how the polymer/fullerene interactions and arrangements can influence the charge separation and transport in OSCs. Recently, we have studied the interfacial properties of BHJ OSCs using the computational (DFT) means.7 Some new insights into intermolecular factors that affect the performance of OSCs have been gained. The molecular dimers employed in that study7 did not contain alkyl side chains typically present in these systems.
For some time now, it has been recognized that the side chains attached to solution-processed OSC polymers are critical not only for controlling the solubility but also for the polymer/fullerene interaction. It has been reported that side chains can exert a considerable influence on the properties of low band gap (LBG) copolymers and can lead to higher PCEs in OSCs.8–12 Side chains affect the extend of the π–π stacking and lamellar distances between polymers. Both factors are crucial for the charge transport and thus the device performance.9,12 We note that, besides various alkyl side chains, other side chains such as alkoxy groups,11 unsaturated alkenes12 and side chains containing cyclic compounds such as cyclohexane12 can be attached to both donors and acceptors in OSCs. In this work, for simplicity, we consider only alkyl side chains. Alkyl side chains can be of different types: they can be linear or branched. They can have different lengths. When branched, the branching points can be located at different positions along the main side chain. Whether linear or branched, they can be located at different points along the polymer backbones.
It is generally accepted that the OSC efficiency depends strongly on the length of alkyl side chains (i.e. the number of carbon atoms in a side chain). For example, poly(3-hexylthiophene)s (P3HTs) with six C atoms in their side chains have been found to have superior properties as an OSC material relative to poly(3-butylthiophene)s (P3BTs) and poly(3-pentylthiophene)s (P3PTs) with four C and five C atoms in their side chains respectively.8 Dyer-Smith et al.13 showed also that the length of linear side chains in thienopyrroledione (TPD) units (while keeping the branched side chains on benzodithiophene (BDT) fixed) of PBDTTPD copolymers (which are based on the benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene–thieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione repeat unit) can highly affect the polymer self-assembling properties and OSC efficiency. For example, devices fabricated from PBDTTPD with n-heptyl (C7)-substituted TPD motifs achieved a higher PCE of about 8.5% compared to those fabricated with n-hexyl (C6)- and n-octyl (C8)-substituted TPD motifs which have PCEs of about 6.6% and 7.5% respectively. However, it remains unclear how the addition/reduction of one or two carbon atoms on the alkyl side chains can affect the polymer/fullerene interactions and improve PCEs. Moreover, it has been reported that, in some cases, as the length of side chains in conjugated polymers increases, the open-circuit voltage VOC, which is proportional to the interfacial energy gap (=(εHOMO(polymer) − εLUMO(fullerene)) where polymer is a donor and fullerene is an acceptor), also increases.14 The reason for the higher VOCs (whether it is due to the lowering of εHOMO(polymer)s or because of the influence of interfacial interactions) is not generally understood. In some other studies, no consistent trend between the side chain length and VOC has been observed.15,16
The types of side chains, linear or branched, can also play an important role in determining the efficiency of OSCs. For example, it has been suggested that OSC materials should be designed with linear side chains attached to the electron-accepting motifs and branched side chains attached to the electron-donating motifs of polymers.8,17 This will make the donor units of polymers more accessible to the fullerenes and will lead to favourable polymer/fullerene interactions. For example, the work of Dyer-Smith et al.13 reported that a high PCE of 8.5% was achieved when the branched alkyl-substituted BDT (donor) motifs were combined with linear alkyl-substituted TPD (acceptor) motifs; however, when the branched side chains were replaced by linear ones on BDT units, a major change was induced in polymer self-assembly which resulted in a large drop in the PCE (3.2%) of OSCs. Other studies also showed that the branched alkyl side chains (such as 2-ethylhexyl) in LBG polymers are significant for achieving the highest PCEs.18 For example, a remarkable PCE of about 8.2–9.02% was achieved with all-branched alkyl side chains on the acceptor and donor units of PTB7 copolymers (which are based on thieno[3,4-b]thiophene/benzodithiophene monomers).19,20 The branching position of one alkyl chain along the other (main) alkyl side chain is another factor that can be used to improve the polymer properties and device performance. In particular, it was reported that a PCE of above 10% was obtained when the second-position branched alkyl-side-chains was used on quaterthiophene-based polymers (e.g. Pff4TBT-2OD).21
Given that experiments do not or cannot provide a comprehensive picture on the effect of side chains on OSC device performance and very few theoretical studies on the role of alkyl side chains on polymer/fullerene interactions at interfaces have been carried out, there is a need for an in-depth investigation of the effect of side chains in OSCs. In our previous work,7 we employed the dispersion-corrected density functional theory (D-DFT) to investigate the electronic properties and the interfacial interactions of various promising monomer/fullerene combinations. Our results exhibited optimal property trends that lead us to the determination of general guidelines that can be used to select the best polymers when designing OSCs with high efficiencies. In the present work, we focus on the effect of alkyl side chains using the same type of monomer and fullerene as in a previous study7 (see Scheme 1). Our aim is threefold: to examine the effect of different lengths, types, and branching positions of side chains (1) on the binding energies of various pairings of monomers and fullerenes, and (2) on their electronic properties; and (3) to assess whether the trends we obtained in previous work7 of the electronic properties and the interfacial interactions of various pairings of monomers and fullerenes without side chains are consistent with the trends when side chains are added. This computational study identifies new trends in alkyl side chains and determines the favourable monomer/fullerene interactions for the device performance. This study is useful for designing polymers for achieving highly efficient OSCs. We note that our investigation is not meant to be complete, in the sense, that we do not consider all high performance polymer/fullerene OSCs. For example, there are other polymer/fullerene cells that have achieved PCEs of either close to or higher than 10% (such as those involving PBDT-TSR22 or PBDT-TS123 polymers). Our study employs a representative sample of systems from which we can extract possible trends and correlations between the side chain effect and OSC performance.
 Scheme 1  OSC polymers and their PCEs as reported in the literature, wherein the alkyl side chains are varied by the (1) lengths, (2) types, and (3) branching positions. 
2 Computational details
2.1 Computational approach
All monomer/fullerene combinations studied in this work were fully geometry optimized using the B97-D324 and B3LYP-D325,26 D-DFT approximations (with the 6-31G(d) basis set) as implemented in Gaussian 09.27 Previous work28 showed that both D-DFT methods provide good performance and consistent trends in describing the interfacial interactions of monomers and fullerenes. Furthermore, because DFT/B3LYP/6-31G(d) is known to provide electronic structure parameters that agree well with the experimental data,29 the isolated monomers and fullerenes were optimized using B3LYP to obtain the HOMO (εHOMO) and LUMO (εLUMO) eigenvalues and bandgaps (Eg = εHOMO − εLUMO) in the gas phase. The electronic structure parameters of interacting (single) monomers and fullerenes were determined from single point (SP) B3LYP/6-31G(d) computations. These SP calculations used the B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 monomer and fullerene structures as obtained from the geometry optimization of their respective dimers. Previous work7,28 showed that this approach gives very accurate and reliable results compared to the experimental data of polymers and fullerenes. Since both D-DFT methods provide similar trends, in the following sections, we display only the B97-D3 results, and the actual B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 values are provided in the tables in the ESI.†
2.2 Preferred conformations of dimers
We consider homogeneous and heterogeneous pairings to simulate the interfacial interactions between polymers, and between polymers and fullerenes respectively. Homogeneous pairing consists of two monomers of the same type (such as, for example, two monomers of P3HT) and heterogeneous pairing consists of one monomer and one fullerene (such as, for example, monomer of P3HT and PCBM). In this work, the initial structures of dimers with side chains needed for the full geometry optimizations of the various pairings were selected based on conformational analysis (without the side chains) carried out in a previous study.7 For the homogeneous pairs, the most stable conformations, which correspond to the lowest total energy states (and highest binding energies), were found to consist of two co-facial, π-stacking monomers. In heterogeneous pairs, monomers were located on the sides of fullerenes in their preferred (most stable) orientations (monomers located on top and bottom of fullerenes gave rise to less stable conformations).
We found that, for heterogeneous pairs, in addition to this general (side) location of monomers relative to fullerenes, consideration has to be given to the orientation of the side chains. For example, we consider P3HT/PCBM and P3HT/PC71BM pairs as shown in Fig. 1. In order to obtain a valid comparison between the two pairings, P3HT was placed with the same orientation relative to both types of fullerenes PCBM and PC71BM (see the optimized geometries of both pairings in Fig. 1(a) and (b)). When the side chains are present in heterogeneous (geometry optimized) pairs, the preferred configuration is when the side chains are wrapped around or directed toward the fullerene (as displayed in Fig. 1(a) and (b)). Configurations that have side chains directed away from fullerenes (as displayed in Fig. 1(c)) are less stable.
 Fig. 1  Illustrations of the preferred configurations of (a) P3HT/PC71BM and (b) P3HT/PCBM. (a) and (b) Illustrate that in preferred configurations the side chains of monomers wrap around fullerenes, whereas (c) illustrates that in the least stable configuration the side chains are directed away from fullerenes. 
2.3 Computed quantities
The strength of interfacial interactions of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairings including monomers with various forms of alkyl side chains is evaluated by determining their binding energies (ΔEbs) which are defined as: (1)where Epair is the total energy of the monomer/monomer or monomer/fullerene pair, and E1 and E2 are the total energies of individual monomers or monomers and fullerenes respectively.
To examine the effect of side chains on the electronic structures, the electronic parameters (εHOMO, εLUMO, and Eg) were also calculated for the individual gas phase monomers and fullerenes as well as the interacting monomers and fullerenes. In previous work,7 we determined the optimal electronic-property trends for optimizing the PCEs of OSCs (such as, for example, decreasing ΔεLUMO(=εLUMOacceptor − εLUMOdonor) and increasing the ratio (ΔεHD–LA − 0.3)/Eg(monomer) where (ΔεHD–LA = εHOMOacceptor − εLUMOdonor)). In this work, we calculate these energetic offsets with varying side chains to search for trends that can correlate with the device performance.
2.4 Side chain effect studies
In the first part of this work, we compare the binding energies of pairs that include seven different types of monomers of the most promising/popular polymers used in organic solar cells (they are marked in red in Scheme 1 and discussed in Section 3.1). The purpose of the first comparison is to examine the correlation of the binding energies with the experimentally determined PCEs and to see if these results are consistent with previous work7 that contained no or short side chains.
In the second part of this work, we compare the binding energies of pairs that include the same type of monomer but with different alkyl side chains (as discussed in Sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4). In this comparison, we considered three forms of alkyl side chains that differ by the: (1) length, (2) type, and (3) branching position of side chains. Based on these forms, the monomers are divided into three categories, which are displayed in Scheme 1:
(1) P3T, PCDTBT, PBDTTPD, PNT4T, Pff4TBT, and PBTff4T. The size of side chains is defined by the number of carbon atoms (nc). The nc is varied in P3T from C4 to C12, in PCDTBT from C2 to C12, in PBDTTBT from C6 to C12, and in PNT4T, Pff4TBT, and PBTff4T from C6/C8 to C10/C12;
(2) P3HT, PBDTTPD, and PTB. For each monomer, three types of side chains were considered: all-linear, linear-and-branched, and all-branched side chains. The type of side chain is defined by the number of branches (nB), and hence nB is varied from 0 to 2;
(3) PNT4T, Pff4TBT, and PBTff4T. The alkyl side chains in each monomer are branched at three different branching positions (PBs) which are designated as 1, 2, and 3.
To evaluate the effect of alkyl groups on the above categories of monomers, the binding energies of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs were calculated as a function of nc, nB, and PB of alkyl side chains. This evaluation will help us to understand as to why certain side chains (such as C6, EH/C8, and PB = 2 in P3HT, PBDTTPD, and Pff4TBT respectively) are optimal for the monomer/fullerene interactions (and give high PCEs). We note that some monomers with side chains that were included in our study exhibited no corresponding PCEs (see Scheme 1). They were added to our computational study to provide a more complete picture of the role of side chains in the interfacial interactions between monomers and fullerenes.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Comparison: monomer/fullerene pairs with high PCEs without and with side chains
In this section, we examine the ΔEbs of various heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs that include seven different types of promising monomers (marked in red in Scheme 1) whose properties were investigated in ref. 7. As indicated above, in a previous computational study7 all monomers were taken as having either no or short side chains, however, in experimental set-ups these monomers have different types of side chains: P3HT (all-linear), PCDTBT (all-linear), PBDTTPD (linear-and-branched), PTB7 (all-branched), PNT4T (all-branched), Pff4TBT (all-branched), and PBTff4T (all-branched). When side chains are present, in agreement with Fig. 12 in ref. 7, Fig. 2 shows that the ΔEbs of pairs with smaller fullerenes are bigger than those involving larger fullerenes. However, unlike no or short side chain results,7 the inclusion of side chains lowers the ΔEbs of homogeneous pairs relative to the corresponding heterogeneous pair values. Also in comparison to Fig. 12,7 the binding energies in Fig. 2 are more spread out and the trends (which are similar) are clearer to see in Fig. 2. Pairs involving PNT4T exhibit the highest ΔEb and pairs involving P3HT exhibit the lowest ΔEb. In addition, the inclusion of side chains increases the magnitudes of ΔEbs of the heterogeneous dimers (relative to the dimers without side chains) due to the wrapping of the side chains around the fullerenes and decreases the magnitudes of ΔEbs of the homogeneous pairs since the side chains weaken their π-stacking interactions (by moving the monomers further apart). This seems to indicate that ΔEbs of homogeneous pairs must be less than those of heterogeneous pairs to obtain optimal monomer/fullerene contacts (without being interfered with the monomer/monomer interactions and leading to phase separation). For dimers with either short or long side chains, the overall tendency is to have larger ΔEbs for solar cells with higher PCEs.
 Fig. 2  Total B97-D3 binding energies of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs. The solid and dashed lines are included for a guide to the eyes purpose only. 
As in a previous study,7 we consider the dependence of ΔEb on the isolated chain-length (Lmonomer) of monomers with side chains. As before, we note that the monomer of PNT4T has the longest Lmonomer while the monomer of P3HT has the shortest Lmonomer (corresponding to their highest and lowest ΔEbs). In Fig. 3, we plot the ΔEb of monomer/fullerene pairs versus the respective isolated Lmonomer. The results of both pairings containing PCBM and PC71BM show that as Lmonomer increases, the ΔEb also increases somewhat. With the exception of P3HT, the results of Fig. 3 and previous work7 (that did not include side chains) show that ΔEbs of monomers/fullerenes have a weak dependence on the Lmonomers beyond a certain length for example 10 Å. This is because the length of the fullerene that interacts with the monomer is approximately the same for all monomers.
 Fig. 3  B97-D3 binding energies of monomer/PCBM and monomer/PC71BM pairs versus the isolated monomers’ chain lengths. 
3.2 Varying the length of side chains
In this section, we consider the ΔEbs of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs containing varying lengths of side chains in monomers (of the same type) (see Fig. 4 and Table S1 in the ESI†). Similar to the results presented in Section 3.1, with few exceptions, the monomer/monomer pairs exhibit the lowest ΔEbs while the monomer/PCBM pairs exhibit the highest ΔEbs. The ΔEbs of monomer/PC71BM provide intermediate values. The results also clearly show that ΔEbs depend on the length of side chains. In particular, depending on the type of monomer, ΔEb may increase with increasing nc, and it may level off or even decrease after a certain value of nc.
 Fig. 4  Binding energies of the homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs versus the length of side chains in (a) P3T, (b) PCDTBT, (c) the TPD motif of PBDTTPD, and (d) Pff4TBT, PBTff4T, and PNT4T. Pairs corresponding to OSCs with the highest experimental PCEs are marked in red. 
For pairs containing P3T monomers, Fig. 4(a) show that as nc in side chains increases from C4 to C8, the ΔEbs of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs increase. For nc larger than C8, ΔEb continues to increase for homogeneous pairs while it levels off for monomer/PCBM and monomer/PC71BM pairs. The optimized geometries of monomers/fullerenes show that for ncs up to C8, the side chains interact with fullerenes, while for ncs larger than C8, the side chains exceed the size of fullerenes (see examples of P3T/PCBM pairs in Fig. 5(a–d) and (e–g) respectively). Hence, the ΔEbs of the P3T/fullerene pairs level off due to the excessive length of the side chains that are no longer involved in the monomer/fullerene interaction. However, the optimized geometries of homogeneous pairs show that the linear relationship between ΔEb and nc is maintained due to the interaction between the side chains (see the example of P3T-C14/P3T-C14 in Fig. 5(h)). The ΔEb results of P3T also show that they are correlated with experimental PCEs. For example, as the monomer changes from P3BT (with C4 side chains) to P3HT (with C6 side chains), the ΔEb of heterogeneous pairs containing the respective monomers with PCBM increases from approximately 1.5 to 1.6 eV while the corresponding PCE increases from 3.2 to 4.6% (see Fig. 4(a)). It is expected, based on the ΔEb values (which level off after C8 in heterogeneous pairs), that increasing the chain length in P3T beyond C6 or C8 would not result in an increased PCE.
 Fig. 5  Optimized geometries of the heterogeneous pairs containing P3T with (a) C4, (b) C5, (c) C6, (d) C8, (e) C10, (f) C12, and (g) C14 side chains, and (h) the homogeneous P3T-C14/P3T-C14 pair. 
For heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs containing PCDTBT monomers, ΔEb increases as nc increases up to C8 (see Fig. 4(b)). However, the ΔEbs of the heterogeneous pairs continue to become larger while the ΔEbs of the homogeneous pairs level off when the chain is increased to C12. The result is due to the fact that side chains are not extensively involved in monomer/monomer interaction in homogeneous pairs, and hence increasing nc does not affect their ΔEbs (see the optimized geometries of PCDTBT/PCDTBT pairs with C8 and C12 side chains in Fig. 6(a) and (b)). Furthermore, Fig. 6(c) and (d) illustrate that the increase in ΔEbs of the heterogeneous pairs is due to C12 side chains interacting with the larger part of fullerenes compared to C8 side chains. From the literature,1,29,30 it is known that PCDTBT with 2-octyl side chains has optimal device performance. Our computational results suggest that PCDTBT with C12 side chains can also be a good candidate for OSCs with enhanced PCE. It is clear from Fig. 6(c) and (d) that increasing the length of side chains in PCDTBT beyond C12 would not result in increased ΔEbs (and most likely larger PCEs).
 Fig. 6  Optimized geometries of the (a and b) homogeneous and (c and d) heterogeneous pairs containing PCDTBT with C8 and C12 side chains. 
For pairs containing PBDTTPD monomers, there are two types of side chains attached to each monomer: the linear side chain (which is varied in length) on the TBD unit and the branched side chain (which is kept constant as EH) on the BDT unit. As can be seen from Fig. 4(c), as nc increases from C6 to C12, ΔEb increases for homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs. However, the change in ΔEbs is very small for nc larger than C7, indicating that the optimal ΔEb is possibly achieved at C7 or C8. The optimized geometries of monomer/fullerene pairs (see examples of PBDTTPD/PC71BM in Fig. 7(a)–(d)) show that C7 and C8 side chains interact with the full length of fullerene whereas C6 interacts less and C12 exceeds the length of PC71BM. This indicates that C6 and C12 side chains are the least favourable for the optimal monomer/fullerene interactions. The optimized geometries of monomer/monomer pairs (see examples of PBDTTPD/PBDTTPD in Fig. 7(e)–(h)) show that the optimal overlap between monomers and their side chains occurs when nc is either C7 or C8 (when nc is smaller (C6) there is not enough of an overlap and when it is larger (C12), ΔEb does not increase significantly since the overlap levels off). Fig. 4(c) shows that the experimental PCEs of pairs containing PC71BM and PBDTTPD with 2EH/C6 and 2EH/C7 correlate well with the values of ΔEbs (i.e. we have larger PCEs with larger ΔEbs). However, beyond this point (C7), even though ΔEbs may increase slightly, there is no further improvement in device performance, and hence there is no gain in making side chains longer.
 Fig. 7  Optimized geometries of the (a–d) heterogeneous and (e–h) homogeneous pairs containing PBDTTPD with C6, C7, C8, and C12 side chains. 
For PNT4T, PBTff4T, and Pff4TBT monomers, the alkyl side chains are branched into two different lengths (e.g. C6/C8). The results of pairs containing PNT4T, PBTff4T, and Pff4TBT monomers (see Fig. 4(d)) show that as nc increases from C6/C8 to C8/C10 (both chains are increased by 2 carbons), ΔEb increases for all heterogeneous pairs while it may decrease significantly or level off for the homogeneous pairs. ΔEbs are reduced for all pairs when nc increases from C8/C10 to C10/C12. Fig. 8 illustrates the examples of the optimized geometries of heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs with varying nc from C6/C8 to C10/C12 side chains. The optimized geometries of monomer/fullerene pairs show that C6/C8 side chains interact with the least area of fullerenes, C8/C10 side chains interact most fully with fullerenes, while C10/C12 side chains exceed the diameter of fullerenes (see Fig. 8(a)–(f)). These interfacial/structural properties explain why the pairs containing C10/C12 side chains exhibit the lowest ΔEbs, C6/C8 side chains exhibit intermediate ΔEbs, and C8/C10 side chains exhibit the highest ΔEbs. The optimized geometries of the monomer/monomer pairs show that C6/C8 side chains tend to be more distant from the side chains of the other monomer in a given pair (see Fig. 8(g)), while C10/C12 side chains tend to be very close to each other and possibly interfere with the monomers’ overlap (see Fig. 8(i)). However, C8/C10 side chains of monomer/monomer pairs tend to be not too close and not too far from each other (see Fig. 8(h)). Therefore, the most favourable side chains in homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs are C8/C10 due to their optimal ΔEbs and interfacial properties. These results are in very good agreement with Lu et al.'s29 report which showed that devices containing Pff4TBT-2OD/PC71BM (with C8/C10) exhibit a higher PCE than those containing Pff4TBT-2DT/PC71BM (with C10/C12). They also found that unnecessarily long alkyl chains lead to weakening of the stacking of polymers and several other detrimental effects.
 Fig. 8  Optimized geometries of the (a–f) heterogeneous and (g–i) homogeneous pairs containing PNT4T, PBTff4T, and Pff4TBT with C6/C8, C8/C10, and C10/C12 side chains. 
As mentioned in the previous section, it is preferable (in order to avoid phase separation for optimal device performance) for homogeneous pairs with side chains to have lower ΔEbs than for heterogeneous pairs with side chains. Hence, we note that pairs with side chain lengths for which this condition is not satisfied (such as P3T with nc above C8, PCDTBT with nc = C2, Pff4TBT with nc = C6/C8, and PNT4T with nc = C6/C8) will possibly correspond to OSCs with low PCEs.
3.3 Varying the types of side chains
To examine the effect of varying the types of side chains on monomer/fullerene interactions, we analyse the binding energies of the homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs including monomers of the same type with all-linear (nB = 0), linear-and-branched (nB = 1), and all-branched (nB = 2) side chains (see Fig. 9 and Table S2 in the ESI†). Similar to the previous Section 3.2, the results show that ΔEbs are significantly affected by varying the types of side chains. However the trends in ΔEb are somewhat different when type versus length of side chains is varied. The results of Fig. 9 reveal that, for a given monomer, the ΔEb value mainly decreases with the increase in the number of branches (nB). This means that all-linear side chains lead to the highest values of ΔEb, linear-and-branched side chains lead to the intermediate values of ΔEb, and all-branched side chains lead to the lowest values of ΔEb. This trend in ΔEb is consistent for the majority of heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs as is illustrated, for example in pairs containing monomers of P3HT, PBDTTPD, and PTB7.
 Fig. 9  Binding energies of the heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs containing (a) P3HT, (b) PBDTTPD, and (c) PTB7 versus nB = 0 (all-linear), nB = 1 (linear-and-branched), and nB = 2 (all-branched) side chains. 
For pairs including P3HT monomers, three P3HT derivatives are considered by varying the types of side chains from all-linear (nB = 0) in P3HT to linear-and-branched (nB = 1) in P3HT-co-EHT, and to all-branched (nB = 2) in P3EHT. As we noted above, the ΔEb of most pairs decreases with increasing nB (see the results in Fig. 9(a)). For example, as the homogeneous pair changes from P3HT/P3HT to P3EHT/P3EHT, ΔEb decreases from 1.1 to 0.9 eV with increasing nB. The optimized geometries of P3HT/fullerenes illustrate that increasing the number of branched side chains places the monomers further away from fullerenes (see Fig. 10(a)–(c)). Hence, all-branched side chains lead to the least favourable P3EHT/fullerene interactions while all-linear side chains lead to more optimal P3HT/fullerene interactions. This result is in good agreement with the literature which shows that the hexyl side chains are the optimal side chains for P3Ts.8 One notable exception in the results is the pairing of P3HT-co-EHT and PCBM which exhibits somewhat higher ΔEb compared to P3HT/PCBM. This is possibly due to the interaction between this monomer and the side group of the fullerene (see Fig. 10(b)). It can be said that the ΔEbs of pairs that include P3HT and PCBM correlate well with the experimental PCEs as reported by Burkhart et al.31 (see Fig. 9(a)). These results imply that the higher ΔEb corresponds to the higher PCE when the type of side chain is varied for a monomer such as P3HT.
 Fig. 10  (a–c) Optimized geometries of the heterogeneous pairs containing P3HT upon varying the number of branches in side chains from nB = 0 to 2. 
For pairs including PBDTTPD, the relationship between ΔEb and nB is illustrated in Fig. 9(b) for varying the types of side chains (from all-linear to all-branched). As shown in Fig. 11, due to the steric interactions, the optimized geometries of the gas phase ((a)–(c)) and interacting PBDTTPD monomers ((d)–(f)) show that linear side chains tend to attract and branched side chains tend to repel each other. In a pairing such as PC71BM and monomer of PBDTTPD, all-linear side chains (C12/C8) are attracted to the fullerene, and in the half linear half branched side chain monomer the (C8) linear side chain of the acceptor (TPD) motif is attracted to the fullerene while the (EH) branched side chain of the donor (BDT) motif is repulsed by the fullerene, and all-branched side chains (2EH/EH) mostly move away from the fullerene. Hence, in these pairings, the magnitude of the ΔEb is primarily determined by the linear side chains wrapped around the fullerene (the more the linear chains the higher the ΔEb). The moving away of the branched side-chains allows BDT (donor) to move closer to the fullerene (see Fig. 11(h) and (i)). As mentioned in the Introduction, it has been suggested in the literature that high performance OSC materials should be designed with the donor unit of the polymer being more sterically accessible and the acceptor unit being more sterically hindered relative to fullerenes.2 This condition is clearly fulfilled by the linear-and-branched side chains of PBDTTPD, and hence (EH/C8) are the favourable side chains and the resulting monomer/fullerene interaction is the optimal one for higher PCEs. In contrast, all-linear side chains (C12/C8) do not satisfy the condition for high performance OSC materials because C12/C8 linear side chains interfere with the interaction between the fullerene and donor (BDT) motif (see Fig. 11(g)). In this case, the highest ΔEb of pairs that contain PBDTTPD with C12/C8 side chains does not give the highest PCE because the large ΔEb is mainly due to the strong interaction of all-linear side chains with fullerene but the structural arrangement of the monomer relative to fullerene is not optimal. In addition, the presence of C12/C8 side chains increases the ΔEb of homogeneous PBDTTPD/PBDTTPD relative to PBDTTPD/fullerene pairs, hence, making the interactions between PBDTTPD and fullerenes less favourable or comparable in magnitude. These results explain why the all-linear side chains in the donor and acceptor motifs of PBDTTPD resulted in a dramatic drop of PCE to about 3% relative to the PCE of PBDTTPD with EH/C8 side chains (of about 7%).13 Moreover, the low experimental PCE value for pairs involving PBDTTPD with all-branched side chains (2EH/EH) are correlated well with the lowest ΔEbs. Therefore, our results, which are in good agreement with the literature, indicate that the optimal relative arrangement of the monomer and fullerene with a relatively high value of ΔEb is a significant factor to consider when choosing the favourable acceptor–donor polymers in combination with fullerenes in OSCs.
 Fig. 11  Optimized geometries of the (a–c) gas phase PBDTTPDs, and (d–f) homogeneous and (g–i) heterogeneous pairs containing PBDTTPD with C12/C8, EH/C8, and 2EH/EH side chains. 
For pairs containing PTB monomers, the results of varying the types of side chains confirm again that increasing the branched side chains generally decreases the ΔEb of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs (see Fig. 9(c)). Fig. 12(a)–(c) illustrates the optimized geometries of PTB monomers in the gas phase with various types of side chains. For the homogeneous pairs, the optimized geometries show that the all-linear side chains of one PTB1 are attracted toward the all-linear side chains of the other PTB1 in a given pair, whereas the linear side chains of the acceptor motif of one PTB4 are more distant from the branched side chains of the donor motif of the other monomer (see Fig. 12(d)–(f)). This indicates that, for a given PTB/PTB pair, the linear side chains of one monomer are more attracted and the branched side chains of one monomer are more repulsed by the respective side chains of the other monomer. Therefore, as expected, the PTB7/PTB7 with all-branched side chains exhibits the lowest ΔEb among other pairs. For the heterogeneous pairs, the optimized geometries show that no interference was found by any type of side chains that could make monomers less accessible to fullerenes (see again Fig. 12(g)–(i)). This is mainly because the side chains of a PTB monomer tend to move away from each other as seen for gas phase monomers in Fig. 12(a)–(c). This result agrees with reports29 that stated that PTB are exceptional donor–acceptor polymers because of the ester group that makes the side chains more distant from the conjugated backbone, and hence, even with the all-linear or all-branched side chains of PTB, the donor unit remains relatively accessible to fullerene. The optimized geometries show also that the C8/C10 linear side chains of PTB1 exceed the lengths of fullerene (see Fig. 12(g)). The excessive length of the linear side chains in PTB1 leads to unfavourable interaction with lower ΔEbs of PTB1/fullerene relative to the ΔEb of PTB1/PTB1, and thus a lower PCE. In addition, the all-branched side chains of PTB7, which interact with the least lengths of fullerene and hence lead to lowest ΔEb, are also unfavorable for the monomer/fullerene interaction (see Fig. 12(i)). Although the highest PCE was observed in the PTB7/PC71BM pair, the low stability of pairs containing PTB7 agrees with the reports that state that PTB7 suffers from certain limitations and it is sensitive to the choice of fullerenes, meaning that PCEs are very low when PTB7 is combined with PCBM.32,33 In contrast, the optimized geometries of pairs containing PTB4 indicate that linear-and-branched side chains are the optimal ones because the C8 linear side chains of the acceptor motif interact well with the full length of fullerenes (see Fig. 12(h)). The relatively high ΔEb of pairs containing PTB4 with favorable interfacial properties correlates well with the PCE of the PTB4/PCBM pair of about 6.1–7.1% which is considered to be relatively high. Therefore, PTB4 with different types of fullerenes can be a good candidate for improving the performance of OSCs.
 Fig. 12  Optimized geometries of the (a–c) gas phase PTBs, and (d–f) homogeneous and (g–i) heterogeneous pairs containing PTB with C10/C8, EH/C8, and 2EH/EH side chains. 
3.4 Varying the branching positions of branched side chains
In this section, we consider three monomers with branched side chains only. We set the length of their side chains to be C8/C10. The side chains of each monomer are branched at different branching positions (PBs): 1, 2, and 3. It was found recently that devices including these three polymers with PB = 2 exhibited the highest PCEs that range from 9.6 to 10.5%.29 To understand why this particular branching position is favourable for monomer/fullerene interfaces, we calculate the ΔEbs of the heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs containing monomers of PNT4T, PBTff4T, and Pff4TBT upon varying the PB of side chains (see Fig. 13 and Table S3 in the ESI†). The results for most of the heterogeneous pairs (see Fig. 13) show that as PB changes from 1 to 3, the ΔEb increases from 1 to 2, and then decreases or levels off from 2 to 3. For example, when the monomer changes from Pff4TBT-1ON to Pff4TBT-2OD and then to Pff4TBT-3OT, the ΔEb of Pff4TBT/PCBM increases from 2.1 to 2.5 and then decreases to 2.2 eV, respectively. In most cases, the highest ΔEbs were found for pairs including PNT4T-2OD, PBTff4T-2OD, and Pff4TBT-2OD (i.e. with PB = 2). The optimized geometries of monomer/fullerene pairs (see examples in Fig. 14(a)–(f)) show that PB = 2 tends to bring side chains closer to fullerenes relative to side chains with PB = 1 or 3. Another notable feature of monomers with PB = 2 is that side chains that do not interact with fullerenes are aligned more or less along the monomer backbone whereas those with PB = 1 or 3 are structurally oriented in random directions or away from the monomers (see Fig. 14(d)–(f)). These observations indicate that, in most cases, the ΔEb results correlate well with the experimental PCE findings. That is, PB = 2 is the best branching position of the side chains for the branched monomers used in OSCs.29
 Fig. 13  Binding energies of the heterogeneous pairs containing Pff4TBT, PBTff4T, and PNT4T upon varying the branching position of the branched side chains from PB = 1 to 3. 
 Fig. 14  Optimized geometries of the (a–f) heterogeneous pairs containing PNT4T and PBTff4T, and (g–i) homogeneous pairs containing PNT4T with various branching positions of side chains, PB = 1 (1ON), PB = 2 (2OD), and PB = 3 (3OT). 
In contrast to the results of heterogeneous pairs, the branched side chains in homogeneous pairs behave differently as a function of the branching positions (see Table S3 in the ESI†). The results of the homogeneous pairs show that ΔEbs are reduced for monomers with PB = 2 side chains. This reduction can be understood when optimized geometries (see examples of PNT4T/PNT4T in Fig. 14(g)–(i)) are considered. PB = 2 the branching position tends to make the branched side chains of one monomer more distant from those of other monomers and hence increases the interaction between the backbones of monomers (see Fig. 14(h)). A stronger interaction between the backbones is preferable for enhancing the charge transport. The ΔEbs of pairs containing monomers with PB = 1 and 3 are higher due to the larger interactions between the side chains of the monomers (see Fig. 14(g) and (i)). This increases the possibility that these side chains will interfere with the monomers’ backbone interactions and hence decrease the PCEs. Moreover, unlike PB = 1 and 3, PB = 2 the branching position tends to provide lower ΔEbs of homogeneous pairs, in comparison to the ΔEbs of heterogeneous pairs, leading to more favourable monomer/fullerene interactions. Therefore, in addition to the highest ΔEbs and PCEs of monomer-2OD/fullerene pairs due to PB = 2, the second branching position leads to the more favourable monomer/monomer interfaces and hence optimizing the overall device performance.
3.5 Electronic properties of fullerene/monomer dimers with side chains
In previous sections, we showed that the side chains of monomers play an important role in monomer/fullerene interactions. In particular, we obtained different trends of ΔEbs depending on the length, type, and branching position of side chains. What about the trends of electronic properties? It is known that the knowledge of the energy levels of polymers and fullerenes is essential for the device performance of OSCs. However, the side chains are generally shortened or replaced by hydrogen atoms in computational studies due to the negligible effect of side chains on the electronic structures of conjugated materials. In our previous work,7 we determined that Eg (of the order of 2 eV), the lowest ΔεLUMO, and the highest (ΔεHD–LA − 0.3)/Eg(monomer) of low monomers are the optimal electronic properties that can lead to achieving the highest experimental PCE in polymer/fullerene OSCs. In this work, we determine whether similar trends are obtained when the length, type, and branching position of side chains are varied in monomers. That is, in this section, we compare the electronic structures of monomers with short/no side chains (referred to as without side chains) to monomers with different lengths and types of side chains (referred to as with side chains and marked red in Scheme 1). We also calculate the SP B3LYP energy levels using B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 optimized geometries of interacting monomers with both types of fullerenes and with various lengths, types, and branching positions of side chains (see Fig. 15 for the B97-D3 results). In addition, we calculate the electronic offsets of the B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 interaction, and the B3LYP isolated monomers and fullerenes (see Tables S4–S6 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 15  A figure similar to the one in the previous work7 of the ratio ((ΔεHD–LA − 0.3)/Eg(monomer)) using gas phase monomers with side chains (marked red in Scheme 1) and fullerenes (optimized at the B3LYP method) versus the respective monomers’ Egs. 
Fig. S1 in the ESI† shows the energy levels of gas phase monomers with side chains and compares them to those without side chains as obtained in previous work.7 The results show that the side chains slightly increase both the LUMO and HOMO energy levels of short- and medium-sized monomers (such as monomers of P3HT, PTB7, and PBDTTPD) relative to the energy levels of those without side chains. However, for longer monomers (such as monomers of PNT4T, PBTff4T, and Pff4TBT) with side chains, the HOMO levels are decreased slightly while the LUMO levels remain the same compared to the respective levels of monomers without side chains. Hence, as expected, the presence of side chains has a negligible effect on the top energy levels of monomers. In all cases (with and without side chains), as the monomer's backbone length increases from P3HT to PNT4T, the energy gap, Eg, decreases.
The results displayed in Fig. S2 in the ESI† show that the energy levels of each monomer are affected very little by varying the length, type, or branching position of the side chains. In some cases, slight changes are obtained in the HOMO and/or LUMO levels due to the changes in the geometries of interacting monomers. For example, for the various lengths and branching positions of the side chains in Pff4TBT, monomers interacting with larger fullerenes exhibit slightly higher energy levels relative to those interacting with smaller fullerenes. In addition, unlike the binding energy results, the electronic offsets (see Tables S4–S6 in the ESI†) show no significant changes for different side chains. In fact, the electronic offsets for the majority of monomers and fullerenes are almost identical for the various lengths, types, and branching positions of side chains.
Based on the above results, it is expected that the electronic property trends for monomers and dimers with different side chains will be very similar to those obtained in a previous study.7 To confirm this, we plot the ratio of (ΔεH–L − 0.3)/Eg(monomer) of gas phase monomers with side chains (marked red in Scheme 1) and fullerenes versus Eg(monomer) (see Fig. 15). As before, the results show that maximizing this ratio is important for increasing the PCE. This indicates that accurate electronic property trends can be obtained computationally for various monomer/fullerene pairs, regardless of the length and types of side chains.
3.6 Some additional general comments and implications
In this Section, we generalize our results to a broader range of BHJ OSCs. We note that, in addition to OSCs that contain fullerenes as acceptors, recently non-fullerene OSCs have been proposed with relatively high PCEs (for recent reviews see ref. 34–38). Important non-fullerene electron acceptors include molecular systems such as ITIC39–41 and other small acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) molecules.34 The effect of side chains in specific BHJ non-fullerene OSCs remains to be studied. However, we can make a few general observations based mostly on the computed binding energies of the homogeneous pairs presented in this paper. Typically, in both fullerene and non-fullerene OSCs there are three different possible intermixing regions in the active layer: polymer rich and pure (fullerene or non-fullerene) acceptor domains and a narrow interfacial region between these two domains. For non-fullerene OSCs, the homogeneous binding energies can be used to make general comments about the polymer as well as the acceptor domain dependence on side chains since the small molecule acceptors are often similar in structure to monomers. In fact, homogenous pair binding energies can be even used to make some general comments about the side chain effect for the heterogeneous pairings in non-fullerene OSCs since, as stated above, in many cases both the monomers of the polymers and the acceptors have similar planar conjugated structures. In all cases, for the best OSC performances, it is preferable that these planar (or nearly planar) molecular systems interact with each other in the so called π stacking configuration in order to enhance their charge transport properties. Hence, anything (like for example, inappropriate side chains) that interferes with these backbone interactions will lower the PCEs of OSCs.
Table S1 in the ESI† and Fig. 4 show that the binding energies of the homogeneous pairings increase with the length size (eventually levelling off in most cases) when side chains are simple linear chains. This suggests that increasing the length of linear alkyl side chains (up to 6 or 8 carbon atoms) increases the stability of the pure polymer domains (by forming for example microphase separated lamellar structures42), the acceptor domains, and the heterogeneous interfacial regions. This agrees with the reported photovoltaic performance of non-fullerene acceptor OSC systems in which the PCEs increased from 7.27% to 7.79% when the length of linear side chains increased from ITIC-SC6 to ITIC-SC8 when paired with PBDB-ST donors, respectively.43 In contrast, Table S1 (ESI†) and Fig. 4 show that when the lengths of the branched side chains are increased beyond a certain point, the binding energies decrease. That is, our results show that when polymers with branched side chains are present, shorter length chains are preferable to too long lengths of branched side chains since these too long chains interfere with the greater overlap between donor and/or acceptor backbones. This is also confirmed, for example, by the work of Dou et al.44 who noted that shorter π–π stacking distances and thus a higher PCE of 11.13% are obtained when ITIC is combined with PTBFEH-BDD with short length branched side chains relative to PTBFSEH-BDD with longer branched side chains. Therefore, our results indicate that “longer” linear alkyl side chains and “shorter” branched chains should be used to increase the stability of the domains involving polymers and small molecule acceptors.
Furthermore, it is important to note that, as stated in Section 1, the interfacial regions (between donor and acceptor domains) are especially critical for the charge transport processes (such as exciton dissociation, charge separation and recombination). For example, recent work45 illustrates that the interaction parameter which determines the miscibility between donors and acceptors in both fullerene and non-fullerene OSCs is essential for controlling the blend morphology of their active layer. Their work45 shows that the high fill factor is achieved when there is a strong phase separation in the amorphous (mixed domain) layer. However, in addition to this phase separation requirement, the domains should remain sufficiently small for good exciton separation and charge transport. It is important to note that these morphological changes (domain size, aggregation, and miscibility) can be optimized with the use of appropriate arrangements of side chains. As noted above, a “wrong” choice of side chains can lead to greater interference between the backbones of polymers and acceptors, and unfavorably affect the interactions between their respective pure domains, thus leading to OSCs with lower PCEs. In other words, side chains which favor the formation of large (highly stable) pure domains in preference to domain mixing will lead to larger aggregation and poorer miscibility in OSCs involving both fullerenes and non-fullerenes acceptors. It is in this respect that our work involving binding energies can contribute to the identification of good (from a point of view of a domain formation) donor/acceptor combinations with the optimal side chains that would prevent large aggregate formation of either polymers or acceptors. In particular, we noted in number of places (see Sections 3.1–3.4) that not only the absolute magnitudes of the binding energies are important but the relative binding energies (with the relevant structural features) of the homogeneous and heterogeneous dimers should be also considered when discussing the relative importance of interactions between donors and acceptors. It is our conclusion that in order to prevent these large aggregates (corresponding to very stable pure domains) of either donors (polymers) or acceptors (fullerenes and non-fullerenes), the binding energy of the heterogeneous dimers should be either the same or somewhat larger than the binding energies of either of the homogeneous pairs for optimal device performance. We believe that the analysis involving relative binding energies is highly relevant to the discussion (and future research) of miscibility (and blend morphology) for both fullerene and non-fullerene OSCs.
In summary, the effect of side chains on the performance of BHJ OSCs can be investigated with the computations of the binding energies corresponding to the various pair interactions. Our main conclusion is that the stability of the homogeneous pair interactions between donors or acceptors with optimal side chains must be tempered with the strong (or equivalent) binding energy of the heterogeneous pairs (between acceptors and donors) in order to promote effective charge transport.
4 Conclusions
In this work, we have investigated the role of the length, type, and branching positions of side chains on the binding energies of various homogeneous and heterogeneous pairings of monomers and fullerenes using dispersion corrected B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 methods. We have found that the magnitudes of ΔEbs correlate well with the monomer's side chain lengths and the corresponding experimental PCEs. In addition, we have also found that the type of side chain has an effect on the structural arrangements of the combinations as well as on the magnitudes of their ΔEbs. We have determined the following ΔEb trends that, in most cases, correlate well with the trends in experimental PCEs:
1. For monomers of P3T, PCDTBT, PBDTTPD, PBTff4T, Pff4TBT, and PNT4T with varying lengths of side chains in a given pair, up to a certain length of side-chains, ΔEbs increase as lengths increase, beyond this the ΔEbs level off or decrease.
2. For monomers of P3HT, PBDTTPD, and PTB7 with varying types of side chains in a given pair, ΔEbs decrease upon increasing the number of branched side-chains.
3. For monomers of PBTff4T, Pff4TBT, and PNT4T with various branching positions of branched side chains in a given heterogeneous pair, in most cases, ΔEb peaks at the branching position PB = 2.
4. For all monomers pairs with side chains studied in this work, the ΔEbs of homogeneous pairs must be less than those of heterogeneous pairs to obtain optimal monomer/fullerene contacts.
In addition to the ΔEb trends, we have found that the structural properties of monomer/fullerene and monomer/monomer interactions are important for determining the optimal side chain arrangement for improved PCEs of OSCs with fullerenes. The excessive lengths of side chains that exceed the dimension of the fullerenes are particularly not favourable for the monomer/fullerene interactions. In general, alkyl side chains that interact with the full length of fullerenes (without interfering between the interaction of the backbones of monomers and fullerenes) lead to the optimal ΔEbs, and PCEs. Our results also agree with the experimental studies that favour the linear-and-branched side chains in acceptor–donor polymers. Finally, no significant changes were found in the electronic properties of monomer/fullerene combinations when monomer side chains were varied. This study provides important insight for selecting appropriate polymer side chains to enhance the PCEs of OSCs with fullerenes as acceptors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the following for making this research possible: WestGrid (http://www.westgrid.ca), SHARCNET (http://www.sharcnet.ca), ACENET (http://www.ace-net.ca), and Compute Canada/Calcul Canada (http://www.computecanada.ca) for providing the computational facilities. ACENET is the regional high performance computing consortium for universities in Atlantic Canada, and it is funded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency (ACOA), and the provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick. SHARCNET (http://www.sharcnet.ca) is a consortium of 18 colleges, universities and research institutes operating a network of high-performance computer clusters across south western, central and northern Ontario. We would also like to thank King Abdulaziz University in Saudi Arabia and the Saudi Cultural Bureau in Canada for the full scholarship given to S. A. A.
Notes and references
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 78–90 RSC .
C. Sutton, C. Risko and J. L. Bredas, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Ryno, M. K. Ravva, X. K. Chen, H. Y. Li and J. L. Bredas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601370 CrossRef .
M. K. Ravva, T. Wang and J. L. Bredas, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8181–8189 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Xiao, L. M. Ding and J. Z. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 340–342 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramki, N. Venkatesh, G. Sathiyan, R. Thangamuthu and P. Sakthivel, Org. Electron., 2019, 73, 182–204 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ayoub and J. B. Lagowski, Mater. Des., 2018, 156, 558–569 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zhang and Y. F. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 192–209 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Wessendorf, A. Perez-Rodriguez, J. Hanisch, A. P. Arndt, I. Ata, G. L. Schulz, A. Quintilla, P. Bauerle, U. Lemmer, P. Wochner, E. Ahlswede and E. Barrena, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2571–2580 RSC .
L. Ye, X. C. Jiao, S. Q. Zhang, H. F. Yao, Y. P. Qin, H. Ade and J. H. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601138 CrossRef .
L. Ye, W. B. Li, X. Guo, M. J. Zhang and H. Ade, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 6568–6577 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, H. J. Bin, Z. X. Peng, B. B. Qiu, C. K. Sun, A. Liebman-Pelaez, Z. G. Zhang, C. H. Zhu, H. Ade, Z. J. Zhang and Y. F. Li, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6028–6036 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dyer-Smith, I. A. Howard, C. Cabanetos, A. El Labban, P. M. Beaujuge and F. Laquai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401778 CrossRef .
V. Savikhin, M. Babics, M. Neophytou, S. J. Liu, S. D. Oosterhout, H. P. Yan, X. D. Gu, P. M. Beaujuge and M. F. Toney, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7872–7884 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, C. W. Lin, C. T. Chen, C. T. Chen, J. Golder, Y. B. Lan and J. K. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 3689–3701 RSC .
R. Heuvel, F. J. M. Colberts, J. Y. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20904–20915 RSC .
I. Constantinou, T. H. Lai, E. D. Klump, S. Goswami, K. S. Schanze and F. So, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26999–27005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Gao, M. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. T. Liu, Y. L. Yang and L. C. Zhao, Polymers, 2017, 9, 39 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lakhotiya, N. Belsare, S. Arbuj, B. Kale and A. Rana, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 7457–7463 RSC .
Y. X. Xu, L. Y. Sun, J. F. Wu, W. Y. Ye, Y. S. Chen, S. M. Zhang, C. Y. Miao and H. Huang, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 168, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Chochos, M. Spanos, A. Katsouras, E. Tatsi, S. Drakopoulou, V. G. Gregoriou and A. Avgeropoulos, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 91, 51–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Yao, W. C. Zhao, Z. Zheng, Y. Cui, J. Q. Zhang, Z. X. Wei and J. H. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1708–1713 RSC .
S. Q. Zhang, L. Ye, W. C. Zhao, B. Yang, Q. Wang and J. H. Hou, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1787–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648–5652 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Lee, W. T. Yang and R. G. Parr, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 785–789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, X. Li, M. Caricato, A. Marenich, J. Bloino, B. G. Janesko and R. Gomperts, et al., Gaussian 09, Revision A.02, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT,  2016 Search PubMed.
S. A. Ayoub and J. B. Lagowski, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2018, 1139, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Lu, T. Y. Zheng, Q. H. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. L. Zhao and L. P. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Etxebarria, J. Ajuria and R. Pacios, Org. Electron., 2015, 19, 34–60 CrossRef CAS .
B. Burkhart, P. P. Khlyabich and B. C. Thompson, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 3740–3748 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nagarjuna, A. Bagui, A. Garg, V. Gupta and S. P. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26615–26621 CrossRef CAS .
J. Farinhas, R. Oliveira, Q. Ferreira, J. Morgado and A. Charas, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2017, 4501758 Search PubMed .
A. Wadsworth, M. Moser, A. Marks, M. S. Little, N. Gasparini, C. J. Brabec, D. Baran and I. McCulloch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1596–1625 RSC .
G. Y. Zhang, J. B. Zhao, P. C. Y. Chow, K. Jiang, J. Q. Zhang, Z. L. Zhu, J. Zhang, F. Huang and H. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3447–3507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. H. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. W. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Zhang, J. Yuan, Q. Y. Wei and Y. P. Zou, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 414 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Cui, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Gurney, W. Li, Y. Yan, D. Liu, A. J. Pearson and T. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 37, 148–156 CrossRef .
H. Choi, J. Lee, C. M. Oh, S. Jang, H. Kim, M. S. Jeong, S. H. Park and I. W. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8805–8810 RSC .
Q. Q. Pan, S. B. Li, Y. C. Duan, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, Y. Geng, L. Zhao and Z. M. Su, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 31227–31235 RSC .
M. J. Eslamibidgoli and J. B. Lagowski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 10597–10606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Zhang, S. Y. Feng, Y. H. Liu, R. Hou, Z. Zhang, X. J. Xu, Y. Z. Wu and Z. S. Bo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33906–33912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Dou, X. C. Wang, Z. R. Du, H. X. Jiang, F. Li, M. L. Sun and R. Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 958–964 RSC .
L. Ye, H. W. Hu, M. Ghasemi, T. H. Wang, B. A. Collins, J. H. Kim, K. Jiang, J. H. Carpenter, H. Li, Z. K. Li, T. McAfee, J. B. Zhao, X. K. Chen, J. L. Y. Lai, T. X. Ma, J. L. Bredas, H. Yan and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 253–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 binding energies for homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs, and B3LYP electronic structure data for fullerenes and monomers. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp04511bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  OSC polymers and their PCEs as reported in the literature, wherein the alkyl side chains are varied by the (1) lengths, (2) types, and (3) branching positions.	 

 	Fig. 1  Illustrations of the preferred configurations of (a) P3HT/PC71BM and (b) P3HT/PCBM. (a) and (b) Illustrate that in preferred configurations the side chains of monomers wrap around fullerenes, whereas (c) illustrates that in the least stable configuration the side chains are directed away from fullerenes.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Total B97-D3 binding energies of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs. The solid and dashed lines are included for a guide to the eyes purpose only.	 

 	Fig. 3  B97-D3 binding energies of monomer/PCBM and monomer/PC71BM pairs versus the isolated monomers’ chain lengths.	 

 	Fig. 4  Binding energies of the homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs versus the length of side chains in (a) P3T, (b) PCDTBT, (c) the TPD motif of PBDTTPD, and (d) Pff4TBT, PBTff4T, and PNT4T. Pairs corresponding to OSCs with the highest experimental PCEs are marked in red.	 

 	Fig. 5  Optimized geometries of the heterogeneous pairs containing P3T with (a) C4, (b) C5, (c) C6, (d) C8, (e) C10, (f) C12, and (g) C14 side chains, and (h) the homogeneous P3T-C14/P3T-C14 pair.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optimized geometries of the (a and b) homogeneous and (c and d) heterogeneous pairs containing PCDTBT with C8 and C12 side chains.	 

 	Fig. 7  Optimized geometries of the (a–d) heterogeneous and (e–h) homogeneous pairs containing PBDTTPD with C6, C7, C8, and C12 side chains.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optimized geometries of the (a–f) heterogeneous and (g–i) homogeneous pairs containing PNT4T, PBTff4T, and Pff4TBT with C6/C8, C8/C10, and C10/C12 side chains.	 

 	Fig. 9  Binding energies of the heterogeneous and homogeneous pairs containing (a) P3HT, (b) PBDTTPD, and (c) PTB7 versus nB = 0 (all-linear), nB = 1 (linear-and-branched), and nB = 2 (all-branched) side chains.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–c) Optimized geometries of the heterogeneous pairs containing P3HT upon varying the number of branches in side chains from nB = 0 to 2.	 

 	Fig. 11  Optimized geometries of the (a–c) gas phase PBDTTPDs, and (d–f) homogeneous and (g–i) heterogeneous pairs containing PBDTTPD with C12/C8, EH/C8, and 2EH/EH side chains.	 

 	Fig. 12  Optimized geometries of the (a–c) gas phase PTBs, and (d–f) homogeneous and (g–i) heterogeneous pairs containing PTB with C10/C8, EH/C8, and 2EH/EH side chains.	 

 	Fig. 13  Binding energies of the heterogeneous pairs containing Pff4TBT, PBTff4T, and PNT4T upon varying the branching position of the branched side chains from PB = 1 to 3.	 

 	Fig. 14  Optimized geometries of the (a–f) heterogeneous pairs containing PNT4T and PBTff4T, and (g–i) homogeneous pairs containing PNT4T with various branching positions of side chains, PB = 1 (1ON), PB = 2 (2OD), and PB = 3 (3OT).	 

 	Fig. 15  A figure similar to the one in the previous work7 of the ratio ((ΔεHD–LA − 0.3)/Eg(monomer)) using gas phase monomers with side chains (marked red in Scheme 1) and fullerenes (optimized at the B3LYP method) versus the respective monomers’ Egs.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: B97-D3 and B3LYP-D3 binding energies for homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs, and B3LYP electronic structure data for fullerenes and monomers. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cp04511b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
