Tuning the flexibility and thermal storage capacity of solid–solid phase change materials towards wearable applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA13925G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA13925G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20133-20140Tuning the flexibility and thermal storage capacity of solid–solid phase change materials towards wearable applications†

        
          
            Jinming 
            Shi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Waseem 
            Aftab
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zibin 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kunjie 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Maqbool
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haoyang 
            Jiang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Xiong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mulin 
            Qin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Song 
            Gao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ruqiang 
            Zou
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing Key Laboratory for Theory and Technology of Advanced Battery Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: rzou@pku.edu.cn
bInstitute of Clean Energy, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
Received 
      20th December 2019
    , Accepted 8th September 2020First published on 8th September 2020AbstractPolyurethane (PU) based phase change materials (PCMs) undergo the solid–solid phase transition and offer state-of-the-art thermal energy storage (TES). Nevertheless, the exploration of these PCMs in real-life applicable smart devices is generally hindered by the technical bottleneck of structural rigidity, low thermal storage capacity and lack of functionalities. Herein, for the first time, we systematically tuned the thermal storage capacity and flexibility of PU-based PCMs (PU-PCMs) by controlling the molecular weight of polyethylene glycol and figured out the optimum selection through the tradeoff between flexibility and thermal storage capacity. We further incorporated functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in flexible PU-PCMs to improve the thermal conductivity and solar-driven thermal conversion and storage capability. The results demonstrate that the thermal conductivity of the PU–CNT composite is improved by 2.3 times with only 5% weight content of CNTs, and the solar-thermal energy storage efficiency reaches 85.89% at 125 mW cm−2 of irradiation power. Benefitting from the unique mechanical and thermal properties, we further explored our developed composite PCM for solar-driven thermal management of human body parts.
1 Introduction
Phase change materials (PCMs) have been extensively studied for isothermal latent heat storage technologies owing to their high-energy storage capacity and operational simplicity.1–5 Organic PCMs have advantages of large-scale availability in a broad temperature range, low supercooling degree, and noncorrosive nature.6,7 However, liquid leakage of these PCMs during the solid–liquid phase transition hinders their widespread applications. In order to solve the leakage problem, the encapsulation of PCMs into microcapsule shell materials,8–10 porous supporting scaffolds,11–14 and polymeric matrices15–18 have been identified as universal strategies. Besides, the low heat transfer rate and lack of stimulus driven capability of PCMs are also other long-standing problems for energy conversion and storage. Considerable efforts have been made to improve the energy storage/release rate and endow PCMs with stimulus driven abilities.19–22 Introducing highly conductive additives such as carbon or metallic nanoparticles, which can form effective heat transfer channels within composites is the most convenient and commonly used approach.23–26 Among various potential nanomaterials, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are the most effective filler owing to their high thermal conductivity, large surface area, and excellent light absorbance nature. The pristine CNTs possess hydrophobic surfaces, which cause poor dispersity in most organic solvents. In order to improve dispersity, oxygen-containing functional groups can be introduced onto the surface of CNTs by acidic treatment, which benefits fabricating the thermally conductive and mechanically stable PCM/CNT composites.26
Nevertheless, the structural rigidity of conventional PCMs is still a major bottleneck that leads to poor surface contact with integrated devices and ultimately limits real scale applications. In this regard, some efforts have been made to develop flexible PCMs, which can be summarized into three types (Fig. 1a–c). Firstly, PCMs can be infiltrated into carbon-based flexible scaffolds, such as carbon nanotube sponge,27 graphene aerogel fibers,28 and graphene oxide paper.29 The resultant composites exhibit superior shape stability as well as enhanced thermal conductivity while suffering from poor mechanical properties. Secondly, the PCMs are combined with polymeric elastomers that endow the composites with elastic deformation when the temperature is above the melting point of confined PCMs.30–32 However, the resultant composites regain rigidity once the temperature drops below the melting point. Thirdly, the PCMs are infiltrated into the interior of hollow fiber such as flexible polypropylene fiber.33,34 This approach is limited due to incomplete infiltration of PCMs, which is mainly caused by a surface energy barrier. As a result, the composites possess lower energy storage capacity. Considering these scenarios, the development of flexible PCMs on a large scale possessing reasonable thermal properties is highly demanded for real-life applications.
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of different kinds of flexible PCMs. (a) PCM/carbon-based porous materials; (b) PCM/multi-block copolymer elastomer; (c) PCM/polymer hollow fiber; (d) flexible PU based solid–solid PCM and its transformation mechanism between crystalline and amorphous states. 
The exploration of polymeric PCMs could be an imperative option whose flexibility comes from the PCM itself rather than the supporting materials. In this respect, polyurethane (PU) is a polymer composed of alternating sequences of hard and soft segments joined by urethane links, which usually present excellent flexibility, elasticity, and thermomechanical stability.35 Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is a typical solid–liquid PCM consisting of repeating ethyl-ether segments with active hydroxyl groups at both ends, and is one of the most versatile precursors of solid–solid PU-based PCMs (PU-PCMs).36 However, the currently reported solid–solid PU-PCMs generally possess poor flexibility due to the high crystallization degree and rigidity of the PEG segment in the PU molecular structure. Herein, we developed ultra-flexible PU-PCMs by tuning the molecular weight of the PEG segment and degree of crosslinking in the PU condensate (Fig. 1d). Notably, in the PU-PCM structure, the functional groups in molecular chains of PU cross-link with each other through abundant hydrogen bonding. In their crystalline states, the polymer chains remain in highly ordered arrangements with clear crystal boundaries. During the heating process, the crystal boundaries disappear and polymer chains become disordered gradually; thus the PU-PCMs eventually transform into their amorphous states. We further investigated the tradeoff between flexibility and thermal storage capacity in PU-PCMs and figured out the optimum molecular weight. Furthermore, functionalized CNTs were introduced into the flexible PU-PCMs. The resultant CNT incorporated PU (PU–CNT) composites can be shaped as desired and rehabilitate in a wide temperature range with enhanced thermal conductivity and efficient solar-thermal energy storage capacity. These unique mechanical and thermal properties endow our developed composite PCM with the function of solar-driven thermal management of human body parts.
2 Results and discussion
2.1 Structural characterization
PU was synthesized by the polymerization reaction of polyethylene glycol (PEG-n, n = 1000, 1500, 2000, 3000, 4000, 6000, 8000, and 10000, n represents the molecular weight of PEG) and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI),37 and the PU–CNT composite was fabricated by in situ polymerization of PEG and HDI in the presence of functionalized CNTs. The chemical structures and crystalline properties of PU and their composites were confirmed by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. In the FTIR spectra of PU (Fig. S1a, ESI†), the appearance of new bands at 3338 cm−1, 1535 cm−1 and 1718 cm−1 due to the stretching and bending vibration of –N–H and stretching vibration of –CO respectively confirm the formation of urethane links (–NHCOO).27 Besides, the disappearance of the –NCO peak at 2253 cm−1 ensures the complete reaction of the –NCO group with hydroxyl and preformed urethane links during synthesis and crosslinking of PU molecular chains respectively. This crosslinking is mainly responsible for making PU flexible. Without crosslinking at higher temperatures, the –NCO peak exists in the FTIR spectrum and results in unflexible PU (PU-UN) with reduced intensity. To improve the dispersion of CNTs when preparing PU–CNT composites and enhance the interface interaction between CNTs (hydrophobic) and PEG (hydrophilic), the pristine CNTs (CNT-P) were acidified to introduce oxygen-containing functional groups as illustrated in Scheme S1 (ESI).† The attachment of these functional groups was confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy (Fig. S1b, ESI†). In the FTIR spectra of acidified CNTs (CNT-A), the existence of peaks at 1718 cm−1 and 1110 cm−1 should be attributed to the stretching vibration of –CO and –C–OH bonds in the carboxyl group respectively, indicating the successful functionalization of CNT-P.38,39 After acidification, the degree of entanglement and agglomeration of CNTs decreased while the surface became roughened as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI).† Notably, no additional peaks were observed for the PU–CNT composite compared with the PU, which indicates that newly formed urethane linkages between the acidified CNTs and isocyanate possess the same characteristic peak as the PU molecular structure (Fig. S1c, ESI†).
The crystalline properties were characterized by XRD analysis (Fig. S1d, ESI†). For the PU sample, two strong diffraction peaks correspond to the (112) and (120) crystal planes, which are almost similar to PEG diffraction peaks with a little lower intensity caused by the confinement of the PEG segment within the PU skeleton. The XRD pattern of the PU–CNT composite is in accordance with individual PU and CNT patterns.40 Furthermore, the molecular weight dependent crystalline morphologies were studied by polarized optical microscopy (POM) analysis (Fig. S4, ESI†). Pristine PEG exhibits large a spherulite structure consisting of numerous long and fine lamellas, indicating the good crystallization abilities resulting from the linear and symmetrical polyether chain without pendant groups (Fig. S4a, ESI†).41,42 Similar spherulite structures can also be observed in corresponding PU samples with reduced spherulite size (Fig. S4b–f, ESI†). The uniform distribution and reduction of the PU spherulite size are attributed to the crosslinking of the PEG segment within the PU structure, which restricts the free movement of the PEG segment and ultimately reduces the degree of crystallization.43,44 This observation is consistent with XRD results and ensures the synthesis of form-stable and flexible PU. Moreover, PU synthesized by using the maximum molecular weight PEG possesses the largest spherulite size and the highest degree of crystallization among all the PU samples, which results from the decreased degree of polymerization and crosslinking. The influence of PEG molecular weight on the crystalline properties of PU could be further confirmed by the regular difference of the phase change and mechanical properties.
2.2 Thermal storage capacity and flexibility trade off
Thermal storage capacity and flexibility of PCMs are two important parameters that determine the effectiveness of subjected PCM in real-life applications. In the case of PU-based PCMs, both these properties are dominated by the PEG molecular weight while mutually dependent on each other. Herein, we first systematically explored the trade-off between thermal storage capacity and mechanical properties in the PU-PCM system by varying PEG molecular weights and then determined the optimum PU-PCM that possessed favorable flexibility and phase change enthalpy. The thermal energy storage performance including phase transition temperatures and enthalpies was determined by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis. The DSC results of PUn (n represents the molecular weight of the PEG precursor) samples with different PEG molecular weights are presented in Fig. 2a and b and the corresponding data are shown in Table S2 (ESI).† As expected, the phase change enthalpies and temperatures of PU improve by increasing PEG molecular weights, which could be attributed to two aspects: the original phase change properties of PEG and the confinement degree of the PEG segment within the PU skeleton. Pristine PEG molecular chains consist of repeating ethyl-ether segments with active hydroxyl groups at both ends, therefore intermolecular bonds can easily be formed and broken during the reversible phase transition. PEG with longer molecular chains have higher intermolecular interaction, which results in increased phase change enthalpy. The increment continues until reaching the threshold level (PEG-6000) above which the larger intermolecular interactions are compromised by the ease of crystallization. After polymerization with isocyanate, the free movement of the PEG segment is sterically confined within the urethane junctions, ultimately leading to the reduction of the reversible crystallization degree.45 Low molecular weight PEG-based PU possesses higher content of the isocyanate segment in the final PU structure, which significantly reduces the crystallization degree and ultimately suppresses the phase change parameters. Conclusively, the higher molecular weight PEG-based PU system exhibits superior phase change properties and vice versa.
 Fig. 2  The influence of PEG molecular weight on the thermal and mechanical properties of PU. (a) DSC curves and (b) plot showing the elevation of phase change parameters of PU samples with different PEG molecular weights; (c) tensile stress–strain curves and (d) plot showing the reduction of strain at yield of PU samples with different PEG molecular weights. The inset in (d) is the photograph of the contrast between original samples and PU samples after the tensile test. 
On the other hand, the mechanical properties such as flexibility and toughness of the PU-PCM system also largely depend on the molecular weight of segmented PEG. Fig. 2c presents the tensile stress–strain curves up to yield for PU samples synthesized from different PEG molecular weights. It is found that PU1000 with the lowest elasticity modulus presents excellent flexibility, which shows no yield and breaks until strain up to 200% (the maximum displacement of the testing machine) as shown in Fig. S6 (ESI).† With the increase of PEG molecular weight, the elasticity modulus improves and strain at yield diminishes gradually (Fig. 2d). The PU8000 sample reveals only 3.2% strain at the imposed stress of 11.4 MPa and breaks immediately, indicating the strongest rigidity. The PU10000 sample even cannot be cut into the standard specimen shape due to its strong brittleness and poor flexibility. As shown in the inset of Fig. 3d, the samples after tensile testing remain flexible by increasing the PEG molecular weight from 1000 to 3000 and then exhibit fracture during stretching when the molecular weight of PEG ≥ 4000. The reason behind this trend may be attributed to the crosslinking of segmented PU. In low molecular weight PEG-based PU, there are more active groups that enhance the crosslinking degree and result in a high flexibility.46 The obtained results are in full agreement with the conclusion from POM images. Considering the tradeoff between thermal and mechanical properties, it can be concluded that PU3000 is the optimum choice for flexible PCM candidates. The solid–solid phase transition properties and flexibility of PU3000 samples are presented in Fig. S8 (ESI).†
 Fig. 3  The thermal and mechanical properties of PU3000 and PU–CNT composites. (a) DSC curves; (b) thermal conductivity values; (c) tensile stress–strain curves and (d) plot showing the reduction of strain at yield with the increasing CNT wt content. The inset in (d) is the photograph of the contrast between original samples and composite samples after the tensile test. (e) Fatigue reliability test for the PU–CNT3 sample with cyclic tensile stretch. 
2.3 Thermal and mechanical properties of PU–CNT composites
To boost the thermal conductivity of pure PU and endow it with the external stimulus-driven charging capability, we incorporated CNTs within the PU matrix. The DSC curves of PU–CNTx (x represents the weight percent of CNTs) composites with different CNT contents are presented in Fig. 3a and the corresponding data are presented in Table S3 (ESI).† The results reveal that the degree of super-cooling is reduced in PU–CNT composites compared with pure PU, which could be attributed to the faster thermal transport and the lower crystallizing energy barrier with CNTs serving as the heat transfer medium and nucleating agent. Moreover, it can be observed that the weight normalized enthalpy of the composite is higher than that of pure PU. The possible reason behind this unusual trend is the reaction between the functional groups on CNT surfaces and isocyanate during in situ polymerization, which leads to some consumption of isocyanate groups and ultimately reduces the crosslinking degree. Besides, there are intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonds or C–H⋯π interaction between the PU molecular chain and functionalized CNTs, which could also be responsible for enthalpy enhancement.47,48 To ensure fast thermal transport and thermal stability, we performed thermal conductivity measurements and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). As expected, the thermal conductivity of the PU–CNT composite is improved up to 2.3 times as high as that of pure PU (Fig. 3b), which is advantageous to reduce the thermal storage and release time. The prepared composites show no degradation within the working temperature range (Fig. S9, ESI†), declaring the thermal stability for practical utilization.
The tensile stress–strain curves up to yield of PU–CNT composites are presented in Fig. 3c. Noteworthily, the yield strain reduces and the elasticity modulus is enhanced by increasing the CNT content in the composite structure. As the CNT content increases from 0 to 4 wt%, the yield strain decreases from 13.5% to 8.7%, which is ascribed to the reduced degree of polymerization and crosslinking with the addition of acidified CNTs. Further increasing the content of CNTs (5 wt%) results in the brittle nature of the composite structure as shown in Fig. 3c and the inset of Fig. 3d. In addition to the reduced crosslinking, high stiffness and low elongation of CNTs are also responsible for reducing the elasticity of PU–CNT composites compared with pure PU.49 As shown in the SEM image (Fig. S10, ESI†), the CNTs were dispersed and assembled in the PU matrix and influenced the layered morphology of polymeric PU in PU–CNT composites, which may cause the variation of mechanical properties. The orientation of PU molecular chains could change during stretching but the dimensions of CNTs remain unchanged in PU–CNT composites. This is the reason that the elasticity of PU–CNT composites decreases and stiffness increases with the increase of the CNT content in the composite structure. Considering the trade-off between elasticity and stiffness, the 3 wt% loading of CNTs (PU–CNT3) is the optimum composition. The dynamic stability of the prepared PU–CNT3 composite is validated by cyclic tensile testing (Fig. 3e). The positive strain represents stretching while the negative strain represents compression during tensile testing. The stabilized performance over 25 stretching cycles ensures the long-term stability of the prepared composite. The observed performance is comparable with pure PU (Fig. S11, ESI†). The mechanical stability was further verified by the 5000 tensile cycle durability test (Fig. S12, ESI†). After the long-term cycles, the macroscopic appearance of the sample remains nearly unchanged compared to the original sample. However, there is a difference between the un-cycled sample and the 5000-cycle sample after the long-stretching test (up to 200% strain): after the stretching, the un-cycled sample exhibited a uniform elongation, while the 5000-cycle sample displayed a fractured and segmented structure. The reason may lie in the generated micro-cracks that appeared in weaknesses or defects of polymers during the long-term tensile stress. Under the large tensile stress, the sample would earlier tend to break in the position of the micro-cracks. As a result, the strain at yield of the PU–CNT composite exhibited a certain degree of attenuation after 5000 tensile cycles. Nevertheless, the 5000-cycle sample could still withstand about 6% tensile strain, and even after the long-term stretching it just undergoes the yield and still remains un-fractured, presenting acceptable mechanical durability. In short, the PU–CNT composites can achieve high strain (>10%) as well as high tensile strength (>14 MPa), which results in excellent flexibility and toughness. The reported values are the highest among all flexible PCMs to the best of our knowledge (Table S4†).28,32,50
Further, the thermo-mechanical properties of prepared PCM were investigated by the dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA). The storage moduli (E′) as the function of temperature for pure PU and PU–CNT composites are presented in Fig. 4b. It is noted that the values of E′ increased with the increment of CNT content until ∼70 °C, which is consistent with the results obtained by the tensile testing. With the temperature increasing, the values of E′ reduced gradually. At around 40 °C, the E′ curve appears as a slope turning point resulting from the phase transition of PEG segments in the PU polymer. The value of E′ continues to decline with increasing temperature until it reaches a minimum value at around 70 °C, where the free motion of molecular chains starts that leads to the maximum flexibility and lowest stiffness (Fig. 4a). For real-life applications, the large-scale preparation of the flexible PU–CNT composite film without compromising the mechanical and thermal properties is feasible as shown in Fig. S13 (ESI).† We further molded our developed composite into different shapes and recovered as desired. Fig. 4c–e present photographs of the flexible and strong film under curling, folding and knotting conditions at room temperature. Moreover, Fig. 4f shows that the deformation of shape can also be maintained above the melting temperature and rehabilitate at both above or below the crystallization point. The superior flexibility over a wide range of temperatures and feasibility of large-scale preparation of PCM films makes them well suited for wearable smart textiles, thermal protection for flexible electronic devices, etc.51
 Fig. 4  The dynamic thermal–mechanical properties of PU–CNT composites. (a) Schematic illustration of the reversible phase transition in the flexible PU–CNT composite films; (b) DMA curves of PU3000 and PU–CNT composites. Optical images of the flexible PU–CNT composite films under (c) curling, (d) folding, and (e) knotting conditions, respectively. (f) The reversible deformation and rehabilitation above the melting temperature of the flexible PU–CNT composite films. 
2.4 Photo-thermal energy conversion and thermal management applications
The incorporated CNTs endow PU–CNT composites with efficient photo-thermal energy harvesting and storage capability.52 In the PU–CNT composite system, the CNTs can serve as an effective photon captor and molecular heater and thus transfer light energy to thermal energy, which can be stored/released by the surrounding PCMs during phase transition. In order to measure energy harvesting and storage performance, the rectangular-shaped sample was placed in a plastic box and irradiated under simulated solar radiation with controlled intensities (Fig. S14, ESI†). The temperature profile of the solar irradiated sample was recorded by using a Pt sensor and data collection system (Fig. 5a). During the solar irradiation, the temperature of PU–CNT composites rapidly increases in the initial stage until reaching the inflection point, indicating the phase transition of PU. As desired, by increasing the irradiation light intensity from 75 to 125 mW cm−2, the solar heating rate increases and the phase transition period is shortened. The solar-thermal energy storage efficiencies were estimated by using the energy balance equation as shown in Fig. S16 and Table S5 (ESI).† The calculated efficiency reaches 85.89% at 125 mW cm−2 of irradiation power (Fig. 5b), indicating that the resulting PU–CNT composite exhibits superior photo-thermal energy storage and release performance.
 Fig. 5  Photo-thermal energy storage performance by simulated sunlight absorption. (a) The time–temperature evolution curves of the PU–CNT5 composite under illumination by simulated sunlight at intensities of 75–125 mW cm−2. (b) The calculated photo-thermal energy storage efficiency of the PU–CNT5 composite as a function of irradiation light power. (c) The schematic illustration of flexible PU–CNT composite films charged by solar irradiation for human body thermal management application. (d) The time–temperature evolution curves of PU–CNT composite films and cotton fabric pasted on human arm skin after charging to 50 °C. The inset in (d) is the IR image of the charged PCM film on the human arm. 
Benefiting from the superior flexibility, photo-thermal storage capability, and large-scale preparation feasibility, the PU–CNT composite films exhibit huge potential for thermal management (therapy) of human body parts. As demonstrated in Fig. 5c, the PU–CNT composites can be directly charged by solar radiation and convert solar energy to latent heat. The stored latent heat can be gradually released during phase transition to provide thermal comfort on the human body at desired temperatures. The outstanding bending ability and mechanical properties of the as-prepared PCM films can provide desired conformability and toughness for pasting on the human body. For real-life applications, we incorporated PCM composite films into a functional layer of a thermal therapy device as depicted in Fig. S17 (ESI).† Alumina foil pasted between the PCM film and cotton fabric can reflect emitted mid-infrared (IR) radiation from the human body so that the thermal radiative dissipation is suppressed. The PCM film was sealed by using a transparent plastic film on the top to allow the light to pass through. The product was compared with normal cotton fabric as a control. Fig. 5d presents the time–temperature evolution curves of PU–CNT composite films and cotton fabric pasted on human arm skin after charging to 50 °C respectively. The temperature of cotton fabric reduces quickly and drops to the temperature of bare skin after ∼800 s, while the PCM film could maintain a higher temperature than that of bare skin (33.5 °C) for ∼3800 s owing to the stable temperature range of phase transition. The inset IR image in Fig. 5d shows that the charged PCM film pasted on arm skin releases thermal energy uniformly, which provides a valid thermal management effect to the human body. Furthermore, the phase change temperatures of PU-PCMs can be adjusted to satisfy diverse applications with different requirements for heat transfer temperature.
3 Experimental
3.1 Materials
Polyethylene glycol (PEG-n, n = 1000, 1500, 2000, 3000, 4000, 6000, 8000, and 10000, n represents the molecular weight of PEG), hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI), dibutyltin dilaurate (DBTDL) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs, outer diameter: 30–50 nm, length: 10–20 μm, purity > 95 wt%) were purchased from Chengdu Organic Chemicals Co. Ltd, China. Sulfuric acid (H2SO4), nitric acid (HNO3) and dichloromethane (DCM) were purchased from Beijing TongGuang Fine Chemicals Company.
3.2 Preparation of acid-treated MWCNTs
H2SO4 and HNO3 were combined in a 3:1 ratio to create a solution with a final volume of 100 ml. MWCNTs (2 g) were added to this solution and the mixture was ultrasonicated for 2 h at room temperature. Then the mixture was heated to 100 °C under constant stirring and reflux for 8 h, followed by filtering and washing successively with water and ethanol. The resulting products (i.e., the acid-treated MWCNTs (A-CNT)) were dried overnight at 80 °C.
3.3 Synthesis of PU
PU was synthesized through the polymerization between PEG and HDI. The –OH group of PEG and the –NCO group of isocyanate could react to form urethane links (–NHCOO), in which the –NH group could further interact with the residual –NCO group to form a crosslinking structure. PEG with different molecular weights was degassed at 100 °C under vacuum for 24 h. A 1:2 stoichiometric ratio of PEG and HDI was taken and dissolved in DCM and stirred rapidly at room temperature for 5 min in the presence of DBTDL as a catalyst under an argon atmosphere. Then the mixture was transferred to a Teflon Petri dish, followed by heating at 70 °C in an oven for 6 h to obtain PUn (n is the molecular weight of PEG). Different from the conventional one-step polymerization reaction with stirring and heating in the flask, the above-mentioned method with less solvent is beneficial to the cross-linking of the molecular chain, which contributes to the better flexibility of synthesized PU.
3.4 Fabrication of PU–CNT composites
Firstly, a specific amount of A-CNTs was dispersed in PEG3000 dichloromethane solution thoroughly using a probe ultrasonic sonicator for 30 min to obtain a well-dispersed suspension. Subsequently, HDI and DBTDL were added respectively into the A-CNT/PEG solution, followed by stirring rapidly at room temperature for 5 min. Then the mixture was poured into a Petri dish, followed by heating at 70 °C in an oven for 6 h to obtain PU–CNT composites. An identical procedure was utilized to prepare all PU–CNT composites with increasing CNT wt content. The sample with 1 wt% of CNTs is named PU–CNT1, with 2 wt% of CNTs is named PU–CNT2, with 3 wt% of CNTs is named PU–CNT3 and with 5 wt% of CNTs is named PU–CNT5.
3.5 Characterization
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) absorption spectroscopy was performed on a PE Spotlight200 and a Thermo Fisher Nicolet. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained by using a D Rigaku Corporation SmartLab with Cu Kα radiation in the range of 10°–50°. The morphology of the as-prepared materials was observed by using a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, Hitach-s4800) operated at 10 kV. The crystalline morphology of PEG and PU was observed by polarized optical microscopy (POM, 59XC-PC) at room temperature. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) scans of all samples were conducted using a differential scanning calorimeter Netzsch DSC 214 under an Ar atmosphere with a temperature change rate of 5 °C min−1. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a TA Instruments SDT Q600 analyzer with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under a N2 gas flow. The weight of all samples was between 3 and 5 mg for DSC and TGA experiments. Thermal conductivity was characterized by using a hot wire method (TC3010). Before measurements, the detector of the hot wire is closely clamped with two reticular samples. Every measurement is tested 5 times at room temperature. The tensile stress–strain curves of all samples were recorded by using an IBTC-300 in situ dynamic material system at room temperature. The standard dumbbell-shaped specimens (35 × 2 × 1 mm3) were loaded at a constant rate of 1 mm min−1 until fracture or yield. The cyclic tensile stretch test was carried out with a ramp rate of 0.4% s−1 until it reached a maximum value of ±6.0%. Dynamic mechanical analyses (DMA) of PU and PU–CNT composite specimens (30 × 5 × 1 mm3) were carried out using DMA Q800 of TA Instruments in the tensile mode. The temperature was scanned from −20 °C to 140 °C with a scan rate of 5 °C min−1 at a constant frequency of 1 Hz. The storage modulus (E′) as a function of temperature was recorded.
3.6 Photo-thermal energy conversion and personal thermal management
The circular shaped sample was placed under simulated sunlight using a xenon lamp with controlled light intensities (75–125 mW cm−2) respectively, which is calibrated by using a standard Si solar cell (91150 V). The temperature evolution of the irradiated sample was recorded by using a Pt100 thermal sensor pasted on the sample's bottom side. Each sample was irradiated for a certain time followed by cooling down under natural conditions. The photo-thermal energy storage efficiency was determined from stored thermal energy divided by the luminous energy received by the sample over the irradiation time. To evaluate the thermal management performance of the human body, a rectangular large-scale PCC film was pasted on a human arm with aluminum foil attached in the middle. The PCC film was heated to 50 °C and then its temperature evolution of thermal discharging on the arm was recorded. The infrared (IR) images were captured by using an IR camera (SC7300M, FLIR Systems, Inc.).
4 Conclusions
In summary, novel flexible, tough and shapeable PU–CNT solid–solid phase change composites are developed for thermal energy storage. The flexibility of PU–CNT composites is derived from the crosslinking of the segmented PU matrix in a controlled fashion. By varying the chain length of PEG segments, the mechanical and thermal properties of PU-PCM are tailored. Based on DSC analysis and the tensile test, it is concluded that the phase change enthalpy increases by increasing the molecular weight of the PEG segment while the flexibility decreases due to reduced crosslinking. Considering the trade-off between the thermal storage capacity and flexibility, it is determined that PU3000 possesses favorable flexibility and reasonable phase change enthalpy, which makes it the optimum choice for flexible PCMs. Then PU3000 is combined with functionalized CNTs to prepare PU–CNT phase change composites with improved phase change enthalpy and thermal conductivity as well as suppressed super-cooling. During the stretch testing, the flexible PCM composites can sustain a strain higher than 10% with a tensile strength of 14–16 MPa before the yield point, which indicates the outstanding flexibility and toughness. The realized mechanical features make our composite PCM superior among all flexible PCMs. Furthermore, the deformability and recoverability of composite PCM films can be realized in a wide temperature range even higher than the phase transition temperature. Benefiting from the CNTs, the resultant composite PCM can be driven by solar irradiation and presents efficient photo-thermal energy conversion and storage performance. The as-prepared flexible PCM composites exhibit great potential for future applications such as novel smart units of flexible and wearable thermal temperature control systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51825201), and Discipline Construction Project of Peking University (7100602758).
Notes and references
W. Aftab, X. Huang, W. Wu, Z. Liang, A. Mahmood and R. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1392–1424 RSC .
A. L. Cottrill, A. T. Liu, Y. Kunai, V. B. Koman, A. Kaplan, S. G. Mahajan, P. Liu, A. R. Toland and M. S. Strano, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 664 CrossRef .
G. G. D. Han, H. Li and J. C. Grossman, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1446 CrossRef .
P. Tao, C. Chang, Z. Tong, H. Bao, C. Song, J. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1613–1621 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Tong, Q. Ye, H. Hu, X. Nie, C. Yan, W. Shang, C. Song, J. Wu, J. Wang, H. Bao, P. Tao and T. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1478 CrossRef .
D. C. Hyun, N. S. Levinson, U. Jeong and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3780–3795 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pereira da Cunha and P. Eames, Appl. Energy, 2016, 177, 227–238 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Shchukina, M. Graham, Z. Zheng and D. G. Shchukin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4156–4175 RSC .
Z. Zheng, Z. Chang, G. K. Xu, F. Mcbride, A. Ho, Z. Zhuola, M. Michailidis, W. Li, R. Raval and R. Akhtar, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 721 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, J. Liu, X. Fang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4535–4543 RSC .
H. Gao, J. Wang, X. Chen, G. Wang, X. Huang, A. Li and W. Dong, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 769–797 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Liu, W. Xia, R. Zou and R. P. S. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1935–1940 RSC .
X. Huang, W. Xia and R. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19963–19968 RSC .
K. Yuan, Y. Zhou, W. Sun, X. Fang and Z. Zhang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 156, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Kenisarin and K. M. Kenisarina, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 1999–2040 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alkan and A. Sari, Sol. Energy, 2008, 82, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Zeng, S.-H. Zheng, S.-B. Yu, F.-R. Zhu, J. Gan, L. Zhu, Z.-L. Xiao, X.-Y. Zhu, Z. Zhu, L.-X. Sun and Z. Cao, Appl. Energy, 2014, 115, 603–609 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Gao, Y. Wang, T. Xu, Y. Fang and Z. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Jia, G. Alva and G. Fang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2730–2742 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Qureshi, H. M. Ali and S. Khushnood, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2018, 127, 838–856 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ye, P. Tao, C. Chang, L. Zhou, X. Zeng, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3417–3427 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, J. Shi, W. Aftab, M. Qin, A. Usman, F. Zhou, Y. Lv, S. Gao and R. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1904228 Search PubMed .
T. Qian, J. Li, X. Min, W. Guan, Y. Deng and L. Ning, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8526–8536 RSC .
T. Nomura, K. Tabuchi, C. Zhu, N. Sheng, S. Wang and T. Akiyama, Appl. Energy, 2015, 154, 678–685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hou, M. Wang, S. Guo and M. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26476–26482 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, S. Nie, Y. Hao, T. Liu, J. Zhu and S. Yan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 98, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
W. Aftab, A. Mahmood, W. Guo, M. Yousaf, H. Tabassum, X. Huang, Z. Liang, A. Cao and R. Zou, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 401–409 CrossRef .
G. Li, G. Hong, D. Dong, W. Song and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801754 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Q. Tao, Z. Wang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20166–20169 RSC .
W. Wu, W. Wu and S. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2019, 236, 10–21 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Huang, W.-L. Cheng and R. Zhao, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 182, 9–20 CrossRef .
W.-W. Li, W.-L. Cheng, B. Xie, N. Liu and L.-S. Zhang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 149, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Z. He, X. Fang, X. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 6, 36–45 CrossRef .
D. Luo, F. Wei, H. Shao, L. Xiang, J. Yang, Z. Cui, S. Qin and J. Yu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 15500–15513 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, C. Sheng, Y. Xia, X. Yu, C. Liang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, J. Zhang and W. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem., Ind. Ed., 2019, 71, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sundararajan, A. B. Samui and P. S. Kulkarni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18379–18396 RSC .
W. Wu, X. Huang, K. Li, R. Yao, R. Chen and R. Zou, Appl. Energy, 2017, 190, 474–480 CrossRef CAS .
L. Stobinski, B. Lesiak, L. Kövér, J. Tóth, S. Biniak, G. Trykowski and J. Judek, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 501, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choi, J. Jegal and W.-N. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 284, 406–415 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Liu, H. Wang and K. Peng, Appl. Energy, 2015, 152, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pielichowska, M. Nowak, P. Szatkowski and B. Macherzyńska, Appl. Energy, 2016, 162, 1024–1033 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, Y. Xiao, K. Hu, J. Wang, J. Lei and C. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 291, 138–148 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, B. Wu, X. Fu, P. Yan, Y. Yuan, C. Zhou and J. Lei, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, R. Liu, C. Zou, Q. Shao, Y. Lan, X. Cai and L. Zhai, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 130, 466–473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. Yuan, Y. Zhao, Q. Liu and J. Lei, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 48497 Search PubMed .
W. Ziegler, P. Guttmann, S. Kopeinig, M. Dietrich, S. Amirosanloo, G. Riess and W. Kern, Polym. Test., 2018, 71, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, R. Zou, W. Xia, Z. Liu, Y. Shang, J. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Lin, D. Xia and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10884–10892 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, R. Zou, Z. Lin, X. Gui, R. Chen, J. Lin, Y. Shang and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4028–4035 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Jeong, Y. Kang, T. Lim and S. Ju, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800935 CrossRef .
J. Lyu, Z. Liu, X. Wu, G. Li, D. Fang and X. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2236–2245 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, C. Wang, Y. Yin, Y. Li, Y. Xing and J. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1905470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, H. Wang, H. Mao, J. Li and H. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14150–14158 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13925gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of different kinds of flexible PCMs. (a) PCM/carbon-based porous materials; (b) PCM/multi-block copolymer elastomer; (c) PCM/polymer hollow fiber; (d) flexible PU based solid–solid PCM and its transformation mechanism between crystalline and amorphous states.	 

 	Fig. 2  The influence of PEG molecular weight on the thermal and mechanical properties of PU. (a) DSC curves and (b) plot showing the elevation of phase change parameters of PU samples with different PEG molecular weights; (c) tensile stress–strain curves and (d) plot showing the reduction of strain at yield of PU samples with different PEG molecular weights. The inset in (d) is the photograph of the contrast between original samples and PU samples after the tensile test.	 

 	Fig. 3  The thermal and mechanical properties of PU3000 and PU–CNT composites. (a) DSC curves; (b) thermal conductivity values; (c) tensile stress–strain curves and (d) plot showing the reduction of strain at yield with the increasing CNT wt content. The inset in (d) is the photograph of the contrast between original samples and composite samples after the tensile test. (e) Fatigue reliability test for the PU–CNT3 sample with cyclic tensile stretch.	 

 	Fig. 4  The dynamic thermal–mechanical properties of PU–CNT composites. (a) Schematic illustration of the reversible phase transition in the flexible PU–CNT composite films; (b) DMA curves of PU3000 and PU–CNT composites. Optical images of the flexible PU–CNT composite films under (c) curling, (d) folding, and (e) knotting conditions, respectively. (f) The reversible deformation and rehabilitation above the melting temperature of the flexible PU–CNT composite films.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photo-thermal energy storage performance by simulated sunlight absorption. (a) The time–temperature evolution curves of the PU–CNT5 composite under illumination by simulated sunlight at intensities of 75–125 mW cm−2. (b) The calculated photo-thermal energy storage efficiency of the PU–CNT5 composite as a function of irradiation light power. (c) The schematic illustration of flexible PU–CNT composite films charged by solar irradiation for human body thermal management application. (d) The time–temperature evolution curves of PU–CNT composite films and cotton fabric pasted on human arm skin after charging to 50 °C. The inset in (d) is the IR image of the charged PCM film on the human arm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta13925g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
