Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysis  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B316609K View PDF VersionPrevious Article  DOI: 10.1039/B316609K
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19, 301-330Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysis

        
          
            Steve J. 
            Hill
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Toyin A. 
            Arowolo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Owen T. 
            Butler
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jennifer M. 
            Cook
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Malcolm S. 
            Cresser
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chris 
            Harrington
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Douglas L. 
            Miles
          
        
      d
aSchool of Earth, Ocean and Environmental Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AA
bEnvironment Department, The University of York, Heslington, York, UK YO10 5DD
cHealth and Safety Laboratory, Broad Lane, Sheffield, UK S3 7HQ
dBritish Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GG
eDe Montfort University, The Gateway, Leicester, UK LE1 9BH
Received 
      17th December 2003
    First published on 26th January 2004Contents1 Air analysis1.1 Sampling and sample preparation1.2 Instrumental techniques for bulk analysis1.3 Instrumental techniques for analysis of individual particles1.4 On-line measurements1.5 Quality control, certified reference materials, method harmonisation and standardization and measurement uncertainty2 Water analysis2.1 Sample preparation2.2 Speciation2.3 Instrumental analysis2.4 Metrology and data quality3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materials3.1 Sample preparation3.2 Instrumental methods of analysis4 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Reference materials4.2 Sample treatment4.3 Instrumental analysisReferencesAbstract
This is the nineteenth annual review published in JAAS of the application of atomic spectroscopy to the chemical analysis of environmental samples. The review follows on directly from last year's.1 The review critically reports on the most important developments in environmental analysis during the review period, and tends to focus on improvements to existing techniques that provide more reliable and robust analytical methods. Comments on the review and suggestions for possible improvements for future reviews will be welcomed by the review coordinator.

1 Air analysis
This section highlights noteworthy areas of research and development in the analysis of aerosols, particulates and gases by atomic spectrometric techniques. Three useful review articles have been published. In a comprehensive paper, Wilson and co-workers2 present an overview of techniques for the sampling and analysis of fine and coarse particles for both inorganic and organic species. Specifically of interest to readers of this review, the authors briefly describe the instrumental techniques available for the determination of trace metals in airborne particulate matter. They note that ICP-MS can offer detection limits that are superior to those of many other techniques, but that studies need to be conducted to establish its comparability with non-destructive methods of filter analysis. The authors highlight the difficulties in sampling and retaining semi-volatile species, developments in continuous monitoring methods and the emerging need to focus on the fine-mode size range (<2.5 µm) as a means of distinguishing particles arising from human activities rather than those from natural resuspension processes. Pöschl3 continues the theme and highlights the progress made in aerosol particle analysis and the challenges still ahead. In particular, he highlights the progress made in the development of mass spectrometers for real-time in situ analysis of aerosols, and the difficulties that still exist in making carbon speciation measurements. Hoffmann,4 in a review in the same journal, expands upon the developments in real-time mass spectrometry. These three papers and the references therein give a good overview of the state of play in this field of environmental measurement and are recommended to readers who would like to learn more about air sampling and analysis.
1.1 Sampling and sample preparation
In relation to heavy metal atmospheric pollution from anthropogenic sources, biomonitors such as lichens and mosses continue to be used for the qualitative assessment of air quality. Unfortunately, they cannot give the quantitative estimation of air quality that can be obtained by deploying active air samplers. However, such sampling campaigns usually incur high financial and labour costs, hence the continuing attraction of using the lower cost biomonitoring option. A possible intermediate strategy could be to supplement such biomonitors with a few active air samplers, as described by Freitas and co-workers.5 In the Sado Estuary region of Portugal, they co-located active air samplers (Gent-type stacked filter unit samplers, run intermittently for one to two weeks at a time, at three locations) and lichen transplants (lichen samples suspended in air in nylon bags for exposure periods of three, six and nine months) in an attempt to see if the two sampling regimes could be correlated. Forty-seven hanging systems were installed in which two sets of four transplants were able to freely rotate according to the prevailing wind, one set hung to face the usual wind direction and the other set in the opposite direction. Protection against leaching from rainfall was also provided. All samplers were so arranged around an oil-fired power station within the region. Laboratory analysis was subsequently carried out for a range of elements using INAA and PIXE. The authors concluded that a simple linear correlation model could be applied in the case of a few elements but that further data are required. Because of elevated background sources of certain elements from more distant point sources and/or arising from diffusive local sources, coupled with the difficulty of understanding a living system and its interaction with its environment, it may not be possible to find such a correlation between two different sampling systems for many elements.
The sampling of metalloid and volatile metallic species remains a problematic issue. Researchers at the University of Michigan examined techniques for the sampling and analysis of particulate phase mercury.6 Their results indicate that gas phase mercury species can adsorb onto particulate matter previously collected onto quartz fibre filters. This would lead to an elevated value if the particulate matter was subsequently analysed for the mercury. They recommended that a denuder system be used to minimise the formation of this artifact. They also compared a closed vessel microwave-assisted digestion against a pyrolysis procedure for the determination of particulate phase mercury within dust samples. It was noticed that, although a good correlation was obtained, the latter procedure gave results that were on average 30% lower for total particulate matter sampled on open faced samplers and 56% lower for fine particulate matter sampled with a <2.5 µm particle size selector. It is postulated that acidic species co-present in air may, upon volatisation in the furnace, cause passivation of the analytical gold trap, thus causing a low recovery when the released mercury is trapped. Further investigations are planned.
Trapping of gas-phase species continues to attract developments. Zhang and co-workers7 used a commercially available honeycomb denuder sampler (Ogawa & Company) to develop a system to sample gas-phase selenium species. A laboratory hydride generation system was used to generate test atmospheres of hydrogen selenide. It was found that a 2% nitric acid–2% glycerine solution was the most suitable denuder-coating reagent. In the absence of suitable reference atmospheres, the authors successfully digested and analysed aliquots of NIST SRM 1648 urban particulate matter for its selenium content. German workers have developed an in situ sampler to collect volatile metal(loid)s in wetlands at the surface/air interface.8 The gas/water phase separation is achieved by the use of a porous PTFE membrane and the collected species trapped and stabilised in a liquid sorbent trap containing a NaOCl solution. The system is run under slight vacuum and they minimized breakthrough and contamination issues by isolating the phase separation unit away from the trapping unit. Prior to field-testing, they evaluated the system under laboratory conditions using hydride forming arsenic species. Trapping efficiencies were found to be typically around 80% and the trapped species were stabile in the trapping solution for up to six weeks, with losses of less than 10%.
Operationally defined speciation protocols have been reported previously for the determination of nickel in workplace dusts and metals in total suspended particulate (TSP) matter. Workers at the University of Pavia have developed a four-step leach procedure for the speciation of beryllium-containing dust in workplace air emissions.9 The four defined phases determined were: soluble, via a 0.1 M HCl leach; elemental/metallic, via a 0.1 M CuSO4 leach; oxidic, via a HNO3–H2SO4 digest; and siliceous, via a HNO3–HF digest. The developed protocol was checked by analyzing mixtures of pure beryllium salts and compounds, spiked samples and the NIST SRM 1633a coal fly ash, which had only an indicative total beryllium value. The validity of such protocols continues to be debated but the emerging use of techniques such as XAS and other synchrotron-based techniques can potentially shed useful light on the subject.
1.2 Instrumental techniques for bulk analysis
Techniques such as XRF and ICP-MS are well established for the analysis of airborne particulate matter. Thus, published papers tend to offer little in the way of originality, reflecting the mature nature of these techniques. Nevertheless, novel applications continue to be reported. Olle Nygren,10 at the National Institute for Working Life in Sweden, advocates the use of portable XRF for the on-site assessment of workers exposed to metal-containing airborne dusts. Although this has been reported previously, he makes the novel suggestion that a potential use of the technique is as an instructional and teaching aid for workers, for example optimising ways of working to minimise exposure, by making rapid on-site measurements. This reviewer feels that, by coupling this idea with visualization techniques, useful training material could indeed be produced.
Bettinelli and co-workers11 describe a combustion procedure for the determination of halogens in coal prior to its use in generating electricity, i.e. to aid mass balance studies. ICP-MS was used to determine bromine and iodine in the combustion effluent subsequently trapped in an alkaline absorption solution. Excellent recoveries were obtained on suitable reference materials and the data obtained compared favourably with that from analysis by IC (Br) and INAA (I). Method detection limits (ten σ on a method blank) were of the order of 0.1 mg kg−1 for both Br and I and the validated procedure is now in routine use checking the halogen content of coals imported into Italy.
The advent of reaction/collision cell ICP-MS systems allows the determination of a number of analytes previously thought impossible to measure by more conventional systems. Chinese workers have developed a method, using ammonia as a reaction gas, for the determination of trace levels of copper in fly ash.12 The measurement of this element can be hampered by the presence of a large excess of titanium typically found in such a matrix. It must be noted, however, that ICP-AES is more than capable of performing this same task.
The use of ICP-MS as a selective detector for volatile metal(loid) species continues to attract attention. Workers in Canada used GC-ICP-MS to examine volatile emissions from landfills, compost heaps and the air surface boundary above a forest canopy.13 Samples were initially collected in Tedlar gasbags or in gas canisters. They were then transported to the laboratory and cryotrapped onto capillary columns. The columns were subsequently attached between the injector and separation column in a GC system prior to analysis. A number of species were found in the landfill gas samples, most notably organoarsenic, -lead and -tin species as well as molybdenum and tungsten carbonyl species. Iodomethane species were detected in the air above the compost heap samples but no metallic species were detected in the air above the forest canopy. As highlighted previously, the lack of gaseous standards continues to hinder both qualitative and quantitative assessment of these hyphenated techniques.
1.3 Instrumental techniques for analysis of individual particles
Research continues to point to the fact that metals on the surface of particles may play an important role in health effects resulting from exposure to airborne pollution. Accordingly, better analytical information is now required to characterise the surface properties of particles. Work involving the use of SIMS has been published by a number of research groups.14–17 Of concern to many is the exposure to welding fume in the workplace air. Konarski and co-workers14,17 examined the morphology of micro- and nanoparticles emitted during different welding processes. They examined fume collected from electron beam welding and gas tungsten arc welding on stainless steel and from shielded metal arc welding on mild steel using a steel electrode covered with rutile flux. Depth profiling analysis found that carbon, chlorine and fluorine species were enriched in the surface layers. Profiles for elements such as chromium, manganese and iron depended upon the weld process but generally these elements made up the core of such particles. A model particle (Iriodin-221 from Merck with a particle size distribution of 5–25 µm) consisting of a 500 nm diameter illite core and a 425 nm thick rutile shell was used as an instrument set-up standard. The authors suggest that the technique can open new avenues of research into the surface reactivity of inhaled particles. If so, SIMS can complement other surface techniques in building up a more comprehensive picture of the surface of particles.
Increasing evidence is being published supporting a link between atmospheric particles of less than <1 µm in diameter and effects on human health. This has spurred on the development of instrumentation for the sizing and analysis of (ultra)fine particles. A consortium of US researchers is field-testing a second generation LDI-TOF-MS for the compositional analysis of size resolved ultrafine particles at a site in Atlanta.18 Evaluation of data collected so far showed that, for particles less than 100 nm in size, the particle composition is dominated by carbon containing compounds presumably arising from fossil fuel combustion processes. Larger particles showed a more varied composition but typically appeared to have organic carbon characteristics mixed with an inorganic component. They conclude that the strengths of such an instrument lie in its ability to perform single particle analysis in situ without blank or artifact contamination arising from the use of a collection substrate. The instrument allows superior source–receptor studies to be undertaken, as classification can be done on a particle-by-particle basis. Finally, the ability to focus on particles in the 0.01–2.5 µm size range, i.e., particles that can penetrate into the pulmonary regions of the lung and which are implicated in many health related studies will be useful in future.
1.4 On-line measurements
Tighter regulations concerning the emissions of metal(loid) species from stationary sources such as furnaces and incinerators has led a number of research groups to actively pursue the development of on-line measurement techniques. Several papers investigating extractive sampling in conjunction with ICP-AES and LIPS techniques have been reported in previous Updates. Investigation is now turning to the development of measurement systems for process control and as a tool in understanding the fundamental behavior of metals in thermal processes. This requires sampling from within combustion chambers or at an immediate exit point. Thus, it presents a far greater sampling challenge than the above-mentioned work where sampling is typically undertaken downstream of the scrubbing system, i.e., from a cooler, more diluted and less corrosive gas stream. The shortcoming of conventional argon plasmas to handle mixed phase gas streams with a variable gaseous and particulate content is now well known. Timmermans and co-workers,19 in an attempt to circumvent this, are using a new, relatively compact, needle-like MIP(-AES) system which potentially can be operated over a wide power range 150 W–5 kW. Workers at Tampere University of Technology, on the other hand, continue to develop their high power dc–nitrogen plasma (–AAS) system.20 Ultimate detection limits are often not a primary consideration in such work but rather the development of robust sampling and analytical instrumentation. However, the difficulties experienced in obtaining good quantitative data because of the lack of calibration standards, losses in the the sampling system and measurement errors and instabilities caused by matrix/spectral effects remain. Further work is required to surmount these problems.
1.5 Quality control, certified reference materials, method harmonisation and standardization and measurement uncertainty
As highlighted previously, many papers published in this field continue to contain little or no information about the quality of results produced. This can, in part, be attributed to the lack of suitable certified reference materials. However, new bulk reference materials are now coming on stream. The release of certified air filter reference materials such as NIST SRM 2783 is most welcome, but its cost is such that it is not economically viable to use it for analysis where a dissolution step is involved. In the absence of suitable reference materials, cross comparisons with alternative techniques and/or laboratories can sometimes be a suitable alternative.11,21
The release and subsequent use of a new road dust material (BCR 723) certified for its Pd, Pt and Rh content has enabled the differing approaches used to measure trace levels of PGEs resulting from vehicular emissions to be assessed.22 In summary, as expected, an effective dissolution step is required. Typically a high-performance closed vessel microwave-assisted digestion involving the use of HF23–26 or, if a sufficient quantity of dust is available, a lead fire assay works best.27 ICP-MS is the technique of choice and the severe isobaric interferences on Pd can be reduced by matrix reduction using an anion exchange clean up26 and/or a precipitation procedure.25 As such steps do not usually give 100% recoveries, isotopically enriched spikes are required for quantification.
Hand in hand with the development and characterization of certified reference materials has been the ongoing development of standardised procedures by organizations such as the International Standards Organisation (ISO) and Comité Européen de Normalisation (CEN). Of particular interest to analysts working in the workplace air monitoring field is the production of a new ISO standard ISO 15202—Determination of metals and metalloids in airborne particulate matter by inductively coupled atomic emission spectrometry. This has been prepared in three parts: part one details the sampling requirements, part two details the sample preparation requirements and part three details the analytical measurements requirements. Part one has been published as an equivalent British Standard (BS),28 part two will be published shortly as an equivalent BS and it is hoped that part three will be published before the end of 2004. Readers in other countries can contact their own national standards institute to enquire about the status of equivalent standards published in their native language. CEN standards for the determination of trace metals from stationary emission sources involving analysis by ICP-AES and in ambient air samples involving analysis by ICP-MS/ETAAS are in preparation but are unlikely to be available before the middle of 2005. Progress in this standardisation field will be reported in future Updates.
The evaluation of measurement uncertainty associated with a test result is now an essential requirement in many quality systems. Although guidance is available from bodies such as ISO and Eurochem, nevertheless not all analysts are familiar with calculating such uncertainty budgets. Therefore, the publication of suitable test examples is useful. Tirez and co-workers29 have produced an uncertainty budget calculation for the determination of mercury by AFS in incinerator ash. As they say, such calculations may initially appear onerous but the finished budget can be equally applied to other elemental determinations. Commercial software that can aid the process is now appearing. In a useful discussion the authors compare the “bottom-up” approach of quantifying each individual uncertainty component of a method with the “top-down” approach of grouping uncertainty components together and using available data from method validation and other QC procedures, in calculating such budgets.
Uncertainty has usually been associated only with the measurement step. It is well recognised, however, that in many environmental fields, uncertainty in sampling usually dominates. Therefore, more realistic estimates of measurement uncertainty should consider the sampling process. Researchers working on the development of the CEN ambient air standard procedure have constructed such an inclusive budget.30 In a well-conceived experiment they co-located ten PM10 ambient air samplers at four European sites. For a period of a month at each site, twenty-four hour air samples were collected on filters. The samples were subsequently distributed to four laboratories for digestion and analysis for elements of regulatory interest, namely As, Cd, Ni and Pb. ICP-MS and ETAAS techniques were used. The sites were chosen so that typical airborne concentrations encountered would cover the operational range of the proposed method. Inter-laboratory analytical variability was minimized by using a standardised microwave-assisted digestion procedure described in the draft CEN procedure. NIST SRM 1648 urban particulate matter was used throughout the study as an internal QC material and was analysed with each batch of filter samples sent for analysis. The resultant expanded uncertainties obtained for the two instrumental techniques were: 7–12% for As against a target of 40% at a nominal 6 ng m−3 limit value; 13–17% for Cd against a target of 25% at a nominal 5 ng m−3 limit value; 9–21% for Ni against a target of 40% at a nominal 20 ng m−3 limit value; and 7–12% for Pb against a target of 25% at the EU directive limit value of 500 ng m−3. Mean recoveries for SRM material were 103–110% for As, 95–98% for Cd, 93–99% for Ni and 98–103% for Pb.
2 Water analysis
This section highlights new and novel analytical developments in the use of atomic spectroscopy for the determination of trace metal(loid)s in environmental water samples that have been reported since the last review.1
2.1 Sample preparation

2.1.1 Sample collection and preservation. 
Issues related to sample preservation are extremely important, particularly for metal speciation studies where only trace concentrations are usually of interest and any species interconversion during storage needs to be minimized. Studies in this area have provided interesting results and some food for thought for those analysing metal speciation in environmental water samples and those about to embark upon such analyses.
Studies using solid phase microextraction have shown31 that tributyltin chloride is sufficiently volatile at room temperature to be sampled from the headspace above saline water, and determined by GC-MS. This work indicates two important findings: that TBT-Cl can be lost from water samples unless they are stored below room temperature; and that the evaporation of TBT-Cl is an important biogeochemical mechanism for the butyltin compounds commonly found in the marine environment.
A method to preserve the oxidation state of chromium in solution during the sampling process has been described.32 The technique of diffusive gradient thin-films (DGT) was incorporated into a probe that can be used to determine CrIII and CrVI in solution. Separation of the two species occurred in situ, which eliminates the possibility of any changes occurring during sampling and storage, this being a particular problem for redox sensitive elements. The probe uses a layer of polyacrylamide hydrogel over a second layer of resin; the CrIII species in the sample accumulate quantitatively in the resin layer, whilst the CrVI species equilibrate with both the hydrogel and resin. The two species can then be recovered from the device by physically separating the two films and eluting the Cr into solution prior to detection with GF-AAS.
A stability study of arsenic speciation (AsIII, AsV, MMA and DMA)33 in two different waste water samples using HPLC-HG-AFS showed that, for samples stored in the absence of light for 4 months at three different temperatures, AsV, MMA and DMA were stable, whereas AsIII losses were apparent under some conditions, due to conversion to AsV.


2.1.2 Pre-concentration and separation procedures. 
The trend for developing sample preparation methods to remove single elements from complex sample matrices prior to analysis has continued unabated. Whilst the importance of this type of approach is recognized, for the sake of brevity only the most novel sample pre-concentration and separation techniques, along with some multi-elemental methods, will be discussed. The procedures summarized below have been categorized partly on the medium (column, cartridge or disk) used to retain or concentrate the metal or metal species.
A review of the ultratrace measurement of individual rare earth elements in natural water samples34 summarizes the sample preconcentration methods and instrumental techniques (NAA, ID-MS, ICP-AES and ICP-MS) that have been used since 1980.
A rapid and simple method has been described35 for the pre-concentration and discrimination between the labile and the organic fractions of Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, V and Zn in sea-water. The procedure used 8-hydroxyquinoline to form neutral complexes with the metals of interest, which were then adsorbed onto a C18 column prior to elution with 2 M nitric acid followed by ICP-AES measurement. It was validated by the analysis of the total metal content of three certified reference materials of different ionic strengths (SLEW-3, CASS-3 and NASS-3). A one-step preconcentration method36 for use with AAS or ICP-MS analysis employed two columns in series to partition Al, Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, V and Zn in river water samples into a number of operationally defined fractions. The samples were passed through a cation exchange column (Chelex-100) that removed the trace labile fraction, followed by a macroporous resin column (AGMP 1) which retained organic complexes of the trace elements. A third, inert fraction, was determined from the difference between the total dissolved trace metal concentrations determined after UV irradiation of a separate aliquot and the sum of the metals retained on the two columns. In samples from pristine locations on the rivers tested, the sum of the metals retained on the two columns accounted for over 80% of the total dissolved metal concentration. At more polluted locations the inert fraction accounted for up to 95% of the total dissolved metal concentration.
An on-line sequential injection system coupled to a sector field ICP-MS instrument37 has been developed for the determination of ultra trace plutonium concentrations in sea-water. Two micro-columns in series (Sr-Spec and TEVA-Spec) removed the Pu isotopes of interest from 5 L of sea-water prior to introduction into the ICP-MS instrument via a microconcentric nebuliser. The method gave detection limits of 0.19 fg ml−1 and a precision of 5% for 7 replicate analyses; the accuracy was confirmed by analysis of a seawater RM (IAEA-381) and comparison with alpha-spectrometry.
The use of solid phase extraction (SPE) for the simultaneous preconcentration and speciation of different toxic trace metal(loid)s has received some attention recently. It provides a rapid and cheap means of obtaining quantitative data on metal species. A method for the determination of mercury species in water samples38 used a new resin functionalized with N- and S-containing donor sites, which was shown to be selective for mercury. A limit of detection of 90 ng l−1 was achieved for mercury using conventional CV-AAS instrumentation. The speciation of inorganic antimony in water samples using a simple non-polar SPE cartridge has been described.39 A silica-based octyl sorbent selectively retained the SbIII complex formed with ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC), whilst the uncomplexed SbV passed through the cartridge. A limit of detection of 1 ng l−1 was achieved for both species using ICP-MS to analyse the separate fractions.
A chelating resin disk (5 mm diameter, 0.5 mm thickness) possessing an iminodiacetate functional group was used40 to retain Cd, Co, Cu, Mn, Mo, Ni, U and V, but not the alkali and alkaline earth elements, from sea-water. A flow injection mode was used to analyse 1 ml of sea-water with a pH 5.5 buffer as a carrier and a 0.1 M nitric acid solution to elute the trace metals into a conventional ICP-MS instrument. The analytical data for the 8 elements of interest agreed well with the certified data for two sea-water CRMs (CASS-4 and NASS-5). A similar disk-based method has been used to preconcentrate the rare earth elements from sea-water prior to analysis by ICP-MS.41 The methodology was validated by analysing four natural water RMs (JAC00312, SLRS-3, CASS-3 and NASS-4).


2.1.3 Hydride generation. 
A single element hydride generation system for the determination of bismuth42 involved the trapping and preconcentration of bismuthine, formed after reduction of bismuth with sodium tetrahydroborate. The hydride was trapped on a pre-heated tungsten coil and then thermally desorbed into the AAS instrument. The LOD was 3 ng l−1—equivalent to that available with ICP-MS—and the accuracy was validated by analysing a water CRM.
The development of a new type of quartz tube atomizer with a tungsten coil (QTAW) heating device has been reported43 in sufficient detail such that a full instrumental system could be constructed. It was used with a flow injection hydride generation system to determine arsenic in spiked mineral and sea-water. The calibration was shown to be linear up to 500 µg l−1 with a detection limit of 1.5 µg l−1; the recovery of arsenic from spiked samples at the µg l−1 concentration level was quantitative.
Hydride generation methods have also been used for speciation analysis. A simple procedure was developed44 for the direct determination of AsIII and total inorganic arsenic in water samples by flow injection hydride generation AAS. The system allowed for the determination of AsIII and total arsenic, and therefore AsV by difference, by use of two reagent carrier streams. The hydride generation step was robust and tolerant of a number of trace metal interferences. The method was shown to be satisfactory for the determination of arsenic traces in drinking water by analysis of a drinking water CRM. A similar method45 employing the same selective hydride generation approach used ICP-MS detection to determine arsenic speciation in sea-water samples.
A flow injection hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectrometer, involving a novel pervaporation unit instead of the commonly used gas–liquid separator,46 was used for the speciation of AsIII and AsV in samples containing high suspended solids. The pervaporation unit works in a similar manner to a gas–liquid separator, except no gas is blown through the liquid to strip the hydrides from solution. Instead, they are allowed to diffuse from the liquid through a membrane and into a support gas containing argon and hydrogen. It is possible to envisage the improvements that a less turbulent system can make to the stability of the analytical signal, partly through the reduction in the moisture content of the hydride stream. The hydrogen in the support gas helps with the generation of a flame in the AFS unit. Samples were analysed without filtration and calibration was linear, with detection limits of 0.4 and 0.6 µg l−1 for AsIII and AsV, respectively. Speciation of arsenic was achieved by pre-reducing a subsample prior to analysis. The non-reduced portion of the sample would give the value for AsIII and the pre-reduced portion the combined value for AsV and AsIII; the hydride generation conditions were also changed on-line to discriminate between the two species. By subtraction of the two values the concentration of each oxidation state is achieved. Another publication by a different research group44 applied HG-AAS to the measurement of the oxidation states of arsenic by using different reagent conditions to determine both species in the same sample.
A novel low volume electrolysis cell for electrochemical hydride generation47 was used for the multi-elemental determination of As, Bi, Ge, Hg, Sb and Se in spring water. The detection system employed an inductively coupled plasma time-of-flight mass spectrometer to monitor the 12 isotopes and provide absolute detection limits in the range of 10–160 pg for As, Bi, Ge, Hg and Sb and 1.1 ng for Se. The methodology was validated by analysing NIST SRM 1643d. This showed good agreement with the certified values for As and Sb but a drastic difference for Se, possibly due to the presence of hydride inactive species.


2.1.4 Other sample preparation methods. 
A thermoresponsive polymer has been used48 to sequester traces of Co, Cu, Ni and Pb in water. The method was based on the precipitation of the water soluble polymer, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide), on heating to 50 °C. At this temperature the metals, complexed with ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate (APDC), were incorporated into the precipitate, which was recovered and dissolved in an organic solvent, prior to analysis by tungsten filament ETV-ICP-MS. Because of the highly efficient 100-fold preconcentration, determination of the analytes at the ng l−1 to µg l−1 concentration level was possible.

2.2 Speciation
Some important new approaches to the determination of metal species, including toxicologically relevant metals (mercury, arsenic, chromium, antimony) and organometallic species such as organotin compounds, have been reported. Methods predominantly involve the chromatographic separation of the different physicochemical forms of a particular element, prior to detection using an element selective detector. Analytical procedures involving capillary electrophoresis, liquid and gas chromatography are discussed below.
Speciation methods using liquid chromatography coupled to an element specific detector to determine different metal species in water samples have been published. The seasonal variation of the arsenic containing species monomethylarsonic acid (MMAA) and AsIII and AsV in deep and surface sea-water has been reported.49 This work is of particular interest because it was carried out using one of the new generation ICP-MS instruments, equipped with an octapole reaction system (ORS). This permits the removal of the ArCl+ interference at m/z 75 by reaction with helium, resulting in an improvement in the LOD by a factor of 3–6, depending on the particular species compared to the same instrumental set-up without ORS. This paper also reported the use of hydride generation to eliminate the ArCl+ interference, and a comparison between the detection limits for both instrumental set-ups highlights the improvements achievable using a chemical or an instrumental approach. Thus, the LOD for the three As species in a simulated sea-water sample (2% Cl) using the HPLC-ICP-(ORS)-MS set-up ranged from 21–25 ng As l−1, whereas an LOD of 3–5 ng As l−1 was achieved with the HPLC-HG-ICP-MS system. These figures compare well with those reported in the last review1 for the analysis of As in sea-water (LOD 20 ng l−1) using an ICP-MS instrument equipped with an octopole reaction cell. The simultaneous determination50 of 5 arsenic containing species (AsIII, AsV, monomethylarsenic (MMA), dimethylarsenic (DMA) and arsenobetaine (AsBet)) in aqueous samples using HPLC separation and a hexapole ICP-MS instrument provides an interesting comparison with the use of an octopole. The system was validated using the SLRS-4 CRM and provided a limit of detection of between 0.02 for AsBet and 0.4 µg l−1 for MMA.
A method based on anion-exchange chromatography coupled to conventional ICP-MS51 for the determination of AsIII, AsV, MMAA and DMAA in drinking water, was evaluated in terms of its ruggedness and reliability and shown to fulfil the current regulatory requirements of the US EPA. Studies such as this are particularly important in the context of the regulation of toxic metals in drinking water, because they provide strong evidence that the measurement of metal species is feasible from an analytical perspective. Anion-exchange chromatography, coupled to HG-AFS for the determination of inorganic (SbIII and SbV) and organic (Me3SbBr2) species of antimony,52 used the concentration gradient between potassium hydroxide (pH 11) and ammonium tartrate (pH 5) to baseline separate the three species. A resin-based column was necessary because of the pH range employed. The methodology was shown to be suitable for monitoring drinking and surface waters according to the regulations established by the European Union (EU) directives for antimony. The following three studies also highlight the versatility of using liquid chromatography for species separation, prior to element specific detection. Thus, ion exclusion,49 multi-mode ion exchange50 and anion-exchange chromatography51 can be used for As speciation, depending on the pH conditions, the mobile phase and the column selected for the particular study. This versatility can aid the identification of any unknown arsenic containing species through a comparison of retention times in the different chromatographic systems.
The use of on-line isotope dilution calibration methods53 in gas chromatography prior to detection by atomic spectroscopy for the speciation of toxicologically important metal containing compounds has received particular attention. A rapid, sensitive and simple method for the simultaneous determination of the butyltin compounds in coastal sea-water was based on isotope dilution methodologies using a Sn-119 enriched spike of all three butyltin compounds. The pH buffered samples were spiked with the isotopically enriched calibration standard and then derivatized using sodium tetraethylborate. After an appropriate equilibration and reaction time the sample extract was analysed using GC coupled to ICP-MS by monitoring the ions generated at m/z values of 118, 119 and 120. The concentration of the butyltin compounds was calculated from the 118/119 ratio and the 120/119 ratio, thus eliminating the need to carry out the mass bias correction normally required for determinations of the highest accuracy. This means a considerable saving in time and resources, particularly when the cost of producing the isotopically enriched butyltin compounds is considered. The overall figures of merit showed that the instrumental detection limits were approximately 50 fg as Sn for each compound. Recovery experiments from sea-water were quantitative and precision was about 5% at the ppt level.
A two step GC-QFAAS method for the measurement of the three commonly studied butyltin compounds in natural water has been reported.54 The method involved the aqueous phase derivatization of the butyltin compounds using sodium tetraethylborate, followed by the room temperature trapping of the derivatives on a Tenax column. The compounds were then desorbed on-line and analysed via GC-QFAAS. Recoveries for all three compounds at the 100 ng Sn l−1 concentration level were quantitative, with precisions of <6%. Significant improvements in the lifetime of the Tenax column could be achieved by off-line trapping of the derivatives.
Development of an interface to couple capillary gas chromatography with ICP-MS,55 which allows for the determination of high-boiling point (400 °C) analytes and the use of large volume injections, was evaluated using the propyl derivatives of a range of organotin compounds. The detection limits for the derivatized methyl-, butyl-, octyl-and phenyltin compounds studied were in the pg l−1 range for 80 ml water samples extracted with 1 ml of solvent. The interface design allowed more than one GC to be coupled to an ICP-MS instrument.
The speciation of halogenated volatile organic compounds (HVOC) by gas chromatography coupled in series to ICP-MS and an electron capture detector (ECD) has been evaluated56 for the determination of HVOCs in water and air samples. The two detectors complimented one another because the ECD was more sensitive for the detection of chlorinated and brominated compounds whereas the ICP-MS was best for iodinated ones. The detection limits for the ICP-MS system were 0.5, 10 and 50 pg for the iodinated, brominated and chlorinated compounds, respectively, whereas for the ECD they were in the range 0.03–11 pg. The main advantages of incorporating an ICP-MS detector into the system are that it allows for clear identification of the HVOCs and that calibration is almost independent of the particular compounds containing the same halogen.
The speciation of mercury using capillary gas chromatography with detection by microwave induced plasma atomic emission spectrometry,57 used headspace analysis of sea-water via solid phase microextraction (HS-SPME) to sample the monomethylmercury and inorganic mercury (HgII) after conversion to the more volatile sodium tetraphenylborate derivatives. Six parameters related to the derivatization (sample volume, sodium tetraphenylborate concentration, pH, sorption time, extraction–derivatization temperature, and rate of stirring) were optimized. Aqueous phase ethylation with sodium tetraethylborate for the derivatization of methyl and inorganic mercury, prior to analysis using gas chromatography coupled to ICP-TOF-MS,58 was used to determine these species in ice from the French Alps. The authors acknowledge that the possibility of the formation of Hg0 during the derivatization step should be evaluated by using isotopically enriched standards. Presumably the concentration of halide ions in the samples was not sufficient to facilitate the conversion noted in a previous publication.59 It would appear that further studies in this area are necessary to elucidate the conditions where species inter-conversion is most significant. A method60 to analyse the low ambient concentration of mercury and methylmercury in natural water samples used on-line hydride generation cryogenic trapping gas chromatography and detection by AFS. The method was validated for different sample matrices by spike recovery experiments and shown to be suitable for the routine monitoring of inorganic (Hg2+) and methylmercury (counterions not specified) in surface water samples where the predominant mercury species present is the inorganic form (counter ion not specified).
Significant advances in the coupling of capillary electrophoresis to different detectors have been published. A team from China described61,62 the design and use of capillary electrophoresis (CE) coupled on-line, via hydride generation (HG), to an atomic fluorescence detector (AFS). Two experimental set-ups were used, both based on a 50 cm × 100 mm id fused silica capillary at an applied potential of between 15–20 kV. One61 employed boric acid and methanol at pH 9.1 to speciate 4 mercury containing species (inorganic, methyl, ethyl and phenyl) as the cysteine complex, prior to volatile species generation and detection by AFS. The other system62 was used to determine four arsenic containing species (AsIII, AsV, MMA and DMA) with an eluent containing a pH 6.5 phosphate buffer. Both systems delivered similar analytical figures of merit for all of the species studied, including LODs in the range 7–18 µg l−1, precisions for migration times of 2–3%, precisions for peak area responses of 2–6% and spike recoveries from natural water of 87–115%. The application of CE-FI-ICP-MS63 to the speciation of CrIII and CrVI involved the development of two different interfaces: one to couple the flow injection system to the capillary; and the second to couple the capillary to a concentric nebuliser, which was modified to facilitate the electrical earthing (zero potential) necessary for the separation.
2.3 Instrumental analysis

2.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. 
Graphite furnace AAS has recently been compared64 with ICP-MS for the analysis of C, Cd, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn in estuarine waters. An on-line chelating resin column was used to prepare the samples for analysis by ICP-MS, whereas liquid–liquid extraction, facilitated by an organic ligand, was used for the GFAAS samples. The results for Cd, Pb, Mn and Zn agreed well, but those for Co, Cu and Ni by the ICP-MS method were 10–20% lower than those obtained by the AAS method. The different yields were positively correlated with the dissolved organic carbon content of the samples and a better agreement between the two techniques was achieved for Cu and Co after UV irradiation of the samples. The authors considered this good evidence to recommend the UV digestion of acidified estuarine samples prior to multi-elemental analysis by the ICP-MS method.
The possibility of using methods based on AAS for metal speciation studies makes this area of research available to groups who do not have access to more expensive instrumentation such as ICP-MS. A method65 for the determination of CrIII and CrVI in waste water by FAAS used a polymeric column modified by 6-mercaptopurine to separate the two oxidation states prior to detection. A Dowex 1-X anion exchange column was used to separate AsIII and AsV prior to their determination by GFAAS.66 An investigation67 into the free Cu and humate–Cu complexes in natural and waste waters has used a mixed micelle mediated extraction method (cloud point extraction) prior to FAAS analysis.


2.3.2 Atomic emission and fluorescence spectrometry. 
The development of a miniaturized dc glow discharge atomic emission spectrometer68 has been published. The glow discharge was established in a planar glass microstructure at atmospheric pressure, using argon as the carrier gas and the liquid sample itself as the cathode. The authors demonstrated its use for the detection of copper in solution by observing the 325, 327, 511, 515, and 522 nm atomic emission lines. The ultimate goal of the work is to integrate the device into a portable, stand-alone detector.
Electrothermal atomization laser excited atomic fluorescence (ETV-LEAF) has been used by Le Bihan and co-workers to determine lead69 and aluminium70 in sea-water. The hardware included a pulsed Nd∶Yag laser with an optical parametric oscillator as an excitation source, and an intensified charge-coupled device (CCD) as a detector. Detection limits in sea-water were 5 ng l−1 for Al and 0.3 ng l−1 for Pb.
The use of ICP-AES for the determination of the non-volatile, total organic carbon (TOC), inorganic carbon (IC) and total inorganic carbon (TOC) in water samples, offers a different analytical technique71 for the measurement of environmental carbon, based on its atomic emission intensity. A semi-automatic accessory connected to the spectrometer separates the different carbon fractions, i.e., non-volatile, organic and inorganic, prior to excitation and emission. The limits of detection were 70 µg l−1 for TOC and 0.7 µg l−1 for IC. Because the system tolerates highly saline solutions it could overcome problems such as blockage and interferences that afflict conventional methods used for this type of analysis. The determination of Sr and Ba in river water by ICP-AES72 used an ultrasonic nebulizer fitted with a desolvating unit to give detection limits 10–20 times lower than with conventional nebulisation.
Resurrection of the use56 of the direct current plasma (DCP) for the improved determination of trace metals in waste water containing high-suspended solids used an echelle spectrometer and a charge-injection device (CID). The design offers increased sensitivity in the far UV region, with overall wavelength coverage from 175 to 800 nm.


2.3.3 X-ray fluorescence. 
An interesting paper73 describes a combined X-ray diffraction and fluorescence instrument that has been built to the size, mass and power constraints of the Ariane 5 micromissions. It is proposed that this instrument could be used as part of the hardware for a robotic search for ice and hydrous minerals at the poles of the Moon.
A more conventional application74 of wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (WDXRF) to the analysis of thorium in natural water has been reported. Thorium was preconcentrated from a slightly acidic solution onto polyurethane foam loaded with 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid. A limit of detection of 4 mg l−1 with a precision of 4.2% RSD was achieved.


2.3.4 Mass spectrometry. 
2.3.4.1 ICP-MS analysis. 
Few studies showing the capabilities of the new reaction/collision cell instrumentation have been published during the period covered by this review. This is surprising given the potential that such instrumentation holds for the elimination of some of the major interferences encountered in sea-water or waste water analysis and the improved sensitivity this newer technology promises, which is always welcome given the low ambient trace metal concentrations in water. However, some useful data of interest to users of ICP-MS is highlighted here.
The elimination of doubly charged argon ions (Ar2+) by use of a dynamic reaction cell (DRC) has been evaluated75 by studying the effect of different reagent gases (H2, CH3, O2 and NO) on the determination of selenium in natural water. Different operating conditions (reaction gas, reaction gas flow and transmission settings) were used to analyse blank and spiked natural water samples. The measured isotope ratios and signal to background ratios were used to identify where spectral interferences from the ion source or from ions formed inside the DRC were minimized. Interestingly, NO and O2 suppressed the Ar2+ ions but also the Se+ and SeO+ signals, which the authors suggest may to be due to reactive or scattering losses. The lowest limits of detection for Se (2 ng l−1) were achieved by using methane as the reaction gas and monitoring the Se80 isotope.
The analytical performance of three different ICP-MS instruments76 for the determination of copper in water by isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS) compared the use of quadrupole (Elan 6000, PerkinElmer SCIEX), single collector magnetic sector (Element 2, ThermoFinnigan) and multi-collector magnetic sector (Nu Instruments) spectrometers. The instruments were compared on the basis of the total combined uncertainties for the isotope ratio measurements and the amount content measurements, which were calculated on the basis of the EURACHEM and ISO/GUM guidelines. Excellent agreement was observed between all the measurements made with the different instruments using the conditions under investigation. The authors concluded that the use of expensive instrumentation such as a multi-collector ICP-MS for IDMS applications appears not to be justified, unless the highest quality CRMs are available. The relative combined uncertainties for the measurement of the isotopic ratios for a copper blend used for IDMS with each instrument were between 0.07 and 0.4%
							(k
							= 1), whereas the uncertainty for the copper amount determination using IDMS was between 0.45 and 1.0%
							(k
							= 2). This type of study will be of increasing relevance because of the drive by accreditation bodies for uncertainty estimates to be included as part of all accredited methods.
A system for the real-time monitoring of trace metals in surface ocean water has been77–79 used to map the spatial and temporal variation in the distribution of metals in the Pacific coastal margins off California. By integrating real-time ICP-MS measurements with hydrographic data and satellite imagery, it was possible to show an extreme depletion of Ba in ocean waters off the Baja coast78 and map the biogeochemical flux of non-conservative elements (Cd, Cu, Ni and Zn) in this region.77 A high resolution ICP-MS instrument has been used80 to monitor the Cu, Ni and Zn kinetics and equilibrium partitioning between dissolved and particulate phases in San Francisco Bay. The study employed additions of low natural abundance isotopes of each metal to sample mesocosms containing natural water and suspended sediment. Dissolved metal concentrations were then determined using an organic ligand sequential extraction technique followed by HR-ICP-MS measurement and the data used to determine the half-lives of each element.
Studies investigating the performance of new or improved methods of nebulization in ICP-MS have become less prevalent in the literature, so it is encouraging to see some recent work in this area. Any breakthrough in the efficiency of the nebulisation process in ICP-MS promises real improvements in both sensitivity and the reduction of some interferences. The use of ICP-MS with an ultrasonic desolvating nebulizer for the routine determination of uranium in natural water samples81 produced U234/U238 ratio measurements with precisions (0.5% RSD) intermediate between those of thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) and alpha spectrometry. The methodology was used in surface and ground water investigations to identify sources of water and determine mixing ratios in river systems. A method for the ultra-trace determination of Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, P, Pb, Re, Tl, V, Y and Zn in fresh water82 used a desolvating micronebulizer and a sector field ICP-MS instrument to achieve detection limits approximately 10 times better than previously published methods. By careful control of the blank quality and the use of a high resolution sector field instrument, unprecedented detection limits were achieved, e.g., 0.81 ppt for Fe and 0.014 ppt for Pb. The system was used to study the biogeochemistry of trace elements in Lake Superior.
2.3.4.2 Other MS methods. 
Isotope dilution thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS) was used to measure extremely low concentrations of protactinium in Atlantic Ocean sea-water.83 Concentrations of Pa231 in the range 50–2000 ag (10−18 g) could be determined in as little as 100 ml of filtered sea-water, which is significantly lower than the volume usually required for decay counting techniques or ICP-MS methods.

2.4 Metrology and data quality
This section deals with current work being undertaken in support of the use of quality systems or the establishment of such systems. It is encouraging to see indications that such studies are being carried out on several continents. Certification of the B, Cd, Cu, Mg and Pb contents of a synthetic water sample used in Comparison 1284 of the International Measurement Evaluation Programme (IMEP-12) has been described. The aim of IMEP, which is organized in support of the EU, is to demonstrate objectively the degree of equivalence and quality of chemical measurements made in individual laboratories by comparing them with reference values traceable to the SI unit of substance, the Mole. The contents of the sample used in the IMEP-12 round-robin study and the associated uncertainties were reported after their determination using isotope dilution calibration and ICP-MS detection. The paper focuses on B, which is particularly difficult to determine by ICP-ID-MS because of potential problems of low sensitivity, high mass discrimination, memory effects and abundance sensitivity. A complete uncertainty budget was reported for each element.
Work in the USA has concentrated on the establishment of standard methods of analysis that can be used to determine specific analytes according to a predefined instrumental protocol or standard operating procedure. To encourage the uptake of newer instrumental procedures, which can offer improvements in cost, speed or fitness-for-purpose, the ICP-MS method for the measurement of total uranium in environmental water samples (EPA 200.8) was compared85 with the accepted radiochemical method (EPA 908.0). Based on data from laboratory control standards, national proficiency test samples and drinking water samples from the State of Utah (USA), the minimum reporting limit for uranium was found to be a factor of 10 better using ICP-MS, compared with the radiochemical method. The authors concluded that EPA 200.8 is superior for the determination of U in drinking water at the concentrations required by the US EPA.
The Russian Academy of Science86 have described the preparation and assessment of a candidate reference sample of deep lake water from Lake Baikal, which has a calcium hydrocarbonate matrix typical of many river and lake waters. It will be certified for a range of macro- and micro-elements. Samples were taken from a great depth using a technology that preserves the initial composition of the water; trial batches were sampled annually and shown to be stable in terms of composition and homogeneity over a 9-year period.
3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materials
The past year has seen further consolidation of the use of ICP-MS as a routine method of analysis, with an ever-increasing number of papers concerned with novel, and often fascinating, applications of the technique's capabilities to determine elements and their isotopes at very low concentrations. In other respects it has been a year of steady progress in method improvement, often involving minor tinkering with conditions, but with speciation again figuring prominently.
3.1 Sample preparation

3.1.1 Sample dissolution procedures. 
As in past environmental updates, sample preparation procedures continue to be a major cause for concern and a focus of developmental effort. This is largely because the requirements of the determination technique to be used need careful consideration when selecting a sample dissolution procedure. In noteworthy studies, Jacob and Berndt87,88 coupled a high temperature/high pressure flow digestion system (maximum temperature >300 °C, maximum pressure >30 MPa) to a flame AAS instrument which enabled an effective and rapid on-line element determination in biological and environmental matrices. The reliability of the method was demonstrated by the determination of trace elements in various SRMs. In another study, a flow system coupled with FAAS was developed for tannin determination in pigeon pea samples.89 The method, which utilised the precipitation reaction between tannins and proteins, in this case haemoglobin, allowed 30 samples per hour to be analysed with a quantification limit of 0.27 mg l−1 for tannic acid, from monitoring the haemoglobin Fe.
Krachler and co-workers90 developed analytical procedures for the determination of REE in 250 mg sub-samples of difficult-to-digest peat and plant matrices by ICP-MS. Three different pressurised digestion approaches were employed for this purpose: (i) closed vessel acid digestion on a hot-plate at 180 °C; (ii) digestion in a microwave high pressure autoclave at 240 °C; and (iii) high pressure ashing (HPA) at 320 °C. High sample throughput (40 samples simultaneously in about 2 h) favours the microwave autoclave over the other two digestion systems. The accuracy of the optimised procedures was assessed by the determination of REE in digests of the CRM GBW 07602 bush branches and leaves and of the candidate RM CRM 670 aquatic plant.
As in most years in the recent past, there has been a steady flow of publications evaluating various microwave-assisted digestion procedures. This is because the use of microwave radiation to digest soil and plant materials has become a routine procedure in many laboratories due primarily to increased efficiency over conventional digestion methods. Araujo and co-workers91 studied the efficiency of microwave-assisted acid digestion of plants using different concentrations of HNO3 with 30%
						(v/v) H2O2 and measuring the residual carbon content (RCC) using ICP-OES with axial viewing. They concluded that microwave-assisted digestion of plant materials can be carried out under mild conditions which implies that digests do not need extensive dilution before introduction by pneumatic nebulisation to an ICP-OE spectrometer. Herrera and de Castro92 developed a dynamic system for the continuous leaching of Cd and Pb from leaves based on both microwave-assistance and iterative change of the flow direction of the leachate through the extraction cell. A slightly acid aqueous solution was used as leaching solution and the samples (0.5 g) were subjected to 10–15 min of 300 W microwave-assisted leaching prior to analysis by ETAAS. In their quest to propose a rapid, cheap and easily automated digestion method for monitoring heavy metal content in environmental samples, Sastre and colleagues93 compared the determination of Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn using two digestion protocols: a microwave assisted total digestion and an aqua regia extraction procedure based on the ISO 11466 method. From the results obtained, a decision flow chart for choosing a fit-for-purpose digestion procedure was suggested.
Tutschku et al.94 have described a method for the determination of methylmercury and butyltin compounds in marine sediment and tissue using microwave-assisted acid extraction or digestion and solid-phase micro-extraction (SPME), followed by analysis using GC-MIP-AES. Enrichment factors for methylmercury and butyltin compounds of 50–100 were achieved as compared with the typical hexane extraction. Measurements in marine tissue and sediments were possible at levels of 1–2 µg kg−1 for methylmercury and 10–100 ng kg−1 for butyltins. Gonzalez and Barnes95 compared microwave-assisted and waste extraction test (WET) preparation for ICP-MS or ICP-AES analyses of waste samples. The WET protocol, which is used in California to complement the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP), though very useful, is a time-consuming step in the determination of leaching and mobility. The newly optimised microwave extraction procedure proved simple and fast, thereby reducing sample treatment time by almost 280%. Other microwave-assisted digestion procedures that have been reported in the past year include those for the decomposition of vegetal materials,96 plant and bovine-derived materials97 and sludge, soil and sediment samples98 prior to multi-element determination by ICP-OES. Readers of this update interested in the length of time for which microwave digests can be stored prior to analysis should read a noteworthy contribution from Crumbaugh and Kalra.99 They observed minimal variation of elemental concentrations in microwave digests stored under four different sets of conditions throughout the eight months duration of their study.
The applications of ultrasound as a powerful tool for leaching have been reviewed by Luque-Garcia and de Castro.100 Ultrasound-assisted extraction, microwave-assisted acid leaching and reflux have been compared by Vaisanen and Suontamo101 for the determination of As, Cd and Cu in contaminated soil samples by ETAAS. In the study, the determination of Cd and Cu in ultrasound-assisted aqua regia extracts of contaminated soil SRMs was carried out with high accuracy and precision (RSD <5%), whereas the analysis of SRM 2711 failed to obtain the certified concentrations of Cd and Cu by microwave and reflux methods, respectively. The applicability of ultrasonic leaching by dilute acids (HNO3 and HCl) for determination of total metal contents in plant materials has been investigated.102 The method was successfully applied for the determination of Ba, Ca, Cd, Cu, Mg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sr and Zn. Five metals (Al, Cr, Fe, Ti and V) were found to be only partially extractable by dilute acids. In another study, a dynamic ultrasound-assisted extraction step was proposed for the quantitative extraction of Cd and Pb from plant leaves prior to determination by ETAAS.103 The precision of the method, together with its efficiency, rapidity, low cost and environmental acceptability, have been reported to make it a good alternative for the determination of trace metals in plant material.
A method for the determination of Hg and Tl in environmental samples by slurry sampling with ETV-ICP-MS, with permanganate as modifier, was investigated.104 The accuracy of the method was assured by the analysis of eight CRMs, using external calibration with aqueous standards prepared in the same medium as the slurries. The LOD values were 0.18 µg g−1 for Hg and 0.07 µg g−1 for Tl.
Two studies of recoveries of trace elements following novel sample preparation procedures deserve a mention. A single-step matrix removal method has been described for the separation of 13 elements from a high purity Ga matrix.105 The matrix was dissolved in concentrated HNO3 and precipitated as GaF3 by treatment with HF. The precipitate was centrifuged and the supernatant analysed by ICP-AES. The recoveries of 13 elements ranged from 90–98%. Rejnek106 has reported the mineralisation of biological materials for subsequent determination of metals by AAS. The conditions of decomposition by dry and wet mineralisation were verified on CRMs of apple tree leaves (NIST 1515) and human hair (GBW 07601). Good agreement between the measured and certified results was attained in microwave and dry mineralisation in UniClever and Apion mineralisers, respectively.


3.1.2 Speciation. 
Interest in the speciation of metals in soils and other materials has shown no sign of abating over the past year. A comprehensive review of sequential extraction schemes for metal fractionation in environmental samples, e.g., sediment, soil, sewage sludge, fly ash, etc., has been published by Filgueiras and colleagues.107 It contains more than 400 references and covers the literature published over the last decade.
A noteworthy contribution from Quevauviller108 provides an overview of the latest developments on certified reference material production for single and sequential extraction procedures applied to extractable trace elements. Such CRMs are very important for establishing reliability of operationally-defined extraction procedures.
The control of heavy metals is an important aspect of new European Union legislation on sludge treatment. An interesting paper109 reported the application of a sequential extraction protocol to the determination total metal contents and the distributions of metal species in sludge samples from conventional activated sludge wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), collected at different stages of an anaerobic sludge treatment process. Only 14% of the metal was present in readily available forms in treated sludges and the value dropped to 6% in composted sludges.
Those interested in organometallics speciation analysis should read a paper written by Encinar et al.110 summarising the possibilities of using isotopically-labelled species with GC-ICP-MS to validate speciation analysis of organometallic compounds in environmental samples. It reviews applications of this innovative tool to the study and validation of the reported solid/liquid extraction of butyltin species from a CRM sediment using different techniques, including mechanical shaking, microwave, ultrasonic and pressurised liquid extraction.
To characterise the mercury hazard in soil and sediment, a sequential extraction scheme has been developed for either routine laboratory analysis or on-site screening purposes to classify Hg species based on their environmental mobility and/or toxicity.111 The alkylmercury species and soluble inorganic species that contribute most to the potential Hg toxicity in the soil are extracted by an acidic ethanol solution (2% HCl + 10% ethanol) from soil matrices as “mobile and toxic” species. A HPLC system coupled with ICP-MS detection was used to resolve the species into soluble inorganic species (Hg2+), methylmercury and ethylmercury species. Alternatively, these species could be separated by solid phase extraction. In another study on Hg speciation in sediments of a tropical coastal environment, Wasserman and colleagues112 measured the concentrations of Hg species (Hg2+, methylmercury and dimethylmercury) in the sediments of Sepetiba Bay (Brazil) and compared the results with local geochemical parameters. Samples were extracted in an open microwave system and Hg speciation was carried out by ethylation, cryogenic focusing, GC and quartz furnace AAS. Eguchi and Tomiyasu113 proposed two methods for the speciation of Hg in marine sediment. One was for the differential determination of organic mercury, HgO and HgS in sediments based on extraction followed by a CV-AAS determination. In the other procedure, Hg was first extracted by shaking a sample with 1 M HCl containing 3% NaCl in the presence of CuCl. Organic Hg in the sample was extracted with chloroform. Another study evaluated the effect of acidification, reduction and oxidation processes on Hg mobility from sediments after the BCR three-step sequential extraction procedure (BCR-SEP) had been validated with other trace metals.114
A method for the speciation of volatile organoselenium compounds using solid phase micro-extraction (SPME), thermal desorption by an in-house developed desorption unit and detection by different detectors such as AAS and ICP-MS has been reported.115 Dimethylselenium and dimethyldiselenium could be separated and quantified in less than two minutes, with LOD values of 0.7 and 0.9 µg l−1, respectively, when ICP-MS detection was used. It is well known that some plants have the ability not only to grow in the presence of potential environmental contaminants, such as selenium, but also to accumulate them. Such plant species are therefore excellent candidates for Se phytoremediation. One of the accumulation mechanisms for Se-tolerant species is the formation of organoselenium compounds that cannot be incorporated into proteins, thereby avoiding toxicity.116 In the study, the Se speciation in wild-type and genetically modified Se accumulating plants was performed by ion-pairing reversed phase LC using ICP-MS as the detector. Pressurised liquid extraction using an accelerated solvent extractor (Dionex ASE 200) has been evaluated117 for the determination of mono-, di- and tributyltin (MBT, DBT, and TBT, respectively) in PACS-2 CRM. Scriver et al.118 described a procedure for the quantification of TBT in aqueous samples and extracts based on its relatively high volatility in halide media, thereby permitting vapour phase sampling from the headspace above such samples. Tributyltin chloride was purged from various chloride-containing aqueous matrices and collected on the surface of an iridium-treated graphite tube for subsequent quantitation by ETAAS. A procedural concentration LOD of 66 ng g−1 TBT in the sediment was claimed. Yang and co-workers119 studied the species-specific ID-based calibration for trace element speciation. Its combined uncertainty evaluation and determination of TBT in sediment by HPLC-ICP-MS were also reported.
Speciation of chromium has attracted a great deal of interest in view of the toxic properties of CrVI compared with the much less toxic CrIII. Stasinakis and colleagues120 developed a simple, integrated method for the speciation of Cr in wastewater and sewage sludge that utilised liquid anion exchange by Amberlite LA–2 and final determination by ETAAS. The LOD values were 0.39 and 0.45 µg l−1 for total Cr and CrVI, respectively, in the dissolved phase and 2.10 and 0.87 ng g−1 for total Cr and CrVI in the suspended solids. In a novel study,32 the techniques of diffusive gradients and equilibration in thin films have been combined in a single probe that can determine CrIII and CrVI simultaneously in solution. The assembly has a layer of polyacrylamide hydrogel overlying a separate layer of resin embedded in gel. CrIII species accumulate exclusively and quantitatively in the resin layer while CrVI species equilibrate with both hydrogel and resin layers. The technique has a great potential for assessing CrIII and CrVI concentrations in situ in environments near redox boundaries, where possible dynamic changes in CrIII and CrVI concentrations are occurring. A freshwater plant, duckweed, has been utilised to study the growth responses to, and accumulation of Cr in, the presence of Cu and Zn.121 Speciation analysis was carried out by using activated alumina. Metal ion concentrations in the plant were determined by FAA spectrometry. Results indicate that the oxidation state of Cr, as well as its concentration in the media, controlled the growth and the metal accumulation in duckweed.
Smith and co-workers122 have described the direct analysis of the volatile antimony compounds stibine, monomethylantimony, dimethylantimony and trimethylantimony using solid phase micro-extraction with polydimethylsiloxane fibres and GC-MS. The optimised method was applied to the analysis of headspace gases from cultures of Cryptococcus humicolus incubated with inorganic SbIII and SbV substrates.
The chemical forms of zinc in the Zn-tolerant and hyperaccumulator Arabidopsis halleri and in the non-tolerant and non-accumulator Arabidopsis lyrata subsp. petraea were determined at the molecular level by combining chemical analyses, EXAFS, synchroton-based X-ray microfluorescence, and µEXAFS.123 It is well known that understanding how environmentally important trace metals are sequestered in soils at the molecular scale is critical to developing a sound scientific basis for maintaining soil quality and formulating effective remediation strategies. Manceau and co-workers124 determined the speciation of Zn and Ni in ferromanganese nodules from loess soils of the Mississippi Basin by a synergistic use of three non-invasive synchrotron-based techniques: µXRF, µXRD and EXAFS.
In an interesting paper, Ipolyi and co-workers125 evaluated the performance of time-saving extraction devices in the BCR three-step sequential extraction procedure. They developed and optimised two alternative extraction methods—a routine ultrasonic bath and a microwave oven—for their eventual exploitation in the three-stage sequential extraction procedure proposed by the European Standards, Measurements and Testing (S, M & T) Programme (formerly BCR) for the operationally defined speciation of Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn. The conventional BCR three-stage sequential extraction procedure was modified at each stage, applying ultrasonic or microwave devices to shorten the required 16 h of shaking in all three steps. The original and newly developed alternative extraction methods were finally compared by the analysis of BCR 60l. Statistical evaluation of the results showed that the proposed accelerated sequential extraction methods with their much shorter extraction times are valid alternatives to conventional shaking. Giacomelli and co-workers126 studied the fractionation of Cd and Pb also in RM 601 following the BCR protocol for sequential extraction and determining the metals by EAAS using permanent modifiers. The LOD values obtained in the three extracts and for the three modifiers were of the same order of magnitude, ranging from 2–80 ng g−1 for Cd and 1.2–14 ng g−1 for Pb.
Bohari and co-workers127 developed a method for the determination of As species (arsenite, arsenate, monomethylarsonate and dimethylarsinate) and applied it to the study of arsenic speciation in plants. It uses ion-exchange LC coupled on-line to an AF spectrometer through continuous HG. Although none of the procedures tested gave fully satisfactory results with all kinds of plant samples, microwave-assisted extraction with 0.3 mol dm−3 H3PO4 was found to be the most convenient for dealing with terrestrial plants. Yin and co-workers62 developed a novel hyphenated technique, on-line coupling of capillary electrophoresis (CE) to AFS, for speciation analysis of four environmentally significant and toxic forms of As: arsenite, arsenate, monomethylarsenic acid and dimethylarsenic acid. HG was employed to convert the As species from the CE effluent into their respective hydrides. The detection limits were in the range of 9–18 µg l−1
						(as As) and the recoveries of the four As species in locally collected water samples and urine ranged from 91 to 115%. The technique was successfully applied to the speciation of the water–methanol extractable As in a sediment sample. In one particularly interesting study,128 a non-chromatographic speciation method was developed for the determination of water-soluble and phosphate-exchangeable AsIII and AsV in CRMs of coal fly ash and sediments by FI-HG-AAS. The LOD of As was around 0.07 µg l−1 for AsIII and 0.06 µg l−1 for total As after pre-reduction. Liquid chromatography coupled to AFS with post-column HG was used for comparison.
Garcia-Manyes and co-workers129 have developed a method for arsenic speciation in soils based on extraction with a mixture of 1 mol l−1 of H3PO4 and 0.1 mol l−1 of ascorbic acid, and measurement with the coupling of LC-UV-HG-ICP-MS. The method was applied to several contaminated Spanish agricultural soils and the results showed that arsenate was the main species in all the soils analysed. An assessment has been made130 of As speciation in soil solutions and soil water extracts using two different hyphenated techniques, HPIC-ICP-SFMS and cation exchange-ICP-SFMS. Arsenobetaine, dimethylarsinate, arsenite, monomethylarsonate and arsenate were separated using an anion exchange resin. The separation protocol also allowed arsenocholine to be determined. Excellent LOD values for the As species, in the range of 0.04–0.08 ng g−1 for HPIC-ICP-MS, were obtained. Moreover, the LOD values for cation exchange-ICP-SFMS were found to be 2 orders of magnitude better.130 Shi and colleagues131 developed an analytical procedure for determination of AsIII and AsV in soils using sequential extraction combined with FI-HG-AFS. The soils were sequentially extracted by water, 0.6 mol l−1 KH2PO4, 1%
						(v/v) HCl and 1%
						(w/v) NaOH. The extract was analysed for arsenite by HG-AFS in 0.1 mol l−1 citric acid, then the total As in the extract was determined by HG-AFS using on-line reduction of arsenate with L-cysteine. The concentration of arsenate was calculated by difference. The LOD values for AsIII and AsV were 0.11 and 0.07 μg 1−1, respectively.
Montperrus et al.132 compared water and “soft” extractions (NH3OHCl, ammonium oxalate and orthophosphoric acid) for the determination of As species (arsenite, arsenate, monomethylarsonic acid and dimethylarsinic acid) in three environmental RMs (river sediment, agricultural soil, sewage sludge) certified for their total As content. The analytical method used was ion exchange LC coupled on-line to an AF spectrometer via HG. Very low LOD values for As (0.02–0.04 mg kg−1) were obtained for all species. Orthophosphoric acid was the best extractant for sediment (mixed origin) and sludge samples (recent origin) but not for the old formation soil sample, from which As was extracted well only by oxalate.
The use of commercially available solid phase extraction (SPE) cartridges has continued unabated in the past year. Tangen et al.133 described the use of such devices for the fractionation of Al and Fe in soil water. Quantitative determination was by ICP-AES. The team studied different types of SPE cartridges, based on cation exchange, anion exchange and chelation, and recommend a procedure for the fractionation of Al and Fe species in soil and fresh water samples.


3.1.3 Selective extraction methods. 
The increasing use of the ICP-AES as an analytical technique has led to multi-nutrient extractants being preferred in routine soil analysis. Abreu and co-workers134 evaluated the efficiency of multi-nutrient extractants (DTPA, Mehlich 1, Mehlich 3 and ammonium bicarbonate–DTPA) for the determination of available Zn in soils. The DTPA solution was the most efficient extractant for the determination of bioavailable Zn when both crops (corn and soybean) were considered together. Moral and colleagues135 have recently observed that the measurement of heavy metals in soils in Spain was susceptible to problems in the standardisation of extraction procedures due to the wide diversity of soils, the low concentrations of these elements and the lack of appropriate analytical instruments. They therefore evaluated the extractability of Cd, Co, Cr, Ni and Pb from eight contaminated soils from Spain using NH4Cl, CaCl2, SrCl2 and DTPA as extractants. Quantification of dissolved metals was by ICP-MS using matrix-matched standards. The extractability of metals in calcareous soils was best determined by DTPA. In a comparison of chloride salts, they found a higher efficiency of extraction with NH4Cl for almost all the soils and heavy metals studied.
Filgueiras et al.136 developed a single extraction method based on the reagents employed in the EU Standards, Measurement and Testing Programme sequential extraction scheme for partitioning of Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni, and Pb in sediments. Small-scale extractions adapted to ETAAS determinations, i.e., 25 mg mass in 1 ml extractant, were used for the first time in conjunction with selective reagents and conventional operating conditions, i.e. conductive heating, magnetic stirring or ultrasound-assisted extraction. The methodology developed enabled extraction times to be drastically reduced, and savings in the amounts of sample and reagents were also achieved with small scale extractions.
A unique approach to improving the precision of quantification of tributyltin (TBT) in sediments by solid phase micro-extraction (SPME) using ID-GC-MS has been developed.137 A significant improvement in the precision was observed using SPME when a Sn117-enriched TBT spike was employed; the RSD decreased 4-fold to 3%. A 2-fold improvement in the precision of TBT concentration measurement using ID was achieved, demonstrating its superiority in providing more accurate and precise results as compared with the method of standard additions. The ID technique eliminated the problem of poor reproducibility, which typically plagues SPME.
Morales-Munoz et al.138 have proposed the use of acidified and pressurised hot water leaching of Cd and Pb from plants prior to determination by EAAS. The repeatability and within-laboratory reproducibility obtained were 3.7 and 2.3% for Cd and 1.04 and 6.3% for Pb, respectively. Therefore, the precision of the method, together with its efficiency, rapidity and environmental acceptability, makes it a good alternative for the determination of trace metals in plant material. In a similar study, Priego-Lopez and de Castro139 proposed the use of acidified sub-critical water for the continuous extraction of As, Cd, Cu, Hg, Pb and Se from soils prior to: (a) continuous derivatisation (by hydride formation for As and Se, and CV formation for Hg) and determination by AFS; and (b) determination by ETAAS for Cd, Cu and Pb. The good reproducibility of the method, together with its safety and low cost, make it a good alternative for metal extraction from contaminated soils.
Ellwood and Maher140 have suggested that the extraction of sediments with 0.5 M H3PO4 and 0.1 M NH3OHCl allowed the measurement of labile arsenic species while preserving the two redox states of As. The forms and concentrations of As species were measured using HPLC-ICP-MS. A Hamilton PRPX-100 strong anion exchange column using a 20 mM ammonium phosphate buffer (pH 6 and 9.2) was used to separate As species. The As recoveries from sediments spiked with AsV were quantitative whereas, for sediments spiked with AsIII, recoveries of between 89 and 104% were obtained from four oxic sediment CRMs and an anoxic sediment.
In a study on the extraction of trace elements from spruce needles, Lesniewicz and Zyrnicki141 investigated the effectiveness of the extraction process under various experimental conditions, e.g., kind and concentration of extractant, temperature and leaching time. They found that, for some elements, the digestion procedure could be successfully replaced by a solid–liquid extraction process.

3.2 Instrumental methods of analysis

3.2.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. 
A useful review of applications of FAAS to environmental measurements has been published, mainly based on papers published from 1999–2002.142 Another paper reviewed conditions for the determination of As, Sb and Se by HG-AAS.143
A contribution from Welz and colleagues144 discussed instrumentation for AAS using a high-intensity xenon short-arc lamp as a continuum radiation source, a high-resolution double-echelle monochromator, and a CCD array detector that provided a resolution of about 2 pm per pixel. Eight major advantages of the technique were listed in the paper, which all spectroscopists interested in the use of continuum sources for AAS should consult. Another paper from Welz and his team145 used similar equipment to investigate the spectral interferences found with a conventional line-source AA spectrometer in the determination of Tl in marine sediment RMs. A transversely heated graphite furnace was used as the atomiser unit, and the samples were introduced in the form of slurries. The Tl content of environmental samples was measured using ETA and ETV techniques, paying special attention to potential interferences and their control.
Ribeiro and co-workers43 have described a quartz tube atomizer with tungsten coil for the determination of As in a FI-HG system which included a Nafion® membrane that continuously dries the gaseous species, allowing removal of 4.2 mg min−1 of water, corresponding to an efficiency of 92.7%. A LOD of 1.5 mg l−1 and an analytical frequency of 60 determinations per hour were achieved.
Kenduzler and Turker146 developed an AAS method for the determination of trace Cu with pre-concentration by adsorption of its 1-nitroso-2-naphthol-3,6-disulfonic acid chelate on Ambersorb 572 in the pH range 1–8. The Cu chelate was eluted with 5 ml of 0.1 mol l−1 KCN and determined by FAAS. A LOD of 0.34 μg l−1 for Cu and an high enrichment factor of 200 were obtained. The accuracy of the method was confirmed by analysing NIST 1573a tomato leaves and lead base alloy (NBS 53e) and the results demonstrated good agreement with the certified values.
Sometimes, concentrations of elements in soil extracts are very low and conventional analytical methods are not sensitive enough. In an interesting paper, Bujdos and co-workers147 evaluated a very sensitive hydride generation method for the determination of cadmium in soil extracts by AAS. They obtained a LOD of 0.05 ng ml−1 and the precision for 10 replicate analyses of 1 ng ml−1 solution of Cd was ±4%. The method was verified using CRMs. The error that the presence of dimethylselenium and dimethyldiselenium can cause in the determination of inorganic Se by HG techniques has been evaluated.148 The magnitude of error depended on the analytical detector used. A rapid and sensitive method for enrichment and separation of trace amounts of Ga has been established by using a mini-column filled with Amberlite XAD-4.149 Gallium as a 4-(2-thiazolylazo)resorcinol complex was sorbed on the Amberlite XAD-4 resin and easily eluted by using 1 M HNO3; Ga was determined by AAS. The procedure was applied to the determination of Ga in sediment RM (GBW 07309) and water samples with satisfactory results (recovery 95%; relative error 3%; RSD 10%). In another study, a simple and reliable method for the determination of As in sediment and in coal without sample digestion, based on HG from slurry samples, was proposed.150 The advantage of the method was reported to be that only a minimum of reagents and sample handling were required, thereby reducing the risks of contamination or determinand loss. The LOD values for 1 ml of slurry containing 1 mg of sample were 0.54 and 0.7 μg g−1 for coal and sediment, respectively.
Xie and co-workers have developed a method for the determination of traces of mercury in the soil, plants and traditional Chinese medicines using FI quartz tube-AAS.151 The characteristic mass of the method was 59 pg, the LOD was 0.028 μg l−1, RSD was <3.9% and the recovery was about 94%. Yang et al.152 described a method for the determination of total Hg by ETAAS using an in situ concentration technique with a Pd–Zr coating and a chemical modifier. The characteristic mass was 42 pg and the absolute LOD was 33 pg with the proposed modifier. The method was successfully applied to the determination of Hg in biological tissue samples with a recovery range of 94–105%. Da Silva et al.153 investigated Ir, Pd, Rh and Ru, thermally deposited on the platform, as permanent modifiers by for the determination of Hg in ash, sludge, marine and river sediment RMs using solid sampling ETAAS. The performance of Pd was found to be most consistent. The results obtained for Hg in ash, sludge and sediment RMs, using direct solid sampling and calibration against aqueous standards, were satisfactory for a routine procedure, as was the LOD of 0.2 mg kg−1.
A simultaneous sample digestion and determination of Cd, Cu and Pb in biological samples using thermospray flame-furnace AAS (TS-FF-AAS) with slurry sample introduction has been described by Pereira and his colleagues.154 The detection limits for Cd, Cu and Pb using the procedure were found to be 0.5, 4.3 and 3.5 μg g−1, respectively. A t-test showed no differences between the measured and certified values at a 95% confidence level.
Myohanen and co-workers155 developed a method for the simultaneous multi-element determination of As, Cd, Cr and Pb in aqua regia digests of soils and sediments using ETAAS with a transversely heated graphite atomiser and longitudinal Zeeman-effect background correction. A fast furnace program with no pyrolysis stage or chemical modifier was used. The method LOD values calculated from blank samples were 9.5 μg l−1, 0.18 μg l−1, 6.2 μg l−1 and 2.5 μg l−1 for As, Cd, Cr and Pb, respectively. Fast furnace programs were found to be suitable for the simultaneous determination of the four elements in aqua regia digests of soils and sediments. Filgueiras et al.156 compared the conventional and fast thermal programme approaches for the determination of total and extractable Cd in sediments by EAAS following the BCR sequential extraction scheme. Quantitative Cd recoveries could be attained when hot injection and omission of the pyrolysis stage were implemented even in the absence of a Pd matrix modifier. Campillo et al.157 have developed fast programme methodologies for determining Cr, Mo and V in soil, sediment and sludge samples prepared as slurries. Suspensions were prepared by weighing 10–250 mg of sample and adding 25 ml of a solution containing 2.5% and 50% v/v of concentrated HF for V and Mo determination, respectively. No modifier other than HF was required and calibration was carried out using aqueous standards. The reliability of the procedure was checked by comparing the results obtained with others based on microwave-oven sample digestion and analysing various CRMs. The LOD values were 70, 22 and 11 pg for V, Mo and Cr, respectively.
Dobrowolski158 studied and optimised the analytical conditions for Tl determination in soils and sediments by slurry sampling ETAAS. Elimination of a strong background for soils rich in organic materials by application of tungsten carbide-coated graphite tubes/platforms was studied in detail. Application of a strong basic anion-exchange resin for interference elimination in Tl determination in marine sediments was described. A characteristic mass of 13.8 pg was obtained and the LOD for the proposed method was around 0.06 μg g−1. Borges and co-workers159 proposed an ETAAS procedure for the determination of Cd in sediment and sewage sludge slurries. Two permanent modifiers deposited on the platform were tested, Ru and Ir. Modifiers in solution were also tested, Pd plus Mg and phosphate alone or plus Mg. The Ir-treated tube was adopted for practical reasons and because of its good performance. The LOD was 43 ng g−1 in the solid sample and the RSD for the sediment MESS-2 was 2.3%
						(n
						= 10).
Moreda-Pineiro and co-workers160 used Ir-treated graphite tubes for pre-concentration and atomisation of the As, Bi and Se hydrides generated from acidified slurries of marine sediment, soil and coal samples. A batch mode generation system was used for the HG. The variables affecting the acidified slurry preparation procedure (assisted by ultrasonic energy) and the HG/trapping/atomisation processes were studied by using a Plackett–Burman design. The accuracy of the method was verified by analysing PACS-1 (Marine Sediment), GBW-07401 (Soil) and NIST SRM 1632c (Coal) CRMs.
A graphite-furnace AAS method utilising ultrasonic slurry-sampling has been developed for the determination of Ga in soils.161 Of the many potential modifiers tested, i.e., Al, As, Co, Mg, Mo, Ni, Pd, Pd + Mg, Se and Te, Ni was found to be best. The LOD for Ga was 3.0 μg l−1 in soil slurry solution, equivalent to 0.008 μg g−1 in the soil samples. Chemical interference was observed when the acid mixture used to dissolve the samples contained HF. This was eliminated when Ni was added as chemical modifier.
Several interesting studies of modifiers in ETAAS have been reported. The determination of Co in marine sediments by ETAAS was studied using no modifier and Mg and Ti as modifiers.162 In the original matrix, LOD values of 0.4 μg g−1 using no modifier and 0.3 μg g−1 with Ti as modifier were obtained. Lima and co-workers163 thermally deposited different permanent modifiers (W, Rh, Ir, Ru, W–Rh, W–Ru, W–Ir) on the integrated platform of a transversely heated graphite atomiser for the determination of As, Cd and Pb in soil, coal, natural waters and sediments by ETAAS. The performance of the modifiers during the analysis of real samples depended strongly on the type of permanent modifier chosen. However, the results obtained using different permanent modifiers were in agreement with the certified values for CRMs. In another study, the effect of Mg(NO3)2 was compared with that of other modifiers (Pd and Ni nitrates) in the determination of As, Sb and Se by AAS with ETA or HG and in situ preconcentration in the graphite tube.164 In determinations with atomisation in a graphite furnace, the effects of all these modifiers were comparable, while in those with HG and in situ preconcentration in a graphite tube, the Mg modifiers showed poorer performance and a 25% decrease in the analytical signal. In another study, different permanent modifiers (Rh, Ir, Ru, W–Rh, W–Ru, and W–Ir) thermally deposited on the integrated platform of a transversely heated graphite atomizer were employed for the determination of Cd in soil, coal, coal fly ash and sediments by ETAAS.165 Microwave digests of solid samples were used to obtain the analytical characteristics of the method with different permanent modifiers. The Rh, Ir and Ru permanent modifiers were not suitable for Cd determination, where recoveries were always lower than 90%. On the other hand, using W–W, W–Ru and W–Ir as the permanent modifiers, the recoveries obtained were within 95–104% for all samples. The results for Cd in CRMs, employing different permanent modifiers, were in agreement with certified values.
Meeravali and Kumar166 developed a slurry atomization procedure for the determination of total Sn in environmental samples such as stream sediment, oyster tissue and total diet using a Zr–Ir permanent chemical modifier and transverse heated ETAAS. It was validated by analysing RMs. With a Zr–Ir-coated tube, the characteristic mass obtained was 38 ± 2 pg, which is nearly a five-fold improvement compared with that obtained with an uncoated tube. The tube lifetime using aqueous standards and slurries was almost 500 atomisation cycles. The Zr–Ir permanent chemical modifier virtually eliminated the interference effects from chloride, phosphate and silica, giving nearly 90–100% recovery in the presence of 100 mg of the matrix. However, in the presence of 100 mg of sulfide, aluminium nitrate and sodium silicate, recoveries ranged from 30–60%, indicating the presence of matrix interferences.
Kakhnovich167 observed that the determination of As in soil suspensions using the conventional regime of furnace heating (drying, thermal processing, and atomization) can result in errors because of the spectral interference of Si and Al compounds. Although these were eliminated by the use of PdCl2 as a modifier, Pd salts are expensive reagents. Kakhnovich therefore proposed a simple and inexpensive procedure for the determination of As by excluding the thermal processing stage in the heating regime; the evaporation of interfering components and As were thus separated in time, which allows the interferences to be eliminated without a modifier.
Tube ageing has been studied as an important quality factor in the direct determination of Sb in solid samples by ultrasonic slurry sampling-ETAAS.168 The influence of several factors on the tube ageing was evaluated, including the nature and amount of sample matrix and hence concomitants introduced into the atomiser. Scanning electron microscopy and XRD analyses were employed to assess degradation of the L'vov platform.


3.2.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. 
Several comparisons of methods have involved AES. The analytical capabilities of ICP-AES and deuteron activation associated with prompt gamma-rays and delayed X-rays have been investigated by Pillay et al.169 for the determination of transition metals. The sensitivities of the three methods are given and the general applicability of each technique is evaluated. The potential of the three techniques for routine analysis is discussed. Beccaloni et al.170 studied the possible problems during the determination of As by ICP-AES and AAS using two different wavelengths: 188.98 nm and 193.70 nm. Spectral interference was observed during determination by ICP-AES and matrix interference during determination by AAS, in particular using ETAAS with deuterium background correction and HGAAS. They concluded that each of the methods, apart from ETAAS with Zeeman background correction, had its particular drawbacks and no special advantage over other techniques.
The influence of matrix elements such as Ba, Ca, Fe, K, Na and Ti on ICP-AES determination of the REEs in soils and sediments was investigated171 and analytical lines with minimal interferences were recommended. A cation-exchange procedure permitted the determination of 12 REEs with good accuracy (below 10%) and LOD values between 0.05 mg kg−1 for Eu, Tb, Yb and 0.5 mg kg−1 for Er.
It is well known that research on acidic forest soils often uses unbuffered salt solutions as extractants for exchangeable cations. The resulting highly saline solutions usually present analytical problems in FAAS and DCP-AES. Similar problems have been reported by users of ICP-AES. Even though ICP manufacturers usually list precautions to help minimise the salt effect, such issues are seldom mentioned in published articles nowadays. Hislop and Hornbeck172 tried various modifications to eliminate the effects of high dissolved salts on ICPs, including varying parameters such as gas flow rates, sample introduction rates, dilution rates, etc. A 15 s increase of sample uptake and rinse times for the KCl method decreased the LOD by 12%, and carry-over by 25%.
The importance of appropriate internal standards in ICP-AES cannot be over emphasised. Grotti et al.173 developed a systematic procedure for the selection of optimal internal standards in ICP-OES. They verified that the proposed procedure was suitable for choosing the optimal reference lines by analysing both synthetic and real samples.
De la Rosa and co-workers174 demonstrated that ICP-OES permits the determination of trace metal binding to organic matter at ppb concentrations, and showed that pH values of 4 and 5 were the most favourable for binding process. Gasparics and co-workers175 have reported the development of a size exclusion HPLC-ICP-AES method to elucidate the role of citric acid in the complexation of nickel in xylem saps of Ni-contaminated cucumber plants previously grown in nitrate- or urea-containing nutrient solutions.
Lopez-Molinero and co-workers176 have proposed a new method for the determination of Sb in soils based on chemical vapour generation of SbIII with bromide, after reaction in H2SO4 medium and transport of the gaseous phase into an ICP. Measurement of Sb emission intensity at 217.581 nm gave an absolute LOD of 3.5 ng and a precision (RSD) of 5.8% for the injection of five replicates of 175 ng SbIII.
The potential of infrared laser ablation (LA) coupled with ICP-AES as a technique for the determination of trace Cr, Cu, Ni, V and Zn in agricultural soils has been investigated by Mikolas and co-workers.177 Soil samples were mixed with powdered Ag as a binder and an internal standard (GeO2) and pressed into pellets. Accuracy of the proposed method was also tested using CRM soils. The bias did not exceed 10% relative. Suyanto and co-workers178 developed a new technique involving laser plasma confinement and bending effects for direct powder spectrochemical analysis by LA. The spectra of various powder samples such as CuCl2, NaCl and ZnS were measured. The results showed that this technique offers a promising practical alternative for direct spectrochemical analysis of small powder samples, exhibiting extremely low background at reduced surrounding air pressure. In another study, the effect of laser defocusing on analytical performance of LA-ICP-AES has been investigated by varying laser focus conditions with respect to the surface of a low-alloy steel and a powdered sediment pellet.179 Laser-induced plasma (LIP) and LA-ICP-AES emission signals and LIP excitation temperatures (LIP T-ex) were determined and compared for different laser defocus conditions. It was concluded that LIP T-ex and LIP and LA-ICP-AES Fe emission signals depend on laser shot conditions (focus–defocus), and also on the texture, mineralogy, hardness, conductivity and heat capacity of the sample.
The effect of several inorganic (nitric, sulfuric and hydrochloric) and organic (acetic, mercaptoacetic and tartaric) acids on the continuous hydride generation determination of Sn by ICP-OES has been evaluated.180 Employing reduction with sodium tetrahydroborate, the best sensitivity was observed with 2.5 M acetic acid. The LOD for optimised conditions in acetic acid was 0.1 ng ml−1 and method repeatability was in the 3.1–4.5% RSD range. The accuracy of the method was tested by analysis of a soil CRM (GBW 07405).
The use of Ir as a permanent modifier for the determination of Cd and Pb in marine sediment and biological tissues by electrothermal vaporisation plasma emission spectrometry was evaluated by Grinberg and co-workers.181 Good precision (less than 3% RSD) could be achieved with the proposed method. Standard addition calibrations were used to compensate for matrix interference and good agreement was achieved between measured and certified values. LOD values of 3.8 ng g−1 for Pb and 4.0 ng g−1 for Cd in MESS-3 and PACS-2 marine sediment and 4.1 ng g−1 for Pb and 2.2 ng g−1 for Cd in DOLT–2 and TORT–2 biological tissues were obtained.
Zarcinas182 compared ICP-OES analytical wavelengths for lead at 168 and 220 nm in high Fe and Al matrices. The Pb 168 nm line gave a superior detection limit and was less prone to matrix, background continuum radiation and inter-element interference from high concentrations of Al and Fe compared to the Pb 220 nm line.


3.2.3 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. 
As in recent updates, there is not much to report about atomic fluorescence spectrometry in terms of new developments. Liu and colleagues183 described a method for the determination of available AsIII and AsV in soils by FI-HG-AFS. The AsIII in the extract was determined by HG-AFS in 0.1 mol l−1 citric acid medium, and total As was determined after on-line FI reduction of AsV by L-cysteine; the concentration of AsV as calculated by difference. The LOD values of AsIII and AsV were 0.11 and 0.07 ng ml−1, respectively, and the RSD was 1.43 for 7 determinations of 10 ng ml−1 AsIII solution. In another study, the separation and determination of As species in plants using HPLC-HG-AFS, with emphasis on sample extraction procedures, was reported.184 Various extractants were used to extract As species from plants in order to investigate the uptake, transfer and accumulation processes of the element. The analytical procedure was validated by analysing a peach leaves SRM, and successfully used for As speciation in plants grown on contaminated soil near an As mine.


3.2.4 Mass spectrometry. 
3.2.4.1 Inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry. 
As the use of ICP-MS becomes more and more commonplace for the routine analysis of large numbers of samples, the problems encountered may differ from those experienced in the method development phase. A review of routine procedural problems in environmental analysis by ICP-MS is therefore welcome.185 Issues covered include choice of measurement parameters, calibration blanks, curve algorithms and their long-term reliability, internal standards, correction equations and recalibration procedures.
Aside from the more common usage of ICP-MS as a routine multi-element analytical technique, isotope ratio mass spectrometry is also growing in popularity in environmental investigations. For example it has been applied using 15N tracers to study differences in δ-15N signatures of amino acids of various plant species compared with those of their parent soils.186 In another study, 15N-labelled gases were used to study changes in composition of gases stored in septum-sealed vials.187 A particularly novel application was the study of the fate of pulse-tracers of 13C applied to plants throughout the root rhizosphere, which was studied using soil thin sections.188 The presence of recent photo-synthates in the rhizosphere at one and four weeks after pulse spiking was confirmed.
Precise measurement of isotope ratios may be required for several reasons, e.g., to give insight into processes in which an element is involved or to indicate the source of one or more particular elements. In this context, many applications of ICP-MS have been reported. For Hf, isotope ratios have been used to differentiate between contributions of ancient sediments and plume emissions in the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.189 Isotope ratios of Sr have been used to establish the provenance of brown rice.190 Determinations of U isotope ratios, for example 236U : 238U or 235U : 238U, have been reported.191,192 These are usually conducted as part of investigations of possible contamination with radiogenic isotopes, and studies of Pu isotopes are often performed for the same reason.193–196 A procedure using 232Pu as a tracer in the determination of 239Pu, 240Pu and 237Np has been described that was suitable for soil and sea-water.197 Another paper has described a method for the separation and preconcentration of Np and Pu isotopes from sediment matrices prior to their measurement by ICP-MS.198 Two reports have been published on the determination of 99Tc,199,200 one giving an RSD for 99Tc in soil of less than 4%.199
A great advantage of ICP-MS over ICP-AES is that it may be used in conjunction with isotope dilution methodology. Thus, ID-ICP-MS has been applied to the determination of Pb in plants and human hair,201 Pt in road dusts,202 and B in cellular fractions of coffee leaves.203 Synthesised butyltin compounds labelled with 118Sn have been exploited in Sn speciation studies of sediments,204 and the more general potential of such labelling has been discussed.110 Techniques involving ID have also been applied successfully to the determination of Cd, Mo, Th and U in sediments.205
Electrothermal vaporisation is sometimes used in environmental analyses by ICP-MS to further enhance sensitivity for elements present at very low concentrations. Vanhaecke and co-workers206 used ETV from a graphite furnace in combination with ICP-MS for the determination of Pt and Rh in environmental matrixes. By heating the graphite furnace according to a multi-step temperature program, spectral interferences were avoided. The results obtained agreed within the experimental uncertainty with the corresponding certified values or those obtained using pneumatic nebulisation ICP-MS. For a typical sample mass of 2 mg, LOD values were 0.35 ng g−1 for Pt and 0.05 ng g−1 for Rh. Other researchers have used ETV with permanganate as modifier and ICP-MS for the determination of Hg and Tl in environmental RMs using slurry sampling and aqueous standards.104,207
Hydride generation, like ETV, is sometimes used with ICP-MS to enhance sensitivity. In a study of As speciation,129 the extracted As species were separated by LC prior to UV photo-oxidation and HG sample introduction to the ICP. Others have recommended HG for the sensitive determination of traces of Pb in biological and geological samples, because LODs down to 0.002 ng ml−1 could be obtained with ICP-MS.208
The application of ICP-MS using conventional sample introduction is becoming very popular in biomonitoring studies, because of its low LOD values for many elements. Papers have appeared on the analysis of mosses209–211 and lichens21 for this purpose. In the lichen study, HF was included in the sample preparation stage to ensure dissolution of atmospheric soil dust particulates.
The expense of multi-element analysis by ICP-MS can be justified in many studies. For example, if, as claimed, irrigation of rice with water containing REE increases production capacity and disease resistance, the uptake of REE and other elements by the rice plants is clearly of great interest212 and ICP-MS provides adequate sensitivity. As more and more elements have become determinable at ultra-trace levels in environmental samples such as soil solution, the possibility has opened up for improving our understanding of what regulates the solubility of these elements.213 As discussed above for lichens, another study involving peat and plant samples also showed the need to include HF in the sample treatment for complete recovery of many trace elements present.214 This will cause safety concerns in some laboratories.
Generally speaking, however, ICP-MS is popular because of its capacity for single or multi-element determinations with very low detection limits. This is apparent from the range of elements and matrices being studied. These include Pd in soils215 and tree growth rings,216 Re in plant samples,217 Cu and Zn in fractionated legume seed extracts,218 As in As-containing species in soil solution and soil water extracts,130 As and Sb in ancient peat samples,219 organically-bound I in soil humic substances after fractionation by size exclusion chromatography,220 and a wide range of elements in rock leachates.221 As in previous years, ICP-MS has also been the method of choice for the analysis of REE in environmental materials in many studies.90,222,223–226.
The sensitivity of ICP-MS has been exploited in a number studies of selenium in the environment, such as the determination of Se in bio-accumulator plants,227 including some after genetic modification.116 The volatilisation of Se compounds from such plants has been studied,115,228 because it is of considerable interest to those interested in Se biogeochemistry and biogeochemical cycling, and to those interested in the toxicity of the element.
3.2.4.2 Secondary ion mass spectrometry. 
Secondary ion mass spectrometry is a sensitive, high resolution technique capable of mapping the distribution of elements or ions in a sample down to sub-cellular levels. This may be superimposed onto an image of the plant cell or tissue generated by ion-induced secondary electrons. Feeney and co-workers229 studied the distribution of sulfur in wheat starchy endosperm cells using SIMS combined with isotope enhancement and demonstrated that isotopic enrichment can be used to extend the applications of SIMS technology for biological systems.
In the search for a new methodological approach to investigating the role of boron in plant physiology, Derue and co-workers230 assessed the potential of SIMS for imaging 10B and 11B, at physiological concentrations, in plants. They were able to map quantitatively the two B isotopes in control and B-enriched plants, evaluate B concentrations at the level of individual cells and determine B isotopic ratios.
Appelhans and co-workers231 suggested that the lower anion signals measured during SIMS analyses of organophosphorus compounds adsorbed onto soils may be due to sample charging. Consequently, they constructed an electron flood gun and integrated it into one end cap of an ion trap secondary ion mass spectrometer, maintaining the geometry of the self-stabilising extraction optics of the instrument. However, the results showed that low anion signals from the soils were not due to sample charging. The study also showed that the electron flood gun could be intentionally operated to produce EI spectra in the SIMS instrument. This offers the opportunity to measure, nearly simultaneously, species evaporating from a sample, via EI, and species bound to the surface, via SIMS.
Large sample sizes are required normally for accurate gas-phase isotope ratio mass spectrometric analysis, so researchers have been unable to study C and N cycling at microbial scales. To get over this limitation, Cliff and co-workers232 have explored the use of TOF-SIMS to detect 13C and 15N assimilation by individual bacterial cells and to quantify N isotope ratios in bacterial samples and individual fungal hyphae. TOF-SIMS was successfully used to locate and quantify the relative N15 contents of individual hyphae that grew onto Si contact slides in intimate contact with a model organomineral porous matrix composed of kaolin, straw fragments, and freshly deposited manure that was supplemented with 15N3O. The results illustrate that TOF-SIMS has the potential to locate N-assimilating micro-organisms in soil and to quantify the 15N content of cells that have assimilated 15N-labelled mineral N, and show promise as a tool with which to explore the factors controlling microsite heterogeneities in soil. Crone and colleagues112 showed that TOF-SIMS is a useful technique for determining elemental distribution and for measuring B isotopic ratios with high precision in a single foraminiferal shell.
3.2.4.3 Thermal ionisation mass spectrometry. 
Where high precision measurement of isotope ratios is required, TIMS is still often regarded as the technique of choice. It has been used over the past year for the measurement of lead isotope ratios to characterise the origins of Pb at remote locations in the Scottish uplands233 and to determine 235U : 238U ratios.234 It has been suggested, however, that ICP-MS is replacing TIMS for precise isotope ratio measurement.235


3.2.5 Developments in X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. 
The non-destructive nature, easier sample preparation and simultaneous multi-element analysis capability of the ED-XRF spectrometry, make it an attractive technique for the elemental analysis of a wide range of materials. Readers interested in XRF are referred to the atomic spectrometry update on X-ray fluorescence spectrometry in this series.236 A portable XRF instrument has been evaluated as a tool for testing the Pb content of soil during investigations of the homes of children suffering from lead poisoning.237 The XRF readings were highly correlated with laboratory results and satisfied the study criteria for an acceptable screening method. Potts et al.238 investigated the use of portable X-ray fluorescence in the characterisation of As contamination associated with industrial buildings at a heritage arsenic works site in Cornwall, UK. It proved to be highly effective in locating sources of contamination at the site and in providing data that allowed a hypothesis for the origin of this contamination to be formulated and tested in the field. In another study, the backscatter fundamental parameter (BFP) algorithm was adapted and modified for the use with a portable ED-XRF spectrometer system.239 The method utilises coherently and incoherently scattered peaks of primary radiation to estimate the “dark matrix” of the analysed sample. A so-called “full fundamental parameter” model was implemented in the algorithm, allowing simple calibration of the method with only one standard. Differential mass scattering cross-sections were used to improve accuracy. The method was successfully applied to in situ element determinations in soil.
X-ray fluorescence determination of heavy metals in solutions after pre-concentration of their pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate complexes on cellulose filters has been carried out by Gordeeva et al.240 Conditions for the quantitative extraction of Co, Cu, FeIII, Ni, Pb, VIV and Zn from solutions were studied, and the LOD values were 0.1, 1.2, 0.4, 0.2, 0.2, 0.4 and 0.3 μg on the filter, respectively.
In synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence experiments, the escape peaks, generating from the Si (Li) solid detector can seriously disrupt quantitative and qualitative analysis. Kang et al.241 measured and calculated escape peak positions and intensities for 12 elements, using 14 specimens such as metals, compounds and plants. In accordance with calculations, both the experimental and theoretical ratios decreased from 1% to 0.1% with increasing atomic number from 18 to 33.
Non-destructive assay and defect analysis probes based on bremsstrahlung-induced processes have been developed to identify elements and probe defects in large volume samples.242 Bremsstrahlung beams from electron accelerators with end-point energies both above and below the neutron emission threshold were used. Chemical assays of heavy elements in thick samples up to 10 g cm−2 were provided by energy dispersive XRF measurements. The proposed approach could be developed into a technique to trace some heavy metals in large rock and soil samples.
Schelle and co-workers243 have developed a rapid and simple method for multi-element analysis of tree bark using ED-XRF spectrometry. Sample preparation consisted of crushing tree bark into a fine powder prior to the production of pressed pellets. The LOD values for Ag, Al, As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sb, Sn, Ti and Zn were below the μg g−1 level. Analysis of CRMs (fly-ash, soil and tea leaves) was used to check the accuracy and precision. Schimidt et al.244 have accomplished the simultaneous determination of chemical elements in soil standards, plant standards, and mixtures of Pb and S salts diluted in silica by ED-XRF spectroscopy using various multivariate calibration models: back propagation (neural network), Levemberg–Marquardt neural network and radial basis function neural network, fuzzy modelling and partial least squares regression. Savichev and Sorokin245 proposed a procedure for the XRF analysis of soil and rocks using the simplified fundamental parameters method, plotting calibration graphs of line intensity corrected for sample absorption versus concentration. A level of accuracy approaching the theoretical limit was achieved by using K as a reference element. In another study,246 the performance of an ED-XRF system in analysing 15 important trace elements (Co, Cr, Cu, Ga, Nb, Ni, Pb, Rb, Sr, Th, U, V, Y, Zn and Zr) in soils and sediment samples has been investigated. The elements were divided into two groups and determined at different operating conditions suitably optimised for each group. Well characterised soil and sediment RMs were used to estimate the precision and accuracy of the data. The proposed analysis scheme may prove useful when a large number of soil and sediment samples have to be analysed. Naftel and co-workers247 reported two preliminary studies. In one, XRF mapping at a micron scale was used to examine the metal distributions within the roots and rhizosphere of trees. In the other, the effects of earthworm digestion on metal co-ordination were investigated using micro X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy (XANES).


3.2.6 Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. 
Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy has been applied on board ship in the Antarctic to analyse marine sediments collected using different sampling systems.248 Qualitative and quantitative analyses were performed on dried samples, without any further pre-treatment. Quantitative LIBS analyses were performed on a limited number of samples and the results reported were comparable to those for CRMs of Antarctic sediments. In another study soils from various sites have been analysed with the LIBS technique for total carbon and nitrogen.249 Results for carbon were strongly correlated with those from a standard laboratory-based technique involving sample combustion. The LIBS technique has the potential to be packaged into a field-deployable instrument.


3.2.7 Particle induced X-ray emission. 
Oksanen et al.250 studied the feasibility of the PIXE technique for varve counting of vertically taken (cored) marine and lacustrine sediments with a view to its possible use as a dating procedure by observing the yearly variation of the constituent elements. The samples were impregnated with a low viscosity epoxy resin to obtain slabs with preserved layered structure suitable for the PIXE analyses.


3.2.8 Spark-induced breakdown spectroscopy. 
Spark-induced breakdown spectroscopy (SIBS) is a recently developed AF-based analytical technique that is analogous to LIBS. SIBS, however, uses an electrical plasma generation method on non-conductive samples instead of a focused laser beam. Hunter and colleagues251 have described the basic characteristics of SIBS and its application to the field-screening analysis of soil, using a standard addition analytical approach. Detection limits of 25 mg kg−1 were obtained for Ba, Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb. The researchers tested a variety of soils, some contaminated with organic material and U238.

4 Analysis of geological materials
4.1 Reference materials
With the increased emphasis on indicators of performance in analytical systems, Kane and Potts252 discuss two practical ways in which geoanalysts can demonstrate the traceability of their data to national or international standards. These are by the analysis of appropriate certified reference materials (CRMs) and by the use of standard methods of analysis. They conclude that these approaches are hampered by the lack of relevant CRMs and standard methods. Most published standard methods of relevance are directed towards the analysis of ores and materials of industrial interest, indicating that perhaps the geoanalytical community should consider developing equivalent standard methods for the analysis of silicate rocks.
For twenty-one years, Iwan Roelandts made a major contribution to the field of geoanalysis by publishing an annual compilation of recent papers containing information about geochemical RMs, including new analytical data and tabulations of “recommended” values. His bibliography of geochemical reference samples for 2000253 cited 211 articles from thirty journals, with the references indexed by element as well as by author. Although Roelandts has now retired, a successor has been found: Michel Valladon has taken over his mantle and published the review for 2001.254 Interestingly, in a comparison with previous years, Valladon noted that JAAS published the largest number of relevant papers, while Geostandards Newsletter: The Journal of Geostandards and Geoanalysis remains the premier journal in terms of new RM data.
The Geological Survey of Japan (GSJ)255,256 continues to add to its collection of geochemical reference materials. Of particular interest is the proposed coral Porites sp. JCp-1 RM,256 as there are currently few such RMs to support projects in the area of environmental monitoring. Provisional values for 21 elements were reported, with the intention of proposing reference values when the results of future collaborative trials are available. The GSJ has also prepared two soils and two marine sediments.255 One of the soils was artificially spiked with 31 elements, mainly as oxides, to provide a soil RM that contained known chemical forms of minor and trace elements. Homogeneity data and provisional values for 37 major, minor and trace elements, together with a description of the geological and mineralogical characteristics of the materials, have been reported as background information for collaborative studies on their chemical composition.
Because of the commercial importance of high purity quartz in the manufacture of various high technology products, there is a continuing need for well-characterised high purity quartz RMs. Flem and Bédard257 used INAA, solution ICP-MS and LA-ICP-MS to determine over forty elements in two certified RMs with high silica contents: soda-lime float glass SRM 1830 (National Institute of Standards and Technology) and high purity silica BCS 313/1 (Bureau of Analysed Samples Ltd.). The data for most elements agreed within 15% relative but additional measurements by other laboratories were required to confirm the accuracy of their results, especially for those elements that were only measured by one technique. The authors felt that the INAA data for the REE were more reliable because of the larger mass of sample taken (1–3 g) and because BCS 313/1 may not be completely homogeneous with respect to the REE.
Although INAA facilities are becoming scarce in many parts of the world, data obtained by this technique are still useful in confirming data on RMs determined by other methods, as illustrated by a comparison of PGE data in RMs issued by CANMET, determined by INAA and ICP-MS following fire assay preconcentration.258 Ways of improving the performance of INAA are still being sought and the performance of a new semi-planar detector was assessed using thirty-three geochemical RMs.259
4.2 Sample treatment

4.2.1 Solid sample introduction. 
4.2.1.1 Laser ablation. 
Over the last decade the analytical data provided through laser sampling of geological materials has opened up many new avenues of research in the earth sciences. This, in turn, has stimulated a continuing demand for better performance characteristics based on an improved understanding of the processes involved in laser sampling. Latkoczy and Günther260 achieved enhanced sensitivity through various cone and vacuum modifications to a magnetic sector ICP-MS instrument. Changes to the interface region included the use of aluminium cones. Limits of detection for elements suffering from elevated background intensities were improved by two orders of magnitude and, for elements above mass 85, the limits of detection were in the low ng g−1 range for a 30 µm diameter laser spot.
Rodushkin et al.261,262 have made a thorough investigation of analyte- and matrix-dependent elemental responses in LA-ICP-MS. The effects of rf power, lens settings, and the thermodynamic properties of analytes and the sample matrix were examined. They concluded that processes occurring in the plasma, rather than during ablation and transport of material, were dominant in determining elemental responses. They demonstrated differences between elements in the location of their zone of maximum ion density within the ICP and related these to the time required to vaporise analyte atoms from the ablated particles. The magnitude of the maximum sensitivity for any element was found to be matrix dependent, with the more refractory elements requiring lower carrier gas rates to achieve optimum performance. From these observations, they went on to study analyte response as a function of carrier gas flow rate in 16 matrices and were able to define three groups of elements that behaved consistently: refractory elements with high oxide dissociation enthalpies, rare and heavier alkaline earth elements, and volatile and low mass elements. They proposed that this classification could act as a guide in the selection of suitable internal standards for LA-ICP-MS.
Researchers from ETH Zürich have made several important contributions to the understanding of the particle size distribution of ablated material and its influence on fractionation effects in LA-ICP-MS. Guillong and Günther263 tested various modes of ablation, including single hole drilling and rastering, to investigate the influence of the particle size on excitation processes in the ICP, whilst ablating NIST reference glasses. They demonstrated that the particle size distribution produced by a 266 nm laser was significantly larger than that of aerosols formed using a 193 nm laser. Significantly, the larger particle fractions were not completely vaporised and ionised in the ICP. When ablating a single hole, the particle size distribution became smaller with increasing crater depth. In contrast, rastering produced a constant supply of larger particles, which resulted in significantly larger matrix effects in the plasma. Solution analysis of particles collected during the experiment showed that a representative aerosol entered the ICP. Thus, they concluded that the dominant process influencing elemental fractionation during LA-ICP-MS was incomplete aerosol or particle excitation in the ICP. Guillong et al.264 developed a particle separation device that enabled them to vary the maximum particle size transmitted to the plasma. Various sample materials were ablated to show the potential of the device for reducing ICP-induced elemental fractionation. For silicate materials, particles larger than 0.5 µm significantly reduced the capacity of the ICP to produce ions; this effect was element dependent. Horn and Günther265 demonstrated the influence that ablation carrier gasses, such as argon, helium and neon, can have on the distribution of particle sizes generated and transported during the ablation of silicate glasses. The nature of the carrier gas strongly influenced the particle size distribution when a 193 nm laser was employed, but this effect was far less pronounced at 266 nm. The explanation for this observation was that the larger primary particles produced by the 266 nm ablations were not greatly influenced by the carrier gas, whereas the 193 nm laser produced a greater amount of vapour which subsequently condenses to form larger aggregates. Other authors' comments on appropriate wavelengths,266 the effect of oxygen on laser-induced elemental fractionation267 and chemically assisted LA-ICP-MS268 should be read with the above observations in mind.
Nowhere has LA-ICP-MS made a more dramatic impact than in the determination of isotope ratios in geological research, whether it be measurements of stable isotopes in nature, or of radiogenic elements for geochronology. The technique has achieved acceptance as the preferred alternative to TIMS in a remarkably short period of time. Becker's235 review of the development and current status of precise and accurate isotope ratio measurements by ICP-MS and LA-ICP-MS is therefore timely. One area of research that has particularly benefited from recent innovations is the study of the Re–Os isotopic system, which has proved to be a very useful tool for investigating a wide range of geological and cosmochemical problems. Reisberg and Meisel269 have written an extensive review of the major advances in Re–Os analysis in recent years, including the in situ analysis of sulfides and other PGE-rich phases by LA-ICP-MS. Although LA has the obvious advantage of eliminating the need for time-consuming chemical separation procedures, it is currently limited to the analysis of phases larger than about 40 µm. It also suffers from the isobaric interference of 187Re and 187Os, which may limit the precision obtainable because of the corrections that need to be made.
Interlaboratory comparisons are valuable in confirming the credibility of LA-ICP-MS as a robust analytical tool. Thus, the results of the first round of a new international proficiency testing programme for microprobe laboratories make interesting reading.270 The test material was TB-1, a basaltic glass fused and prepared by the USGS. Participants were asked to determine the average composition of two fragments of TB-1 using their routine sample preparation procedures and to select the most appropriate analytical strategy for this purpose. Thirty-nine laboratories contributed data; the majority of the major element data were obtained by EPMA and most of that for trace elements by LA-ICP-MS. Data from bulk powders of the same material analysed by conventional ICP-MS, INAA and XRF techniques in nine selected laboratories were used to derive the assigned values. A comparison of the performance of the bulk and microprobe techniques used, mainly EPMA and LA-ICP-MS, showed remarkably good agreement, with significant bias observed only for the major oxide MgO. The spread of the reported results by LA-ICP-MS for Ba, Cs, Ni, Sc, Sr, U and a number REE was comparable to that of the bulk analytical results, although the range for Nb and one or two of the light REE appeared to be significantly wider. In general, the precision of the major elements determined by EPMA was not as good as that from the bulk techniques, which is not entirely surprising.
Well characterised reference materials are a vital cornerstone of reliable geochemical analysis. LA-ICP-MS was used to determine 42 major and trace elements in three USGS basalt glass RMs BCR-2G, BHVO-2G and BIR-1G.271 The relative standard deviation of the data was less than 10% for most elements, with the exception of Sb and Sn. It was concluded that all these glasses were homogeneous on a scale of 60 µm. In contrast, Eggins and Shelley272 examined wafers of the NIST 610–616 series of glass reference materials and concluded that they are heterogeneous with respect to at least 25 trace elements at the spatial resolution of microanalytical techniques such as SIMS, LA-ICP-MS and EPMA. The chemical and optical properties of the heterogeneous domains were consistent with loss of volatile components from the molten glass surface during manufacture; Tl was found to be an excellent marker of depleted domains within the glasses because of its volatility. These observations should act as a warning to anyone using these glasses as RMs, as many previous investigations concluded that they were essentially homogeneous. On the positive side, a majority of elements, including Ba, Be, Co, Ga, Hf, In, Mg, Nb, Ni, REE, Sc, Sr, Ta, Th, U, V, Y, Zn and Zr, showed no evidence of significant heterogeneity. An initial study of the composition of some Corning archaeological reference glasses using EPMA, LA-ICP-MS and SIMS indicated their potential use as secondary standards in the analysis of materials such as synthetic ceramics, minerals and silicate glasses.273
The use of LA-ICP-MS for the multi-element analysis of geological materials is now so widespread that many geochemical papers supply very limited analytical information. Typical applications include the classification of glasses,274 stratigraphic correlation,275 mineralisation in ore deposits through the analysis of fluid inclusions276,277 and the bulk analysis of coal.278 LA-ICP-MS was used to determine Hg in sediment cores from Minamata Bay in a study to reconstruct the history of Hg pollution in this locality.279 The samples were ground and screened to pass a 74 µm sieve before being pressed into pellets. Particle size did not affect the sensitivity of the measurements, probably because of the volatility of Hg. One soil and two marine sediment CRMs were used to construct the calibration curve. The authors reported that satisfactory results, with a detection limit of 0.02 mg kg−1, were obtained without internal standarisation and were in good agreement with those by ID-CV-ICP-MS.
A popular application is the in-situ dating of minerals using laser ablation to introduce samples to multicollector magnetic sector ICP-MS instruments. Here, an essential prerequisite is the skill to select the right material/mineral for analysis. Again, in many cases, authors have not considered detailed analytical descriptions worthy of inclusion, indicating the maturity of the technique. Instead, the reader is directed to a review of recent developments and future requirements in accessory mineral research by Poitrasson et al.,280 which cited over 220 references. A tabulated comparison of current U–Th–Pb dating techniques that have been applied to zircon and monazite was particularly valuable.
Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) has advantages in applications where remote sampling is required. Trials of an instrumented rover equipped with stereo imaging, multiple spectral reflectance and LIBS have been conducted in Nevada with the objective of using such technology on exploration missions to Mars.281 The LIBS data were a significant aid in understanding the extent of sample coatings and compositional and mineralogical diversity. A compact LIBS system has been employed in the analysis of marine sediment cores on board ship because of its tolerance to mechanical vibration.248 The samples received no pretreatment other than drying and the accuracy was assessed using one RM of Antarctic sediment.
4.2.1.2 Slurry sampling. 
At first sight, there would appear to have been a resurgence of interest in the introduction of geological materials into analytical systems as slurries. However, it is difficult to distinguish many significant advances. This is particularly true of recently published methods employing vapour/hydride generation systems coupled to ETAAS systems, where only minor differences in approach could be discerned. Using batch processing and iridium-treated graphite tubes, Moreda-Pineiro and co-workers reported methods for the determination of As, Bi and Se,160 As, Bi, Ge, Hg and SeIV,282 Hg283 and Sn284 in a variety of geological and environmental matrices. A similar analytical arrangement was used by a Brazilian research group to determine Cd159 and As150 in slurries of sediments, coal and fly ash by HG-ETAAS. Other studies employing slurry sampling measured Tl in soils and sediments,158 Cr in fly ash285 and Cr, Mo and V in soils and sediments.157 Graphite tubes tend to age faster when used to atomise slurries; possible ways of extending their lifetime were presented by Cal-Prieto and his colleagues.168
Maia et al.286 determined Cd, Hg, Pb and Tl in coal and fly ash slurries by ETV-ICP-MS using isotopic dilution calibration to obtain superior accuracy. Ultrasonic stirring of the slurry immediately prior to its introduction into the graphite tube was an important aspect of the procedure. Palladium was used as the matrix modifier for Cd and Tl, gold, iridium or palladium for Hg and iridium or palladium for Pb. Limits of detection were typically around 0.08, 0.03, 1 and 0.02 µg g−1 for Cd, Hg, Pb and Tl respectively. Dias et al.287 used a related approach for quantifying As, Pb, Se and Sn concentrations in sediment slurries using ruthenium as the modifier and NaCl as a physical carrier. A method to measure the Hg and Tl content of environmental samples by ETV-ICP-MS using slurry sampling and calibration against aqueous standards was made possible by the addition of potassium permanganate to stabilise the analytes.104
Rather more novel was the evaluation of the direct introduction of clay slurries into an ICP-AES spectrometer with axial view configuration.288 Although the viewing mode did not present any practical limitations on the introduction of a complex suspension, the particle size and mineralogical composition of CRM used to calibrate the system required careful consideration.


4.2.2 Sample dissolution. 
Rendering solid powdered samples into solution is often a rate-limiting step in geochemical laboratories, leading to a continual quest for simple and rapid methods for sample digestion. Microwave assisted digestions for the determination of metals in sediments, soils and sludges93,98 may be fit-for-purpose in monitoring programmes but the use of hydrofluoric acid is required if silicate minerals need to be dissolved. The problem then arises of how to remove or neutralise the excess acid prior to analysis. Taylor et al.289 used open vessel focused microwave digestion, which they reckoned was more convenient than conventional closed vessel high pressure methods, because it allowed the removal of the HF as volatile SiF4, evaporation to dryness and final dissolution in dilute acid. Although the method was rapid and gave results comparable to conventional hotplate digestion, the digestion was still incomplete for granitic samples containing refractory minerals, for which a fusion was the preferred method of preparation.
Fusions with alkali salts such as lithium metaborate290 are known to be reliable, but the high blank levels and high total dissolved solids content of the resultant solutions can be a concern. For these reasons, the combination of sodium peroxide sintering and ICP-MS is an attractive alternative for the determination of Hf, Nb, the rare earth elements (REE), Ta, Th, Y and Zr in geological materials. Meisel et al.291 demonstrated that this technique is easy for inexperienced analysts to learn and achieve very reproducible results; samples containing refractory accessory minerals are completely dissolved. The sensitivity of the latest generation of quadrupole ICP-MS instruments is such that, for chondrite-normalised REE abundances of greater than one, dilutions of 1 ∶ 5200 were analysed without difficulty.
Recent advances in digestion methods used in the analysis of precious metals have been reviewed by Balcerzak,292 who discussed the applicability of fire assay, acid treatment, chlorination and alkaline oxidising fusion to the quantitative recovery of metals from various materials. Mitkin and co-workers293,294 used potassium tetrafluorobromate, prepared in situ by adding liquid BrF3 to a mixture of KHF2 and sample powder, for the rapid decomposition of chromites and other refractory materials. After fluorination, the fusion product was heated to 550 °C with sulfuric acid to produce a non-hygroscopic material suitable for the determination of precious metals by dc arc plasma emission spectrometry or ETV-AAS.
An alternative approach to rapid sample digestion is continuous flow digestion, which can be used either in stand alone or on-line mode. Jacob and Berndt88 devised a high temperature/high pressure flow digestion system coupled to a flame AAS instrument for use with biological and environmental materials. Samples, prepared as 2% suspensions in 2.5 M nitric acid, were fed into an electrically heated Pt–Ir capillary at a temperature of 320 °C. Detection limits of 0.25, 2.2, 1.4, 4.5 and 0.8 µg g−1 were achieved for Cd, Cu, Mn, Pb and Zn, respectively. Because the whole system does not contain any glass, the authors claim that hydrofluoric acid can been used if the samples require it. Beauchemin et al.221 have used on-line leaching to assess the mobility of specific elements in complex natural materials such as rocks. Profiles of changes in concentration during leaching were obtained by pumping reagents (water or different strengths of nitric acid), either continuously or with flow injection, through a microcolumn containing the sample and monitoring the analyte signal by ICP-MS. The resulting spectra were complex but provided information on the metals released and which phases were breaking down. A similar philosophy was adopted by Benway et al.295 to monitor a series of cleaning and dissolution reactions designed to demonstrate the heterogeneity of Mg : Ca in foraminiferal calcite. The combination of slow, controlled dissolution and time-resolved analysis by ICP-MS provided a complete elemental description of the different calcite domains within a single foraminiferal shell. The possibility of employing ultrasound to accelerate leaching processes in both batch and dynamic systems has been highlighted by Luque-Garcia and de Castro.100
Those readers who find the range of operationally defined sequential extraction schemes somewhat bewildering are referred to a recent review on the subject.107 It contains more than 400 references, principally covering literature published over the last ten years, and addresses topics such as the comparability between commonly used sequential extraction schemes, their validation and harmonisation, as well as future requirements. In addition, Quevauviller108 has reviewed the ways in which the European Union has sought to harmonise sequential extraction schemes, through the Bureau Communitaire de Reference (BCR) programme and its successor the Standards Measurement and Testing (ST&M) programme, by making available certified soil and sediment RMs designed specifically for this purpose. The processes involved in the preparation and validation of RMs certified for their extractable trace element content are described, together with an overview of the latest developments in CRM production. Various modifications of the original BCR and later ST&M three-step extraction schemes have been reported for specific applications,114,125,126,136,156,296,297 mainly with the aim of reducing the extraction times. However, they only serve to emphasise the importance of the BCR CRMs in the validation of any proposed alternative methodology.


4.2.3 Separation and preconcentration. 
Methods commonly used in the determination of the REE by ICP-AES are based on sample dissolution by acids or fusion, followed by ion exchange separation to remove matrix components and to concentrate the REE in a small volume of solution prior to measurement. Minicolumns containing Dowex 50W-X8 resin have been evaluated for separation of the REE using both off-line and on-line continuous flow systems.298 Other proposed separation systems include extraction on activated charcoal,299 solvent extraction300 and chromatographic separation.301
Methods involving nickel sulfide fire assay are still popular for the determination of gold and the platinum group elements (PGE) and have been used in environmental studies such as a baseline survey of PGEs in fluvial sediments302 and the determination of Pd, Pt and Rh in road dusts.25 Juvonen et al.303 devised practical solutions to problems encountered in applying the method to black shales and samples containing magnetite. The interference from graphite in black shales was eliminated either by roasting the sample prior to fusion or by adding an oxidant to the fusion flux; the addition of a reducing agent to samples containing magnetite enabled the procedure to be applied to such samples. Gros et al.304 revisited the nickel sulfide—tellurium coprecipitation procedure with the aim of reducing losses of the volatile PGE, Os and Pd. By dissolving the nickel sulfide bead in 20% HCl in an open system, where the hydrogen sulfide could escape without the loss of HCl, Os was nearly completely recovered, while the volatility of Pd was greatly reduced. Other methods proposed for the extraction and preconcentration of palladium included the use of silica gel chemically modified with mercapto groups305 and a polyamine Metalfix–Chelamine resin.306
Incompatible elements, such as Hf, Th, U and Zr, are important in petrogenetic modelling because of their tendency to reside in refractory accessory minerals in rocks rather than the main silicate phases. Le Fevre and Pin307 determined these four elements by isotope dilution and quadrupole ICP-MS, after decomposing samples by fusion with lithium metaborate and selectively separating the analytes by extraction chromatography using UTEVA.Spec resin supplied by Eichrom. Combining isotope dilution with sample decomposition by fusion is rarely encountered as the procedure for adding the isotopically enriched tracer to the solid flux needs to be considered carefully. Apparently, the performance of the UTEVA.Spec resin is very sensitive to the presence of fluorine, even at trace levels, which makes it difficult to use after sample dissolution with HF. However, the fusion method gave nearly quantitative recoveries of Th and U, even when dilute HF was used for back-extraction of the analytes. For Hf and Zr, the yields were found to be strongly dependent on the age of the resin. Some newly produced batches of resin failed to retain these elements, whereas satisfactory yields were obtained using resin that was over five years old. The same laboratory has also investigated a novel method for the determination of Hf, Nb, Ta and Zr in geological materials using N-benzoyl-N-phenylhydroxylamine supported on a microporous polymeric resin to separate the analytes of interest from the matrix.308 Samples were decomposed by both HF dissolution and alkali fusion. Poor recoveries for Ta were observed when lithium metaborate fusion was used; these were improved significantly when a small amount of BF was added to the quenching solution to prevent loss by hydrolysis. Relatively high blank values for Ta and Zr were observed, which was difficult to attribute to either the Teflon materials used or memory effects during measurement by ICP-MS. The limits of quantitative determination were 3, 16, 6 and 30 ng g−1 for Hf, Nb, Ta and Zr, respectively, for a 0.1 g sample; good precision and accuracy were demonstrated.
Calcium is a major element in most geological materials, including biogenic carbonates like aragonite, the main constituent of fish ear bones (otoliths). Arslan and Paulson309 sought to improve the quality of their otolith analysis by using an iminodiacetate-based chelating resin for on-line preconcentration and separation prior to measurement by ICP-MS. After dissolution, they achieved up to 25-fold preconcentration of 31 trace elements and successfully removed the calcium matrix.
Some interesting separation methods have been developed specifically for use with magnetic sector ICP-MS instruments equipped with either single or multiple collectors. Kenna198 provided a comprehensive account of the separation and preconcentration techniques developed at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution for the determination of 237Np and 239Pu, 240Pu, 241Pu in sediments by isotope dilution (ID) magnetic sector ICP-MS. Measurement precision was between 1 and 5% for all isotopes except 241Pu, which was 10–15%
						(±1 standard error). The limit of detection was 0.5 fg g−1 for all isotopes of interest. High precision measurements of Ti isotopes using multicollector (MC) ICP-MS requires a high degree of purification to avoid potential matrix effects and isobaric interferences. Makishima et al.310 reported a new procedure for the separation of Ti after decomposition of the sample with HF. Firstly, major elements and the majority of trace elements were removed using the anion-exchange resin AG 1X8. After eliminating fluoride ions by evaporation and redissolution in nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide, Ti was separated from zirconium and hafnium using the UTEVA extraction resin—the same resin used by Le Fevre and Pin.307 Trace amounts of aluminium and phosphorus were removed on a third column, which was identical to the first. Recoveries were almost 100% and no Ti isotope fractionation occurred during the chemical processing. In a novel approach to the measurement of the REE, Baker et al.223 separated acid digested samples on a cation exchange column by collecting the middle–heavy and light REE as two groups. This provided a Ba-free light REE portion and a middle–heavy cut, with sufficient separation of the light REE to render oxide interferences trivial. In combination with ID-MC-ICP-MS equipped with a desolvating nebuliser, replicate digestions yielded analytical precisions of less than 1%.


4.2.4 Speciation studies. 
During the period under review there has been much interest in the development of isotopically-labelled compounds for validating the determination of organometallic species by GC-ICP-MS. The analytical advantages of this method of quantification, based on isotope ratio measurements of each separate species, are summarised by Encinar et al.110 They illustrate, through the use of spikes containing a number of isotopically labelled species, that it is possible to detect and correct for any species degradation at each stage during the complex extraction process. This approach is particularly useful for ensuring quantitative recoveries of the species being sought from a solid matrix, such as sediments, and evaluating the extent of possible extraction-derived rearrangement reactions.
Most of the applications employing isotope dilution GC-ICP-MS focussed on the measurement of butyltin compounds in marine sediments. Mono-, di- and tributyltin (MBT, DBT and TBT) were determined by researchers in Oviedo, Spain117,311 using a double spike containing 119Sn-enriched MBT, 118Sn-enriched DBT and 119Sn-enriched TBT to confirm the best conditions for quantitative extraction of these species from the solid matrix. Pressurised liquid extraction using an accelerated solvent extractor was quantitative for all butyltin species at 110 °C, with extraction times as low as 10 min. Inagaki and co-workers204 also prepared their own spike containing 118Sn-enriched butyltin compounds to determine butyltin species in marine sediment CRMs PACS-2 (NRCC, Canada) and BCR 646 (IRMM, Belgium). Tripropyltin was added with the spike to facilitate the correction for mass bias. Good agreement with the certified values was noted except for MBT in PACS-2, which was significantly higher; however, it agreed closely with data for PACS-2 reported by Alonso et al.311 and Encinar et al.117 Monperrus and co-workers312 had access to a new commercially available TBT standard labelled with 117Sn when determining TBT in sediments by ID GC-ICP-MS. They compared three spiking procedures using the labelled standard to estimate the efficiency of each, resulting in the development of a rapid method in which microwave-assisted extraction was combined with spike addition. Two different methods to correct for mass bias were evaluated: either by nebulising a solution of antimony continuously during acquisitions or by injecting a solution of TBT between each acquisition; the first approach was selected as it was more cost-effective. PACS-2 and BCR 646 were again used to confirm the accuracy of the overall procedure. Yang et al.313 used the same 117Sn-enriched TBT standard in their measurements of TBT in PACS-2 using solid phase microextraction in combination with GC-ICP-MS, with tripropyltin as an internal standard. An eighteen-fold improvement in the precision of the TBT measurements was reported, compared with that by the method of standard additions. The same authors119 have also described a similar method employing ID in combination with HPLC-ICP-MS detection for the same analytical task. Bancon-Montigny et al.31 demonstrated that TBT chloride could be detected in the vapour phase above PACS-2 sediment after one night of passive sampling, without any heating of the sample. This observation was exploited by Scriver et al.,118 who developed a technique based on in situ trapping of TBT as the volatile chloride using flow injection coupled to ETAAS, after microwave-assisted leaching and continuous purging of the TBT chloride through a gas–liquid separator.
Chromatographic methods employing HPLC have been proposed for the determination of As132,140 and Hg111 species in sediments. Ellwood and Maher140 used 0.5 M phosphoric acid and hydroxylamine hydrochloride to extract labile As species from marine sediments while preserving the two redox states. The As species were separated on a Hamilton PRPX-100 strong anion exchange column prior to measurement by ICP-MS. Freeze drying of the sediments and limited exposure to air was recommended in order to preserve the original speciation. As the final concentration determined is strongly dependent on the extraction procedure applied, Montperrus et al.132 compared the extraction efficiency of a number of reagents in the determination of As species by HPLC-HG-AFS. They concluded that orthophosphoric acid was best for sediments of mixed origin and recent sludge samples, but that oxalate was more effective for old formation soils. Han and co-workers111 developed a HPLC-ICP-MS system to provide information on Hg species in soils and sediments.

4.3 Instrumental analysis

4.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. 
Flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) is still widely used for the analysis of geological materials because it is relatively simple to operate and inexpensive to maintain. A helpful review of applications of FAAS to environmental measurements, based on papers published between 1999 and 2002, has been compiled by Janusa and Beck.142 On-line flow-injection methods for the separation and preconcentration of analytes in microcolumns coupled to FAAS have been proposed recently for the determination of Ag in ore samples314 and Cr in sediments.315
As noted in Section 4.2.1.2, there is much active interest in the introduction of solid samples as slurries directly into graphite furnaces157,159,166,285,316 or via cold vapour/hydride generation systems.150,160,282–284 The use of solid sample graphite furnace AAS has also been proposed for determining the amount of As297 and Hg114 remaining in the solid residues left after sequential leaching of sediments using the BCR three-step extraction procedure. Given these developments, new users to this approach will find pearls of wisdom in Belarra and colleagues' critical, but tutorial, evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of methods involving the introduction of solid samples into a graphite furnace.317
Since the early years of ETV-AAS development, attempts to modify the graphite surface in order to improve its performance have given rise to many hundreds of research papers. Usually, refractory materials that form stable carbides, e.g., Nb, Ta, W or Zr, are used either alone, or combined with platinum group modifiers, to form a permanent deposit on the surface that can withstand repeated atomisation cycles. As a consequence, the possible permutations are vast. Meeravali and Kumar166 assessed the performance of zirconium, iridium and zirconium–iridium combined as chemical modifiers in the determination of Sn in stream sediment with slurry introduction. The Zr–Ir coating was effective in minimising interference effects from chloride, phosphate and silica but reduced recoveries were evident in the presence of large amounts of sulfide, aluminium nitrate and sodium silicate. Moreira et al.162 selected titanium as a chemical modifier for the measurement of Co in marine sediments by ETV-AAS. Da Silva et al.153 found palladium to be the most consistent of the chemical modifiers investigated when determining Hg in environmental reference materials using solid sampling ETV-AAS. Calibration against aqueous standards was possible with the addition of potassium permanganate to prevent loss of Hg during the drying cycle. Lima and co-workers163,165 studied a variety of permanent chemical modifiers and concluded that for the determination of As, Cd and Pb in soil, sediment and coal, W–Rh, W–Ru and W–Ir all gave better recoveries, which were within 95–103% of the certified values for the CRMs analysed, compared with those using single W, Rh, Ru or Ir modifiers. Other modifiers used in slurry sampling applications are given in Section 4.2.1.2.
Research has continued on the development of an effective method for the determination of Tl in samples with a high chloride content. To overcome the formation of the volatile monochloride TlCl, Vale and Welz318 found that the best means of controlling this interference was atomisation under isothermal conditions, with palladium as a modifier. An alternative approach appeared to be the “fast furnace” concept, where the use of both a modifier and the pyrolysis stage are omitted. This approach requires an efficient background correction system, so high resolution continuum source AAS was used to investigate the spectral interferences found in conventional line-source AAS.145 A transversely heated graphite furnace was used and the marine sediments were introduced as slurries. Although a strong iron absorption line could have been responsible for some of the interferences observed, the outstanding feature at atomisation temperatures greater than 2000 °C was the molecular absorption spectrum of gaseous sulfur dioxide, which had a maximum around the Tl line and exhibited a pronounced rotational fine structure. These molecular structures were completely removed by subtracting a model spectrum obtained from the atomisation of KHSO4. The method had a characteristic mass of 15–16 pg Tl and a detection limit of 0.02 µg g−1 Tl.
Several other researchers have explored the use of fast thermal programmes. Using a transversely heated graphite atomiser and longitudinal Zeeman-effect background correction, Myohanen et al.155 developed a heating programme that required no pyrolysis stage or chemical modifier for the determination of As, Cd, Cr and Pb in aqua regia digests of soils and sediments. Filgueiras et al.156 have compared conventional and fast thermal programmes approaches for the determination of total and extractable Cd in sediments. Quantitative recoveries of Cd were achieved by injecting samples onto a preheated platform and omitting the pyrolysis stage, even in the absence of a palladium modifier.
Bismuth has been determined in fifty geological RMs by Terashima et al.319 A mixed acid attack, including HF, was used to decompose the samples. After the addition of ascorbic acid and thiourea, bismuth hydride was generated with 1% sodium tetrahydroborate and 2 M HCl. For samples with low Bi contents, solvent extraction and ETV-AAS was preferred. For 0.5 g subsamples, the limits of detection were 5 ng g−1 by hydride generation quartz cell AAS and 0.8 ng g−1 using solvent extraction ETV-AAS.


4.3.2 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. 
There are few developments to report in the application of atomic fluorescence spectrometry to geological analysis. HPLC coupling to AFS detection via hydride generation was used to measure four arsenic species (arsenite, arsenate, monomethylarsonic acid and dimethylarsinic acid) leached from sediments and soils by a variety of extractants.132 Low detection limits, ranging from 0.02 to 0.04 mg kg−1, were obtained for all species in all the matrices studied. In the determination of inorganic Se species by hydride generation AFS, SeIV is usually determined first, and then total Se after the reduction of any SeVI to SeIV. Moreno and colleagues148 highlighted a potential problem arising from the presence of organoselenium compounds formed by microbial activity in sediments and soils because these organic species would result in an overestimate of the total inorganic Se content. The coupling of GC to AFS was proposed for their individual quantification.


4.3.3 Atomic emission spectrometry. 
Although methodologies for the determination of the REE by ICP-AES have been in routine use for many years, they depend on the separation of the REE from the bulk of the matrix elements. Developments in this area are covered in Section 4.2.3.
Atomic emission techniques are regularly used for the analysis of marine sediments.98,320 Pozebon and Martins320 described their method for the determination of Al, As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Ba, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, V and Zn in marine sediments by ICP-AES using an instrument equipped with radial and axial viewing of the plasma. They found it necessary to matrix match the arsenic and vanadium contents when determining Cd, and obtained more accurate results for Al and Ba when the samples were fused instead of digested with acid. Although the sample introduction system coped with the high dissolved solids content of these solutions, radial viewing was obligatory for some elements. In this context, it should be noted that Isoyama et al.321 have designed a PTFE Babington nebuliser equipped with a hood, to operate in conjunction with a PTFE cyclone chamber, for introducing samples with high salt contents into ICP-AES instruments. Averyt and colleagues322 developed a method for obtaining precise Sr : Ca, Sr : Ba and Ca : Ba ratios in marine barite from deep-sea sediments, after dissolution in ETDA. Microwave-induced plasma AES has been employed to determine organotin species in marine sediments following solid phase microextraction and gas chromatography.94 Enrichment factors of 50–100 for methyltin and butyltin compounds were achieved. Furnace atomisation plasma emission spectrometry (FAPES) provided excellent detection limits of 4.0 and 3.8 ng g−1 for Cd and Pb, respectively.181 The use of iridium as a permanent modifier played an important role in the performance of the method and the best results were achieved when both the graphite tube wall and the centre electrode were coated.


4.3.4 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. 
For an authoritative account of the recent advances in ICP-MS, including magnetic sector instrumentation and laser ablation sample introduction, readers should consult the latest Atomic Spectrometry Update on atomic mass spectrometry.323 In geochemistry, one of the major growth areas has been the applications of magnetic sector ICP-MS, and this is reflected in the Update. For clarity, the authors have decided to distinguish between developments in quadrupole-based ICP-MS and those in magnetic sector ICP-MS, although some aspects, such as isotope dilution, will be pertinent to both.
4.3.4.1 Quadrupole-based instrumentation. 
One of the reasons for the popularity of ICP-MS for geochemical analysis is that it provides a sensitive detector for some important trace constituents, such as the precious metals,302–304 Hf, Nb, REE, Ta, Th, U and Zr.291,307,308 These data are often used to model fundamental geochemical processes and thus adequate uncertainty estimates are required to have confidence in such interpretations. Ely and Neal324 proposed a method for calculating uncertainty budgets for PGE data obtained by ICP-MS that included the contribution from the mathematical manipulations of the data, e.g., drift correction, to the overall estimate of uncertainty.
ICP-MS is being increasingly used to monitor radiological hazards, an area that was once the exclusive domain of radiochemical techniques. The direct determination of 226Ra by ICP-MS suffers from severe polyatomic interferences325 so Larivière et al.326 developed a method for its determination in uranium ores based on three different resins commercially available from Eichrom, each with a specific role. A combination of Sr*Spec and UTEVA cartridges was used to separate uranium, strontium, barium and lead from 226Ra. The eluate was then loaded onto a Ln resin, composed of di-(2-ethylhexyl)orthophosphoric acid, to preconcentrate the Ra and separate it from interferences created by cerium, lanthanum and neodymium. The entire separation procedure took only a few minutes and gave an absolute detection limit of 0.02 fg for less than 4 mg of solid sample.
Zheng et al.205 employed isotope dilution (ID) in a scheme of analysis designed for the rapid determination of the redox sensitive elements Cd, Mo and U in small samples from a core of marine sediment. A spike containing 95Mo, 111Cd and 236U was added to 10 mg of powdered sediment prior to a HF mixed acid digestion. Thorium was also determined using the U isotope spike as a proxy. The most significant sources of bias came from changes in mass bias between runs and from isobaric interferences in the measurement of Mo and Cd isotopes. As well as providing precise analyses, the wide dynamic range offered by isotope dilution was an advantage when the expected range of concentrations in the samples was large. Isotope dilution also facilitated the accurate determination of Pt in road dusts without separation from interfering elements.202 The detection limit of 0.1 µg kg−1 Pt was more than adequate to establish the spatial distribution of Pt in the roadside environment.
The coupling of separation technology to ICP-MS continues to attract much interest from those concerned with the measurement of organometallic species; relevant applications have been discussed in Section 4.2.4. The physiochemical form of trace elements in sediments can be characterised by coupling field-flow fractionation (FFF) to ICP-MS. Siripinyanond and co-workers327 studied the distributions of Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb, Sr, Ti and Zn bound to various size fractions of colloidal and particulate materials in a river sediment core, together with their chemical availability, using a combination of selective extraction and flow FFF-ICP-MS. Most trace metals were found to be bound to the 10–15 cm deep sediment layer and 2–6 nm macromolecules of humic and fulvic acids.
An authoritative review of reaction cells and collision cells for ICP-MS by Tanner et al.328 provides an excellent synopsis of the history, design, operation and application of reaction/collision cells from their first incorporation in ICP-MS instruments up to late 2001. It contains a general tutorial on the fundamentals of ion collision and reaction and critically assesses the available literature on their application to the analysis of geological and environmental materials. Ben-Younes et al.329 reported their study of the effectiveness of ammonia in reducing carbon-based polyatomic ion interferences in ETV collision cell ICP-MS. The interferences on Cr and Mg isotope ions were reduced significantly and although improved detection limits were achieved for 28Si and 29Si, ammonia was found to be unsuitable as a reaction gas for the determination of 30Si. Liu and Jiang330 used ammonia in a dynamic reaction cell system to eliminate interferences from titanium polyatomic ions during the determination of Cu in coal fly ash.
4.3.4.2 Magnetic sector instrumentation. 
Isotope dilution (ID) ICP-MS is a rapidly expanding field, equally applicable to quadrupole and magnetic sector instrumentation. Pin and Le Fèvre,331 in their review of isotope dilution with matrix element removal, highlighted the advantages conferred by this approach because ID removes the need for quantitative sample handling after the addition of the isotope spike. They addressed critical aspects of the practicalities of achieving precise and accurate measurements of an isotope ratio and gave representative examples of a wide range of geoanalytical applications of this methodology.
It would appear that the geological community has fully endorsed the capability of MC-ICP-MS to provide much of the highest precision isotopic data that they desire. Becker,235 in her review of the state-of-the-art and progress in precise and accurate isotope ratio measurements by ICP-MS, confirmed that most stable elements in the Periodic Table, apart from gases such as H, O, N or the noble gases, have been the subject of isotope ratio measurements by ICP-MS and LA-ICP-MS. Her overview, which cites 106 references, surveyed the instrumentation, capability and limitations of ICP-MS for this application and future requirements.
The range of geological applications based on isotope ratio measurements continues to expand in line with the available technology. Lecuyer et al.332 developed a rapid and simple protocol for the separation and preconcentration of B from carbonates, phosphates and silicates, prior to B isotope measurements designed to evaluate B isotope fractionation between calcite and sea-water as a function of pH. An overall variation in the Se isotope composition of selected terrestrial and extraterrestrial materials of 8‰ was reported by Rouxel and co-workers.333 Selenium isotopes were separated and preconcentrated on cotton impregnated with thioglycollic acid prior to determination by HG-MC-ICP-MS; the estimated external precision for 82Se/76Se was 0.25‰
							(2 sigma). High precision measurements of Ti isotope ratios in silicates using MC-ICP-MS required a high degree of purification to avoid potential matrix effects and isobaric interferences.310,334 Instrumental mass bias was corrected by using a standard bracketing approach. Becker et al.335 discussed the difficulties surrounding the high precision measurement of Ru isotopes by MC-ICP-MS. Analyses of meteorite samples demonstrated that if the interferences from molybdenum were sufficiently large (Mo/Ru >104), the uncertainties on the Mo interference correction could propagate through the mass bias correction to yield inaccurate results for Ru isotope compositions. Modified methods for the measurement of 238U/230Th disequilibria in volcanic rocks using MC-ICP-MS have been published.336,337 Weyer et al.338 determined ultra-low concentrations of Hf, Nb, Ta and Zr by ID-MC-ICP-MS; a novel aspect was their use of an isotopic tracer enriched in 180Ta. The procedure required only about 0.5 g of the analytes to perform an ID analysis with an external reproducibility of better than 1%. As well as providing new and more precise data for these elements in geological CRMs, the Zr/Hf and Nb/Ta ratios of the solar system were determined, based on new data for two chondrites and six achondrites.
In spite of many advances, the characterisation and correction of mass fractionation during measurements by MC-ICP-MS is still an area of concern. Vance and Thirlwall339 investigated the Nd isotopic system and concluded that the standard approach of using 146Nd ∶
							144Nd to normalise other Nd isotopes led to both inaccurate and relatively imprecise results. These figures of merit were greatly improved if a normalising ratio close in mass to the ratio to be normalised was used. For example, if 145Nd ∶
							142Nd was normalised using 143Nd ∶
							144Nd, a value identical to that obtained by TIMS was obtained. An alternative approach was to apply a secondary mass bias correction using post-normalisation linear correlations between isotope ratios. The data obtained on two different instruments suggested that the quasi-empirical exponential law does not correct perfectly for mass discrimination on any mass spectrometer. Chu and co-workers340 evaluated the relationship between the mass bias of Yb and Hf, with a view to improving isobaric interference corrections on radiogenic 176Hf. They concluded that the presently accepted Yb isotopic abundances were not appropriate and defined new ones based on TIMS and MC-ICP-MS data. Using the new values, it was demonstrated that Yb and Hf have similar levels of mass bias in plasma ionisation instruments, enabling the use of Hf isotope ratios to correct Yb mass bias before the subsequent correction of 176Hf for isobaric 176Yb. Waight et al.341 proposed a new approach to the correction of mass bias in the measurement of Rb isotopes by adding zirconium at the isotope dilution step and assuming a natural 90Zr ∶
							91Zr ratio of 4.588 in the calculations.
Waight et al.342 also described the pitfalls to be avoided in Sr isotope determinations by MC-ICP-MS. Similar accuracy and precision to that achievable by TIMS was obtained on unspiked samples but at a cost. The chemical clean-up, to remove potential interferences from Rb, doubly charged REE, and dimers and argides of Ca, involved more steps than are required for TIMS, background corrections were required at m/z 84 and 86 to correct for interferences derived from krypton in the argon supply, and each analysis consumed 300 ng of Sr compared with TIMS where approximately 1 ng can be measured. The reproducibility for spiked Sr samples was significantly worse than that for unspiked ones because it was not possible to determine the exact isotopic composition of the interfering Rb. This problem could be overcome by spiking half the digested sample and reserving the other aliquot. Measurements of Sr isotope ratios by LA-MC-ICP-MS did not accord with those by solution analysis and the discrepancies were thought to arise from isobaric interferences from Ca dimers and argides, and doubly charged REE, as well as mass bias effects due to different loading of the plasma. Bizzarro and co-workers343 considered most of these potential interferences in their investigation of the 87Sr/86Sr composition of apatite and carbonates by LA-MC-ICP-MS, so the discrepancies reported by Waight et al.342 may have been instrument specific.
Recent developments and potential pitfalls for Os isotopic measurements by magnetic sector ICP-MS were summarised in a review by Reisberg and Meisel269 containing 98 references. In a simplified method for the Re–Os dating of molybdenite proposed by Malinovsky and co-workers,344 sample digestion and sample/spike equilibration were achieved by a two-stage autoclave-based procedure using a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids. After distillation, OsO4 was trapped in a mixture of 0.05% thiourea in 0.05 M sodium hydroxide, whilst the Re remaining in solution after distillation was separated from excess Mo using an anion-exchange column. Typical instrumental precision for Os and Re isotope ratio measurements on a single collector ICP-MS instrument was in the range 0.02–0.2% RSD, depending on the analyte concentrations. Osmium memory effects were eliminated using 5% ammonia solution, but the accuracy of the method was limited by difficulties in evaluating the exact concentration of Os in the spike solution. Three different ICP-MS technologies were assessed in the determination of the isotopic composition of three samples of Precambrian origin highly enriched in 187Os;345 good agreement of isotopic abundance was found between the three methods. Norman et al.346 identified that the direct introduction of OsO4 vapour into the plasma by sparging has several advantages, as it negated the need for chemical separation of Os and also eliminated the nebuliser and spray chamber assembly, which are primary sources of memory and carry-over between samples during solution analysis. Replicate analysis of an in-house standard sparged into a MC-ICP-MS instrument yielded an average 188Os ∶
							192Os value that was within 10 ppm of the accepted value when corrected for mass bias, with a reproducibility of ±0.5‰
							(2 SE). Whilst not achieving the ultimate precision and sensitivity of N-TIMS, the sparging technique was felt to be suitable for a variety of geological applications.
The high resolution (HR) capability of magnetic sector ICP-MS instruments was exploited by Makishima et al.347 for the determination of Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn in geological materials where only milligram amounts of sample were available. Silicate samples mixed with isotope dilution spikes were digested with HF–HBr and Br2, and subsequently decomposed at 518 K in a Teflon bomb. The supernatant was introduced into the ICP by FI via a HF-resistant torch and spray chamber, with the spectrometer set at a mass resolution of 7500 to achieve separation of the analytes from interfering polyatomic ions. No matrix effects were observed down to a dilution factor of 50 and detection limits were less than 0.04 µg g−1. Accurate data were obtained for small sample sizes with a wide range of Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn contents, making it suitable for analysing samples such as meteorites, mantle peridotites and mineral separates. Pretorius et al.348 took advantage of high resolution instrumentation to reduce many of the potential spectral inteferences that plague the determination of the PGEs. Trace levels of Ir, Pt, Re and Ru in kimberlite and peridotitic rocks were measured, without isotopic spiking or matrix removal, using HR-ICP-MS equipped with a self-aspirating Teflon® Microflow nebuliser, which has uptake rates ranging from 20 to 300 µL min−1, high sensitivity and is tolerant of high TDS. The method developed did not require extensive sample preparation and Os could be preconcentrated from the same sample aliquot.


4.3.5 Other mass spectrometric techniques. 
Given the huge growth in geological applications based on MC-ICP-MS data, it is not surprising that the number of new developments in TIMS is relatively small. Molybdenum isotope fractionation has the potential to be an important tool in the study of ore genesis provided precisions of 0.1 permil per mass unit can be achieved. Wieser and de Laeter349 made a preliminary study of Mo isotope ratios in molybdenites using a 94Mo–100Mo double spiking method and a TIMS multicollector system to achieve high precision measurements. Because W has a high first ionisation potential and is very refractory, it lends itself to measurement by N-TIMS through the formation of WO3−. Quitte and co-workers350 developed a two-stage anion exchange procedure for the dissolution and chemical separation of W from both metal and silicate phases of meteorites prior to measurement by N-TIMS. An improvement in sensitivity of 10–100 times that of previously published procedures was achieved, permitting W isotope ratios to be measured on small quantities of W-poor material with an external precision for 182W/184W of 5 × 10−5
						(2 s). A new multicollector technique for the measurement of Ca isotope ratios by TIMS has been proposed,351 which improved the internal precision of 44Ca/40Ca by a factor of 2–4 and the sample throughput by a factor of three, compared with the peak jumping method commonly used.
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) has been utilised in studies of the composition of selected minerals, particularly for light elements. Natural andesite was used to prepare calibration glasses for determining the H content of a wide range of glass and mineral compositions by SIMS.352 Koga et al.353 were able to reduce the detection limit for water analysis in various minerals by SIMS to 2–4 ppm H2O. The accuracy of the SIMS calibration was dependent on the FTIR extinction coefficients used to establish the calibration lines, which were accurate to 10–30% at the 95% confidence limit. Ottolini et al.354,355 determined B, Be, F, H and Li in various silicate minerals using silicon as an internal standard to convert the secondary ion intensities into concentrations. Comparison with data obtained on the same crystals by EMPA and single-crystal structure-refinement (SREF) indicated that, for most minerals, matrix effects due to crystallographic orientation were smaller than the analytical uncertainty of 10%. The most significant matrix effects appeared to be related to the iron and manganese content of the minerals, with Be the element least affected. Concentrations determined by SIMS and SREF agreed well for most of the light elements when present as major constituents. Hauri and co-workers356 described the in situ analysis of diamonds for N content, δ13C and δ15N, with a spatial resolution of 25 µm. Carbon isotopes were analysed using extreme energy filtering, while the N abundance and isotopes were measured at high mass resolution with energy filtering. Instrument alignment and standardisation required considerable care to achieve a total uncertainty of ±0.3‰ for δ13C (1 sigma); heterogeneity of the standards limited the accuracy of the δ15N determinations to ±3‰
						(1 sigma).
Techniques to characterise the distribution of gold and other precious metals in ore minerals continue to attract interest. A newly developed TOF-RIMS instrument has been applied to the determination of Au, Pd and Rh in sulfides, iron oxides and silicates.357,358 Quantification was performed on the basis of calibration curves established with reference samples covering three orders of magnitude in concentration. Detection limits were in the range 8–17 ppb with a precision of ±15%. SIMS was used to characterise Au in pyrite from a polymetallic sulfide ore deposit;359 the results showed that finely dispersed gold was found in pyrite spherules and porous masses, whereas nuggets of Au were associated with the crystalline pyrite, suggesting that during the maturation of pyrite containing finely dispersed Au, the Au is mobilised and ultimately concentrated at grain edges as nuggets. In some hydrothermal ore deposits iron–titanium oxides can act as important hosts for Au, the exact sites having important implications for ore genesis and ore extraction. Larocque et al.360 analysed magnetite and ilmenite standards implanted with 197Au to calibrate SIMS measurements of these minerals. Because of the small diameter of the oxide phenocrysts, a small raster size and beam diameter were required; thus, a 10 µm diameter caesium primary beam was rastered over an area with 50 µm sides. Detection limits of 10 ppb Au in magnetite and 240 ppb Au in ilmenite were achieved.
Few relevant applications of accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) have been reported recently. Research at the AUSTRALIS microbeam AMS facility, designed principally for in situ microanalysis of geological samples, has concentrated on the measurement of Pb, Os and S isotopes.361 Precisions of less than 0.3‰ were possible using a fast switching system to counter the effect of instabilities in the ion source and beam transport system. As part of a study on the detection of short-lived radionuclides from the remnants of supernovae during the last decade, AMS was used to search for 244Pu in a deep ocean sediment that acts as a repository for cosmic dust.362 An upper limit for the deposition of interstellar 244Pu of 0.2 atoms cm−2 y−1 was obtained.
For a wider overview of recent developments in all aspects of atomic mass spectrometry, the reader should consult the relevant Update in this series.323


4.3.6 X-ray techniques. 
In many geochemical laboratories, XRF is routinely used for bulk analysis, while studies of heterogeneous specimens are made using microprobe techniques such as EPMA, LA-ICP-MS and synchrotron facilities. However, developments in X-ray optics have made it possible to construct instruments capable of analysing small sample areas in an acceptable time. A new benchtop micro-XRay spectrometer described by Haschke et al.363 was fitted with a capillary optical system capable of spatial resolutions down to 10 µm. An XRF-microprobe developed in Switzerland has been applied to the precise Pb–Th–U dating of individual monazite grains.364,365 With counting times of 10 min, detection limits of about 10 ppm could be achieved on single monazite grains as small as 50 mg; sufficient counts were collected over 40 min to date monazite grains as young as 15 Ma. The results were initially evaluated against dates obtained by U–Pb TIMS364 and further favourable comparisons were made with data obtained by EPMA and LA-MC-ICP-MS.365
A popular application of energy dispersive XRF (EDXRF) has been the analysis of ore concentrates.366–368 Savichev and Sorokin245 proposed a simplified method of fundamental parameters in the analysis of soils and rocks by EDXRF. This involved a calibration based on correction of the observed line intensity only for sample absorption; the best accuracy was achieved for major element oxides when potassium was used as the reference element. Revenko369 devised a new method for the analysis of rocks, soils and sediments by XRF, based on revised absorption–enhancement correction procedures. It was subsequently used to analyse 1500 carbonate sediments and overcame several problems that arise with these type of samples.
Although many earth scientists have limited access to proton-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) facilities, a number of geochemical studies have benefited from the high resolution elemental data this technique can provide. It has been used to delineate varves in cores of marine sediments through annual variations in Fe and Si concentrations250 and evaluate estuarine contamination over 150 years370 through the correlation of elemental profiles of a sediment core with radiometric dating. Recent advances at the CSIRO–GEOMOC nuclear microprobe facility provided rapid pixel-by-pixel correction for matrix and absorption effects across the image area to yield true quantitative images371,372 and has been applied to the study of inclusions and associated mineral assemblages. Yttrium zoning in garnets from metamorphic rocks was achieved using micro-PIXE, where other techniques had limitations for this application.373 Quantitative spot analyses ranged from about 1500 ppm at the core to 50 ppm at the rim. The very precise determinations by this technique, with a detection limit of less than 5 ppm, allowed better definition of the thermal history of the associated rocks through the application of a recently calibrated geothermometer.
For a comprehensive review of the current status of XRF spectrometry, the Atomic Spectrometry Update on this subject is recommended.374

5 References
S. J. Hill, T. A. Arowolo, O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, M. S. Cresser, C. F. Harrington and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18, 170 RSC .
W. E. Wilson, J. C. Chow, C. Claiborn, F. S. Wei, J. Engelbrecht and J. G. Watson, Chemosphere, 2002, 49(9), 1009 CrossRef CAS .
U. Pöschl, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(Jan), 130 .
T. Hoffmann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(1), 36 CAS .
C. J. Costa, A. P. Marques, M. C. Freitas, M. A. Reis and O. R. Oliveira, Environ. Pollut., 2002, 120(1), 97 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lynam and G. J. Keeler, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374, 1009 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Zhang, H. Xu and J. C. Yu, Talanta, 2002, 57(2), 323 CrossRef CAS .
B. Planer-Friedrich, J. Matschullat, B. J. Merkel, G. Roewer and P. Volke, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Profumo, G. Spini, L. Cucca and M. Pesavento, Talanta, 2002, 57(5), 929 CrossRef CAS .
O. Nygren, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(5), 623 RSC .
M. Bettinelli, S. Spezia, C. Minoia and A. Ronchi, At. Spectrosc., 2002, 23(4), 105 CAS .
Hui-Tao Liu and Shiuh-Jen Jiang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375, 306 CAS .
S. Maillefer, C. R. Lehr and W. R. Cullen, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2003, 17(3), 154 CrossRef CAS .
P. Konarski, I. Iwanejko and A. Mierzejewska, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203, 757 CrossRef .
R. Lazzeri, G. Clauser, E. Iacob, A. Lui, G. Tonidandel and M. Anderle, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203, 767 CrossRef .
H. Seyama, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203, 745 CrossRef .
P. Konarski, I. Iwanejko and M. Cwil, Vacuum, 2003, 70(2–3), 385 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Rhoads, D. J. Phares, A. S. Wexler and M. V. Johnston, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 2003, 108(D7) Search PubMed .
E. A. H. Timmermans, F. P. J. de Groote, J. Jonkers, A. Gamero, A. Sola and J. J. A. M. van der Mullen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003,(May), 823 CAS .
R. Oikari, M. Aho and R. Hernberg, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17(1), 87 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bettinelli, M. Perotti, S. Spezia, C. Baffi, G. M. Beone, F. Alberici, S. Bergonzi, C. Bettinelli, P. Cantarini and L. Mascetti, Microchem. J., 2002, 73(1–2), 131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zischka, P. Schramel, H. Muntau, A. Rehnert, M. Gomez Gomez, B. Stojanik, G. Wannemaker, R. Dams, P. Quevauviller and E. Maier, Trends Anal. Chem., 2002, 21(12), 851 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matusiewicz and M. Lesinski, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2002, 82(4), 207 CAS .
D. Cinti, M. Angelone, U. Masi and C. Cremisini, Sci. Tot. Environ., 2002, 293(1–3), 47 Search PubMed .
M. B. Gomez, M. M. Gomez and M. A. Palacios, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(1), 80 RSC .
K. Kanitsar, G. Koellensperger, S. Hann, A. Limbeck, H. Puxbaum and G. Stingeder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 239 RSC .
R. A. Sutherland, Arch. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2003, 44(4), 430 CrossRef CAS .
BS ISO 15202-1:2000, Workplace Air, Determination of Metals and Metalloids in Airborne Particulate Matter by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry. Part 1: Sampling, BSI, London,  2000 Search PubMed .
K. Tirez, F. Beutels, W. Brusten, B. Noten and N. De Brucker, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374, 990 CrossRef CAS .
K. Berger, F. Bunzel and R. Neuroth, Gefahrstoffe Reinhaltung der Luft (Air Quality Control), 2003, 63(4), 157 Search PubMed .
C. Bancon-Montigny, P. Maxwell, L. Yang, Z. Mester, R. E. Sturgeon and J. W. Lam, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1506 RSC .
H. Ernstberger, H. Zhang and W. Davison, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373(8), 873 CrossRef CAS .
M. Segura, J. Munoz, Y. Madrid and C. Camara, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(3), 513 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Rao and V. M. N. Biju, Rev. Anal. Chem., 2002, 21(3), 233 Search PubMed .
G. Abbasse, B. Ouddane and J. C. Fischer, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(5), 873 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Jiann and B. J. Presley, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(18), 4716 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Kim and C. K. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(15), 3824 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Mondal and A. K. Das, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 477(1), 73 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Yu, Q. T. Cai, Z. X. Guo, Z. G. Yang and S. B. Khoo, Analyst, 2002, 127(10), 1380 RSC .
K. H. Lee, M. Oshima and S. Motomizu, Analyst, 2002, 127(6), 769 RSC .
Y. Takaku, Y. Kudo, J. Kimura, T. Hayashi, I. Ota, H. Hasegawa and S. Ueda, Bunseki Kagaku, 2002, 51(7), 539 CAS .
O. Cankur, N. Ertas and O. Y. Ataman, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(6), 603 RSC .
A. S. Ribeiro, M. A. Z. Arruda and S. Cadore, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1516 RSC .
N. M. M. Coelho, A. C. da Silva and C. M. da Silva, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 460(2), 227 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Den, W. C. Wei, J. Mierzwa and M. H. Yang, J. Chin. Chem. Soc., 2002, 49(2), 197 CAS .
A. Caballo-Lopez and M. D. Luque de Castro, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1363 RSC .
N. H. Bings, Z. Stefanka and S. R. Mallada, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 479(2), 203 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, Y. Ando, T. Saitoh and M. Hiraide, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1556 RSC .
T. Nakazato, H. Tao, T. Taniguchi and K. Isshiki, Talanta, 2002, 58(1), 121 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Xie, R. Kerrich, E. Irving, K. Liber and F. Abou-Shakra, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1037 RSC .
J. A. Day, M. M. Montes-Bayon, A. P. Vonderheide and J. A. Caruso, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373(7), 664 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sayago, R. Beltran, M. A. F. Recamales and J. L. Gomez-Ariza, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1400 RSC .
P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, J. R. Encinar, J. I. Garcia Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(8), 824 RSC .
K. C. Bowles, S. C. Apte and L. T. Hales, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 477(1), 103 CrossRef CAS .
D. Glindemann, G. Ilgen, R. Herrmann and T. Gollan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1386 RSC .
A. Schwarz and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(2), 212 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Carro, I. Neira, R. Rodil and R. A. Lorenzo, Chromatographia, 2002, 56(11–12), 733 CAS .
J. Leenaers, W. Van Mol, H. G. Infante and F. C. Adams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1492 RSC .
N. Demuth and K. Heumann, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 4020 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stoichev, R. C. R. Martin-Doimeadios, D. Amouroux, N. Molenat and O. F. X. Donard, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(4), 517 RSC .
X. P. Yan, X. B. Yin, D. Q. Jiang and X. W. He, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(7), 1726 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yin, X. P. Yan, Y. Jiang and X. W. He, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(15), 3720 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Gine, A. P. G. Gervasio, A. F. Lavorante, C. E. S. Miranda and E. Carrilho, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(7), 736 RSC .
K. Ndung'u, R. P. Franks, K. W. Bruland and A. R. Flegal, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 481(1), 127 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Mondal and A. K. Das, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn, 2003, 76(1), 111 CrossRef CAS .
P. Smichowski, L. Valiente and A. Ledesma, At. Spectrosc., 2002, 23(3), 92 CAS .
D. L. Giokas, J. Antelo, E. K. Paleologos, F. Arce and M. I. Karayannis, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(4), 505 Search PubMed .
M. G. Ikonomou, M. P. Fernandez, T. He and D. Cullon, J. Chromatogr. A, 2002, 975(2), 319 CrossRef CAS .
A. Le Bihan, Y. Lijour, P. Giamarchi, L. Burel-Deschamps and L. Stephan, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(6), 815 CAS .
A. Le Bihan, Y. Lijour, P. Giamarchi, L. Burel-Deschamps and L. Stephan, Spectrochim. Acta Part, B, 2003, 58(1), 15 CrossRef .
S. E. Maestre, J. Mora, V. Hernandis and J. L. Todoli, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(1), 111 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Dalai and M. Sarin, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(3), 301 CAS .
P. Sarrazin, D. Blake, D. Bish, D. Vaniman, S. Chipera, S. A. Collins and S. T. Elliott, Planet Space Sci., 2002, 50(14–15), 1361 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. de Carvalho, M. D. F. Domingues, J. L. Mantovano and J. da Cunha, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(2), 253 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hattendorf and D. Gunther, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(1), 1 CrossRef .
J. Diemer, C. R. Quetel and P. D. P. Taylor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1137 RSC .
B. K. Esser and A. Volpe, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(13), 2826 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Volpe and B. K. Esser, J. Mar. Syst., 2002, 36(1–2), 51 CrossRef .
B. K. Esser and A. M. Volpe, Mar. Chem., 2002, 79(2), 67 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Gee and K. W. Bruland, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2002, 66(17), 3063 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Kraemer, M. W. Doughten and T. D. Bullen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(22), 4899 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Field and R. M. Sherrell, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 254 RSC .
C. C. Shen, H. Cheng, R. L. Edwards, S. B. Moran, H. N. Edmonds, J. A. Hoff and R. B. Thomas, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(5), 1075 CrossRef CAS .
J. Diemer, C. R. Quetel and P. D. P. Taylor, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(2), 220 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pawlak and G. Rabiega, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(24), 5395 CrossRef CAS .
A. Suturin, L. F. Paradina, V. N. Epov, A. R. Semenov, V. I. Lozhkin and L. L. Petrov, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 277 CrossRef .
P. Jacob and H. J. Berndt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(12), 1615 RSC .
P. Jacob and H. Berndt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(12), 1615 RSC .
E. C. Ferreira, G. B. Souza and A. R. A. Nogueira, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2003, 14(2), 329 Search PubMed .
M. Krachler, C. Mohl, H. Emons and W. Shotyk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(8), 844 RSC .
G. C. L. Araujo, M. H. Gonzalez, A. G. Ferreira, A. R. A. Nogueira and J. A. Nobrega, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 2121 CrossRef .
M. C. Herrera and M. D. L. de Castro, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1530 RSC .
J. Sastre, A. Sahuquillo, M. Vidal and G. Rauret, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 462(1), 59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tutschku, M. M. Schantz and S. A. Wise, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(18), 4694 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gonzalez and R. M. Barnes, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(2), 255 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Mingorance, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373(3), 153 CrossRef CAS .
E. Carrilho, M. H. Gonzalez, A. R. A. Nogueira and G. M. Cruz, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50(15), 4164 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sandroni and C. M. M. Smith, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 468(2), 335 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Crumbaugh and Y. P. Kalra, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2002, 33(15–18), 3437 CAS .
J. L. Luque-Garcia and M. D. Luque de Castro, Trends Anal. Chem., 2003, 22(1), 41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vaisanen and R. Suontamo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(7), 739 RSC .
J. Borkowska-Burnecka, J. Wisz and W. Zyrnicki, Chem. Anal., 2003, 48(1), 115 Search PubMed .
J. Ruiz-Jimenez, J. L. Luque-Garcia and M. D. Luque de Castro, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 480(2), 231 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. da Silva, L. F. Dias, T. D. Saint'Pierre, A. J. Curtius and B. Welz, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 344 RSC .
A. C. Sahayam, S. Thangavel and S. C. Chaurasia, At. Spectrosc., 2003, 24(1), 11 CAS .
J. Rejnek, Chem. Listy, 2002, 96(12), 1010 Search PubMed .
A. V. Filgueiras, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(6), 823 RSC .
P. Quevauviller, Trends Anal. Chem., 2002, 21(11), 774 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Solis, E. Alonso and P. Riesco, Water Air Soil Pollut., 2002, 140(1–4), 139 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Encinar, P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, J. I. Garcia Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, Trends Anal. Chem., 2003, 22(2), 108 CrossRef .
Y. Han, H. M. Kingston, H. M. Boylan, G. M. M. Rahman, S. Shah, R. C. Richter, D. D. Link and S. Bhandari, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(5), 428 CAS .
J. C. Wasserman, B. Amouroux, M. A. V. Wasserman and O. F. X. Donard, Environ. Technol., 2002, 23, 899 CAS .
T. Eguchi and T. Tomiyasu, Bunseki Kagaku, 2002, 51(9), 859 CAS .
A. Sahuquillo, G. Rauret, M. Bianchi, A. Rehnert and H. Muntau, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(4), 578 CAS .
C. Dietz, T. Perez-Corona, Y. Madrid-Albarran and C. Camara, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(5), 467 RSC .
M. Montes-Bayon, D. L. Le Duc, N. Terry and J. A. Caruso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(8), 872 RSC .
J. R. Encinar, P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, J. R. Fernandez, J. I. Garcia Alonso, S. Diez, J. M. Bayona and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(20), 5237 CrossRef .
C. Scriver, Z. Mester, R. E. Sturgeon, L. Poter and S. Willie, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1511 RSC .
L. Yang, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(13), 2968 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Stasinakis, N. S. Thomaidis and T. D. Lekkas, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 478(1), 119 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dirilgen and F. Dogan, Ecotox. Environ. Safe., 2002, 53(3), 397 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Smith, W. A. Maher, P. J. Craig and R. O. Jenkins, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2002, 16(6), 287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sarret, P. Saumitou-Laprade, V. Bert, O. Proux, J. L. Hazemann, A. S. Traverse, M. A. Marcus and A. Manceau, Plant Physiol., 2002, 130(4), 1815 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manceau, N. Tamura, R. S. Celestre, A. A. MacDowell, N. Geoffroy, G. Sposito and H. A. Padmore, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37(1), 75 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ipolyi, C. Brunori, C. Cremisini, P. Fodor, L. Macaluso and R. Morabito, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(4), 541 Search PubMed .
M. B. O. Giacomelli, M. C. Lima, L. F. Dias, B. Welz and A. J. Curtius, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1339 RSC .
Y. Bohari, G. Lobos, H. Pinochet, F. Pannier, A. Astruc and M. Potin-Gautier, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(4), 596 RSC .
J. C. Gonzalez, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, Talanta, 2003, 59(3), 525 CrossRef .
S. Garcia-Manyes, G. Jimenez, A. Padro, R. Rubio and G. Rauret, Talanta, 2002, 58(1), 97 CrossRef CAS .
G. Koellensperger, J. Nurmi, S. Hann, G. Stingeder, W. J. Fitz and W. W. Wenzel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1042 RSC .
J. B. Shi, Z. Y. Tang, Z. X. Jin, Q. Chi, B. He and G. B. Jiang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 477(1), 139 CrossRef CAS .
M. Montperrus, Y. Bohari, M. Bueno, A. Astruc and M. Astruc, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2002, 16(7), 347 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tangen, T. Wickstrom, S. Lierhagen, R. Vogt and W. Lund, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36(24), 5421 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Abreu, B. van Raij, U. Gabe, M. F. Abreu and A. Paz-Gonzalez, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2002, 33(15–18), 3313 CrossRef CAS .
R. Moral, R. J. Gilkes and J. Moreno-Caselles, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2002, 33(15–18), 2781 CAS .
A. V. Filgueiras, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(1), 103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bancon-Montigny, P. Maxwell, L. Yang, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(21), 5606 CrossRef .
S. Morales-Munoz, J. L. Luque-Garcia and M. D. Luque de Castro, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(1), 159 CrossRef .
E. Priego-Lopez and M. D. Luque de Castro, Talanta, 2002, 58(2), 377 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ellwood and W. A. Maher, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 477(2), 279 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lesniewicz and W. Zyrnicki, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2003, 34(5–6), 629 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Janusa and J. N. Beck, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2002, 37(2), 137 CAS .
P. Niedzielski, M. Siepak and J. Siepak, Chem. Anal., 2002, 47(6), 807 Search PubMed .
B. Welz, H. Becker-Ross, S. Florek, U. Heitmann and M. G. R. Vale, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2003, 14(2), 220 Search PubMed .
B. Welz, M. G. R. Vale, M. M. Silva, H. Becker-Ross, M. D. Huang, S. Florek and U. Heitmann, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(6), 1043 CrossRef .
E. Kenduzler and A. R. Turker, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 480(2), 259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bujdos, V. Stresko, J. Medved and J. Kubova, Fresenius’ Environ. Bull., 2002, 11(9B), 686 Search PubMed .
M. E. Moreno, C. Perez-Conde and C. Camara, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(5), 666 .
U. Divrikli, M. Soylak and L. Elci, Anal. Lett., 2003, 36(4), 839 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Vieira, B. Welz and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 2057 CrossRef .
W. B. Xie, C. Wang, P. R. Guo, J. Y. Yao and Z. L. Ying, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2002, 30(12), 1466 CAS .
L. L. Yang, D. Q. Zhang and Q. X. Zhou, Anal. Sci., 2002, 18(7), 811 CAS .
A. F. da Silva, B. Welz and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 2031 CrossRef .
E. R. Pereira, H. Berndt and M. A. Z. Arruda, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1308 RSC .
T. Myohanen, V. Mantylahti, K. Koivunen and R. J. Matilainen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(11), 1681 CrossRef .
A. V. Filgueiras, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 466(2), 303 CrossRef CAS .
N. Campillo, I. Lopez-Garcia, P. Vinas, I. Arnau-Jerez and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1429 RSC .
R. Dobrowolski, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(7–8), 1294 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. G. Borges, L. F. Dias, M. da Veiga and A. J. Curtius, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2003, 14(2), 291 Search PubMed .
J. Moreda-Pineiro, P. Lopez-Mahia, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo, E. Fernandez-Fernandez and D. Prada-Rodriguez, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(7), 721 RSC .
M. Langodegard and G. Wibetoe, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373(8), 820 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Moreira, C. B. Maia and A. K. Avila, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 2141 CrossRef .
E. C. Lima, R. V. Barbosa, J. L. Brasil and A. Santos, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1523 RSC .
P. Niedzielski, M. Siepak and J. Siepak, Microchem. J., 2002, 72(2), 137 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Lima, R. V. Barbosa, J. C. P. Vaghetti and L. S. Ferreira, At. Spectrosc., 2002, 23(4), 135 CAS .
N. N. Meeravali and S. J. Kumar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(7), 704 RSC .
Z. N. Kakhnovich, Eurasian Soil Sci., 2002, 35(10), 1058 Search PubMed .
M. J. Cal-Prieto, A. Carlosena, J. M. Andrade, P. Lopez-Mahia, S. Muniategui and D. Prada, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(1), 29 RSC .
A. E. Pillay, J. R. Williams, M.
O. El Mardi, S. M. Hassan and A. Al-Hamdi, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 254(3), 465 CrossRef CAS .
E. Beccaloni, L. Musmeci and E. Stacul, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., , (, 2002, 374(7–8), 1230 Search PubMed .
R. Djingova and J. Ivanova, Talanta, 2002, 57(5), 821 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Hislop and J. W. Hornbeck, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2002, 33(15–18), 3377 CAS .
M. Grotti, E. Magi and R. Leardi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 274 RSC .
G. de la Rosa, J. R. Peralta-Videa and J. L. Gardea-Torresdey, J. Hazard. Mater., 2003, 97(1–3), 207 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gasparics, V. G. Mihucz, E. Tatar and G. Zaray, Microchem. J., 2002, 73(1–2), 89 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lopez-Molinero, O. Mendoza, A. Callizo, P. Chamorro and J. R. Castillo, Analyst, 2002, 127(10), 1386 RSC .
J. Mikolas, P. Musil, V. Stuchlikova, K. Novotny, V. Otruba and V. Kanicky, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(2), 244 CrossRef CAS .
H. Suyanto, H. Kurniawan, T. J. Lie, M. O. Tjia and K. Kagawa, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(8), 1325 CrossRef .
M. Ohata, Y. Iwasaki, N. Furuta and I. B. Brenner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B,, 2002, 57(11), 1713 CrossRef .
S. Farias, R. E. Rodriguez, A. Ledesma, D. A. Batistoni and P. Smichowski, Microchem. J., 2002, 73(1–2), 79 CrossRef CAS .
P. Grinberg, R. C. Campos and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(7), 693 RSC .
B. A. Zarcinas, Sci. Tot. Environ., 2002, 295(1–3), 241 Search PubMed .
H. D. Liu, J. B. Shi, Q. Chi, Z. Y. Tang, Z. X. Jin and C. H. Xiong, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2002, 22(5), 862 Search PubMed .
B. He, Y. Fang, G. B. Jiang and Z. M. Ni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(11), 1705 CrossRef .
S. Salomon, V. Jenne and M. Hoenig, Talanta, 2002, 57(1), 157 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bol, N. J. Ostle and K. J. Petzke, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci.—Z. Pflanzenernahr. Bodenkd., 2002, 165(6), 661 Search PubMed .
R. J. Laughlin and R. J. Stevens, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2003, 67(2), 540 CAS .
P. M. C. Bruneau, N. Ostle, D. A. Davidson, I. C. Grieve and A. E. Fallick, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 16(23), 2190 CrossRef CAS .
M. Andres, J. Blichert-Toft and J. G. Schilling, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2002, 3 Search PubMed .
A. Kawasaki, H. Oda and T. Hirata, Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 2002, 48(5), 635 Search PubMed .
S. F. Boulyga, J. L. Matusevich, V. P. Mironov, V. P. Kudrjashov, L. Halicz, I. Segal, J. A. McLean, A. Montaser and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(8), 958 RSC .
P. R. Danesi, A. Bleise, W. Burkart, T. Cabianca, M. J. Campbell, M. Makarewicz, J. Moreno, C. Tuniz and M. Hotchkis, J. Environ. Radioact., 2003, 64(2–3), 121 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ferrari, M. Perego and M. Fanciulli, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A—Vac. Surf. Films, 2002, 20(3), 616 Search PubMed .
S. F. Boulyga and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1143 RSC .
Y. Muramatsu, S. Yoshida and A. Tanaka, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2003, 255(3), 477 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Boulyga, D. Desideri, M. A. Meli, C. Testa and J. S. Becker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 226(3), 329 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Chen, H. Dahlgaard, S. P. Nielsen and A. Aarkrog, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(3), 451 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Kenna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(11), 1471 RSC .
C. K. Kim, C. S. Kim, B. H. Rho and J. I. Lee, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 252(2), 421 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mas, M. Garcia-Leon and J. P. Bolivar, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2002, 484(1–3), 660 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Yang, Z. Y. Huang, L. Zhao, Z. X. Zhuang and X. R. Wang, Chem. J. Chin. Univ.-Chin., 2002, 23(9), 1688 Search PubMed .
E. Higney, V. Olive, A. B. MacKenzie and I. D. Pulford, Appl. Geochem., 2002, 17(8), 1123 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. S. Bellato, A. A. Menegario and M. F. Gine, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2003, 14(2), 269 Search PubMed .
K. Inagaki, A. Takatsu, T. Watanabe, Y. Aoyagi and K. Okamoto, Analyst, 2003, 128(3), 265 RSC .
Y. Zheng, B. Weinman, T. Cronin, M. Q. Fleisher and R. F. Anderson, Appl. Geochem., 2003, 18(4), 539 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vanhaecke, M. Resano, M. Pruneda-Lopez and L. Moens, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(23), 6040 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lamas, J. Fleckenstein, S. Schroetter, R. M. Sparovek and E. Schnug, Commun. Soil Sci. Plant Anal., 2002, 33(15–18), 3469 CAS .
S. Y. Chen, Z. F. Zhang, H. M. Yu, W. Q. Liu and M. Sun, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 463(2), 177 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ayrault, L. Galsomies, G. Amblard, M. D. Sciarretta, P. Bonhomme and A. Gaudry, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2002, 82(7), 463 CAS .
P. Adamo, S. Giordano, S. Vingiani, R. C. Cobianchi and P. Violante, Environ. Pollut., 2003, 122(1), 91 CrossRef CAS .
L. Galsomies, S. Ayrault, F. Carrot, C. Deschamps and M. A. Letrouit-Galinou, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37(2), 241 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. F. Al-Dayel, S. A. Al-Kahtani and J. A. Hefne, Asian J. Spectrosc., 2002, 6(1), 23 Search PubMed .
G. Tyler and T. Olsson, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci.-Z. Pflanzenernahr. Bodenkd., 2002, 165(5), 594 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krachler, C. Mohl, H. Emons and W. Shotyk, Spectrochim.
Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(8), 1277 Search PubMed .
M. Potter, Trans. Inst. Min. Metall. Sect. B—Appl. Earth Sci., 2002, 111, B58 Search PubMed .
D. J. Bellis, K. Satake, M. Noda, N. Nishimura and C. W. McLeod, Sci. Tot. Environ., 2002, 295(1–3), 91 Search PubMed .
K. Tagami and S. Uchida, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2003, 255(3), 547 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mestek, J. Kominkova, R. Koplik, M. Borkova and M. Suchanek, Talanta, 2002, 57(6), 1133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krachler, H. Emons, C. Barbante, G. Cozzi, P. Cescon and W. Shotyk, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 458(2), 387 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamada, I. Hisamori and K. Yonebayashi, Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 2002, 48(3), 379 Search PubMed .
D. Beauchemin, K. Kyser and D. Chipley, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(15), 3924 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Wang, B. L. Huang, Z. W. Guan, L. M. Yang and B. Li, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2001, 370(8), 1041 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baker, T. Waight and D. Ulfbeck, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2002, 66(20), 3635 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sekimoto, K. Horie, T. Matsumoto and H. Haraguchi, Bunseki Kagaku, 2002, 51(11), 1075 CAS .
M. Astrom and N. Corin, Water Res., 2003, 37(2), 273 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Zhang, M. A. Nearing, V. O. Polyakov and J. M. Friedrich, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2003, 67(1), 279 CAS .
M. Montes-Bayon, T. D. Grant, J. Meija and J. A. Caruso, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1015 RSC .
J. Meija, M. Montes-Bayon, D. L. Le Duc, N. Terry and J. A. Caruso, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74(22), 5837 CrossRef .
K. A. Feeney, P. J. Heard, F. J. Zhao and P. R. Shewry, J. Cereal Sci., 2003, 37(3), 311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Derue, D. Gibouin, M. C. Verdus, F. Lefebvre, M. Demarty, C. Ripoll and M. Thellier, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2002, 58(2), 104 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Appelhans, M. B. Ward and J. E. Olson, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 221(1), 21 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Cliff, D. J. Gaspar, P. J. Bottomley and D. D. Myrold, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2002, 68(8), 4067 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bacon, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(2), 291 RSC .
S. K. Sahoo, H. Yonehara, K. Kurotaki, K. Fujimoto and Y. Nakamura, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 252(2), 241 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1172 RSC .
P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, J. Marshall, C. Streli, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1439 RSC .
G. Reames and L. L. Lance, J. Environ. Health, 2002, 64(8), 9 Search PubMed .
P. J. Potts, M. H. Ramsey and J. Carlisle, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(6), 1017 RSC .
D. Wegrzynek, A. Markowicz and E. Chinea-Cano, X-Ray Spectrom., 2003, 32(2), 119 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Gordeeva, M. A. Statkus, N. M. Sorokina, G. I. Tsizin and Y. A. Zolotov, J. Anal. Chem., 2002, 57(8), 701 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. Kang, X. Sun, X. Ju, Y. Y. Huang, K. Yao, Z. Q. Wu and D. C. Xian, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 192(4), 365 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Selim, D. P. Wells, J. F. Harmon, J. Kwofie, R. Spaulding, G. Erickson and T. Roney, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A—Accel. Spectrom. Dect. Assoc. Equip., 2002, 495(2), 154 Search PubMed .
E. Schelle, I. Staton, P. J. Clarkson, D. J. Bellis and C. W. McLeod, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2002, 82(11–12), 785 CAS .
F. Schimidt, M. Bueno and R. J. Poppi, Quim. Nova, 2002, 25(6A), 949 Search PubMed .
A. T. Savichev and S. E. Sorokin, Eurasian Soil Sci., 2002, 35(12), 1282 Search PubMed .
N. K. Saini, P. K. Mukherjee, M. S. Rathi, P. P. Khanna and K. K. Purohit, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2002, 20(4), 539 Search PubMed .
S. J. Naftel, R. R. Martin, F. Courchesne, V. Seguin and R. Protz, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2002, 47(2), 36 Search PubMed .
R. Barbini, F. Colao, V. Lazic, R. Fantoni, A. Palucci and M. Angelone, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(7), 1203 CrossRef .
M. Z. Martin, S. D. Wullschleger, C. T. Garten and A. V. Palumbo, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(12), 2072 Search PubMed .
M. Oksanen, J. J. Merilainen, J. Raisanen, T. Saarinen and A. Virtanen, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 253(2), 331 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. R. Hunter, R. T. Wainner, L. G. Piper and S. J. Davis, Appl. Optics, 2003, 42(12), 2102 Search PubMed .
J. S. Kane and P. J. Potts, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 171 CAS .
I. Roelandts, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 101 .
M. Valladon, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(3), 313 .
S. Terashima, N. Imai, M. Taniguchi, T. Okai and A. Nishimura, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 85 CAS .
T. Okai, A. Suzuki, H. Kawahata, S. Terashima and N. Imai, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 95 CAS .
B. Flem and L. P. Bedard, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(3), 287 CAS .
L. P. Bedard and S. J. Barnes, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 254(2), 319 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Bedard and S. J. Barnes, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2002, 254(3), 485 CrossRef CAS .
C. Latkoczy and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1264 RSC .
I. Rodushkin, M. D. Axelsson, D. Malinovsky and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1223 RSC .
I. Rodushkin, M. D. Axelsson, D. Malinovsky and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1231 RSC .
M. Guillong and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(8), 831 RSC .
M. Guillong, H. R. Kuhn and D. Gunther, Spectrochim. Acta Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 211 CrossRef .
I. Horn and D. Gunther, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 207(1–4), 144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gonzalez, X. L. Mao, J. Roy, S. S. Mao and R. E. Russo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1108 RSC .
J. Kosler, H. P. Longerich and M. N. Tubrett, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(2), 251 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirata, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(2), 228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Reisberg and T. Meisel, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(3), 249 CAS .
P. J. Potts, M. Thompson and S. Wilson, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, X. M. Liu, H. L. Yuan, B. Hattendorf, D. Gunther, L. Chen and S. H. Hu, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 181 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Eggins and J. M. G. Shelley, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(3), 269 CAS .
E. P. Vicenzi, S. Eggins, A. Logan and R. Wysoczanski, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 2002, 107(6), 719 Search PubMed .
T. Schmidt, T. Vogt, J. P. Surmann and W. Kossler, Pharmazie, 2002, 57(6), 396 Search PubMed .
N. J. G. Pearce, W. J. Eastwood, J. A. Westgate and W. T. Perkins, J. Geol. Soc., 2002, 159, 545 Search PubMed .
T. Ulrich, S. D. Golding, B. S. Kamber, K. Zaw and A. Taube, Ore Geol. Rev., 2003, 22(1–2), 61 CrossRef .
T. Ulrich, D. Gunther and C. A. Heinrich, Econ. Geol. Bull. Soc. Econ. Geol., 2002, 97(8), 1863 .
L. Kleiber, H. Fink, R. Niessner and U. Panne, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(1), 109 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Tao, Y. Fujikawa, M. Mitsui and R. Yamada, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(5), 560 RSC .
F. Poitrasson, J. M. Hanchar and U. Schaltegger, Chem. Geol., 2002, 191(1–3), 3 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Wiens, R. E. Arvidson, D. A. Cremers, M. J. Ferris, J. D. Blacic, F. P. Seelos and K. S. Deal, J. Geophys. Res.—Planets, 2002, 107(E11), art. no. Search PubMed .
J. Moreda-Pineiro, P. Lopez-Mahia, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo, E. Fernandez-Fernandez and D. Prada-Rodriguez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(5), 883 CrossRef .
J. Moreda-Pineiro, P. Lopez-Mahia, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo, E. Fernandez-Fernandez and D. Prada-Rodriguez, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 460(1), 111 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moreda-Pineiro, P. Lopez-Mahia, S. Muniategui-Lorenzo, E. Fernandez-Fernandez and D. Prada-Rodriguez, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 461(2), 261 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baralkiewicz, S. Lamont and M. Stemerowicz, Chem. Anal., 2002, 47(3), 457 Search PubMed .
S. M. Maia, D. Pozebon and A. J. Curtius, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 330 RSC .
L. F. Dias, T. D. Saint'Pierre, S. M. Maia, M. A. M. da Silva, V. L. A. Frescura, B. Welz and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 2003 CrossRef .
C. S. Silva, J. A. Nobrega and T. Blanco, Quim. Nova, 2002, 25(6B), 1194 Search PubMed .
V. F. Taylor, A. Toms and H. P. Longerich, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 372(2), 360 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Panteeva, D. P. Gladkochoub, T. V. Donskaya, V. V. Markova and G. P. Sandimirova, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 341 CrossRef .
T. Meisel, N. Schoner, V. Paliulionyte and E. Kahr, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 53 CAS .
M. Balcerzak, Anal. Sci., 2002, 18(7), 737 CAS .
V. N. Mitkin, S. B. Zayakina, V. G. Tsimbalist and A. A. Galizky, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 297 CrossRef .
V. N. Mitkin, S. B. Zayakin and G. N. Anoshin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 311 CrossRef .
H. M. Benway, B. A. Haley, G. P. Klinkhammer and A. C. Mix, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2003, 4 Search PubMed .
A. Smeda and W. Zyrnicki, Microchem. J., 2002, 72(1), 9 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sahuquillo, G. Rauret, A. Rehnert and H. Muntau, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 476(1), 15 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Boaventura, R. C. De Oliveira and R. E. Santelli, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 63 CAS .
D. S. R. Murty, P. L. Mohanta and R. Radhamani, At. Spectrosc., 2002, 23(2), 65 CAS .
N. K. Roy and P. Roychowdhury, At. Spectrosc., 2002, 23(4), 125 CAS .
M. S. Navarro, H. Ulbrich, S. Andrade and V. A. Janasi, J. Alloy. Compd, 2002, 344(1–2), 40 CrossRef CAS .
E. de Vos, S. J. Edwards, I. McDonald, D. S. Wray and P. J. Carey, Appl. Geochem., 2002, 17(8), 1115 CrossRef CAS .
R. Juvonen, T. Lakomaa and L. Soikkeli, Talanta, 2002, 58(3), 595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gros, J. P. Lorand and A. Luguet, Chem. Geol., 2002, 185(3–4), 179 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Losev, Y. V. Kudrina, N. V. Maznyak and A. K. Trofimchuk, J. Anal. Chem., 2003, 58(2), 124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iglesias, E. Antico and V. Salvado, Talanta, 2003, 59(4), 651 CrossRef CAS .
B. Le Fevre and C. Pin, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 161 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Yang and C. Pin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 458(2), 375 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Arslan and A. J. Paulson, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 372(7–8), 776 CrossRef CAS .
A. Makishima, X. K. Zhu, N. S. Belshaw and R. K. O'Nions, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1290 RSC .
J. I. Garcia Alonso, J. R. Encinar, P. R. Gonzalez and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 373(6), 432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Monperrus, O. Zuloaga, E. Krupp, D. Amouroux, R. Wahlen, B. Fairman and O. F. X. Donard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 247 RSC .
L. Yang, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(8), 944 RSC .
P. Liu, Q. S. Pu, Q. Y. Sun and Z. X. Su, Anal. Sci., 2003, 19(3), 409 CAS .
A. N. Anthemidis, G. A. Zachariadis, J. S. Kougoulis and J. A. Stratis, Talanta, 2002, 57(1), 15 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Massadeh and R. D. Snook, J. Environ. Monit., 2002, 4(4), 567 Search PubMed .
M. A. Belarra, M. Resano, F. Vanhaecke and L. Moens, Trends Anal. Chem., 2002, 21(12), 828 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. R. Vale and B. Welz, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 1821 CrossRef .
S. Terashima, T. Okai and N. Imai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2002, 51(5), 317 CAS .
D. Pozebon and P. Martins, At. Spectrosc., 2002, 23(4), 111 CAS .
H. Isoyama, T. Uchida, T. Nagashima and O. Ohira, Anal. Sci., 2003, 19(4), 593 CAS .
K. B. Averyt, A. Paytan and G. C. Li, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2003, 4 Search PubMed .
J. R. Bacon, J. C. Greenwood, L. Van Vaeck and J. G. Williams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 955 RSC .
J. C. Ely and C. R. Neal, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 31 CAS .
V. N. Epov, D. Lariviere, R. D. Evans, C. Li and R. J. Cornett, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2003, 256(1), 53 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lariviere, V. N. Epov, R. D. Evans and R. J. Cornett, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 338 RSC .
A. Siripinyanond, R. M. Barnes and D. Amarasiriwardena, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(9), 1055 RSC .
S. D. Tanner, V. I. Baranov and D. R. Bandura, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(9), 1361 CrossRef .
M. Ben-Younes, D. C. Gregoire and C. L. Chakrabarti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 361 CrossRef .
H. T. Liu and S. J. Jiang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(2), 306 CAS .
C. Pin and B. Le Fevre, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 135 CAS .
C. Lecuyer, P. Grandjean, B. Reynard, F. Albarede and P. Telouk, Chem. Geol., 2002, 186(1–2), 45 CrossRef CAS .
O. Rouxel, J. Ludden, J. Carignan, L. Marin and Y. Fouquet, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2002, 66(18), 3191 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Zhu, A. Makishima, Y. Guo, N. S. Belshaw and R. K. O'Nions, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 220(1), 21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Becker, C. Dalpe and R. J. Walker, Analyst, 2002, 127(6), 775 RSC .
A. J. Pietruszka, R. W. Carlson and E. H. Hauri, Chem. Geol., 2002, 188(3–4), 171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuda and S. Nakai, Geochem. J., 2002, 36(5), 465 CAS .
S. Weyer, C. Munker, M. Rehkamper and K. Mezger, Chem. Geol., 2002, 187(3–4), 295 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vance and M. Thirlwall, Chem. Geol., 2002, 185(3–4), 227 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Chu, R. N. Taylor, V. Chavagnac, R. W. Nesbitt, R. M. Boella, J. A. Milton, C. R. German, G. Bayon and K. Burton, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(12), 1567 RSC .
T. Waight, J. Baker and B. Willigers, Chem. Geol., 2002, 186(1–2), 99 CrossRef CAS .
T. Waight, J. Baker and D. Peate, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 221(3), 229 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bizzarro, A. Simonetti, R. K. Stevenson and S. Kurszlaukis, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(2), 289 CrossRef CAS .
D. Malinovsky, I. Rodushkin, D. Baxter and B. Ohlander, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2002, 463(1), 111 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Boulyga, I. Segal, T. I. Platzner, L. Halicz and J. S. Becker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 218(3), 245 CrossRef CAS .
M. Norman, V. Bennett, M. McCulloch and L. Kinsley, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2002, 17(10), 1394 RSC .
A. Makishima, K. Kobayashi and E. Nakamura, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(1), 41 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pretorius, D. Chipley, K. Kyser and H. Helmstaedt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 302 RSC .
M. E. Wieser and J. R. de Laeter, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 225(2), 177 CrossRef CAS .
G. Quitte, J. L. Birck, F. Capmas and C. J. Allegre, Geostand. Newsl., 2002, 26(2), 149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heuser, A. Eisenhauer, N. Gussone, B. Bock, B. T. Hansen and T. F. Nagler, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 220(3), 385 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. King, T. W. Vennemann, J. R. Holloway, R. L. Hervig, J. B. Lowenstern and J. F. Forneris, Am. Mineral., 2002, 87(8–9), 1077 CAS .
K. Koga, E. Hauri, M. Hirschmann and D. Bell, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2003, 4 Search PubMed .
L. Ottolini, F. Camara and F. C. Hawthorne, Mikrochim. Acta, 2002, 139(1–4), 125 Search PubMed .
L. Ottolini, F. Camara, F. C. Hawthorne and J. Stirling, Am. Mineral., 2002, 87(10), 1477 .
E. H. Hauri, J. Wang, D. G. Pearson and G. P. Bulanova, Chem. Geol., 2002, 185(1–2), 149 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Dimov, S. L. Chryssoulis and R. H. Lipson, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2002, 73(12), 4295 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Dimov and S. L. Chryssoulis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 203, 235 CrossRef .
A. Pratt and N. Duke, JOM—J. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc., 2003, 55(4), 51 Search PubMed .
A. C. L. Larocque, J. A. Stimac, G. McMahon, J. A. Jackman, V. P. Chartrand, D. Hickmott and E. Gauerke, Econ. Geol. Bull. Soc. Econ. Geol., 2002, 97(1), 159 CAS .
S. H. Sie, T. R. Niklaus, D. A. Sims, F. Bruhn, G. Suter and G. Cripps, Aust. J. Earth Sci., 2002, 49(4), 601 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paul, A. Valenta, I. Ahmad, D. Berkovits, C. Bordeanu, S. Ghelberg, Y. Hashimoto, A. Hershkowitz, S. Jiang, T. Nakanishi and K. Sakamoto, Nucl. Phys. A, 2003, 719, 29C CrossRef .
M. Haschke, W. Scholz, U. Theis, J. Nicolosi, B. Scruggs and L. Herzceg, J. Phys. IV, 2002, 12(PR6), 83 Search PubMed .
M. Engi, A. K. Cheburkin and V. Koppel, Chem. Geol., 2002, 191(1–3), 225 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Scherrer, M. Engi, A. Berger, R. R. Parrish and A. Cheburkin, Chem. Geol., 2002, 191(1–3), 243 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ekinci, G. Budak and A. Karabulut, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf., 2002, 75(3), 351 Search PubMed .
C. K. Bhat, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2002, 65(3), 193 CrossRef CAS .
R. Polat, A. Gurol, N. Ekinci, C. Cakir, A. Bastug, G. Budak and A. Karabulut, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2003, 21(1), 63 Search PubMed .
A. G. Revenko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2002, 31(3), 264 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Martin, R. Garcia-Tenorio, E. G. San Miguel, M. A. Respaldiza, J. P. Bolivar, L. C. Alves and M. F. da Silva, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 153 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Ryan, E. van Achterbergh, C. J. Yeats, T. T. Win and G. Cripps, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 400 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Ryan, E. van Achterbergh, C. J. Yeats, S. L. Drieberg, G. Mark, B. M. McInnes, T. T. Win, G. Cripps and G. F. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 188, 18 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borghi, R. Cossio and C. Mazzoli, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2002, 189, 412 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, J. Marshall, C. Streli, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1297 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
