Solution-processed ferroelectric terpolymer nanocomposites with high breakdown strength and energy density utilizing boron nitride nanosheets   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE02962C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02962C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 922-931Solution-processed ferroelectric terpolymer nanocomposites with high breakdown strength and energy density utilizing boron nitride nanosheets†

        
          
            Qi 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Guangzu 
            Zhang‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Feihua 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kuo 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Matthew R. 
            Gadinski
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chuanxi 
            Xiong
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Qing 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA. E-mail: wang@matse.psu.edu
bSchool of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, P. R. China
cState Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, People's Republic of China. E-mail: cxx@live.whut.edu.cn
Received 
      18th September 2014
    , Accepted 21st November 2014First published on 2nd December 2014AbstractThe development of high-performance capacitive energy storage devices is of critical importance to address an ever-increasing electricity need. The energy density of a film capacitor is determined by the dielectric constant and breakdown strength of dielectric materials. With the highest dielectric constant among the known polymers, poly(vinylidene fluoride)-based ferroelectric terpolymers are of great potential for high energy density capacitors. However, their energy storage capability has long been limited by the relatively low breakdown strength. Here we demonstrate remarkable improvements in the energy density and charge–discharge efficiency of the ferroelectric terpolymers upon the incorporation of ultra-thin boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs). It is found that BNNSs function as a robust scaffold to hamper the onset of electromechanical failure and simultaneously as an efficient insulating barrier against electrical conduction in the resulting polymer nanocomposites, resulting in greatly enhanced breakdown strength. Of particular note is the improved thermal conductivity of the terpolymer with the introduction of BNNSs; this is anticipated to benefit the stability and lifetime of polymer capacitors. This work establishes a facile, yet efficient approach to solution-processable dielectric materials with performance comparable or even superior to those achieved in the traditionally melt-extruded ultra-thin films.

Broader context
With increased energy production from solar and wind power, energy storage technologies are crucial for efficient utilization of the electricity generated from these intermittent, renewable sources. Among currently available technologies for electrical energy storage, film capacitors possess an intrinsic advantage of high power densities and fast charge–discharge rate, yet they are considerably limited by energy densities that are much lower than those of the electrochemical energy storage devices such as batteries. This work presents a nanocomposite approach based on boron nitride nanosheets to the state-of-the-art ferroelectric polymers, which leads to great improvement in energy densities and energy discharge capability. The excellent performance along with the simplicity and scalability of preparation makes the ferroelectric polymer nanocomposites promising candidates for compact and flexible high-energy high-power capacitive energy storage devices.

1. Introduction
The exploitation of high-performance, easily processed, lightweight and cost-effective materials has been at the center of the development of electrical energy storage and conversion technologies required by the implementation, miniaturization and integration of advanced electronic devices.1 Dielectric materials can store and release electrical energy through dielectric polarization and depolarization by the application and removal of electric fields, and thereby enable the dielectric capacitor technology. Capacitors are basic components in electronic and electrical systems such as portable electronics, medical defibrillators, hybrid electric vehicles and power grids. Dielectric capacitors store energy electrostatically in an electric field and possess the intrinsic fast charge–discharge capability to offer the highest power density and longest lifetime among all currently available electrical energy storage devices,2,3 which is crucial for power electronics, power conditioning, and power conversion. However, they are limited by the amount of energy that can be stored in dielectric materials. For example, the energy density of the best commercially available film capacitors represented by biaxially oriented polypropylenes (BOPPs) is usually at least one order of magnitude lower than those of the electrochemical supercapacitors and batteries on the market.4–6 Significant improvements in the energy density would enable the reduction in size, weight and cost of the power systems.
The stored energy density (U) of a dielectric capacitor is determined by the applied electric field (E) and the induced electric displacement (D) within the dielectric materials sandwiched between two electrodes, as expressed by U = ∫EdD (see ESI Fig. S1† for schematic representation). In particular, U scales quadratically with E and linearly with the dielectric constant in linear dielectrics following the equation U = 1/2DE = 1/2Kε0E2, where K is the dielectric constant and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. Apparently, as the breakdown strength (Eb) signifies the maximum E that can be applied on a dielectric material, Eb becomes the most critical parameter that defines the U value of capacitors. One example is that, although the K value (∼2.2) of BOPP is hundreds to thousands times lower than those (usually at the level of 103–104) of typical ceramic capacitors, such as barium titanate,7 they share a very similar U of ∼5 J cm−3, owing to the superior Eb of BOPP (700 MV m−1) when compared to that of the ceramic films, i.e., ∼80 MV m−1.
Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF)-based ferroelectric polymers are considered as the most promising class of dielectric materials for high energy density capacitors because of their unique combination of high Eb and large K.8–10 The strong polarization arising from C–F bonds and the spontaneous alignment of dipoles in the crystalline phases give rise to PVDF based polymers with higher K relative to non-ferroelectric polymers whose room temperature K is far less than 10. The solution-cast thin films of ferroelectric copolymers such as poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-chlorotrifluoroethylene), P(VDF-CTFE), with K values around 10 at 1 kHz, display energy densities of 7–8 J cm−3 at an Eb of ∼400 MV m−1.11,12 Substantially higher energy densities of 17–25 J cm−3 have been obtained in the ferroelectric copolymer thin films such as P(VDF-CTFE) and P(VDF-HFP) (poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)) manufactured from melt-stretching and extrusion-blowing processes.10,13,14 The melt stretching-based methods improve mechanical properties and reduce ionic conduction of thin films, leading to radically increased Eb values, e.g. >570 MV m−1, with respect to the solution-cast films, which directly translate to greater energy densities. On the other hand, it is worthwhile to point out that the stretching inevitably promotes a partial conversion of a non-polar α-phase in PVDF to a polar β-phase. This results in high remnant polarization and large ferroelectric loss, and accordingly, decreases the charge–discharge efficiency of capacitors (defined as Ue/U, where Ue denotes the discharged energy density, see ESI Fig. S1†).15
A unique class of PVDF-based ferroelectric polymers is the terpolymers including poly(vinylidene fluoride-ter-trifluoroethylene-ter-chlorotrifluoroethylene), P(VDF-TrFE-CTFE), and poly(vinylidene fluoride-ter-trifluoroethylene-ter-chlorofluoroethylene), P(VDF-TrFE-CFE), which enjoy the highest room-temperature K values (i.e. ∼50 at 1 kHz) among the known dielectric polymers.16,17 The incorporation of the third monomers such as CTFE and CFE containing slightly bulky chlorine atoms into P(VDF-TrFE)s moves the Curie transition to near ambient temperature by reducing the crystalline domain size and the energy barrier in phase transition, and converts the normal ferroelectrics of the copolymers to a ferroelectric relaxor.18 The terpolymer with high reversible polarization indicated by a narrow polarization loop and a large electrical displacement exhibits an electrical energy density of ∼9 J cm−3 at 400 MV m−1.19 However, the presence of CTFE and CFE as defects unfortunately degrades the mechanical strength of the polymers. For example, the Young's modulus of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) is only around 150 MPa, compared to ca. 800 MPa of P(VDF-HFP).14 As dielectric breakdown of ferroelectric polymers is mainly governed by the electromechanical mechanism,20 the inferior mechanical properties of the terpolymers result in a much lower Eb (i.e. <400 MV m−1) in comparison to those of the ferroelectric copolymers. Moreover, these terpolymers are found to be too soft to be effectively processed into an ultra-thin film (i.e. <10 μm) with enhanced dielectric strength by using the most common melt-extrusion or stretching methods. Therefore, even though these terpolymers have the highest K values, their potential for high energy density capacitors has not been fully exploited due to limitations in Eb as aforementioned.
Herein we describe a nanocomposite approach based on ultra-thin boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) toward ferroelectric P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) terpolymers exhibiting significantly improved Eb in comparison to the pristine terpolymer. This is distinctively different from most of the conventional dielectric nanocomposites,21,22 in which the introduction of inorganic nanofillers normally lowers Eb. The improvement in Eb of PVDF-based polymers has been previously achieved by aligning inorganic nanofillers, such as SiO2 nanoparticles,23,24 montmorillonite nanoplates,25,26 and kaolinite clay nanofillers,27 in the polymer matrix via mechanical stretching. However, the increased Eb is typically accompanied by the decrease in the charge–discharge efficiency. In this work, marked improvements in energy storage and discharge capability associated with elevated Eb have been demonstrated in P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites. Notably, compared to the state-of-the-art dielectric thin films processed by melt-extrusion and stretching methods, the solution-processed polymer nanocomposites not only display a similar level of energy density and Eb but also present reduced dielectric loss and much higher charge–discharge efficiencies under the applied fields.
2. Experimental
2.1. Methods

Preparation of BNNSs. 
BNNSs are chemically exfoliated in DMF following a sonication-centrifugation process.28–30 Typically, 2g h-BN powders (Sigma-Aldrich) were dispersed in 150 mL DMF (Sigma-Aldrich) under vigorous stirring. The mixture was then subjected to a 48 h tip-type sonication (175 W, 500 W × 35%). The resultant mixture was first centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 40 min, and the supernatant was collected. This step purified the mixture from un-exfoliated h-BN powders. Then the supernatant was subjected to a 20 min centrifugation at 10000 rpm to precipitate BNNSs. After vacuum drying overnight at 70 °C, BNNSs were obtained.


Synthesis of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)s. 
The synthesis of terpolymers follows a literature work.18,31,32 Deionized water and potassium peroxodisulfate (VWR) initiator were added to a stainless steel vessel which was subsequently sealed and degassed via a vacuum pump and cooled using a liquid nitrogen bath. Gaseous VDF, TrFE and CFE (SynQuest Laboratory Inc.) were pumped into the reaction vessel separately with the amount varied by time to control the composition. The vessel was heated at 90 °C for 12 h. After this time, the volatiles were vented, and subsequent precipitation into methanol, washing by hexane, and drying in vacuo afforded a white solid identified as P(VDF-TrFE-CFE). 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, ppm): δ 2.2–2.5 (m, 2H, –CH2–CH2–, VDF and CFE tail to tail segments), 2.6–3.6 (m, 2H, –CH2–, VDF and CFE head to head segments), 5.4–6.1 (m, H, –CFH–, TrFE segments). 19F NMR (DMSO-d6, ppm): δ −92.5 (s, 2F, –CF2–CH2–CF2–CH2–CF2–, VDF–VDF tail to head linkages), −93.3 6 (s, 2F, –CHF–CH2–CF2–CH2–CF2– TrFE–VDF tail to tail linkages), −93.5 (s, 2F, –CClF–CH2–CF2–CH2–CF2–, CFE–VDF tail to tail linkages), −100 to −112 (m, 2F, –CF2–CFCl–, VDF/TrFE–CFE head to tail linkages), −114.2 (m, 2F, –CF2–CH2–CF2–CF2–CH2–, VDF–VDF head to head linkages), −116.5 (m, 2F, –CH2–CF2–CF2–CH2–CH2–), −121.7 (s, 2F, –CF2–CHF–CF2–CHF–CH2–, TrFE–TrFE head to tail linkages), −122.8 (d, 2F, –CF2–CHF–CF2–CHF–CH2–), −129.9 (m, 2F, –CH2–CF2–CF2–CHF–CH2–), −130.9 (m, 2F, –CF2–CFCl–CF2–CHF–CH2–), −195.5 (s, F, –CFCl–), −199 (m, F, –CF2–CF2–CHF–CH2–CF2–), −212 (m, F, –CH2–CF2–CHF–CF2–CH2–). The composition of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) is 59.2/33.6/7.2 mol%.


Fabrication of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites. 
Typically, P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) powders were dissolved in DMF before filtering through a glass fiber filter (0.7 μm pore size), and stirred overnight to give a homogeneous solution at a concentration of 50 mg mL−1. The BNNS dispersion was prepared at a concentration of 4 mg mL−1 in DMF by tip-type sonication (175 W, 500 W × 35%) for 1 h, which was then mixed in the required ratio with P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) solution. After vigorously stirring overnight, the suspension was then subjected to a 30 min tip-type sonication (175 W, 500 W × 35%) before drop casting on glass plates. The cast films were first dried at 90 °C for 6 h, and subsequently peeled off the glass plates for further drying in vacuum at 110 °C overnight to remove the trace solvent. The loading of BNNSs in the nanocomposites was further confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, ESI Fig. S2†). The typical thickness of the nanocomposite films is around 15 μm, and can be tuned by varying the concentration of the suspensions.

2.2. Characterization
TEM (Joel JEM-2001F) images were obtained by placing a few drops of the dispersion on a lacey carbon covered copper grid, and evaporating them at room temperature prior to observation. SEM measurements were performed with a Hitachi S-4800 field emission electron microscope. Gold electrodes of a diameter of 3 mm and a thickness of 60 nm were sputtered on both sides of the polymer films for the electrical measurements. Dielectric constant and loss were measured using an Agilent LCR meter (E4980A). Resistivity was obtained under an electric field provided by a Hewlett Packard 4140B pA meter/voltage source and a KEPCO BOP 1000M amplifier. High-field D–E loops were collected using a modified Sawyer–Tower circuit, where the samples were subjected to a triangular unipolar wave with a frequency of 10 Hz. Dielectric breakdown strength measurements were performed on a TREK P0621P instrument using the electrostatic pull-down method under a DC voltage ramp of 500 V s−1. Tensile mechanical testing was carried out on an Instron 5866 using a 200 N load cell and an extension rate of 20 mm min−1. FTIR spectra were obtained in the attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode using the ZnSe crystal as a contact to the samples on a Varian Digilab FTS-8010 spectrometer. DSC was conducted by using a TA Instrument Q100 differential scanning calorimeter at a heating and cooling rate of 10 °C min−1. X-ray diffraction analysis was studied by use of a PANalytical X'pert Pro MPD theta–theta diffractometer. All data were analyzed using Jade software with a Gaussian–Lorentz superposition fitting function. TGA measurements were performed simultaneously with a thermal analyzer (Netzsch, STA 499C) at a heating rate of 10 °C min−1 under N2 flow. See the ESI† for the method of thermal conductivity measurements.
3. Results
3.1. Preparation of BNNSs and the nanocomposites
BNNSs are prepared through the liquid exfoliation method28–30 from bulk hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) and selected as the fillers to form P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites. h-BN, the most stable crystalline form of boron nitride (BN), is a layered van der Waals crystal similar to graphite. Such 2D crystal with strong B–N covalent sp2 bonds in the plane is able to display the advantages of the (002) face of a graphitic-like structure such as high mechanical strength and thermal conductivity,28i.e., h-BN is reported to be only second to single-layer graphene in terms of in-plane stiffness33 and has a thermal conductivity equally as good as graphite.34h-BN is a wide band gap insulator with dielectric permittivity ranging from 3–4 and breakdown strength around 800 MV m−1.35,36 More interestingly, the breakdown voltage of h-BN can be further promoted by decreasing the thickness of the h-BN sheet down to few layers, motivating the applications of BNNSs as a dielectric layer in nanoelectronics.37
Liquid exfoliation via a sonication-centrifugation process affords ultra-thin BNNSs that can form stable suspensions in DMF without any chemical modification, even at a relatively high concentration (i.e. 4 mg mL−1, Fig. 1a, inset), which is attributable to the polar surface of BNNSs induced by B–N bonds.28 This also allows TEM observation of individual free-standing BNNSs directly deposited from the DMF suspension. The dark field TEM image shown in Fig. 1a gives the typical morphology profile of an individual BNNS with a lateral size of approximately 400 nm. To determine the thickness of the BNNS, an exposed edge is zoomed-in under high-resolution TEM as exhibited in Fig. 1b. It is clear that the BNNSs consisting of 4 layers are 2 nm thick, and the electron diffraction pattern (Fig. 1b, inset) validates the hexagonal symmetry nature of BNNSs. Statistical analysis (Fig. 1c and d) over a sample set of 34 pieces of BNNSs indicates that the majority of the nanosheets are about 2 nm (4-layer sheets) in thickness and 400 nm in lateral size. The productivity of the few-layered BNNSs in this work is approximately 2.5%, i.e. every 2 g of BN powders yields ∼50 mg of BNNSs. It is reported that on scale-up to a 10 m3 of liquid volume in a shear exfoliation method, production rates can exceed 100 g h−1 for the preparation of 2-D nanostructures.38 This would help to realize large-scale production of the composites.
 Fig. 1  (a) Dark field TEM image of BNNSs. Inset, BNNSs dissolved in DMF at a concentration of 4 g mL−1. (b) High-resolution TEM image of BNNSs with 2 nm thickness. Inset, the electron diffraction pattern displaying a hexagonal symmetry. (c) Statistical analysis on the number of monolayers per sheet of a set of BNNSs. (d) Statistical analysis on the lateral size of a set of BNNSs. 
With a polar surface, a proper fraction of bare BNNSs are also found to be readily dispersed in a matrix of polar polymer to afford uniform nanocomposite films via a simple solution casting technique.30 This is confirmed in our studies by a large-scale cross-section SEM image of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites, as a homogeneous distribution of BNNSs within the terpolymer is evident up to 12 wt% loading (Fig. 2a). Since BNNSs are of high aspect ratio and specific surface area, they would form a dense network-like microstructure in the polymer matrix upon a drop-casting process (Fig. 2c), which is verified in the simulation studies as presented in ESI Fig. S3.† By increasing the filler concentration beyond 12 wt%, aggregation of BNNSs is seen in the nanocomposite as a result of the dense stacking of the nanosheets (ESI Fig. S4†). The top-view (Fig. 2b) and cross-section (Fig. 2c) SEM images at a higher magnification of the nanocomposite sample with 12 wt% filler also suggest that BNNSs merge well into the host matrix, demonstrating a good compatibility of the inorganic and organic phases. Note that this is attained with unmodified BNNSs, which stand in sharp contrast to conventional polymer nanocomposites that usually require surface functionalization of inorganic fillers to achieve uniform filler dispersion in the polymer matrix. This not only would simplify the fabrication of the polymer nanocomposites by eliminating the step of chemical modification but also is beneficial to the breakdown strength of the polymer nanocomposites. In the cases of dielectric nanocomposites, the ligands used in surface modification are typically long hydrocarbon chains, which become the most vulnerable local region to voltage due to their lowest K in comparison to the high-K ferroelectric polymer and inorganic dopant phases.39 The large difference in K leads to a highly inhomogeneous distribution of local electric fields in nanocomposites, and accordingly, degrades the overall dielectric strength.38
 Fig. 2  (a) Large-scale cross-section SEM image of the P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS composite film with 12 wt% BNNSs. (b) Zoom-in top-view and (c) cross-section SEM images of the P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS composite film with 12 wt% BNNSs. 
3.2. Breakdown strength of the nanocomposites
Dielectric breakdown strength of the pristine terpolymer and the nanocomposites is analyzed by using a two-parameter Weibull statistic described as P(E) = 1 − exp(−(Eb/α)β), where P(E) is the cumulative probability of electric failure, Eb is the measured breakdown field, scale parameter α is the field strength for which there is a 63% probability for the sample to breakdown (Weibull Eb), and shape parameter β evaluates the scatter of the data. A higher value of β stands for less scattering in the experimental data. At least 15 tests per sample are carried out to extract the Weibull Eb. The results are plotted as probability density f(E) versus electric field (Fig. 3a): f(E) = βα−βEbβ−1exp[(−Eb/α)β]. As shown in Fig. 3b, the Weibull Eb of the terpolymer nanocomposites reaches the highest value of 610 MV m−1 at the BNNS filler content of 12 wt%, which represents a 70% increment as compared with that of the pristine terpolymer, i.e. 362 MV m−1. Meanwhile, a marked increase of β value from 8.44 in pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) to 15.8 in the nanocomposite filled with 12 wt% of BNNSs is found (Fig. 3b), suggesting vastly improved dielectric reliability of the nanocomposites. It is also found that the film thickness plays a minor role in determining the breakdown strength within the range from 4–25 μm (ESI Fig. S5†). For the purpose of comparison, in addition to the solution-cast P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) films, the melt-stretched P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) films (ESI Fig. S6†) are prepared by using zone-heated uniaxially stretching since this process has yielded so far the best ferroelectric copolymer capacitor films in the laboratories.13,14 A Eb of 507 MV m−1 is observed in the melt-stretched P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) films. Notably, the achieved Eb of solution-cast P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites is comparable to those of melt-stretched P(VDF-CTFE) and P(VDF-HFP) thin films,10,13,14 signifying that a similar level of performance as achieved in the traditionally melt-stretching processed dielectric films is now accomplished in solution-processable dielectric materials.
 Fig. 3  (a) Weibull plots for P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with various BNNS contents. (b) Weibull breakdown strength (scale parameter) and shape parameter as functions of BNNS fraction. 
3.3. Characterizations of electrical energy storage capability
The electric displacement–electric field (D–E) loops of a series of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites and the pristine terpolymer are obtained by a modified Sawyer–Tower circuit (Fig. 4a–c). The discharged energy density (Ue) is derived from the D–E loop by integration of the area between the discharge curve and the ordinate as indicated in the schematic D–E loop (ESI Fig. S1†). As plotted in Fig. 4d, Ue can reach up to 20.3 J cm−3 from the 15 μm thick terpolymer nanocomposite films with 12 wt% of BNNSs at 650 MV m−1, which represents a 121% improvement over the solution-cast terpolymer measured at 400 MV m−1. The Ue of the polymer nanocomposite is also greater than that of the melt-stretched P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) which possesses a maximum Ue of ∼13.8 J cm−3 at 575 MV m−1 (with the Weibull Eb at 507 MV m−1). As a matter of fact, the Ue achieved in the present nanocomposite, to our knowledge, is one of the highest recorded for solution-processed dielectric capacitor films in the literature, which also rivals the state-of-the-art reported from the extrusion-blown ferroelectric copolymer ultra-thin films with thickness less than 10 μm, e.g. a Ue of 22.3 J cm−3 measured at 650 MV m−1 from ∼5 μm thick P(VDF-HFP) thin films.14 Importantly, it should be noted that the charge–discharge efficiency of the stretched ferroelectric copolymers has been found to be relatively low,40,41 as a result of the partially converted crystal structures from non-polar to polar phases that leads to large hysteresis and associated ferroelectric loss. For instance, the charge–discharge efficiency of the extrusion-blown and melt-stretched P(VDF-HFP) is around 65% at 600 MV m−1, and even lower at low electric fields, e.g. at 300 MV m−1, the efficiency of P(VDF-HFP)s is only ∼57% because of field-dependent loss mechanisms.41 On the other hand, the P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposite shows significantly higher charge–discharge efficiencies, i.e., ∼83% at 300 MV m−1 and ∼80% at 600 MV m−1 (Fig. 4d), which is resulted from the reduced dielectric loss under the applied fields. Besides Ue, the charge–discharge efficiency is another important metric of dielectric materials for energy storage capacitors, as the unreleased energy generates heat and consequently, is detrimental to the performance and reliability of capacitors.
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of D–E loops of pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) and a series of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites at an electric field of 300 MV m−1. Inset: remnant displacement of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites as a function of filler content. D–E loops of (b) pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) and (c) P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with 12 wt% of BNNSs at varied electric fields. (d) Comparison of discharged energy density and charge–discharge efficiency of pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) and P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with 12 wt% of BNNSs at different electric fields. 
The dielectric loss in ferroelectric materials including those from electrical conduction and polarization hysteresis caused by irreversible dipoles is manifested directly by the remnant displacement (i.e. the electric displacement at zero electric field). It is apparent that the remnant displacement decreases drastically from 0.013 C m−2 of the pristine terpolymer to only 0.004 C m−2 of the terpolymer nanocomposite with 12 wt% of BNNSs (Fig. 4a), and much slimmer loops of the nanocomposite in comparison to those of the pristine terpolymer are clearly seen at respective electric fields (Fig. 4b and c). A further increase of BNNS content leads to a slightly increased remnant displacement, presumably due to aggregation of BNNSs. The maximum electric displacement also decreases systematically with the increasing feeding ratio of BNNSs, due to the relatively lower K of BNNSs than the terpolymer, which is consistent with the results from the weak field permittivity measurement (ESI Fig. S7†). It should be emphasized that a properly reduced K value does not scarify the ultimate energy storage capability of the nanocomposites, but rather avoids early D-saturation (i.e., polarization saturation occurs at a field far below the breakdown field), which enables films to store more electrical energy at high fields. For instance, as illustrated in ESI Fig. S8,† at 400 MV m−1 (the maximum electric field allowed for the pristine terpolymer), despite the D value of the nanocomposite with 12 wt% of BNNSs is below that of the pristine terpolymer, a larger integration area is clearly evident in the terpolymer nanocomposites as a consequence of the delayed D-saturation.
3.4. Thermal conductivity
An overlooked advantage of the dielectric polymer nanocomposites is a considerably improved thermal conductivity when compared to that of pristine polymers. As dielectric loss is converted into waste heat, efficient dissipation of heat from dielectric materials to the external medium such as insulating oil is central to operation of capacitors. It is thus informative to examine the thermal conductivity of dielectric materials. Unfortunately, polymers are notoriously poor thermal conductors with thermal conductivities in the range of 0.1–0.5 W m−1 K−1 (ref. 42). As shown in Fig. 5, with the introduction of BNNSs into the terpolymer matrix, the thermal conductivity is increased by 6 times from ∼0.2 W m−1 K−1 of the terpolymer to over 1.4 W m−1 K−1 of the nanocomposite filled with 14 wt% of BNNSs, which is close to that of barium titanate based ceramics (i.e. 1.1–6 W m−1 K−1) (ref. 43).
 Fig. 5  Thermal conductivity of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different filler contents. 
4. Discussion
In an effort to understand the greatly improved Eb values, P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites are systematically characterized in terms of mechanical properties, dissipation factor as well as electrical conduction. We first evaluated the Young's modulus of the materials because it determines the electromechanical failure caused by mutual coulombic force from the opposite electrodes under an applied field, i.e., the higher the modulus is, the better the material can withstand the coulombic force.44 As shown in Fig. 6, the addition of BNNSs into the polymer matrix brings a significant enhancement in Young's modulus with the optimized composition at 12 wt% of BNNSs, which agrees very well with the dependence of Eb on the filler content shown in Fig. 3b. We then calculated the theoretical Eb of the samples based on the electromechanical model according to: Eb = 0.606(Y/(Kε0))1/2, where Y is the Young's modulus and ε0 is the permittivity of free space.45,46 The results summarized in Fig. 6 show that theoretically calculated Eb has a similar trend to experimental data with the highest value appearing at 12 wt% loading of BNNSs. It is thus reasoned that BNNSs within the polymer matrix create a robust scaffold to hamper the onset of electromechanical failure. Analysis within the framework of the electromechanical model highlights the significance of the excellent mechanical strength of BNNSs for improving the Eb of ferroelectric polymers.
 Fig. 6  Young's modulus and theoretical data of breakdown strength calculated based on the electromechanical model of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different filler contents. 
Note that the experimental data of Weibull Eb are much lower than the theoretically predicted values from the electromechanical model; this deviation is apparently due to limitations in the model. Many polymer materials do not exactly follow the elastic stress–strain relationship interpreted by the above equation, and would experience plastic deformation and mechanical failure at an electric field far below Eb (ref. 45). Furthermore, dielectric breakdown of materials is usually governed by multiple factors, although the electromechanical effect has been regarded as the main breakdown mechanism for PVDF based ferroelectric polymers. Dielectric materials studied by using the electromechanical model are in principle considered ideal insulators with the assumption of no electrical conduction under the applied fields. Electrical conduction, however, cannot be ignored in a real dielectric material, especially at high fields, and degrades dramatically the breakdown strength of materials.
Presented in Fig. 7a and b are the weak-field dielectric loss and high-field electrical resistivity of the terpolymer nanocomposites, respectively. It is clear that the dielectric loss is sharply reduced from the pristine terpolymer to the nanocomposites, e.g. at 1 kHz, from 0.053 of the pristine terpolymer to 0.027 of the nanocomposite with 12 wt% of BNNSs. Similarly, high-field DC conductivity measurements reveal that the terpolymer nanocomposites with high BNNS feeding ratios, i.e. >10 wt%, show an order of magnitude improvement in electrical resistivity over that of the pristine terpolymer. These results indicate that the insulating network of BNNSs embedded in the polymer matrix functions as an efficient barrier against the leakage current and the space-charge conduction.
 Fig. 7  (a) Frequency dependence of dielectric loss of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different contents of BNNSs. Inset, dielectric loss of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites at 1 kHz as a function of filler content. (b) Electrical resistivity of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different contents of BNNSs under an electric field of 10 MV m−1. 
The reduction in remnant displacement by the presence of BNNSs is attributed to the suppressed conduction loss, as verified by the results of weak field loss and high field resistivity, and the decreased hysteresis loss that can be understood from the crystalline structures of the terpolymer. While the melt-stretching based processes convert partially the non-polar to polar phases of PVDF, the presence of BNNSs does not alter the crystalline phases of the polymer matrix. As shown in Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra (ESI Fig. S9†), the characteristic peaks corresponding to the T3G, TG and Tm sequence conformations almost remain unaffected upon blending with BNNSs. In concert with the FTIR results, the reflection at 2θ = 18.1° arising from α or γ phase PVDF stays as the main peak in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of both the terpolymer and polymer nanocomposites (ESI Fig. S10†). Note that the diffraction peak becomes broader as the filler content increases, which implies a varied crystal size of the polymer in the nanocomposites. Quantitatively, the Scherrer equation was employed to calculate the apparent crystal size of the samples, since crystal size is an important factor determining the reversibility of the dipoles within ferroelectric crystalline domains. ESI Table S1† shows a marked decrease in crystal size of the terpolymer nanocomposites compared to the pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE), e.g. from 49.4 nm of the pristine terpolymer to 29.0 nm of the nanocomposite with 12 wt% of BNNSs. The crystals with reduced sizes shall facilitate the reverse of dipoles and thereby decrease the hysteresis loss.47 Concurrently, the degree of crystallinity of the polymer matrix is found to be slightly increased in the presence of BNNSs according to the enthalpy of melting extracted from the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curves (ESI Fig. S11 and Table S2†). The inorganic nanosheets are thought to serve as nucleating agents to promote the population density of the nucleation centers for PVDF crystallization as implied by the elevated crystallization temperature (Tc) of the nanocomposites, e.g., from 104 °C of the pristine terpolymers to 110 °C of the terpolymer nanocomposites with 12 wt% BNNSs. These results along with the decreased electrical conduction suggest that the introduction of BNNSs provides a feasible route for ferroelectric polymers to reduce the energy loss and increase the charge–discharge efficiency for dielectric energy storage. In stark contrast, the improvements in Eb and U gained by mechanical stretching of dielectric films could be offset by the increase in high-field hysteresis loss and the reduction in charge–discharge efficiency arising from the evolution of the polar β phases at the expense of the nonpolar α phase.
We have also prepared BNNSs with different lateral sizes and thicknesses to assess the influence of filler dimension on dielectric properties of the polymer nanocomposites. The BNNSs include the smaller lateral size BNNSs (termed as sl-BNNSs, with an average lateral size of ∼250 nm and a thickness of ∼2 nm, ESI Fig. S12†) and two types of thicker BNNSs (referred to as 8t-BNNSs and 15t-BNNSs, for their average thicknesses of 8 and 15 nm, respectively, see ESI Fig. S13†). It is found that sl-BNNSs filled P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)s exhibit the same compositional dependent breakdown strength and the maximum breakdown field as the polymer nanocomposite loaded with regular size BNNSs with a lateral size of 400 nm and a thickness of 2 nm (Fig. 8a). Accordingly, as shown in Fig. 8b, P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/sl-BNNS nanocomposites also display very high energy densities and charge–discharge efficiencies. On the other hand, the polymer nanocomposites with thicker BNNS fillers, i.e. 8t- and 15t-BNNSs, have lower Weibull breakdown strengths. At the same BNNS content, it appears that thinner fillers yield a higher breakdown field of the nanocomposites (Fig. 9). These results indicate that ultra-thin sheets are necessary, while the lateral dimension within a range from 250–400 nm may not be an important factor to determine the dielectric properties of the BNNS-doped ferroelectric polymers. Since the lateral size of ultra-thin BNNSs is difficult to reach beyond this range via the liquid exfoliation method, it remains an open question if larger or smaller sheets could considerably affect the performance of the resulting nanocomposites.
 Fig. 8  (a) Weibull breakdown strength and shape parameter as functions of sl-BNNS fraction. (b) Discharged energy density and charge–discharge efficiency of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/sl-BNNS nanocomposites with 12 wt% of sl-BNNSs at different electric fields. 
 Fig. 9  Weibull breakdown strength and shape parameter as functions of BNNS content in (a) P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/8t-BNNS and (b) P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/15t-BNNS nanocomposites. 
5. Conclusions
This work demonstrates the significantly enhanced dielectric breakdown strength, reduced energy loss, and improved charge–discharge efficiency of a ferroelectric terpolymer through incorporation of ultra-thin BNNSs, outperforming what can be achieved by the melt-stretched and solution-cast pristine terpolymer. By capitalizing on the polar surface of the BNNSs with a large specific surface area, the inorganic components are intimately and homogeneously dispersed in the polymer matrix without chemical surface modification. This renders a uniform and dense network of nanosheets as an efficient barrier against leakage current and space charge conduction that also acts as a robust scaffold to prevent electrochemical failure. Compared to the traditional melt-stretching or extrusion-blowing process used to produce high breakdown strength and high energy density dielectric polymer thin films, our approach is straightforward and versatile. Of particular significance is the considerably improved thermal conductivity of the terpolymer with the introduction of BNNSs, which is anticipated to benefit the breakdown stability and lifetime of polymer capacitors. The strategy presented herein could also have a profound impact on the applications of PVDF-based ferroelectric polymers in electrocaloric and pyroelectric energy conversions where concomitant enhancements in breakdown voltage and thermal conductivity are highly desired.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the US office of Naval Research (N00014-11-1-0342) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51072151, 51173139, 51373132).
Notes and references
M. S. Whittingham, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, P. C. Irwin and K. Younsi, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2004, 11, 797–807 CrossRef .
S. Ducharme, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2447–2450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rabuffi and G. Picci, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2002, 30, 1939–1942 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pikul, H. G. Zhang, J. Cho, P. V. Braun and W. P. King, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1732 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Love, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1990, 73, 323–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Lovinger, Science, 1983, 220, 1115–1121 CAS .

          H. S. Nalwa, Ferroelectric Polymers, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
B. Chu, X. Zhou, K. Ren, B. Neese, M. Lin, Q. Wang, F. Bauer and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2006, 313, 334–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang and T. C. Chung, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 9391–9397 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Q. Meng and T. C. Chung, Polymer, 2009, 50, 707–715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, B. Chu, B. Neese, M. Lin and Q. M. Zhang, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2007, 14, 1133–1138 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, X. Zhao, Z. Suo, C. Zou, J. Runt, S. Liu, S. Zhang and Q. M. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 162901 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Khanchaitit, K. Han, M. R. Gadinski, Q. Li and Q. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2845 Search PubMed .
F. Xia, Z.-Y. Cheng, H. S. Xu, H. F. Li, Q. M. Zhang, G. J. Kavarnos, R. Y. Ting, G. Abdul-Sadek and K. D. Belfield, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1574–1577 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Z.-Y. Cheng, D. Olson, T. Mai, Q. M. Zhang and G. Kavarnos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Claude, B. Neese, Q. M. Zhang and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8120–8121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chu, X. Zhou, B. Neese, Q. M. Zhang and F. Bauer, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2006, 13, 1162–1169 CAS .
N. Zebouchi, M. Bendaoud, R. Essolbi, D. Malec, B. Ai and H. Giam, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 2497–2501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and L. Zhu, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1421–1429 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Dang, J. Yuan, S. H. Yao and R. J. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6334–6365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Roy, J. K. Nelson, R. K. MacCrone, L. S. Schadler, C. W. Reed, R. Keefe and W. Zenger, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2005, 12, 629–643 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takala, H. Ranta, P. Nevalainen, P. Pakonen, J. Pelto, M. Karttunen, S. Virtanen, V. Koivu, M. Pettersson, B. Sonerud and K. Kannus, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2010, 17, 1259–1267 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tomer, G. Polizos, C. A. Randall and E. Manias, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 074113 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Fillery, H. Koerner, L. Drummy, E. Dunkerley, M. F. Durstock, D. F. Schmidt and R. A. Vaia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1388–1396 CAS .
V. Tomer, E. Manias and C. A. Randall, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 044107 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhi, Y. Bando, C. C. Tang, H. Kuwahara and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, K. Han, M. R. Gadinski, G. Z. Zhang and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bauer, E. Fousson, Q. M. Zhang and L. M. Lee, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2004, 11, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, J. Claude, Q. M. Zhang and Q. Wang, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 6962 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sahin, S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Bekaroglu, E. Akturk, R. T. Senger and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 155453 CrossRef .
D. Golberg, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, T. Terao, M. Mitome, C. Tang and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2979–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Young, C. R. Dean, I. Meric, S. Sorgenfrei, H. Ren, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 235458 CrossRef .
J. E. Padilha, R. B. Pontes and A. Fazzio, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2012, 24, 075301 CrossRef PubMed .
K. R. Paton, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Li, L. Zhang and S. Ducharme, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 132901 CrossRef PubMed .
F.
X. Guan, L. Y. Yang, J. Wang, B. Guan, K. Han, Q. Wang and L. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3176–3188 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Zhou, Doctoral thesis, The Pennsylvania State University,  December, 2009 .
C. L. Choy, Polymers, 1977, 18, 984–1004 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. S. Touloukian, R. W. Powell, C. Y. Ho and P. G. Klemens, Thermophysical Properties of Matter, IFI/Plenum Press, New York,  1970 Search PubMed .
J. Claude, Y. Lu and Q. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 212904 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Stark and C. G. Garton, Nature, 1955, 176, 1225–1226 CrossRef .
M. Ieda, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 1980, 15, 206–224 CrossRef .
J. Li, S. I. Seok, B. J. Chu, F. Dogan, Q. M. Zhang and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 217–221 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Structural characterizations, more dielectric property measurements and experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee02962c‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
With increased energy production from solar and wind power, energy storage technologies are crucial for efficient utilization of the electricity generated from these intermittent, renewable sources. Among currently available technologies for electrical energy storage, film capacitors possess an intrinsic advantage of high power densities and fast charge–discharge rate, yet they are considerably limited by energy densities that are much lower than those of the electrochemical energy storage devices such as batteries. This work presents a nanocomposite approach based on boron nitride nanosheets to the state-of-the-art ferroelectric polymers, which leads to great improvement in energy densities and energy discharge capability. The excellent performance along with the simplicity and scalability of preparation makes the ferroelectric polymer nanocomposites promising candidates for compact and flexible high-energy high-power capacitive energy storage devices.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Dark field TEM image of BNNSs. Inset, BNNSs dissolved in DMF at a concentration of 4 g mL−1. (b) High-resolution TEM image of BNNSs with 2 nm thickness. Inset, the electron diffraction pattern displaying a hexagonal symmetry. (c) Statistical analysis on the number of monolayers per sheet of a set of BNNSs. (d) Statistical analysis on the lateral size of a set of BNNSs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Large-scale cross-section SEM image of the P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS composite film with 12 wt% BNNSs. (b) Zoom-in top-view and (c) cross-section SEM images of the P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS composite film with 12 wt% BNNSs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Weibull plots for P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with various BNNS contents. (b) Weibull breakdown strength (scale parameter) and shape parameter as functions of BNNS fraction.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of D–E loops of pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) and a series of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites at an electric field of 300 MV m−1. Inset: remnant displacement of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites as a function of filler content. D–E loops of (b) pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) and (c) P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with 12 wt% of BNNSs at varied electric fields. (d) Comparison of discharged energy density and charge–discharge efficiency of pristine P(VDF-TrFE-CFE) and P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with 12 wt% of BNNSs at different electric fields.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermal conductivity of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different filler contents.	 

 	Fig. 6  Young's modulus and theoretical data of breakdown strength calculated based on the electromechanical model of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different filler contents.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Frequency dependence of dielectric loss of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different contents of BNNSs. Inset, dielectric loss of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites at 1 kHz as a function of filler content. (b) Electrical resistivity of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/BNNS nanocomposites with different contents of BNNSs under an electric field of 10 MV m−1.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Weibull breakdown strength and shape parameter as functions of sl-BNNS fraction. (b) Discharged energy density and charge–discharge efficiency of P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/sl-BNNS nanocomposites with 12 wt% of sl-BNNSs at different electric fields.	 

 	Fig. 9  Weibull breakdown strength and shape parameter as functions of BNNS content in (a) P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/8t-BNNS and (b) P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)/15t-BNNS nanocomposites.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Structural characterizations, more dielectric property measurements and experimental details. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee02962c
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
