Synthesis, photophysical properties and surface chemistry of chalcopyrite-type semiconductor nanocrystals  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC03875B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC03875B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11665-11709Synthesis, photophysical properties and surface chemistry of chalcopyrite-type semiconductor nanocrystals

        
          
            Davina 
            Moodelly
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Patrycja 
            Kowalik
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Piotr 
            Bujak
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Adam 
            Pron
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Reiss
          
          
        
      *a
aUniv. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, CNRS, IRIG, SyMMES, STEP, 38000 Grenoble, France. E-mail: peter.reiss@cea.fr
bWarsaw University of Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, Noakowskiego 3, 00-664 Warsaw, Poland. E-mail: pbujak@ch.pw.edu.pl
cFaculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1 Str., PL-02-093 Warsaw, Poland
Received 
      17th July 2019
    , Accepted 16th August 2019First published on 30th August 2019AbstractTernary and quaternary chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals of MIMIIIE2 and MIMIIIZnE2 type (MI = Ag, Cu; MIII = In, Fe; E = S, Se) and their core/shell structures have attracted a huge interest in the past decade because they combine size- and composition-tunable optical and electronic properties without relying on toxic elements such as Cd and Pb. These materials had been primarily studied as light harvesters in solar cell applications. However, in the form of colloidal nanocrystals, they exhibit remarkable photoluminescence properties in the visible and near infrared range. At the same time, the underlying emission mechanisms are distinctly different from those occurring in binary semiconductor quantum dots. Several models have been developed to explain the origin of the observed phenomena, in particular the line width broadening, large Stokes shifts and long photoluminescence lifetimes. This review first focusses on the current understanding of the optical properties of the title compounds. Next, an overview of the main synthesis methods is given, both in organic solvents and in the aqueous phase. In the second part, the surface chemistry and ligand exchange procedures are discussed. Finally, organic/inorganic hybrids of chalcopyrite nanocrystals with electroactive molecules are presented as well as their use in photovoltaics.
Davina Moodelly
Davina Moodelly obtained her engineering degree in Materials Science from the Engineering School of Rennes (ESIR) in France and continued at the University of Rennes, where she got her MSc degree in Solid-State Chemistry in 2016. She is currently doing her PhD in Inorganic Chemistry and Bioinorganic Chemistry under the supervision of Peter Reiss and Marie Carrière. Passionate about chemistry, her main interest is developing green methods to obtain highly luminescent non-toxic quantum dots with emission in the visible and infrared range ready to be used as fluorescent probes for bioimaging and in medical applications.
Patrycja Kowalik
Patrycja Kowalik obtained her MSc degree in chemistry in 2018 from the University of Warsaw, specializing in electrochemistry and bioelectrochemistry. In the same year she started her PhD research in a joint PhD program TRI-BIO-CHEM established jointly by three research institutions: University of Warsaw, Warsaw University of Technology and Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology. Her PhD research, supervised jointly by professors Piotr Bujak of Warsaw University of Technology and Anna Nowicka of University of Warsaw, is devoted to the synthesis and surface functionalization of nontoxic semiconductor nanocrystals for biomedical applications.
Piotr Bujak
Piotr Bujak got his MSc in chemistry from Silesian University of Technology 2004. In 2008, at the University of Silesia he defended his PhD thesis devoted to the NMR investigations of copolymers. Then he started working at the Department of Inorganic and Coordination Chemistry (University of Silesia), where he developed an effective method for the synthesis of new isoxazolines. In 2012 he accepted the position of a research associate at Warsaw University of Technology, joining the group of Professor Adam Pron, where he presently works at the associate professor position, focusing on the preparation of electroactive hybrids consisting of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals functionalized with low and high molecular mass organic semiconductors.
Adam Pron
Adam Pron was born (1951) and educated in Poland. After obtaining his MSc in chemistry he moved to the USA where in 1980 he completed his PhD at the University of Pennsylvania (under the supervision of Alan G. MacDiarmid). Then he joined the Warsaw University of Technology where he became full professor in 1993. In 1998 he moved to Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) in Grenoble (France). In 2012 he retired from CEA and accepted full-time professorship at Warsaw University of Technology. His research interests involve preparation and characterization of organic electroactive materials and hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials.
Peter Reiss
Peter Reiss is a researcher at CEA Grenoble, SyMMES laboratory and head of the team Synthesis, Structure and Properties of Functional Materials. He graduated in 1997 from the University of Karlsruhe (Germany), and earned his PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Dieter Fenske (2000). His research activities focus on colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (“conventional” and metal halide perovskites) and nanowires, in particular their synthesis and functionalization. The studied applications range from fluorescent markers for biological labelling and detection over the development of efficient emitters for LEDs and displays to new strategies for nanocrystal based energy conversion (photovoltaics, thermoelectrics) and storage.
1. Introduction
For many years, in the chemistry of numerous types of binary inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals of II–VI, IV–VI, III–V, I–VI and II–V type, tuning of the band gap energy (Eg) was achieved only by the change of the nanocrystal size and shape, i.e. through the so-called “quantum confinement effect”. Composition changes as a tool for controlled tuning of binary nanoparticles’ physical properties have been exploited in recent years only, with a major focus on nonstoichiometric copper(I) chalcogenides (Cu2−xE, E = S, Se, Te) as nanomaterials exhibiting localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).1 It should be noted, however, that from the very early stages of nanocrystal research, preparation of solid solutions of two binary semiconductors constituted a convenient way for modifying their properties. This was especially true in the cases where the quantum confinement effect could not be effectively exploited. In semiconductors of high Eg the range of band gap tuning through quantum confinement is limited because Eg of the bulk material constitutes the lower limit of the band gap change. Low values of the Bohr exciton radius (rB) can be another obstacle since it imposes strict control of the nanocrystal size and its dispersity in a very narrow range. For these reasons several methods of binary nanocrystal alloying were elaborated as well as procedures of the fabrication of core/shell nanoparticles, which led to improvement and stabilization of their physical properties such as the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), for example.2–4 In the case of core/shell nanocrystals, the shell can have different roles depending on the band alignment of both constituents:2 in the case of (reverse) type I systems, both photogenerated carriers (electrons and holes) are confined in the core (shell), whereas in type II systems, the staggered band alignment leads to separation of the carriers in the core and shell region, respectively. This situation can lead to an effective Eg, which is lower than that of both constituting semiconductors, thus offering an interesting additional possibility for accessing lower band gap regions.
Although alloying of two binary semiconductors is a convenient way of controlled modification of their properties, the necessity of the preparation of toxic metal-free nanocrystals stimulated the research on ternary and quaternary compounds with a special emphasis on the relation between their composition and physical properties.5–10 Among a plethora of ternary chalcogenide semiconductors (I–III–VI), particular interest was devoted to chalcopyrite-type Ag(Cu)–In–S(Se) systems of low bulk band gap (Eg = 1.0–1.8 eV).11 More recently, a number of papers appeared on ternary nanocrystals which do not contain indium. As one example, iron-based nanocrystals such as CuFeS2 and CuFeSe2 exhibit even lower bulk band gaps of 0.6 eV and 0.2 eV, respectively. The research on indium-free compounds was stimulated by several factors, among them the price and predicted scarcity of indium. In recent years indium became one of the most expensive elements used in electronics mainly due to its massive application in semiconductor industry and as transparent conductive coating of glass substrates in the form of indium-tin-oxide (ITO). In addition to stoichiometric nanocrystals of the formula MI:MIII:EVI = 1:1:2 several nonstoichiometric compositions were prepared in which MI:MIII ≠ 1. These nanocrystals can be considered as solid solutions of the corresponding binary systems. In both cases (stoichiometric and nonstoichiometric nanocrystals), the reactivities of the used precursors, which are largely governed by the choice of the stabilizing ligands, constitute the key factors determining the composition, crystal structure, size and shape of the resulting nanocrystals. In addition to the thermodynamically stable structures, such as the chalcopyrite-type structure in typical ternary systems, in nanocrystalline forms of semiconductors metastable structures are frequently found, which are nonexistent in bulk materials. As a result, the obtained nanocrystals can exhibit new, sometimes unexpected, properties.
As already stated, three factors govern the Eg value of ternary nanocrystals: their composition, structure and size. Two of these factors (composition and structure) determine Eg in bulk semiconductors. For example, ternary CuInSe2 (chalcopyrite), CuIn3Se5 (chalcopyrite) and CuIn5Se8 (hexagonal) exhibit band gap energies of 1.04, 1.21 and 1.15 eV, respectively.12 In the case of ternary nanocrystals, the effect of composition and size on Eg cannot be considered independently. There exist examples where the change of the composition induces size and shape changes, influencing Eg in the opposite way. For example, in nonstoichiometric Cu–In–S nanocrystals of the same size, a gradual increase of the copper content results in a significant lowering of Eg.13 However, if this increase in copper content is accompanied by a strong lowering of the nanocrystal size, two opposite effects are observed leading to band gap widening. Evidently, the quantum confinement effect predominates in this case.14
Nanocrystals’ composition has a very pronounced effect on their luminescent properties. For stoichiometric nanocrystals (MI:MIII:EVI = 1:1:2), in practically all cases the presence of surface defects limits the PLQY to a few percent, at the most. However, deviance from stoichiometry may produce defects which are favorable for photoluminescence, not only in terms of color tuning but also for PLQY improvement. In binary semiconductor nanocrystals, the simple radiative exciton recombination mechanism holds: 1S(e) → 1S(h). In contrast, in ternary nanocrystals radiative recombination generally involves intra-band gap states, which may be specific of structural defects and/or involve strong electron–phonon interactions.9 This type of radiative recombination is characterized by large Stokes shifts (several hundreds of meV) and photoluminescence line width broadening,15–22 and will be discussed in more detail in the following section. Controlled synthesis of (core) ternary nanocrystals has, however, its limitation as far as the PLQY is considered. For this reason, a passivating shell is frequently deposited on both stoichiometric and nonstoichiometric nanocrystals yielding core/shell systems of improved photoluminescence. Alternatively, highly luminescent quaternary nanocrystals can be obtained, without the necessity of shell deposition, by appropriate alloying of ternary nanocrystals, in particular by the addition of zinc.5–8,10 In the latter case, the PLQY is strongly influenced by the nanocrystals’ composition.23–27 Apart from the luminescence properties of ternary/quaternary chalcopyrite-type semiconductor nanocrystals, the other specific physical properties governed by their composition should be marked. Among them, the recently studied relationship between the nanocrystals’ composition and the presence of localized surface plasmon resonance deserves a special interest.1,28–31 Another important area of interest involves the investigation of the composition effect on their thermoelectric properties. Due to their inherent low thermal conductivity, nanocrystals of appropriate thermoelectric materials are promising candidates for the conversion of thermal energy into electricity.32–36
Finally, when analyzing the effect of the structure on particular properties of ternary and quaternary nanocrystals, the composition of their surface should not be neglected. Three types of surfaces can be distinguished: (i) “balanced” in which the charges of cations and anions mutually compensate; (ii) “cation-rich”; and (iii) “anion-rich”. Each of these surface states originates from and requires different types of ligands.37,38 A special variant of nanocrystal surfaces involves the formation of covalent bonds between ligands and nanocrystal surface atoms (usually sulfur atoms).39 In this perspective, the study of the nature of the nanocrystal surface and the identification of primary ligands are of crucial importance, especially in cases of the elaboration of ligand exchange procedures. The primary ligand identification is not a trivial task, but significant progress has been achieved in this respect in recent years.39–42
2. Optical properties of ternary and quaternary chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals
As a general observation, chalcopyrite-type ternary and quaternary nanocrystals exhibit broad PL bands (much larger than the bulk materials) and large Stokes shifts, indicating intra-gap levels involved in the emission mechanism. UV-vis absorption spectra can be used to extract the band gap energy of the QDs using the Tauc plot formalism.43 The blue-shift of the absorption spectra with decreasing NC size is an unambiguous manifestation of quantum confinement effects. Chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals generally exhibit an absorption tail beyond their band gap, called the Urbach tail and described as α ∼ exp(E/Eu) with Eu being the Urbach energy.44 In the following, we will examine in detail the photophysical properties of AgInS2 NCs, taken as a representative example for the whole family of materials, before extending the discussion to other compounds.
2.1 Photoluminescence behavior of AgInS2 nanocrystals
The paper by Hamanaka et al. from 2011 constitutes a seminal earlier work on the PL emission properties of AgInS2 (AIS) NCs, giving a thorough analysis of the photophysical mechanisms by means of a complete set of complementary spectroscopic studies.45 The main conclusions stem from the comparison of the luminescence behavior of AIS NCs with that of bulk AIS, leading to the hypothesis that photoluminescence arises via donor–acceptor pair (DAP) recombination, i.e. transitions between pairs of intra-band gap states. The bulk band gap of AIS has been reported as 1.87 eV46 and the Bohr exciton radius as 5.5 nm.45 Native defects in bulk AIS arising from the non-stoichiometric composition are mainly sulfur vacancies (VS), silver vacancies (VAg), sulfur interstitials (Sint) and silver interstitials (Agint).47 VS and Agint act as donors, and VAg and Sint act as acceptors. The reported binding energies in the bulk range from ED = 20 to 100 meV (VS), with Agint (90 meV) acting as a deep donor defect, while EA = 180–190 meV has been reported for VAg.48
The temperature dependence of steady-state PL spectra was exploited for determining the binding energies of the DAPs. The PL intensity of 2.6 nm AIS NCs has been found to be quasi T-independent in the range of 30–190 K (Fig. 1A). For higher temperatures, thermal quenching occurs due to the thermally activated emptying of donor and acceptor levels and increase of the non-radiative recombination rate. In this regime, the temperature dependence of the PL intensity can be described by eqn (1): (1)with E the thermal activation energy, kB the Boltzmann constant and A a constant. Fitting the data points in Fig. 1a results in an activation energy of 100 meV, corresponding to the shallower donor level. In the same work, a binding energy of 220 meV has been determined for the acceptor defect.45
 Fig. 1  (A) Temperature dependence of the integrated PL intensities of 2.6 nm AIS NCs (inset: linear scale); the line represents the fitting obtained using eqn (1) and E = 100 meV. (B) TRPL spectra of AgInS2 NCs recorded at 4.2 K for various delay times after the excitation. Inset: Evolution of the PL peak energies with the delay time. (C) Excitation power dependence of the PL peak energy at 4.2 K. Inset: PL spectra recorded at different excitation intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 

Time-resolved PL studies. 
To get further insight into the emission mechanisms, the exploitation of the time-resolved PL behavior of the nanocrystals is a very potent approach. Fitting the PL decay curves of ternary and quaternary chalcopyrite-type NCs requires generally at least two exponentials (cf.eqn (2)): (2)where I(t) is the PL intensity at the delay time t from the excitation pulse, Ai are the amplitudes and τi the lifetimes. In addition to the determination of the PL lifetimes, the analysis of the evolution of the PL spectra with the delay time from the excitation pulse can give further valuable information. Low temperature TRPL studies on AgInS2 NCs revealed a decrease (from 1.72 eV to 1.57 eV) of the PL peak energy accompanied by a decrease of the FWHM (from 450 to 330 meV) when increasing the delay between excitation and detection from 0 to 2 μs (Fig. 1B).45 This kind of behavior indicates DAP recombination processes, in which the Coulomb interaction between the donor and the acceptor modifies the binding energy. By consequence, the emission energy is dependent on the donor–acceptor distance r, which can be expressed with eqn (3): (3)where Eg is the energy band gap, and ED and EA are the donor and acceptor binding energy, respectively. Therefore, due to the stronger Coulomb interaction the PL energy of spatially close DA pairs is higher than that of distant pairs. This also induces a higher recombination probability because of the larger wave function overlap. By consequence the recombination rate of the higher energy PL emission is larger and hence its decay time shorter than that of the lower energy transition. The resulting distribution of decay times is at the origin of the observed PL shift to lower energies/longer wavelengths and the decrease of the line width with increasing delay from the excitation pulse. At the same time eqn (3) also explains (partially) the size dependence of the PL spectra: in small sized QDs, distant DAPs leading to lower energy/higher wavelength emission do not contribute to the PL spectrum. On the other hand, it does not explain why for larger sizes the contribution of distant DAPs becomes predominant.


Influence of the size and composition on the PL properties. 
Smaller AIS QDs synthesized in organics exhibit a shorter decay time than larger ones as demonstrated for NCs in the size range of 2.5–4.3 nm.49 In the same work, the authors also observed that the PLQY was highest for the smallest QDs (2.5 nm: 63%; 3.4 nm: 37%; 4.3 nm: 36%). The higher QY for the smaller QDs was ascribed to a higher concentration of donor and acceptor levels (on the order of 1020 cm−3 for the larger particles) due to the lower temperature used for their synthesis (here 150 °C). Higher temperatures induce increased ionic mobility in the crystal lattice, which improves crystallinity and reduces the density of defect states. This is in accordance with the fact that in the case of aqueous synthesized AIS QDs a similar trend of size/QY correlation is not observed, as they are all synthesized at 90–100 °C. On the other hand, the higher concentration of donor and acceptor defects in aqueous AIS NCs also explains their larger radiative recombination rates and higher PL QYs. A further parameter influencing the PL intensity in CIS and AIS NCs is their composition: higher PL QYs are generally observed for Ag- and Cu-deficient compositions (Ag/In and Cu/In < 1). In these cases, the density of Ag and Cu vacancies increases, introducing acceptor levels in the crystal structure leading to enhanced emission.
These features demonstrate the opposite behavior in ternary QDs as compared to classical binary systems such as CdSe or InP: there generally high synthesis temperatures are used with the goal to minimize crystalline defects, which are detrimental to the efficiency of band-edge emission.


Excitation power dependence. 
A blue-shift/shift to higher energy of the PL band with increasing excitation density is another characteristic indicating DAP recombination, implying holes and electrons trapped by defect sites (Fig. 1C).50 The shift to higher energy is a result of the increasing contribution of spatially confined DA pairs and lower contribution of distant pairs. With decreasing excitation densities the PL spectra of AgInS2 NCs converge to the lowest energy peak, e.g., 1.58 eV for 2.6 nm particles.45 Interestingly, the width of this PL peak, recorded at 4.2 K, is still broad (FWHM: 380 meV), which implies that the line width is not a consequence of the distribution of the DA pair distances. A plausible cause for the broadening is the electron–phonon interaction (cf. below). The excitation power dependence can be described by a power law I ∝ Lk, where I is the PL intensity, L the excitation intensity and k a coefficient. For DAP recombinations and free-to-bound mechanisms k < 1, while k > 1 is indicative of excitonic emission.51

2.2 Other materials and limits of the DAP model
One weakness of the DAP model (cf.Fig. 2A) is that it cannot easily explain the observed strong size dependence of the PL energies. As outlined above, the PL emission energy depends on the spatial separation of the DAP, which could in principle induce NC size dependent PL spectra. However, the implied distances may not be relevant: in bulk AgInS2 for instance, Krustok et al. reported that emission from defect pairs further apart than 5.3 Å could not be detected.48 This indicates that changes in the size of typically 3–10 times larger NCs may have negligible impact on the observed emission energy of DAPs.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the DAP mode (A) and free-to-bound mechanism (B). (C) Self-trapped exciton model: qualitative single-configurational-coordinate diagram demonstrating absorption, exciton self-trapping and luminescence. Panel (C) is reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
When comparing with Cu-based chalcopyrite-type materials, the copper oxidation state in the NC ground state gave rise to conflicting reports. Synthesis methods using either Cu+ or Cu2+ precursors have been described in the literature. However, many reactions take place at high temperature in the presence of electron-rich solvents and ligands, which makes the reduction of Cu2+ very likely. The absence of the characteristic ESR signal of Cu2+ in the paramagnetic d9 electronic configuration is a further indication that the predominant copper oxidation state in the NC ground state is +1.
In the case of CIS NCs, additional studies such as excitation power-dependent, ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy53 converged towards the free-to-bound mechanism, which has become the favorite way for explaining the PL properties of this material (cf.Fig. 2B).11 It implies recombination of a delocalized conduction band electron with a hole localized at a point defect, which has been identified as the Vcu acceptor state. Gamelin and coworkers performed first single-particle spectroscopy on 3.8 nm CIS NCs capped with a thin CdS shell.54 While the ensemble PL measurements showed a peak centered at 1.65 eV and a line width of 300 meV, individual QDs exhibited smaller line widths varying in the range of 190–270 meV. Although narrower these values are still much larger than the typical line widths of binary metal chalcogenide NCs (around 50 meV). The same study demonstrated blinking of the CIS NCs and identified the “off” state as a metastable charge-separated state giving rise to delayed PL. Klimov and coworkers carried out single-particle spectroscopy on CIS NCs capped with a very thick ZnS shell, revealing in comparison with the above study reduced line widths showing an average value of ≈130 meV (FWHM).55 Intriguingly, the PL lifetimes of individual NCs varied in the large range of ≈75–325 ns, with an average value around 220 ns, quasi identical with that of ensemble measurements. These results were interpreted in the frame of the free-to-bound mechanism and the authors concluded that the line broadening observed in the ensemble was a result of the positional heterogeneity of the distribution of Cu-related point defects in individual NCs. It was suggested that this effect could induce differences in the electron–hole interaction energy as large as 300 meV. Considering the still comparably large single-dot line width with only 30% of the measured NCs <100 meV, the involvement of multiple emissive centers/defects per QD has been evoked, supported by the asymmetric line shape of the PL peak. Due to the thick ZnS shell, antibunching measurements were possible in this case, confirming the single-particle character of the investigated NCs. Single-particle measurements are also rare in the case of AIS NCs. Baranov, Resch-Genger and coworkers studied aqueous synthesized AIS/ZnS QDs capped with mercaptopropionic acid (MPA).56 The obtained single-dot line widths of 220 meV (FWHM) were around three times smaller than the ensemble line widths (580 meV). Stroyuk and coworkers investigated glutathione (GSH)-capped AIS/ZnS QDs and obtained single-particle line widths in the range of 240–360 meV (ensemble: around 400 meV), albeit, due to bleaching, without the demonstration of antibunching to preclude the presence of small aggregates.57
Another shortcoming of the DAP model as outlined by Stroyuk, Zahn and coworkers is its failure to account for the spectral width of the PL bands of AIS NCs, which is not or only weakly influenced by the average NC size, size distribution, temperature and excitation power.57 This argument is corroborated by the relatively large PL line widths observed in single-particle spectroscopy. Similar to that suggested by Gamelin and coworkers in the case of CIS NCs (vide infra), the so-called self-trapped exciton model was proposed, which conciliates the different experimental observations. It assumes that one of the photogenerated carriers (e.g., the hole) is localized at a lattice site (e.g., Cu+ or Ag+ site), which leads to local lattice distortions (Jahn–Teller effect) and strong electron–phonon interactions (Fig. 2C).5,52 The broad band emission is interpreted as a series of phonon replicas of the zero-phonon emission line.57 As such, the self-trapped exciton model can be considered as a special case of the free-to-bound mechanism, in which no native point defects for hole localization are required.
An alternative description of the luminescence properties of ternary Cu-based nanocrystals has been proposed in a seminal review by Gamelin and coworkers, who considered CIS as an ultimate case of Cu-doped NCs.58 Indeed, the spectral features of Cu-doped CdSe or InP NCs show many similarities with those observed for CIS nanocrystals. This picture has been further enlarged by comparing the PL properties with metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCBCT) luminescence occurring in many tetrahedral Cu+ complexes. In a recent work, Hughes et al. investigated Ag1−xCuxInS2 nanocrystals with x varying from 0 to 1, which gave the opportunity to identify the impact of Cu-doping on the PL properties of AIS nanocrystals.59 In particular, the midgap states occurring above the valence band of AIS upon copper doping were associated with Cu+ 3d valence orbitals. With increasing copper contents the PL peak shifted rapidly to lower energies for small x but then became independent of x for x > 0.20. This behavior confirms the limited hole delocalization in the excited state, estimated via Monte Carlo simulations to involve a maximum of 3–4 copper atoms, and further supports the self-trapped exciton model for describing these systems.

The case of CuFeS2 nanocrystals. 
Copper iron sulfide nanocrystals can exhibit an unusual purple color in colloidal solution, resembling gold nanoparticles, and a golden luster in the form of thin films. These features arise from an absorption band located at around 500 nm, which has been identified as a plasmon resonance band.60 Bhattacharyya and Pandey were the first to report detailed studies of the optical properties of this material.61 The absorption spectra of CuFeS2 (core) NCs exhibit a size-dependent absorption onset varying from 0.5 to 2.0 eV for NCs in the size range of 13 to 2.4 nm (Fig. 3A). The evolution of the band gap, extracted from the absorbance data, with NC size was modelled using the effective mass approximation (Fig. 3B), and the excitonic reduced mass has been estimated as 0.35, a rather high value. Photoluminescence of CuFeS2 NCs could be observed for the first time after the growth of a CdS shell, while the as-prepared NCs were non-luminescent. On the other hand, XRD analyses suggested the formation of a CuFeS2–CdS alloy structure (Fig. 3C), which is also confirmed by the blue-shift of emission with increasing CdS content. For the different core sizes PL emission in a broad range (0.7–2.5 eV) could be obtained (Fig. 3D), with QYs in the range of 17% (1.43 eV)–87% (1.87 eV). An approximately linear relationship between the Stokes shift and the band gap was established (Fig. 3E), which was extrapolated to a very small value (30 meV) when coming close to the bulk band edge (0.52 eV). Finally, TRPL measurements were performed revealing a strong dependence of the emission kinetics on the PL peak energy: the PL lifetime increased by nearly one order of magnitude when changing from a PL peak at 2.2 eV to 1.4 eV. The obtained data could be fitted with a (E − Eg)−3 curve (Fig. 3F). All in all, the authors explained the observed PL behavior of CuFeS2–CdS alloy NCs within the framework of the free-to-bound model discussed above, with the distinction that transitions to surface defects are considered as non-radiative.61 Therefore, due to fast non-radiative recombination with surface traps the NCs do not exhibit PL emission prior to passivation with CdS.
 Fig. 3  (A) UV-vis absorption spectra of CuFeS2 NCs synthesized with increasing reaction time (from right to left). (B) Variation of the band gap with NC size (red dots: experimental data; dashed line: calculated evolution using the effective mass approximation). (C) Scheme representing CuFeS2/CdS alloy NCs obtained after overgrowth with a CdS shell. (D) PL spectra of the CuFeS2/CdS alloy NCs (inset: photographs of the two samples with the highest PL QY, 87% for the red and 54% for the yellow one). (E) Variation of the Stokes shift with the band gap, extracted from absorbance data. The dashed line indicates a linear fit (inset: model with the Stokes shift represented by blue double arrows). (F) Evolution of the PL lifetime with the PL emission maximum, fitted with a (E − Eg)−3 curve (dashed line). Adapted with permission from ref. 61, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In view of all cited studies, it could seem completely hopeless to expect being able one day to drastically reduce the PL line width of multinary chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals by chemical means. However, a recent work of Uematsu, Torimoto and coworkers opens up new perspectives for this field.62 In this study, first AIS nanocrystals were synthesized at low temperature (135 °C) showing an elevated PLQY (64%). In a second step, at higher temperature (230–280 °C) an amorphous shell of a III–VI semiconductor (GaSx with x = 0.8–1.5) was grown on the surface of the AIS nanocrystals. During the shell growth, several novel features are observable in the UV-vis absorption spectrum, and most strikingly, a sharp PL peak appears at 585 nm (Fig. 4). The line width of this peak is significantly narrower than that of the parent AIS nanocrystals (28.6 nm/103 meV vs. 220 nm/388 meV) and the PLE spectrum shows a distinct excitonic feature at around 530 nm. Such a line width is comparable with the values measured for high quality CdSe QDs, and narrower than those obtained for state-of-the-art InP-based QDs.63 To remove inhomogeneous broadening effects (e.g., induced by particle size distribution), single particle analysis was carried out, resulting in a line width of 24.0 nm/80 meV. Furthermore, TRPL studies revealed a drastic reduction of the PL lifetime components of the core/shell nanocrystals. All these features point towards excitonic emission being at the origin of the 585 nm peak. Nonetheless, further studies are required to demonstrate notably the nanocrystal size dependence of this kind of behavior.
 Fig. 4  Changes of the optical properties of AIS nanocrystals upon growth of an amorphous GaSx shell. (a) Absorption spectra before and after 60 min of shell growth. (b) Evolution of the PL spectra as a function of the heating time at 260 °C. (c) Photograph of the samples with growing heating time from left to right under UV light. (d) Energy diagrams of the explored core/shell systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 from the authors. 

3. Synthesis of chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals
In this section, a general overview of synthetic approaches will be given by means of tables, and selected examples of syntheses will be highlighted with some emphasis on those not yet extensively reviewed elsewhere.5,64,65 First Cu-based nanocrystals – Cu–In–E, Cu–In–Zn–E (E = S, Se) as well as CuFeS2 – and next their Ag-based counterparts will be discussed.
3.1 Synthesis of CIS and CIZS nanocrystals in organic solvents

Table 1 gives a general overview of the main methods reported for the preparation of ternary CuInS2 (CIS) and quaternary CuZnInS (CIZS) nanocrystals in organic solvents and in aqueous medium. CIZS core nanocrystals were reported to exhibit superior optical properties in terms of PLQY as compared to CIS.23 ZnS shell growth on CIS and CIZS nanocrystals deserves particular attention: due to the low lattice mismatch and favored by the high mobility of Cu ions in the crystal lattice, cation exchange and alloying can compete with epitaxial shell growth.66 These effects are easily detectable by a pronounced hypsochromic shift (blue-shift) of the PL peaks. Growth of thicker ZnS shells providing improved chemical and photostability requires therefore the fine-tuning of the reaction parameters enabled by the in-depth characterization of the obtained heterostructures.
Table 1 Main synthesis methods for CIS and CIZS nanocrystals in organic solvents and in aqueous medium




Method
Precursors, solvents
Crystalline structure, size and shape
PL emission
PL QY
Ref.




CIS and CIZS nanocrystals in organic medium


Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, Zn(Ac)2, n-butylamine, Al-isopropoxide
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs, 4.4–4.9 nm
740 nm
—

67



Hot injection
Cu(Ac)·H2O, In(Ac)3, DMF, 1-thioglycerol, H2S (reaction between FeS and H2SO4), Zn(Ac)2·2H2O
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: 2.35 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.09 nm
660–700 nm
9–15%

68



Heat-up and hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, Se powder, DDT, OLA, tributylphosphine, ODE, Zn(St)2
Chalcopyrite, polygonal, CISSe: 2.8–3.4 nm (increased reaction time), CISSe/ZnS: 3.8 nm
722–830 nm
CISSe: 1.2%

69



CISSe/ZnS: 40.7%


Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, ODE, Zn(St)2, OLA
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: 2.1 nm, CIS/ZnS: from 4.3 to 10.5 nm
570–660 nm
—

70



Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, S powder, Se powder, OLA, ODE
Chalcopyrite, polygonal, CIS/In2Se3: 4.8 nm
—
—

71



Hot injection
Cu O-2,2-dimethylpentan-3-yl dithiocarbonate, In O-2,2-dimethylpentan-3-yl dithiocarbonate, dioleamide, ODE, OLA, OA
Chalcopyrite, polygonal/globular, 3–4 nm
710 nm
—

72



Solvothermal
Cu, In, S, ethylenediamine (reaction in an autoclave for several days at 220 °C)
Trigonal, microplatelets and nanowires
—
—

73



Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn(DDTC)2, Zn(St)2, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, S powder, TOP
Chalcopyrite, spherical, 3 nm
523–619 nm
Up to 47%

74



Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT, OLA, ODE
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs, CIS: 4.3 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.6–6.6 nm
614–713 nm
—

75



Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT, OLA, ODE
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS/ZnS: 2.68 nm
CIS: 725 nm
CIS: 1.3%

76



CIS/ZnS: 675 nm
CIS/ZnS: 65%


Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, 1-octanethiol, Zn(Ac)2
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal, CIZS/ZnS: 4 nm, CIZS/ZnS/ZnS: 7.8 nm
572–537 nm
CIZS: 30%

77



CIZS/ZnS: 64%


CIZS/ZnS/ZnS: 77%


Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, ZnCl2
Chalcopyrite, polygonal, CIS: 2.9 nm, CIS/ZnS: 5.4 nm
CIS/ZnS: 520–700 nm
CIS: up to 5%

78



CIS/ZnS: up to 81%


Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, ODE, X mL of OLA (X = 0, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5) and 1 − X mL of ODE
Cubic zinc blende (X = 0–1.5 mL), pseudo chalcopyrite/wurtzite (X = 2–2.5 mL), from 4.2 to 15 nm
705–730 nm
—

79



Hot injection and heat-up
CuCl, InCl3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT, Se powder, OA, OLA
Cubic zinc blende, polygonal/almost spherical QDs, <5 nm
552–680 nm
30%

80



Heat-up
Cu(Ac)2, In(Ac)3, SnCl2·2H2O, DDT, ODE, Zn(Ac)2
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs 5 nm
Cu–In–Sn–S: 701–894 nm
Up to 75%

81



Cu–In–Sn–S/ZnS: 628–785 nm




UbiQD company (ubiqd.com)


862 nm
91%

82



Heat-up for core QDs, hot injection of the core in ZnS shell precursor solution at different temperatures
Core: CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, shell: CIS seeds, Zn(St)2, ZnI2, S powder, OLA, DDT, ODE
Pyramidal and polyhedral, CIS seeds: 2.5 nm, shell: 150 °C: ∼2.5–3 nm, 210 °C: ∼4.7 nm
—



66



Heat-up
CuI, InI3, DDT, OA, ODE
Chalcopyrite, polyhedral, ∼4 nm
702 nm
5%

16



Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, ZnSt2, DDT, ODE
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: 2–4 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3–7 nm
595–830 nm
60% (CIS-20 min/ZnS)

19



Solvothermal
CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn-ethylxanthate, Zn(St)2, DDT, ODE, DMF
Polyhedral QDs, CIS: 1.4–2.2 nm, CIS/ZnS: 2.4–3.6 nm
CIS: 647–664 nm
CIS: up to 8.8%

21



CIS/ZnS:
CIS/ZnS: 65%


Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, ZnSt2, myristic acid, ODE
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: ∼2.4 nm, CIS/ZnS: ∼3.3
CIS: 630–800 nm
CIS: 8% (645 nm for In:Cu = 1.5)

83



CIS/ZnS: 570–630 nm
CIS/ZnS: 65% at 625 nm


Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, ZnSt2, DDT
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal, CIS: up to ∼3.3 nm
CIS: 630–780 nm
CIS: 5.8%

84



CIS/ZnS: 671 nm
CIS/ZnS: 67%


CIS/CdS: 709 nm
CIS/CdS: 86%


Heat-up + cation exchange
(1) CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, (2) ZnSt2, ODE, TOP
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal, ∼2–3 nm
CIS: 658–714
CIS: 7–23%

23



CIZS: 590–640
CIZS: 54–80%


Hot injection
Cu(NO3)2, In(Ac)3, sulfur, Zn(Ac)2, OA, TOP, MA
Chalcopyrite, polyhedral QDs, CIS/ZnS: 5–15 nm
650–800 nm
30%

85



Heat-up
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl4·4H2O, Zn(Ac)2, Zn-oleate, DDT, ODE
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: ∼2.5 nm, CIS/ZnS: ∼3.5 nm (250 °C/7 h), CIS/ZnS/ZnS: ∼4.3 nm
CIS: 670 nm
CIS: 31.8%

86



CIS/ZnS: 576 nm
CIS/ZnS: 76.4%


CIS/ZnS/ZnS: 559 nm
CIS/ZnS/ZnS: 80%


Room temperature photolysis
[(TOP)2CuIn(SR)4] with R = n-propyl or t-butyl, toluene or dioctylphthalate
Chalcopyrite, ∼2 nm
450–660 nm
—

87



Room temperature reaction
Cu- and In-xanthate, toluene, OLA
Chalcopyrite, ∼2–3 nm
815 nm
—

88







CIS and CIZS nanocrystals in aqueous medium


Hydrothermal
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, MPA, NaOH, thiourea, 10.5 mL H2O, 150 °C, 23 h, pH = 11.3
Chalcopyrite 2–4 nm
660 nm
3.3%

89



Heat-up
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, Na-citrate, Na2S, Zn(Ac)2, thiourea, 20 mL H2O, 95 °C, 40 min, pH = 5.5, Na-citrate/In = 4
Chalcopyrite, CIS: 2.1 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.8 nm
543–625 nm
38% for Cu:In = 1:4

90



Microwave
Cu(NO3)2, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, Na2S, Zn(Ac)2, NaOH, 19.2 mL H2O, 100 °C, 5 min, pH = 8.5
Chalcopyrite, CIS: 2.8 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.3 nm
550–680 nm
24% for Cu:In = 1:4 (600 nm)

91



Hydrothermal
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, thiourea, Zn(Ac)2, ZnCl2, Na-citrate, Na2S, 150 °C, 23 h, pH = 11.3
CIZS: 4.6–5.5 nm
475–672 nm
35% for Cu:In:Zn = 1:20:5 (600 nm)

92



Hydrothermal
In(NO3)2·5H2O, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, GSH, Na2S, 100 °C, 6–20 h, pH = 8
Chalcopyrite, spherical/polygonal QDs 3.69, 7.01, 13.59 nm (6 h, 8 h, 10 h)
550 nm + 700 nm
14% (Cu:In = 1:4)

93



Heat-up
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, Na2S, Zn(Ac)2, thiourea, 125 mL H2O, 100 °C, 4 h, pH = 8.5 (core)
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs
CIS: 777 nm (Cu:In = 1:4)
CIS: ∼4.5%

94



CIS/ZnS: 700–777 nm
CIS/ZnS: 15.9%





Hot-injection approach. 
The hot-injection method is usually used when the sulfur sources are very reactive (S-OLA mixture, H2S gas). The injection of the S-precursor at <180 °C allows the separation of the nucleation and growth processes and hence a better control of the size distribution of the QDs. When 1-dodecanethiol (DDT) is used in the hot-injection method, higher temperatures (typically >230 °C) are applied to ensure the rapid release of sulfur.
Zhang et al. proposed the organic synthesis of hydrophilic CIS and CIS/ZnS core/shell QDs in dimethylformamide (DMF) with 1-thioglycerol and H2S as the sulfur sources.68 The working temperature is low: 120 °C for the core and 140 °C for the core/shell, due to the reactive sulfur source. By varying the Cu:In ratio from 1:1 to 1:4, PL emission in the range of 660–700 nm was achieved with the maximum intensity attained for Cu:In = 1:4 at 635 nm and 15% PL QY. This value remains modest compared to syntheses at higher temperatures with DDT as the ligand and sulfur source, yielding smaller particles. Liu et al. studied the influence of the addition of OLA in a variant of the well-established DDT-based synthesis23,84,95 on the crystalline phase and optical properties of CIS QDs.79 For small quantities (0–1.5 mL) of OLA during synthesis, QDs in the zinc blende phase were obtained whose band gap depended on the amount of OLA (cf.Table 2). As the volume of OLA was increased to 2–2.5 mL, the chalcopyrite and wurtzite phases appeared and coexisted with the QDs becoming polyhedral and significantly larger in size (10–15 nm). These results demonstrate that OLA served to control the growth rate by binding in a dynamic way to the metal sites of the nuclei. In particular, OLA can slow down the growth rate and control the morphology provided that it is added in an optimal amount.
Table 2 Influence of the amount of OLA on the crystal structure and morphology of CIS QDs79




OAm (mL)
Structure
Morphology
Size (nm)
Band gap (eV)




0
Zinc-blende
Pyramidal
5.4
1.44


1.0
Zinc-blende
Pyramidal
4.9
1.58


1.5
Zinc-blende
Pyramidal
4.2
1.74


2.0
Chalcopyrite/wurtzite
Pyramidal/hexagonal
—/10–15
1.83


2.5
Chalcopyrite/wurtzite
Pyramidal/hexagonal
—/10–15
1.91




Wang et al. synthesized quaternary CISSe and CISSe/ZnS core/shell QDs at the commonly used high temperatures of 200–220 °C in the presence of DDT as the sulfur source and ligand and Se-OLA (selenium in oleylamine) as the Se precursor (Fig. 5).69 The particles presented a gradient Se content with the concentration increasing from the core to the surface as the Se precursor was injected after CIS nuclei were formed. A relatively narrow size distribution and polygonal morphology were observed. Passivation with a ZnS shell increased the size from 3.4 nm to 3.8 nm, indicating the formation of only 1 ZnS monolayer. The PL QY concomitantly increased from 1.2% to 40.7% confirming the efficient passivation of surface defects.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the synthesis reactions of CISSe and CISSe/ZnS QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. 
Thicker ZnS shells have been obtained by Liu et al., who reported the synthesis of CIS/ZnS QDs with up to around 5 monolayers of ZnS.75 By working at a temperature of 210 °C, a first layer of ZnS was added which formed alloyed CIZS on the surface of the core CIS particles. The formation of this alloy led to the shrinking of the size of the optically active CIS core from 4.3 nm to 3.6 nm due to the substitution of Cu+ and In3+ ions by Zn2+. The comparably low temperature of 210 °C slowed down the rate of release of Zn2+ and promoted alloy formation. To grow thicker ZnS shells, the temperature was raised to 230 °C and successive amounts of ZnS precursor solutions were injected every 2 h to grow a thick ZnS shell in a layer-by-layer fashion up to a final size of 6.6 nm. Dong et al. reported the heat-up synthesis of smaller CIS/ZnS QDs with an average size of 2.68 nm showing a high PLQY of 65% by using the same reactants and working temperatures.76
Berends et al. investigated the factors leading either to alloying or to ZnS shell growth on CIS nanocrystals and developed a modified hot-injection method for the shell synthesis.66 In this case, a purified solution of CIS seeds and the S precursor were injected into a hot solution of the Zn precursor. For the latter, either more reactive ZnI2 in ODE or less reactive Zn(St)2 (zinc stearate) in 1-octadecene (ODE) was used. The S-precursor was chosen among (less reactive) DDT/ODE or (more reactive) S-ODE/OLA mixtures. Several washing/purification processes of the CIS seeds were tested and the spectral shift of the PL as well as the change in PL intensity was investigated after shelling. Washing with methanol/butanol led to a more important PL decrease of the core CIS seeds, indicating its efficiency in removing unreacted and side products. It was thus used before shelling. Fig. 6 demonstrates that the observed blue-shift, attributed to cation exchange and alloying leading to a CIZS structure, is more important at 150 °C whatever precursors used. The shift is most important for the least reactive precursor couple ZnSt2/DDT. This indicates that due to the slow release of Zn2+ and S2− ions in the reaction medium Zn2+ has more time to diffuse in the core nanocrystals instead of favoring heteroepitaxial growth of a ZnS shell. When the temperature is increased, the extent of blue-shift is decreased and is lowest for ZnI2/DDT, closely followed by ZnI2/S because Zn2+ is released faster and the release of S2− from DDT is accelerated, which favors heteroepitaxial ZnS growth on the CIS seeds. The temperature of 210 °C is not enough to activate Zn(St)2 and consequently the blue-shift is most important with the Zn(St)2/DDT couple. A higher temperature, usually >230 °C, is required for the synthesis of a ZnS shell with the latter precursors. Concluding, for reducing competing cation exchange reactions, it is better to use highly reactive precursors at higher temperatures to favor the rapid formation of ZnS monomers which can then deposit on the CIS core. A similar study was carried out in the past by Park et al. involving several zinc precursors with different reactivities in combination with DDT at 230 °C.83 There it was found that the blue shift was least pronounced when ZnCl2 was used as the Zn precursor in comparison with Zn acetate, Zn acetylacetonate and Zn(St)2. A high PL QY of 65% was achieved at 625 nm.
 Fig. 6  (A) Influence of the purification method on the PL intensity of core CIS QDs. (B) Effect of temperature and shell reactants on the extent of blue-shift (induced by alloying and cation exchange) and Zn:Cu ratio in the product. (C) Blue-shift vs. In:Cu ratio. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 


Heat-up approach. 
The heat-up method, which is experimentally very simple as all precursors, ligands and solvents are mixed at room temperature and then heated to the desired reaction temperature, is the most widely used when DDT is the sulfur source. DDT is very versatile in the synthesis of CIS nanocrystals, as it can also serve as the source of surface ligands and as a (co-)solvent. Due to the great simplicity of the approach, DDT-based reactions have been most widely studied for synthesizing Cu-based chalcopyrite nanocrystals in organic solvents.23,84,95 For CIS QDs, a well-established procedure involves the use of CuI, In(OAc)3 and DDT (either as the sole solvent or in a mixture with ODE), complexation at 100 °C and reaction at 230 °C. This method yields stoichiometric CIS nanocrystals in high yield whose size can be adjusted from around 2 to 7 nm by varying the reaction time.19,84 After ZnS shell growth, high PL QYs were obtained, in earlier works of Li et al. up to around 60%,19 later 80% and higher.84,86 Even higher values can be achieved when CdS is used instead of ZnS as the shell material.84
Lox et al. synthesized CIZS/ZnS QDs via the heat-up method74 and studied ZnS shell growth using Zn(St)2 in the presence or absence of TOP-S. Without TOP-S, the PL wavelength varied from 619 to 537 nm when increasing the Zn:Cu ratio from 1.8 to 11. When TOP-S was added together with Zn(St)2, the PL wavelength was even more blue-shifted down to 523 nm. It was therefore suggested that TOP acted as a soft base that promoted the removal of Cu+ ions from the core and favored substitution by Zn2+ ions. In both cases, the highest PLQYs of 47% and 37%, respectively, were obtained for QDs with a Zn:Cu ratio of 1.8.
In 2018, Wu et al. studied the influence of shell thickness on the optical properties and stability of the core/shell QDs.77 Starting with a Cu:In ratio of 1:4, core CIZS QDs were synthesized at 230 °C, which were then overgrown with a thin ZnS shell in the presence of Zn(OAc)2 at the same temperature for 2 h (Fig. 7). To achieve the growth of a thicker shell, instead of using DDT as the ligand and sulfur source, 1-octanethiol (OT) was used at 240 °C in the presence of Zn(OAc)2 during 12 h. During the shell growth, the PL QY increased from 30% to 64% (thin shell) and finally to 77% (thick shell). At the same time, the PL wavelength was blue-shifted from 572 nm to 551 nm (thin shell) and to 537 nm (thick shell). The QDs grew from 4 ± 1.8 nm in the case of the thin shell QDs to 7.8 ± 1.2 nm with the thick shell, which indicates a ZnS shell thickness of around 6 monolayers. It was hypothesized that surface alloy CIZS could decrease the lattice mismatch and facilitate the thick shell deposition. After phase transfer to water, the QDs maintained a high PLQY of 58%.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the synthesis of the core, core/thin-shell and core/thick-shell structure on CIZS nanocrystals using 1-octanethiol (OT) and zinc acetate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Wang et al. used the standard DDT method with the same metal ratio as above (Cu:In = 1:4) for the core, but ZnCl2 dissolved in DDT for the shell synthesis.78 At the reaction temperature of 230 °C, ZnCl2 is more reactive than Zn-carboxylates and hence releases Zn2+ ions more efficiently. The core CIS nanocrystals had an average size of 2.9 nm and grew to 5.4 nm upon shelling, i.e. the shell thickness was around 4 monolayers. During shell growth, the PL wavelength shifted from 700 to 635 nm indicating some alloying to occur. A maximum PLQY of 81% was obtained under optimized conditions.
Chen et al. synthesized Sn-doped CIS and CIS/ZnS QDs with the goal to shift the PL emission further to the red.81 The core and core/shell QDs were synthesized at the established temperature of 230 °C. By varying the Sn content and the Cu:In ratio, it was possible to change the PL maximum position of the Cu–In–Sn–S/ZnS core/shell QDs from 614 to 740 nm. A maximum QY of 75% was reached for an Sn content of 0.1 mmol and for a Cu:In ratio of 1:2. It was proposed that Sn2+ would either substitute Cu+ or diffuse into Cu-vacancy defect sites or both, making the red shift more important for Cu-rich QDs. Fig. 8 shows the evolution of the PLQY as a function of the Sn content and the change in band gap of the materials with increasing Sn content.
 Fig. 8  Left panel: PLQY of Cu–Sn–In–S core and Cu–Sn–In–S/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals as a function of the used quantity of Sn precursor. Right panel: Change in the band gap of the quaternary QDs with increasing Sn content. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It should be mentioned that CIS nanocrystals can even be synthesized at room temperature by choosing appropriate precursors and reaction conditions. In a photolysis reaction, Nairn et al. used a single-source precursor ([(TOP)2CuIn(SR)4] with R = n-propyl or t-butyl) in dioctylphthalate for preparing small (around 2 nm) CIS nanocrystals whose optical properties could be tuned by changing the duration of UV irradiation.87 Buchmaier et al. succeeded in preparing CIS nanocrystals at room temperature by adding OLA to a solution of the metal xanthates in toluene.88 Around 3 nm sized CIS QDs capped with OLA and emitting at 815 were obtained. The reaction mechanism could be identified using NMR spectroscopy, revealing the direct reaction of the amine with the metal xanthates.

3.2 Aqueous synthesis of CIS and CIZS nanocrystals

Hydrothermal approach. 
The hydrothermal approach implies working in a closed system (autoclave) at elevated pressure. It enables modifying the solubility parameters and hence reactivity of the species in the reaction mixture. This method also extends the temperature range of aqueous syntheses, which can have beneficial effects on the crystallinity of the products. Furthermore, in some cases crystalline phases not achievable with ambient pressure syntheses can be obtained. In an earlier work, Liu et al. synthesized CIS QDs in water via the hydrothermal approach at 150 °C and reaction times >20 h.89 The surface ligand mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) acted also as the reducing agent for the Cu2+ precursor. When setting the Cu:In:S:MPA ratio at 1:1:2:12 the obtained CIS QDs had an emission at 660 nm with an optimal PLQY of 3.3% at pH = 11. At lower pH a secondary CuxS phase was generated. Jiang et al. devised a similar synthesis to fabricate Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals.92 Instead of using MPA, glutathione (GSH) was chosen and thiourea was used as the sulfur source in combination with ZnCl2 as the Zn-precursor during the core synthesis. The shell was grown in the heat-up method applying Na2S and Zn(OAc)2. With a starting precursor ratio of Cu:In:Zn = 1:20:5 for the core synthesis, after the growth of approximately one monolayer of ZnS a PLQY of 35% was reached.
Arshad et al. used metal nitrate precursors in a ratio of Cu:In = 1:4 with GSH as the ligand and obtained a maximum PLQY of 14%.93 The reaction temperature was 100 °C for varying reaction times from 6 to 20 h, leading to the formation of comparably large particles in the size range of ∼3.7–13.6 nm. A dual emission was observed at 550 nm and 750 nm, related to 2 different populations of nanocrystals.


Heat-up synthesis. 
Chen et al. carried out the synthesis of CIS nanocrystals using a one-pot approach implying sodium citrate to adjust the reactivity of In3+ ions, following the HSAB principle.90 GSH was used as the capping ligand and reducing agent of Cu2+ ions, while Na2S was the highly reactive sulfur source. A ZnS shell was subsequently grown by adding Zn(OAc)2 and thiourea. By varying the Cu:In ratio in the core synthesis, the PL emission could be tuned from 543 to 625 nm, visible after the growth of around 3 monolayers of ZnS (Fig. 9). The PL QY varied from 20 to 38% with an initial Cu:In ratio of 1:4 giving the highest value. Shelling led to an increase in the average size of the QDs from 2.1 nm to 3.8 nm.
 Fig. 9  (A) Absorbance spectra; (B) PL spectra and (C) photographs of CIS/ZnS colloidal solutions under UV light (365 nm) obtained for varying Cu:In ratios in the CIS core synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Liu et al. carried out the synthesis in a larger volume of water (125 mL) and at 10 times higher concentration than in the previous example.94 The Cu:In ratio of 1:4 was maintained, which led to a near infrared PL emission of the as-synthesized core at 777 nm. After ZnS shell growth, the emission maximum was blue-shifted to 700 nm with a PLQY of 15.9%.


Microwave approach. 
Aqueous syntheses using microwave heating are very fast compared to other methods. The high dipole moment of water induces a very efficient absorption of microwave radiation and dielectric heating. Reaction time and microwave power are two critical parameters to be adjusted to control the growth rate of the particles. Xiong et al. performed the aqueous synthesis of CIS/ZnS nanocrystals via microwave heating at 100 °C for 5 min at pH 8.5.91 Similar reactants were used as in the case of the heat-up approach described above90 except that Na2S was applied as the sulfur source during shelling. Once again the optimal PLQY (24%) was obtained for a Cu:In ratio of 1:4.

3.3 Synthesis of Cu–In–Se nanocrystals
Switching from CIS to CuInSe2 (CISe) nanocrystals enables to extend the PL emission range to the near infrared. However, the choice of appropriate Se precursors is more restricted than in the case of the sulfides, in particular for aqueous syntheses, and by consequence fewer reports have been published. In many examples mixed chalcogenide systems are studied, i.e. MIMIII(SexS2−x) nanocrystals. Table 3 summarizes the main synthesis methods reported for CISe and CI(SexS2−x) nanocrystals.
Table 3 Synthesis methods used for Cu–In–Se nanocrystals




Method
Precursors, solvents
Crystalline structure, size and shape
PL emission
PL QY
Ref.




Organic synthesis of CISe nanocrystals


Hot injection
CuCl, CuI, InI3, InCl3, (Me3Si)2Se, TOP, OA
Cubic + chalcopyrite, spherical, 2–6 nm (depending on reaction conditions)
650–975 nm
25%

17 and 96



Heat-up
CuI, InCl3, Se powder, TOP, TOOP (trioctylphosphite), HDA, ODE
Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼1.2–5.6 nm (depending on reaction time)
838–918 nm
1.9–5%

97



Heat-up
Selenourea, CuI, InCl3, TOP, OLA, ODE, DDT, Zn(EtX)2, Di-n-octylamine (DOA), Zn(Ac)2
Chalcopyrite, spherical ∼3 nm, polygonal ∼5 nm
650–1030 nm
Up to 40–50%

98



Heat-up
S powder, Se powder, CuCl, InCl3, OLA
Chalcopyrite, polygonal, ∼15–17 nm
—
—

99



Heat-up and hot injection
S powder, Se powder, CuCl, InCl3, OA, OLA ZnCl2
Cubic zinc blende, pyramidal, ∼15–17 nm
—
—

100



Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OA, ODE, tri-n-butylphosphine-Se, TOP-Se, Zn(St)2
Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼2.5–3.5 nm (depending on growth time and temperature)
600–850 nm
CISe: ∼3–4%

101



CISe/ZnS: ∼10–26%


Hot injection
Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, DDT, ODE, TBP-Se, Zn-oleate, Zn(EtX)2, TOP, OLA
Chalcopyrite and sphalerite, spherical, ∼1–3 nm
650–750 nm
Up to 40%

102



Heat-up
CuI, InI3, OLA, oleylammonium selenocarbamate
Chalcopyrite, polygonal, ∼2.5–10 nm
∼700–900 nm (for QDs ∼2.5–4 nm)
—

103



Hot injection
LiN(SiMe3)2, TOP-Se, CuCl, InCl3, TOP, Zn(Et)2
Chalcopyrite, CISe: ∼3–8 nm
750–1100 nm
CISe: 15%

104



CISe/ZnSe: 60%


Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, Se powder, TOP, OLA
Chalcopyrite, ∼2.9–6.6 nm
∼900–1030 nm
CISSe: up to 5%

105



CISSe/Cd or Zn-oleate: up to 50%


Heat-up
Cu(II) oleate, In(Ac)3, DDT, diphenyl diselenide, OLA, ODE, Woollin's reagent
Chalcopyrite or wurtzite, polygonal, CISe: (W) = 20–100 nm + 3–7 nm + 2–4 nm, (C) = 2–4 nm + 4–6 nm, CIS: (W) = 3–7 nm + 2–4 nm, (C) = 7–14 nm + 2–4 nm
—
—

106



Heat-up
CuI, In(Ac)3, Se powder, paraffin wax, OLA, DDT
Chalcopyrite, spherical, 2–10 nm (with the decrease in DDT from 2 to 0.2 mL)
665–820 nm



107



Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, Se powder
Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs, 5–5.7 nm in height
—
—

108



Hot injection
CuI, In(Ac)3, MPA, Se powder, OLA, ODE, Zn(Ac)2, diphenylphosphine (DPP)
Chalcopyrite, spherical, 4.5 nm
∼825 nm
—

109



Hot injection
Cu(Ac)2, In(Ac)3, Zn(Ac)2, ODE, DDT, OLA, Se power, S powder
Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼3 nm
545–850 nm
40–60% after ZnS shell growth

110



Cation exchange + heat-up
Cu2−x seeds: Se-OLA + DDT, Cu(acac)2-OLA + DDT, 220 °C, CISe: Cu2−x seeds at 120 °C, In(Ac)2, TOP, OLA, OCA, CISe/ZnS: CISe, Zn(Ac)2, OLA; OCA, thiourea, DMF, 250 °C
Cubic, spherical/pyramidal, Cu2−xS: 4.3–11.3 nm, CISe: 5.8–13.5 nm, CISeS/ZnS: 9–18 nm
980–1225 nm
—

111







Aqueous synthesis of CISe nanocrystals


Hydrothermal
InOH3, CuCl2, TGA, NaHSe (Se + NaBH4), NH4OH
Chalcopyrite, spherical, CISe: ∼3.6 nm, CISe/ZnS: ∼3.9 nm
612–686 nm
11.6–23.3%

112






Hot-injection approach. 
Allen and Bawendi were the first to propose the synthesis of CISe QDs, using the hot-injection method and bis(trimethylsilyl)selenide [(Me3Si)2Se] as the Se source.17 By changing the reaction conditions (injection temperature, growth temperature, concentration and nature of the metal precursors), it was possible to prepare QDs of different sizes and compositions with well-defined absorption features and modulated PL emission. In particular, cubic-phase CuIn5S8 QDs of ∼2–3.5 nm size with emission wavelengths ranging from 650 to 850 nm as well as chalcopyrite CuIn2.3Se4 QDs of 3.0–3.5 nm size with an emission up to 975 nm were obtained. The maximum PLQY was 25%. In this synthesis, high injection temperatures of 280 °C and 350 °C were used to decompose the Se-precursor. A similar synthesis was reported by Park et al. yielding QDs emitting at around 800 nm, suitable for biological in vivo imaging after ZnS shell growth and aqueous phase transfer.96 Zhong et al. used a different type of Se precursor, namely Se dissolved in tri-n-butylphosphine (TBP-Se).101 The DDT method established for CIS nanocrystals was used18,19 but with a lower reaction temperature of 180–200 °C. Fast injection of the TBP-Se precursor led to the cleavage of Cu–S and In–S bonds and formation of CISe nanocrystals. After ZnS shell growth, a PLQY of 26% was achieved for an emission of 716 nm. Panthani et al. adapted a similar method for producing quaternary CuIn(SexS2−x) nanocrystals using TBP-Se and DDT as the Se and S precursors, respectively.102 The method, implying injection of TBP-Se at 180 °C and growth at 220 °C, yielded particles in the size range of 1–3 nm. The Cu:In starting ratio was 1:1 and was also found in the resulting QDs. Also, nanocrystals grown at <200 °C contained more Se, confirming that DDT requires higher temperatures for decomposition. With increased growth time, the PL emission could be tuned from ∼650 to 750 nm after 90 min. The growth of a ZnS shell did not result in a blue-shift, indicating heteroepitaxial growth of ZnS on top of CuIn(SexS2−x), and led to a maximum PLQY of 40%.
Yarema and coworkers developed a silylamide-promoted reaction by injecting lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide (LiN(SiMe3)2) together with the Se precursor (TOP-Se) in a solution of the metal chloride precursors in TOP at 285 °C.104 Due to the formation of highly reactive metal-silylamide intermediates, nucleation occurred at a high rate, leading to small-sized nanocrystals of well-defined shape (spherical or tetrahedral), crystal structure and composition. The size of the CISe nanocrystals could be tuned over a wide range from 2.7 to 7.9 nm. After growing a thin (around one monolayer) ZnS or a ZnSe shell PLQYs up to 60% could be reached (Fig. 10). In the case of the ZnS shell a strong blue-shift of the emission was observed, contrary to the case of the ZnSe shell.
 Fig. 10  Left panel: Increase of the nanocrystal size and change of morphology as the amount of the Se-precursor is decreased in the silylamide-promoted synthesis of CISe nanocrystals. Middle panel: Dependence of the band gap energy on the particle size (Bohr exciton radius: 10.6 nm). Right panel: PL spectra and QYs of the optimized CISe core and CISe/ZnSe core/shell QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
McDaniel et al. synthesized pyramidal chalcopyrite CuInSexS2−x nanocrystals by slowly injecting a solution of OLA/DDT-Se (prepared by dissolving Se powder in the solvent mixture) at different temperatures between 180 and 210 °C into the metal precursor solution.105 By varying the Se content and hence the composition, QDs of a mean size of ∼4 nm showing different PL emission wavelengths were obtained. It was stated that the main factor influencing the composition of the QDs was the injection temperature, which should therefore be kept constant during injection. Size increase can be achieved by prolonging the reaction time from 1 to 60 min, leading to nanocrystals of ∼2.9–6.6 nm. Depending on the reaction conditions, the PL emission could be tuned over a wide range (Fig. 11). Upon surface treatment with Cd-oleate, a maximum PLQY of 50% was obtained at 990 nm.
 Fig. 11  Modulation of the optical properties of CuInSexS2−x QDs by varying the amount of Se. (A) Absorbance spectra of QDs synthesized at an injection temperature of 180 °C. (B) Corresponding PL spectra; (C) PL spectra for various injection temperatures when using 2 mmol of Se. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
More recently, Guan et al. investigated in more detail the formation of mixed chalcogenide Cu–In–Zn–S–Se (CIZSSe) QDs. The influence of using either the heat-up or the hot-injection method as well as that of the applied Cu, S and Se concentrations on the optical properties of the obtained particles was studied.80 Selenium powder and DDT were used as the chalcogenide precursors. The following observations were made: When the Cu amount was varied from 0 to 0.09 mmol in the heat-up method, the PL emission exhibited a bathochromic shift from 552 to 672 nm. The PL QY reached a maximum of 28% for 0.05 mmol of Cu used. When the Se content was varied from 1 to 3 mmol, the PL maximum shifted only from 604 to 614 nm, while the QY decreased to 20% (Fig. 12). When the S content (DDT volume) was increased, an inverse wavelength shift was observed (from 640 to 602 nm when increasing the DDT content from 1 to 3 mmol), accompanied by the increase of the PLQY to 30% for 3 mL of DDT. Concerning the influence of Zn content, it was found that the blue-shift of the PL maximum was more important with the heat-up method. This was attributed to the fact that the Zn2+ ions had more time to diffuse into the crystal structure than with the hot-injection method. The CIZSSe QDs showed the cubic zinc blende structure and essentially no difference was noted in the size and morphology of the QDs obtained with the two methods. From these observations and additional XPS studies, the authors concluded that CIZSSe QDs, contrary to the case of CIZS nanocrystals, were formed via the incorporation of copper into In–Zn–Se–S nanocrystals. Although the bulk band gap of CISe is significantly smaller than that of CIS (1.0 vs. 1.5 eV), no significant red-shift of the PL emission could be obtained in this study, presumably due to the widening of the band due to zinc incorporation into the crystal lattice.
 Fig. 12  (a) PL emission spectra of the Cu–In–Zn–S–Se core QDs synthesized with different amounts of Se. (b) XRD patterns of the obtained core QDs with broad peaks indicating the small size of the QDs in the chalcopyrite phase. (c and d) TEM images of the cores obtained with 1 mmol Se and 3 mmol Se respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Zn-containing sulfur-free CIZSe nanocrystals were synthesized by L. Zhang et al., who used Se-diphenylphosphine (DPP-Se) as the Se source.109 By varying the Cu:In ratio, the PL intensity was optimized for a fixed emission wavelength of ∼825 nm, achieved for Cu:In = 0.7:1. R. Zhang et al. prepared CIZSe/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals using Se powder in an OLA/DDT mixture as the Se source.110 It was injected at comparably low temperature (175 °C) to the metal precursor solution with the goal to prevent the decomposition of DDT, which only served as the surface ligand. By changing the Zn:Cu ratio the PL emission could be tuned from 545 to 850 nm. After the growth of a ZnS shell, the PLQY reached values of 40–60%.


Heat-up approach. 
In an early work from 2009, Nose et al. synthesized CISe nanocrystals in a one-pot heat-up approach at a high temperature of 320 °C.97 TOP-Se was used as the Se precursor and hexadecylamine (HDA) as the surface ligand. The average size of the QDs varied from ∼1.2 to 5.6 nm depending on the reaction time accompanied by a relatively weak shift of the PL peak position from 838 to 918 nm. Absorption features varying in the range of 746–838 nm with increasing size suggested quantum confinement effects. The sample emitting at 918 nm presented the highest QY of 5%. Cassette et al. used selenourea as the Se-source to synthesize CISe QDs at different temperatures and different temperature ramps (fast or slow heating).98 The PL emission could be shifted from 750 to 950 nm when the solution was rapidly heated from 140 °C to 180 °C. This shift was accompanied by an increase of the PLQY from 4 to 20%. The particles became enriched in Cu as the reaction temperature increased and for higher temperatures up to ∼250 °C sulfur was detected in the nanocrystals as a consequence of the decomposition of DDT. Upon shelling with ZnS, the PLQY could be raised up to 40–50% at 800 nm. Yang and coworkers used oleylammonium selenocarbamate as an alternative Se source.103 However, it was found challenging to control the growth of the particles at high temperatures due to the high reactivity of the Se precursor and the use of OLA as the surface ligand. Smaller particles (<10 nm) could be obtained at lower temperatures (<180 °C). Only nanocrystals <5 nm presented a weak PL emission in the ∼700–900 nm range.
Fueled by the interest of CISe nanocrystals for use as solar cell absorbers,11 several reports concern the preparation of larger sized particles, which generally do not exhibit detectable PL. As an example, Chiang et al. synthesized large (∼15–17 nm) CuIn(S1−xSex)2 nanoparticles using the metal chlorides and elemental chalcogenide precursors in OLA at 265 °C, which exhibited modulated band gap energies depending on the composition.99 The composition could be varied in the whole range (i.e. 0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and a linear increase of the lattice parameter with Se content was observed, following Végard's law (Fig. 13). By consequence, the band gap of the particles could be tuned continuously from 0.98 to 1.46 eV, revealing nonlinear behavior with a bowing parameter of 0.17 eV. A similar study was carried out by Li et al. on (ZnSe)x(CuInSe2)1−x and CuInSexS2−x nanoparticles,100 obtained by hot injection of the metal precursors at 300 °C in a solution containing Se and S precursors. While the obtained nanoparticles exhibited the same size as in the previous example, a pyramidal morphology was observed as well as a cubic zinc blende structure. It was proposed that the high reaction temperature favored the formation of this metastable cubic phase.
 Fig. 13  Left panel: XRD diffractograms of 15–17 nm CuIn(S1−xSex)2 nanoparticles in the chalcopyrite phase with varying compositions ranging from pure CIS to pure CISe. Middle panel: Linear increase of the lattice parameter with increasing Se content. Right panel: Nonlinear decrease of the band gap energy with increasing Se content. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Later Gabka et al. studied the influence of solvent on the crystalline phase of CIS and CISe nanocrystals.106 By keeping the same reaction conditions and using OLA as the solvent, wurtzite CISe and chalcopyrite CIS nanocrystals were obtained. When using ODE instead of OLA the situation was reversed, yielding chalcopyrite CISe and wurtzite CIS particles. In these syntheses, novel types of Se precursors were applied: diphenyl diselenide (DPDS) and Woollin's reagent (2,4-diphenyl-1,3,2,4-diselenadiphosphetan-2,4-diselenide).
Lox et al.47 devised a cation exchange approach where first spherical Cu2−xSe seeds of different sizes were synthesized in a heat-up method.111 During the subsequent cation exchange, TOP was used as a soft base for extracting Cu+ ions and substituting them by In3+ ions. The incorporation of In3+ led to a slight increase in size with respect to the Cu2−xSe seeds. A size range of 5.8–13.5 nm of the CISe nanoparticles crystallizing in the cubic phase was achieved. After ZnS shell growth a significant size increase was observed (9–18 nm) and the core/shell particles adopted a pyramidal shape. PL emission in the range of 980–1225 nm could be measured after shell growth.
The aqueous synthesis of CISe nanocrystals is still in its infancy and adopts methods developed for AISe nanocrystals (vide infra).112

3.4 Synthesis of CuFeS2 and CuFeSe2 nanocrystals
CuFeS2 is the mineral after which the whole class of materials is named: chalcopyrite. The iron-based compounds are not known for their outstanding photoluminescence properties, even though rare literature examples exist.61,113 Nonetheless, copper iron chalcogenides constitute low band gap semiconductors containing non-toxic, low cost and Earth abundant metals, which makes them attractive for diverse applications including solar cells, materials for plasmonic heating in hyperthermia, thermoelectricity, and as electrode materials in dye-sensitized solar cells as well as in Li-ion batteries. Table 4 summarizes the main synthesis methods for CuFeE2 (E = S, Se) nanocrystals.
Table 4 Synthesis methods for CuFeS2 and CuFeSe2 nanocrystals




Method
Precursors, solvents
Crystalline structure, size and shape
Ref.




Hot injection of metal precursors
Cu(II)-ethyldithiocarbamate, Fe(III)-ethyldithiocarbamate, S powder, TOP, OLA, OA, DCB, Cu(acac)2
Chalcopyrite, spherical or pyramidal: (Cu(acac)2, no OA), ∼12 nm (spheres), ∼30 nm (pyramidal)

114



Heat-up
Cu(OAc)2·H2O, Fe(OAc)2, S powder and octadecylamine (ODA), TOP, T: 240 °C, 280 °C or 320 °C
Cubic/isocubanite, CuFe2S3, nanobrick, 5–38 nm

115



Hot injection of Fe precursor
Cu(OAc)2, Ph2Se2, Fe(OAc)3, OA, OLA
Chalcopyrite, quasi-cubic NPs, ∼18 nm

116



Hot injection of S precursor
Cu(OAc)2, FeCl2, ODE, OA, DDT, S-OLA, Cd-oleate
Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼2.4–12 nm

61



Hot injection + NIR irradiation
Cu(acac)2, Fe(acac)3, OLA, diphenyl ether, Ph2Se2, triethylenetetramine-3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde, HAuCl4·4H2O
Chalcopyrite, spherical CFS QDs ∼6 nm, CFS@Au nanosheets ∼50 nm thick

117



Heat-up
CuAc, FeCl3, DDT, ODE
Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼6.7 nm

118



Heat-up and annealing
Li2S, glucose, ethylene glycol, Fe(OAc)3, Cu(OAc)2
Chalcopyrite, 5–10 nm

119



Heat-up
CuI, Fe(acac)3, DDT, ODE
Wurtzite (majority), chalcopyrite (minority), faceted polygonal, ∼40 nm

35



Hot injection
FeCl3·4H2O, CuCl2·H2O, OLA, DDT, Se powder
Chalcopyrite, spherical, 1–2 nm

113



Hot injection
S powder, Cu(II)-oleate, Fe(St)3, ODE, OLA
S-OLA: from chalcopyrite to cubic with increased Cu:Fe ratio, faceted polygonal NCs, 5–15 nm, S-ODE: cubic for low S-ODE amount, chalcopyrite for excess S-ODE, from small spherical NCs to big polygonal NCs, 6–20 nm

31



Heat up
CuCl, FeCl3, thiourea, OA, OLA
Chalcopyrite and high bornite, spherical to pyramidal, 1.5–9.3 nm

120



Hot injection
S powder, Cu(II)-oleate, Fe(St)3, OLA
Chalcopyrite, faceted polygonal NCs, 5–15 nm

33





Wang and coworkers synthesized spherical and pyramidal CuFeS2 NPs by using either Cu(II)-ethyldithiocarbamate in a mixture of dichlorobenzene (DCB) and oleic acid (OA) or Cu-acetylacetonate in DCB, respectively (Fig. 14).114 It was found that an excess of sulfur favored the formation of particles showing homogeneous morphology and stoichiometry. For both morphologies the X-ray diffraction data were assigned to the chalcopyrite phase of CuFeS2. The absorption spectrum of the pyramidal NPs presented a pronounced band at 550 nm while that of the spherical NPs exhibited a shoulder around 480 nm. Using the Tauc plot band gap energies of 0.52 and 0.95 eV were extracted, respectively.
 Fig. 14  (1) TEM images of CuFeS2 nanocrystals synthesized in the presence (a) or absence (b) of oleic acid. (2) Absorbance spectra of the pyramidal (a) and spherical (b) nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. 
In 2015, Lyubutin et al. prepared isocubanite CuFe2S3 nanoparticles in the size range of 5 to 38 nm by heating a mixture of Cu(OAc)2·H2O, Fe(OAc)2, S powder and octadecylamine (ODA) in TOP at different temperatures.115 The particles had a ‘nanobrick’ structure and exhibited a pronounced tendency for stacking (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  TEM (a and b) and HRTEM (c and d) images of different sized CuFe2S3 nanobricks (5 nm synthesized at 240 °C; 38 nm at 320 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Inc. 
Bhattacharyya and Pandey synthesized chalcopyrite CuFeS2 NPs of different sizes by varying the growth time at 180 °C.61 Cu(OAc)2 and FeCl2 were used as the metal precursors in ODE. S-OLA acted as the S source while OA and DDT were used as complexing agents and surface ligands. The absorption onset of the different sized nanoparticles exhibited pronounced size dependence due to the quantum confinement effect and the band gap energy could be varied in the range of 0.5–2.0 eV (Fig. 16). Upon passivation with a CdS shell, for the first time PL emission of CuFeS2 nanocrystals could be observed, with PLQY reaching values as high as 87%. The optical properties of these nanoparticles are discussed in Section 2.
 Fig. 16  (a) Absorption spectra of different sized CuFeS2 nanocrystals (decreasing size from left to right) demonstrating quantum confinement effects. (b) X-ray diffractogram indicating that the particles crystallize in the chalcopyrite phase. (c–g) TEM and HRTEM images of the obtained particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Gabka et al. synthesized plasmonic CuFeS2 nanocrystals using the hot-injection approach and studied the influence of two different sulfur precursors, S-OLA and S-ODE.31 S-ODE resulted in sulfur-deficient nanoparticles, for which charge compensation occurred by means of carboxylate ligands. While S-ODE showed a higher reactivity towards Cu(II)-oleate, S-OLA exhibited balanced reactivity leading to stoichiometric nanoparticles. For a Cu:Fe ratio of 1:1, a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) peak around 490 nm appeared when S-OLA was used or with S-ODE in excess. The LSPR peak decreased in intensity, broadened and exhibited a bathochromic shift up to 1200 nm when increasing the Cu:Fe ratio up to 6:1 (Fig. 17). The crystal phase changed from chalcopyrite to cubic as the NCs became more deficient in Fe. The synthesis could be scaled up by a factor of 20 enabling the use of the nanocrystals in thermoelectric measurements.33 The same group synthesized Cu–Fe–S nanocrystals of tunable size in the range of 1.5–9.3 nm and narrow size distribution using thiourea as the sulfur precursor in a heat-up approach at 180 °C.120
 Fig. 17  Left panel: XRD patterns of CuFeS2 nanocrystals showing the chalcopyrite phase for Fe-rich (A-1 and A-2) and the cubic phase for Fe-poor (A-3 and A-4) compositions. Right panel: Corresponding absorption spectra; the position of the LSPR peak undergoes a bathochromic shift as the nanocrystals become Fe-deficient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Girma et al. devised a very simple heat-up synthesis of CuFeS2 nanocrystals using, as in the case of CIS nanocrystals, DDT as the ligand and sulfur source.118 The reaction temperature was set to 240 °C and particles with an average size of ∼6.7 nm were obtained showing an absorption shoulder at ∼550 nm. Guo et al. synthesized 5–10 nm CuFeS2 nanocrystals in a carbon framework by mixing Fe(OAc)3 and Cu(OAc)2 in a solution containing Li2S, glucose and ethylene glycol.119 The reaction was carried out in an oven at 300 °C followed by calcination in a tube furnace at the same temperature. The obtained CuFeS2/C composites were successfully used as anode material in Li-ion batteries exhibiting high capacity and excellent cycling stability. Vaure et al. adapted the synthesis of CuInS2 nanocrystals to CuFeS2 by using DDT as the co-solvent, the surface ligand and the S source.35 In a one-pot heat-up approach at 230 °C, nanoparticles of a mean size of ∼40 nm were obtained, which exhibited the wurtzite phase, nonexistent in the bulk. The comparably large particle size as well as the high yield and simple scalability of this reaction made this approach particularly suitable for preparing CuFeS2 nanocrystals for thermoelectric studies.
Wang et al. synthesized shape-controlled CuFeSe2 nanocrystals using diphenyldiselenide (Ph2Se2) as the Se precursor in a hot-injection approach.116 The morphology of the NPs depended on the solvent used: with OLA only well-defined cubes were formed, while with increasing OA content in an OLA/OA mixture the particles became more spherical (Fig. 18). Phase-pure CuFeSe2 was obtained for a precursor ratio Cu:Fe:Se = 0.7:1.0:2.0. In the case of the 1:1:2 ratio Cu2S impurities were generated due to the higher reactivity of the Cu and Se precursors with respect to the Fe precursor.
 Fig. 18  Evolution of the morphology of CuFeSe2 with increasing concentration of oleic acid (OA) in the precursor mixture: (a) in pure oleylamine (OLA, 8.0 mL), (b) OLA (7.5 mL)/OA (0.5 mL), (c) OLA (7.0 mL)/OA (1.0 mL), and (d) in OLA (6.0 mL)/OA (2.0 mL). Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Wu et al. synthesized ultrasmall (1–2 nm) CuFeSe2 quantum dots using the metal chlorides in OLA and DDT and injecting this precursor solution obtained at 120 °C slowly into a hot solution (180 °C) of Se powder in OLA.113 The obtained QDs exhibited several features in the absorption spectrum and a PL emission peak, which shifted from 400 to 480 nm when changing the excitation wavelength from 300 to 400 nm, albeit no information about the PLQY was given.
3.5 Organic synthesis of AgInS2 (AIS) and Ag–In–Zn–S (ZAIS) nanocrystals
As in the case of Cu-based chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals, also for their Ag-based counterparts a large number of synthetic methods either in organic solvents or in water have been developed. Table 5 lists the main methods for preparing AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals in organics.
Table 5 Summary of the methods used for the synthesis of AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals in organic solvents




Method
Precursors, solvents
Crystalline structure, size and shape
PL emission
PL QY (%)
Ref.




Single-source precursor
(AgIn)[S2CN(C2H5)2]4, OLA
Cubic to orthorhombic, spherical NPs, 2.5 nm to 6 nm
620 nm
10

121



(AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4, OLA, Zn(OAc)2, thioacetamide
Tetragonal chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, 4.4 nm (no HT) – 5–6 nm (HT)
As-prepared: 525–780 nm
As-prepared: ∼20%

45 and 122–124



HT: 515–750 nm
HT: 66%


With ZnS shell: 510–740 nm
With ZnS shell: 80%


AgxIn(1−x)[S2CN(C2H5)2](3−2x), OLA, OCA, Zn(OAc)2, thioacetamide
Cubic (low Ag:In), tetragonal (medium Ag:In), orthorhombic (high Ag:In with OLA), polyhedral and spherical QDs, core: 4.3 nm (oleylamine), 3.9 nm (octylamine)
Core: 650 nm to 830 nm
Core-OLA: 40%

125



Core-OCA: 70%


Core-OCA@shell: 80%


AgDDTC, In(OAc)3, DDT, ODE, CuI, Zn(St)2, TOP
Chalcopyrite, spherical NPs, 2–3 nm
AIS: 600 nm
AIS: 30%

126



AIS/ZnS: 570 nm
AIS/ZnS: 52.6%


Cu:AIS: up to 660 nm
Cu:AIS: 20%


Cu:AIS/ZnS: 570–610 nm
Cu:AIS/ZnS: up to 56.5%


(AgIn)xZn2(1−x) (S2CN(C2H5)2)4, OLA, Zn(OAc)2, thioacetamide, TOP
Chalcopyrite, almost spherical NPs, 5.8–8.6 nm
540–710 nm
80% (TOP + ZnS, x = 0.85)

127



Ag-DDTC, In(OAc)3, Zn(St)2, Mn(OAc)2, DDT, OLA, ODE
Chalcopyrite, almost spherical, 3–5 nm
ZAIS/ZnS: 560 nm
ZAIS/ZnS: 53%

128 and 129



Mn-ZAIS/ZnS: 620–660 nm
Mn-ZAIS/ZnS: 35% to 7%


AgDDTC, In(OAc)3, Zn(OAc)2, DDT, OA, from Ag2S → AIS → ZAIS by doping
Ag2S: monoclinic spherical QDs (3.5–6.3 nm), AIS: orthorhombic and chalcopyrite, spherical (2.5–6.6 nm), ZAIS: chalcopyrite, spherical (∼6.6 nm)
Ag2S: up to 815 nm
AIS: 16%

130



AIS: 705–815 nm
ZAIS: 58%


ZAIS: 546–570 nm


Hot injection
Ag(OAc), In(OAc)3, tri-n-OCA, DDT, DDA (dodecylamine), S powder
Chalcopyrite to orthorhombic, pyramidal NPs, 2.5–4.3 nm (CH), 5.6 nm (OTH)
770–855 nm
AIS: 46%

49, 50 and 131



AIS-DDT: 63%


AgNO3, In(St)3, OA, DDT, ODE, S powder, Zn(St)2, Zn(EtX)2, DMF, toluene
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, core: 2.5 nm, core@shell: 3.5 nm
Core: 570 nm
Core: up to 22%

132



Core@shell: 520 nm
Core@shell: up to 60%


AgNO3, In(AcAc)2, An(St)2, OA, ODE, DDT, TOP
Spherical QDs, core ZAIS: 1.9–3.3 nm
ZAIS: 602–719 nm
3–31%

133 and 134



AgNO3, InCl3, OA, n-dodecylthiol, ODE, S powder, OLA, Zn(St)2
Orthorhombic, spherical QDs, AIS: 2.5–3.5 nm
AIS: 632–739 nm
AIS: 62%

135



AIZS: 510–684 nm
ZAIS: 34%


AgNO3, InCl3, OA, n-dodecylthiol, ODE, S powder, OLA, Zn(Cl)2
AIS: almost spherical QDs, 2.5–3.2 nm, AIS/ZnS: pyramidal QDs
AIS: 638 nm
AIS: 60%

136



AIS–ZnS: 548 nm
AIS/ZnS: 72%


AgNO3, In(AcAc)3, OA, OLA, DDT, ODE, S powder, Zn(St)2, TOP
Cubic, polygonal QDs, ZAIS: 3.9 nm
AIS: 590 nm
42–75%

137



ZAIS: 491–526 nm


AgNO3, In(AcAc)3, Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, S powder, Zn(St)2, OLA, OTT (1-octanethiol), OA
Cubic, spherical QDs, ∼4 nm after alloying and shelling
ZAIS: 590 nm
∼86% after alloying + shelling

138 and 139



ZAIS/ZnS: 536 nm


ZAIS/ZIS: 533 nm


ZAIS/ZIS/ZnS: 511 nm


AgNO3, In(OAc)3, OA, DDT, OLA, TOP, S powder, Zn(OAc)2
Chalcopyrite, spherical and polygonal NPs, ∼4 nm
561 nm
∼40%

140



AgNO3, InCl3, Zn(St)2, DDT, ODE, S powder
Chalcopyrite, polygonal QDs, ∼6 nm
680 nm
∼30% after ligand exchange

141 and 142



Ag(OAc), In(OAc)3, DDT, thiourea, OLA, S powder, Ga(AcAc)3, 1,3-dimethylthiourea, Zn(OAc)2, TOP
Chalcopyrite, polygonal AIS ∼6.5 nm, spherical AIS/GaSx ∼ 6.9 nm
AIS: 780 nm
AIS/ZnS: 64%

62



AIS/ZnS: 700 nm
OLA-AIS/GaSx: ∼29%


AIS/InSx: 580 nm and 710 nm
TOP-AIS/GaSx: 56%


AIS/GaSx: 600 nm and ∼750 nm


AgNO3, InCl3, DT, S powder, OLA, OCA, ODE or DCB
In-between orthorhombic AIS and hexagonal ZnS phases, spherical NPs, 5.6 to 7.2 nm
625–720 nm
67% for AIS-OLA in ODE

26



AgNO3, In(AcAc)3, OA, DDT, TOP, S powder, toluene, Zn(St)2
Spherical NPs, core: 3 nm, core@shell: no visible change
Core: 610–710 nm
Core (20 min): 2.8%

143–147



Core@shell: 929 nm
Core@shell: 6.7%


Heat-up
AgAc:In(OAc)3:Zn(OAc)2 = x:x:2(1 − x) = 0.2 mmol, thiourea, OLA, DDT
Chalcopyrite to orthorhombic as x increases from 0.1 to 1, polygonal and spherical QDs, 3.9–8.5 nm (as DDT content decreases)
520–810 nm
79% for x = 0.5 with an avg size of QDs of 5.5 nm

148–150



AgNO3, In(OAc)3, DDT, Zn(St)2, S powder
Chalcopyrite, almost spherical NPs, AIS – 2.8 nm, AIS/ZnS – 3.5 nm
AIS: 605 nm
AIS: 26%

151 and 152



AIS/ZnS: 550 nm
AIS/ZnS: 34%





Single-source precursor approach. 
Single-source precursors contain all required elements for the target compounds and can be of great interest in the case of multinary nanocrystals for levelling the reactivities of the individual constituents. For AIS-based nanocrystals, in particular diethyldithiocarbamate single-source precursors have been applied, which can be easily prepared from commercial reagents. In 2010, Feng et al. proposed the synthesis of AIS nanocrystals in the size range of 2.5–6 nm through the solvothermal decomposition of the single-source precursor (AgIn)[S2CN(C2H5)2]4, in OLA.121 By varying the reaction temperature (140–180 °C) and the reaction time (30–360 min), either cubic or orthorhombic nanocrystals were obtained whose PL varied from 620 to 750 nm, with the highest QY (10%) reached for 2.5 nm QDs emitting at 620 nm. Torimoto et al. synthesized quaternary Ag–In–Zn–S (ZAIS) quantum dots by using the corresponding Zn-containing single-source precursor dissolved in OLA at 180 °C.122 The composition of the precursor (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4 could be varied from 0 < x ≤ 1 to obtain QDs of different compositions and hence different emission wavelengths. The as-synthesized QDs were purified and redispersed in OLA for a heat treatment process between 180 and 300 °C to improve crystallinity by decreasing bulk defects. Not only an increase in size was observed during this post-synthetic process but also a blue-shift irrespective of the starting composition. By varying the composition using 0.4 ≤ x ≤ 0.9, the PL wavelength could be tuned from 525 to 780 nm (Fig. 19). The highest PLQY was reached when the composition was set at x = 0.9 (66% at 690 nm). Upon additional passivation with a ZnS shell, the PL wavelength shifted to 660 nm accompanied by an increase of the QY to 80%.
 Fig. 19  Left panel: PL spectra of ZAIS nanocrystals using the single-source precursor (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4 with x = 0.4 (a), 0.7 (b), 0.9 (c) and 1.0 (d). As-prepared nanocrystals (dotted line), after heat-treatment at 180 °C (broken line) and with an additional ZnS shell (solid line). Right panel: PLQY vs. emission maximum and composition for the three different conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Dai et al. adopted a different strategy to change the composition of the AIS nanocrystals and improve the PLQY125 by varying the Ag:In ratio in the single-source precursor (AgxIn(1−x)[S2CN(C2H5)2](3−2x)). Either OLA or octylamine (OCA) was used as the solvent and ligand. The former yielded polyhedral QDs with an average size of 4.3 nm and several crystalline phases were observed depending on the Ag:In ratio. The PL emission could be varied from 650 to 830 nm by adjusting 0.1 ≤ (Ag:In) ≤ 0.7. The use of OCA resulted in slightly smaller QDs with an average size of 3.8 nm, with a PL wavelength range of 650–775 nm. The highest QY of 70% was obtained with OCA and Ag:In = 0.37 in the nanocrystals (applied: Ag:In = 0.6). With OLA the PLQY was limited to 40% for Ag:In <0.15 (used <0.2). These results indicated that OCA passivates surface defects of the obtained AIS nanocrystals more efficiently than OLA.
In 2016, Chevallier et al.127 modified Torimoto's approach122 by first dispersing the single-source precursor in OLA and heating to 180 °C instead of first heating followed by the injection of OLA. Furthermore, the obtained nanocrystals were treated with zinc acetate and thioacetamide in OLA to grow a ZnS shell at comparably low temperature (140 °C). Finally, ligand exchange of OLA with TOP was performed. Fig. 20 shows the evolution of the PLQY as a function of the wavelength for the different methods and compositions. The wavelength of the ZAIS core nanocrystals could be varied from 540 to 710 nm and a high PLQY of up to ∼80% could be obtained upon ligand exchange with TOP.
 Fig. 20  PLQY of ZAIS nanocrystals as a function of the emission wavelength for different precursor compositions (x in (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4) and synthesis procedures. The shaded area indicates the wavelength range of interest for use as color converters in white light emitting diodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Chen et al. used commercial silver diethyldithiocarbamate (AgS2CN(C2H5)2, abbreviated AgDDTC) acting as a Ag and S source in combination with In(OAc)3 and DDT in a heat-up approach at 190–200 °C.126 The obtained AIS nanocrystals were subsequently surface-doped with Cu by exposure to a CuI/DDT mixture at the same temperature and finally capped with a ZnS shell. Doping with increasing amounts of Cu (up to 10%) led to a red-shift of the emission wavelength, from around 600 nm (pure AIS) to 660 nm (Cu:AIS), while the PL lifetime of 300–400 ns was not strongly affected. ZnS shell growth leads to a blue-shift of emission, attributed by the authors to Zn–Cu cation exchange at the nanocrystal surface, and maximum PLQYs in the range of 50–60%. Chen et al. and Zaeimian et al. applied a similar approach to dope ZAIS QDs with Mn2+, however, using a higher doping temperature of 240 °C.128,129 Increasing the doping level of Mn:ZAIS/ZnS led to a shift of the PL wavelength from around 560 nm to around 620–660 nm, albeit with decreasing PLQY (53% for undoped, 7% for the highest doping level).128


Hot-injection method. 
In 2010, Ogawa et al. synthesized AIS nanocrystals using metal-thiolate complexes as starting compounds.50 The QDs were obtained by 2 routes: (i) a heat-up method (thermal decomposition) of the Ag–In-thiolate in tri-n-octylamine (TOA) under reflux or (ii) a hot-injection approach, in which an S-ligand solution (sulfur in dodecylamine or DDT) was rapidly injected into the metal-thiolate solution at high temperature. The heat-up method gave rise to dendrite-like nanoparticles, while the hot injection method generated small QDs. The obtained nanocrystals showed NIR emission in the range of 770–855 nm with the highest QY of 46% obtained for 2.5 nm particles.131 Further passivation with DDT increased the QY of the AIS core nanocrystals to 63% without the use of an inorganic ZnS shell.49Fig. 21 shows the absorption and PL spectra of 4 different sized AIS nanocrystals obtained by the described hot-injection method.
 Fig. 21  Absorption spectra (dashed curves) and PL spectra (solid curves) of different sized AIS nanocrystals obtained by a hot-injection method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011 Elsevier B.V. 
Mao et al. synthesized AIS and ZAIS by the injection of the S-precursor in the presence of TOP into the mixture of the metal precursors at 90 °C and further heating to 210 °C.133,134 They investigated the effect of the reaction temperature and the time of reaction on the QY of the different QDs. In the case of ZAIS QDs, the best result is obtained for a reaction time of 30 min with a PL QY of ∼32% at ∼600 nm (Fig. 22). The increase in temperature and reaction time leads to a continuous blue-shift up to 30 min due to the depletion of Ag and enrichment of Zn in the nanocrystals. At the same time, the average size of the spherical QDs also increased from 1.9 to 3.3 nm. It was hypothesized that from around 30 min on a ZnS shell started to grow.
 Fig. 22  Normalized UV-vis absorption (A) and PL (B) spectra of the AIZS NCs synthesized from the one-pot reaction by heating the Ag/In/Zn/S precursor solution from 90 to 210 °C after injection of the sulfur precursor at 90 °C. The temperature increase is shown in the inset in (A) and the evolution of the QY is shown in (B). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
A change of In3+ and thiol precursors allowed Xiang et al. to synthesize AIS nanocrystals at a lower temperature of 110 °C.135 The QDs had a size of 2.5–3.5 nm and exhibited the chalcopyrite structure. The emission wavelength could be tuned from 632 to 739 nm by changing the Ag:In ratio. A maximum PLQY of 62% was obtained for a ratio of Ag:In = 1:4. This exceptionally high value for core AIS nanocrystals was attributed to the introduction of oleylamine which could improve the surface state without any heat treatment, similarly as in ref. 50. In the case of ZAIS nanocrystals, synthesized at 170 °C, the emission wavelength could be varied from 510 to 684 nm and the highest QY was 34% for an Ag:In:Zn ratio of 1:4:1. Bujak et al. studied the influence of the sulfur precursor (S/OLA or S/OCA) and solvent (ODE or DCB) on the optical properties of the ZAIS quaternary QDs (OCA: octylamine, DCB: dichlorobenzene).26 The obtained nanocrystals were In-rich for In:Zn ratios ranging from 0.25 to 0.94, demonstrating the higher reactivity of InCl3 with respect to Zn(St)2 at the reaction temperature of 180 °C. Interestingly, the Ag content in the nanocrystals was found to be related to the In:Zn ratio with the highest Ag conversion (0.17–0.19) occurring for the highest In:Zn ratios. Optimized ZAIS nanocrystals had an emission at 720 nm (∼7 nm) with a QY of 67%. In DCB and with the sulfur precursor being S + OCA, the QY was 64% at 625 nm and the nanocrystals were more Ag-deficient with an average size of ∼6 nm.
Concerning ZnS shell growth, by changing the Zn precursor from zinc stearate to more reactive zinc chloride, it was possible to decrease the reaction temperature to 150 °C and obtain AIS/ZnS nanocrystals with a PLQY up to 72% after 15 min of shell synthesis.136 Prolonged shell growth decreased the QY, accompanied by significant morphological changes of the particles. A drop in QY from 75% to 61% was also observed by Yoon et al.21 when the thickness of the ZnS shell on ZAIS nanocrystals was increased beyond a certain point.137 It is noteworthy that ZAIS nanocrystals can conserve high PLQYs during aqueous phase transfer even without the growth of an additional protecting ZnS shell. As an example, Matysiak-Brynda used mercaptoundecanoic acid, which effectively transfers ZAIS QDs into water due to the strong Ag–thiol interaction, while maintaining a PLQY of 30% (starting value around 70%).142 Uematsu et al. developed a different low temperature synthesis of AIS QDs by using thiourea as the sulfur source.62 Thiourea liberates sulfur more slowly than most other sources and the low reaction temperature (135 °C) allowed the formation of ∼4.1 nm nanocrystals. The hot-injection approach yielded nanocrystals with a PLQY reaching 64% without any further treatment. Two new shell materials have been proposed, namely amorphous III–VI semiconductor InSx and GaSx shells. While their use led to an initial decrease of the PLQY with respect to the core (29% vs. 64%), with GaSx (x = 0.8–1.5) narrow band edge emission was observed for the first time with ternary AIS nanocrystals (Fig. 23). For an emission at 585 nm, line widths as narrow as 28.6 nm in the ensemble (∼100 meV) and 24 nm (80 meV) at the single particle level were obtained (cf. Section 2). Furthermore, upon surface treatment with TOP as discussed above,127 a high PLQY of 56% could be recovered.
 Fig. 23  Optical properties of AIS core (a) and AIS/GaSx core/shell nanocrystals: (b) before and (c) after surface treatment with TOP. (d) Photographs of the samples under visible and UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 from the authors. 


Heat-up method. 
Kameyama et al. synthesized ZAIS nanocrystals in a heat-up approach at 250 °C using metal acetate precursors and thiourea in OLA containing DDT (from 0 to 8.7 vol%).148 The same kind of synthesis was later used by Sharma et al. for single-particle spectroscopy149 and by Minoshima et al. for studying the optical properties on a plasmonic chip.150 The composition of the QDs could be varied by varying the metal acetate feed ratio. The average size of the particles varied from 8.5 to 3.9 nm when increasing the DDT content from 0 to 8.7 vol % without affecting the composition, and narrow size distributions were obtained. The PL emission ranged from 520 to 810 nm with QYs reaching up to 79% without further passivation with an inorganic shell (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Top left panel: TEM images of (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 nanocrystals obtained in a heat-up approach and change of the size as a function of the DDT content used in the reaction. Top right panel: Photograph of samples of varying composition and size under UV light. Bottom panel: PLQY as a function of size, composition and emission wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
When replacing Ag(OAc) by AgNO3, it is possible to conduct the AIS syntheses at a lower temperature. As an example, Cichy et al. synthesized AIS/ZnS nanocrystals at 110–120 °C.151,152 Average sizes of ∼2.8 nm (λem = 605 nm) for AIS and ∼3.5 nm (λem = 550 nm) for AIS/ZnS were obtained with a maximum QY of 34%. Finally, AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals could also be obtained by cation exchange starting from Ag2S seeds.130 Cation exchange was carried out by injecting, at room temperature, a methanolic In(NO3)3 solution to the Ag2S nanoparticles in toluene containing DDT. In this reaction, DDT acts as an Ag+ extracting agent and enables each trivalent In3+ ion to replace every 3 Ag+ ions extracted. Depending on the reaction time either indium-doped In:Ag2S nanocrystals or AgInS2 nanocrystals were obtained. The cation exchange rate depended on the initial size of Ag2S seeds used and ranged from a few hours for small QDs (∼4 nm) to a few days for bigger ones (∼8.8 nm). There was a noticeable blue-shift of the PL emission wavelength with the increasing amount of In3+ integrated in the Ag2S seeds. For instance, starting with 4.1 nm Ag2S seeds emitting at 1200 nm, the PL peak position shifted to ∼780 nm after 5 hours of cation exchange. TEM showed that the obtained nanocrystals were monodisperse with a decrease of the average particle size after cation exchange. XRD showed that small AIS QDs adopted the tetragonal chalcopyrite phase while bigger ones crystallized in the orthorhombic phase. The emission wavelength could be tuned from 700 to 1050 nm depending on the extent of cation exchange and initial size of Ag2S QDs, while no PL QY was reported. It is also possible to start from Ag nanocrystals used as a template for generating Ag2S seeds and then carry out the cation exchange to produce AIS nanocrystals.153
In summary, all of the three main synthetic approaches highlighted (single-source precursor decomposition, hot-injection, heat-up) can yield high quality AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals. PLQYs exceeding 60–70% have been reported for the core particles, i.e. without further passivation with an inorganic shell, mainly related to specific surface ligands (e.g., TOP). Contrary to established II–VI and III–V semiconductor QDs, generally no aqueous phase transfer of AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals is performed: if they are required in aqueous medium, e.g. for biological studies, they can be advantageously directly synthesized in water without sacrificing their exceptional PL emission properties, as demonstrated in the following section.

3.6 Aqueous synthesis of AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals

Table 6 summarizes the main methods used for preparing Ag-based chalcopyrite nanocrystals in the aqueous phase.
Table 6 Synthesis methods for AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals in the aqueous phase




Method
Precursors, solvents
Crystalline structure, size and shape
PL emission
PL QY (%)
Ref.




Hot injection
Ag(OAc), In(Oac)3, GSH, NaOH, Na2S, Zn(Oac)2
Cubic (stated in the paper) but looks more chalcopyrite, AIS: ∼3 nm, ZAIS: ∼4 nm
AIS: 585–606 nm (varied Ag/In) and 560–660 nm (varied In/S)
AIS: <3%

154



ZAIS: 596 nm
ZAIS: 15%


Heat-up (AIS), hot injection (AIS/ZnS)
AgNO3, In(NO3)3, PAA (polyacrylic acid of Na salt), MAA (mercaptoacetic acid or TGA-thioglycolic acid), sodium citrate, Zn(NO3)2, Na2S
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, ZAIS: <5 nm
AIS: 595 nm
AIS: 1%

155



AIS/ZnS: 565 nm
AIS/ZnS: 20% for Ag:In = 1:4


Microwave
AgNO3, In(NO3)3, Na2S, GSH, Zn(Oac)2·2H2O, NaOH,
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, AIS: ∼2.5 nm, ZAIS: ∼3 nm
AIS: 570 nm
AIS: 14%

156 and 157



AIS/ZnS: 553 nm
AIS/ZnS: 40%


Room temperature
AgNO3, In(Oac)3, S-N2H4·H2O, multidentate polymer MDP (PAA-g-MEA), NaOH
Orthorhombic, spherical QDs, 3.9–6.3 nm (increased reaction time)
689–817 nm
∼35%

158



Room temperature
Ag-Mercaptoacetate, In-mercaptoacetate, gelatin, MAA, Na2S, Zn2+ (source not specified)
Chalcopyrite, cubic (after annealing at 200 °C), ∼4 nm
AIS: 620 nm (580 nm in gelatin)
Not reported

159



AIS/ZnS: 590 nm (570 nm in gelatin)


ZAIS: 542 nm


ZAIS/ZnS: 544 nm


Hydrothermal
AgNO3, In(OH)3, ammonium sulfide (NH4)2S, MAA = TGA, NH4OH, gelatin, ZnCl2, thiourea
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, AIS: ∼2.4 nm, AIS/ZnS: ∼2.9 nm
AIS: 561–625 nm
AIS: 3.6–11.6%

160



AIS/ZnS: 535–607 nm
AIS/ZnS: 18.4–39.1%


Room temperature
AgNO3, InCl3, Zn(CH3COO)2, Na2S, MAA, NaOH, HNO3, glycerol, Na-mercaptoacetate
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, AIS: 5–6 nm
AIS: 580–625 nm in water and up to 725 nm after HT in glycerol
AIS: 12% (Ag/In = 1:4)

161



AIS/ZnS: 30%


Hydrothermal, followed by hot injection of the shell
Ag(Oac), In(Oac)3, Zn(Oac)2, thioacetamide, L-cysteine, NaOH
Cubic AgIn5S8, 3–3.2 nm
ZAIS: 560–650 nm (Ag:In = 1:6 to 1:1)
ZAIS: 26% for Ag:In = 1:4

162



ZAIS/ZnS:
ZAIS/ZnS: 26–35%


Heat-up
AgNO3, InCl3, MAA, Na2S, NH4OH, Zn(Oac)2·2H2O + CuCl2·2H2O for ref. 163
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, 2–4 nm
AIS: 630–710 nm
AIS/ZnS: up to 47%

163–165



AIS/ZnS: up to 680 nm


Hydrothermal
AgNO3, In(NO3)3, sodium citrate, GSH, Na2S, NaOH
Chalcopyrite, spherical, 3–6 nm
575–650 nm
Up to 21.6%

166



Heat-up
AgNO3, In(Oac)3, Zn(Oac)2, Na2S, MAA, NaOH
Hexagonal (AgInZn2S4), spherical QDs, ∼3 nm
550–650 nm
Up to 41.2%

167



Heat-up
AgNO3, InCl3, Na2S, Na-citrate, NaOH, Zn(Oac)2, GSH
Not reported
600–780 nm
Up to 19%

168



Heat-up
AgNO3, InCl3, Na2S, citric acid, NH4OH, Zn(Oac)2, GSH
Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, ∼1.5–4 m
AIS: 560–660 nm
AIS: up to 32%

169



ZAIS: 520–620 nm
AIS/ZnS: up to 60%


Microwave
AgNO3, InCl3, MPA, D-Pen, Na2S, NH4OH, Zn(Oac)2·2H2O
Chalcopyrite, polygonal/pyramidal QDs, 3–5.6 nm
587–728 nm
10–66%

56






Hot injection approach. 
The aqueous synthesis of AIS and ZAIS QDs is relatively recent compared with the organic approach. In 2012, Luo et al. described the synthesis of 3–4 nm AIS and ZAIS nanocrystals by the dropwise injection of the reactive sulfur precursor, Na2S, into an aqueous solution, at pH 8–8.5, of the metal acetates and GSH at 95 °C.154 Subsequent slow injection of Zn(OAc)2 afforded quaternary ZAIS nanocrystals. The PL maximum could be modulated from 585 to 660 nm and the highest PL intensity was obtained for a starting Ag/In/S ratio of 1:10:10. It reached around 3% for AIS and 15% for ZAIS nanocrystals at 596 nm. Regulacio et al. combined the heat-up and hot-injection approach for the synthesis of 3 nm sized ZAIS nanocrystals.155 Instead of metal acetates, metal nitrate precursors were applied which are more reactive, while PAA (polyacrylic acid sodium salt) and MAA (mercaptoacetic acid) served as surface ligands. During ZnS shell growth, the reactivity of zinc nitrate was lowered by the addition of a citrate salt to form a less reactive zinc citrate complex. The emission wavelength could be tuned with the Ag:In feed ratio in the range of 525–640 nm and the highest PLQY was obtained for an Ag/In ratio of 1:4 reaching 20% at 565 nm (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  (a) PL spectra of ZAIS nanocrystals synthesized with varying Ag:In ratios. (b) Photographs of the samples under visible (top) and UV light (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Microwave approach. 
Xiong et al. synthesized AIS and AIS/ZnS nanocrystals starting from the metal nitrates and Na2S for the core and zinc acetate for the shell.156 Due to microwave heating the reaction time was as short as 5 min at 100 °C. The obtained nanocrystals had a mean size of ∼2.5 nm for AIS and ∼3 nm for AIS/ZnS and crystallized in the chalcopyrite tetragonal phase. For the AIS core nanocrystals, the highest PLQY of 14% at 570 nm was obtained for Ag:In:S:GSH = 1:5:5:20. Passivation with the ZnS shell increased the QY to 40% at 553 nm. Martynenko et al. recently adapted the metal nitrate based synthesis of AIS/ZnS nanocrystals for use with microwave heating, applying mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) as the surface ligand. The PL maximum could be varied from 587 to 728 nm with the highest QY of 66% at 638 nm.


Room temperature synthesis. 
Tan et al. developed a room temperature synthesis of AIS nanocrystals based on the use of silver nitrate, indium acetate and elemental sulfur dissolved in hydrazine hydrate, in combination with a tailor-made polymeric surface ligand (poly(acrylic acid)-graft-mercaptoethylamine).158 This bulky, multidentate ligand was the key element to adjust the reactivity of the metal and sulfur precursors. The PL wavelength could be varied from 687 to 817 nm by increasing the reaction time from 45 to 105 min, which led to a size increase of the nanocrystals from 3.9 to 6.3 nm. Importantly, high PLQYs of around 35% were achieved for all sizes even for the longest wavelengths. The obtained particles were spherical and crystallized in the orthorhombic phase (Fig. 26) and exhibited long PL lifetimes (800–850 ns).
 Fig. 26  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM micrograph, (c) X-ray diffractogram, (d) size distribution of strongly NIR-emitting AIS nanocrystals synthesized at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. 
Borkovska et al. used mercaptoacetate metal salts, Na2S as the sulfur source and MAA as a ligand to synthesize the AIS, ZAIS and the respective core/shell structures at room temperature.159 Raevskaya et al. adopted a similar synthesis and identified once again an optimum Ag:In ratio of 1:4 for achieving the highest PL intensity.161 The core QDs obtained under these conditions had a QY of 12% (625 nm) which increased to 30% after ZnS shell growth.


Hydrothermal approach. 
Kang et al. devised a large-scale synthesis of AIS and AIS/ZnS in 4 L of water.160 Ammonium sulfide was used as the sulfur precursor, which is less reactive than Na2S, in combination with indium hydroxide, silver nitrate and thioglycolic acid. Gelatin was added in order to chelate the metal precursors and balance their reactivity. By working in a pressure cooker at 120 °C (∼180 kPa), around 3 g of AIS core nanocrystals with a size of ∼2.4 nm was obtained. They were subsequently overgrown with a ZnS shell by adding zinc chloride and thiourea to reach a final size of ∼2.9 nm. The PL wavelength could be tuned in the range of 535–607 nm and for the optimized ratio of the precursors and ligands of Ag:In:S:TGA = 1:4:4:43.2 a maximum PLQY of 39% was reached. Song et al. synthesized ZAIS and ZAIS/ZnS QDs via the hydrothermal route using a similar approach but a smaller volume and thioacetamide as a medium reactive sulfur source as well as L-cysteine as a stabilizer instead of gelatin (Fig. 27).162 By increasing the Ag:In ratio, the PL wavelength could be varied from 560 to 650 nm. The size of the QDs after ZnS shell growth was 3–3.2 nm and the highest PLQY (35%) was obtained for Ag:In = 1:4.
 Fig. 27  Method for the hydrothermal synthesis of L-cysteine stabilized ZAIS and ZAIS/ZnS nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 


Heat-up approach. 
Raevskaya et al. proposed a one-pot heat-up approach for AIS nanocrystals using the metal MAA complexes in combination with Na2S as the reactive sulfur source at pH ∼ 9.164 AIS/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals were obtained by heating the core solution in the presence of Zn-MAA. One appealing feature of this type of reaction is the high PLQY on the order of 40–50% of the obtained QDs, however, at the cost of a high polydispersity. Nonetheless, the crude sample could be separated into around ten fractions by means of size-selective precipitation. The best and most stable QDs were obtained for an Ag:In:S ratio of 1:7:10 and Ag:Zn = 1:10. The particles crystallized in the tetragonal phase and had a size of 2–4 nm as well as size-dependent PL wavelengths ranging from ∼630 nm to 710 nm (Fig. 28). Copper-doped AIS/ZnS QDs were synthesized in a similar way with the goal to shift the PL wavelength to higher values.163 The highest QY of 58% at 646 nm was obtained for a reactant feed ratio of Cu:Ag:In:S = 0.2:2:7:10. Finally, the same group reported an optimized synthesis of AIS/ZnS nanocrystals resulting in a slightly increased PLQY. Citric acid was added to reduce the reactivity of the indium ions by forming an In-citrate complex and GSH was used as the surface ligand. The obtained QDs had sizes from ∼1.5 to 4 nm in the chalcopyrite phase and the PL wavelength varied from 560 to 660 nm for AIS core and from 520 to 620 nm for AIS/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals. The optimal starting composition Ag:In:S = 1:4:5 resulted in the highest QY for the core (32%) and core/shell system (60%).
 Fig. 28  (a) Top: Relative amounts of the different fractions obtained via size-selective precipitation of AIS/ZnS nanocrystals prepared by a heating up method using metal mercaptoacetates and sodium sulfide. Bottom: Photograph of the fractions under UV light. (b) PLQY of the different fractions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Liu et al. proposed a synthesis in a more concentrated solution in the presence of a Zn precursor during core preparation to obtain quaternary ZAIS nanocrystals. Less reactive In(OAc)3 was used instead of InCl3. A maximum QY of 41.2% was obtained when the reactants’ ratio was set at Ag:Zn:S:In:MPA = 1:5:20:2:75.

3.7 Aqueous and organic synthesis of Ag–In–Se nanocrystals
As in the case of the Cu-based counterparts, AISe nanocrystals allow shifting the absorption onset and PL emission to the NIR range due to their lower band gap than AIS and ZAIS. Table 7 summarizes the synthesis methods reported for AISe nanocrystals.
Table 7 Methods for the synthesis of AISe nanocrystals in organic solvents or aqueous medium




Method
Precursors, solvents
Crystal structure, size and shape
PL emission
PL QY (%)
Ref.




Hot injection
AgAc, In(OAc)3, Se pellets, OLA, TOP, myristic acid, ODE
Orthorhombic and tetragonal, almost spherical nanoparticles with size ∼7–25 nm
Not reported
Not reported

151



AgNO3, In(St)3, Se powder, S powder, OLA, ODE, OA
AgInSe2: orthorhombic phase; pear-shaped particles ∼15 × 24 nm, AgIn(S1−xSex): orthorhombic phase; pear-shaped particles with size ∼13 nm in L
Not reported



170



AgI, InI3, TOP, OLA, (Me3Si)2Se
Orthorhombic or hexagonal, spherical QDs of size ∼3 nm and ∼6 nm
625 nm (3 nm) and 650 nm (6 nm)
15% at 650 nm

171



AgNO3, In(OAc)3, Se powder, ODE, OLA, OA, DDT, S powder, Zn(St)2
Tetragonal, polygonal QDs, AgInSe2 ∼5 nm, AgInSe2/ZnS ∼6.5 nm
AgInSe2: 700–820 nm depending on the reaction conditions
AgInSe2: up to ∼8%

172



AgInSe2/ZnS: from 780 nm to 820 nm for the core synthesized at 175 °C
AgInSe2/ZnS: up to 40% depending on the Ag:In:Se:Zn ratio


AgNO3, In(OAc)3, MPA, NaOH, Zn(OAc)2, NaHSe (Se + NaBH4), DI H2O
Tetragonal, spherical QDs, AISe: 3.3 nm, AISe/ZnSe: 3.9 nm
AISe/ZnSe: 625–940 nm
AISe: up to 10% (reaction at 90 °C for Ag:In = 2:1)

173



AISe/ZnSe: 7–31%


AgNO3, InCl3, OA, OLA, cyclohexeno-1,2,3- selenadiazole
Orthorhombic, spherical particles, size > 30 nm
Not reported
Not reported

174







Heat-up
[(PPh3)2AgIn–(SeC(O)Ph)4], OLA or HDA (hexadecylamine), DDT, phenyl phosphine source route
Orthorhombic, nanorods or tadpole-shaped NPs, W: 14–17 nm; L: 50–250 nm
820 nm
Not reported

175–177



Ag2O, In(OAc)3, DDT, ODE, OLA, TBP (tributylphosphine), Se powder
Orthorhombic, from spherical QDs to pyramidal or prismatic QDs, 9 to 23 nm
From 955 to 1250 nm
Up to 21% for QDs synthesized at 190 °C for 60–150 min

178



AgNO3, InCl3, Na-citrate, GSH, Na2Se2O3, HCl, DI H2O
Tetragonal, spherical NPs to nanorods by increasing Na2Se2O3 amount, spheres: ∼5 nm, nanorods: ∼ 40 × 500 nm
Not reported
Not reported

179







Aqueous synthesis: solvothermal/hydrothermal
AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, Se powder, N2H4·H2O, DI H2O
Tetragonal, nanorods, W: 30–60 nm, L: 1–5 μm
Not reported
Not reported

180



AgNO3, In(OH)3, TGA, gelatin, NH3, Se powder, NaBH4, DI H2O, ZnO, ammonium thioglycolate, thiourea
Tetragonal, spherical, ∼3.4 nm
AISe/ZnS: 580–670 nm
10–23% depending on the Ag:In ratio

112



AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, SeO2, PVP, OA, DMF
Orthorhombic, polygonal and tadpole-shaped QDs, 70–1100 nm
Not reported
Not reported

181



SeO2, NaBH4, AgNO3, In(NO3)3, Na-citrate, GSH, MPA, TGA, DI H2O
Tetragonal, polygonal QDs
680 nm
Not reported

182 and 183





In 2003, Jin et al. described the first synthesis of AgInSe2 nanoparticles, in this case nanorods with a length of ∼1–5 μm and a diameter of ∼30–60 nm crystallizing in the chalcopyrite phase, via the hydrothermal route.180 Later, Ng et al. described a different route to synthesize AgInSe2 nanorods of 15 × 50 nm size using the single-source precursor [(PPh3)2AgIn-(SeC(O)Ph)4] in the presence of oleylamine and DDT in a heat-up approach.175 The obtained nanorods exhibited a narrow size distribution and crystallized in the orthorhombic phase. Tian et al. used the same precursor and added the sulfur analog in an attempt to synthesize AgInSxSe2−x nanoparticles, which led, however, to the formation of tadpole-shaped AISe nanoparticles.177 Allen and Bawendi were the first to synthesize AgInSe2 nanoparticles with a size below 10 nm.171 In the hot-injection approach, bis(trimethylsilyl)selenide [(Me3Si)2Se] dissolved in TOP was quickly injected into the reaction medium containing TOP, OLA, AgI and InI3 at 280 °C, followed by particle growth at 210 °C. Orthorhombic (∼3 nm, 10 min of reaction) or hexagonal (∼6 nm, 20 min of reaction) nanocrystals were obtained showing broad emission at 625 nm and 650 nm, respectively, with around 15% QY. Bai et al. synthesized ternary AgInSe2 and quaternary AgIn(S1−xSex) nanocrystals in a mixed hot-injection/heat-up approach.170 The formation of AgInSe2 nanoparticles proceeded via intermediate spherical Ag2Se nanocrystals due to the use of reactive AgNO3 in combination with comparably unreactive indium stearate and Se dissolved in oleylamine as the selenium source. Finally, pear-shaped, monodisperse AgInSe2 nanocrystals of ∼15 × 24 nm size crystallizing in the orthorhombic phase were obtained (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Formation of pear-shaped AISe nanocrystals via initially formed Ag2Se nanoparticles. TEM images of aliquots taken after 10 s (a), 5 min (b), 10 min (c), 30 min (d), 60 min (e) and 120 min (f). (g) Schematic representation of the formation mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When both S-OLA and Se-OLA were injected into the reaction medium, alloyed AgIn(S1−xSex) nanocrystals formed also adopting the orthorhombic phase. The evolution of the lattice parameter with Se/S content followed Végard's law. By varying the amount of OLA used from 0.5 mL to 10 mL, the particle size decreased from 20–50 nm to 10–20 nm and the shape changed from pear-shaped NPs to spherical NPs.
Deng et al. proposed a lower temperature synthesis of AgInSe2 nanocrystals commonly used for the preparation of AgInS2.172 By using a Se-OLA solution injected at 175 °C, ∼5 nm nanocrystals crystallizing in the tetragonal phase were obtained. By varying the Ag:In feed ratio the PL emission could be varied in the range of 700–820 nm. The highest QY of 10% was obtained for Ag:In:Se = 0.7:1.1:2 (Fig. 30). The growth of a ZnS shell led to a red shift of the emission wavelength for a Zn:In ratio of 1:1. However, a blue shift became predominant as the Zn:In ratio increased, indicating alloying and/or core compression. The PL wavelength of the AISe/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals could be varied from 780 to 820 nm. The highest QY of 40% was achieved for 6.5 nm particles, containing around 2–3 monolayers of ZnS. Aqueous phase transfer with an amphiphilic polymer resulted in a 35–50% loss of PLQY.
 Fig. 30  (a) Absorption and (b) PL spectra of AISe/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals starting from AISe cores synthesized with varying Ag:In ratios (Zn:In ratio fixed at 1:1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It is also possible to synthesize AISe nanocrystals in water: hydrothermal and hot-injection approaches have been reported. Kang et al. used a combination of both methods for preparing AISe core and AISe/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals in large quantity applying a 5 L pressure cooker.112 AgNO3 and indium thioglycolate were used as the metal precursors and gelatin as a stabilizer. The mixture obtained in 4 L of water was pre-heated before quickly injecting the Se precursor (Se powder and NaBH4 prepared under an inert atmosphere) and heating for 1 h at 120 °C (180 kPa). The obtained core AISe nanocrystals were subsequently overgrown with a ZnS shell by injecting a stock solution of Zn (Zn-TGA) and thiourea at 80 °C and maintaining the heating for 1 h. However, only a very thin ZnS layer could be deposited as the size increased only from ∼3.1 to ∼3.4 nm. When replacing AgNO3 by CuCl2 the same reaction could be used for preparing CISe and CISe/ZnS nanocrystals of ∼3.6 and ∼3.9 nm size, respectively. The PL maximum could be modulated from 580 to 670 nm for AISe/ZnS (from 612 to 686 nm for CISe/ZnS) (Fig. 31). The absorption spectra exhibited a shoulder, which shifted to lower wavelengths for decreasing Ag or Cu contents. The PL QY increased from <5% for the core QDs to 10.1–20.5% for AISe/ZnS (11.6–23.3% for CISe/ZnS). The highest PL QY was obtained when the Ag:In ratio was set to 1:2 (Cu:In ratio: 1:12).
 Fig. 31  UV-vis absorption (A and B) and PL (C and D) spectra of CISe/ZnS (A and C) and AISe/ZnS (B and D) core/shell nanocrystals synthesized in a hydrothermal approach using different Cu:In and Ag:In feed ratios. (E) Photograph of the samples under UV light. (F) Evolution of the PLQY as a function of the used metal ion ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Che et al. adapted the hot-injection method to the aqueous synthesis of AISe and AISe/ZnS.173 By swiftly injecting NaHSe prepared from Se powder and NaBH4 into a solution of AgNO3 and In(OAc)3 in the presence of MPA at 90 °C, AISe nanocrystals with an average size of 3.3 nm were obtained. Upon ZnSe shell growth by injecting a zinc acetate solution, the average size increased to 3.9 nm. The nanoparticles crystallized in the tetragonal phase and their PL emission maximum could be varied from 625 to 940 nm by varying the Ag:In ratio. A maximum PLQY of 31% was reached for Ag:In = 2:1 with an emission centered around 650 nm (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  PL spectra and PLQYs of AISe/ZnSe core/shell nanocrystals prepared in water using the hot-injection method and different Ag:In feed ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Inc. 
4. Ligand identification by NMR and comparison of NMR and XPS results
Ligands added to the reaction mixture, so called “primary” ligands, play an important role, together with precursors and solvents, in the synthesis of nanocrystals. They frequently affect the solubility of precursors, the nucleation and crystal growth processes and determine the size and shape of the resulting nanoparticles. Finally, by binding to the nanocrystal surface they assure their colloidal stability and determine their physicochemical properties.
In the case of ternary nanocrystals, primary ligands may also influence the composition of the synthesized nanocrystals (stoichiometric vs. nonstoichiometric) by differentiating the reactivities of the individual precursors and hence influencing their conversion to monomers, i.e. initially created nanocrystal building blocks. Unbalanced reactivity of the metal precursors frequently leads to a two-step growth mechanism, with the formation of binary nanocrystals in the first step and cation exchange in the second one, resulting in ternary character of the obtained nanocrystals.184–186 Balanced reactivities of precursors can be observed when the two metal precursors form common complexes with the ligand(s). In this case, the composition of the ternary nanocrystals remains essentially constant during growth. Balanced reactivities were found for reaction mixtures containing simple precursors of silver and indium or copper and indium in combination with DDT. The intermediately formed phases then decomposed directly to ternary nanocrystals.42,50 The mechanism of nucleation and crystal growth plays an important role in the determination of not only the nanocrystals’ composition but also the crystal structure and shape.
In the course of nanocrystal synthesis in complex reaction mixtures, “neutral” molecules such as ODE may undergo chemical transformation to their final forms capable of bonding to the nanocrystal surface. On the other hand, through reactions of their functional groups ligands can form new molecules, which do not bind to nanocrystals. Ligands may influence not only the surface properties of the obtained nanoparticles but also their luminescence. As an example, in the case of nonstoichiometric Ag–In–S nanocrystals the replacement of oleylamine (OLA) by octylamine (OCA) led to an increase of the luminescence quantum yield from 28% to 68% for nanoparticles of the same composition and size.125
Moreover, the type of primary ligands and their more or less labile character determine the efficiency of ligand exchange processes enabling for example the transfer of the nanocrystals to aqueous media without significant loss of their luminescence. Comprehensive understanding of the synthesized nanocrystals can only be achieved by the joint characterization of their inorganic core and their surface completed by determination of the ligands’ chemical identity. This can be done by using two complementary techniques: X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR).
XPS is the principal technique providing information not only on the inorganic core surface but also on the ligands attached to it. Based on survey and high-resolution XPS spectra, it is possible to determine the nanocrystals’ composition and the oxidation state of their constituting elements. Moreover, by deconvolution of high-resolution spectra, in favorable cases it is possible to differentiate between “surface” and “core” atoms of the same element. In one of the pioneering works on XPS use in the characterization of nanocrystals, this technique was applied to nanocrystal samples in which pyridine was used for the first time for the removal of primary ligands.187 XPS is very universal; its application allows for differentiation between alloyed and core/shell nanocrystals of similar compositions. An instructive example is given by Nam et al.21 describing CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystals with 1.0–1.5 ZnS shell monolayers. XPS analysis yielded the Zn/Cu ratio equal to 22.5 whereas EDS analysis of the same nanocrystals gave the Zn/Cu ratio six times smaller. This apparent discrepancy unequivocally indicated the core/shell nature of the nanocrystals since EDS probed the whole nanocrystal while XPS is more sensitive to the shell due to the lower measurement depth.21 In the case of core/shell Gd2O3:Eu3+/Y2O3 nanocrystals, the shell thickness could be approximated by using a simple principle of the exponential dependence of the core element-related photoelectron intensity on the shell thickness, which is expressed by I/I0 = exp(−t/d), where I/I0 is the normalized core element-related photoelectron intensity in a core/shell particle relative to that in the core counterpart, t is the shell thickness, and d is the attenuation distance of the photoelectron in the shell.188

1H NMR is a convenient method for the identification of primary ligands. In the case of hydrophobic ligands, the studied nanocrystals are being dispersed in deuterated, hydrophobic solvents (CDCl3 or C6D6), whereas for hydrophilic ligands D2O is the medium of choice. It should be however noted that simple analysis of the obtained NMR spectrum may not be sufficient for an unequivocal identification of primary ligands, especially those strongly bound to the nanocrystal surface. For example, the 1H NMR spectrum of colloidal dispersion of alloyed Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals gave no evidence of the presence of DDT as the capping ligand. However, selective dissolution of the inorganic core, followed by separation of the organic residue, led to an unequivocal identification of DDT through the analysis of the solution NMR spectrum of this residue. These difficulties in the ligand identification by NMR measurements of colloidal dispersions are caused by limited mobility of molecules forming strong bonds with the nanocrystal surface such as thiols or amines. This limited mobility strongly influences the relaxation times leading to spectral line broadening or even disappearance. Protons of the anchor group, or groups being in its close vicinity, are especially affected.41 For these reasons an appropriate strategy in the ligand identification should involve the measurement of the 1H NMR spectrum of colloidal dispersions and, additionally, the solution 1H NMR spectrum of the organic residue, recovered after dissolution of the inorganic core. In special cases the unequivocal identification can be only achieved by registering the dispersion NMR spectrum in combination with the detailed analysis of the nanocrystals’ IR spectra.189 Ligand identification by 1H NMR is based on the analysis of signals originating from protons located in close vicinity of the functional groups. In Fig. 33, chemical structures of the most popular chemical compounds (ligands among others) used in the preparation of colloidal nanocrystals, as well as products of their possible transformations, are listed. These data are completed by chemical shift values attributed to the diagnostic proton signals. It should be noted that the most popular three compounds used in the synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals, namely 1-octadecene (ODE), (Z)-1-amino-9-octadecene (oleylamine, OLA) and (9Z)-octadec-9-enoic acid (oleic acid, OA), are derivatives of the same hydrocarbon – octadecane, C18H38. This makes their identification, as well as the identification of their transformation products, more challenging.
 Fig. 33  Structures of widely used reagents (solvents, ligands) in nanocrystal synthesis and their conversion products together with the 1H NMR chemical shifts of characteristic protons. 
Two-dimensional NMR techniques provide additional information about the surface state of colloidal nanocrystals. In particular, diffusion-ordered NMR spectroscopy (DOSY) allows for the determination of the nanocrystals’ diffusion coefficient which can be used for the calculations of their hydrodynamic diameter dH.190 The use of NOESY NMR, i.e. a technique based on NOE (Nuclear Overhauser Effect), leads in many cases to an unequivocal identification of nanocrystal surface bound ligands. For this purpose, two NOESY NMR spectra have to be registered and compared: (i) the spectrum of an appropriate standard of the expected ligand, (ii) the spectrum of the dispersion of nanocrystals. A negative NOE effect indicates a large value of the correlation times, originating from the strong binding of the ligand to the nanocrystal surface.191
In Table 8 spectroscopic data from HR-XPS studies of selected nanocrystals are collected together with NMR and IR analyses of their primary ligands.
Table 8 Characterization of surface (XPS spectroscopy) and the initial ligands (NMR and IR) in the colloidal ternary nanocrystals




Material
Precursors/ligands-solvents
Surface (XPS) (eV)
Ligands (NMR, IR)
Ref.




DDT – 1-dodecanethiol, t-DDT – tert-dodecanethiol, ODE – 1-octadecene, TOPO – trioctylphosphine, TOP – trioctylphosphine, OLA – oleylamine, DCB – 1,2-dichlorobenzene, OA – oleic acid, SA – stearic acid, PTMP-PMMA – thiol-functionalized poly(methacrylic acid), TEG – triethylene glycol, PVP – polyvinylpyrrolidone.




AgInS2
AgAc, In(Ac)3, S/OLA, DDT, ODE
367.0/373.5 (Ag+), 444.5/452.1 (In3+), 161.3 and 162.2 (S2−)
—

192



AgInS2
(Ph3P)2AgIn(SCOPh)4, DDT, OA
367.4 (Ag+), 444.4 (In3+), 161.3 (S2−)
—

193



AgInS2
AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, DDT
368/374 (Ag+), 444.9/452.4 (In3+), 161.9 and 163 (S2−)
—

194



AgInS2
AgNO3, InCl3, S/OLA, DDT, ODE
368.0/374 (Ag+), 445.0/452.5 (In3+), 161.8/163.0 (S2−), 163.2/164.4 (aliphatic thiols)
OA (2.35 ppm) product of the transformation of OLA

195



AgInZnS
AgNO3, InCl3, Zn-stearate, S/OLA, DDT, ODE
368.0/374.0 (Ag+), 445.1/452.7 (In3+), 1022.2/1045.2 (Zn2+), 161.9/163.0 (S2−), 162.7/163.9 (aliphatic thiols)
SA (2.35 ppm), 1-aminooctadecane (product of the transformation of OLA)

26



AgInSe2
AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, Se, N2H4·H2O, H2O, autoclave
367.6/373.6 (Ag+), 444.4/451.7 (In3+), 53.8 (Se2−)
—

180



AgInSe2
(PPh3)2AgIn(SeC(O)Ph)4, DDT, OLA
367.17/373.16 (Ag+), 443.99/451.54 (In3+), 53.78 (Se2−)
OLA, DDT (IR)

175



CuInS2
Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, DDT, OLA
932.40/952.18 (Cu+), 445.06/452.60 (In3+), 162.20/163.15 (S2−)
—

196



CuInS2
CuI, In(OAc)3, DDT, ODE
932.3/952.3 (Cu+), 445.1/452.5 (In3+), 162.2 and 163.4 (S2−)
DDT, 2572 cm−1 (S–H)

197



CuInS2
CuCl, InCl3·4H2O, DDT, OA, ODE
932.5/952.3 (Cu+), 444.8/452.3 (In3+), 161.7/162.8 (S2−)
OA, 1550–1700 cm−1 (CO)

198



CuInS2
CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT
932.8/952.7 (Cu+), 445.3/452.9 (In3+), 162.0/163.2 (aliphatic thiols), 163.3/164.5 (S2−)
DDT, (C12H25)2S (13C NMR)

78



CuInZnS
Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT/t-DDT, TOPO, ODE
931.8/951.6 (Cu+), 444.3/451.9 (In3+), 161.3/162.4 (S2−)
—

199



CuInZnS
Cu-Oleate, InCl3, Zn-stearate, S/OLA, DDT, ODE
932.7/952.5 (Cu+), 445.0/452.4 (In3+), 1029.9/1044.9 (Zn2+), 162.1 and 163.0 (S2−)
DDT (2.52 and 1.60 ppm)

41 and 141



CuInSe2
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, Se, ethylenediamine, autoclave
942.0 (Cu+), 444.85 (In3+), 54.05 (Se2−)
Ethylenediamine, 408 and 516 cm−1

200



CuInSe2
Cu-Oleate, InCl3, Ph2Se2, OLA
931.8/951.9 (Cu+), 444.5/452.0 (In3+), 54.2 (Se2−)
—

201



CuInSe2
CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, Se ethylenediamine, TEG, PVP
931.7 (Cu+), 444.3 (In3+), 54.0 (Se2−)
—

202



CuInSe2
Cu(Ac)2·H2O, InCl3·4H2O, Se OLA
931.6/951.7 (Cu+), 444.4/451.9 (In3+), 54.05 (Se2−)
—

203



CuFeS2
Cu[S2CN(Et)2]2, Fe[S2CN(Et)2]3, S/TOP/OLA, OA, DCB
932.8/952.8 (Cu+), 710.8/723.6 (Fe3+), 163.2 (S2−)
—

114



CuFeS2
Cu-Oleate, Fe-stearate, S/OLA, ODE
932.0/952.0 (Cu+), 933.5/954.4 (Cu2+), 709.6–710.2 (Fe3+), 713.0–713.9 (Fe2+), 161.2/162.1 (S2−), 162.4 and 164.5 (aliphatic thiols) 168.8–170.5 (S(VI))
S-OLA crystal-bound (NMR)

31



CuFeS2
CuAc, FeCl3, DDT, ODE
932.9/952.7 (Cu+), 713.9/727.3 (Fe3+), 164.8/169.6 (S2−)
—

118



CuFeSe2
Cu(acac)2, Fe(acac)3, Ph2Se2, OA, OLA
932.4/952.2 (Cu+), 710.3/723.6 (Fe3+), 53.9/54.2 (Se2−)
OA, 1736 cm−1 (CO), OLA 3356 cm−1 (N–H)

116



CuFeSe2
CuCl2·2H2O, FeSO4·7H2O, Se, NaBH4, H2O, PTMP-PMMA
932.16/951.92 (Cu+), 710.54/723.05 (Fe3+), 54.72 (Se2−)
PTMP-PMMA, 1693 cm−1 (CO), 1482 cm−1 and 1586 cm−1 (COO)

204



CuFeSe2
CuCl2·2H2O, FeCl3, Se, DDT, OA, OLA
932.1/951.9 (Cu+), 933.7/953.6 (Cu2+), 711.0/724.6 (Fe3+), ∼719 and 729 and 733, 54.3 and 55.1 (Se2−)
—

205





5. Ligand exchange
Introduction of desired surface ligands at the stage of nanocrystals’ preparation is subject to several restrictions for two main reasons: (i) it usually requires the elaboration of a new synthesis method and (ii) in the harsh conditions frequently required for obtaining good quality nanocrystals these functional ligands may undergo undesired transformation or even degradation. For these reasons mainly established standard ligands as those specified earlier are usually used as components of the reaction mixture. These primary ligands are then exchanged for the target ligands in a separate process, after the purification and precipitation of the as-prepared nanocrystals. Many synthesis procedures take place in organic solvents and therefore the primary ligands are hydrophobic. On the other hand, for many purposes they have to be exchanged for hydrophilic ones, which render the resulting nanocrystals dispersable in aqueous media.
As an alternative, preparation procedures in which the primary ligands are of hydrophilic nature are being developed. There, bifunctional hydrophilic ligands are applied, which usually contain an appropriate anchor group (for example thiol-type end group) and an additional group assuring the polarity. Typical ligands of this type are 1-thioglycerol, thioglycolic acid (TGA), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), and L-cysteine (Cys). A somehow more complex yet popular ligand is glutathione (γ-glutamyl-cysteinyl-glycine) (GSH). With these ligands the nanocrystals’ synthesis can be directly carried out in aqueous solutions (cf. Section 3).6 Macromolecular-type hydrophilic ligands can also be used at the preparation stage. The preparation of hydrophilic ternary CuFeSe2 nanocrystals, tested in the photothermal therapy of cancer, can be considered as an instructive example. In this case precursors of copper and iron are introduced to the aqueous reaction mixture containing selenium and NaBH4 together with trithiol-terminated poly(methacrylic acid) (PTMP-PMAA, Mn = 6360 g mol−1), which serves as a hydrophilic ligand.204
In the case of primary ligand exchange, three types of procedures can be distinguished. First, in the exchange of hydrophobic primary ligands for hydrophobic target ligands, the resulting nanocrystals are dispersable in typical nonpolar solvents such as hexane (ε = 1.9), cyclohexane (ε = 2.0), benzene (ε = 2.3), toluene (ε = 2.4), chloroform (ε = 4.7), or dichloromethane (ε = 8.9), i.e. in solvents differing in their dielectric constant (ε) by less than one order of magnitude. Second, initial ligands are being exchanged for either low molecular mass or polymeric two- or multifunctional ligands, assuring the nanocrystals’ dispersibility in aqueous media. In these cases colloidal nanoparticles of hydrophilic surface can be transferred to water (ε = 78) or simple alcohols such as methanol (ε = 32) or ethanol (ε = 24). Third, primary ligands of anionic type can be exchanged for inorganic complex anions such as Sn2S64−, Sn2Se64−, AsS33−, or MoS42−, or simple anions like S2−, SCN−, or BF4−. Nanocrystals capped with inorganic anions can be transferred to highly polar solvents, e.g. DMF (ε = 36), DMSO (ε = 47), and FA (formamide, ε = 106).
Introduction of desired ligands via ligand exchange procedures requires the precise determination of the primary ligands’ chemical identity. This is especially important in the case of ternary and quaternary nanocrystals since in the reaction mixture used for the preparation of these nanoparticles several compounds acting as potential sources of ligands are usually present.
As already discussed in Section 4, in some nanocrystals the stabilizing ligands are attached to the nanocrystal surface through a covalent bond. In this case it is not possible to determine the nanocrystal–ligand interface. Covalent bonding of ligands frequently takes place in the associations of binary, ternary or quaternary sulfide nanocrystals with thiol-type ligands, as a consequence of redox reactions occurring during the nanoparticles’ preparation.39 Covalently bound ligands cannot be removed by simple ligand exchange procedures and the introduction of the desired ligands requires, in this case, a significant modification of the inorganic core surface composition. Another type of bonding between the nanocrystal surface and the stabilizing ligands involves the formation of a coordination bond. In these nanocrystals the interface between the inorganic core and the ligand shell can be unequivocally determined using standard techniques.
Ligands are sometimes classified as L-, X- and Z-type engaging 2, 1 and 0 electrons, respectively, in the bonding. In this classification, the nanocrystal surface is treated as a coordination system. L-type ligands are typical Lewis bases, forming bonds with surface cations. Z-type ligands are Lewis acids binding to surface anions. X-type ligands can form bonds with either cations or anions, depending on their affinity.206,207 This classification was successfully applied to a large group of nanocrystalline forms of binary semiconductors, for example CdSe, CdS, PbSe, PbS and others.38
Exchange of primary ligands for ligands of the same type (L for L′, X for X′ and Z for Z′) should in principle not involve changes in the composition of the inorganic core surface. Exchange of L for L′ (or Z for Z′) is mainly determined by the affinity of a given ligand to a surface cation (or anion). In this context, it is convenient to apply Pearson's principle of hard and soft acids and bases for estimating the affinity between surface atoms and given ligands. In the case of exchanging X for X′, acid–base equilibria can be exploited in which the ligands’ dissociation constant should be considered.
Exchanges of X ligands for L ones and vice versa are more complex. The presence of X ligands is typical of nanocrystal surfaces which are cation-rich. The introduction of L ligands must therefore involve a change in the inorganic core surface stoichiometry. In this process a fraction of surface cations have to leave the nanocrystal surface together with X. The leaving cations also bind L ligands, which for this reason have to be taken in excess. The overall process, which is presented in Fig. 34 for the example of CdS QDs, results in balancing the nanocrystal's surface new stoichiometry.38
 Fig. 34  Displacement of L-MX2 from metal chalcogenide nanocrystals promoted by exchange of X-type ligands for L-type ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Similar studies of L and X ligand exchange were carried out for ternary nanocrystals, including stoichiometric CuInS2. In particular, nanocrystals prepared from Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, and sulfur in a mixture of ODE and 1-octadecylamine were investigated. These nanocrystals were capped with L-type ligands, namely 1-octadecylamine. It turned out that these ligands desorbed from the inorganic core surface and could be replaced by thiol-type ligands. Unfortunately, this method was ineffective in the case of the exchange of 1-octadecylamine for long chain carboxylic acids.208 However, when 1-octadecylamine was replaced with oleylamine in the reaction mixture, the resulting nanocrystals exhibited an unbalanced, cation rich surface. As a result, X-type ligands were present on the surface in addition to L-type ones and could be used for the introduction of carboxylic acid ligands via ligand exchange.208
One-step procedures of ligand exchange, in which a large excess of the desired ligands is used, are rarely successful, essentially only in the cases of labile primary ligands. In the majority of cases the primary ligands are characterized by large affinities to the inorganic core surface which makes the ligand exchange process difficult. As an example, the presence of strongly bound DDT ligands on the surface of non-stoichiometric Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals impedes the one-step ligand exchange (see Section 4 for the detailed description).41 A two-step procedure is therefore necessary for the introduction of the desired ligands. In the first step, the primary ligand is being exchanged for a suitable labile ligand, which is then replaced by the target ligand. Pyridine turns out to be an effective labile ligand, not only for CdSe nanocrystals209,210 but also in the case of alloyed Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals.41,141 The use of pyridine labile ligands facilitates the introduction of simple amine ligands, e.g., n-butylamine, or hydrophilic ligands such as 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid which promotes the transfer of nanocrystals to water.141 It should be, however, remembered that replacement of the primary ligands by pyridine may involve the change of the composition of the inorganic core surface affecting the nanocrystals’ properties. In the case of alloyed Ag–In–Zn–S nanocrystals this double step ligand exchange resulted in photoluminescence quenching.41,141
Electrochemistry can be considered as a convenient tool for characterizing nanocrystal–ligand interactions, provided that appropriate probing ligands are designed. An instructive example is described below. The studies were carried out for alloyed quaternary Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals, for which four tailor-made ligands were designed and synthesized. These ligands contained the same alkyl diphenylamine segment, assuring their solubility in nonpolar solvents, but differed by the nature of the anchor group: –CAr–NH2 (L-1), –CH2NH2 (L-2), –COOH (L-3), and –SH (L-4) (Fig. 35). The redox potentials of the free ligands, indicated in Fig. 35, were determined by cyclic voltammetry. The ligands were then introduced to Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals through the above-described two-step ligand exchange procedure involving a pyridine intermediate. Finally, their redox potentials after binding to the nanocrystal surface were measured by cyclic voltammetry.41
 Fig. 35  Chemical structure of electroactive ligands introduced to Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals in a two-step procedure via labile, intermediate pyridine ligands and the oxidation potential of their functional groups vs. Ag/Ag+.41 Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
An interesting difference in the electrochemical behavior of free and nanocrystal surface-bound ligands was found for L-1 and L-2. The NH2-group of L-1 is significantly less basic than the corresponding group of L-2. This is caused by the conjugation of this functional group with the diphenylamine segment. Binding this group to the nanocrystal surface resulted in a shift of its oxidation potential towards higher values by 34 mV while the reversibility of both redox couples was retained. Binding the non-conjugated and more basic NH2-group of L-2 to the nanocrystal surface resulted in the disappearance of its oxidation peak in the corresponding voltammogram. This was interpreted as a manifestation of a strong bond with the nanocrystal surface which lowered the electron density of the amine group and impeded its oxidation. In the case of L-4, the typical oxidation of –SH to a –S–S-linkage containing dimer did not occur after binding this ligand to the nanocrystal surface.41
Although significant research efforts have been directed towards the aqueous synthesis of binary, ternary and quaternary nanocrystals capped with hydrophilic primary ligands,6 nanocrystal synthesis procedures in organic solvents are still being used in many examples of nanocrystals devoted to biomedical applications. This is essentially motivated by the frequently observed lower size distribution of nanocrystals prepared in organics and by the greater facility for the engineering of sophisticated core/shell structures leading to higher PLQY as well as chemical and photo-stability. Transfer of hydrophobic nanocrystals to water can also be achieved without the necessity of primary ligand exchange. Hydrophobic nanocrystals can be rendered hydrophilic through their encapsulation with amphiphilic copolymers. In this case the hydrophilic groups “sticking out” assure hydrophilic character of this association. This approach was successfully tested for binary nanocrystals containing toxic elements (e.g., CdSe) with the goal of inorganic core isolation from the environment, especially in in vivo experiments. Encapsulation is also used in the case of toxic metal-free binary, ternary and quaternary nanocrystals due to high luminescence stability in terms of emission colors and PLQY of such association in a wide pH range.6
As far as the transfer of nanocrystals to water is considered, ligand exchange can be considered as a simpler alternative to encapsulation. Furthermore, particular types of bio-assays relying on Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) require a close proximity of the donor and acceptor moieties,211,212 which is impeded by the comparably thick organic layer induced during encapsulation with amphiphilic polymers. In Table 9 the principal procedures elaborated for the effective exchange of hydrophobic ligands for hydrophilic ones are listed for a variety of ternary and quaternary nanocrystals. Typically, bifunctional ligands containing an anchor group and a reactive group facilitating further functionalization are being used, among them 2-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA). This is a typical approach in biomedical applications of nanocrystals since it allows for the subsequent binding of biologically active molecules or objects.6 Nonetheless, due to their single anchoring functions, these simple molecules may exhibit limited stability on the nanocrystal surface. This problem can be overcome by applying the powerful approaches developed for CdSe-based QDs, which imply the use of multidentate ligands.213
Table 9 Exchange of initial ligands for hydrophilic organic ligands in ternary, core/shell and alloyed quaternary nanocrystals, photoluminescence quantum yields (before and after ligand exchange), procedures, applications




Material
Initial ligands
QY (%)
Ligand exchange method
QY (%)
Application
Ref.




OLA – oleylamine, OA – oleic acid, SA – stearic acid, DDT – 1-dodecanethiol, TOP – trioctylphosphine, MPA – 3-mercaptopropionic acid, MUA – 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid, DMF – N,N-dimethylformamide, TMAH – tetramethylammonium hydroxide, DHLA – dihydrolipoic acid, GSH – L-glutathione.




AgInZnS
Dodecylamine
—
MPA/MeOH, KOH/water, pH = 13, rt, 30 min
47
Bioapplication, bioimaging, HCC1954 breast tumor cells

217



AgInZnS
Dodecylamine
—
MPA/EtOH, KOH/water, rt, 3 h
—
Bioapplication, bioimaging, human U87 glioblastoma cells,…

218



AgInZnS/ZnS
OLA, DDT
43
MPA/MeOH, TMAH, rt, 2 h
14
Bioapplication, bioimaging, KB cells

219



AgInZnS/ZnS
OLA
—
MPA/MeOH, TMAH, 70 °C, 4 h
—
Bioapplication, bioimaging, in vivo

220



AgInZnS
Octadecylamine SA
59
MUA, NaOH/water, 50 °C, 10 h
31
Bioapplication, human H460 cells

142



ZnAgInSe/AgInZnCdSe
OLA
—
MPA/MeOH, NaOH/water, rt, 2 h
—
Photovoltaics, water photolysis

221



CuInS2/ZnS
OA
20
MPA, NaOH, water
—
Photodetectors

222



CuInS2/ZnS
DDT
60
DHLA, 70 °C, 2 h, DMF, t-BuOK
48
Bioapplication, bioimaging, in vivo

19



CuInS2/ZnS
DDT
37
(1-Tetradecyl)trimethylammonium bromide/water, rt, 24 h
36
Bioapplication, bioimaging, HepG2 cells

223



CuInS2/ZnS
OLA
68
MPA and GSH/DMF, 130 °C, 10–15 min
34
Bioapplication, bioimaging, MCF10CA1a breast tumor cells

224



CuInS2/ZnS
OLA
72
6-Mercaptohexanol (MCH), 180 °C, 15 min
70
Light emitting diodes

215



CuInZnS
DDT
56
MUA/MeOH, TMAH, pH = 9.0, 70 °C, 30 min
50
Photocatalysis

225



CuInSe2
OLA
—
PEGn–SH, n = 6, 18, 60, 150, CHCl3, rt, 12 h
—
Photocatalysis

216



Cu–In–Se/ZnS
OLA, TOP, DDT
40
Dithiol sulfobetaine zwitterionic ligands/water
20
Bioapplication, bioimaging, in vivo

98



CuFeS2
DDT, OLA
—
CH3O–PEG–SH/MeOH, rt, 2 h
—
Photothermal therapy

226





Hydrophilic semiconductor nanocrystals find very diversified applications, which are not limited to biomedical sciences. These are photocatalysis and, more recently, electronics. The latter case is especially important since processing from aqueous dispersions makes possible the use of simple and short ligands which less perturb the electrical transport as compared to long-chain hydrophobic ligands.214 In this respect, two instructive cases are especially worth mentioning. First, replacement of OLA by hydrophilic 6-mercaptohexanol in the preparation of core/shell CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystals did not lower their luminescence quantum yield (70%). Moreover, it facilitated the fabrication process of highly efficient light emitting diodes.215 Second, capping of CuInSe2, nanocrystals with a series of PEGn-thiols (n = 6, 18, 60, 150) yielded hydrophilic nanomaterials of excellent photocatalytic properties.216 This approach opens up new perspectives for semiconductor nanocrystals’ applications.
There exist only few reports on the removal of primary hydrophobic organic ligands using purely inorganic reagents. In the case of CuInS2 nanocrystals, thiol-type DDT ligands were removed by the action of (NH4)2S. The resulting S2− capped nanocrystals could be dispersed in formamide (FA).227 Complex inorganic ligands were introduced to OLA-stabilized CuInSe2 nanocrystals, namely molecular metal chalcogenide complexes (MCCs), initially synthesized and applied to binary semiconductor nanocrystals by Kovalenko et al.228 In the case of ternary nanocrystals, three new MCCs containing the hydrazinium (N2H5+) cation were synthesized: N4H9Cu7S4, (N2H4)2(N2H5)2In2Se4 and (N2H4)x(N2H5)3(Cu2In2S3Se4).229 They were then used for replacing OLA primary ligands in CuInS2 nanocrystals. The resulting nanoparticles could be dispersed in hydrazine. Primary ligands were also exchanged for S2−, HS−, and OH− yielding dispersions stable in water.
The above described studies were performed with the goal of improving the parameters of CuInS2 and CuInSe2 based photovoltaic cells. Removal of initial organic ligands was also carried out in the preparation of nanocrystalline photocatalysts of the composition (AgInS2)0.6(ZnS)0.4. Exchange of OLA for S2− capping ions, through the action of (NH4)2S, resulted in an improvement of the photocatalytic activity.230 In the case of ternary CuFeS2 nanocrystals, potassium selenide was used for the removal of primary organic ligands35 as well as ammonium sulfide.33 Meerwein's salt (triethyloxonium tetrafluoroborate) also turned out to be very suitable for this purpose.33 These procedures of introducing inorganic capping ligands are especially important in the elaboration of nanocrystal-based thermoelectric materials.
6. Hybrids of semiconductor nanocrystals with organic electroactive molecules
Hybrids of inorganic semiconductors with organic semiconductors or organic metals as ligands have been studied for many years, mainly in view of their applications in electronics.231 A simple method of the preparation of such hybrid materials is blending inorganic nanocrystals with high molecular mass organic semiconductors. This procedure was used in a pioneering work devoted to the elaboration of a new type of photovoltaic cells in which the bulk heterojunction consisted of colloidal CdSe nanocrystals and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). It should be noted that this blend was processed from a mixture of pyridine and chloroform which facilitated the removal of primary ligands and improved the nanocrystals’ dispersibility within the polymer matrix.232 Another pioneering work in this domain of science focused on the preparation of quantum dot light emitting diodes. In this case core/shell InAs/ZnSe nanocrystals were prepared and blended with semiconducting polymers such as poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV) and poly[(9,9-dihexylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(1,4-(benzo-[2,1′,3]thiadiazole))] (F6BT).233
These blends, or more precisely nanocomposites consisting of inorganic and organic components, frequently suffered from uncontrolled aggregation of the inorganic component due to incomplete removal of primary ligands and weak interactions of the introduced nanoparticles with the polymer matrix. An obvious solution to this problem was the design of electroactive polymers containing anchor-type functions which facilitated their binding to nanocrystals. Anchor groups were introduced by copolymerization of 3-hexylthiophene with ester group functionalized thiophene, followed by post-polymerization transformation of the ester groups into carboxylic ones.234 Other methods involved the use of bifunctional molecules as nanocrystals’ capping ligands which, in addition to the anchor function, contained a reactive end group to which an electroactive molecule or a macromolecule could be grafted.235,236 In a variant of this approach, molecular recognition, via a set of hydrogen bonds between diaminopyrimidine functionalized poly(3-hexylthiophene) and mercaptothymine-capped CdSe nanocrystals, was used to significantly increase the nanocrystal–polymer interactions, leading to uniformly distributed nanocrystals in the polymer matrix.237 However, materials elaborated with the help of the above outlined concepts only showed modest performances when used in photovoltaic cells238 and were never tested as components of light emitting diodes. Finally, nanostructuration of the polymer matrix is another very promising approach for achieving nanocrystal/conjugated polymer hybrids of well-defined morphology. Examples of QD/poly(alkylthiophene) hybrids obtained with this approach employed solvent-induced formation of polymer nanofibers,239 directional epitaxial crystallization using a sacrificial substrate (e.g., 1,3,5-trichlorobenzene)240,241 or even mechanical rubbing.242
Hybrids of ternary nanocrystals were tested as components of photodetectors201,243,244 and bulk heterojunction solar cells.245–250 In this respect CuInS2 (Eg = 1.5 eV) and CuInSe2 (Eg = 1.0 eV) nanocrystals were the most extensively studied, taking into account the number of papers devoted to this subject.5
For photovoltaic applications, ternary nanocrystals, similar to binary ones, were blended with semiconducting polymers, e.g. P3HT. In all these applications detailed characterization of the nanocrystals is necessary. In particular their Eg values as well as the valence and conduction band positions (or in molecular chemistry terms HOMO and LUMO levels) have to be determined since appropriate alignment of the energy levels of all components of a given device constitutes the necessary condition for its proper functioning. Identification of surface defects of the nanocrystals is also crucial because their presence significantly influences the electronic properties of the nanomaterials studied. Electrochemical methods constitute a convenient characterization tool in this respect.11,251,252 However, the results of the electrochemical studies have to be interpreted with appropriate caution since these methods are sensitive to the presence of nanocrystals’ surface defects. This is especially important in the electrochemical studies of the quantum confinement effect.253 For this reason, appropriate interpretation of experimental data frequently requires the support of quantum chemical (DFT) calculations.254
Detailed cyclic voltammetry studies of CuInSe2 nanocrystals differing in size allowed for the determination of the positions of the conduction and valence bands (LUMO, HOMO). They also led to the identification of states located below and above these bands which corresponded to the presence of defects.255 These carefully characterized CuInSe2 nanocrystals were then blended with P3HT in different mass ratios. For low contents of nanocrystals (CuInSe2/P3HT = 1/19) electrons originating from the exciton dissociation were trapped by defect states located close to the conduction band. The transport of charge was then dominated by holes and resulted in an increase of the photocurrent in the tested device. For high contents of nanocrystals (CuInSe2/P3HT = 6/1) the typical photovoltaic effect was recorded due to the percolation of the acceptor (nanocrystals) phase. Dissociation of excitons at the polymer/nanocrystal interface resulted in the transport of holes in the polymer phase and electrons in the nanocrystalline phase (Fig. 36). Cyclic voltammetry studies carried out at different temperatures for the same sample of nanocrystals revealed the effect of temperature on the presence of surface defects, clarifying the role of annealing in the preparation of active layers in photovoltaic devices.255
 Fig. 36  Schematic diagram of the structure, energy levels, excitation, and carrier transport in the hybrid CuInSe2 nanocrystals and P3HT composite of a CuInSe2/P3HT weight ratio of 1/19 and 6/1.255 
The above described instructive examples clearly indicate the crucial role of active layer engineering by appropriately adjusting the contents of nanocrystalline and polymeric components. It should also be noted that the replacement of long chain-type nanocrystal ligands by short chain ones is advantageous. It not only diminishes the insulating effect of these ligands but also increases the volume fraction of the inorganic part transporting electrons.
In Table 10 a selection of reported hybrids of ternary nanocrystals with semiconducting polymers, prepared in the form of nanocomposites and used in photovoltaic cells or photodetectors, are compared.
Table 10 Comparison of selected examples of hybrids of ternary nanocrystals with polymers as components of photovoltaic devices and photodetectors




Materials
Size (nm)

E
gopt (eV)

E
gele (eV)

E
HOMO (eV)

E
LUMO (eV)
Device
PCE (%)
Ref.




P3HT – poly(3-hexylthiophene), PEDOT:PSS – poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonic acid), PCBM – 1-((3-methoxycarbonyl)-propyl-1-yl)-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61, MEH-PPV – poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene), PET – polyethylene terephthalate, PCDTBT – (poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl]).




AgInS2
7.2
2.4
—
—
—
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT/Al
0.47

256



CuInS2
∼3.0
—
2.30
−6.00
−3.70
ITO/QDs-PEDOT:PSS/PCBM/LiF/Al
0.07

257



CuInS2
2–4
1.74
1.80
−5.80
−4.00
ITO/QDs-MEH-PPV/CuInS2/Al
0.13

258



CuInS2
7.4
—
1.50
−5.60
−4.10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT-PCBM/Al
1.6

247



CuInS2
3–5
—
—
—
—
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-PCDTBT/Ag
2.56

250



CuInSe2
15 × 20
—
—
—
—
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT/LiF/Al
—

245



CuInSe2
3.4
1.63
1.71
−5.34
−3.63
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT/Al
0.70

255



CuInSe2
∼2.0
2.27
—
—
—
Photodetector, PET/QDs-P3HT/Au
N.A.

203



CuInSe2
∼21.3
1.03
—
—
—
Photodetector, SiO2/QDs-P3HT/Pt
N.A.

201



CuInSe2
∼15
1.03
—
—
—
Photodetector, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM:CuInSe2/Al
N.A.

244





In addition to hybrid materials in the form of nanocomposites, which were tested in bulk heterojunction photovoltaic cells, classical cells consisting of separate layers of inorganic and organic components were also fabricated. Using CuInS2257 or alloyed-type (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 nanocrystals,259 photovoltaic cells of various architecture were designed (Fig. 37). However, to date none of the fabricated bi- or multilayer devices have shown competing parameters.
 Fig. 37  Energy diagrams of the hybrid inorganic–organic solar cells composed of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuInS2/PCBM/Al (a) and ITO/ZnO/(AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2/P3HT/MoO3/Ag (b). 
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) can be considered as an interesting alternative to bulk heterojunction or multilayer ones.260 In these devices semiconductor nanocrystals can play the role of sensitizers of mesoporous photoelectrodes (e.g., TiO2, NiO, etc.), opening novel opportunities with respect to traditionally developed organometallic complexes or organic dyes.261–270 Since the QDs act as sensitizers of mesoporous photoelectrodes, the resulting quantum dot sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) offer the immense advantage that no thick nanocrystal layers are required for light harvesting. Due to the large surface-to-volume ratio and disruption of the crystalline lattice at the nanocrystal surface, achieving efficient charge transport through QD films is highly challenging.4 The main benefits of inorganic nanocrystals over organic dyes are: (i) possibility of a precise tuning of the band gap; (ii) higher extinction coefficients; (iii) higher resistance against oxygen and moisture; and (iv) possibilities of generating multiple excitons from single-photon absorption, through the impact ionization effect (or the inverse Auger process), which could push the theoretical maximum conversion efficiency of these devices as high as 44%.271–273 Ternary semiconductor nanocrystals which do not contain toxic elements are especially interesting for applications in DSSCs.274–283 In QDSSCs, surface ligands, such as mercaptophosphonic acids, for example, play predominantly the role of linker molecules assuring better organization of nanoparticles.281,284 The nanocrystalline systems used in QDSSCs, such as Cu2S–CuInS2–ZnSe for example, are rather complex and precise adjustment of the components’ energy levels is of crucial importance (Fig. 38a).274 However, the most recent papers reported on significantly simplified architectures with nonstoichiometric Zn–Cu–In–Se nanocrystals, capped with ascorbic acid. The resulting devices reached a PCE close to 14% (Fig. 38b).283
 Fig. 38  Schematic diagram of Cu2S–CuInS2–ZnSe (a) and Zn–Cu–In–Se (b) QD-sensitized solar cells with relative positions of band gap edges. 
In Table 11 the principal parameters of quantum dot-sensitized solar cells are compared for devices of various architectures and containing different types of nanocrystals.
Table 11 Comparison of principal parameters of quantum dot-sensitized solar cells containing different types of ternary nanocrystals




Photoanode
Electrolyte
Counter electrode

V
OC (mV)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.




Ru-535 bis-TBA – N719, Solaronix SA, MPA – mercaptopropionic acid, RGO – reduced graphene oxide, PEDOT:PSS – poly(styrenesulfonate)-doped poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), GH – graphene hydrogel.




TiO2/AgInS2-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Au
450
4.62
0.39
0.80

285



TiO2/AgInS2–ZnS-QDS
S2−/Sx2−
CuxS
490
8.34
0.55
2.25

286



TiO2/Cu2S–CuInS2–ZnSe-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Pt
605
10.96
0.40
2.52

274



TiO2/CuInS2-QDs/CdS/ZnS
S2−/Sx2−
CuS
560
17.0
0.45
4.20

287



TiO2/CuInS2-Mn–CdS-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
CuS
581
19.29
0.48
5.38

288



TiO2/CdS/CuInS2–CdS-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Cu2S–RGO
529
15.65
0.47
3.91

277



TiO2/CuInS2–ZnS-MPA-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Cu2S
586
20.65
0.58
7.04

279



TiO2/CuInS2-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Cu2S–RGO
501
10.10
0.47
2.38

289



TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA
I−/I3−

CuInS

2

-QDs–PEDOT:PSS
700
16.0
0.58
6.50

290



TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA
I−/I3−

CuInS

2

-QDs

750
12.08
0.70
6.35

227



TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA
I−/I3−

CuInS

2

-QDs

743
12.81
0.72
6.83

13



TiO2/CuInSe2–ZnS–MPA-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Cu2S
583
22.61
0.51
6.79

280



TiO2/CuInSe1.4S0.6-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
Cu2S
550
10.5
0.60
3.45

276



TiO2/CuInSe1.6S0.4-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
CuxS
560
16.8
0.59
5.51

278



TiO2/Zn–Cu–In–Se-QDs
S2−/Sx2−
GH–Cu2S/Ti
770
26.49
0.68
13.85

283



TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA
I−/I3−

CuFeS

2

-QDs

665
17.32
0.70
8.10

291





Core/shell nanocrystals with a ternary core frequently exhibit high luminescence quantum yields and for this reason they are frequently considered as promising components of quantum dot light emitting diodes (LEDs). In multilayer LEDs nanocrystal layers are frequently combined with layers of low- or high-molecular mass organic electroactive compounds. Independent of a given LED architecture, exchange of long chain primary ligands for simple ligands, such as 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT), is advantageous. In AgIn5S8/ZnS-based LEDs, removal of primary oleic acid (OA) ligands with simultaneous introduction of EDT ligands resulted in an increase of the efficiency from 0.023% to 1.52%.292 An even more spectacular effect was achieved for diodes based on Cu–In–S/ZnS nanocrystals. In this case the exchange of DDT, strongly bonded to the nanocrystal surface, for EDT yielded LEDs exhibiting EQE = 7.8%, a luminance of 4490 cd m−2 and a current efficiency of 8.3 cd A−1.78 Modification of the nanocrystal surface via ligand exchange plays an increasingly important role. Exchange of oleylamine (OLA) primary ligands for 6-mercaptohexanol (MSH) allowed for the transfer of MSH-capped CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystals to water with a rather negligible decrease of luminescence QY from 72.3% to 70.5%. Processing of CuInS2/ZnS nanocrystalline layers from their dispersions in typical polar solvents yielded highly efficient LEDs with a luminance approaching 8400 cd/m2, a current efficiency of 9.43 cd A−1 and EQE = 3.22%.215
Test diodes based on nanocrystalline luminophores frequently differ in their architecture. In their classical layered configuration (Fig. 39a) ITO in combination with PEDOT:PSS and Al are the most frequently used electrodes. Polymers such as poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine) (TPD) or poly(vinylcarbazole) (PVK) serve as hole transporting materials (HTMs). As an electron transporting material (ETM) ZnO is frequently used.
 Fig. 39  Energy band diagram of LED (ITO/PEDOT):PSS/(TPD or PVK)/Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnO/Al (a) and inverted LED (ITO/ZnO/CuInS2–ZnS/CBP/TCTA/MoO3/Al) structure (b). 
It is possible to design LEDs of inverse configuration, for example ITO/ZnO/QDs/CBP/TCTA/MoO3/Al, as demonstrated in Fig. 39b. In these devices, the appropriate adjustment of the LUMO energy levels of ZnO (ca. −4.0 eV) and of the nanocrystalline component is of crucial importance for the device functioning. Inverse configuration LEDs with AgIn5S8/ZnS and Cu–In–S/ZnS nanocrystals were fabricated showing an EQE of 1.52% and 7.8%, respectively.78,292
In Table 12 the parameters of diodes of different configurations, fabricated from core/shell and alloyed nanocrystals, are compared.
Table 12 Comparison of LEDs with ternary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals as electroluminophores: materials, photoluminescence emission peak position, photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), device structure, Von – the turn-on voltage, luminance and current efficiency




Materials
PL emission peak position (nm)
PLQY (%)
Device structure

V
on (V)
Luminance (cd m−2)
Current efficiency (cd A−1)
Ref.




Poly(TPD) – poly(N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)benzidine), Alq3 – tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline), EDT – 1,2-ethanedithiol, MCH – 6-mercaptohexanol, CBP – 4,4′-N,N′-dicarbazole-biphenyl, TCTA – 4,4′,4′′-tri(9-carbazoyl)triphenylamine, PEI – polyethylenimine, poly(TFB) – poly((9,9-dioctylfluorenyl-2,7-diyl)-co-(4,4′-(N-(4-s-butylphenyl))diphenyl-amine)), TPBI – 1,3,5-tris(N-phenylbenzimidazol-2-yl)benzene.




AgInZnS/ZnS
520–560
41–52
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/ZnO/Al
—
498–999
0.36–1.17

293



AgIn5S8/ZnS
585, 670
26–29
ITO/ZnO/PEI/QDs-EDT/CBP/MoOx/Au
2.5
310
2.3

292



CuInS2–ZnS/ZnSe–ZnS
553, 580, 620
40–60
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/Alq3/Ca/Al
4.4–14.3
1160–1600
0.49–0.62

294



CuInS2–ZnS/ZnS
577, 606
40–65
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/Alq3/Ca/Al
4.8–5.0
1700–2100
0.88–0.92

295



CuInS2/ZnS
560
70
ITO/ZnO/QDs-MCH/CBP/TCTA/MoO3/Al
3.7
8375
9.43

215



CuInS/ZnS
577
79–89
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TFB)/QDs/ZnO/Al
2.6–3.0
5245–8120
18.2

296



CuInS/ZnS
635
81
ITO/ZnO/QDs-EDT/TCTA/MoO3/Au
—
4490
8.3

78



CuInZnS
660
—
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(PVK or pol(TPD))/QDs/ZnO/Al
2–5
—
—

297



Cu:Zn–In–Se/ZnS
580
70–80
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/TPBI/LiF/Al
3.6
220
2.45

24



Cu:Zn–In–Se
590–673
23–38
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/ZnO/Al
—
320
0.97

298



CuInZnSSe
604, 664
20–30
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TFB)/QDs/ZnO/Al
2.9–4.0
1074–1502
0.4

80





7. Conclusions and perspectives
The reviewed ternary and quaternary chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals have emerged in the past ten years as a novel class of semiconductor nanoparticles with unique optical properties. While conventional quantum dots and recently developed metal halide perovskite nanocrystals are relying on the use of hazardous elements such as Cd and Pb,299 the title compounds offer a very appealing toxic-heavy-metal-free alternative. Physical and chemical properties are strongly dependent on their composition. For this reason two types of nanocrystals should be distinguished: (i) stoichiometric ones, in which MI:MIII = 1:1, and (ii) nonstoichiometric ones, which can be considered as solid solutions of the corresponding binary systems of common anions. Within each of these subgroups some common features can be found. For example, stoichiometric nanocrystals are generally weakly luminescent, whereas nonstoichiometric compositions show enhanced PLQYs. In particular, a MI:MIII ratio of 1:4 has been reported in many studies to yield the highest luminescence efficiency (cf. Section 3). Likewise, the addition of zinc to the reaction mixture or through post-synthetic cation exchange affording quaternary CIZS or ZAIS nanocrystals systematically led to an increase of the PLQY up to 80% for Cu0.13In0.74Zn0.59S223 as well as reduced blinking.300 Various factors were mentioned for explaining these observations, e.g., the elimination of internal trap states through the filling of vacancies or the expulsion of interstitial atoms, or the rigidification of the crystal lattice and reduced interatomic diffusion.11
Some peculiar optical properties characterizing all compounds are the broad emission line widths and large Stokes shifts (both on the order of several hundreds of meV) as well as the long PL lifetimes (several hundreds of nanoseconds). As discussed in Section 2, the self-trapped exciton model seems to best explain the different experimental observations, in particular the inherent broad PL line width and the size dependence of the PL energy.9 However, the unambiguous identification of the nature of the hole-localizing state deserves further studies. To this end, Nelson et al. showed that Ag+ and Cu+ doping of CdSe nanocrystals results in very similar spectroscopic properties, despite the large difference of the ionization energies of both dopants.301 The study revealed that photogenerated holes localize in Cu 3d orbitals with copper being formally oxidized from Cu+ to Cu2+. Ag+ is not oxidized and holes localize preferentially in the 4p orbitals of the four neighboring Se2− ions. Large excited-state nuclear reorganization is predicted involving Jahn–Teller distortion within the [MSe4] dopant cluster. Due to the great resemblance between the optical properties of Cu-doped nanocrystals and of CIS (or AIS) nanocrystals,52,58 similar effects can be expected there, leading to strong electron–phonon coupling and supporting the self-trapped exciton model. Nonetheless, native defects (e.g. M+ vacancies) cannot be ruled out to be involved in the emission process as, although they are not required, they act as preferential sites for hole localization if present.302 While for a long time no synthetic strategies were visible permitting reduction of the PL line width of these materials, a recent report of Uematsu et al. opens up new perspectives.62 By the growth of an amorphous GaSx shell on AIS nanocrystals, a narrow PL emission peak appeared (single-particle line width: 80 meV at 585 nm), which was attributed to excitonic band edge emission. Nonetheless, the generality of this observation for different sized nanocrystals showing different emission wavelengths and for other types of chalcopyrite nanocrystals remains to be demonstrated and the detailed emission mechanism understood.
As far as synthesis is concerned, those studies, in which the nucleation and growth mechanisms are elucidated, deserve particular attention. Recent investigations on the synthesis of CuInS2 nanocrystals can be considered here as an instructive example.41,42,106,208 Further investigations on precursor reactivities are needed leading to the controllable synthesis of nanocrystals of varying compositions. Relative precursor reactivities determine not only the nanocrystal composition but also the type of its surface (balanced vs. unbalanced). They also have a pronounced effect on the nature of surface ligands. Aqueous synthesis is becoming an important route for chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals, leading to similar and in some cases even superior optical properties. A prominent example is water-soluble AgInS2 nanocrystals, which exhibit PLQYs above 50–60%, placing them among the strongest emitting QDs in the aqueous phase. On the other hand, the growth of thicker protective shells on the surface of the core particles remains a challenging task in aqueous syntheses. In organic syntheses, shell growth has been successfully achieved for all types of core nanocrystals. Still the shell materials explored so far are essentially restricted to zinc sulfide. In the case of CIS nanocrystals, special precautions need to be applied to avoid alloying instead of heteroepitaxial shell growth.23,66 For other compositions (e.g., selenides), the lattice mismatch with ZnS is impeding the growth of a thicker shell without defects, calling for alternative shell materials.
Finally, it should be pointed out that this group of nanomaterials is continuously expanding as evidenced by a very recent work on the luminescence properties of CuAlS2/CdS.303 In view of the progress of this field and its potential to expand in terms of novel materials, it can be expected that the optical properties of ternary and quaternary chalcopyrite-type nanocrystals will become competitive with respect to state-of-the-art binary quantum dots. Their potential for use in a wide variety of applications has already been demonstrated in many proof-of-concept studies.5,11,304 These applications are not restricted to the exploitation of the PL properties, but can also rely on the absorption, electronic, magnetic, catalytic and thermoelectric properties of the title compounds, tunable with their size, shape, composition, doping level and surface state.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
A. P. and P. K. acknowledge the support of the National Science Center of Poland, Grant No. 2015/17/B/ST4/03837. P. K. additionally acknowledges financial support from the Project TRI-BIO-CHEM which is implemented under the Operational Program Knowledge Education Development 2014–2020 co-financed by the European Social Fund. D. M. and P. R. acknowledge funding from the French National Research Agency ANR (Grant ANR-16-CE09-0015-03 Neutrinos). P. R. further gratefully acknowledges ANR for financial support via grant FLUO (ANR-18-CE09-0039-01).
References
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. V. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Klimov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss, D. J. Milliron, P. Guyot-Sionnnest, G. Konstantatos, W. J. Parak, T. Hyeon, B. A. Korgel, C. B. Murray and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1012–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J. S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrancois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756–3776 RSC .
L. Jing, S. V. Kershaw, Y. Li, X. Huang, Y. Li, A. L. Rogach and M. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10623–10730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Reiss, M. Carrière, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10731–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibáñez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Berends, M. J. J. Mangnus, C. Xia, F. T. Rabouw and C. de Mello Donega, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1600–1616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bujak, Synth. Met., 2016, 222, 93–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sandroni, K. D. Wegner, D. Aldakov and P. Reiss, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1076–1088 CrossRef .
S. M. Wasim, C. Rincón, G. Marín and J. M. Delgado, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 94–96 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, S. Chang, D. Li, L. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Chen, B. Zou, H. Zhong and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5949–5956 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, S. S. Lo, T. Mirkovic, Y. Li, Y. Ding, Y. Li and G. D. Scholes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5253–5262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Castro, S. G. Bailey, R. P. Raffaelle, K. K. Banger and A. F. Hepp, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12429–12435 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uehara, K. Watanabe, Y. Tajiri, H. Nakamura and H. Maeda, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 134709 CrossRef PubMed .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Zhong, Y. Zhou, M. F. Ye, Y. J. He, J. P. Ye, C. He, C. H. Yang and Y. F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6434–6443 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, T. Daou, I. Texier, T. Tran, N. Liem and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2422–2429 CrossRef CAS .
D.-E. Nam, W.-S. Song and H. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 361, 491–496 CrossRef CAS .
D.-E. Nam, W.-S. Song and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18220–18226 RSC .
O. Yarema, M. Yarema, D. Bozyigit, W. M. M. Lin and V. Wood, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11134–11142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Trizio, M. Prato, A. Genovese, A. Casu, M. Povia, R. Simonutti, M. J. P. Alcocer, C. D’Andrea, F. Tassone and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2400–2406 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Lou, W. Ji, J. Zhao and X. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1204–1212 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Giedyk, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, J. Herbich, B. Golec, I. Wielgus and A. Pron, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5002–5012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bujak, Z. Wróbel, M. Penkala, K. Kotwica, A. Kmita, M. Gajewska, A. Ostrowski, P. Kowalik and A. Pron, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 1358–1370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. L. Lox, Z. Dang, M. Lê Anh, E. Hollinger and V. Lesnyak, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2873–2883 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Niezgoda, M. A. Harrison, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3294–3298 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Niezgoda, E. Yap, J. D. Keene, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3262–3269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and M. T. Swihart, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1786–1791 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, A. Ostrowski, W. Tomaszewski, W. Lisowski, J. W. Sobczak and A. Pron, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 6660–6669 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kowalik, P. Bujak, M. Penkala, K. Kotwica, A. Kmita, M. Gajewska, A. Ostrowski and A. Pron, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6246–6250 RSC .
G. Gabka, R. Zybała, P. Bujak, A. Ostrowski, M. Chmielewski, W. Lisowski, J. W. Sobczak and A. Pron, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 3150–3153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, X. Shen, Z. Zhang, X. Lu, W. Yao, J. Dai, D. Xie, L. Guo, G. Wang and X. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 301–308 RSC .
L. Vaure, Y. Liu, D. Cadavid, F. Agnese, D. Aldakov, S. Pouget, A. Cabot, P. Reiss and P. Chenevier, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 982–991 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ostovari Moghaddam, A. Shokuhfar, P. Guardia, Y. Zhang and A. Cabot, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 773, 1064–1074 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Anderson, M. P. Hendricks, J. J. Choi and J. S. Owen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18536–18548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Turo and J. E. Macdonald, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10205–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, M. Gryszel, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, G. Z. Zukowska, F. Agnese, A. Pron and P. Reiss, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12985–12988 RSC .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, M. Gryszel, K. Kotwica and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9656–9664 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gromova, A. Lefrançois, L. Vaure, F. Agnese, D. Aldakov, A. Maurice, D. Djurado, C. Lebrun, A. de Geyer, T. U. Schülli, S. Pouget and P. Reiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15748–15759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tauc, Mater. Res. Bull., 1968, 3, 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
F. Urbach, Phys. Rev., 1953, 92, 1324 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki and T. Kuzuya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1786–1792 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Shay, B. Tell, L. M. Schiavone, H. M. Kasper and F. Thiel, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1974, 9, 1719–1723 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hattori, K. Akamatsu and N. Kamegashira, J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 71, 3414–3418 CrossRef CAS .
J. Krustok, J. Raudoja, M. Krunks, H. Mändar and H. Collan, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 88, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hamanaka, K. Ozawa and T. Kuzuya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14562–14568 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogawa, T. Kuzuya, Y. Hamanaka and K. Sumiyama, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2226–2231 RSC .
T. Schmidt, K. Lischka and W. Zulehner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 8989–8994 CrossRef .
K. E. Knowles, H. D. Nelson, T. B. Kilburn and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13138–13147 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, D. Zhu, J. Zhao, M. Ikezawa, X. Wang and Y. Masumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 023118 CrossRef .
P. J. Whitham, A. Marchioro, K. E. Knowles, T. B. Kilburn, P. J. Reid and D. R. Gamelin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17136–17142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zang, H. Li, N. S. Makarov, K. A. Velizhanin, K. Wu, Y.-S. Park and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1787–1795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Martynenko, A. S. Baimuratov, F. Weigert, J. X. Soares, L. Dhamo, P. Nickl, I. Doerfel, J. Pauli, I. D. Rukhlenko, A. V. Baranov and U. Resch-Genger, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1595–1603 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stroyuk, F. Weigert, A. Raevskaya, F. Spranger, C. Würth, U. Resch-Genger, N. Gaponik and D. R. T. Zahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 2632–2641 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Knowles, K. H. Hartstein, T. B. Kilburn, A. Marchioro, H. D. Nelson, P. J. Whitham and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10820–10851 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Hughes, S. R. Ostheller, H. D. Nelson and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1318–1325 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sugathan, B. Bhattacharyya, V. V. R. Kishore, A. Kumar, G. P. Rajasekar, D. D. Sarma and A. Pandey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 696–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bhattacharyya and A. Pandey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10207–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Uematsu, K. Wajima, D. K. Sharma, S. Hirata, T. Yamamoto, T. Kameyama, M. Vacha, T. Torimoto and S. Kuwabata, NPG Asia, Materials, 2018, 10, 713–726 CAS .
S. Tamang, C. Lincheneau, Y. Hermans, S. Jeong and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2491–2506 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibanez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS .
L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10852–10887 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Berends, W. van der Stam, J. P. Hofmann, E. Bladt, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Bals and C. de Mello Donega, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2400–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, S. Tian, Y. Xie, X. Zhao and X. Gong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 509–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Xia, L. Lian, X. Fu, L. Yin, J. Zhang, W. Luo, X. Miao and D. Zhang, J. Electron. Mater., 2019, 48, 286–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Liang, J. Li, X. Xu, X. Cheng, H. Jin, D. Xu and G. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 2037–2048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, C. Xin, Z. Fang, X. Fang, J. Zhou, H. Yu, L. Li and Q. Ju, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1047, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Simi and I. V. Vanchipurackal, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 8, 203–206 Search PubMed .
V. Perner, T. Rath, F. Pirolt, O. Glatter, K. Wewerka, I. Letofsky-Papst, P. Zach, M. Hobisch, B. Kunert and G. Trimmel, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 356–363 RSC .
H. Lühmann, E. Quiroga-González, L. Kienle, V. Duppel, G. Neubüser and W. Bensch, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2019, 645, 198–206 CrossRef .
J. F. L. Lox, F. Eichler, T. Erdem, M. Adam, N. Gaponik, H. V. Demir, V. Lesnyak and A. Eychmüller, Z. Phys. Chem., 2018, 233, 23–40 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, H. Li, Z. Liu and Y.-H. Xie, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 546, 276–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, J. Ren, T. Li and Y. Wang, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 165, 273–278 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, T. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Lv, X. Liu, J. Li, H. Shen and L. S. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 447–454 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Xin, D. Yao, Y. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Liu, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, B. Yang and H. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8939–8947 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Li, Z. Liu and Y.-H. Xie, Mater. Des., 2018, 149, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guan, A. Tang, P. Lv, Z. Liu, X. Li, Z. a. Tan, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, C. Yang and F. Teng, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701389 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Li, L. Wang, T. Zhou and R.-J. Xie, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9788–9795 RSC .
M. R. Bergren, N. S. Makarov, K. Ramasamy, A. Jackson, R. Guglielmetti and H. McDaniel, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 520–525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park and S.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3745–3750 RSC .
L. Li, A. Pandey, D. J. Werder, B. P. Khanal, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1176–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, R. Hu, W.-C. Law, I. Roy, J. Zhu, L. Ye, S. Hu, X. Zhang and K.-T. Yong, Analyst, 2013, 138, 6144–6153 RSC .
S. H. Park, A. Hong, J.-H. Kim, H. Yang, K. Lee and H. S. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6764–6771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Nairn, P. J. Shapiro, B. Twamley, T. Pounds, R. von Wandruszka, T. R. Fletcher, M. Williams, C. Wang and M. G. Norton, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1218–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Buchmaier, T. Rath, F. Pirolt, A.-C. Knall, P. Kaschnitz, O. Glatter, K. Wewerka, F. Hofer, B. Kunert, K. Krenn and G. Trimmel, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 106120–106129 RSC .
S. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Qiao and X. Su, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 819–825 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. Li, L. Huang and D. Pan, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 7819–7821 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Xiong, G.-H. Yang, X.-C. Wu and J.-J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8210–8216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, J. Song, H. Wang, X. Ye, H. Wang, W. Zhang, M. Yang, R. Xia, L. Zhu and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2402–2410 RSC .
A. Arshad, R. Akram, S. Iqbal, F. Batool, B. Iqbal, B. Khalid and A. U. Khan, Arabian J. Chem., 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.arabjc.2016.10.002 .
X.-Y. Liu, G. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Li, J. Jiang, Y.-T. Long and Z. Ning, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1379–1388 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Ando, H. Enomoto and N. Murase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20190–20199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, C. Dvoracek, K. H. Lee, J. F. Galloway, H.-e. C. Bhang, M. G. Pomper and P. C. Searson, Small, 2011, 7, 3148–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nose, T. Omata and S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3455–3460 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cassette, T. Pons, C. Bouet, M. Helle, L. Bezdetnaya, F. Marchal and B. Dubertret, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6117–6124 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Y. Chiang, S.-H. Chang, C.-Y. Chen, F.-W. Yuan and H.-Y. Tuan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1592–1599 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. Zhao, Q. Liu, L. Huang, G. Wang, D. Pan, H. Zhang and X. He, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 11958–11964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, Z. Wang, E. Bovero, Z. Lu, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12396–12402 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Panthani, T. A. Khan, D. K. Reid, D. J. Hellebusch, M. R. Rasch, J. A. Maynard and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4294–4298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J.-Y. Kim, J. H. Yu, T.-Y. Ahn, H. Lee, T.-S. Choi, Y.-W. Kim, J. Joo, M. J. Ko and T. Hyeon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20517 RSC .
O. Yarema, D. Bozyigit, I. Rousseau, L. Nowack, M. Yarema, W. Heiss and V. Wood, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3753–3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McDaniel, A. Y. Koposov, S. Draguta, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16987–16994 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gabka, K. Leniarska, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, M. Donten and P. Bujak, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 162, 291–298 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, J. Zhu, Y. Xu, L. Zhou and S. Dai, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10021–10025 RSC .
W. van der Stam, M. de Graaf, S. Gudjonsdottir, J. J. Geuchies, J. J. Dijkema, N. Kirkwood, W. H. Evers, A. Longo and A. J. Houtepen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11244–11253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Pan, W. Wang, J. Du, Z. Ren, Q. Shen and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21442–21451 RSC .
R. Zhang, T. Deng, J. Wang, G. Wu, S. Li, Y. Gu and D. Deng, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 5387–5394 RSC .
J. F. L. Lox, Z. Dang, V. M. Dzhagan, D. Spittel, B. Martín-García, I. Moreels, D. R. T. Zahn and V. Lesnyak, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2607–2617 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, Y. Yang, L. Huang, Y. Tao, L. Wang and D. Pan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4482–4488 RSC .
N. Wu, Y. Li, M. Zeng, J. Gao, Y. Tang, Z. Zeng and Y. Zheng, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 271, 292–297 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. A. Wang, N. Bao and A. Gupta, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 387–390 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Lyubutin, C.-R. Lin, S. S. Starchikov, Y.-J. Siao and Y.-T. Tseng, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 221, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Jiang, T. Ding, C. Wang, J. Zuo and Q. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2235–2241 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wen, H. Li, S. He, F. Chen, E. Ding, S. Liu, B. Wang and Y. Peng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2380–2387 RSC .
W. M. Girma, S.-H. Tzing, P.-J. Tseng, C.-C. Huang, Y.-C. Ling and J.-Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4590–4602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, H. Song, Y. Liu and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31752–31762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, J. Zukrowski, D. Zabost, K. Kotwica, K. Malinowska, A. Ostrowski, I. Wielgus, W. Lisowski, J. W. Sobczak, M. Przybylski and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15091–15101 RSC .
Z. Feng, P. Dai, X. Ma, J. Zhan and Z. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013104 CrossRef .
T. Torimoto, S. Ogawa, T. Adachi, T. Kameyama, K.-i. Okazaki, T. Shibayama, A. Kudo and S. Kuwabata, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2082–2084 RSC .
T. Uematsu, A. Doko, T. Torimoto, K. Oohora, T. Hayashi and S. Kuwabata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15667–15676 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, T. Adachi, K. Okazaki, M. Sakuraoka, T. Shibayama, B. Ohtani, A. Kudo and S. Kuwabata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12388–12389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, S. Ogawa, T. Kameyama, K.-i. Okazaki, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata, Y. Tsuboi and T. Torimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12851–12858 RSC .
S. Chen, V. Demillo, M. Lu and X. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 51161–51170 RSC .
T. Chevallier, G. Le Blevennec and F. Chandezon, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7612–7620 RSC .
S. Chen, M. S. Zaeimian, J. H. S. K. Monteiro, J. Zhao, A. G. Mamalis, A. de Bettencourt-Dias and X. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 725, 1077–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Zaeimian, B. Gallian, C. Harrison, Y. Wang, J. Zhao and X. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 765, 236–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zeng, F. Chen, Z. Liu, Z. Guan, X. Li, F. Teng and A. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1307–1315 RSC .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki, K. Ozawa and T. Kuzuya, J. Lumin., 2013, 133, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Chang, G.-Q. Wang, C.-Y. Cheng, W.-X. Lin and J.-C. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10609–10618 RSC .
B. Mao, C.-H. Chuang, F. Lu, L. Sang, J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 648–656 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mao, C.-H. Chuang, C. McCleese, J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13883–13889 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiang, C. Xie, J. Wang, J. Zhong, X. Liang, H. Yang, L. Luo and Z. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 588, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Xie, J. Zhong, X. Liang and W. Xiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 648, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Yoon, J. H. Oh, M. Ko, H. Yoo and Y. R. Do, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7342–7350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ko, H. C. Yoon, H. Yoo, J. H. Oh, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1602638 CrossRef .
T. Kameyama, M. Kishi, C. Miyamae, D. K. Sharma, S. Hirata, T. Yamamoto, T. Uematsu, M. Vacha, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42844–42855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, T. Zhu, M. Deng, X. Tang, S. Han, A. Liu, Y. Bai, D. Qu, X. Huang and F. Qiu, J. Lumin., 2018, 201, 182–188 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Giedyk, K. Kotwica, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, W. Lisowski, J. W. Sobczak and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23082–23088 RSC .
E. Matysiak-Brynda, P. Bujak, E. Augustin, A. Kowalczyk, Z. Mazerska, A. Pron and A. M. Nowicka, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1286–1296 RSC .
B. Mao, C.-H. Chuang, J. Wang and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8945–8954 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ruan, Y. Zhang, M. Lu, C. Ji, C. Sun, X. Chen, H. Chen, V. Colvin and W. Yu, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 13 CrossRef .
S. P. Hong, H. K. Park, J. H. Oh, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18939–18949 RSC .
N. S. Han, H. C. Yoon, S. Jeong, J. H. Oh, S. M. Park, Y. R. Do and J. K. Song, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10285–10291 RSC .
S. Jeong, H. C. Yoon, N. S. Han, J. H. Oh, S. M. Park, B. K. Min, Y. R. Do and J. K. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3149–3155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kameyama, T. Takahashi, T. Machida, Y. Kamiya, T. Yamamoto, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24740–24749 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Sharma, S. Hirata, L. Bujak, V. Biju, T. Kameyama, M. Kishi, T. Torimoto and M. Vacha, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13687–13694 RSC .
W. Minoshima, R. Ito, T. Takiyama, T. Kameyama, T. Torimoto and K. Tawa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 367, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cichy, R. Rich, A. Olejniczak, Z. Gryczynski and W. Strek, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4151–4159 RSC .
B. Cichy, D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Samoc and W. Stręk, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 149–158 RSC .
H. Shang, Q. Di, M. Ji, B. Bai, J. Liu, W. Chen, M. Xu, H. Rong, J. Liu and J. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 13676–13680 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Huang and X. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Regulacio, K. Y. Win, S. L. Lo, S.-Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Wang, M.-Y. Han and Y. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2322 RSC .
W.-W. Xiong, G.-H. Yang, X.-C. Wu and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4160–4165 RSC .
I. A. Mir, V. S. Radhakrishanan, K. Rawat, T. Prasad and H. B. Bohidar, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 9322 CrossRef .
L. Tan, S. Liu, X. Li, I. S. Chronakis and Y. Shen, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 125, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Borkovska, A. Romanyuk, V. Strelchuk, Y. Polishchuk, V. Kladko, A. Raevskaya, O. Stroyuk and T. Kryshtab, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 37, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, L. Huang, Y. Yang and D. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7933–7940 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Raevskaya, M. V. Ivanchenko, O. L. Stroyuk, S. Y. Kuchmiy and V. F. Plyusnin, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 135 CrossRef .
J. Song, T. Jiang, T. Guo, L. Liu, H. Wang, T. Xia, W. Zhang, X. Ye, M. Yang, L. Zhu, R. Xia and X. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 1627–1633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raevskaya, O. Rozovik, A. Novikova, O. Selyshchev, O. Stroyuk, V. Dzhagan, I. Goryacheva, N. Gaponik, D. R. T. Zahn and A. Eychmüller, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 7550–7557 RSC .
A. Raevskaya, V. Lesnyak, D. Haubold, V. Dzhagan, O. Stroyuk, N. Gaponik, D. R. T. Zahn and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9032–9042 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Mazing, O. A. Korepanov, O. A. Aleksandrova and V. A. Moshnikov, Opt. Spectrosc., 2018, 125, 773–776 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, T. Chen, Y. Xu, M. Wang, W. Jiang and W. Jiang, J. Lumin., 2018, 200, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Tang, M. Deng, T. Zhu, Y. Bai, D. Qu, X. Huang and F. Qiu, J. Lumin., 2018, 202, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Kurshanov, Y. A. Gromova, S. A. Cherevkov, E. V. Ushakova, T. K. Kormilina, A. Dubavik, A. V. Fedorov and A. V. Baranov, Opt. Spectrosc., 2018, 125, 1041–1046 CrossRef CAS .
O. Stroyuk, A. Raevskaya, N. Gaponik, O. Selyshchev, V. Dzhagan, S. Schulze and D. R. T. Zahn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10267–10277 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bai, C. Li, F. Li, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Huang, C. Chen, Y. Han, Z. Shi and S. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6782–6789 RSC .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, L. Qu and Y. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7077 RSC .
D. Che, X. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Duan, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 463, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Kshirsagar and P. K. Khanna, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2854–2866 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Ng, C. B. Boothroyd and J. J. Vittal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7118–7119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Elim, W. Ji, M.-T. Ng and J. J. Vittal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 033106 CrossRef .
L. Tian, M. T. Ng, N. Venkatram, W. Ji and J. J. Vittal, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1237–1242 CrossRef CAS .
M.-A. Langevin, A. M. Ritcey and C. N. Allen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3476–3482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Oluwafemi, B. M. M. May, S. Parani and N. Tsolekile, J. Electron. Mater., 2019, 48, 3423–3427 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, K. Tang, C. An and L. Huang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 253, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Qi, L. Ji, X. Li, C. Ma, Z. Deng and J. Deng, Mater. Lett., 2015, 161, 442–446 CrossRef CAS .
P.-N. Li, A. V. Ghule and J.-Y. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Abate and J.-Y. Chang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 182, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Connor, C. M. Hsu, B. D. Weil, S. Aloni and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4962–4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kruszynska, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15976–15986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. Bloemen, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20535–20543 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. B. Katari, V. L. Colvin and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4109–4117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, T.-K. Tseng, M. Davidson and P. H. Holloway, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3113–3118 RSC .
B. von Holt, S. Kudera, A. Weiss, T. E. Schrader, L. Manna, W. J. Parak and M. Braun, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2728–2732 RSC .
Z. Hens and J. C. Martins, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1211–1221 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fritzinger, I. Moreels, P. Lommens, R. Koole, Z. Hens and J. C. Martins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3024–3032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Peng, S. Zhang, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8523–8529 RSC .
L. Tian, H. I. Elim, W. Ji and J. J. Vittal, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4276–4278,  10.1039/B607855A .
Z. Liu, K. Tang, D. Wang, L. Wang and Q. Hao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1570–1575 RSC .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Kotwica, A. Ostrowski, W. Lisowski, J. W. Sobczak and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1217–1228 RSC .
J. Guo, W.-H. Zhou, M. Li, Z.-L. Hou, J. Jiao, Z.-J. Zhou and S.-X. Wu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2012, 359, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang and E. R. Waclawik, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5612–5619 RSC .
F. Gong, S. Tian, B. Liu, D. Xiong and X. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36875–36881 RSC .
A. Singh, C. Coughlan, D. J. Milliron and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1517–1523 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Xie, J. Huang and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1456–1459 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wang, Y.-Q. Wang, F.-F. Cao, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12218–12221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Jin, X. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, H. Du and L. Cui, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 8186–8192 RSC .
W. Bi, M. Zhou, Z. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Yu and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9162–9164 RSC .
X. Jiang, S. Zhang, F. Ren, L. Chen, J. Zeng, M. Zhu, Z. Cheng, M. Gao and Z. Li, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5633–5645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Zuo, J.-S. Chen, J.-M. Song, H.-L. Niu and C.-J. Mao, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. H. Green, J. Organomet. Chem., 1995, 500, 127–148 CrossRef CAS .
J. De Roo, K. De Keukeleere, Z. Hens and I. Van Driessche, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13277–13283 RSC .
R. Dierick, F. Van den Broeck, K. De Nolf, Q. Zhao, A. Vantomme, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5950–5957 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lokteva, N. Radychev, F. Witt, H. Borchert, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12784 CrossRef CAS .
N. Radychev, I. Lokteva, F. Witt, J. Kolny-Olesiak, H. Borchert and J. Parisi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14111–14122 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Wegner and N. Hildebrandt, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4792–4834 RSC .
L. Mattera, S. Bhuckory, K. D. Wegner, X. Qiu, F. Agnese, C. Lincheneau, T. Senden, D. Djurado, L. J. Charbonniere, N. Hildebrandt and P. Reiss, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11275–11283 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C.-y. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11669–11717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Li and H. S. Teng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3656–3664 RSC .
Z. Bai, W. Ji, D. Han, L. Chen, B. Chen, H. Shen, B. Zou and H. Zhong, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1085–1091 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jana, K. N. Lawrence, M. B. Teunis, M. Mandal, A. Kumbhar and R. Sardar, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1107–1120 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lee, Y. Kim, J. Jung, M. A. Kim, N. Kim, S. J. Lee, S. K. Kim, Y.-R. Kim and J. K. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11957–11963 RSC .
P. Subramaniam, S. J. Lee, S. Shah, S. Patel, V. Starovoytov and K.-B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4014–4019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-T. Xuan, J.-Q. Liu, C.-Y. Yu, R.-J. Xie and H.-L. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ogihara, H. Yukawa, T. Kameyama, H. Nishi, D. Onoshima, T. Ishikawa, T. Torimoto and Y. Baba, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Halder, A. Ghosh, S. Parvin and S. Bhattacharyya, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
D. So and G. Konstantatos, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8424–8432 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Liu, C. Cao and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21979–21986 RSC .
C. Zhao, Z. Bai, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. Zou and H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17623–17629 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang and X. Zhong, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 4065–4072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, T. Avellini, A. Petrelli, I. Kriegel, R. Gaspari, G. Almeida, G. Bertoni, A. Cavalli, F. Scotognella, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4848–4858 CrossRef CAS .
R.-Y. Yao, Z.-J. Zhou, Z.-L. Hou, X. Wang, W.-H. Zhou and S.-X. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3143–3148 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2009, 324, 1417–1420 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Stolle, M. G. Panthani, T. B. Harvey, V. A. Akhavan and B. A. Korgel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2757–2761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Dey, A. Nag and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8276–8279 RSC .
P. Reiss, E. Couderc, J. De Girolamo and A. Pron, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 446–489 RSC .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tessler, V. Medvedev, M. Kazes, S. Kan and U. Banin, Science, 2002, 295, 1506–1508 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Aldakov, T. Jiu, M. Zagorska, R. d. Bettignies, P.-H. Jouneau, A. Pron and F. Chandezon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7497–7505 RSC .
J. De Girolamo, P. Reiss and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14681–14688 CrossRef CAS .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, J. Bleuse and A. Pron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11574–11582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. De Girolamo, P. Reiss and A. Pron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8797–8801 CrossRef CAS .
J. De Girolamo, P. Reiss, M. Zagorska, R. De Bettignies, S. Bailly, J. Y. Mevellec, S. Lefrant, J. P. Travers and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4027–4035 RSC .
T. Jiu, P. Reiss, S. Guillerez, R. de Bettignies, S. Bailly and F. Chandezon, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2010, 16, 1619–1626 CAS .
M. Brinkmann, D. Aldakov and F. Chandezon, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3819–3823 CrossRef CAS .
L. Roiban, L. Hartmann, A. Fiore, D. Djurado, F. Chandezon, P. Reiss, J. F. Legrand, S. Doyle, M. Brinkmann and O. Ersen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7212–7220 RSC .
L. Hartmann, D. Djurado, I. Florea, J.-F. Legrand, A. Fiore, P. Reiss, S. Doyle, A. Vorobiev, S. Pouget, F. Chandezon, O. Ersen and M. Brinkmann, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 6177–6186 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wang, J.-S. Hu, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17582–17589 RSC .
B. Luszczynska, M. Z. Szymanski, J. M. Verilhac, P. Reiss and D. Djurado, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3206–3212 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici, H. Hoppe, F. Schäffler, D. Meissner, M. A. Malik and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451-452, 612–618 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kruszynska, M. Knipper, J. Kolny-Olesiak, H. Borchert and J. Parisi, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7374–7377 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lefrançois, B. Luszczynska, B. Pepin-Donat, C. Lombard, B. Bouthinon, J.-M. Verilhac, M. Gromova, J. Faure-Vincent, S. Pouget, F. Chandezon, S. Sadki and P. Reiss, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7768 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Pépin-Donat, C. Ottone, C. Morell, C. Lombard, A. Lefrançois, P. Reiss, M. Leclerc and S. Sadki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20647–20660 CrossRef .
T. Rath, M. Edler, W. Haas, A. Fischereder, S. Moscher, A. Schenk, R. Trattnig, M. Sezen, G. Mauthner, A. Pein, D. Meischler, K. Bartl, R. Saf, N. Bansal, S. A. Haque, F. Hofer, E. J. W. List and G. Trimmel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1046–1050 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rath, D. Scheunemann, R. Canteri, H. Amenitsch, J. Handl, K. Wewerka, G. Kothleitner, S. Leimgruber, A.-C. Knall and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 943–952 RSC .
M. Amelia, C. Lincheneau, S. Silvi and A. Credi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5728–5743 RSC .
C. Querner, P. Reiss, S. Sadki, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3204–3209 RSC .
E. Kucur, J. Riegler, G. A. Urban and T. Nann, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 2333–2337 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Haram, A. Kshirsagar, Y. D. Gujarathi, P. P. Ingole, O. A. Nene, G. B. Markad and S. P. Nanavati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6243–6249 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Zhong, Z. Bai, B. Zou, Y. Li and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7280–7286 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guchhait and A. J. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4181–4189 CrossRef CAS .
E. Arici, N. S. Sariciftci and D. Meissner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yue, S. Han, R. Peng, W. Shen, H. Geng, F. Wu, S. Tao and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7570–7578 RSC .
E.-m. Kim, P. Ruankham, J.-h. Lee, K. Hachiya and T. Sagawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 55, 02BF06 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 186601 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778–17787 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290–2304 CrossRef .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
M. Shalom, I. Hod, Z. Tachan, S. Buhbut, S. Tirosh and A. Zaban, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1874–1878 RSC .
S. H. Im, H.-j. Kim, S. W. Kim, S.-W. Kim and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4181–4186 RSC .
Z. Pan, H. Rao, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and X. Zhong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7659–7702 RSC .
V. T. Chebrolu and H.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4911–4933 RSC .
I. Mora-Seró, S. Giménez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, R. Gómez, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1848–1857 CrossRef .
S. Buhbut, S. Itzhakov, E. Tauber, M. Shalom, I. Hod, T. Geiger, Y. Garini, D. Oron and A. Zaban, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha, D. J. Riley and J. P. Waggett, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8378–8381 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Chang, L.-F. Su, C.-H. Li, C.-C. Chang and J.-M. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4848–4850 RSC .
C.-C. Chang, J.-K. Chen, C.-P. Chen, C.-H. Yang and J.-Y. Chang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11296–11306 CrossRef CAS .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 355 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Santra, P. V. Nair, K. George Thomas and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. McDaniel, N. Fuke, N. S. Makarov, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 3887 Search PubMed .
Z. Pan, I. Mora-Seró, Q. Shen, H. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhong and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1649–1655 RSC .
D. Aldakov, M. T. Sajjad, V. Ivanova, A. K. Bansal, J. Park, P. Reiss and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19050–19060 RSC .
J. Park, M. T. Sajjad, P.-H. Jouneau, A. Ruseckas, J. Faure-Vincent, I. D. W. Samuel, P. Reiss and D. Aldakov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 827–837 RSC .
H. Zhang, W. Fang, W. Wang, N. Qian and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6927–6936 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li and X. Zhong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 796–806 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kadlag, P. Patil, M. Jagadeeswara Rao, S. Datta and A. Nag, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 3605–3612 RSC .
S. M. Kobosko, D. H. Jara and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33379–33388 CrossRef CAS .
T.-L. Li, Y.-L. Lee and H. Teng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5315–5324 RSC .
J. Luo, H. Wei, Q. Huang, X. Hu, H. Zhao, R. Yu, D. Li, Y. Luo and Q. Meng, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3881–3883 RSC .
D. H. Jara, S. J. Yoon, K. G. Stamplecoskie and P. V. Kamat, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7221–7228 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Xu, Z. Liu, S. Pang, X. Zhou, S. Dong, X. Chen and G. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6242–6246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, B. Zhou, C. Yang, S. Liao, W.-H. Zhang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11488–11491 RSC .
C. Ji, M. Lu, H. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Shen, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8187–8193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Choi, S. Kim, H. C. Yoon, M. Ko, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 953–959 RSC .
Z. Tan, Y. Zhang, C. Xie, H. Su, J. Liu, C. Zhang, N. Dellas, S. E. Mohney, Y. Wang, J. Wang and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3553–3558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Zhang, Z. a. Tan, Y. Li, C. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Bando, S. Yang and B. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2081–2088 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zaiats, S. Ikeda, S. Kinge and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30741–30745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, W. Ji, J. Zhao, W. Yang, C. Li and J. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 581–588 RSC .
D. Aldakov and P. Reiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 12527–12541 CAS .
A. Zhang, C. Dong, L. Li, J. Yin, H. Liu, X. Huang and J. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Nelson, S. O. M. Hinterding, R. Fainblat, S. E. Creutz, X. Li and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6411–6421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Nelson and D. R. Gamelin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18124–18133 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bhattacharyya, T. Pandit, G. P. Rajasekar and A. Pandey, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4451–4456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, F. Purcell-Milton and Y. K. Gun’ko, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 85 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Davina Moodelly
	Davina Moodelly obtained her engineering degree in Materials Science from the Engineering School of Rennes (ESIR) in France and continued at the University of Rennes, where she got her MSc degree in Solid-State Chemistry in 2016. She is currently doing her PhD in Inorganic Chemistry and Bioinorganic Chemistry under the supervision of Peter Reiss and Marie Carrière. Passionate about chemistry, her main interest is developing green methods to obtain highly luminescent non-toxic quantum dots with emission in the visible and infrared range ready to be used as fluorescent probes for bioimaging and in medical applications.

Patrycja Kowalik
	Patrycja Kowalik obtained her MSc degree in chemistry in 2018 from the University of Warsaw, specializing in electrochemistry and bioelectrochemistry. In the same year she started her PhD research in a joint PhD program TRI-BIO-CHEM established jointly by three research institutions: University of Warsaw, Warsaw University of Technology and Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology. Her PhD research, supervised jointly by professors Piotr Bujak of Warsaw University of Technology and Anna Nowicka of University of Warsaw, is devoted to the synthesis and surface functionalization of nontoxic semiconductor nanocrystals for biomedical applications.

Piotr Bujak
	Piotr Bujak got his MSc in chemistry from Silesian University of Technology 2004. In 2008, at the University of Silesia he defended his PhD thesis devoted to the NMR investigations of copolymers. Then he started working at the Department of Inorganic and Coordination Chemistry (University of Silesia), where he developed an effective method for the synthesis of new isoxazolines. In 2012 he accepted the position of a research associate at Warsaw University of Technology, joining the group of Professor Adam Pron, where he presently works at the associate professor position, focusing on the preparation of electroactive hybrids consisting of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals functionalized with low and high molecular mass organic semiconductors.

Adam Pron
	Adam Pron was born (1951) and educated in Poland. After obtaining his MSc in chemistry he moved to the USA where in 1980 he completed his PhD at the University of Pennsylvania (under the supervision of Alan G. MacDiarmid). Then he joined the Warsaw University of Technology where he became full professor in 1993. In 1998 he moved to Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) in Grenoble (France). In 2012 he retired from CEA and accepted full-time professorship at Warsaw University of Technology. His research interests involve preparation and characterization of organic electroactive materials and hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials.

Peter Reiss
	Peter Reiss is a researcher at CEA Grenoble, SyMMES laboratory and head of the team Synthesis, Structure and Properties of Functional Materials. He graduated in 1997 from the University of Karlsruhe (Germany), and earned his PhD in inorganic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Dieter Fenske (2000). His research activities focus on colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (“conventional” and metal halide perovskites) and nanowires, in particular their synthesis and functionalization. The studied applications range from fluorescent markers for biological labelling and detection over the development of efficient emitters for LEDs and displays to new strategies for nanocrystal based energy conversion (photovoltaics, thermoelectrics) and storage.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (A) Temperature dependence of the integrated PL intensities of 2.6 nm AIS NCs (inset: linear scale); the line represents the fitting obtained using eqn (1) and E = 100 meV. (B) TRPL spectra of AgInS2 NCs recorded at 4.2 K for various delay times after the excitation. Inset: Evolution of the PL peak energies with the delay time. (C) Excitation power dependence of the PL peak energy at 4.2 K. Inset: PL spectra recorded at different excitation intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the DAP mode (A) and free-to-bound mechanism (B). (C) Self-trapped exciton model: qualitative single-configurational-coordinate diagram demonstrating absorption, exciton self-trapping and luminescence. Panel (C) is reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) UV-vis absorption spectra of CuFeS2 NCs synthesized with increasing reaction time (from right to left). (B) Variation of the band gap with NC size (red dots: experimental data; dashed line: calculated evolution using the effective mass approximation). (C) Scheme representing CuFeS2/CdS alloy NCs obtained after overgrowth with a CdS shell. (D) PL spectra of the CuFeS2/CdS alloy NCs (inset: photographs of the two samples with the highest PL QY, 87% for the red and 54% for the yellow one). (E) Variation of the Stokes shift with the band gap, extracted from absorbance data. The dashed line indicates a linear fit (inset: model with the Stokes shift represented by blue double arrows). (F) Evolution of the PL lifetime with the PL emission maximum, fitted with a (E − Eg)−3 curve (dashed line). Adapted with permission from ref. 61, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Changes of the optical properties of AIS nanocrystals upon growth of an amorphous GaSx shell. (a) Absorption spectra before and after 60 min of shell growth. (b) Evolution of the PL spectra as a function of the heating time at 260 °C. (c) Photograph of the samples with growing heating time from left to right under UV light. (d) Energy diagrams of the explored core/shell systems. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 from the authors.	 

CIS and CIZS nanocrystals in organic medium
Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, Zn(Ac)2, n-butylamine, Al-isopropoxide	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs, 4.4–4.9 nm	740 nm	—	
67

Hot injection	Cu(Ac)·H2O, In(Ac)3, DMF, 1-thioglycerol, H2S (reaction between FeS and H2SO4), Zn(Ac)2·2H2O	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: 2.35 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.09 nm	660–700 nm	9–15%	
68

Heat-up and hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, Se powder, DDT, OLA, tributylphosphine, ODE, Zn(St)2	Chalcopyrite, polygonal, CISSe: 2.8–3.4 nm (increased reaction time), CISSe/ZnS: 3.8 nm	722–830 nm	CISSe: 1.2%	
69

CISSe/ZnS: 40.7%
Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, ODE, Zn(St)2, OLA	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: 2.1 nm, CIS/ZnS: from 4.3 to 10.5 nm	570–660 nm	—	
70

Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, S powder, Se powder, OLA, ODE	Chalcopyrite, polygonal, CIS/In2Se3: 4.8 nm	—	—	
71

Hot injection	Cu O-2,2-dimethylpentan-3-yl dithiocarbonate, In O-2,2-dimethylpentan-3-yl dithiocarbonate, dioleamide, ODE, OLA, OA	Chalcopyrite, polygonal/globular, 3–4 nm	710 nm	—	
72

Solvothermal	Cu, In, S, ethylenediamine (reaction in an autoclave for several days at 220 °C)	Trigonal, microplatelets and nanowires	—	—	
73

Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn(DDTC)2, Zn(St)2, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, S powder, TOP	Chalcopyrite, spherical, 3 nm	523–619 nm	Up to 47%	
74

Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT, OLA, ODE	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs, CIS: 4.3 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.6–6.6 nm	614–713 nm	—	
75

Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT, OLA, ODE	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS/ZnS: 2.68 nm	CIS: 725 nm	CIS: 1.3%	
76

CIS/ZnS: 675 nm	CIS/ZnS: 65%
Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, 1-octanethiol, Zn(Ac)2	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal, CIZS/ZnS: 4 nm, CIZS/ZnS/ZnS: 7.8 nm	572–537 nm	CIZS: 30%	
77

CIZS/ZnS: 64%
CIZS/ZnS/ZnS: 77%
Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, ZnCl2	Chalcopyrite, polygonal, CIS: 2.9 nm, CIS/ZnS: 5.4 nm	CIS/ZnS: 520–700 nm	CIS: up to 5%	
78

CIS/ZnS: up to 81%
Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, ODE, X mL of OLA (X = 0, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5) and 1 − X mL of ODE	Cubic zinc blende (X = 0–1.5 mL), pseudo chalcopyrite/wurtzite (X = 2–2.5 mL), from 4.2 to 15 nm	705–730 nm	—	
79

Hot injection and heat-up	CuCl, InCl3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT, Se powder, OA, OLA	Cubic zinc blende, polygonal/almost spherical QDs, <5 nm	552–680 nm	30%	
80

Heat-up	Cu(Ac)2, In(Ac)3, SnCl2·2H2O, DDT, ODE, Zn(Ac)2	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs 5 nm	Cu–In–Sn–S: 701–894 nm	Up to 75%	
81

Cu–In–Sn–S/ZnS: 628–785 nm

	UbiQD company (ubiqd.com)	
	862 nm	91%	
82

Heat-up for core QDs, hot injection of the core in ZnS shell precursor solution at different temperatures	Core: CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, shell: CIS seeds, Zn(St)2, ZnI2, S powder, OLA, DDT, ODE	Pyramidal and polyhedral, CIS seeds: 2.5 nm, shell: 150 °C: ∼2.5–3 nm, 210 °C: ∼4.7 nm	—	
	
66

Heat-up	CuI, InI3, DDT, OA, ODE	Chalcopyrite, polyhedral, ∼4 nm	702 nm	5%	
16

Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, ZnSt2, DDT, ODE	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: 2–4 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3–7 nm	595–830 nm	60% (CIS-20 min/ZnS)	
19

Solvothermal	CuI, In(Ac)3, Zn-ethylxanthate, Zn(St)2, DDT, ODE, DMF	Polyhedral QDs, CIS: 1.4–2.2 nm, CIS/ZnS: 2.4–3.6 nm	CIS: 647–664 nm	CIS: up to 8.8%	
21

CIS/ZnS:	CIS/ZnS: 65%
Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, ZnSt2, myristic acid, ODE	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: ∼2.4 nm, CIS/ZnS: ∼3.3	CIS: 630–800 nm	CIS: 8% (645 nm for In:Cu = 1.5)	
83

CIS/ZnS: 570–630 nm	CIS/ZnS: 65% at 625 nm
Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, ZnSt2, DDT	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal, CIS: up to ∼3.3 nm	CIS: 630–780 nm	CIS: 5.8%	
84

CIS/ZnS: 671 nm	CIS/ZnS: 67%
CIS/CdS: 709 nm	CIS/CdS: 86%
Heat-up + cation exchange	(1) CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, (2) ZnSt2, ODE, TOP	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal, ∼2–3 nm	CIS: 658–714	CIS: 7–23%	
23

CIZS: 590–640	CIZS: 54–80%
Hot injection	Cu(NO3)2, In(Ac)3, sulfur, Zn(Ac)2, OA, TOP, MA	Chalcopyrite, polyhedral QDs, CIS/ZnS: 5–15 nm	650–800 nm	30%	
85

Heat-up	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl4·4H2O, Zn(Ac)2, Zn-oleate, DDT, ODE	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, CIS: ∼2.5 nm, CIS/ZnS: ∼3.5 nm (250 °C/7 h), CIS/ZnS/ZnS: ∼4.3 nm	CIS: 670 nm	CIS: 31.8%	
86

CIS/ZnS: 576 nm	CIS/ZnS: 76.4%
CIS/ZnS/ZnS: 559 nm	CIS/ZnS/ZnS: 80%
Room temperature photolysis	[(TOP)2CuIn(SR)4] with R = n-propyl or t-butyl, toluene or dioctylphthalate	Chalcopyrite, ∼2 nm	450–660 nm	—	
87

Room temperature reaction	Cu- and In-xanthate, toluene, OLA	Chalcopyrite, ∼2–3 nm	815 nm	—	
88



CIS and CIZS nanocrystals in aqueous medium
Hydrothermal	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, MPA, NaOH, thiourea, 10.5 mL H2O, 150 °C, 23 h, pH = 11.3	Chalcopyrite 2–4 nm	660 nm	3.3%	
89

Heat-up	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, Na-citrate, Na2S, Zn(Ac)2, thiourea, 20 mL H2O, 95 °C, 40 min, pH = 5.5, Na-citrate/In = 4	Chalcopyrite, CIS: 2.1 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.8 nm	543–625 nm	38% for Cu:In = 1:4	
90

Microwave	Cu(NO3)2, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, Na2S, Zn(Ac)2, NaOH, 19.2 mL H2O, 100 °C, 5 min, pH = 8.5	Chalcopyrite, CIS: 2.8 nm, CIS/ZnS: 3.3 nm	550–680 nm	24% for Cu:In = 1:4 (600 nm)	
91

Hydrothermal	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, thiourea, Zn(Ac)2, ZnCl2, Na-citrate, Na2S, 150 °C, 23 h, pH = 11.3	CIZS: 4.6–5.5 nm	475–672 nm	35% for Cu:In:Zn = 1:20:5 (600 nm)	
92

Hydrothermal	In(NO3)2·5H2O, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O, GSH, Na2S, 100 °C, 6–20 h, pH = 8	Chalcopyrite, spherical/polygonal QDs 3.69, 7.01, 13.59 nm (6 h, 8 h, 10 h)	550 nm + 700 nm	14% (Cu:In = 1:4)	
93

Heat-up	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, GSH, Na2S, Zn(Ac)2, thiourea, 125 mL H2O, 100 °C, 4 h, pH = 8.5 (core)	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs	CIS: 777 nm (Cu:In = 1:4)	CIS: ∼4.5%	
94

CIS/ZnS: 700–777 nm	CIS/ZnS: 15.9%

0	Zinc-blende	Pyramidal	5.4	1.44
1.0	Zinc-blende	Pyramidal	4.9	1.58
1.5	Zinc-blende	Pyramidal	4.2	1.74
2.0	Chalcopyrite/wurtzite	Pyramidal/hexagonal	—/10–15	1.83
2.5	Chalcopyrite/wurtzite	Pyramidal/hexagonal	—/10–15	1.91

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the synthesis reactions of CISSe and CISSe/ZnS QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Influence of the purification method on the PL intensity of core CIS QDs. (B) Effect of temperature and shell reactants on the extent of blue-shift (induced by alloying and cation exchange) and Zn:Cu ratio in the product. (C) Blue-shift vs. In:Cu ratio. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the synthesis of the core, core/thin-shell and core/thick-shell structure on CIZS nanocrystals using 1-octanethiol (OT) and zinc acetate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Left panel: PLQY of Cu–Sn–In–S core and Cu–Sn–In–S/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals as a function of the used quantity of Sn precursor. Right panel: Change in the band gap of the quaternary QDs with increasing Sn content. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Absorbance spectra; (B) PL spectra and (C) photographs of CIS/ZnS colloidal solutions under UV light (365 nm) obtained for varying Cu:In ratios in the CIS core synthesis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

Organic synthesis of CISe nanocrystals
Hot injection	CuCl, CuI, InI3, InCl3, (Me3Si)2Se, TOP, OA	Cubic + chalcopyrite, spherical, 2–6 nm (depending on reaction conditions)	650–975 nm	25%	
17 and 96

Heat-up	CuI, InCl3, Se powder, TOP, TOOP (trioctylphosphite), HDA, ODE	Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼1.2–5.6 nm (depending on reaction time)	838–918 nm	1.9–5%	
97

Heat-up	Selenourea, CuI, InCl3, TOP, OLA, ODE, DDT, Zn(EtX)2, Di-n-octylamine (DOA), Zn(Ac)2	Chalcopyrite, spherical ∼3 nm, polygonal ∼5 nm	650–1030 nm	Up to 40–50%	
98

Heat-up	S powder, Se powder, CuCl, InCl3, OLA	Chalcopyrite, polygonal, ∼15–17 nm	—	—	
99

Heat-up and hot injection	S powder, Se powder, CuCl, InCl3, OA, OLA ZnCl2	Cubic zinc blende, pyramidal, ∼15–17 nm	—	—	
100

Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OA, ODE, tri-n-butylphosphine-Se, TOP-Se, Zn(St)2	Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼2.5–3.5 nm (depending on growth time and temperature)	600–850 nm	CISe: ∼3–4%	
101

CISe/ZnS: ∼10–26%
Hot injection	Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, DDT, ODE, TBP-Se, Zn-oleate, Zn(EtX)2, TOP, OLA	Chalcopyrite and sphalerite, spherical, ∼1–3 nm	650–750 nm	Up to 40%	
102

Heat-up	CuI, InI3, OLA, oleylammonium selenocarbamate	Chalcopyrite, polygonal, ∼2.5–10 nm	∼700–900 nm (for QDs ∼2.5–4 nm)	—	
103

Hot injection	LiN(SiMe3)2, TOP-Se, CuCl, InCl3, TOP, Zn(Et)2	Chalcopyrite, CISe: ∼3–8 nm	750–1100 nm	CISe: 15%	
104

CISe/ZnSe: 60%
Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, Se powder, TOP, OLA	Chalcopyrite, ∼2.9–6.6 nm	∼900–1030 nm	CISSe: up to 5%	
105

CISSe/Cd or Zn-oleate: up to 50%
Heat-up	Cu(II) oleate, In(Ac)3, DDT, diphenyl diselenide, OLA, ODE, Woollin's reagent	Chalcopyrite or wurtzite, polygonal, CISe: (W) = 20–100 nm + 3–7 nm + 2–4 nm, (C) = 2–4 nm + 4–6 nm, CIS: (W) = 3–7 nm + 2–4 nm, (C) = 7–14 nm + 2–4 nm	—	—	
106

Heat-up	CuI, In(Ac)3, Se powder, paraffin wax, OLA, DDT	Chalcopyrite, spherical, 2–10 nm (with the decrease in DDT from 2 to 0.2 mL)	665–820 nm	
	
107

Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT, OLA, OA, ODE, Se powder	Chalcopyrite, pyramidal QDs, 5–5.7 nm in height	—	—	
108

Hot injection	CuI, In(Ac)3, MPA, Se powder, OLA, ODE, Zn(Ac)2, diphenylphosphine (DPP)	Chalcopyrite, spherical, 4.5 nm	∼825 nm	—	
109

Hot injection	Cu(Ac)2, In(Ac)3, Zn(Ac)2, ODE, DDT, OLA, Se power, S powder	Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼3 nm	545–850 nm	40–60% after ZnS shell growth	
110

Cation exchange + heat-up	Cu2−x seeds: Se-OLA + DDT, Cu(acac)2-OLA + DDT, 220 °C, CISe: Cu2−x seeds at 120 °C, In(Ac)2, TOP, OLA, OCA, CISe/ZnS: CISe, Zn(Ac)2, OLA; OCA, thiourea, DMF, 250 °C	Cubic, spherical/pyramidal, Cu2−xS: 4.3–11.3 nm, CISe: 5.8–13.5 nm, CISeS/ZnS: 9–18 nm	980–1225 nm	—	
111



Aqueous synthesis of CISe nanocrystals
Hydrothermal	InOH3, CuCl2, TGA, NaHSe (Se + NaBH4), NH4OH	Chalcopyrite, spherical, CISe: ∼3.6 nm, CISe/ZnS: ∼3.9 nm	612–686 nm	11.6–23.3%	
112


 	Fig. 10  Left panel: Increase of the nanocrystal size and change of morphology as the amount of the Se-precursor is decreased in the silylamide-promoted synthesis of CISe nanocrystals. Middle panel: Dependence of the band gap energy on the particle size (Bohr exciton radius: 10.6 nm). Right panel: PL spectra and QYs of the optimized CISe core and CISe/ZnSe core/shell QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Modulation of the optical properties of CuInSexS2−x QDs by varying the amount of Se. (A) Absorbance spectra of QDs synthesized at an injection temperature of 180 °C. (B) Corresponding PL spectra; (C) PL spectra for various injection temperatures when using 2 mmol of Se. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) PL emission spectra of the Cu–In–Zn–S–Se core QDs synthesized with different amounts of Se. (b) XRD patterns of the obtained core QDs with broad peaks indicating the small size of the QDs in the chalcopyrite phase. (c and d) TEM images of the cores obtained with 1 mmol Se and 3 mmol Se respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 13  Left panel: XRD diffractograms of 15–17 nm CuIn(S1−xSex)2 nanoparticles in the chalcopyrite phase with varying compositions ranging from pure CIS to pure CISe. Middle panel: Linear increase of the lattice parameter with increasing Se content. Right panel: Nonlinear decrease of the band gap energy with increasing Se content. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

Hot injection of metal precursors	Cu(II)-ethyldithiocarbamate, Fe(III)-ethyldithiocarbamate, S powder, TOP, OLA, OA, DCB, Cu(acac)2	Chalcopyrite, spherical or pyramidal: (Cu(acac)2, no OA), ∼12 nm (spheres), ∼30 nm (pyramidal)	
114

Heat-up	Cu(OAc)2·H2O, Fe(OAc)2, S powder and octadecylamine (ODA), TOP, T: 240 °C, 280 °C or 320 °C	Cubic/isocubanite, CuFe2S3, nanobrick, 5–38 nm	
115

Hot injection of Fe precursor	Cu(OAc)2, Ph2Se2, Fe(OAc)3, OA, OLA	Chalcopyrite, quasi-cubic NPs, ∼18 nm	
116

Hot injection of S precursor	Cu(OAc)2, FeCl2, ODE, OA, DDT, S-OLA, Cd-oleate	Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼2.4–12 nm	
61

Hot injection + NIR irradiation	Cu(acac)2, Fe(acac)3, OLA, diphenyl ether, Ph2Se2, triethylenetetramine-3,4-dihydroxybenzaldehyde, HAuCl4·4H2O	Chalcopyrite, spherical CFS QDs ∼6 nm, CFS@Au nanosheets ∼50 nm thick	
117

Heat-up	CuAc, FeCl3, DDT, ODE	Chalcopyrite, spherical, ∼6.7 nm	
118

Heat-up and annealing	Li2S, glucose, ethylene glycol, Fe(OAc)3, Cu(OAc)2	Chalcopyrite, 5–10 nm	
119

Heat-up	CuI, Fe(acac)3, DDT, ODE	Wurtzite (majority), chalcopyrite (minority), faceted polygonal, ∼40 nm	
35

Hot injection	FeCl3·4H2O, CuCl2·H2O, OLA, DDT, Se powder	Chalcopyrite, spherical, 1–2 nm	
113

Hot injection	S powder, Cu(II)-oleate, Fe(St)3, ODE, OLA	S-OLA: from chalcopyrite to cubic with increased Cu:Fe ratio, faceted polygonal NCs, 5–15 nm, S-ODE: cubic for low S-ODE amount, chalcopyrite for excess S-ODE, from small spherical NCs to big polygonal NCs, 6–20 nm	
31

Heat up	CuCl, FeCl3, thiourea, OA, OLA	Chalcopyrite and high bornite, spherical to pyramidal, 1.5–9.3 nm	
120

Hot injection	S powder, Cu(II)-oleate, Fe(St)3, OLA	Chalcopyrite, faceted polygonal NCs, 5–15 nm	
33


 	Fig. 14  (1) TEM images of CuFeS2 nanocrystals synthesized in the presence (a) or absence (b) of oleic acid. (2) Absorbance spectra of the pyramidal (a) and spherical (b) nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM (a and b) and HRTEM (c and d) images of different sized CuFe2S3 nanobricks (5 nm synthesized at 240 °C; 38 nm at 320 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2014 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Absorption spectra of different sized CuFeS2 nanocrystals (decreasing size from left to right) demonstrating quantum confinement effects. (b) X-ray diffractogram indicating that the particles crystallize in the chalcopyrite phase. (c–g) TEM and HRTEM images of the obtained particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Left panel: XRD patterns of CuFeS2 nanocrystals showing the chalcopyrite phase for Fe-rich (A-1 and A-2) and the cubic phase for Fe-poor (A-3 and A-4) compositions. Right panel: Corresponding absorption spectra; the position of the LSPR peak undergoes a bathochromic shift as the nanocrystals become Fe-deficient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Evolution of the morphology of CuFeSe2 with increasing concentration of oleic acid (OA) in the precursor mixture: (a) in pure oleylamine (OLA, 8.0 mL), (b) OLA (7.5 mL)/OA (0.5 mL), (c) OLA (7.0 mL)/OA (1.0 mL), and (d) in OLA (6.0 mL)/OA (2.0 mL). Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

Single-source precursor	(AgIn)[S2CN(C2H5)2]4, OLA	Cubic to orthorhombic, spherical NPs, 2.5 nm to 6 nm	620 nm	10	
121

(AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4, OLA, Zn(OAc)2, thioacetamide	Tetragonal chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, 4.4 nm (no HT) – 5–6 nm (HT)	As-prepared: 525–780 nm	As-prepared: ∼20%	
45 and 122–124

HT: 515–750 nm	HT: 66%
With ZnS shell: 510–740 nm	With ZnS shell: 80%
AgxIn(1−x)[S2CN(C2H5)2](3−2x), OLA, OCA, Zn(OAc)2, thioacetamide	Cubic (low Ag:In), tetragonal (medium Ag:In), orthorhombic (high Ag:In with OLA), polyhedral and spherical QDs, core: 4.3 nm (oleylamine), 3.9 nm (octylamine)	Core: 650 nm to 830 nm	Core-OLA: 40%	
125

Core-OCA: 70%
Core-OCA@shell: 80%
AgDDTC, In(OAc)3, DDT, ODE, CuI, Zn(St)2, TOP	Chalcopyrite, spherical NPs, 2–3 nm	AIS: 600 nm	AIS: 30%	
126

AIS/ZnS: 570 nm	AIS/ZnS: 52.6%
Cu:AIS: up to 660 nm	Cu:AIS: 20%
Cu:AIS/ZnS: 570–610 nm	Cu:AIS/ZnS: up to 56.5%
(AgIn)xZn2(1−x) (S2CN(C2H5)2)4, OLA, Zn(OAc)2, thioacetamide, TOP	Chalcopyrite, almost spherical NPs, 5.8–8.6 nm	540–710 nm	80% (TOP + ZnS, x = 0.85)	
127

Ag-DDTC, In(OAc)3, Zn(St)2, Mn(OAc)2, DDT, OLA, ODE	Chalcopyrite, almost spherical, 3–5 nm	ZAIS/ZnS: 560 nm	ZAIS/ZnS: 53%	
128 and 129

Mn-ZAIS/ZnS: 620–660 nm	Mn-ZAIS/ZnS: 35% to 7%
AgDDTC, In(OAc)3, Zn(OAc)2, DDT, OA, from Ag2S → AIS → ZAIS by doping	Ag2S: monoclinic spherical QDs (3.5–6.3 nm), AIS: orthorhombic and chalcopyrite, spherical (2.5–6.6 nm), ZAIS: chalcopyrite, spherical (∼6.6 nm)	Ag2S: up to 815 nm	AIS: 16%	
130

AIS: 705–815 nm	ZAIS: 58%
ZAIS: 546–570 nm
Hot injection	Ag(OAc), In(OAc)3, tri-n-OCA, DDT, DDA (dodecylamine), S powder	Chalcopyrite to orthorhombic, pyramidal NPs, 2.5–4.3 nm (CH), 5.6 nm (OTH)	770–855 nm	AIS: 46%	
49, 50 and 131

AIS-DDT: 63%
AgNO3, In(St)3, OA, DDT, ODE, S powder, Zn(St)2, Zn(EtX)2, DMF, toluene	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, core: 2.5 nm, core@shell: 3.5 nm	Core: 570 nm	Core: up to 22%	
132

Core@shell: 520 nm	Core@shell: up to 60%
AgNO3, In(AcAc)2, An(St)2, OA, ODE, DDT, TOP	Spherical QDs, core ZAIS: 1.9–3.3 nm	ZAIS: 602–719 nm	3–31%	
133 and 134

AgNO3, InCl3, OA, n-dodecylthiol, ODE, S powder, OLA, Zn(St)2	Orthorhombic, spherical QDs, AIS: 2.5–3.5 nm	AIS: 632–739 nm	AIS: 62%	
135

AIZS: 510–684 nm	ZAIS: 34%
AgNO3, InCl3, OA, n-dodecylthiol, ODE, S powder, OLA, Zn(Cl)2	AIS: almost spherical QDs, 2.5–3.2 nm, AIS/ZnS: pyramidal QDs	AIS: 638 nm	AIS: 60%	
136

AIS–ZnS: 548 nm	AIS/ZnS: 72%
AgNO3, In(AcAc)3, OA, OLA, DDT, ODE, S powder, Zn(St)2, TOP	Cubic, polygonal QDs, ZAIS: 3.9 nm	AIS: 590 nm	42–75%	
137

ZAIS: 491–526 nm
AgNO3, In(AcAc)3, Zn(OAc)2·2H2O, S powder, Zn(St)2, OLA, OTT (1-octanethiol), OA	Cubic, spherical QDs, ∼4 nm after alloying and shelling	ZAIS: 590 nm	∼86% after alloying + shelling	
138 and 139

ZAIS/ZnS: 536 nm
ZAIS/ZIS: 533 nm
ZAIS/ZIS/ZnS: 511 nm
AgNO3, In(OAc)3, OA, DDT, OLA, TOP, S powder, Zn(OAc)2	Chalcopyrite, spherical and polygonal NPs, ∼4 nm	561 nm	∼40%	
140

AgNO3, InCl3, Zn(St)2, DDT, ODE, S powder	Chalcopyrite, polygonal QDs, ∼6 nm	680 nm	∼30% after ligand exchange	
141 and 142

Ag(OAc), In(OAc)3, DDT, thiourea, OLA, S powder, Ga(AcAc)3, 1,3-dimethylthiourea, Zn(OAc)2, TOP	Chalcopyrite, polygonal AIS ∼6.5 nm, spherical AIS/GaSx ∼ 6.9 nm	AIS: 780 nm	AIS/ZnS: 64%	
62

AIS/ZnS: 700 nm	OLA-AIS/GaSx: ∼29%
AIS/InSx: 580 nm and 710 nm	TOP-AIS/GaSx: 56%
AIS/GaSx: 600 nm and ∼750 nm
AgNO3, InCl3, DT, S powder, OLA, OCA, ODE or DCB	In-between orthorhombic AIS and hexagonal ZnS phases, spherical NPs, 5.6 to 7.2 nm	625–720 nm	67% for AIS-OLA in ODE	
26

AgNO3, In(AcAc)3, OA, DDT, TOP, S powder, toluene, Zn(St)2	Spherical NPs, core: 3 nm, core@shell: no visible change	Core: 610–710 nm	Core (20 min): 2.8%	
143–147

Core@shell: 929 nm	Core@shell: 6.7%
Heat-up	AgAc:In(OAc)3:Zn(OAc)2 = x:x:2(1 − x) = 0.2 mmol, thiourea, OLA, DDT	Chalcopyrite to orthorhombic as x increases from 0.1 to 1, polygonal and spherical QDs, 3.9–8.5 nm (as DDT content decreases)	520–810 nm	79% for x = 0.5 with an avg size of QDs of 5.5 nm	
148–150

AgNO3, In(OAc)3, DDT, Zn(St)2, S powder	Chalcopyrite, almost spherical NPs, AIS – 2.8 nm, AIS/ZnS – 3.5 nm	AIS: 605 nm	AIS: 26%	
151 and 152

AIS/ZnS: 550 nm	AIS/ZnS: 34%

 	Fig. 19  Left panel: PL spectra of ZAIS nanocrystals using the single-source precursor (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4 with x = 0.4 (a), 0.7 (b), 0.9 (c) and 1.0 (d). As-prepared nanocrystals (dotted line), after heat-treatment at 180 °C (broken line) and with an additional ZnS shell (solid line). Right panel: PLQY vs. emission maximum and composition for the three different conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  PLQY of ZAIS nanocrystals as a function of the emission wavelength for different precursor compositions (x in (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4) and synthesis procedures. The shaded area indicates the wavelength range of interest for use as color converters in white light emitting diodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Absorption spectra (dashed curves) and PL spectra (solid curves) of different sized AIS nanocrystals obtained by a hot-injection method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2011 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 22  Normalized UV-vis absorption (A) and PL (B) spectra of the AIZS NCs synthesized from the one-pot reaction by heating the Ag/In/Zn/S precursor solution from 90 to 210 °C after injection of the sulfur precursor at 90 °C. The temperature increase is shown in the inset in (A) and the evolution of the QY is shown in (B). Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Optical properties of AIS core (a) and AIS/GaSx core/shell nanocrystals: (b) before and (c) after surface treatment with TOP. (d) Photographs of the samples under visible and UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2018 from the authors.	 

 	Fig. 24  Top left panel: TEM images of (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 nanocrystals obtained in a heat-up approach and change of the size as a function of the DDT content used in the reaction. Top right panel: Photograph of samples of varying composition and size under UV light. Bottom panel: PLQY as a function of size, composition and emission wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

Hot injection	Ag(OAc), In(Oac)3, GSH, NaOH, Na2S, Zn(Oac)2	Cubic (stated in the paper) but looks more chalcopyrite, AIS: ∼3 nm, ZAIS: ∼4 nm	AIS: 585–606 nm (varied Ag/In) and 560–660 nm (varied In/S)	AIS: <3%	
154

ZAIS: 596 nm	ZAIS: 15%
Heat-up (AIS), hot injection (AIS/ZnS)	AgNO3, In(NO3)3, PAA (polyacrylic acid of Na salt), MAA (mercaptoacetic acid or TGA-thioglycolic acid), sodium citrate, Zn(NO3)2, Na2S	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, ZAIS: <5 nm	AIS: 595 nm	AIS: 1%	
155

AIS/ZnS: 565 nm	AIS/ZnS: 20% for Ag:In = 1:4
Microwave	AgNO3, In(NO3)3, Na2S, GSH, Zn(Oac)2·2H2O, NaOH,	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, AIS: ∼2.5 nm, ZAIS: ∼3 nm	AIS: 570 nm	AIS: 14%	
156 and 157

AIS/ZnS: 553 nm	AIS/ZnS: 40%
Room temperature	AgNO3, In(Oac)3, S-N2H4·H2O, multidentate polymer MDP (PAA-g-MEA), NaOH	Orthorhombic, spherical QDs, 3.9–6.3 nm (increased reaction time)	689–817 nm	∼35%	
158

Room temperature	Ag-Mercaptoacetate, In-mercaptoacetate, gelatin, MAA, Na2S, Zn2+ (source not specified)	Chalcopyrite, cubic (after annealing at 200 °C), ∼4 nm	AIS: 620 nm (580 nm in gelatin)	Not reported	
159

AIS/ZnS: 590 nm (570 nm in gelatin)
ZAIS: 542 nm
ZAIS/ZnS: 544 nm
Hydrothermal	AgNO3, In(OH)3, ammonium sulfide (NH4)2S, MAA = TGA, NH4OH, gelatin, ZnCl2, thiourea	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, AIS: ∼2.4 nm, AIS/ZnS: ∼2.9 nm	AIS: 561–625 nm	AIS: 3.6–11.6%	
160

AIS/ZnS: 535–607 nm	AIS/ZnS: 18.4–39.1%
Room temperature	AgNO3, InCl3, Zn(CH3COO)2, Na2S, MAA, NaOH, HNO3, glycerol, Na-mercaptoacetate	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, AIS: 5–6 nm	AIS: 580–625 nm in water and up to 725 nm after HT in glycerol	AIS: 12% (Ag/In = 1:4)	
161

AIS/ZnS: 30%
Hydrothermal, followed by hot injection of the shell	Ag(Oac), In(Oac)3, Zn(Oac)2, thioacetamide, L-cysteine, NaOH	Cubic AgIn5S8, 3–3.2 nm	ZAIS: 560–650 nm (Ag:In = 1:6 to 1:1)	ZAIS: 26% for Ag:In = 1:4	
162

ZAIS/ZnS:	ZAIS/ZnS: 26–35%
Heat-up	AgNO3, InCl3, MAA, Na2S, NH4OH, Zn(Oac)2·2H2O + CuCl2·2H2O for ref. 163	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, 2–4 nm	AIS: 630–710 nm	AIS/ZnS: up to 47%	
163–165

AIS/ZnS: up to 680 nm
Hydrothermal	AgNO3, In(NO3)3, sodium citrate, GSH, Na2S, NaOH	Chalcopyrite, spherical, 3–6 nm	575–650 nm	Up to 21.6%	
166

Heat-up	AgNO3, In(Oac)3, Zn(Oac)2, Na2S, MAA, NaOH	Hexagonal (AgInZn2S4), spherical QDs, ∼3 nm	550–650 nm	Up to 41.2%	
167

Heat-up	AgNO3, InCl3, Na2S, Na-citrate, NaOH, Zn(Oac)2, GSH	Not reported	600–780 nm	Up to 19%	
168

Heat-up	AgNO3, InCl3, Na2S, citric acid, NH4OH, Zn(Oac)2, GSH	Chalcopyrite, spherical QDs, ∼1.5–4 m	AIS: 560–660 nm	AIS: up to 32%	
169

ZAIS: 520–620 nm	AIS/ZnS: up to 60%
Microwave	AgNO3, InCl3, MPA, D-Pen, Na2S, NH4OH, Zn(Oac)2·2H2O	Chalcopyrite, polygonal/pyramidal QDs, 3–5.6 nm	587–728 nm	10–66%	
56


 	Fig. 25  (a) PL spectra of ZAIS nanocrystals synthesized with varying Ag:In ratios. (b) Photographs of the samples under visible (top) and UV light (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 155. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM micrograph, (c) X-ray diffractogram, (d) size distribution of strongly NIR-emitting AIS nanocrystals synthesized at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 27  Method for the hydrothermal synthesis of L-cysteine stabilized ZAIS and ZAIS/ZnS nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Top: Relative amounts of the different fractions obtained via size-selective precipitation of AIS/ZnS nanocrystals prepared by a heating up method using metal mercaptoacetates and sodium sulfide. Bottom: Photograph of the fractions under UV light. (b) PLQY of the different fractions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

Hot injection	AgAc, In(OAc)3, Se pellets, OLA, TOP, myristic acid, ODE	Orthorhombic and tetragonal, almost spherical nanoparticles with size ∼7–25 nm	Not reported	Not reported	
151

AgNO3, In(St)3, Se powder, S powder, OLA, ODE, OA	AgInSe2: orthorhombic phase; pear-shaped particles ∼15 × 24 nm, AgIn(S1−xSex): orthorhombic phase; pear-shaped particles with size ∼13 nm in L	Not reported	
	
170

AgI, InI3, TOP, OLA, (Me3Si)2Se	Orthorhombic or hexagonal, spherical QDs of size ∼3 nm and ∼6 nm	625 nm (3 nm) and 650 nm (6 nm)	15% at 650 nm	
171

AgNO3, In(OAc)3, Se powder, ODE, OLA, OA, DDT, S powder, Zn(St)2	Tetragonal, polygonal QDs, AgInSe2 ∼5 nm, AgInSe2/ZnS ∼6.5 nm	AgInSe2: 700–820 nm depending on the reaction conditions	AgInSe2: up to ∼8%	
172

AgInSe2/ZnS: from 780 nm to 820 nm for the core synthesized at 175 °C	AgInSe2/ZnS: up to 40% depending on the Ag:In:Se:Zn ratio
AgNO3, In(OAc)3, MPA, NaOH, Zn(OAc)2, NaHSe (Se + NaBH4), DI H2O	Tetragonal, spherical QDs, AISe: 3.3 nm, AISe/ZnSe: 3.9 nm	AISe/ZnSe: 625–940 nm	AISe: up to 10% (reaction at 90 °C for Ag:In = 2:1)	
173

AISe/ZnSe: 7–31%
AgNO3, InCl3, OA, OLA, cyclohexeno-1,2,3- selenadiazole	Orthorhombic, spherical particles, size > 30 nm	Not reported	Not reported	
174



Heat-up	[(PPh3)2AgIn–(SeC(O)Ph)4], OLA or HDA (hexadecylamine), DDT, phenyl phosphine source route	Orthorhombic, nanorods or tadpole-shaped NPs, W: 14–17 nm; L: 50–250 nm	820 nm	Not reported	
175–177

Ag2O, In(OAc)3, DDT, ODE, OLA, TBP (tributylphosphine), Se powder	Orthorhombic, from spherical QDs to pyramidal or prismatic QDs, 9 to 23 nm	From 955 to 1250 nm	Up to 21% for QDs synthesized at 190 °C for 60–150 min	
178

AgNO3, InCl3, Na-citrate, GSH, Na2Se2O3, HCl, DI H2O	Tetragonal, spherical NPs to nanorods by increasing Na2Se2O3 amount, spheres: ∼5 nm, nanorods: ∼ 40 × 500 nm	Not reported	Not reported	
179



Aqueous synthesis: solvothermal/hydrothermal	AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, Se powder, N2H4·H2O, DI H2O	Tetragonal, nanorods, W: 30–60 nm, L: 1–5 μm	Not reported	Not reported	
180

AgNO3, In(OH)3, TGA, gelatin, NH3, Se powder, NaBH4, DI H2O, ZnO, ammonium thioglycolate, thiourea	Tetragonal, spherical, ∼3.4 nm	AISe/ZnS: 580–670 nm	10–23% depending on the Ag:In ratio	
112

AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, SeO2, PVP, OA, DMF	Orthorhombic, polygonal and tadpole-shaped QDs, 70–1100 nm	Not reported	Not reported	
181

SeO2, NaBH4, AgNO3, In(NO3)3, Na-citrate, GSH, MPA, TGA, DI H2O	Tetragonal, polygonal QDs	680 nm	Not reported	
182 and 183


 	Fig. 29  Formation of pear-shaped AISe nanocrystals via initially formed Ag2Se nanoparticles. TEM images of aliquots taken after 10 s (a), 5 min (b), 10 min (c), 30 min (d), 60 min (e) and 120 min (f). (g) Schematic representation of the formation mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Absorption and (b) PL spectra of AISe/ZnS core/shell nanocrystals starting from AISe cores synthesized with varying Ag:In ratios (Zn:In ratio fixed at 1:1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  UV-vis absorption (A and B) and PL (C and D) spectra of CISe/ZnS (A and C) and AISe/ZnS (B and D) core/shell nanocrystals synthesized in a hydrothermal approach using different Cu:In and Ag:In feed ratios. (E) Photograph of the samples under UV light. (F) Evolution of the PLQY as a function of the used metal ion ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  PL spectra and PLQYs of AISe/ZnSe core/shell nanocrystals prepared in water using the hot-injection method and different Ag:In feed ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 33  Structures of widely used reagents (solvents, ligands) in nanocrystal synthesis and their conversion products together with the 1H NMR chemical shifts of characteristic protons.	 


AgInS2	AgAc, In(Ac)3, S/OLA, DDT, ODE	367.0/373.5 (Ag+), 444.5/452.1 (In3+), 161.3 and 162.2 (S2−)	—	
192

AgInS2	(Ph3P)2AgIn(SCOPh)4, DDT, OA	367.4 (Ag+), 444.4 (In3+), 161.3 (S2−)	—	
193

AgInS2	AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, DDT	368/374 (Ag+), 444.9/452.4 (In3+), 161.9 and 163 (S2−)	—	
194

AgInS2	AgNO3, InCl3, S/OLA, DDT, ODE	368.0/374 (Ag+), 445.0/452.5 (In3+), 161.8/163.0 (S2−), 163.2/164.4 (aliphatic thiols)	OA (2.35 ppm) product of the transformation of OLA	
195

AgInZnS	AgNO3, InCl3, Zn-stearate, S/OLA, DDT, ODE	368.0/374.0 (Ag+), 445.1/452.7 (In3+), 1022.2/1045.2 (Zn2+), 161.9/163.0 (S2−), 162.7/163.9 (aliphatic thiols)	SA (2.35 ppm), 1-aminooctadecane (product of the transformation of OLA)	
26

AgInSe2	AgNO3, InCl3·4H2O, Se, N2H4·H2O, H2O, autoclave	367.6/373.6 (Ag+), 444.4/451.7 (In3+), 53.8 (Se2−)	—	
180

AgInSe2	(PPh3)2AgIn(SeC(O)Ph)4, DDT, OLA	367.17/373.16 (Ag+), 443.99/451.54 (In3+), 53.78 (Se2−)	OLA, DDT (IR)	
175

CuInS2	Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, DDT, OLA	932.40/952.18 (Cu+), 445.06/452.60 (In3+), 162.20/163.15 (S2−)	—	
196

CuInS2	CuI, In(OAc)3, DDT, ODE	932.3/952.3 (Cu+), 445.1/452.5 (In3+), 162.2 and 163.4 (S2−)	DDT, 2572 cm−1 (S–H)	
197

CuInS2	CuCl, InCl3·4H2O, DDT, OA, ODE	932.5/952.3 (Cu+), 444.8/452.3 (In3+), 161.7/162.8 (S2−)	OA, 1550–1700 cm−1 (CO)	
198

CuInS2	CuI, In(Ac)3, DDT	932.8/952.7 (Cu+), 445.3/452.9 (In3+), 162.0/163.2 (aliphatic thiols), 163.3/164.5 (S2−)	DDT, (C12H25)2S (13C NMR)	
78

CuInZnS	Cu(acac)2, In(acac)3, Zn(Ac)2, DDT/t-DDT, TOPO, ODE	931.8/951.6 (Cu+), 444.3/451.9 (In3+), 161.3/162.4 (S2−)	—	
199

CuInZnS	Cu-Oleate, InCl3, Zn-stearate, S/OLA, DDT, ODE	932.7/952.5 (Cu+), 445.0/452.4 (In3+), 1029.9/1044.9 (Zn2+), 162.1 and 163.0 (S2−)	DDT (2.52 and 1.60 ppm)	
41 and 141

CuInSe2	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, Se, ethylenediamine, autoclave	942.0 (Cu+), 444.85 (In3+), 54.05 (Se2−)	Ethylenediamine, 408 and 516 cm−1	
200

CuInSe2	Cu-Oleate, InCl3, Ph2Se2, OLA	931.8/951.9 (Cu+), 444.5/452.0 (In3+), 54.2 (Se2−)	—	
201

CuInSe2	CuCl2·2H2O, InCl3·4H2O, Se ethylenediamine, TEG, PVP	931.7 (Cu+), 444.3 (In3+), 54.0 (Se2−)	—	
202

CuInSe2	Cu(Ac)2·H2O, InCl3·4H2O, Se OLA	931.6/951.7 (Cu+), 444.4/451.9 (In3+), 54.05 (Se2−)	—	
203

CuFeS2	Cu[S2CN(Et)2]2, Fe[S2CN(Et)2]3, S/TOP/OLA, OA, DCB	932.8/952.8 (Cu+), 710.8/723.6 (Fe3+), 163.2 (S2−)	—	
114

CuFeS2	Cu-Oleate, Fe-stearate, S/OLA, ODE	932.0/952.0 (Cu+), 933.5/954.4 (Cu2+), 709.6–710.2 (Fe3+), 713.0–713.9 (Fe2+), 161.2/162.1 (S2−), 162.4 and 164.5 (aliphatic thiols) 168.8–170.5 (S(VI))	S-OLA crystal-bound (NMR)	
31

CuFeS2	CuAc, FeCl3, DDT, ODE	932.9/952.7 (Cu+), 713.9/727.3 (Fe3+), 164.8/169.6 (S2−)	—	
118

CuFeSe2	Cu(acac)2, Fe(acac)3, Ph2Se2, OA, OLA	932.4/952.2 (Cu+), 710.3/723.6 (Fe3+), 53.9/54.2 (Se2−)	OA, 1736 cm−1 (CO), OLA 3356 cm−1 (N–H)	
116

CuFeSe2	CuCl2·2H2O, FeSO4·7H2O, Se, NaBH4, H2O, PTMP-PMMA	932.16/951.92 (Cu+), 710.54/723.05 (Fe3+), 54.72 (Se2−)	PTMP-PMMA, 1693 cm−1 (CO), 1482 cm−1 and 1586 cm−1 (COO)	
204

CuFeSe2	CuCl2·2H2O, FeCl3, Se, DDT, OA, OLA	932.1/951.9 (Cu+), 933.7/953.6 (Cu2+), 711.0/724.6 (Fe3+), ∼719 and 729 and 733, 54.3 and 55.1 (Se2−)	—	
205


 	Fig. 34  Displacement of L-MX2 from metal chalcogenide nanocrystals promoted by exchange of X-type ligands for L-type ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Chemical structure of electroactive ligands introduced to Cu–In–Zn–S nanocrystals in a two-step procedure via labile, intermediate pyridine ligands and the oxidation potential of their functional groups vs. Ag/Ag+.41 Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 


AgInZnS	Dodecylamine	—	MPA/MeOH, KOH/water, pH = 13, rt, 30 min	47	Bioapplication, bioimaging, HCC1954 breast tumor cells	
217

AgInZnS	Dodecylamine	—	MPA/EtOH, KOH/water, rt, 3 h	—	Bioapplication, bioimaging, human U87 glioblastoma cells,…	
218

AgInZnS/ZnS	OLA, DDT	43	MPA/MeOH, TMAH, rt, 2 h	14	Bioapplication, bioimaging, KB cells	
219

AgInZnS/ZnS	OLA	—	MPA/MeOH, TMAH, 70 °C, 4 h	—	Bioapplication, bioimaging, in vivo	
220

AgInZnS	Octadecylamine SA	59	MUA, NaOH/water, 50 °C, 10 h	31	Bioapplication, human H460 cells	
142

ZnAgInSe/AgInZnCdSe	OLA	—	MPA/MeOH, NaOH/water, rt, 2 h	—	Photovoltaics, water photolysis	
221

CuInS2/ZnS	OA	20	MPA, NaOH, water	—	Photodetectors	
222

CuInS2/ZnS	DDT	60	DHLA, 70 °C, 2 h, DMF, t-BuOK	48	Bioapplication, bioimaging, in vivo	
19

CuInS2/ZnS	DDT	37	(1-Tetradecyl)trimethylammonium bromide/water, rt, 24 h	36	Bioapplication, bioimaging, HepG2 cells	
223

CuInS2/ZnS	OLA	68	MPA and GSH/DMF, 130 °C, 10–15 min	34	Bioapplication, bioimaging, MCF10CA1a breast tumor cells	
224

CuInS2/ZnS	OLA	72	6-Mercaptohexanol (MCH), 180 °C, 15 min	70	Light emitting diodes	
215

CuInZnS	DDT	56	MUA/MeOH, TMAH, pH = 9.0, 70 °C, 30 min	50	Photocatalysis	
225

CuInSe2	OLA	—	PEGn–SH, n = 6, 18, 60, 150, CHCl3, rt, 12 h	—	Photocatalysis	
216

Cu–In–Se/ZnS	OLA, TOP, DDT	40	Dithiol sulfobetaine zwitterionic ligands/water	20	Bioapplication, bioimaging, in vivo	
98

CuFeS2	DDT, OLA	—	CH3O–PEG–SH/MeOH, rt, 2 h	—	Photothermal therapy	
226


 	Fig. 36  Schematic diagram of the structure, energy levels, excitation, and carrier transport in the hybrid CuInSe2 nanocrystals and P3HT composite of a CuInSe2/P3HT weight ratio of 1/19 and 6/1.255	 


AgInS2	7.2	2.4	—	—	—	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT/Al	0.47	
256

CuInS2	∼3.0	—	2.30	−6.00	−3.70	ITO/QDs-PEDOT:PSS/PCBM/LiF/Al	0.07	
257

CuInS2	2–4	1.74	1.80	−5.80	−4.00	ITO/QDs-MEH-PPV/CuInS2/Al	0.13	
258

CuInS2	7.4	—	1.50	−5.60	−4.10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT-PCBM/Al	1.6	
247

CuInS2	3–5	—	—	—	—	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-PCDTBT/Ag	2.56	
250

CuInSe2	15 × 20	—	—	—	—	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT/LiF/Al	—	
245

CuInSe2	3.4	1.63	1.71	−5.34	−3.63	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/QDs-P3HT/Al	0.70	
255

CuInSe2	∼2.0	2.27	—	—	—	Photodetector, PET/QDs-P3HT/Au	N.A.	
203

CuInSe2	∼21.3	1.03	—	—	—	Photodetector, SiO2/QDs-P3HT/Pt	N.A.	
201

CuInSe2	∼15	1.03	—	—	—	Photodetector, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM:CuInSe2/Al	N.A.	
244


 	Fig. 37  Energy diagrams of the hybrid inorganic–organic solar cells composed of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CuInS2/PCBM/Al (a) and ITO/ZnO/(AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2/P3HT/MoO3/Ag (b).	 

 	Fig. 38  Schematic diagram of Cu2S–CuInS2–ZnSe (a) and Zn–Cu–In–Se (b) QD-sensitized solar cells with relative positions of band gap edges.	 


TiO2/AgInS2-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Au	450	4.62	0.39	0.80	
285

TiO2/AgInS2–ZnS-QDS	S2−/Sx2−	CuxS	490	8.34	0.55	2.25	
286

TiO2/Cu2S–CuInS2–ZnSe-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Pt	605	10.96	0.40	2.52	
274

TiO2/CuInS2-QDs/CdS/ZnS	S2−/Sx2−	CuS	560	17.0	0.45	4.20	
287

TiO2/CuInS2-Mn–CdS-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	CuS	581	19.29	0.48	5.38	
288

TiO2/CdS/CuInS2–CdS-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Cu2S–RGO	529	15.65	0.47	3.91	
277

TiO2/CuInS2–ZnS-MPA-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Cu2S	586	20.65	0.58	7.04	
279

TiO2/CuInS2-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Cu2S–RGO	501	10.10	0.47	2.38	
289

TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA	I−/I3−	
CuInS

2

-QDs–PEDOT:PSS	700	16.0	0.58	6.50	
290

TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA	I−/I3−	
CuInS

2

-QDs
	750	12.08	0.70	6.35	
227

TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA	I−/I3−	
CuInS

2

-QDs
	743	12.81	0.72	6.83	
13

TiO2/CuInSe2–ZnS–MPA-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Cu2S	583	22.61	0.51	6.79	
280

TiO2/CuInSe1.4S0.6-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	Cu2S	550	10.5	0.60	3.45	
276

TiO2/CuInSe1.6S0.4-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	CuxS	560	16.8	0.59	5.51	
278

TiO2/Zn–Cu–In–Se-QDs	S2−/Sx2−	GH–Cu2S/Ti	770	26.49	0.68	13.85	
283

TiO2/Ru-535 bis-TBA	I−/I3−	
CuFeS

2

-QDs
	665	17.32	0.70	8.10	
291


 	Fig. 39  Energy band diagram of LED (ITO/PEDOT):PSS/(TPD or PVK)/Cu–In–Zn–S/ZnO/Al (a) and inverted LED (ITO/ZnO/CuInS2–ZnS/CBP/TCTA/MoO3/Al) structure (b).	 


AgInZnS/ZnS	520–560	41–52	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/ZnO/Al	—	498–999	0.36–1.17	
293

AgIn5S8/ZnS	585, 670	26–29	ITO/ZnO/PEI/QDs-EDT/CBP/MoOx/Au	2.5	310	2.3	
292

CuInS2–ZnS/ZnSe–ZnS	553, 580, 620	40–60	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/Alq3/Ca/Al	4.4–14.3	1160–1600	0.49–0.62	
294

CuInS2–ZnS/ZnS	577, 606	40–65	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/Alq3/Ca/Al	4.8–5.0	1700–2100	0.88–0.92	
295

CuInS2/ZnS	560	70	ITO/ZnO/QDs-MCH/CBP/TCTA/MoO3/Al	3.7	8375	9.43	
215

CuInS/ZnS	577	79–89	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TFB)/QDs/ZnO/Al	2.6–3.0	5245–8120	18.2	
296

CuInS/ZnS	635	81	ITO/ZnO/QDs-EDT/TCTA/MoO3/Au	—	4490	8.3	
78

CuInZnS	660	—	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(PVK or pol(TPD))/QDs/ZnO/Al	2–5	—	—	
297

Cu:Zn–In–Se/ZnS	580	70–80	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/TPBI/LiF/Al	3.6	220	2.45	
24

Cu:Zn–In–Se	590–673	23–38	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TPD)/QDs/ZnO/Al	—	320	0.97	
298

CuInZnSSe	604, 664	20–30	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(TFB)/QDs/ZnO/Al	2.9–4.0	1074–1502	0.4	
80


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
