Perovskites for protonic ceramic fuel cells: a review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00132B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00132B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2200-2232Perovskites for protonic ceramic fuel cells: a review

        
          
            Jiafeng 
            Cao
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuexia 
            Ji
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *bc
aInstitute of Materials Science and Engineering & School of Science and Engineering of Mathematics and Physics, Anhui University of Technology, Maanshan 243032, Anhui Province, P. R. China. E-mail: jiafengcao@126.com
bWA School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering (WASM-MECE), Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia 6102, Australia
cKey Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, P. R. China. E-mail: shaozp@njtech.edu.cn
Received 
      14th January 2022
    , Accepted 6th April 2022First published on 7th April 2022AbstractProtonic ceramic fuel cells (PCFCs), capable of harmonious and efficient conversion of chemical energy into electric power at reduced temperature enabled by fast proton conduction, are promising energy technology, which may radically re-define the whole way of energy conversion in the future, while their practical use is highly dependent on the availability of efficient key cell materials, i.e., electrolyte and electrodes, that should meet several important requirements, such as conductivity, stability, catalytic activity, compatibility, and cost. During the past two decades, complex oxides with the ABO3 perovskite or related structure have been extensively exploited as key materials in PCFCs, i.e., electrolyte and electrodes, due to their flexible composition with versatile properties. Rational design of perovskite and perovskite-related oxides with robust properties remains a pending research challenge, which makes in-depth understanding of the material engineering in PCFCs a specific focus of research. In this review, recent advances in the material engineering of perovskite oxides for PCFCs are summarized, and regulation strategies are presented, and applications as the electrodes and electrolyte are discussed. Importance is paid to exploiting the general rule of compositional engineering for amending the lattice structure, defect structure, and ionic transportation behavior of perovskite oxides, consequently providing useful guidance on the development of alternative perovskite materials for PCFCs and related fields.
Jiafeng Cao
Jiafeng Cao is an associate professor at Anhui University of Technology. He received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2017. He worked as a visiting scholar in Prof. Zongping Shao's research group at Curtin University in 2019. His research activities mainly focus on the fundamental studies of protonic ceramic fuel cells and related fields.
Yuexia Ji
Yuexia Ji received her PhD from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2013. She is currently an associate professor at Anhui University of Technology. Her research interests focus on the design of advanced electrolyte, anode, and cathode materials for solid oxide fuel cells.
Zongping Shao
Zongping Shao is a professor at Nanjing Tech University, China, and also a joint-appointed professor at Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2000. His research interests mainly include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, oxygen permeable membranes and low-temperature energy conversion devices.

Broader context
Perovskites with proton, oxygen ion or electron transport capabilities are fundamental energy-conversion materials in the extensive exploration and application of diverse electrochemical devices, such as PCFCs. Various kinds of perovskite oxides together with different types of cations/anions in A/B/O sites have been reported in recent decades, which have, to varying degrees, promoted the activation of electrolytes and electrodes for high-efficiency electrochemical processes in PCFCs. Nevertheless, a systematical and accurate guideline for the rational design of perovskite-type materials is lacking, leading to a chaotic situation in the research of this area, which has never been appealing more than today. This review rearranges the most important fundamentals in PCFCs, gives insights into the efficient ways for accurately tuning the performances of perovskite-type oxides, and provides recent advances in the rational design of novel perovskite materials, in addition to some perspectives in the research of PCFCs.

1. Introduction
The fast growth in the world population and quick industrialization result in a tremendously increasing global energy demand, while the excessive consumption of non-renewable fossil fuels not only releases considerable amounts of environmental pollutants and greenhouse gases, but also brings about serious concerns about the sustainable development of our society.1,2 Therefore, to render a carbon neutral society, more and more importance is paid to sustainable energy systems that should be renewable, carbon neutral, and clean. The combination of green hydrogen produced from renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind power, and electrochemical energy conversion devices of fuel cells may provide an ideal alternative solution for such a purpose.3
Fuel cells are electrochemical energy conversion devices that could generate electric power from chemical fuels through electrochemical reaction ways with high efficiency and low emission. If green hydrogen is used as the fuel, zero emission can be realized. Among various types of fuel cells, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), composed of ceramic oxides, are particularly interesting because of their low material cost with non-noble metal catalysts, high stability due to their all-solid cell configuration, high electrode reaction kinetics due to elevated operating temperature, and superior values of exhaust heat, which are highly promising for stationary power generation.4
There are mainly two types of SOFCs, i.e., traditional oxide ion-conducting fuel cells (O-SOFCs), which use oxygen ion conductors, such as yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) and doped ceria, as electrolytes,5,6 and protonic ceramic fuel cells (PCFCs),7 which use proton-conducting oxides as electrolytes. Currently, there is substantially increased interest in PCFCs for power generation because they have great potential for operation at reduced temperature, considering the high mobility of protons and the higher energy efficiency by avoiding the dilution effect of water on fuel gas.8–10 It is believed that the decrease of operating temperature is a critical step in the commercialization of SOFC technology,11 which would bring several valuable benefits, such as prolonged cell life times and reduced cell material, operating and sealing costs.
Materials play the key role in the performance of SOFCs, and the electrolyte determines the operating principle of the fuel cells. Many oxides have been reported to display significant proton conductivity at elevated temperature, and some of them have been considered as electrolyte materials of PCFCs.12 Taking into full consideration their stability under the practical operating conditions of fuel cells (temperature, oxygen partial pressure and atmosphere), conductivity, ionic transfer number, and easy synthesis, currently most of the PCFCs use proton-conducting perovskite oxides as electrolyte materials. Perovskite-type oxides refer to the specific category of composite oxides with the general formula ABO3, in which A is a lanthanum or alkaline earth element or a mix of them, and B is another metal cation, such as zirconium and cerium, and B and O form a network of corner-sharing BO6 octahedra surrounding the larger A-site cation.13 One of the greatest advantages of perovskite oxides as electrolyte materials of PCFCs is that all the A, B and O sites in the perovskite lattice can be partially substituted, resulting in a great group of oxides with highly diversified electrochemical properties, thus providing a highly versatile platform for material design. In 1980, Iwahara et al. first found notable protonic conductivity in some perovskite oxides under a humidified atmosphere at elevated temperature.14 Later, many researchers have confirmed that doped SrCeO3 and BaCeO3 had proton conductivity at intermediate temperatures (450–700 °C).15,16 Up to now, considerable research activities have been conducted to develop PCFCs by using perovskite-type electrolytes and multiple materials with perovskite-related structures that have been developed.
Electrodes, i.e. the anode and cathode, are another two key parts of fuel cells. Over the cathode, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) happens, while the fuel oxidation reaction occurs at the anode. In many cases, in particular by taking a thin-film electrolyte configuration and operating at reduced temperature, the electrode polarization becomes the main energy loss for the whole fuel cell. Therefore, the development of highly efficient electrodes has become another key research target for fuel cells. For PCFCs, to overcome the sluggish reaction kinetics at the cathode is a particular challenge. During the last decade, considerable research efforts have been directed to the development of alternative cathodes for PCFCs.17–19 Among them, perovskite-based electrodes have received the most attention because of their compositional flexibility and versatile properties. Various perovskite-type oxygen ion and electron co-conducting, and proton, oxygen ion and electron triple-conducting oxides have been exploited.20–22 Different from O-SOFCs, water is produced on the cathode side of PCFCs; thus the electrode reactions at the cathode of PCFCs are more complicated, which in many cases largely determine the final electric power output. An ideal cathode for PCFCs should maintain high values of conductivity for oxygen ions, electrons and protons simultaneously, thus requiring the development of delicate materials.
In this review, the recent developments of perovskite oxides used for the key parts of PCFCs (electrolyte and electrodes) are comprehensively summarized. First, the operating principle of PCFCs and the different roles and requirements of materials for the electrolyte and electrodes of PCFCs are presented, and then the transportation properties, chemical stability, sintering and other physicochemical properties of perovskite oxides are extensively discussed. The ways for tuning the different properties of perovskite materials such as proton conductivity, oxygen–ion conductivity, electronic conductivity, chemical stability, phase stability and sinterability are extensively reviewed, and the ways of A site, B site and O site doping are of particular importance. Recent advances in the development of perovskite-based electrolyte, cathode and anode materials used in PCFCs are comprehensively reviewed. Finally, the challenges associated with perovskite-based PCFCs are discussed and future research breakthroughs and perspectives are presented, from our experiences.
2. Operating principles of PCFCs and the different roles of individual cell parts
2.1 Operating principles of PCFCs
A typical PCFC single cell mainly consists of three ceramic/ceramic metal (cermet) layers in materials – anode, cathode and electrolyte, which enables mass transport (protons) from anode to cathode side – and achieves high-efficiency energy conversion at a relatively low temperature compared to traditional O-SOFCs, thanks to the lower activation energy of proton conduction than oxygen ion conduction, as shown in Fig. 1. At the anode, the supplied fuels (H2, CH4, NH3, etc.) are catalytically dissociated into protons, electrons, etc. Taking the H2 fuel for example, the electrochemical reactions that occur inside the anode are expressed by the following steps briefly: (1)where the ads subscript represents the adsorbed molecule or atom. After that, the thermally activated protons diffuse through the electrolyte bulk, while the electron transports across the external circuit to supply power for the external equipment.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a PCFC structure. 
At the cathode, the oxygen gas is catalytically dissociated into oxygen ions, which then react with the protons transported from the anode, and produce water eventually. The whole processes can be described through the following reaction steps: (2)
In summary, the overall reaction is: (3)
In order to achieve high-efficiency energy conversion, the cell should at least have: (1) superior catalytic materials for both electrodes to minimize electrode polarization resistance; (2) high and stable ionic conductivity for the electrolyte layer at a relatively low temperature with negligible electronic conductivity; and (3) favourable thermal–chemical compatibility between electrolyte and electrodes for long-running services.
2.2 Role and requirements of PCFC anodes
The anode, also called the fuel electrode, works for the fuel oxidation reaction under a reducing atmosphere. High porosity for the free diffusion of fuel gas or the oxidation product, high electronic conductivity for electric energy output, superior ionic conductivity for proton transport, and favourable chemical stability for ensuring high durability are required for the anode materials in PCFCs. In order to decrease the ohmic resistance induced by the thick electrolyte part, the anode is usually used as the supporting layer (substrate) to a thin electrolyte membrane. From this point of view, the electrochemical properties of the anode attract more attraction.
In conventional O-SOFCs, nickel-YSZ cermet is typically used as the anode material,23 while perovskite oxides are alternative anode materials for PCFCs. Most perovskite oxides used in PCFCs can be obtained through a high-temperature sintering process over a wide temperature range. The porosity of perovskite oxides can be tailored by simply regulating the sintering temperature under practical fabrication conditions. For instance, Nakayama analysed the phase formation rule of LaCoO3 by a thermogravimetric test and based on infrared spectra and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns.24 The results indicated that the phase formation was complete over a wide temperature range (600–1200 °C) through three strategies: the calcination of the oxide mixture, the calcination of the coprecipitates, and the decomposition method. Such a wide phase formation range and phase stability would benefit the practical formation of interlocking porosity just by adopting suitable sintering processes.
Electronic conductivity and ionic conductivity are two important parameters for evaluating the potential of perovskite oxides for application as anode materials. It is widely accepted that an electronic conductivity of >100 S cm−1 is essential to eliminate additional contributions of the ohmic drop induced by the electrode. As we know, the perovskite structure has very high compositional flexibility. Through cation substitutions such as doping with transition metal ions, the electronic conductivity of perovskite oxides can be greatly enhanced. Meanwhile, the increase of ionic conductivity can accelerate the mass transport across the catalyst surface, which, in turn, accelerates the electrochemical reaction rate. As an anode for PCFCs, the capability for conducting both electrons and protons would allow the electrode reaction to penetrate into the electrode bulk, instead of the traditional triple phase boundary (TPB), thus greatly increasing the electrode performance. At the anode, the additional functional interlayer characterised by fewer pores between the anode and electrolyte can greatly enhance the cell performances compared to the cell without any functional layer.25,26 Indeed, more active sites and reduced mismatch between the anode and electrolyte can be achieved through this strategy. Moreover, the proton conduction of the anode would be greatly increased since fewer pores and more proton transport channels could be constructed by regulating the anodic functional interlayer, which is also considered as a critical reason for the increased cell performance.27
An appropriate porosity of the anode benefits the mass transport and optimizes the mass distribution across the anode area. A variety of alternative technologies were applied for the optimization of the porosity of anode. The phase inversion method is a good example, which has been widely used in O-SOFCs.28 This strategy can also be used to achieve macrovoids, especially finger-like pores in the PCFC anode, which can facilitate mass transport, decrease concentration polarization, and enhance the cell performance.29–31
Chemical stability is another important parameter when developing materials with high catalytic properties. In PCFCs, the anode works under a reducing atmosphere. Therefore, anodes with superior chemical stability against reducing fuels are helpful in maintaining the continuous power output at a high level. For this consideration, during the past decades nickel-based cermets were extensively used as anodes.32,33 Unfortunately, a great amount of alkaline-earth metal-based perovskites are not stable in a reducing atmosphere and at high temperatures. Particularly, the surface instability remains a concern when these materials are used as electrocatalysts under different circumstances,34 such as H2O and CO2 containing atmospheres. For instance, it was reported that some residue (SrCO3 and SrMoO4) could be formed on the surface of Sr2MMoO6 (M = Mg, Fe, Co and Ni) double perovskite oxides, demonstrating their insufficient stability under reducing conditions, which could inevitably block the catalytic pathways.35 Furthermore, the development of PCFCs would, sometime or the other, confront a crucial technical step for operating with various fuels, such as hydrocarbons, and by then their chemical stability would be more important for their commercial applications. Anyway, developing a high-performance ceramic anode with a stable structure against a strict atmosphere is an urgent task.
2.3 Role and requirements of PCFC electrolyte
The electrolyte is a dense layer that completely cuts off the direct combustion reaction between fuel and oxygen gas but only allows the transport of the ions inside. As sketched in Fig. 1, in PCFCs, the thermally activated proton generated at the anode diffuses into the electrolyte grains and subsequently moves toward the cathode side. Therefore, an electrolyte that is suitable for PCFCs should meet the following basic requirements: (1) an easily film-forming material from the engineering point of view, (2) easy densification to ensure complete separation of fuel and oxygen gas, (3) an ionic conductor with a high proton transport ability, (4) an electron-blocking layer for suppressing internal electronic leakage, and (5) high thermal and chemical stability in various atmospheres.
Since the ohmic resistance of a cell mainly originates from the electrolyte part, a thin electrolyte film will greatly reduce the ohmic loss of the cell. Bae et al. successfully synthesized a perovskite-type BaCe0.55Zr0.3Y0.15O3−δ electrolyte with a small thickness of 1 μm by a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method.36 The activation energy for the ohmic area specific resistance (ASR) was calculated to be about 0.27 eV, and a peak power density (PPD) of over 1 W cm−2 was obtained at 600 °C for the corresponding cell, which could be mainly attributed to the ultra-thin electrolyte film.
An electrolyte membrane with high density can facilitate bulk ionic conduction. It is widely recognized that the ionic resistance of the electrolyte is contributed by two parts: bulk and grain boundary resistances, corresponding to the proton transport within the grain interior and between different ceramic grains, respectively.37 It is generally accepted that a low level of grain boundaries is beneficial to enhanced ionic conduction by alleviating the proton transport resistance along the grain boundaries, which is highly associated with the cell performances. Clearly, the higher density the film has, the less grain boundaries the electrolyte has. Otherwise, for the electrolyte film with small grain size and abundant grain boundaries, the proton conductivity will be severely reduced due to the large grain boundary resistance. When the grain boundary resistance is small enough, the ionic conduction ability of the film will be mainly associated with the bulk conductivity. In this case, the composition and the structure of the adopted material are key to optimizing the overall ionic conductivity of the electrolyte. In addition, the electrolyte should be an electronic insulator to eliminate internal electronic short circuit. Fortunately, some perovskite oxides, such as BaCeO3-based oxides, have negligible electronic conductivity at relatively low temperatures.16 Since the electrolyte experiences both the oxidizing atmosphere on the cathode side and the reducing atmosphere on the anode side under real conditions, it should be strongly resistant to reducing, oxidising, and corrosive atmospheres. Perovskite-type alkaline earth cerates are usually not suitable when being used as electrolytes for PCFCs due to their instability towards H2O and CO2 containing atmospheres, while, in contrast, their zirconate analogues are much more stable under the same conditions.38 By tailoring the zirconium  concentration in alkaline earth-based perovskite oxides, membranes with both favourable chemical stability against CO2 and H2O and good sinterability may be achieved.39
2.4 Role and requirements of PCFC cathodes
The cathode, sometimes also referred to as the air electrode, is the place where the ORR occurs, as sketched in Fig. 1. In the PCFC cathode, water is formed. To be outstanding cathodes for PCFCs, the materials should meet several standards to complete the complicated electrochemical reactions simultaneously. These standards mainly include: high electronic conductivity, good catalytic activity for the ORR, superior ionic conductivity for both O2− and H+, sufficient porosity for ensuring free flow of the oxidizing gas, and favourable thermo-mechanical-chemical stability under cathodic operating conditions.
The high electronic conduction capability is a pre-requirement for an electrode material. As we know, most perovskite-type oxides are p-type conductors,40 demonstrating their suitability as PCFC cathodes. With the increase of temperature in air, an apparent transition in the conduction behaviour from semiconductor-like to metallic like is usually observed at intermediate temperature, which makes the perovskite oxides highly suitable for use at the operating temperature of PCFCs (400–750 °C).41 Typically, a high conductivity of 100 S cm−1 is favoured. However, if the electrode morphology is well designed, in particular the cathode film is thin enough, a low conductivity of 1 S cm−1 is still applicable. Thus, the electrical conductivity of most perovskite oxides is usually affordable in most circumstances as cathodes for PCFCs.
The ionic conductivity of the cathode plays a crucial role in the electrode reaction kinetics. For PCFCs, the mixed proton, oxygen ion and electron conductivity of the cathode will extend the electrochemical reaction from the TPB to the whole electrode bulk and surface; consequently, the electrode polarization resistance may be significantly reduced. Theoretically, to achieve a PPD of 1.0 W cm−2, the total ASR induced by the electrodes should at least be lower than 0.3 Ω cm2 when the electrolyte ohmic resistance is 0.15 Ω cm2.42 The significantly increased active sites because of the penetration of reactions into the electrode bulk from the mixed ionic conductivity then provide a good opportunity to reach this low ASR requirement for the cathode. It is also highly beneficial for reducing the operating temperature of PCFCs. The perovskites have been defined as perfect candidates owing to their diverse physical and chemical properties, such as their high ionic conductivities in the bulk and their catalytic activity on the surface.43 Moreover, some perovskites have an excellent ability to conduct protons, which can be used to build triple-conducting cathodes.44 More reasonably, this kind of cathode could be expected to greatly improve the power conversion efficiencies of PCFCs.
Like the anode, the porosity of the cathode is of high relevance for the mass transport and distribution across the whole cathode. Delicate modification of cathode microstructure, including its porosity, is beneficial to decreasing the cathodic polarization, because both the oxidizing gas transport and product removal occur in the cathode of PCFCs. Several pioneering and valuable works have been reported,20,45,46 demonstrating the availability and significance of the microstructural engineering of PCFCs in promoting the electrochemical reactions of the cathode.
Thermal stability is also an important factor for cathodes, and still it remains a key challenge for the commercial development of PCFCs due to the incompatibility in thermal expansion behaviour between the cathode and electrolyte. Most well-developed perovskite-type cathode materials show high thermal-expansion coefficients (TECs) (20–25 × 10−6 K−1), which are much higher than those of popular electrolytes (around 10 × 10−6 K−1).47 Therefore, there still remains large room for improving the thermal stability of PCFCs. Since water is generated on the cathode side in PCFCs, the chemical durability against steam gas is critical for the further development of the cathode. A consensus has been reached that most popular alkali metal ion-based perovskites are steam susceptible at high temperatures, for example Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF5582).48 Therefore, suppressing the surficial decomposition of alkali metal ion-based perovskites is crucial to extending their long-term operational stability.
3. Fundamentals of perovskite-type proton conductors
In history, the discovery of the proton conduction mechanism in solid oxides has lagged behind other solids, such as the solid polymer Nafion, a popular electrolyte material in polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells, in which the proton diffuses in the form of confined water within the polymer matrix.49 In 1980, Goodenough demonstrated fast proton conduction in Sb2O5·nH2O, SnO2·nH2O and ZrO2·nH2O in the room temperature range, which is considered as a pioneering work in the experimental verification of the proton conduction mechanism in solid oxides.50 In principle, in the oxides, the proton cannot fully occupy a single lattice site but bond with other ions, such as in the form of hydroxide defects, due to its much less ion radius as compared to other cations and anions. Therefore, the generation of hydroxide defects and the formation of proton transport channels are two important prerequisites for solid oxide characterised by high proton conductivities. Both prerequisites, the hydroxide defects and the proton transport channels, are not confined in solid oxides since the oxygen ions that locate inside the lattice or anchor onto the surfaces can provide abundant active sites for the chemical linkage with the protons in the form of O–H bond. For instance, ZrO2, a typical oxygen ion-conducting polycrystalline solid, can be decorated as a proton-conducting medium under particular circumstances. Using ab initio molecular dynamics simulation, Sato et al. investigated the proton migration behaviour on a cubic ZrO2(110) surface.51 Their simulation results showed that some H2O molecules that chemisorbed on zirconium atoms, i.e. Zr–OH2, could dissociate into H+ and OH−. Protons diffused from Zr–OH2 to Zr–OH−via a direct proton transfer and a path of chain protonation reaction with the neighbouring H2O molecules. However, the proton conduction in the ceramic ZrO2 membrane is extremely low, making it fall farther behind other oxides in practical applications. Up to now, perovskites, pyrochlores, monazites, and scheelites, and their related oxides have become alternative candidates for proton-conducting devices in the energy sector, owing to their distinguished structural characteristics, as shown in Fig. 2. Based on the literature about proton-conducting oxides, at least four typical characteristics can be found from their outstanding proton conduction ability: a variety of oxygen vacancies, an appropriate oxygen polyhedral shape, a suitable lattice geometry, and the structural stability under working atmospheres. For perovskite-based PCFCs, all these features can be found in the defect generation and ionic transport processes, as demonstrated below.
 Fig. 2  Crystal structures of (a) perovskite-type BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ, (b) pyrochlore-structured La2Zr2O7, (c) LaPO4 monazite, and (d) BaMoO4 scheelite. 
3.1 Defect generation in proton-conducting materials
The generation of hydroxide defects is the first prerequisite for the proton diffusion in the oxides. In humid and reducing atmospheres, the hydroxide defect could be induced through the hydration reaction (eqn (4)) at the expense of the vacancies: (4)Under dry and H2 conditions, protons dissolve as hydroxide defects in the oxide by the direct redox reaction (eqn (5)) accompanied by generation of two electrons: (5)In humid and oxidizing atmospheres, protons can be introduced into the oxides by the hydrogenation reaction, as shown in eqn (6). As a result, two hydroxide defects are generated with an emission of half O2: (6)
Under real operating conditions, the reaction given in eqn (4) is more likely to be triggered once the oxides are fed with wet fuels, for instance, the modified H2. For this reason, the oxygen vacancies are critical to the proton generation of the oxides. Experimentally, acceptor substitution doping is the most-frequent strategy in creating oxygen vacancies according to the charge compensation mechanism, as demonstrated in: (7)
Under a dry oxidizing atmosphere, the oxygen vacancies generated by acceptor dopants can work as diffusion channels for the transport of oxygen ions, where oxygen ions diffuse through the vacancy diffusion mode in the oxides. Otherwise, these oxygen vacancies  generated by acceptor dopants can either work as hydration sites for proton conduction under reducing conditions, as shown in eqn (4).
3.2 Proton conduction mechanism in perovskite-type oxides
Proton conduction is expected after the successful construction of diffusion channels for protons in the perovskite lattice. The most well-known proton transport mechanism in the oxides is described as the “hopping” mode, also named the Grotthuss mechanism.52 According to this mode, the thermally activated proton keeps rotating around the oxygen ion and, intermittently, hops from one oxygen ion site towards another, forms a chemical bond with each other and keeps rotating around the new oxygen ion until the next hopping occurs. The oxygen polyhedral shape and the lattice geometry play important roles in achieving those transportations, an easy conclusion obtained by comparing the four typical proton-conducting oxides in Fig. 2. It is clearly shown that, in perovskites (ABO3, Fig. 2a) and pyrochlores (A2B2O7, Fig. 2b),53 the interconnected BO6 octahedral networks are formed by corner-sharing, whereas monazites (ABO4, Fig. 2c) and scheelites (ABO4, Fig. 2d) can be visualized as the assembly of BO4 tetrahedra. Among these materials, perovskites have been the most widely-used oxides in PCFCs characterised by high proton conductivities until now. From the viewpoint of the lattice symmetry, to successfully transport protons, the oxide should have an appropriate oxygen polyhedral shape that is suitable for the chemical binding between protons and oxygen ions and, simultaneously, hold the appropriate lattice geometry, for instance, the proper distortion and rotation of the oxygen polyhedral structure and the suitable distance between isolated oxygen polyhedrons. In general, the distortion from the ideal structure could be realized by size mismatch between the cations and anions induced by metal ion substitution, while the rotation and the distance between different oxygen polyhedrons are more likely determined by the original structure of the oxides. Consequently, the mass transport across different crystal lattices in oxides could enable various interesting electrochemical performances. Gao et al. analysed the impacts of the unit-cell volume and the octahedral rotations on the ionic conductivity of La0.9Sr0.1Ga0.95Mg0.05O3−δ (LSGM) through density functional theory (DFT), providing good reference for PCFCs. Their results demonstrated that large unit-cell volumes and strong octahedral rotations could efficiently decrease ionic migration barriers and create adequate transport pathways with low energy, which consequently enhance the ionic conductivity.54 Experimentally, superlattice structures were successfully obtained with the realization of large unit-cell volume and strong octahedral rotations in perovskites, simultaneously, which displayed an increase in ionic conductivity by a factor of 2.5, around 600 °C. Another proton diffusion model is termed the “Vehicle” mechanism, which is more frequently used to interpret the proton permeation phenomenon around room temperature in oxides. Since most of the well-known proton conductors follow the Grotthuss mechanism, in this review, the “Vehicle” mechanism is not recorded as the highlight content.
3.3 More than proton:oxygen ion transport and electronic conduction in perovskite-type electrodes
Since cathode materials work under an oxidizing atmosphere (Fig. 1), the oxygen ion diffusion shall be the dominant mass transport. In the bulk, a large amount of oxygen ion vacancies generated through acceptor substitution build up channels for oxygen ion transport, which is termed the vacancy diffusion mechanism. As described in eqn (8), the surficial oxygen ion vacancy can capture one adsorbed O with an emission of two holes, resulting in continuous running of the cathode: (8)The holes generated in eqn (8) would combine with the electrons derived from the anode side, forming a complete discharging circuit. Concurrently, the electronic conduction in perovskites follows a polaron hopping mechanism, which will be discussed in the following section. Additionally, it was reported that oxygen ion transport follows the vacancy diffusion mechanism in a single-structure perovskite but the oxygen interstitial diffusion mechanism in some layered perovskites with Ruddleson–Popper structure.55
It can be seen that both proton and oxygen ion conduction are highly dependent on oxygen vacancies, especially for the oxides in a humid atmosphere, where the hydration reaction (eqn (4)) occurs. Moreover, two lattice oxygen ions can capture one adsorbed H2O and generate two hydroxide defects in the humid air simultaneously, and such a reaction is known as the hydrogenation reaction (eqn (6)). The proton then diffuses according to the Grotthuss mechanism in the perovskite lattice. From the viewpoint of the mass transport efficiencies, triple conducting materials, i.e. mixed proton–oxygen ion–electron conductors, are considered as the next generation of PCFC cathodes which can greatly enhance the cell performances because of the extension of reaction sites from the TPB to the whole electrode surface.22
As for a perovskite-type anode, because it is directly exposed to the fuel atmosphere, the oxygen ion diffusion would be strongly suppressed, and the proton diffusion shall be the primary mass transport through the bulk lattice. The hydroxide defect is mainly generated through the hydration reaction and the redox reaction (eqn (4) and (5)), followed by proton transport via the Grotthuss model. Actually, in most circumstances, perovskite oxides are used as supplementary components coupled with other metals in anodes, such as nickel, forming metal–perovskite composite anodes. In such composites, the nickel works as the electronic conduction component and the fuel oxidation site, while the perovskite is employed as the ion-conducting (proton) phase to facilitate the electrochemical reaction in the anode, and the additional phase to alleviate the thermo-mechanical effects between the anode and electrolyte.
A high electronic conductivity is beneficial to boosting the catalytic efficiency and decreasing the total ohmic resistance of the cell. When perovskite-type oxides are used as the anode and cathode materials, the electronic conductivity is always one of the most important concerns since large proportions of perovskites show congenital deficiencies in electronic conductivity according to reported studies.56,57 The electronic conductivity in perovskite oxides with transition metal ions anchored in B-sites is triggered by a polaron hopping mechanism. The electron defects hop between the B-site cations and the oxygen ions in a way in accordance with the Zerner double exchange process: Bn+–O2−–B(n+1)+ ⇒ B(n+1)+–O−–B(n+1)+ ⇒ B(n+1)+–O2−–Bn+.58,59 Theoretically, the energy band theory is usually used to analyse the electronic conductivity of different perovskite oxides represented by the distribution of electronic states or the density of states (DOS), which is a descriptor that governs diverse physical and chemical properties on the surface and in the bulk.43
4. Ways for property tuning of perovskite oxides towards applications in PCFCs
When scanning through the literature reported in the past decades, ion substitution, use of additives and self-reconstruction are the most widely-used and efficient strategies for adjusting the properties of perovskite oxides, consequently improving their performances in PCFCs.
4.1 Ion substitution
Ion substitution is a direct and economical way. Its fundamental builds on the different roles of A, B and O ions in the ABO3 structure. In the parent ABO3, the typical chemical valence of the A-site ion is +2 (e.g. alkaline-earth metal ions), which in turn could make it easy for it to combine with some +4 valence in the B-site (e.g. Ce4+ or Zr4+). The particular 12-fold cuboctahedral coordination of A-site ions with oxygen ions could fulfil the space constituted by different BO6 octahedrons to stabilize the perovskite framework. Generally, B-site ions play more important roles in the ionic and electronic conduction, while A-site ions are more involved in holding the structure framework that is related to the chemical stability. Nevertheless, A-site ions also have the power to affect the ionic conduction by influencing the oxygen ion in the A–O layer or probably the BO6 octahedrons. For alkaline-earth metal ions, two electrons fill the outmost layers of the alkaline-earth metal ions with inner layers fulfilled with adequate electrons. Therefore, in principle, these A-site ions have confined impact on the BO6 octahedrons. As described in Fig. 3a, when the cations in A and B sites or the anions in O sites are partially substituted with other ions with different valences and electronegativities, the local chemical composition and the lattice structure of the perovskite will be changed to varying degrees depending on which kind of dopant is used. These A/B/O-site substitutions operate by tailoring the oxygen vacancy concentration, improving the lattice geometry, changing the cation electronegativity, etc. Consequently, a variety of distinguished electrochemical performances in ionic transformation, electronic conduction, etc., can be expected, reasonably.
 Fig. 3  Perovskite material modifications through: (a) cation/anion substitutions, (b) use of additives, (c) in situ exsolution, and (d) a one-pot strategy. 
Nowadays, the most popular metal ions in the A site of the perovskites in PCFCs are Ca, Sr and Ba.60–63 Interestingly, most reported famous proton-conducting electrolyte materials are composed of Ba ions in the A site, e.g. BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3−δ (BZCY172),64 and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1O3−δ (BZCYYb1711).65 These materials show much higher proton conductivities than Ca and Sr based perovskites. The same phenomenon can be found in the double perovskite GdBaCo2O6−δ.66 No vacancies were found in the Ba–O layer, but these oxygen ions were considered as the main sites for the protonation of the oxides. Considering the different basicities among these alkaline-earth metal ions, it seems reasonable to conclude that the proton conduction across the BO6 octahedrons is partly dependent on the basicity of the A-site ions.
B-site substitution is the most-frequently-used doping strategy in material engineering in PCFCs. The key metal ions so far used in the B site are Zr and Ce, and both of them have +4 valence. There are mainly two big differences between Zr and Ce. One is the ionic polarity. The ionic polarity of Zr4+ is much larger than that of Ce4+. When combined with alkaline-earth metal ions, the chemical stability of Zr-based oxides in a humid environment or a CO2 atmosphere is much better than that of Ce-based oxides. The other effect caused by the ionic polarity is ionic conduction. As is well known, different from Ce-based perovskites which show partial oxygen ion conduction at elevated temperatures, Zr-based perovskite-type electrolytes are nearly pure proton conductors.67 The ionic polarity may be responsible for the different ionic conduction performances between them, which is still awaiting to be confirmed. Particularly, the different valence electron layer structure could make the valence of Ce feasible in the oxide with Ce3+ co-existing with Ce4+, which in turn could trigger more oxygen vacancies. By doping with rare earth ions with +3 valence in the B site, more oxygen vacancies can be successfully induced in the material's lattice. Nowadays, most of the ions in the La series including Y3+, Yb3+, Sm3+, Gd3+, and Pr3+ can be used to create oxygen vacancies in the perovskite lattice.37,68,69 Under these conditions, the ionic polarity can also be used to analyse the different ionic conductivities of various perovskite electrolyte materials. The dopants with high ionic polarities could play an enormous role in acting as the trap of the protons, thus significantly influencing the proton conductivity of the perovskites. Experimentally, a descriptor of activation energy is usually used in quantitatively measuring the transport ability of the protons in oxides.
The electronic conduction can be controllably regulated by employing different types and various amounts of transition metal ions in the B site of the perovskite. For example, to acquire a certain degree of electronic conductivity, the metal ions in the B sites could be partially replaced with other transition metal ions, such as Fe, Co, and Ni.70 To accurately design perovskite electrodes, the energy band theory is generally used as an important reference, and an ORR catalytic descriptor for different oxides has been established for perovskite oxides.71 For example, the electronic configuration of perovskite-based BSCF5582 is shown in Fig. 4a.72 The d orbital electrons of transition metal ions provide high flexibility in changing their valences. Subsequently, the electron conduction pathway could be constituted through the valence change of the metal ions and oxygen ions (from O2− to O−) accompanied by redox reactions with adsorbed groups, as shown in Fig. 4b and c, with the illustration of the catalytic descriptor (eg).43 Metal ion substitution in perovskites can change the oxidation state of the pristine transition metal at the B-site, modify the eg filling of the transition metal, and alter the energetics of the corresponding electrochemical reactions, as demonstrated in Fig. 4d. For the double perovskite, the diverse cations in A/B sites drive the complexity in the electronic conduction mechanism. For example, Vøllestad et al. studied the ionic and electrical properties of La-substituted BGLC (Ba1−xGd0.8La0.2+xCo2O6−δ, 0 < x < 0.5) at high temperature. They pointed out that the electronic conductivity of BGLC could be rationally described by a two-band conduction mechanism where a p-type charge carrier held a dominant position together with a less mobile n-type charge carrier (Fig. 4e).73
 Fig. 4  (a) Typical electronic configuration of perovskite-type BSCF5582. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Relevant transition metal orbitals of Fe, Co and Ni ions. (c) A BO5 configuration with a sketch of an O2 π* orbital donating electrons to an empty eg orbital. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) An E pyramid diagram of La series transition metal ion-based perovskite oxides, designed for illustration of the role of the eg electron (the descriptor) in the ORR activity of La-based perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. (e) A typical energy band of Co-based oxides with diverse valence states of Co ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The anion substitution theory also builds on the particular electronic structure of perovskite oxides. Until now, various types of anions, e.g. F−, Cl− N−, and S2−, have been used as the substituents in the modifications of PCFC cathodes and electrolyte.74 For instance, the fluorine ion with high electronegativity (3.90) allows better attractability with electrons compared to the oxygen ion (3.44).75 Partial F substitution of O ions could change the valence electron density of the oxygen ion, weaken the chemical bonds between cations and oxygen ions, reduce O2− transport resistance, and finally enhance the lattice oxygen transport ability. Moreover, some anion substitution can effectively depress the basicity of materials and consequently enhance the chemical durability of the perovskites.
When selecting metal ions for perovskite oxides, one key factor to be considered is the size of the metal ions. Generally, a large ionic radius in the A-site could bring several advantages. For example, it could help the perovskite to maintain high symmetry, which in turn gives rise to colossal ionic conductivities. Very different from electrolytes, the most popular perovskite-type electrode materials contain Sr in their A sites, for example, Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ (SSC551),76 La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ (LSCF6428),77 and BSCF5582.78 The possible reason may be attributed to the appropriate ionic radius of the Sr ion compared to Ca, Ba and La ions in electrode materials. The B-site ion size is more responsible for the symmetry of the BO6 octahedrons, and plays a more important role in the ionic conduction. The ionic radius should be appropriate enough to minimize the structural distortion, which brings about positive effects on the ionic conduction through BO6 octahedrons for electrolyte materials, or, otherwise, maximize the lattice distortion, which may achieve a balance between ionic conduction and electronic conduction. As discussed above, the ionic polarity is a fundamental factor that significantly affects the chemical stability of the oxides and the activation energy of the ionic transport (protons and oxygen ions) in oxides. The electronegativity or the ionization energy of these metal ions can provide important references for accurate design of perovskite materials in PCFCs. In addition, the electronic configuration of the metal ions is highly responsible for the electrochemical ability of the perovskites, especially for the B-site metal ions because the BO6 octahedrons are usually considered as the active sites where a great number of electrochemical reactions occur through the interaction between BO6 octahedrons and adsorbed active groups (Fig. 4b and c).43,79
4.2 Diverse additives
According to our experiences, when confronting some annoying problems in PCFCs, ion substitution sometimes shows confined power to solve these problems. For example, the relative density of a ceramic electrolyte membrane is an important factor in evaluating its practical application value. Experimentally, this value should be at least 90% to avoid the formation of penetrating holes for sufficient separation of fuel gas and static air. However, perovskite oxides employed as electrolytes in PCFCs usually show poor sintering capability and require ultrahigh-temperature treatment for membrane densification, thus bringing many disadvantages. Cation substitution, such as Zn doping, indeed, can improve the electrolyte sinterability. However, as the sintering aid, the impact of the dopant on the ionic conductivity remains a big concern. Moreover, the working principles of some dopants used for sintering aids are in strong relation to the secondary phase induced by the dopants. For example, Wang and co-workers pointed out that a BaO–ZnO eutectic, rather than ZnO, should be responsible for the improvement of the sintering behavior of Y-doped BaCeO3–BaZrO3 solid solutions.80 Their results indicated that the direct excessive addition strategy may be more flexible and controllable in the enhancement of the sinterability of the oxides compared to the doping method, as illustrated in Fig. 3b, which can greatly broaden the scope of the modification strategies using sintering aids. Introduction of auxiliary agents also enables the achievement of high-density electrolyte at a relatively low temperature comparable to that at an elevated temperature. Table 1 summarizes the most-frequently used sintering aids in different incorporation modes, mainly including doping methods and external addition methods. According to the as-reported studies, at least three strategies have been used in partial substitution of the cations in A/B sites in perovskite oxides, as shown in Table 1. In addition, the excessive addition method is the strategy wherein one or two sintering aids are directly mixed with the perovskite oxide. In Table 1, some reports about the sintering aids served as the raw precursor powders with A oxide and B oxides are classified into the excessive addition method owing to the lack of detailed evidence of the phase composition according to these reports. Different impacts can be created by different incorporation methods. Through the direct stoichiometric doping method, generally the phase stability of the modified perovskite could be easily maintained, while through the non-stoichiometric method great phase instability can be created due to the excessive cation occupation in A/B sites. For the excessive addition method, the impurity phase could be generated because of the phase aggregation which mainly occurs at the grain boundaries in most circumstances. Meanwhile, through the excessive addition method, partial metal ions can also be incorporated into the lattice sites at high temperature because of the high compositional flexibility of the perovskite structure. Moreover, the ionic conductivity of the perovskite can be modified by the addition of the sintering aid. As we know, the total ionic conduction of the solid is highly dependent on the ionic transport ability through the bulk and across the grain boundary. The doping method may influence the ionic conduction in the solid by affecting the bulk ionic conduction and grain-boundary conduction. For the stoichiometric doping method, partial substitution of A/B-site cations can influence the bulk ionic conduction because the chemical composition of the perovskite will be changed through the substitution method. Moreover, the modified grain will grow into a large size inevitably in most circumstances through the substitution method, which is an important factor that affects the grain-boundary conduction. In contrast, the excessive addition method may mainly influence the ionic conduction by affecting the ionic transport ability across the grain boundary since the excessive addition method is more prone to induce impurity at the grain boundary area compared to the substitution method in most circumstances.
Table 1 A summary of different kinds of sintering aids including various incorporation methods, the chemical compositions with single perovskite ABO3−δ for particular illustration, the composition categories of different types of sintering aids and some typical sintering aids previously used. M represents the cation of the sintering aids




Incorporation methods
Chemical compositions
Categories
Typical sintering aids




Stoichiometric substitution
AB1−xMxO3−δ/A1−xBMxO3−δ
Transition metal ions
Ni, Zn, Co, etc.85–87


Post-transition metal ions
In, etc.88


Alkali metal/alkaline earth metal ions
Li, Ca, etc.89


AB1−x−yM1xM2yO3−δ
Co-doping with metal ions
Bi-In, etc.90


Non-stoichiometric doping
ABMxO3−δ/AMxBO3−δ
Transition metal ions
Zn, etc.91


Post-transition metal ions
Bi, etc.92


Alkali metal/alkaline earth metal ions
Li, etc.93


Non-stoichiometric ratio
A1+xBO3−δ
A-site metal ions
Ba, etc.94


Excessive addition
A oxide + B oxides + xMO (precursor powders)
Transition metal oxides
NiO, CuO, etc.95


Alkaline earth metal ions
MgO, etc.96


ABO3−δ + xMO
Transition metal oxides
CuO, NiO, ZnO, CoO, Fe2O3, etc.97,98


Post-transition metal oxides
Bi2O3, etc.99


Alkali metal oxides/alkaline earth metal oxides
Li2O, CaO, etc.89,100


Metalloid oxides
B2O3, etc.101


Nonmetal oxides
P2O5, etc.102


ABO3−δ + xM1O + yM2O
Composite sintering aids
Bi2O3–CuO, BaO–CuO, etc.103,104




The theoretical foundation of this strategy follows the synergistic effect between the host phase and additional phase. For instance, the widely-accepted working principle of sintering aids still keeps in line with the traditional ceramic sintering theories. Most of the as-used sintering aids have lower melting points relative to the host materials. When working as a dopant, the additive could apparently reduce the phase transition point of the whole host from the perspective of their thermal diagram. Second, excessive addition of some sintering aids can induce the formation of a solid solution which is much more beneficial for membrane densification, as is promoted in traditional functional ZrC ceramic.82 Third, additives are able to induce more defects inside the crystal lattice, making mass transfer easy. Fourth, for interstitial solid solution, the additional ion that is incorporated in the interstitial sites can drive the lattice distortion, which in turn further increases the membrane density. Fifth, some sintering aids could promote the formation of a liquid phase at the surfaces of the host grains at high temperature.83 As a consequence, the liquid component significantly accelerates the mass transport efficiency especially across the surface and works as a driving force for the sufficient drain of gas pores. Sixth, growth of large grains is thermodynamically approved, thus making the membrane even denser. Experimentally, various types of candidates were reported as sintering aids in the reduction of the sintering temperature for PCFC membranes, such as transition metal oxides, which would be discussed in the following parts. The catalytic properties of the electrodes can also be modified with additives. The impregnation method is a good example.84 Generally, a high temperature sintering process is necessary for the successful formation of the perovskite oxide phase. These particles will, inevitably, grow up together with the formation of large sizes of bulk materials, which is considered as a reason for the reduced catalytic activity. But fortunately, most perovskites show excellent thermal stability with other phases over a wide temperature range. By introducing metal ion solution on the surfaces of perovskites, i.e. impregnation, the secondary phase can be in situ fabricated through a high temperature treatment. These additives characterised by small size and high catalytic activity can operate as the active sites for the ORR or the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), which will greatly enhance the catalytic activity of perovskite-based materials.
4.3 Self-reconstruction
Self-reconstruction is the third powerful way in that more and more researchers have exploited it for improving the perovskite properties in PCFCs. The basic fundamental of this strategy builds on the synergistic effect and the size effect, simultaneously. The first aspect can be understood based on the above section. The second effect can be simply explained by: the smaller the particle size, the more densely accessible active sites the catalyst surface has. Fig. 3c and d show two different self-reconstruction methods for building hybrid catalysts in the lab. Fig. 3c describes the in situ exsolution strategy for the formation of additional phases, while Fig. 3d displays the one-pot synthesis method. The main difference between these two strategies is that the first method generally needs a post-treatment for the successful fabrication of exsoluted phases, whereas the second is a more direct way without any additional treatments.

In situ exsolution phases deriving from the composition of the hosts could be reasonably designed, varying from metal, metal oxides or even perovskite oxides. The exsolution amount could also be flexibly controlled by reasonably altering the treatment atmosphere, the sintering temperature and the immersion time. One of the most valuable advantages of this way is that the exsolution phase could strongly locate on the host surface (very different from the impregnation method), extremely promoting the ionic exchange between the host and the exsoluted phases. Additionally, the exsolutions could in turn induce more defects in the host materials due to the partial composition loss of the hosts, which will further boost the catalytic activity of the materials.
One-pot synthesis provides another strategy for enhancing perovskite-based electrolyte and electrode materials. From the literal meaning, this strategy indicates that all the components are synthesised simultaneously in the same reaction vessel without any additional treatments.105 Since the same components can be significantly separated by the other phases, the grain growth can be remarkably depressed, thus forming much smaller particles compared to the single phase sintered at the same temperature. Meanwhile, the contact between different phases can be efficiently strengthened thanks to the one-pot treatment, which is considered as an advantage factor in improving the electrochemical reactions.
5. Recent advances in perovskite-based PCFCs
5.1 Developments in perovskite-type electrolytes
The electrolyte is the core part of PCFCs that determines the energy conversion abilities of the cells. Most of the electrolyte materials reported up to now for PCFCs are based on doped BaCeO3−δ and BaZrO3−δ perovskite-type proton conductors. Such materials, if fully densified, show high intrinsic conductivity at intermediate temperature, which was experimentally confirmed to be as high as 0.11 S cm−1 at 500 °C in BaZr0.8Y0.2O3−δ (BZY82),106 comparable to the benchmark of typical O-SOFCs, such as doped ceria. Indeed, selected perovskite oxides, such as yttrium and/or ytterbium doped BaCe1−xYxO3−δ,107 BaZr1−xYxO3−δ,108 BaZrxCe0.8−xY0.2O3−δ,56 and BaZrxCe0.8−xY0.1Yb0.1O3−δ65 (marked BCY, BZY, BZCY and BZCYYb, respectively), exhibit considerable proton conductivities with relatively low proton migration energy over the intermediate temperature range, which are widely considered as the most well-promising electrolyte materials for PCFCs reported until now.16
As a blocking layer that sandwiches the porous anode and cathode layers together to avoid the direct mixing of fuel gas at the anode side and oxidizing gas at the cathode side, the electrolyte membrane should be well densified with an adequate density (at least higher than 90%) in the absence of pinholes. Meanwhile, the apparent conductivity of a polycrystalline oxide electrolyte is determined by both the conductivity in the oxide interior and the grain boundary conductivity. Poor sintering of the electrolyte membrane may cause large resistance for the ion diffusion across the grain boundary. As a result, significantly reduced apparent conductivity of the electrolyte membrane may be experienced if it is poorly sintered. Unfortunately, many Ce/Zr-based perovskite-type protonic conductors show poor sintering capability, and ultrahigh sintering temperature and a long dwelling time are required to achieve a sufficient density of the electrolyte membrane. Such complex fabrication conditions will bring several problems. First, they will greatly increase the energy consumption for cell fabrication. Second, due to the low saturated vapor pressure level of alkaline earth metal, barium evaporation from the A-site becomes obvious during sintering at high temperature,109 resulting in composition segregation of the perovskite oxides (Fig. 5a and b), thus affecting the intrinsic conductivity and mechanical strength of the electrolytes.110 When the dwelling temperature reaches 1300 °C, Ba ion diffusion could be triggered,111,112 leading to the chemical inhomogeneity of the electrolyte, while the presence of impurity phases and element segregation in electrolyte could have a considerable influence on the proton conductivity of these electrolytes. What is worse, when the temperature is even higher, the interface reaction between the electrolyte and electrode via cation exchange is thermodynamically favored, which may affect the ionic conductivity of both the electrode and electrolyte. Therefore, improving the sinterability at reduced temperature is considered as a key step towards the practical use of proton-conducting perovskite oxides as electrolytes in PCFCs. Although some advanced technologies such as atomic layer deposition (ALD) and PLD techniques can be used in the fabrication of ultra-thin electrolyte membranes,113,114 up to now, the promoted sintering behavior of perovskite membranes achieved by applying sintering aids has been extensively used, which is believed to be a more practical way due to its simplicity, easy scale up, and low cost.
 Fig. 5  (a and b) Elemental mapping scanning of a BZCY172 pellet surface fabricated by a conventional sintering strategy at 1400 °C, with a presentation of Y element segregation, measured by scanning electron microscopy together with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS). Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Shrinkage curves of BZY20Ni1 and BZY20Ni2 electrolyte specimens. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) Dilatometric thermal results showing distinguished trends of BZY and 4 mol% Zn doped BZY electrolytes and 0.6NiO-0.4BaZr0.8Y0.2O3−δ (NiO-BZY) green cermet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (e) Dilatometric results of BZYb15 ceramics with: the stoichiometric addition of 1.0 mol% CuO, the excessive introduction of 1.0 mol% CuO, and the specimen without any CuO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. Arrhenius plots of BZY, 1 mol% Cu doped BZY, 1 mol% Ni doped BZY, and 1 mol% Zn doped BZY electrolytes test under different atmospheres: (f) dry air and (g) wet air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (h) An optical image of the BZCYYb4411 pellet sintered at 1500 °C for 5 h. (i) Ba element distribution result from adequate to deficient regions, respectively, represented from red to blue, indicating the Ba cation ratio: Ba/(Zr + Ce + Y + Yb). Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, to date, many new perovskite-type electrolytes have been successfully synthesized and reported, which  can be used for PCFCs. In the following part, several outstanding electrolytes including Ce/Zr-based perovskites are reviewed, and some advanced fabrication methods in membrane densification are discussed.

5.1.1 Sinterability improvement of Ce/Zr based perovskites. 
Ce/Zr-based perovskite-type oxides are the most widely used protonic conductors in PCFCs. Doping the perovskite lattice with low-melting-point oxides, such as transition metal oxides, could remarkably decrease the sintering temperature for membrane densification. For BaZrxCe1−xO3−δ electrolyte with a zirconium relative amount (x) of >0.1, a sintering temperature of >1350 °C is necessary in order to achieve a high ceramic density (>90%). Using the doping method, the sintering temperature could be reduced by a degree of 100–300 °C relative to the elevated temperature for the unmodified membrane with similar density. As shown in Fig. 5c, by applying the substitution method for BaZr0.8Y0.20O3−δ (BZY20),85 the pellet made from slightly Ni doped BaZr0.8Y0.19Ni0.01O3−δ (BZY20Ni1) started to densify at around 1100 °C, while the initial densification point of the BaZr0.8Y0.18Ni0.02O3−δ (BZY20Ni2) sample located at around 1050 °C, both of which are at least 100 °C below that of the BZY20 pellet. In another study, by stoichiometrically dissolving 4 mol% Zn into BZY20 oxides, forming BaZr0.8Y0.16Zn0.04O3−δ (BZY20Zn4, Fig. 5d),115 the modified pellet started to shrink at 1100 °C and reached a maximum shrinkage of 21% at 1460 °C, which was almost four times that of pristine BZY20 (about 5.5%) and comparable to that of the 0.6NiO-0.4BaZr0.8Y0.2O3−δ anode. Interestingly, at temperatures higher than 1460 °C, BZY20Zn4 started to expand again, resulting in a decrease of sintering density. Copper doping was also found to be very effective in decreasing the sintering temperature of protonic electrolytes. Fig. 5e shows the distinguished sintering shrinkage capabilities of the stoichiometric Cu-doped BaZr0.85Yb0.15O3−δ (BZYb15Cu) and excessive addition of 1.0 mol% CuO. In contrast, the relative densities of the aid-free green samples were only about 58–60%.
Lithium is the lightest metal with a lower melting point compared with other metals. Sun et al. modified BZY20 with Li.93 Though the material demonstrated higher ionic conduction in wet air than BZY20 without any auxiliary agent, unfortunately, the maximum power densities (MPDs) of this type of fuel cell were very low (53, 39, and 26 mW cm−2 at 700, 650, and 600 °C, respectively), which might be attributed to the low conductivities in a reducing atmosphere considering the unstable Li ions, according to our knowledge. In another study, it was found that 2 mol% cobalt addition into the oxide lattice significantly improved the relative density of BZCYYb1711.87 But, cobalt doping inside BZCY was proved to be not very helpful in increasing the proton conductivity of the host.116 In contrast, excessive Co doping will enhance the electronic transport as a consequence of the formation of BaCoO3 impurity, as shown in the electrochemical results measured in an oxidizing atmosphere.116,117 Furthermore, the electrical conductivities of Co-doped electrolyte are believed to be even higher in a reducing atmosphere considering the low anti-reduction ability of Co-containing compounds. Sn-doped BZY20 displayed a higher total conductivity than pure BZY20, but it still was subpar in comparison with BZY electrolyte under a N2 atmosphere.118 Meanwhile, Bi-modified BZY10 was reported, by Le and co-workers, as the evidence in decreasing the grain boundary conductivity.92 Their results demonstrated that the shrinkage of green BZY was only 10.4% at 1480 °C. As the Bi2O3 amount increased, the shrinkage value doubled at 1470 °C for 3 mol% Bi2O3 additive, implying that Bi addition into barium zirconate significantly enhanced its sintering ability.92 Another result showed that through the substitution of Ca in the A-site of BZY20, the pellet exhibited a higher conductivity and a correspondingly high output power density, but unfortunately Ca addition was not greatly helpful in the reduction of sintering temperature.89 Some rare earth ions, such as Pr and Nd, could slightly change the sinterability behavior of host materials once they were used as dopants.119 For example, Fabbri et al. provided the shrinkage curves and the relative density results of Pr doped proton-conducting pellets.120 Their results proved that Pr doping promoted the sinterability of ceramic electrolyte with reduced sintering temperatures for densification of proton-conducting materials. Interestingly, this type of sintering aid was found to increase the proton conductivity of PCFC electrolyte,41 which was much more different from NiO and ZnO that usually had a negative effect on the ionic conductivity.
In addition to the doping method, directly mixing the material host with the additional sintering aid phase is also an efficient approach to improving the sinterability of PCFC electrolytes. Fig. 5e compares the different shrinkage trends between the 1 mol% Cu doping strategy and the mixing method with 1 mol% excessive CuO, as reported by Park et al.121 Both the methods extremely enhanced the material sinterability compared with the pristine 15 mol% Yb-doped BaZrO3 (BZYb15). The sample obtained through the physical mixing method demonstrated a higher shrinkage ratio than that of the stoichiometrically doped sample below 1400 °C. However, at a temperature of >1400 °C, the doped sample prevailed over the physically mixed sample. In another study, Babilo and Haile conducted a comparison of the density values of BaZr0.85Y0.15O3−δ (BZY15) pellets in the presence of different modifiers.122 The experiments were carried out by mechanical addition of 4 mol% sintering aids into the BZY15 host followed by a calcination process at 1300 °C for 4 h. In comparison with pure BZY15, Ni, Cu and Zn modified samples had high densities, presenting the final density from about 60% of pure BZY15 to approximately 86–88% for the modified samples. In contrast, other additives, especially Fe, V and Cr, substantially deteriorated the host densification behavior through the direct mixing method. The investigation also suggested that the most suitable doping concentration of transition metal oxides was around 4 mol%. The same promoting effect induced by the sintering aid for the membrane densification can be found in BaCeO3-based conductors. For example, a sintering temperature of higher than 1500 °C was essential for a BaCe0.9Gd0.1O3−δ (BCG) perovskite membrane to reach a relative density of >90%, while it could be reduced to the 1250–1450 °C range by incorporating some transition metal oxides as sintering aids.124–126 The improved densification of the electrolyte membrane then ensured colossal conductivity. Up to now, in addition to the aforementioned sintering aids, multiple additives employing two complex additives have been adopted to reduce the sintering temperature of PCFC electrolytes, such as Bi2O3–CuO and BaO–CuO.103,104 Indeed, these additives could improve the sintering of proton-conducting perovskite oxides to different degrees.
Based on the as-reported studies and our expertise, a reasonable conclusion can be made that the addition of sintering aids is able to cause significant enhancements in shrinkage through different ways. First, the electrolyte volume changes at low sintering temperatures, indicating a decrease of phase formation temperature due to additives. Second, the excessive addition of sintering aids densifies the electrolyte ceramic by a partial liquid phase-enhanced way, while the stoichiometric doping more likely follows the lattice distortion action pathway.80 However, the difference between these two strategies is not obvious since generally both may contribute to the shrinkage enhancement together for an actual sintering process. For example, in the result of ref. 127, the volume of BaCe0.35Zr0.5Y0.15O3−δ (BCZY) shrank about 20% when the temperature was 1500 °C, whereas external ZnO-modified BCZY could attain almost the same shrinkage degree below 1200 °C. Furthermore, no matter what modification method it used, ZnO additive easily led to relative densities larger than 95% at 1100–1450 °C in different host materials.98,115,128 Therefore, an appropriate sintering aid is a very effective intermediary in decreasing the sintering temperature and can be used to significantly promote the densification process of solid electrolyte ceramics.
However, some additives could remarkably impair ionic conductivities, as clearly shown in Fig. 5f and g for Cu, Ni, and Zn doped BZY, coincidently.96 As reported by Bozza and co-workers, although the sintering point of BZY was drastically reduced, both the bulk and grain boundary conductivities were recorded at an decreased level through Ni doping.85 Even though NiO was under assessment by an external addition method, NiO particles enriched in the grain boundaries might deteriorate the total conductivity by increasing the grain boundary resistance. The experimental data proved that the grain boundary conductivities of ultrafine-grained pellets were found to be 2–4 times lower than those of microcrystalline samples.129 One possible reason was that the in situ formed BaY2NiO5 phase dispersed at the grain surface in ultrafine-grained pellets (with addition of NiO), blocking the conducting path of protons. The other reason was that protons in space-charge layers could be diluted due to the electrostatic interaction from two adjacent space-charge layers, leading to a decrease of proton conductivities in grain boundaries according to the space-charge layer theory.130 As mentioned above, two strategies, an external addition way and an internal doping method, could be used, for example, in the research of the sinterability improvement of BZCY172.131 The doping method was proved to be more effective in improving the electrolyte sinterability and conductivity simultaneously in this literature. A previous investigation on the element distribution of Ni/Zn doped BZY15 showed that both Zn and Ni could accumulate in the grain boundaries.132 Metallic Ni particles were observed on the grain surface after treatment under a reducing atmosphere. The effect of the interstitially dissolved Ni metal on ionic conductivity was  studied in terms  of the proton trapping ability of the perovskite octahedra. Another report by Kim and co-workers showed that the hydration kinetics, the hydration equilibrium constant and the proton mobility were highly suppressed when NiO was used as an additive in BZY20 electrolyte.133 In their work, it was supposed that Ni served as a trap site for protons. However, the electronic mobility could be improved by increasing the extent of orbital overlap. In addition, Han et al. observed that the hydration level could be reduced in BZY20 when using NiO as a sintering additive.134 Baral studied the reason behind the decrease of the proton conductivity by analytically comparing the electrical and dielectric properties.127 In this work, the author claimed that, due to Zn doping in BZY15, the dielectric constant was reduced by two orders of magnitude, leading to a stronger coulombic interaction between protons and dopants, and the proton trapping could be increased together with an elevated binding or association energy. In total, the proton conductivity might decrease with increased electrical conductivity because the bivalent transition-metal ions actually replaced the elements at the B-sites, which was helpful for the electron transfer.135 Moreover, the impurity at the grain boundary caused by the additives may be considered as a negative factor for the mechanical properties of electrolyte ceramic. In the reference reported by Ciria et al., the fast mechanical degradation of the samples made by reactive sintering under extremely compressive conditions could be attributed to the reduction of NiO nanoparticles distributed at the grain boundaries.136 At present, it is still a major challenge for most sintering additives to enhance the proton conductivity of solid ceramic electrolytes beyond their sinterability effect.
In contrast to NiO, fortunately, the introduction of ZnO displayed minor influence on the total conductivity of perovskite hosts.80,137,138 The possible reason was attributed to the fact that the bulk resistance increased slightly with Zn addition, whereas the grain boundary resistance decreased in contrast, rendering similar total conductivity values.137 The total conductivity of Ba0.97Zr0.77Y0.19Zn0.04O3−δ reached 1.0 × 10−3 S cm−1 in 5% wet H2 at 600 °C, which was almost the same as the unmodified BZY20.138 Also, the conductivity improvements of BaCeO3-based electrolytes have been reported. The comparison showed that, among the general transition metal ions, Zn was demonstrated to be most effective for the densification of doped BaCeO3−δ than La, Nd, Sm, Y, etc., through an external addition method.98 The corresponding results showed that the Zn additive did not cause serious differences in the electrical and ionic conductivities. The reason why ZnO addition was more efficient than the other transition metals was supposed to be related to the appropriate ionic radius of the zinc ion which is similar to Zr4+, and thus the Zn2+ ion can be more easily doped into the perovskite lattice. But this conclusion was still with a conjecture, and it could not be used to explain the different effects of Cu2+ and Zn2+ sintering aids with similar radii.
In addition to sintering aids, many other meaningful approaches have been tried. As is known to us, grain size and grain boundary microstructure have important effects on ionic conduction behavior.139 The ceramic powders synthesized by special treatment such as ultrafine grained particles, or the grain boundary-free electrolyte fabricated by a particular process can be used to improve the electrical performance of the cell.106,140 For example, grain boundary-free BZY electrolyte films were fabricated on a MgO substrate by the PLD method, with the proton conductivity reaching up to 0.11 S cm−1 at 500 °C,106 more than 120 times higher than that of polycrystalline electrolytes with the same composition (500 °C, 9 × 10−4 S cm−1). Additionally, excessive Ba element at the A site can improve the sinterabilities of the electrolyte without introducing additional impurities. He et al. improved the performance of dual-ion solid oxide fuel cells by improving the sinterabilities and conducting properties of BZCYYb electrolyte by introducing excessive A-site Ba ions.94 More than two times protonic conductivity (0.042 S cm−1) was obtained for Ba(Zr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1)0.95O3−δ compared to BZCYYb1711 at a relatively lower sintering temperature (1350 °C). Choi and co-workers provided a new fabrication method for the densification of a stoichiometric BZCYYb4411 electrolyte with an average size of about 10 μm by controlling the chemical potential of Ba, near the electrolyte surface during the high-temperature sintering process, as shown in Fig. 5h and i.123 The cell with the modified BZCYYb4411 electrolyte exhibited outstanding PPDs of 1.90 W cm−2 and 1.01 W cm−2 at 650 °C and 550 °C, as well as low ohmic resistances of 0.060 Ω cm2 and 0.082 Ω cm2 respectively.
Experimentally, the sintering temperature could be reduced by using complicated fabrication methods, such as the aerosol deposition strategy and the microwave sintering method, that, however, greatly broaden the fabrication selections in membrane densification. Bae used the aerosol deposition method and successfully synthesized BaZr0.8Y0.2O3−δ (BZY82) without any use of sintering additives.141 Even when the sintering temperature was reduced to 1200 °C, a high performance could also be achieved. Wang et al. employed the microwave sintering method in the synthesis of BZCY172.142 A low temperature and a short dwell time (900 °C for 1 h) appeared to be adequate for the formation of a pure perovskite phase. A dense membrane with a density value of 96% could be obtained at 1300 °C for 5 h. Consequently, the fuel cell fabricated by applying this type of electrolyte membrane demonstrated a conductivity of 7 × 10−3 S cm−1 and delivered an MPD of 791 mW cm−2 at 700 °C.


5.1.2 Nanosized electrolyte. 
The perovskite oxide surface is the most active area where mass transfer occurs, including the ionic transport across the spatial boundaries between different grains. If the perovskite particles crystallize at the nanoscale, many interesting phenomena would be observed, for example the high surficial ionic conductivities. The abundant surficial oxygen ions and  the defects can serve as the fast vehicle for ionic transfer. Hence, by employing nano-sized electrolytes, the cell performance could be greatly boosted since the internal ionic conductivity is greatly improved. Unlike the densification method for traditional electrolyte, herein, the electrolyte with nanostructure has not been fully densified by the conventional high-temperature sintering process. Actually, the microstructure of the electrolyte is nanocrystalline. For example, Xia et al. developed nano-sized BaCo0.4Fe0.4Zr0.1Y0.1O3−δ (BCFZY4411) as electrolyte.143 The electronic conduction was suppressed by constructing a BCFZY4411-ZnO p–n heterostructure. Dual-ion (H+/O2−) conducting behavior was confirmed. Meanwhile, when the BZCY filter was used for blocking the oxygen ion and electron, a high power density could be achieved at 500 °C (about 500 mW cm−2), further demonstrating high proton conductivity of this hybrid.143 Surprisingly, this type of electrolyte usually generates elevated power output compared to the traditional electrolyte with an extra-dense structure. For example, Yousaf Shah et al. used a La-doped BZY proton conductor as the electrolyte. A very high ionic conductivity of 0.15 S cm−1 and a high MPD of 0.78 W cm−2 were obtained at 500 °C.144 Recently, Mushtaq et al. achieved an OCV value of 1.12 V and an MPD of >1 W cm−2 on the Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe0.8Sb0.2O3−δ–Sm0.2Ce0.8O2−δ (BSFSb-SDC) heterostructure electrolyte at 550 °C, as shown in Fig. 6a–c.145 They claimed that the internal/built-in electric field that originated from the potential gradient between BSFSb and SDC particles/grains was responsible for the successful operation of the cell. The Prof. Zhu group contributed a great number of related studies on P–N junction-based fuel cells, most of which display high power densities.146–149 However, until now, convincing experimental evidence has not been provided for the accurate explanation of the surficial ionic conduction, according to our knowledge.
 Fig. 6  (a) Fuel cell performance test on BSFSb-SDC electrolyte. (b) SEM image of the fuel cell with the typical “P–N” junction. (c) Energy band structure at the “P–N” junction-type BSFSb-SDC interface and schematic sketch of the ionic transport with the aid of the internal/built-in electric field. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. PCFC electrolyte design principle developed on the strong electron correlations: the distortion of the SNO perovskite structure (d). A comparison between proton incorporation and diffusion mechanisms in the conventional solid electrolyte (e) and SNO (f). Different electronic configuration of Ni 3d orbitals for the pristine and the electron-doped SNO in the ionic limit (g). (h) Schematic operation mechanism of the PCFC on SNO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 


5.1.3 New electrolytes beyond Ce/Zr-based perovskites. 
Discovering alternative perovskite oxides as electrolyte materials for PCFCs beyond the scope of Ce/Zr-based perovskites remains a huge challenge. However, some highlights in the explorations of new types of perovskites have been reported. Zhou et al. synthesized a nickelate perovskite (SmNiO3, SNO) as an electrolyte. The oxide showed comparable ionic conductivity to the best-performing solid electrolytes at the same temperature points with a relatively low activation energy (about 0.3 eV).150 As shown in Fig. 6d–h, the internal electronic conduction could be suppressed by a filling-controlled Mott transition induced by internal hydrogen incorporation. Proton incorporation could happen spontaneously, and thus protons could transport by rotational diffusion within an octahedron and transfer to a neighboring oxygen ion, which was facilitated by the hydrogen bond. Świerczek et al. reported three new perovskite-type electrolytes: BaSn0.5In0.5O2.75 (BSI), 10 mol% La doped BSI, and 10 mol% Gd doped BSI.151 High temperature X-ray measurements and thermogravimetric (TGA) measurements proved the presence of protons in the configuration of OH˙ defects in the hydrated samples. The proton conductivity was found in the range of 10−3 of magnitude between 500 and 700 °C. However, the performances of these oxides were not tested in the fuel cell in this literature, remaining an interesting issue for further study.

5.2 Recent advances in perovskite-type cathodes
The cathode part is of enormous importance to the cell since the electrochemical reactions that occur in the cathode are highly effective for the device performance. Based on the reaction principles of PCFCs, the adsorption ability towards O2 and other active species, such as O, O− and O2− (Fig. 7a), the redox ability of the metal ions in the light of the single atom scale, the mass exchange ability from the viewpoint of the perovskite unit scale, and the micro-morphology of the catalytic particles in the electrodes are the most important parameters we believe in determining the ultimate energy conversion capabilities of the cathode, which will be, respectively, elaborated as follows. It should be pointed out that each aspect described above is in strong correlation with each other. Generally, one experimental modification may result in several changes in cathode performances; for example, metal ion doping, which can simultaneously improve the adsorption ability and the redox ability and micro-structure of the catalysts. What we provide here, from the viewpoint of different electrochemical reaction processes, is a clear description of advanced high-performance electrode materials, with the aim of accurate design of perovskite materials in the future.
 Fig. 7  (a) A schematic sketch of the mass exchange on the surface and ionic diffusion in the BSCF bulk (Ba/Sr: green balls, Co/Fe: purple balls, O: red balls, H: blue balls, oxygen vacancies: white balls). TG curves measured in static air for Ba0.5La0.5FeO3−δ (BLF) prepared: (b) under O2, (c) under N2, and (d) by annealing the sample (b) at 1200 °C in N2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Scheme of a single PCFC fed with ammonia fuel. (f) Mechanistic results of NH3 decomposition using DFT calculations from the viewpoint of minimum energy pathways. (g) Scheme for microkinetic modelling of the NH3 decomposition process on Fe–Ni(111) and Ni(111) active surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5.2.1 Enhancement of adsorption/desorption abilities. 
Complicated electrochemical processes that occur in PCFCs must be accompanied by the energy conversion and the exchange of activated species. One key step in the electrochemical reactions inside the cathode is O2 adsorption. However, under actual working conditions, the cell operates at extremely high temperatures (typically higher than 400 °C), causing a large number of difficulties for comprehensive research in this issue. As a result, the adsorption/desorption abilities of the cathode catalysts used in PCFCs have not aroused much interest.
Generally, transition ion-based perovskite oxides show flexible oxygen dissolvability under different atmospheres. Ikeda et al. examined the oxygen adsorption/desorption behaviour of SrFeO3−δ between 100 and 800 °C through thermogravimetric analysis and Mössbauer spectroscopy.154 Three different phases with oxygen-vacancy-ordered structures were found at different working temperatures: SrFeO2.875 below 300 °C, SrFeO2.75 between 300 and 400 °C, and SrFeO2.5 above 400 °C. This result directly supports the structural and compositional flexibility of Fe-based perovskites under a particular atmosphere, providing high possibility for material design in PCFCs. Masunaga et al. investigated the oxygen adsorption properties of A-site alkaline earth metal ion-based perovskites and the relationship between oxygen adsorption and crystal structure.155 The research demonstrated that a cubic structural Sr0.5Ba0.5FeO3−δ (SBF) sample had the highest amount of adsorbed oxygen at 450 °C compared to Sr0.5Ca0.5FeO3−δ (SCF) and Ca0.5Ba0.5FeO3−δ (CBF), which were composed of a double perovskite phase. The same phenomenon can be verified in cobalt oxides. In most circumstances, oxygen intercalation into strontium cobalt oxide could induce lattice distortion and phase structure evolution. Toquin et al. gave evidence for the continuous evolution of the B-site Co valence state from +3 (for SrCoO2.5) to +4 (for SrCoO3) and the formation of O− species for certain stoichiometric strontium cobalt oxide was proved by in situ XAFS spectroscopy.156 For La doped BaFeO3 (Ba0.5La0.5FeO3−δ), a typical Fe-based perovskite, Okiba et al. observed an abrupt weight decrease of Δδ = 0.145 due to the release of oxygen above 300 °C, accompanied by a decrease in Fe valence (Fig. 7b–d).152 All of the above-mentioned results pointed out a critical natural rule that the prerequisite of the oxygen intercalation into the perovskite-type cathode material in PCFCs is usually governed by the flexible valence of the B-site ions and the diversified structure evolution abilities of the perovskite oxides. Therefore, the surficial adsorption/desorption processes are usually accompanied by bulk oxygen diffusion, structural changes, the secondary reaction, etc., which are important to the cell performances as well.
For O-SOFCs, H2O is formed on the anode side. Therefore, theoretically in the cathode of O-SOFCs, there is no competitive adsorption between O2 and H2O considering the different reaction model from PCFCs. Hence, the H2O adsorption of the catalyst particles in O-SOFCs could be ignored. However, when the perovskite-type catalyst is employed as the cathode for PCFCs, the competitive adsorption between O2 and H2O should be considered. The results of the cell performance with different cathodic vapor pressures (pH2O) proved this viewpoint.157 Since the ORR process is considered as the rate-determining step in the electrochemical reaction, the excessive accumulation of H2O will inevitably dilute the oxygen concentration, and consequently decrease the total amount of oxygen in unit volume that participates in the electrochemical reaction, which is not good for the vulnerable adsorption of O2. Actually, an outstanding cathode candidate for PCFCs should be characterized by both O2 and H2O adsorptions. The H2O adsorption, to a certain extent, is a prerequisite for the proton uptake in the catalyst which is widely considered as the next breakthrough in developing high-performance cathodes with high proton conductivity for PCFCs.
Doping with different metal ions would affect the crystallization behaviours of catalysts, and subsequently influence the size of particles and their surface morphology, which could in turn affect the adsorption and desorption abilities of the materials. Deganello et al. observed a huge decrease of particle size and a large increase of the surface area of SrFeO3 perovskite through Ce doping under high-temperature sintering conditions, which could enhance the electrocatalytic activity of the samples.158 Yaqub et al. correlated the shrinkage behaviour with the particle sizes of the calcined powders and confirmed a large particle size through Ni doping in the B-site of La0.2Sr0.25Ca0.45TiO3 perovskite, which could, to some extent, affect the electrical and catalytic properties of the materials.159 Therefore, it is one of the most convincing manifestations that the electrode particles with the smaller size could contribute much to their oxygen adsorption and desorption abilities under real cell operating conditions. Fujishiro et al. revealed that, upon substitution of 10 mol% indium into BaFeO3−δ, change to the cubic perovskite structure occurred, accompanied by the random rearrangement of oxide ion vacancies and by an increase in the valence of Fe ions.160 10 mol% In doped BaFeO3−δ exhibited the largest amount of desorbed oxygen from the lattice, indicating that it is a promising candidate for oxygen storage materials. Besides, the adsorption/desorption ability is also an important factor to be considered when evaluating the catalytic properties of the anode. Zhang and co-workers reported an Fe-decorated Ni-BZCY1711 anode and obtained an outstanding performance, achieving the highest performance of SOFCs fuelled on ammonia reported until now (Fig. 7e, PPDs of 0.360, 0.723, 1.257, and 1.609 W cm−2 at 550, 600, 650, and 700 °C, respectively).153 Moreover, the cells show an excellent durability. The authors attributed the superior catalytic activity and durability of the anode to the alternation of NH3 adsorption strength and N2 desorption barrier heights, which were successfully confirmed by first-principles based mechanistic and microkinetic modelling (Fig. 7f and g).


5.2.2 Redox ability optimization of perovskite units. 
The redox ability is one of the most critical parameters representing the electrochemical capabilities of perovskite catalysts. Particularly, surface redox-active centres in transition-metal oxides are the key factor in determining the efficiency of electrocatalysts.161 Therefore, the redox ability of catalyst materials, especially the surficial exposed metal ions, appear to be crucial to the electrode properties. An electrochemical redox process is built on the electron-exchange process between the catalyst material and the adsorbed species, making transition metals and related oxides the most famous catalysts in energy conversion/storage devices.162–165
When scanning through the history of cathode material developments in SOFCs, cobalt/iron-based oxides are the most-widely used candidates, because of the high catalytic activities of the 4d-5d electrons in these cobalt and iron ions. In most electrochemical processes, B-site ions in the perovskite, such as the cobalt and iron ions, are the primary reaction sites where the adsorbed particles could be split or re-assembled into new particle species. Actually, the redox ability of most perovskite oxides has their intrinsic rules. Suntivich et al. assessed the intrinsic ORR activities of 15 lanthanum-based perovskite oxides in alkaline solution, and the final conclusion pointed out that the eg orbital filling principle could be quantitatively used as the appropriate descriptor to explain the rule of the material categories and the ORR activities.81 As for this principle (Fig. 4d), the eg electronic configuration was found to be highly in correlation with the adsorption ability to oxygen molecules and the energetics of the electrochemical reactions, reflecting the rate-limiting steps of the ORR activities for oxide catalysts. However, these results just reflect the critical influences of the electronic configuration on the ORR activities under ambient conditions, and could not be completely used in the analysis of high-temperature solid oxides. What's the real relationship between the electronic configuration and the ORR activities at high temperature and in a strict atmosphere is still unclear. Since the redox ability is highly relevant to the electronic conductivity of materials, to a certain extent, the main content of the active ions in perovskites would dominate the electrode performances.
Ionic doping is the most efficient strategy for altering the redox ability of transition metal ion-based perovskite-type catalysts. To our knowledge, three different doping categories are frequently used: doping with typical transition metal ions (Fe, Co, Ni, etc.), substitution of inactive cations such as La, Y, and Sc, and doping with cations with high valence states such as Nb, Ta, Mo, and Zr. Different working mechanisms can be discovered in the catalysts modified with different types of dopants.
Since cobalt has the most suitable electronic configuration for external redox reactions in most circumstances, theoretically, cobalt-based perovskites may display the highest catalytic properties compared to the perovskites embedded with other transition metal ions like Fe and Ni with the same structural type. However, the catalytic performance is also influenced by many other factors, such as the oxygen vacancy concentration, lattice distortion and structural stability. For example, under real conditions, many cobalt perovskites show poor structural stability, and multiphase transitions could appear with the increase of temperature.166 Most well-known perovskite catalysts reported up to now are composed of two or more different transition metal ions in their B sites, for example, LSCF642877 and BSCF5582.78 Partial substitution of Co with Fe or Ni will decrease the electrical conductivity to a certain extent.77 However, a higher oxygen ion conductivity can be achieved, demonstrating the strong synergistic effect between Co and other metal ions.167
Similarly, the synergistic effect between Co and inactive metal ions also occurs extensively. Chen et al. researched SrCoO3−δ oxide doped with redox-inactive cation Sc.168 The phase structure, electrical conductivity, defect chemistry, electrochemical reactivity, etc., were experimentally characterized and hypothetically analysed. Among different specimens, SrCo0.95Sc0.05O3−δ showed the best performance in stabilization of the oxygen-vacancy-disordered structure of the oxide. The projected density of states (PDOS) indicated that the A-site cation would not directly affect the conductivity, as displayed in Fig. 8a. The bonding strength between Sc and O was found to be higher than the strength between Co and O, as shown in Fig. 8b, resulting in a reduced oxygen diffusion coefficient when the Sc content was increased. This work clearly demonstrated an efficient doping strategy with redox-inactive cation for the design of highly active mixed conducting perovskites. Gwon et al. investigated the effect of La doping in SrCoO3−δ cathodes on the electrical properties of the catalysts. Among the specimens, La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ displayed the highest electrical conductivity.169 However, when combined with GDC electrolyte material, La0.4Sr0.6CoO3−δ, rather than La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ, showed superior comprehensive properties, which was confirmed as a more suitable cathode candidate for IT-SOFCs, providing important reference to the design of the cathode materials in PCFCs.
 Fig. 8  (a) PDOS plots of pristine tetragonal SrCoO3 (top) and Sc-doped tetragonal SrCoO3 (bottom). (b) Charge density difference plot for SrCo1−xScxO3−δ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) The electrical conductivities versus temperatures for different amounts of Nb doped into SrCoO3 in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (d) The overpotential values of 10 mol% Ta doped SCO in the ORR mode at 550–800 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A comparison of proton concentrations between SFM and SFMZ. (f) Thermogravimetric relaxation curves while changing pH2O values at 500 °C. (g) A schematic illustration of hole redistribution and proton transport in an SFM-based perovskite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity of Cu and Nd co-doped samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (i) Long-term sustainability of the button cells containing an F-BSCF5582 cathode (red) and the pristine BSCF5582 cathode (blue), tested at 700 °C with a current density of 0.3 A cm−2. Arrhenius plots of (j) oxygen ion chemical bulk diffusion coefficients (Dchem), and (k) oxygen chemical surface exchange coefficients (kchem) of F-BSCF5582 and BSCF5582 pellets measured between 550 and 700 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. 
Metal ions with a p6 outer electron configuration have been reported to be effective substituents in the stabilization of the oxygen-disordered perovskite structure and high crystallographic symmetry in perovskites, for instance, the cubic phase. Wang et al. reported that Nb doping could significantly enhance the electrical conductivity as well as the thermal stability of cubic SrCoO3−δ (SCO), as displayed in Fig. 8c.170 Wang and co-workers employed Ta as the substitution ion for the Co-site in SrCoO3−δ, forming a primitive cubic perovskite.171 The electrical conductivity and electrochemical activity were found to be more stable than Nb doped SCO. The authors attributed these improvements to the stronger Ta–O bonding because of the larger electronegativity difference between Ta5+ and O2− than Nd5+ and O2−, which could maintain the elevated oxygen stoichiometry, the superior oxidation state of Co ions, and the reasonably low overpotential in the ORR mode over a high temperature range (Fig. 8d). Besides, Ti and Sc were both proved to be promising dopants in order to sufficiently stabilize enhanced electrochemical properties from the same viewpoint.168,172 Ren et al. reported that cooperatively modifying the basicity and concentration of oxygen vacancies with Zr4+ would promote the proton transport for mixed oxygen-ionic and electronic conductors.173 Accordingly, they synthesized a Zr4+-doped Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6−δ (SFMZ) perovskite with plentiful oxygen vacancies and an excellent hydration ability, which efficiently accelerated the formation process of protonic defects compared to the unmodified SFM, as displayed in Fig. 8e–g. The as-prepared SFMZ exhibited superior proton diffusion kinetics with a DH,chem value of 8.71 × 10−7 cm2 s−1 (700 °C), comparable to that of BZCYYb1711 (1.84 × 10−6 cm2 s−1). Using the SFMZ cathode, a low polarization resistance of 0.169 Ω cm2 and an MPD of 0.79 W cm−2 were achieved at 700 °C.
Co-doping with two or more types of metal ions could strengthen the electronic properties. For instance, the maximum amount of Nb dopant in SrCoO3 was reported to be about 10%.175 Le et al. developed an extensive dopant strategy using Cu beyond Nb, i.e. Nd, Cu co-doped SrCoO3.174 Excess oxygen vacancies could be obtained through Cu doping. Moreover, the electrical conductivity of SrCo0.85Nb0.05Cu0.10O3−δ (SCNC10) achieved was 550 S cm−1 at 400 °C, demonstrating the strong synergetic effect of the co-doping strategy (Fig. 8h). Zhou et al. reported a Sc,Nd co-doped SrCoO3 cathode material (SrSc0.175Nb0.025Co0.8O3−δ) together with extremely high ORR activity and low activation energy. An MPD of 498 mW cm2 at 700 °C was obtained on a 46 μm-thick BZCY172 electrolyte.41 Li employed Nd and Ta as the dopants of SrCoO3−δ.176 The cathode displayed a relatively low area-specific polarization resistance (0.16 and 0.68 Ω cm2 at 500 and 450 °C) compared to the single metal Nd or Ta doped SrCoO3−δ. Then high peak power densities were expected in a fuel cell based on a Gd0.1Ce0.9O1.95 membrane, which could attain 1.2 and 0.7 W cm2 at 500 and 450 °C, respectively. The authors considered that the oxygen vacancies, the ionic mobility, and the surface electron transfer were modified by the synergistic effects of Nd and Ta dopants, clearly demonstrating the advantages of the co-doping process. However, high-performance results were recorded on an O-SOFC. The properties of this material in PCFCs are expected. Besides, Chen and co-workers reported that Sn was an effective doping ion for the stabilization of the cubic phase structure of SrCoO3 and proved that co-doping with Fe could greatly improve the solubility of Sn into SrCoO3.177 The results showed that the oxygen vacancy formation could be greatly facilitated via the co-doping strategy with Sn and Fe.
In addition to A/B-site cation substitutions, O-site anion doping has been proved to be an alternative for optimizing the catalyst's performances because of the higher electronegativity of O-site doping anions than O ions. Many anions have been successfully used in the modification of cathode materials, such as F−, Cl−, and S2−.74 The introduction of different anions at the O position, on the one hand, can effectively stabilize transition metal ions by reducing the electron spinning of transition metal ions, consequently suppressing the thermal expansion behavior of the cathode layers. On the other hand, anion substitution can effectively reduce the basicity of materials, and hence the interaction between metal ions and oxygen ions can be reduced due to the strong electronegativity of the dopant, such as fluoride anions, resulting in higher oxygen transport performance than the parent perovskites. As a consequence, good oxygen reduction catalytic activities and high thermal matching between electrolytes and cathodes can be achieved. Zhang et al. successfully prepared the perovskite-type oxychloride BaFe0.6Co0.3Ce0.1O2.95−δCl0.05 (BFCCCl), and proved that chloride incorporation could significantly boost the electrochemical activity.178 The PPDs were increased from 386 to 593 mW cm−2 at 600 °C on a BZCYYb1711 electrolyte. Xie et al. synthesized F doped BSCF5582 as a potential cathode material coupled with F doped proton-conducting electrolyte BaCe0.8Sm0.2F0.1O2.85 (Fig. 8i).75 As further demonstrated in Fig. 8j and k, the F substitution improved the oxygen incorporation kinetics at the tested temperatures, as demonstrated by the experimental results. Moreover, a button cell equipped with the F doped cathode was found to be much more stable during a test period of 270 h at a current density of 300 mA cm−2 and 700 °C. Liu et al. fabricated a F-doped Ba0.95Ca0.05Fe0.85Sn0.05Y0.1O3−δ cathode with an improved conductivity.179 When BZCY172 electrolyte was applied, an encouraging performance with a PPD of 1050 mW cm−2 and an ultralow polarization resistance of 0.04 Ω cm2 at 700 °C was achieved.


5.2.3 Mass transfer regulation: proton-oxygen ion-electron triple-conducting cathodes. 
Triple-conducting cathodes, i.e. single-phase oxides or composites with mixed proton, oxygen ion and electron co-conducting behaviours, are widely considered as the most suitable candidates for PCFCs.22,180–183 Among them, proton conductivity is the most difficult aspect to improve for most cathodes due to the working oxidizing atmosphere of the cathode. Reihaneh et al. researched the proton uptake of (Ba/Sr/La)(Fe/Co/Zn/Y)O3−δ perovskites, and investigated the proton concentration in perovskite Ba0.95La0.05Fe0.8Zn0.2O3−δ.184 As displayed in Fig. 9a and b, the proton concentrations of  about 10%, 5.5%, and 2.3% per formula unit were recorded at 250 °C, 400 °C and 500 °C, respectively, which had taken the crown of proton concentration in the mixed-conducting perovskites before this work. Unfortunately, the cell performance was not as dazzling as their proton concentration test. One possible reason we think is related to the sinterability of the catalyst changed by the Zn dopant, which may enlarge the particle size and hence decrease the cell performance. Wachowski et al. studied the water uptake abilities of rare earth ion-containing BaLnCo2O6−δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, etc.) with the use of thermogravimetry (TG) and water adsorption isotherms. TG water uptake experiments indicated that, in a particular gas atmosphere at 300 °C, among all samples, BaLnCo2O6−δ (Ln = La, Gd) exhibited considerable water uptake content, as comparably shown in Fig. 9c–e.185 In this work, the authors also revealed that the water uptake observed at high temperature (300 °C) was a bulk process, and it could not be simply described by hydration or hydrogenation processes. Otherwise, the water uptake showed a high dependence on the layered structure of the oxide and different dopants at the A-site lattice of the perovskite. In consideration of the high protonic conduction of double perovskite oxides, Vøllestad et al. employed excessive La doping into the A-site of BaGd0.8La0.2Co2O6−δ as the steam anode for hydrogen production from water electrolysis. A hydrogen generation rate of >15 N ml min−1 was observed with low polarization resistance and high faradaic efficiency.186
 Fig. 9  (a) Proton concentration variations of La and Sr contents on the A site of the perovskite. (b) Effect of partial substitution of Zn or Co on the B site tested at 250 °C and 16 mbar H2O. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. (c) H2O uptake in BaLnCo2O6−δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, etc.) recorded at 300 °C. (d) STEM micrograph of double-perovskite BaGdCo2O6−δ, and (e) electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) map for the area labelled in (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustrations of the free dual-ion transport channels in SSNCF (left) and the conflicting dual-ion transport channels in BSCF5582 (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Cross-sectional SEM image focusing on the PBSCF PLD film. (h) The cell performance of a PCFC equipped with a PBSCF PLD layer on BZCYYb4411 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Zhou et al. pointed out that BSCF5582 was not ideal for PCFCs due to the conflicting dual-ion diffusion channels inside (Fig. 9f).187 Accordingly, they designed a novel cathode material, composed of Sr2Sc0.1Nb0.1Co1.5Fe0.3O6−δ (SSNCF) with the harmonious and non-conflicting proton and oxygen ion transport channels, which remarkably improved the performance of BZCYYb1711-based SOFCs. As declared by the authors, in that fuel cell, oxygen ions diffused through oxygen vacancies (vehicle mechanism), while protons transport through lattice oxygen (Grotthuss mechanism). Furthermore, through partial W substitution in B-site cations (BSCFW), the proton conduction together with the chemical and thermal stability were improved.10 Duan et al. synthesized BaCo0.4Fe0.4Zr0.1Y0.1O3−δ (BCFZY4411), which the authors called the “new generation” cathode material for PCFCs.95 They claimed that Zr and Y doping could induce partial proton conduction into the cathode, which was the main reason for the improved cell performances (455 mW cm−2 recorded at 500 °C). Driven by the same viewpoint, Wei et al. prepared a triple-conducting BaFe0.8Ce0.1Y0.1O3−δ (BFCY) perovskite cathode by the Pechini sol–gel process with the aid of the Ce and Y double doping method.189 A polarization resistance of 0.05 Ω cm2 and a PPD of 750 mW cm−2 were reached at 700 °C.
Another interesting ionic conducting phenomenon happened on the fuel cell composed of BZCYYb4411 electrolyte, which can be considered as a nearly pure proton conductor, reported by Choi et al. in 2018.188 The authors used a dense PrBa0.5Sr0.5Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ (PBSCF) film as a blocking interlayer between the electrolyte and cathode (Fig. 9g). Extremely high power densities were generated on the PCFC employed by the dense PBSCF interlayer, clearly proving the strong proton conductivity of PBSCF. An outstanding peak powder density of 1098 mW cm−2 was recorded at 600 °C (Fig. 9h), surpassing all the records before this work. More importantly, this work demonstrated the proton transport nature of the typical double perovskites.


5.2.4 Architecture modification of cathodes. 
It is reasonable to expect an elevated electrochemical reaction rate once more active sites are generated on the catalyst's surface. As we know, a PCFC works at elevated temperature compared to other protonic fuel cells. Therefore, it is extremely hard to maintain a uniform particle shape at such high temperature. Though some particular architectural cathodes have been reported, such as “nanofibers” prepared by the electrospinning method,190,191 further modification seems to be necessary in order to enhance the catalytic performance of the fibres. However, ultrafine perovskite powders can be used as the cathode catalyst for the pursuit of enhanced cell performance. Accordingly, size optimization will be a useful tool for improving the cathode performance. Several strategies reported up to now can be used for synthesising high-performance cathodes with ultrasmall particles. The most-famous ones are: impregnation method, one-pot synthesis strategy, and in situ exsolution pathway.
BZY is a chemically stable proton-conductor, but its catalytic performance is ultralow when being used as the composite cathode combined with other catalysts. Bi et al. impregnated Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ (SSC) and PrBaCo2O5+δ (PBCO) nanoparticles into BZY backbones on the cathode side (Fig. 10a and b).192 The modified cathode allowed an outstanding power output below 600 °C. As shown in Fig. 10b, a perfect adherence was found in the SEM image. Liu et al. prepared PrBaCo2O5+δ-BZCY1711 composite cathodes by repeating impregnation of PBCO into a BZCYYb1711 scaffold.193 A PPD of 0.49 W cm−2 and a small polarization resistance of 0.078 Ω cm2 were obtained at 750 °C. Many other effective efforts have also been made in order to enhance the catalytic activities of cathodes. Shimada et al. fabricated a porous BZCYYb1711 layer impregnated with screen-printed cathode paste.194 The contact area between the cathode and electrolyte was enlarged through impregnation, which effectively extended the TPB region. Li et al. reported a Y0.25Bi0.75O1.5 (YSB)-infiltrated LSCF6428 composite cathode.195 Chen et al. synthesised a triple-phase cathode by impregnating Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ (SSC) into a La0.7Sr0.3FeO3−δ-BZCY172 (LSF-BZCY) composite.196 Most reports demonstrated superior electrochemical performances compared to pristine cathodes.
 Fig. 10  Cross-sectional SEM images of the interface between the cathode and electrolyte before (a) and after (b) impregnating small SSC particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. (c–e) STEM micrograph and HR-TEM results of the BCCY sample. The fitted values of Dchem (f) and kchem (g) of the BCCY hybrid measured at 500–650 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (h) Stability test of the PCFC with a LSCF2.7 cathode at 600 °C, inset: the SEM image of the cell after a long-term stability investigation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. HRTEM (i) and enlarged HRTEM (j) images of BCFC nano-sized grains in a cubic perovskite, and an orthorhombic perovskite (k). (l) FFT-filtered image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
A one-pot synthesis method can be used in the synthesis of nanoparticles because the crystalline process and the growth of the particles can be efficiently suppressed by sintering the whole raw materials together in the same reaction vessel during the phase formation procedure of different materials. As reported by Berger and co-workers, Ba(Ce,Fe)O3−δ-Ba(Fe,Ce)O3−δ hybrids were successfully obtained by a one-pot process. The hybrids were composed of proton and electron co-conducting phases, which could facilitate the ionic transport in electrodes for PCFCs.197 Very recently, we conducted several valuable studies in this research area. For example, Song et al. synthesized a multi-phase cathode in accordance with stoichiometric BaCo0.7(Ce0.8Y0.2)0.3O3−δ (BCCY).198 A mixed proton and electron conducting BaCexYyCozO3−δ component and hybrid oxygen ion and electron conducting BaCoxCeyYzO3−δ, and BaCoO3−δ components were obtained and, respectively, identified. The interplay between the aforementioned phases promoted the ORR kinetics of the hybrids and improved their thermo-mechanical compatibility (TEC) when tested on BZCYYb1711 and BZCY442 electrolytes, respectively. The Dchem and kchem values of the BCCY composite, BSCF and BCFZY were measured at 500–650 °C in this work, as shown in Fig. 10c–g. The kchem values of the BCCY composite were found to be much higher than those of BSCF and BCFZY. A PPD of 464 mW cm−2 was obtained at 650 °C on BZCY442 electrolyte. Furthermore, a robust operational sustainability of 812 h was achieved at 550 °C, demonstrating the successful fabrication of multi-phase nanoparticles. Shi and co-workers described new composite materials with different ratios of Sr in compositions of LaSrxCo1.5Fe1.5O10−δ.199 Ruddlesden–Popper-single perovskite (RP-SP) nanocomposites for x = 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, and 2.8, SP oxide for x = 2.0, and RP oxide for x = 3.0 were simultaneously synthesized via a simple one-pot strategy. A cell with BZCY172 electrolyte and LSCF2.7 showed an MPD of 391 mW cm−2 and good operational durability at 600 °C (Fig. 10h). In addition, Zhao et al. used BaCe0.4Fe0.4Co0.2O3−δ (BCFC) precursor powder as the precursor for the development of the next generation of one-pot synthesis.200 As presented in Fig. 10i–l, a twin-perovskite nanocomposite cathode composed of cubic and orthorhombic grains was clearly found with a uniform distribution observed by HRTEM. A low polarization resistance of 0.075 Ω cm2 together with a PPD of 335 mW cm−2 was achieved at 700 °C.

In situ exsolution of additional nanoparticles is attracting more and more attention in the research of new cathodes. Rioja-Monllor et al. used this strategy in the synthesis of a La0.5Ba0.5CoO3−δ-BaZrO3 (LBO-BZO)-based composite.201 The final specimen consisted of a matrix of the BZO phase (about 45 nm) embedded with small LBO grains (about 20 nm). The ASR of the composite cathode obtained through the exsolution strategy was 1.54 Ω cm2 at 600 °C with an activation energy (Ea) of 0.60 eV in 3% moist air. Through the topotactic ion exchange process, Joo et al. successfully prepared catalytic nanoparticles, where deposited Fe guest cations could exchange with the Co host cations in PrBaMn1.7Co0.3O5+δ, which was found to be favourable for the incorporation of Fe into the parent host lattice with an incorporation energy of −0.41 eV, and a cation exchange energy of −0.34 eV, resulting in an improved catalytic activity.202 Chen et al. reported a new dual-phase cathode with a composition of PrNi0.5Mn0.5O3 (PNM) perovskite and exsoluted PrOx particles, which could be easily synthesized by a glycine-nitrate solution combustion method.203 A low ASR value of 0.052 Ω cm2 was recorded at 700 °C, which was attributed to the in situ reaction between the exsoluted particles, i.e. Ba ions and PrOx.


5.2.5 More efforts to superior cathodes. 
In addition to the aforementioned aspects, multiple strategies are available for improving perovskite-type materials for superior cathodes of PCFCs. Jeong et al. employed H2 permeable metal-supported fuel cells (HMFCs), using Sc doped BaZrO3−δ (BZS) electrolytes, and LSCF6428 as a cathode, to investigate the electrochemical mechanism of HMFCs.204 Interestingly, as concluded in the literature, the proton concentration gradients and the cathode reaction at the TPBs could be harshly prompted by blocking the oxide ion conduction at the anode. Consequently, the polarization resistances of the HMFCs with LSCF6428 were decreased by a factor of 2–3. This work provided an alternative method for the improvement of the cathodes by tailoring the whole electrochemical reaction mode of PCFCs. In addition, the research of high-entropy electrode materials, normally comprised of five or more components with compositions between 5% and 35% in near-equimolar proportions forming a single-phase with a solid solution-type structure, is a research hotspot in the exploration of new cathode materials for electrochemical use. For example, Dąbrowa et al. synthesized B-site high-entropy La1−xSrx(Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Ni)O3−δ (x = 0–0.3, an evolution compound from LSCF6428) perovskites at a relatively low temperature. However, the maximum total conductivity of 16.03 S cm−1 was much lower compared to the well-known perovskite-type air electrode.205 In principle, a high-temperature calcination step is necessary to avoid incomplete crystallisation phases for the high-entropy perovskite oxides. Therefore, the catalytic activities of the perovskite oxides may be reduced inevitably to various degrees due to the particle coarsening effect.206 Most reported studies about high-entropy cathodes are based on O-SOFCs, and very few studies have been reported in the research of PCFCs. Because both the cathodes in O-SOFCs and PCFCs are ionic and electronic conductors, the performance of high-entropy cathodes in PCFCs with ionic and electronic conductivities is an interesting issue. New opportunities are given in the optimization of PCFCs, such as superionic conductivity, ultralow thermal instability, high lattice distortion, stabile single-phase structure, and even other fantastic characteristics.207

5.3 Frontiers in perovskite-based anode materials
Anode properties, such as the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) rate and the anti-carbon deposition ability, are strongly related to the cell performances. Ni-based cermet composed of Ni metal and perovskite oxides has remained the most important anode until now. Moreover, since most cobalt-based perovskite oxides are prone to decompose under strong reducing atmospheres, iron-based perovskites are the most widely-used candidates for single-phase anodes owing to their relatively high catalytic capabilities and thermochemical stabilities. However, most Fe-based perovskites still cannot sustain long-term stabilities under strong reducing conditions due to the chemical nature of Fe ions. In order to further enhance the stability of these materials, additional substituents, such as Mo and Nd, are most frequently used in experimental research studies.208,209 The main mechanism of the stability enhancement through metal ion doping is related to several factors, such as the synergistic effect between different metal ions. For example, for Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6−δ, it was demonstrated that even under a strong reducing atmosphere it was not possible to reduce Fe3+ ions thoroughly to Fe2+ because the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox band is overlapped with the Mo5+/Mo6+ couple, which can efficiently protect the Fe3+ from being completely reduced in the perovskite structure.210,211

5.3.1 Carbon coking resistant anodes. 
When the cell is fed with hydrocarbon fuels, hydrogen can be transformed through a polarized ceramic proton-conducting membrane through internal catalytic reforming within the anode, which can reduce the system complexity, and reduce the overall cost required for hydrogen generation from the external reformer. Zhu et al. focused their attention on the effects of dehydrogenation on PCFCs.212 Their results (Fig. 11a) showed that when an inlet mixture was under the deposit limit, the dehydrogenated mixture could remain free of carbon deposits, even with significant hydrogen removal, which provided key guidelines that assist in establishing the initial fuel/steam ratios. Duan et al. presented the long-term testing results of PCFCs on a BZY172 electrolyte membrane using more than ten different fuels (hydrogen, methane, domestic natural gas, propane, etc.) in the temperature range between 500 and 600 °C (Fig. 11b).213 Many cells were tested for more than six thousand hours. The results demonstrated outstanding performance and good durability (less than 1.5% degradation per 1 thousand hours) across all types of fuels without any further treatments. Hong et al. studied the performance of a catalyst with an 8 wt% Ni (8Ni) or 6 wt% Ni, 2 wt% M (M = Co, Cu, and Rh) (labelled 6Ni2M) modified anode backbone BZCYYb4411, for investigation of steam reforming of methane at 350–550 °C, as displayed in Fig. 11c–f.214 Different from 8Ni, 6Ni2Rh and 6Ni2Co exhibited higher methane conversion and hydrogen yields, which were less dependent on the gas flow rate. In addition, the catalyst showed higher resistance to carbon deposition and displayed sustained excellent catalytic activities in the long-term test.
 Fig. 11  (a) Ternary C–H–O chart showing the equilibrium coke limits as functions of temperature at atmospheric pressure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of a PCFC and mechanisms of self-assisted sulphur cleaning and carbon recovery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c and d) Diagrams for illustration of the influence of temperature on internal steam reforming of methane by different catalysts without carbon deposition. (e and f) Comparisons of the influence of the steam/carbon (S/C) ratio on the internal steam reforming of methane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.3.2 Architectural modification of anodes. 
The surfaces of anode particles could be optimized through technical treatments, which could in turn accelerate the electrochemical reaction rate that occurred on the catalyst surface. Liu et al. reported a novel proton-conducting ethane fuel cell (PCEFC). The anode material was comprised of double-layered perovskite (Pr0.4Sr0.6)3(Fe0.85Mo0.15)2O7 (PSFM) with highly dispersive Co-Fe alloy nanograins prepared by directly annealing the cubic Pr0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Mo0.1O3−δ (PSCFM) in a 10% H2/N2 atmosphere at 900 °C (Fig. 12a–c).215 The fuel cell with a BZCY172 electrolyte-supported PCEFC achieved a peak power output density of 496.2 mW cm−2 when fed with H2 and 348.84 mW cm−2 when fuelled with C2H6 at 750 °C. Meanwhile, high ethylene yields, 13.2% and 41.5% at 650 °C and 750 °C, with a high ethylene selectivity of >91% and zero CO2 emission, were achieved, thanks to the in situ exsolved Co-Fe alloy nanograins on the PSFM backbone. Moreover, the cell presented high stability at a constant current density of 0.65 A cm−2 at 750 °C in C2H6 for 100 h, showing a good coking resistance. After that, using the same strategy, the authors synthesized the perovskite framework SrMo0.8Co0.1Fe0.1O3−δ (SMCFO) anchored with Co nanoparticles through an annealing treatment in reducing flow at 850 °C.216 PPDs of 377 mW cm−2 in H2 and 268 mW cm−2 in C2H6 were achieved at 750 °C with a C2H4 yield improvement from 11.9% to 37.8% at 650–750 °C. Fan et al. designed a (La0.6Sr0.4)0.95Fe0.8Ni0.1Mo0.1O3−δ (LSFNM) perovskite oxide with 5 mol% A-site cation deficiency.217 Afterwards, the in situ exsolved Fe–Ni nanoparticles were realised, as shown in Fig. 12d–f. The high-valence molybdenum ions in the oxide could stabilize the structure when exposed to a 10% H2/Ar reducing atmosphere, and enabled the exsolution of Fe–Ni nanoparticles from the perovskite matrix. The cell generated an MPD of 172 mW cm−2 at 750 °C when fed with C2H6 with an ethylene yield value of approximately 40.5%. Shi et al. successfully realised the co-generation of propylene and ethylene with electricity in a propane-fuelled PCFC using the (Pr0.3Sr0.7)0.9Ni0.1Ti0.9O3 (PSNT) catalyst (Fig. 12g and h).218In situ exsolved nickel nanoparticles were observed on the surface of the reduced PSNT, which strongly improved the propane conversion rate and suppressed the anode carbon deposition. Consequently, the conversion selectivity to propylene and ethylene were 36% and 32%, respectively, at 300 mA cm−2 and 700 °C. Wei's results indicated that the addition of Ni exsolved La0.6Sr0.2Cr0.85Ni0.15O3−δ (LSCrN) on the Ni-BZCYYb1711 anode adversely affected the cell performance when H2 was used as the fuel.219 However, with CO2–CH4 as fuel, the modified cell outputted an MPD of 0.605 W cm−2 together with a good operational stability of 65 h, resulting from the highly efficient on-cell dry reforming of CH4 by a Ni nanoparticle-modified catalytic layer (Fig. 12i and j). A question that should be addressed is how the exsolution process occurs in different perovskites, such as single perovskites and layered perovskites. Kwon and co-workers investigated the exsolution phenomenon in the exsolution behaviours of the most famous transition metals (Mn, Co, Ni and Fe) on a PrBaMn2O5+δ layered perovskite (Fig. 12k and l).220 They found that the oxygen vacancies introduced by the reduction process could destabilize the perovskite structure and induce spontaneous exsolution of B-site cations. Then they made a speculation that a spontaneous exsolution process occurred in layered perovskites with adequate oxygen vacancies. For various transition metals, exsolution trends could occur spontaneously with the formation of self-grown catalytic nanoparticles on the layered perovskite. According to DFT calculations, the authors proposed the mechanism that co-segregation of B-site metal and oxygen vacancies were important to the exsolution process. The calculation results showed that Co and Ni had higher co-segregation energies (about 0.55 and 0.50 eV, respectively, Fig. 12m), much more different from those of Mn and Fe. Other studies focused on the effect of exsoluted particles on cell sustainability. Zhang et al. investigated the in situ exsolution of Ni–Fe nanoparticles from a Sr2Fe1.4Ni0.1Mo0.5O6 (SFNM) perovskite-type electrode by researching the variation of electrode polarization resistance and the morphological evolution of the electrode particles (Fig. 12n).221 The results showed that during the whole 745 h stability test, the polarization resistance measured at 800 °C initially decreased from 0.68 to 0.31 Ω cm2 with an degradation rate of 22.92% per 100 h in the first test period (200 h), then was stable in the next 200 h, and increased to 0.40 Ω cm2 with a low degradation rate of 6.20% per 100 h in the last 345 h. These results clearly unveiled the effects of metal ion exsolution on the electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 12  (a) The operating principle of an ethane-fed PCFC, with the cogeneration of ethylene and electricity. (b) The surficial image of a PSCFM particle reduced at 900 °C for 2 h. (c) SEM image of the modified anode particle after the durability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d and e) High magnification images of the reduced LSFNM grain. (f) SEM image of the anode surface after a 60 h stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (g) Schematic illustration of co-generation of olefins and electricity via a Ni-exsolved anode-equipped PCFC. (h) Gas distribution results of C3H8 conversion over a reduced PSNT catalyst measured at 750 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (i) Schematic diagram of CO2 dry reforming of CH4. (j) Cell performance with a Ni-exsolved LSCrN catalytic anode layer fed with CO2–CH4 fuel tested at 550–700 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (k) Schematic illustration of the exsolution process of B-site 15 mol% Ni cation doped PrBaMn2O5+δ under reducing conditions. (l) Schematic illustration of the model built for the measurement of co-segregation energy. (m) DFT calculation results of different co-segregation energy values of Co, Ni, Mn and Fe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (n) Evolution of the ASR of the SFNM perovskite over elapsed time for a symmetrical cell measured at 800 °C in the 97% H2–3% H2O atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

6. Challenges and perspectives
PCFCs are widely considered as alternative electrochemical devices for direct electric power generation from fuels to conventional O-SOFCs, primarily because of the lower operating temperature for proton ceramic conductors than oxygen ion conductors, which have aroused extensive research interest in the past decades. In this review, we provide a panoramic survey of the application of perovskite-related materials in this dynamic field. First, the operating principles of PCFCs were given, then the fundamentals of perovskite-type proton conductors were discussed, followed by the summarization of efficient ways for property tuning of perovskite oxides towards applications in PCFCs, and recent developments in perovskite-based PCFCs including electrolytes, cathodes, and anodes were extensively reviewed. Beyond these viewpoints, it should be noted that, as new energy devices under the stage of laboratory research, PCFCs still confront several challenges, making them far away from large-scale practical applications.
First, the operating mechanism of PCFCs is still not fully understood. The forward way to unveil the operating mechanism of the catalyst particles in PCFCs has not been thoroughly lit up. Several key working procedures of each part of the cell are unsolved. For instance, the most investigated PCFCs are established on BZCY172 and BZCYYb1711 electrolyte materials. Although attractive operating performances were achieved, very few works concerned their ionic conduction behaviors under real working conditions. As is known to us, these types of perovskites can transport oxygen ions and protons flexibly, depending on the operating conditions (temperature, steam pressure, and oxygen partial pressure). They may work as dual-ion conducting electrocatalysts, enabling hydrogen–oxygen electrochemical reactions in both the fuel electrode and the air electrode. A very different conclusion could be attained if sufficiently considering their dual-ion conductivity than simply evaluating their proton conductivity, which is very important to further design of fuel cell stack, since very complex conditions will be faced for the actual design of cell products. Unfortunately, most studies have not paid sufficient attention to their dual ion conductivity, but simply regarded these two electrolytes as pure proton-conducting oxides. On the other hand, our knowledge about the ORR and HOR mechanisms of PCFCs is full of fragments, which are still being covered by several big problems. For example, to date, three adsorption models have been identified for explaining the adsorption phenomenon of transition metal ions to oxygen: the Griffiths model, the Pauling model and the Bridge model. However, which kind of model is suitable to explain the real adsorption form experimentally and accurately for the perovskite cathode of PCFCs working at high temperatures is still unclear. Similarly, the adsorption behavior of H2 on the surfaces of anode materials is not completely understood as well. Further in-depth and complete works are urgently needed for the continuous development of PCFCs. The ionic conductivity and sinterability are two main issues in the research of electrolytes of PCFCs, while the redox ability should be considered for perovskite-type cathodes. Even though we have made great progress, unfortunately, until now, there has been no systematic and reliable theory that can direct the rational design of perovskite oxides with high proton and oxygen ion conductivities. Coincidentally, many reports have proved that perovskite oxides with high symmetry demonstrated higher ionic conductivity compared to oxides with low symmetry, and a variety of works have been devoted to improving the symmetry of the electrolyte material structure. Therefore, to enhance the ionic conductivity, it may be extremely valuable to decrease the distortion and rotation of the perovskite unit, which deserves further attention. Furthermore, the relationship between the perovskite distortion or rotation and the electronic conductivity has not been completely unveiled. Actually, there is still a long way ahead for accurate verification of the intrinsic operating principles of PCFCs.
Insufficient stability is another big challenge for perovskite proton conductors to be used in PCFCs. With decades of research efforts, PCFCs have attained surprising power output abilities over an intermediate-low temperature range. Exceeding 1 W cm−2 at 600 °C is no longer an untouchable score for PCFCs at the current stage. However, in the past ten years, the improvement in cell stability has made extremely slow progress. To meet the goal for practical use as proposed by the United States Department of Energy in 2019, fuel cells must: achieve a proven lifetime of 40000 hours or more, with less than 0.2 percent per 1000 hours degradation rate.222 Very clearly, this is a tough goal for PCFCs considering the current cell stability performance. As we know, most research studies only conducted the cell stability test within hundreds of hours. An extended period of stability test is a challenging work under current situations, such as the cost and durability of the equipment. Actually, according to reported studies, the stability level of the cell remains unclear for most reported perovskites used in PCFCs, and it is full of great uncertainty for the stability verification of a variety of famous electrolyte and electrode materials as reported in a large number of studies. A further long-time operational test focusing on electrolyte and electrode stability should be conducted, thousands of hours at least, and more hours better.
Third, SOFCs still lag behind proton exchange membranes from the view of their practical application progress. The latter have been proved to be suitable candidates for electromotors for vehicles, such as heavy trucks.223,224 One advantage of PCFCs compared to other fuel cells is fuel flexibility, for example the efficient use of hydrocarbon fuels. In the oxygen-ion conducting fuel cell, oxygen ions transport from the cathode side across the electrolyte to the anode side where they react with protons with the formation of H2O. However, very different from traditional O-SOFCs, the hydrogen–oxygen reaction happens at the cathode side in PCFCs. This distinct working model will bring in more challenges for the efficient use of hydrocarbon fuels. If the hydrocarbon fuel is fed into an O-SOFC, the reforming reaction can be well coupled. A very different situation will be faced in hydrocarbon-fed PCFCs. In order to depress the carbon coking on the catalyst surface, the injection of additional H2O into the anode chamber is essential. Theoretically, more H2O is needed for the fuel with a higher value of C/H. Therefore, the dilution effect cannot be completely avoided, neither the adsorption to the fuel molecules nor the exposure of active sites to adsorbed species. Fortunately, some pioneering studies have been conducted, as demonstrated in the aforementioned parts. More convincing studies should be done in the future in order to broaden the application area of PCFCs.
From the material point of view, the most promising candidates used for PCFC electrolytes until now are still BZCY172 and BZCYYb1711 though many new materials have been reported in the past decades. The deficiency in the availability of suitable electrolyte materials terribly blocks the further developments of PCFCs, in particular their commercialization. As well, the interface between the electrolyte and electrode layer has not been thoroughly optimized. Very few works focus on interfaces, though the interface structure also plays a critical role in the energy conversion abilities of the cells. The interfacial metal ion segregation is a big concern, which may greatly affect the final performances of the cell since the cathode and the electrolyte take the same perovskite structure. In the sintering aid-assisted densification of proton-conducting perovskite membranes, our special emphasis is paid to the working mechanism of different sintering aids, i.e., the interaction between sintering aids and the perovskite materials, and its effect on the proton conductivity. We believe that a comprehensive understanding of the working mechanism of sintering aids will be highly helpful for the rational design of new alternative sintering aids in PCFCs, as well as other ceramic-based electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices, such as all-solid lithium-ion batteries. In the current stage, although more sintering additives can significantly improve the grain growth, it is not inevitable to suppose an ionic conductivity enhancement simultaneously. In contrast, more sintering additives might introduce impurities at the grain boundaries, giving rise to negative effects on the proton conductivity.225,226 A systematic understanding of the role of sintering aids in the densification of protonic membranes is highly important for the further development of PCFCs, which can result in improved sintering capability without impairing their conductivities. New sintering aids that can have beneficial effects on membrane densification and proton conductivity enhancement for electrolytes are still needed to be developed for practical use of PCFCs. It is noted that a sintering aid doped in an internally stoichiometric form is more preferable than a sintering aid physically mixed with a perovskite considering their different effects on the conductivity of electrolyte membranes.86,115,138,227 Whether an internal doping or external addition method is used, there, at present we believe  in most circumstances, truly exist some impurities along with the grain boundary which may hinder the passage of protons across the grain boundary, thus reducing the conductivity of the electrolyte, especially when high amounts of auxiliary agent are added. Therefore, an effective way for developing new methods for increasing grain size and eliminating grain boundaries is highly demanded. Experimentally, technical control over impurity is an approach to solve the aforementioned problems. Several promising strategies are worth further attempting, such as: accurately stoichiometric internal doping with sintering aids; and chemical methods inhibiting unstable heterogeneous phases induced by metal ion diffusion, such as Ba evaporation.
Like O-SOFCs, the cathode greatly determines the power output of PCFCs. As to the reaction mechanism, it is more complicated in PCFCs since water is formed over their cathode. The ionic conduction mechanism in the cathode of PCFCs remains unclear. In perovskite-type cathode materials with mixed-valent transition metal ions in B-sites, protonic defects can be generated through dissociative incorporation of water molecules.184 The hydration process (eqn (4) which involves proton uptake at the expense of oxygen ion vacancies mostly occurs under a humid reducing atmosphere, while hydrogenation (eqn (6)), which is independent of oxygen vacancies, generally occurs under humid gas conditions.22 In general, oxygen ion diffusion overwhelms proton transportation in cathode materials. However, for PCFCs, the steam is generated on the cathode side. Meanwhile, it is well known that the oxygen ion conductivity is highly dependent on the oxygen ion vacancies. Therefore, the hydrogenation sites would probably be suppressed due to the high level of oxygen ion vacancies for oxygen ion diffusion on the catalyst surface. Based on the previous analyses, ionic diffusion (H+ and O2−) confliction may exist, both on the surface and in the bulk lattice. Herein, we consider that the working principles of perovskites in transporting H+ and O2− should be first completely identified to accurate understand traditional cathodes. As analysed above, triple-conducting cathodes are beneficial to PCFCs. How to enhance the proton conductivity without obvious influence on the oxygen ion conduction ability, or the way to improving the dual-ion conductivity simultaneously (H+ and O2−) would be challenging but meaningful issues in future research. Partial element doping into the perovskite oxide lattice to different degrees appears to be the most efficient strategy in the design of new materials, especially in regulating the dual-ion conductivity, at the current stage. However, doping could introduce beneficial or detrimental effects on the proton conductivity in the perovskite oxide interior or the grain boundaries, which deserves more attention in the future. What's more, it is still really challenging to accurately record each electrochemical step that occurs on the surface or inside the lattice of the catalyst particles under real working conditions. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis is a powerful tool for the in situ observation of different electrochemical reactions.228 However, for PCFCs, it is not affordable as a direct method for measuring the behaviours of mass species transport. It is still hard to provide some details, such as the active sites of the cathode particles to adsorbed species such as O2−, O− and O, and the relationship between the active sites and the cell performances, through the EIS analysis method.
Compositional engineering is the most popular and important methodology for amending the properties of perovskite oxides, and consequently their performance in various applications, including PCFCs. Doping is the simplest and most efficient way for altering the cathode properties. The similar energies between the d orbitals and the s orbitals in the transition metal ions provide them high feasibility in changing their valence in the oxides, giving rise to huge space for improving the cathode performance. However, in order to identify the relationships between appropriate metal ion substitution and perovskite oxide properties, the fundamental working principles of compositional engineering in perovskite oxides should be further addressed. In situ exsolution is a good strategy for improving the catalytic properties of perovskites. However, the cathode works under an oxidizing atmosphere, causing a lot of difficulties in the fabrication of active sites such as transition metals. Electrochemical poling is a good instantaneous generation of active nanostructures for recovering the properties of catalysts, which was tried by Jae-ha and co-workers.229 More attempts can be made in this field of research.
Moreover, as for electrode materials, the proton, oxygen ion and electronic conductivities should be first accurately measured for in-depth understanding of the polarization, the ohmic loss and the electrode reaction mechanism of PCFCs. However, confined by the development of current technologies, it is still not an easy task to accurately record the proton, oxygen ion, and electronic conductivities, separately. Herein, the working principles of different metal ions and anions in A/B/O sites of perovskites should be clearly identified to understand the origin of the high performance of the benchmark cathode materials, which then provide useful guidance on the design of alternative cathodes. Large grain size is a negative factor in reducing the performances of perovskite-type cathodes. Most of the transition metal ion-based perovskites show excellent sinterabilities compared to Ce/Zr-based perovskites. Through a long-term calcination procedure, the cathode particles would easily grow up to the size on the microscale, which may deteriorate the catalytic properties even more strongly. Moreover, thermo-mechanical instability has aroused much attention and has made great progress in the research of oxygen ion-conducting fuel cells.47 More concerns should be addressed over this issue for PCFCs from the viewpoint of practical use.
As to the anode, Ni-based cermets are the most-frequently used anode materials in PCFCs. However, many drawbacks can be found in this type of anode. One grave concern is the terrible carbon coking of Ni-based materials. Though many studies have pointed out that the Ni-based anode can be optimized through partial substitution of Ni with other metals, such as Cu, the long-term operational stabilities of these modified anodes should be supported by adequate data. Additionally, as we know, some Ni-based materials are hazardous which may be harmful to the health of people once material leakage from the cell stack occurs. Ni-free anodes deserve further attention in the exploration of suitable anode materials for PCFCs. Nickel-free perovskite anodes demonstrate superior coking resistance and sulphur poisoning; however, their electrical conductivity is usually insufficient, particularly under anode operating conditions, and the catalytic performance for hydrogen electrocatalytic oxidation is much poorer than the conventional nickel-based anode. Even so, such concerns should not obscure the good. In summary, as a feasible and efficient energy conversion strategy, PCFCs are worthy of constant efforts towards their potential applications in the future.
Author contributions
Z. Shao and J. Cao contributed to the central idea and conducted the analyses. J. Cao and Y. Ji collected resources. All authors contributed to the writing and editing of the document.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province (No. 2108085MB35), the Scientific Research Project of Education Department of Anhui Province (No. KJ2021ZD0043), and the Australian Research Council Discovery Projects (DP200103315 and DP200103332). Dr Jiafeng Cao would like to acknowledge the financial support from the China Scholarship Council (201808340038) for his visit to Curtin University, Australia.
References
D. P. van Vuuren, E. Stehfest, D. E. H. J. Gernaat, J. C. Doelman, M. van den Berg, M. Harmsen, H. S. de Boer, L. F. Bouwman, V. Daioglou, O. Y. Edelenbosch, B. Girod, T. Kram, L. Lassaletta, P. L. Lucas, H. van Meijl, C. Müller, B. J. van Ruijven, S. van der Sluis and A. Tabeau, Glob. Environ. Change, 2017, 42, 237–250 CrossRef .
D. Gielen, F. Boshell, D. Saygin, M. D. Bazilian, N. Wagner and R. Gorini, Energy Strategy Rev., 2019, 24, 38–50 CrossRef .
S. E. Hosseini and M. A. Wahid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 850–866 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ramadhani, M. A. Hussain, H. Mokhlis and S. Hajimolana, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 460–484 CrossRef .
M. Han, X. Tang, H. Yin and S. Peng, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, K. Jang, D.-K. Lim, S. Ahn, D. Oh, H. Kim, J. Seo, P.-P. Choi and W. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2496–2508 RSC .
S. Choi, C. J. Kucharczyk, Y. Liang, X. Zhang, I. Takeuchi, H.-I. Ji and S. M. Haile, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ferguson, A. Dubois, K. Albrecht and R. J. Braun, Energy Convers. Manag., 2021, 248, 114763 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seong, J. Kim, D. Jeong, S. Sengodan, M. Liu, S. Choi and G. Kim, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, e2004099 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hu, J. Kim, H. Niu, L. M. Daniels, T. D. Manning, R. Chen, B. Liu, R. Feetham, J. B. Claridge and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2559–2566 RSC .
E. D. Wachsman and K. T. Lee, Science, 2011, 334, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hossain, A. M. Abdalla, S. N. B. Jamain, J. H. Zaini and A. K. Azad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 79, 750–764 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Christopher, J. Bartel, B. R. Goldsmith, R. Ouyang, L. M. G. C. B. Musgrave and M. Scheffler, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 0693 Search PubMed .
T. Takahashi and H. Iwahara, Rev. Chim. Miner., 1980, 17, 243–253 CAS .
G. C. Mather and M. S. Islam, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1736–1744 CrossRef CAS .
D. Medvedev, A. Murashkina, E. Pikalova, A. Demin, A. Podias and P. Tsiakaras, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 60, 72–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, J. Hong, D.-K. Lim, S. Ahn, J. Kim, J. K. Kim, D. Oh, S. Jeon, S.-J. Song and W. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1097–1105 RSC .
M. Liang, Y. Zhu, Y. Song, D. Guan, Z. Luo, G. Yang, S. P. Jiang, W. Zhou, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, e2106379 Search PubMed .
J.-S. Shin, H. Park, K. Park, M. Saqib, M. Jo, J. H. Kim, H.-T. Lim, M. Kim, J. Kim and J.-Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 607–621 RSC .
W. Bian, W. Wu, Y. Gao, J. Y. Gomez, H. Ding, W. Tang, M. Zhou and D. Ding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102907 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, S. Hinokuma, T. Ina, C. Zhu, H. Habazaki and Y. Aoki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11043–11055 RSC .
M. Papac, V. Stevanovic, A. Zakutayev and R. O'Hayre, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 301–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Koide, Y. Someya, T. Yoshida and T. Maruyama, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 132, 253–260 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakayama, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 158, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mitra, T. Meyer, H. N. Lee and F. A. Reboredo, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 141, 084710 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bi, E. Fabbri and E. Traversa, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 37–40 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, S. Lee, D. Y. Jang, H. J. Kim, H. Lee, D. Shin, J. W. Son and J. H. Shim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9097–9103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ren, S. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Lin and F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 290, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. Geng, X. Yu, P. Wang, J. Cheng and T. Hong, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 40, 3104–3110 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shi, F. Su, D. Huan, Y. Xie, J. Lin, W. Tan, R. Peng, C. Xia, C. Chen and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19664–19671 RSC .
Y. Meng, J. Duffy, B. T. Na, J. Gao, T. Yang, J. Tong, S. Lee and K. S. Brinkman, Solid State Ionics, 2021, 368, 115639 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Shao, T. Mori and S. P. Jiang, Mater. Rep. Energy, 2021, 1, 100003 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, C. Su, Y. Wu, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 8104–8151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Z. Shi, C. Li, Q. Ren and G. Li, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 721–737 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, Z. Tao, S. Liu and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 573–579 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, D. H. Kim, H. J. Choi, J.-W. Son and J. H. Shim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801315 CrossRef .
N. Danilov, E. Pikalova, J. Lyagaeva, B. Antonov, D. Medvedev, A. Demin and P. Tsiakaras, J. Power Sources, 2017, 366, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Ryu and S. M. Haile, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 125, 355–367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Lin, R. Ran and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 400–407 CrossRef CAS .
H. U. Anderson, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 52, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhu, G. Zhang, T. Wan, T. Shi, H. Wang, M. Wu, C. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Guo, H. Yu and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 559–565 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, C. Su, H. Shi, Y. Zhu, Y. Song, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 15169–15194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2017, 358, 751–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Muñoz-García and M. Pavone, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 490–500 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Q. He, L. Xia, Q. Xu, C. Cheng, J. Wang and M. Ni, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 47, 4047–4061 CrossRef .
A. Seong, J. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kim, S. Sengodan, J. Shin and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F1098–F1102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Chen, D. Guan, M. Xu, R. Ran, M. Ni, W. Zhou, R. O'Hayre and Z. Shao, Nature, 2021, 591, 246–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, T. Nakamura, K. Yashiro, J. Mizusaki and K. Amezawa, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7307–7314 RSC .
S. J. Paddison, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2003, 33, 289–319 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. England, M. G. Cross, A. Hamnett, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Solid State Ionics, 1980, 1, 231–249 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sato, S. Ohkuma, Y. Shibuta, F. Shimojo and S. Yamaguchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28925–28933 CrossRef CAS .
N. Agmon, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 244, 456–462 CrossRef CAS .
K. Toyoura, A. Nakamura and K. Matsunaga, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8480–8487 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, A. C. P. Jain, S. Pandya, Y. Dong, Y. Yuan, H. Zhou, L. R. Dedon, V. Thoreton, S. Saremi, R. Xu, A. Luo, T. Chen, V. Gopalan, E. Ertekin, J. Kilner, T. Ishihara, N. H. Perry, D. R. Trinkle and L. W. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, C. Su, Y. Ji, G. Yang and Z. Shao, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 57, 406–427 CrossRef .
L. Yang, C. Zuo and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1845–1848 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun and Z. Cheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F3104–F3113 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dong, D. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhao and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15071–15079 RSC .
R. L. Cook and A. F. Sammells, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 45, 311–321 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dudek, B. Lis, R. Lach, S. Daugėla, T. Šalkus, A. Kežionis, M. Mosiałek, R. P. Socha, J. Morgiel, M. Gajek, M. Sitarz and M. Ziąbka, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 304, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, H. J. Choi, G. D. Han, J. Koo, E. H. Kang, D. H. Kim, K. Bae and J. H. Shim, J. Power Sources, 2021, 482, 229043 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huan, L. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Xie, N. Shi, S. Xue, C. Xia, R. Peng and Y. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4994–5003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, N. Hou, T. Gan, L. Fan, Y. Zhang, J. Li, G. Gao, Y. Zhao and Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2021, 495, 229776 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuo, S. Zha, M. Liu, M. Hatano and M. Uchiyama, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3318–3320 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Wang, K. Blinn, M. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Cheng and M. Liu, Science, 2009, 326, 126–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. A. P. Modestino, Master of Science, University of Oslo,  2016 Search PubMed .
D. Han, X. Liu, T. S. Bjørheim and T. Uda, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003149 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuroha, Y. Niina, M. Shudo, G. Sakai, N. Matsunaga, T. Goto, K. Yamauchi, Y. Mikami and Y. Okuyama, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230134 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, L. Xu, J. Meng, J. Meng, X. Liu and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 21232–21241 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishihara, T. Yamada, H. Arikawa, H. Nishiguchi and Y. Takita, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 631–636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Li and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8194–8209 RSC .
S. Hu, J. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Lim, Y. Gao and S. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119593 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vøllestad, M. Schrade, J. Segalini, R. Strandbakke and T. Norby, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15743–15751 RSC .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700242 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, N. Shi, D. Huan, W. Tan, J. Zhu, X. Zheng, H. Pan, R. Peng and C. Xia, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3423–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, W. Rauch, F. Chen and M. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 149, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Anthony Petric and Frank Tietz, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 719–725 CrossRef .
Z. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 255–258 Search PubMed .
M. Riva, M. Kubicek, X. Hao, G. Franceschi, S. Gerhold, M. Schmid, H. Hutter, J. Fleig, C. Franchini, B. Yildiz and U. Diebold, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3710 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, R. Peng, X. Wu, J. Hu and C. Xia, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Kan and G. Zhang, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 32, 1795–1802 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, D. Chen, Z. Shao and S. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2010, 74, 28–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saqib, J.-I. Lee, J.-S. Shin, K. Park, Y.-D. Kim, K. B. Kim, J. H. Kim, H.-T. Lim and J.-Y. Park, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F746–F754 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bozza, K. Bator, W. W. Kubiak and T. Graule, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 36, 101–107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hossain, A. M. Abdalla, N. Radenahmad, A. K. M. Zakaria, J. H. Zaini, S. M. H. Rahman, S. G. Eriksson, J. T. S. Irvine and A. K. Azad, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 894–907 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wan, B. He, R. Wang, Y. Ling and L. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 347, 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Z. Shi, M. Liu, L. Bi and W. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5695–5702 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, E. Fabbri, L. Bi, E. Traversa and R. Koc, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 627–635 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, H. Chen, J. Niu, F. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Ou, T. Nakamura and K. Amezawa, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 36, 3423–3431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 5611–5620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Le, J. Zhang, X. Zhu, J. Zhai and K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, E. Fabbri, L. Bi and E. Traversa, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7692–7700 RSC .
F. He, Z. Teng, G. Yang, C. Zhou, D. Guan, S. Chen, R. Ran, W. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2020, 460, 228105 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, J. Tong, M. Shang, S. Nikodemski, M. Sanders, S. Ricote, A. Almansoori and R. O’Hayre, Science, 2015, 349, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Park, Y. Seo, K. B. Kim, S.-J. Song, B. Park and J.-Y. Park, J. Alloys. Compd., 2015, 639, 435–444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hossain, A. M. Abdalla, J. H. Zaini, C. D. Savaniu, J. T. S. Irvine and A. K. Azad, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 27308–27322 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amsif, D. Marrero-López, J. C. Ruiz-Morales, S. N. Savvin and P. Núñez, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9154–9163 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gui, Y. Ling, G. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Wan, R. Wang, B. He and L. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Tsai, M. Kopczyk, R. J. Smith and V. H. Schmidt, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1083–1090 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Liou and S.-L. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 553–559 CrossRef CAS .
R. Muccillo, E. N. S. Muccillo, T. F. Andrade and O. R. Oliveira, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2017, 130, 1791–1799 CrossRef CAS .
Z. U. D. Babar, M. B. Hanif, J.-T. Gao, C.-J. Li and C.-X. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 7403–7414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biswas, H. An, S. M. Choi, J.-W. Son, J.-H. Lee, B.-K. Kim, H.-W. Lee and K. J. Yoon, Ceram. Interfaces, 2016, 42, 10476–10481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hayashi, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 866–880 RSC .
D. Pergolesi, E. Fabbri, A. D’Epifanio, E. Di Bartolomeo, A. Tebano, S. Sanna, S. Licoccia, G. Balestrino and E. Traversa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 846–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giannici, A. Longo, F. Deganello, A. Balerna, A. S. Arico and A. Martorana, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 587–591 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, D. Pergolesi, S. Licoccia and E. Traversa, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1043–1051 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shima and S. Haile, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 97, 443–455 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, L. Bi and X. S. Zhao, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 558, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, Y. Liu, X. Huang and Y. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10528–10535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, Y. Ji, X. Zhou, C. Cao, X. He and W. Liu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 5791–5800 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shim, J. S. Park, J. An, T. M. Gür, S. Kang and F. B. Prinz, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3290–3296 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, J. Yu, Y. Song, R. Ran, W. Wang and Z. Shao, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 10568–10582 CrossRef CAS .
I. Luisetto, S. Licoccia, A. D'Epifanio, A. Sanson, E. Mercadelli and E. Di Bartolomeo, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 280–285 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ricote and N. Bonanos, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 694–700 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Wang, X. Lou and M. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2266–2270 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, M. Liu and W. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1041–1050 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Shen, Z. Zhu, Z. Wang, Y. Cao, X. Guan, Y. Wang, Z. Wei and M. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2018, 387, 24–32 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, L. Bi, H. Tanaka, D. Pergolesi and E. Traversa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Park, J.-H. Lee, H.-W. Lee and B.-K. Kim, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
P. Babilo and S. M. Haile, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2362–2368 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choi, J. Paik, D. Kim, D. Woo, J. Lee, S. J. Kim, J. Lee and W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6476–6483 RSC .
E. P. Antonova, A. A. Kolchugin, E. Y. Pikalova, D. A. Medvedev and N. M. Bogdanovich, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 306, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
D. Medvedev, V. Maragou, T. Zhuravleva, A. Demin, E. Gorbova and P. Tsiakaras, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 182, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gorbova, V. Maragou, D. Medvedev, A. Demin and P. Tsiakaras, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 887–890 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Baral, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 272, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H. Zhao, N. Xu, X. Li and N. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 2739–2746 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, X. Guo, J. Li, G. Li, Z. Yang, H. Ding, W. Yan, S. Qi, P. Wang and Y. Song, Ceram. Interfaces, 2019, 45, 622–626 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kjølseth, H. Fjeld, Ø. Prytz, P. I. Dahl, C. Estournès, R. Haugsrud and T. Norby, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 268–275 CrossRef .
B. Wang, L. Bi and X. S. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Polfus, M.-L. Fontaine, A. Thøgersen, M. Riktor, T. Norby and R. Bredesen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8105–8112 RSC .
E. Kim, Y. Yamazaki, S. M. Haile and H. I. Yoo, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 275, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
D. Han, K. Shinoda, S. Tsukimoto, H. Takeuchi, C. Hiraiwa, M. Majima and T. Uda, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12552–12560 RSC .
S. B. C. Duval, P. Holtappels, U. Stimming and T. Graule, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1112–1115 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ciria, M. Ben Hassine, M. Jiménez-Melendo, A. Iakovleva, P. Haghi-Ashtiani, V. Aubin and G. Dezanneau, J. Power Sources, 2016, 321, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amsif, D. Marrero-López, J. C. Ruiz-Morales, S. N. Savvin and P. Núñez, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 34, 1553–1562 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 3493–3503 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamazaki, R. Hernandez-Sanchez and S. M. Haile, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2755–2762 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Wang, L. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, K. Brinkman and F. L. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 194–200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bae, J. Choi, K. J. Kim, D. Park and G. M. Choi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2775–2784 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Liu, L. Bi and X. S. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 664–669 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, Y. Mi, B. Wang, B. Lin, G. Chen and B. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1707 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. K. Y. Shah, N. Mushtaq, S. Rauf, N. Akbar, Y. Xing, Y. Wu, B. Wang and B. Zhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 27501–27509 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mushtaq, Y. Lu, C. Xia, W. Dong, B. Wang, M. A. K. Y. Shah, S. Rauf, M. Akbar, E. Hu, R. Raza, M. I. Asghar, P. D. Lund and B. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120503 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. K. Y. Shah, S. Rauf, N. Mushtaq, B. Zhu, Z. Tayyab, M. Yousaf, M. B. Hanif, P. D. Lund, Y. Lu and M. I. Asghar, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 5798–5808 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kamran Yousaf Shah, N. Mushtaq, S. Rauf, C. Xia and B. Zhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 30319–30327 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rauf, B. Zhu, M. A. K. Yousaf Shah, Z. Tayyab, S. Attique, N. Ali, N. Mushtaq, B. Wang, C. Yang, M. I. Asghar and P. D. Lund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35071–35080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qiao, C. Xia, Y. Cai, M. Afzal, H. Wang, J. Qiao and B. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 392, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Guan, H. Zhou, K. Ramadoss, S. Adam, H. Liu, S. Lee, J. Shi, M. Tsuchiya, D. D. Fong and S. Ramanathan, Nature, 2016, 534, 231–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Świerczek, W. Skubida, A. Niemczyk, A. Olszewska and K. Zheng, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 307, 44–50 CrossRef .
T. Okiba, K. Shozugawa, M. Matsuo and T. Hashimoto, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 346, 115191 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, K. Pei, Y. Pan, K. Xu, Y. Ding, B. Zhao, K. Sasaki, Y. Choi, Y. Chen and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 287–295 RSC .
H. Ikeda, S. Nikata, E. Hirakawa, A. Tsuchida and N. Miura, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2016, 147, 166–172 CrossRef CAS .
T. Masunaga, J. Izumi and N. Miura, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 84, 108–112 CrossRef CAS .
R. Le Toquin, W. Paulus, A. Cousson, C. Prestipino and C. Lamberti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13161–13174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-K. Lim, J.-H. Kim, A. U. Chavan, T.-R. Lee, Y.-S. Yoo and S.-J. Song, Ceram. Interfaces, 2016, 42, 3776–3785 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deganello, L. F. Liotta, S. G. Leonardi and G. Neri, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 939–947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yaqub, N. K. Janjua, C. Savaniu and J. T. S. Irvine, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 760–766 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fujishiro, M. Izaki and T. Hashimoto, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 1696–1703 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Mueller, M. L. Machala, H. Bluhm and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, S. Sun, Q. Wang, Z. Dong and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10595–10626 RSC .
F. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Wang and F. Cheng, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 4, 146–168 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Zhang, W. Zhao, S. Yuan, L. Yang, X. Chen, P. Ge, W. Sun and X. Ji, Energy Stor. Mater., 2020, 32, 477–496 CrossRef .
J. M. Paige, Y. Cheng, P. A. Pepin, C. D. Curran, D. Sun, M. U. Chen, S. McIntosh, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 341, 115051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Karvonen, H. Yamauchi and M. Karppinen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7143–7147 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, R. Ran and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 231–246 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, C. Chen, Z. Zhang, Z. M. Baiyee, F. Ciucci and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8562–8571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Gwon, S. Yoo, J. Shin and G. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20806–20811 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Q. Zhou, T. He, G. Li and H. Ding, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3772–3778 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, T. Yang, L. Lei and K. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8989–9002 RSC .
Y. Shen, F. Wang, X. Ma and T. He, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7420–7425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ren, Z. Wang, X. Meng, X. Wang, C. Xu, J. Qiao, W. Sun and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4914–4922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Le, C. Li, X. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Feng, Y. Mao, X. Zhu, N. Zhang and Z. Yuan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 10862–10870 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, W. Jin, Z. Zhu and Z. Shao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 1356–1366 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hua, M. Li, Y. F. Sun, J. H. Li and J. L. Luo, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3333–3341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. Qian and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 339–346 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Yang and S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 440, 227125 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Jin, L. Miao, J. Ding, H. Tang, Z. Gong, R. Peng and W. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11079–11087 CrossRef CAS .
C. Geng, H. Wu, Y. Yang, B. Wei, T. Hong and J. Cheng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 11070–11079 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ren, Z. Wang, C. Xu, W. Sun, J. Qiao, D. W. Rooney and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18365–18372 RSC .
J.-I. Lee, K.-Y. Park, H. Park, H. Bae, M. Saqib, K. Park, J.-S. Shin, M. Jo, J. Kim, S.-J. Song, E. D. Wachsman and J.-Y. Park, J. Power Sources, 2021, 510, 230409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saqib, I.-G. Choi, H. Bae, K. Park, J.-S. Shin, Y.-D. Kim, J.-I. Lee, M. Jo, Y.-C. Kim, K.-S. Lee, S.-J. Song, E. D. Wachsman and J.-Y. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2472–2484 RSC .
R. Zohourian, R. Merkle, G. Raimondi and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801241 CrossRef .
S. L. Wachowski, I. Szpunar, M. H. Sørby, A. Mielewczyk–Gryń, M. Balaguer, C. Ghica, M. C. Istrate, M. Gazda, A. E. Gunnæs, J. M. Serra, T. Norby and R. Strandbakke, Acta Mater., 2020, 199, 297–310 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vollestad, R. Strandbakke, M. Tarach, D. Catalan-Martinez, M. L. Fontaine, D. Beeaff, D. R. Clark, J. M. Serra and T. Norby, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 752–759 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhou, J. Sunarso, Y. Song, J. Dai, J. Zhang, B. Gu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13265–13274 RSC .
S. Choi, C. J. Kucharczyk, Y. G. Liang, X. H. Zhang, I. Takeuchi, H.-I. Ji and S. M. Haile, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, J. Wang, X. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Zhao and J. Chai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 23868–23878 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. Zhen, S. Yoo, Y. Ding, D. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, B. Doyle, X. Xiong and M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, B. deGlee, Y. Tang, Z. Wang, B. Zhao, Y. Wei, L. Zhang, S. Yoo, K. Pei, J. H. Kim, Y. Ding, P. Hu, F. F. Tao and M. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1042–1050 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bi, S. P. Shafi, E. H. Da'as and E. Traversa, Small, 2018, 14, e1801231 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, L. Jia, B. Chi, J. Pu and J. Li, Composites, Part B, 2020, 191, 107936 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shimada, T. Yamaguchi, H. Sumi, K. Nomura, Y. Yamaguchi and Y. Fujishiro, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 458–464 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, B. He, Y. Ling, J. Xu and L. Zhao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 13576–13582 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Tao, G. Hou, N. Xu and Q. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
C. Berger, E. Bucher, R. Merkle, C. Nader, J. Lammer, W. Grogger, J. Maier and W. Sitte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 2474–2482 RSC .
Y. Song, Y. Chen, W. Wang, C. Zhou, Y. Zhong, G. Yang, W. Zhou, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Joule, 2019, 3, 2842–2853 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, C. Su, X. Xu, Y. Pan, G. Yang, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Small, 2021, 17, e2101872 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, J. Cui, M. Zou, S. Mu, H. Huang, Y. Meng, K. He, K. S. Brinkman and J. Tong, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227609 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rioja-Monllor, C. Bernuy-Lopez, M.-L. Fontaine, T. Grande and M.-A. Einarsrud, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8609–8619 RSC .
S. Joo, O. Kwon, K. Kim, S. Kim, H. Kim, J. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, S. Sengodan, J. W. Han and G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Yoo, K. Pei, D. Chen, L. Zhang, B. deGlee, R. Murphy, B. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1704907 CrossRef .
S. Jeong, N. Wang, S. Kitano, H. Habazaki and Y. Aoki, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102025 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dąbrowa, A. Olszewska, A. Falkenstein, C. Schwab, M. Szymczak, M. Zajusz, M. Moździerz, A. Mikuła, K. Zielińska, K. Berent, T. Czeppe, M. Martin and K. Świerczek, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24455–24468 RSC .
A. Sarkar, R. Djenadic, D. Wang, C. Hein, R. Kautenburger, O. Clemens and H. Hahn, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 38, 2318–2327 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amiri and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 782–823 RSC .
N. Dai, J. Feng, Z. Wang, T. Jiang, W. Sun, J. Qiao and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14147 RSC .
S. Jiang, J. Sunarso, W. Zhou, J. Shen, R. Ran and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 209–216 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y.-H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, X. Dong, G. Xiao, F. Zhao and F. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5478–5482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, B. L. Kee, C. Karakaya, R. O’Hayre and R. J. Kee, Catal. Today, 2019, 331, 7–11 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, R. J. Kee, H. Zhu, C. Karakaya, Y. Chen, S. Ricote, A. Jarry, E. J. Crumlin, D. Hook, R. Braun, N. P. Sullivan and R. O'Hayre, Nature, 2018, 557, 217–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hong, S. N. Sutanto, J. A. Lee and J. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6139–6151 RSC .
S. Liu, K. T. Chuang and J.-L. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 760–768 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Subiao Liu, F. Xian-Zhu and L. Jing-Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 283–289 CrossRef .
Y. Fan, X. Xi, J. Li, Q. Wang, M.-M. Li, L.-J. Wang, D. Medvedev, J.-L. Luo and X.-Z. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 393, 139096 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shi, S. Xue, Y. Xie, Y. Yang, D. Huan, Y. Pan, R. Peng, C. Xia, Z. Zhan and Y. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118973 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, P. Qiu, L. Jia, Y. Tan, X. Yang, S. Sun, F. Chen and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9806–9812 RSC .
O. Kwon, S. Sengodan, K. Kim, G. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, Y. W. Ju, J. W. Han and G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, N. Yu, T. Liu and Y. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17834–17844 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Perry, Report on the status of the solid oxide fuel cell program, U. S. D. o. Energy, Washington, DC,  2019 Search PubMed .
H. Fathabadi, Renewable Energy, 2019, 130, 714–724 CrossRef .
I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. Velazquez Abad, P. Balcombe, P.
E. Dodds, P. Ekins, N. Shah and K. R. Ward, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 463–491 RSC .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, M. Liu and J. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13501–13511 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Yang, M. Liu, Z. Tang and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9980–9984 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1581–1584 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sumi, H. Shimada, Y. Yamaguchi, Y. Mizutani, Y. Okuyama and K. Amezawa, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-h. Myung, D. Neagu, D. N. Miller and J. T. S. Irvine, Nature, 2016, 537, 528–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jiafeng Cao
	Jiafeng Cao is an associate professor at Anhui University of Technology. He received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2017. He worked as a visiting scholar in Prof. Zongping Shao's research group at Curtin University in 2019. His research activities mainly focus on the fundamental studies of protonic ceramic fuel cells and related fields.

Yuexia Ji
	Yuexia Ji received her PhD from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2013. She is currently an associate professor at Anhui University of Technology. Her research interests focus on the design of advanced electrolyte, anode, and cathode materials for solid oxide fuel cells.

Zongping Shao
	Zongping Shao is a professor at Nanjing Tech University, China, and also a joint-appointed professor at Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his PhD degree from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2000. His research interests mainly include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, oxygen permeable membranes and low-temperature energy conversion devices.

Broader context
Perovskites with proton, oxygen ion or electron transport capabilities are fundamental energy-conversion materials in the extensive exploration and application of diverse electrochemical devices, such as PCFCs. Various kinds of perovskite oxides together with different types of cations/anions in A/B/O sites have been reported in recent decades, which have, to varying degrees, promoted the activation of electrolytes and electrodes for high-efficiency electrochemical processes in PCFCs. Nevertheless, a systematical and accurate guideline for the rational design of perovskite-type materials is lacking, leading to a chaotic situation in the research of this area, which has never been appealing more than today. This review rearranges the most important fundamentals in PCFCs, gives insights into the efficient ways for accurately tuning the performances of perovskite-type oxides, and provides recent advances in the rational design of novel perovskite materials, in addition to some perspectives in the research of PCFCs.

	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a PCFC structure.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structures of (a) perovskite-type BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ, (b) pyrochlore-structured La2Zr2O7, (c) LaPO4 monazite, and (d) BaMoO4 scheelite.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 3  Perovskite material modifications through: (a) cation/anion substitutions, (b) use of additives, (c) in situ exsolution, and (d) a one-pot strategy.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Typical electronic configuration of perovskite-type BSCF5582. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Relevant transition metal orbitals of Fe, Co and Ni ions. (c) A BO5 configuration with a sketch of an O2 π* orbital donating electrons to an empty eg orbital. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (d) An E pyramid diagram of La series transition metal ion-based perovskite oxides, designed for illustration of the role of the eg electron (the descriptor) in the ORR activity of La-based perovskites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. (e) A typical energy band of Co-based oxides with diverse valence states of Co ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Stoichiometric substitution	AB1−xMxO3−δ/A1−xBMxO3−δ	Transition metal ions	Ni, Zn, Co, etc.85–87
Post-transition metal ions	In, etc.88
Alkali metal/alkaline earth metal ions	Li, Ca, etc.89
AB1−x−yM1xM2yO3−δ	Co-doping with metal ions	Bi-In, etc.90
Non-stoichiometric doping	ABMxO3−δ/AMxBO3−δ	Transition metal ions	Zn, etc.91
Post-transition metal ions	Bi, etc.92
Alkali metal/alkaline earth metal ions	Li, etc.93
Non-stoichiometric ratio	A1+xBO3−δ	A-site metal ions	Ba, etc.94
Excessive addition	A oxide + B oxides + xMO (precursor powders)	Transition metal oxides	NiO, CuO, etc.95
Alkaline earth metal ions	MgO, etc.96
ABO3−δ + xMO	Transition metal oxides	CuO, NiO, ZnO, CoO, Fe2O3, etc.97,98
Post-transition metal oxides	Bi2O3, etc.99
Alkali metal oxides/alkaline earth metal oxides	Li2O, CaO, etc.89,100
Metalloid oxides	B2O3, etc.101
Nonmetal oxides	P2O5, etc.102
ABO3−δ + xM1O + yM2O	Composite sintering aids	Bi2O3–CuO, BaO–CuO, etc.103,104

 	Fig. 5  (a and b) Elemental mapping scanning of a BZCY172 pellet surface fabricated by a conventional sintering strategy at 1400 °C, with a presentation of Y element segregation, measured by scanning electron microscopy together with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS). Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Shrinkage curves of BZY20Ni1 and BZY20Ni2 electrolyte specimens. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) Dilatometric thermal results showing distinguished trends of BZY and 4 mol% Zn doped BZY electrolytes and 0.6NiO-0.4BaZr0.8Y0.2O3−δ (NiO-BZY) green cermet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (e) Dilatometric results of BZYb15 ceramics with: the stoichiometric addition of 1.0 mol% CuO, the excessive introduction of 1.0 mol% CuO, and the specimen without any CuO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. Arrhenius plots of BZY, 1 mol% Cu doped BZY, 1 mol% Ni doped BZY, and 1 mol% Zn doped BZY electrolytes test under different atmospheres: (f) dry air and (g) wet air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (h) An optical image of the BZCYYb4411 pellet sintered at 1500 °C for 5 h. (i) Ba element distribution result from adequate to deficient regions, respectively, represented from red to blue, indicating the Ba cation ratio: Ba/(Zr + Ce + Y + Yb). Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Fuel cell performance test on BSFSb-SDC electrolyte. (b) SEM image of the fuel cell with the typical “P–N” junction. (c) Energy band structure at the “P–N” junction-type BSFSb-SDC interface and schematic sketch of the ionic transport with the aid of the internal/built-in electric field. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. PCFC electrolyte design principle developed on the strong electron correlations: the distortion of the SNO perovskite structure (d). A comparison between proton incorporation and diffusion mechanisms in the conventional solid electrolyte (e) and SNO (f). Different electronic configuration of Ni 3d orbitals for the pristine and the electron-doped SNO in the ionic limit (g). (h) Schematic operation mechanism of the PCFC on SNO electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A schematic sketch of the mass exchange on the surface and ionic diffusion in the BSCF bulk (Ba/Sr: green balls, Co/Fe: purple balls, O: red balls, H: blue balls, oxygen vacancies: white balls). TG curves measured in static air for Ba0.5La0.5FeO3−δ (BLF) prepared: (b) under O2, (c) under N2, and (d) by annealing the sample (b) at 1200 °C in N2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Scheme of a single PCFC fed with ammonia fuel. (f) Mechanistic results of NH3 decomposition using DFT calculations from the viewpoint of minimum energy pathways. (g) Scheme for microkinetic modelling of the NH3 decomposition process on Fe–Ni(111) and Ni(111) active surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) PDOS plots of pristine tetragonal SrCoO3 (top) and Sc-doped tetragonal SrCoO3 (bottom). (b) Charge density difference plot for SrCo1−xScxO3−δ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) The electrical conductivities versus temperatures for different amounts of Nb doped into SrCoO3 in air. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (d) The overpotential values of 10 mol% Ta doped SCO in the ORR mode at 550–800 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A comparison of proton concentrations between SFM and SFMZ. (f) Thermogravimetric relaxation curves while changing pH2O values at 500 °C. (g) A schematic illustration of hole redistribution and proton transport in an SFM-based perovskite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity of Cu and Nd co-doped samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (i) Long-term sustainability of the button cells containing an F-BSCF5582 cathode (red) and the pristine BSCF5582 cathode (blue), tested at 700 °C with a current density of 0.3 A cm−2. Arrhenius plots of (j) oxygen ion chemical bulk diffusion coefficients (Dchem), and (k) oxygen chemical surface exchange coefficients (kchem) of F-BSCF5582 and BSCF5582 pellets measured between 550 and 700 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Proton concentration variations of La and Sr contents on the A site of the perovskite. (b) Effect of partial substitution of Zn or Co on the B site tested at 250 °C and 16 mbar H2O. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. (c) H2O uptake in BaLnCo2O6−δ (Ln = La, Pr, Nd, Sm, etc.) recorded at 300 °C. (d) STEM micrograph of double-perovskite BaGdCo2O6−δ, and (e) electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) map for the area labelled in (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Schematic illustrations of the free dual-ion transport channels in SSNCF (left) and the conflicting dual-ion transport channels in BSCF5582 (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Cross-sectional SEM image focusing on the PBSCF PLD film. (h) The cell performance of a PCFC equipped with a PBSCF PLD layer on BZCYYb4411 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Cross-sectional SEM images of the interface between the cathode and electrolyte before (a) and after (b) impregnating small SSC particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons. (c–e) STEM micrograph and HR-TEM results of the BCCY sample. The fitted values of Dchem (f) and kchem (g) of the BCCY hybrid measured at 500–650 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (h) Stability test of the PCFC with a LSCF2.7 cathode at 600 °C, inset: the SEM image of the cell after a long-term stability investigation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons. HRTEM (i) and enlarged HRTEM (j) images of BCFC nano-sized grains in a cubic perovskite, and an orthorhombic perovskite (k). (l) FFT-filtered image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Ternary C–H–O chart showing the equilibrium coke limits as functions of temperature at atmospheric pressure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of a PCFC and mechanisms of self-assisted sulphur cleaning and carbon recovery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c and d) Diagrams for illustration of the influence of temperature on internal steam reforming of methane by different catalysts without carbon deposition. (e and f) Comparisons of the influence of the steam/carbon (S/C) ratio on the internal steam reforming of methane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The operating principle of an ethane-fed PCFC, with the cogeneration of ethylene and electricity. (b) The surficial image of a PSCFM particle reduced at 900 °C for 2 h. (c) SEM image of the modified anode particle after the durability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d and e) High magnification images of the reduced LSFNM grain. (f) SEM image of the anode surface after a 60 h stability test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (g) Schematic illustration of co-generation of olefins and electricity via a Ni-exsolved anode-equipped PCFC. (h) Gas distribution results of C3H8 conversion over a reduced PSNT catalyst measured at 750 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (i) Schematic diagram of CO2 dry reforming of CH4. (j) Cell performance with a Ni-exsolved LSCrN catalytic anode layer fed with CO2–CH4 fuel tested at 550–700 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (k) Schematic illustration of the exsolution process of B-site 15 mol% Ni cation doped PrBaMn2O5+δ under reducing conditions. (l) Schematic illustration of the model built for the measurement of co-segregation energy. (m) DFT calculation results of different co-segregation energy values of Co, Ni, Mn and Fe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (n) Evolution of the ASR of the SFNM perovskite over elapsed time for a symmetrical cell measured at 800 °C in the 97% H2–3% H2O atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
