Heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for zinc–air batteries: progress, mechanism, and opportunities  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02800B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02800B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4536-4563Heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for zinc–air batteries: progress, mechanism, and opportunities

        
          
            Xiaofeng 
            Zhu†
, 
      
        
          
            Chuangang 
            Hu†
, 
      
        
          
            Rose 
            Amal
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Dai
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Xunyu 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: l.dai@unsw.edu.au; xunyu.lu@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      1st September 2020
    , Accepted 14th October 2020First published on 15th October 2020AbstractZinc–air batteries are regarded as promising candidates for next-generation clean and sustainable energy storage devices, due to their low-cost, safety, eco-friendliness, and high specific energy density. In zinc–air batteries, the air catalysts accelerate the sluggish oxygen electrocatalysis and largely govern the overall battery performance. Among the air catalysts, carbon-based materials have attract great attention, owing to their high conductivity, chemical robustness, porous structure, and tunable composition. Herein, this review presents the recent progress in bifunctional heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for zinc–air batteries, especially for rechargeable and flexible batteries. The review will start with a brief introduction of the development, advantages, and types of zinc–air batteries. Then, the application of bifunctional heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for aqueous and solid-state/flexible zinc–air batteries will be summarized. In the review, an emphasis is given for the investigations on reaction mechanisms, along with corresponding discussions on the role of non-metal and metal dopants. Theoretical predictions will also be discussed to guide the design and fabrication of future bifunctional carbon-based catalysts. Finally, a general perspective on the challenges and opportunities for the future innovation of heteroatom-doped carbon-based catalysts for zinc–air batteries is presented.
Xiaofeng Zhu
Xiaofeng Zhu received the BS degree in Materials Science & Engineering and the MS degree in Materials Science from Wuhan University of Technology, China in 2014 and 2017, respectively, under supervision of Prof. Jiaguo Yu. He is currently a PhD candidate in School of Chemical Engineering at University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia, under supervision of Scientia Prof. Rose Amal and Dr Xunyu Lu since 2017. His current research focuses on the design, synthesis as well as performance improvement and reaction mechanism investigation of carbon-based catalysts for high performance fuel cells and Zn–air batteries.
Chuangang Hu
Dr. Chuangang Hu is a Research Associate in Prof. Liming Dai's group at University of New South Wales, Australia. He received his MS from Henan Normal University in 2011, and his PhD from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2015. After receiving PhD degree, he had continued the postdoctoral studies for 4 years (2015–2019) in Prof. Liming Dai's group at Case Western Reserve University, USA. His research interests focus on carbon-based materials for energy conversion and storage.
Rose Amal
Prof. Rose Amal is an ARC Laureate Fellow and UNSW Scientia Professor who leads the Particles and Catalysis Research Group at the University of New South Wales. Prof. Amal's current research focuses on designing nanomaterials for solar and chemical energy conversion applications (including photocatalysis for water and air purification, water splitting, development of indoor self-cleaning materials, low-temperature catalytic reactions, and utilization of CO2) and engineering systems for solar induced processes, using the sun's energy as a clean fuel source.
Liming Dai
Prof. Liming Dai joined University of New South Wales in 2020 as a Scientia Professor and an Australian Laureate Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering. From 2009–2019, he was the Kent Hale Smith Professor in the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering, and Fellow of the International Association of Advanced Materials. Prof. Dai's expertise covers the synthesis, functionalization, and device fabrication of conjugated polymers and carbon nanomaterials for energy-related and biomedical applications.
Xunyu Lu
Dr. Xunyu Lu is currently a Senior Lecturer and Scientia Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia. He obtained his PhD degree at the School of Chemistry, UNSW, in 2014. His research is mainly focused on the rational design and preparation of cost-effective and active catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion reactions; design and fabrication of energy devices based on the novel catalyst materials and integration of the energy devices with state-of-the-art photovoltaic cells to realize the production of renewable chemicals and fuels with high energy conversion efficiency, high selectivity, and low cost.

Broader context
Due to their low-cost, high energy density, and eco-friendliness, Zn–air batteries (ZABs) have gained extensive interest from both academic and industrial communities in recent years. With the combined features of fuel cells and lithium-ion batteries, the ZABs provide a promising solution to future sustainable and clean energy storage, especially in portable and flexible devices. To overcome the sluggish kinetics associated with the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), heteroatom-doped carbon materials are widely used as catalysts in ZABs. As the thermodynamic properties and catalytic capabilities of the carbon materials are largely governed by the heteroatom dopants, the rational doping strategies and the elucidation of the underlying mechanism are of significant importance. In the present review, the application of bifunctional heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for aqueous and solid-state/flexible ZABs is discussed, and the development of corresponding theories and mechanisms for ORR and OER in rechargeable ZABs is also highlighted. By reviewing this emerging field, we hope to offer critical insights to guide the future development of ZABs as well as other related energy researches.

1. Introduction
The growing pollution and economy have resulted in a surge in the demand for electrical energy. However, 64.5% of electricity is still generated worldwide by using fossil fuels, which consequently leads to environmental pollution and global warming.1,2 Therefore, one of the most urgent research tasks is to replace fossil power by sustainable and green energy technologies to generate electricity for electronic devices/vehicles and grid-powering.2 Among all the different types of electricity storage devices, lithium-ion batteries pioneered by Nobel-laureates J. Goodenough, M. S. Whittingham, and A. Yoshino have long dominated the market due to their considerable energy density and high power density.3–9 Despite its tremendous commercialization success, the lithium-ion battery technology is currently restricted by the insufficient energy density (generally, below 350 W h kg−1), high-cost of anode materials, and potential safety issues.10,11 To address these concerns, efforts have been dedicated to finding safer and more efficient energy conversion and storage solutions with the cost benefits. Recently, metal–air batteries have attracted extensive interests amidst commercial companies and governments.12–14 Metal–air batteries store and reproduce electricity via redox reactions between metal anode and oxygen from external air at the cathode, combining the features of fuel cells and conventional lithium-ion batteries.5,15 Strikingly, the theoretical energy density of metal–air batteries is about 2–10 folds higher than that of lithium-ion batteries.16,17 Moreover, the utilization of free and abundant air (O2) as the cathodic reactant enables lighter weight and lower cost of the metal–air batteries with respect to fuel cells. Similar to fuel cells, metal–air batteries have a long lifetime and flat discharge voltage with zero-carbon emission, making them promising alternatives for lithium-ion batteries.18 Commonly, non-noble transition metals, such as zinc (Zn), lithium (Li), sodium (Na), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), aluminum (Al) and iron (Fe) are used as anodes in metal–air batteries.14 Among them, Li–air batteries possess the highest energy density (5928 W h kg−1) and relatively large voltage output (2.96 V).14 Like Na and K–air batteries, however, the incompatibility of metallic Li to air and water would bring challenges in battery design and operation safety. Mg– and Al–air batteries, on the contrary, are stable in air and aqueous electrolytes with similar energy densities and cell voltages to Li–air batteries. Unfortunately, they suffer a self-discharge when exposed to alkaline electrolytes due to the lower reduction potentials of Al (E0 = −1.66 V) and Mg (E0 = −2.38 V) than that of water (E0 = −0.83 V), leading to a severe battery capacity loss.19 On the contrary, metallic Zn is highly compatible with air and water and its abundant reserve in the earth's crust guarantee the safety and low-cost in Zn–air batteries (ZABs). Meanwhile, ZABs can offer a relatively high energy density (ca. 1086 W h kg−1) and good cell voltage (1.65 V). In this context, the ZAB is considered as a better and feasible choice among all the metal–air batteries,20 thus receiving far more attention from the scientific community.
As an over-a-century-old technology, the concept of ZAB was firstly reported by Smee in 1840.21 Supported by the substantial technological innovations,22 the ZABs started to enter the market and conventionally used in medical applications (e.g., hearing aids).16,23 Subsequently, a milestone was achieved by Zorič and his team, who constructed the first rechargeable ZAB and applied it for small-sized buses.24 This breakthrough inspired the public acceptance of the first commercial rechargeable ZAB produced by NantEnergy in 2012, though with an unsatisfactory energy density (ca. 35 W h kg−1).10,25 While a more detailed history on ZABs with traditional metal-based air-cathodes was well summarized in the excellent review published by Harting et al. in 2012,15 N and P co-doped porous nanocarbon was first reported in 2015 as a metal-free bifunctional catalyst for rechargeable Zn–air batteries with superior performance to the counterparts based on precious metal catalysts (Pt for ORR and RuO2 for OER).26 This, together with the first metal-doped carbon catalysts (Fe–N–C) for a ZAB pioneered by Chen et al. in 2017,27 led to a new era of ZABs based on heteroatom-doped carbon cathodes, which has been embraced by the scientific community worldwide.
Some previous publications have comprehensively reviewed the progress and challenges in the field of ZABs by focusing on the development of ZABs and their performance, which is strongly dependent on the active electrode materials and the associated prompting effects,5,14 and the catalysts used at the air electrodes.17,19,28 Besides, practical concerns on ZABs related to their large-scale industrial and commercial applications have also been previously reviewed.10 An ideal oxygen electrode for ZABs should have a highly conductive porous structure to facilitate both electron and oxygen transports, along with a large specific surface area for high uptake of the reaction products, and hence the high energy density.29,30 By rationally designing carbon-based cathodes with well-defined three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical structures and abundant well-defined doping-induced catalytic sites, high-performance ZABs could thus be developed.31 In this regard, heteroatom-doped carbon materials are one class of the most promising candidates for air electrodes of ZABs, due to their high conductivity, robust chemical resistance, tunable porous texture, and controllable chemical composition and surface/bulk morphologies.
In view of the importance of ZABs based on heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts, a huge amount of investigations and the number of publications is still rapidly increasing every year since it has been firstly reported in 2015.26 A timely review on rapidly growing field of such significance is highly desirable, which, however, to the best of our knowledge, has rarely been systematically and specifically reviewed. Herein, a concise, but comprehensive and critical, review of recent advances in the field of ZABs is provided. The present review first summaries various non-metal and metal heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts developed for ZABs in Fig. 1. Then, the principle and implementation of carbon-based materials in ZABs, especially mechanisms of heteroatom-doped carbons for ORR and OER in rechargeable ZABs, including the triple-effects, d-band, and eg-filling theories, are highlighted. The restriction of the Scaling relations to carbon-based catalyst designs is also discussed, which, together with theoretical simulations, will provide guidelines for the future catalyst design. Finally, current challenges and future perspectives of the heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for ZABs are outlined. This article aims to provide a timely, concise, and critical review by summarizing recent advances in ZABs based on heteroatom doped carbon cathodes and presenting important issues in this emerging field. Through such a critical account, our understanding of carbon-based catalytic materials and the associated catalysis processes for various energy conversion and storage reactions will be significantly enhanced, as with the interests of a broad range of scientists and insights for the future development and commercialization of ZABs.
 Fig. 1  A general scheme of heteroatom-doped carbon materials for ZABs. 
2. Mechanism and configurations of ZABs
Generally speaking, ZABs consist of four parts, namely the Zn metal electrode, air electrode, membrane separator, and electrolyte (Fig. 2a). Normally, concentrated aqueous alkaline solutions (KOH or NaOH) are used as the electrolyte, which provide not only basic environment for Zn electrodes but also sufficient conductivity.32 Separators with a high ionic conductivity allow for the penetration of OH− groups while preventing the dissolved Zn2+ from mobilizing to the air electrode.33,34 Redox reactions occurred on the Zn and air electrodes are presented as follows:
 Fig. 2  (a) The assembly parts and reaction mechanism of ZABs (reproduced with permission from ref. 51; Copyright©2016 AAAS). (b) Schematic diagram of aqueous planar ZABs (reprinted with permission from ref. 34; Copyright©2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Configuration of solid-state/flexible ZABs (adapted with permission from ref. 52; Copyright©2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Zn electrode reaction: Zn + 2OH− ↔ ZnO + H2O + 2e−(1)
Air electrode reaction: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− ↔ 4OH−(2)
Overall reaction: O2 + 2Zn ↔ 2ZnO(3)As shown in Fig. 2a, during discharging, the metallic Zn electrode releases Zn2+, while electrons move from the Zn electrode via the external circuit to the air electrode (reaction (1)). On the other hand, atmospheric O2 diffuses into the air electrode through the gas diffusion layer and is reduced into OH− groups by electrons from the anode via the ORR (reaction (2)). Besides, the generated OH− groups migrate from the air electrode in electrolyte via a separator, forming Zn(OH4)2− species and then dehydrated into ZnO, as shown in reaction (3). The primary ZABs that only allow for the forward reaction (3) (discharging process) whereas the reverse reaction (OER) also occurs in rechargeable ZABs for charging the batteries.
For ORR in alkaline electrolytes, the air electrode reaction generally consists of the following steps: O2(g) + * → O2*(4) O2* + H2O(l) + e− → HOO* + OH−(5) HOO* + e− → O* + OH−(6) O* + H2O(l) + e− → OH− + HO*(7) HO* + e− → OH− + *(8)where, the * represents active sites of the catalysts, and *O, *OOH, *OH stand for the adsorbed intermediates. The formation, adsorption, and reaction of these intermediates significantly affect the ORR/OER activities and thus the overall ZAB performance. Per the OER, it shares the same intermediates to ORR in basic media, and the elementary steps are presented as follows: OH− + * → HO* + e−(9) HO* + OH− → O* + H2O(l) + e−(10) 2O* → O2(g) + 2*(11) O* + OH− → HOO* + e−(12) HOO* + OH− → * + O2(g) + H2O + e−(13)There are actually two OER pathways in the above reactions, identified by the formation of gaseous O2. One of them follows reactions (9)–(11), in which the oxygen is produced from dissociation of *O, while another is associated with the *OOH via the route of reaction (9), (10), (12) and (13). Like the ORR, either of them recognizes the essential role of *O, *OOH, and *OH intermediates in alkaline OER. The adsorption/desorption of these intermediates significantly influence the activity of the active heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts, which will be highlighted in the following sections.
2.1. Aqueous planar ZABs
Based on the different electrolyte and battery configurations, ZABs can be mainly categorized into two types, namely aqueous planar ZABs and solid-state ZABs, as presented in Fig. 2b and c. The aqueous planar ZABs are constructed and sealed with Zn electrode catalyst layers and alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 2b). Most of the ZAB performance tests in laboratories usually employ this configuration due to its simple assembly. As an essential part of ZABs, the air electrode consists of a catalyst layer and a gas diffusion layer (GDL), which facilitates the diffusion of oxygen from the air to the catalyst layer during ORR. To this end, porous and conductive substrates, such as carbon papers, are widely used as the GDL. By coating with electrocatalysts, it forms a gas–liquid–solid triple-phase boundary for oxygen electrocatalysis.35–37 Apart from the Zn and air electrodes, current collectors (metal meshes or foams) for electron harvesting and current delivery and the electrolyte (usually, 6 M KOH) are also well-sealed in the chamber. The ill-sealed ZABs would accelerate the reaction between atmospheric CO2 and alkaline electrolyte, forming carbonates and then jeopardizing the ZABs performance. In this case, a combination of plastic plates shell and screws with gasket kits are commonly adopted in research practices, further simplifying the assembly steps.38–40
Aside from the above system, flow-cell ZABs with circulating electrolytes flowing in and out of ZAB chamber were proposed based on the aqueous configuration. This design is based on the concerns of the degradation of alkaline electrolyte and Zn electrodes.14 The circulated electrolyte can effectively avoid the accumulation of carbonates in aqueous planar ZABs, ensuring the long-term operation of ZABs with a high energy output. Thus, the performance and life-time of ZABs can be largely improved. Nevertheless, flow-cell ZABs with carbon-based catalysts have been rarely reported so far.
2.2. Solid-state/flexible ZABs
For portable and wearable applications of ZABs, the above aqueous alkaline electrolytes have caused some concerns. For instance, the heavyweight of liquid-phase electrolyte discourages the spread use of ZABs in portable devices, and the design (Fig. 2b) requires a perfectly sealed outer casing to avoid safety concerns. Therefore, solid-state electrolytes have been developed to replace aqueous electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 2c.41–43 To fabricate solid-state electrolytes, polymers (e.g., polyethylene glycol, PEG, and polyvinyl alcohol, PVA) are currently used to maintain basic functional groups and water.44,45 Both the PEG and PVA type solid-state electrolytes function as the aqueous electrolyte and the separator, thus further simplifying the design of ZABs. More importantly what's more, solid-state ZABs can be easily engineered into various shapes and their sealing requirement is not as harsh as their aqueous counterparts, enabling the application of the solid-state ZABs in flexible/wearable devices.43,45 However, low content and weak retention of water in solid-state electrolytes would lead to fast electrolyte degradation, and thus a shorter cycle-life for rechargeable ZABs as compared with their liquid-state counterparts.46–49 Furthermore, the continuous loss of basic ingredients from the solid-state electrolytes and their insufficient interaction with electrodes could also cause a large ohmic polarization of the solid-state ZABs, thereby delivering unsatisfying battery performance.47,50
ZABs can generate electricity via redox reactions of Zn and oxygen, and different types of ZABs with specific configurations have been devised for various applications. For all of them, the battery performance highly depends on the catalytic properties of the air electrode, where kinetically sluggish ORR/OER processes occur. Therefore, the well-design of electrocatalysts is the key to better-performed aqueous and solid-state rechargeable ZABs.
3. Air electrode catalysts
As the most important part of an air electrode, the electrocatalyst and gas diffusion layer are combined into a bridge between the gaseous air environment and liquid/solid-phase electrolyte for ORR and OER.53–55 Therefore, active and durable catalysts are needed for achieving good performance of ZABs. Among the conventional catalysts, platinum (Pt) is known as one of the best catalysts for ORR and has been used as the benchmark catalyst in ZABs.56,57 However, the commercial use of Pt in rechargeable ZABs is restricted by its scarcity and instability as well as its poor activity for OER due to the formation of the electrical non-conductive oxide layer(s).58 Likewise, precious metal oxides, such as iridium oxide (IrO2) and ruthenium oxide (RuO2) are considered as benchmarks for OER, while their ORR activities are inferior.59 To reduce the expenditure of precious metal catalysts, earth-abundant transition metal compounds, such as metal oxides, sulfides, selenides, nitrides, carbides, phosphides, borides, hydro(oxy)oxides, and their alloys or complexes, have been demonstrated to be promising for ORR and/or OER electrocatalysis.60–69 Although most of them (i.e., MnOx and CoOx) exhibit the inferior ORR performance to the Pt-based catalysts, their considerable OER activities make them popular choices for rechargeable ZABs.70,71
Along with the intensive investigations of metal compound catalysts, carbon-based materials have been extensively developed as catalysts for the air electrode. Their robust chemical stability and good electrical conductivity ensure the long-term application and efficient electron transfer, while the high surface area and porous structure tunability facilitate the exposure of active sites and the mass diffusion kinetics. Thus, carbon-based catalysts have received extensive attention for the research and development of rechargeable ZABs.
3.1. Metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts
Pristine carbon materials, such as carbon black, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, carbon nanosheets, and graphene, are generally inactive for ORR and OER, due to the lack of active sites for the adsorption and activation of O2 and/or intermediates.72 Recently, tremendous efforts, such as heteroatoms doping, surface modification, and defect engineering, have been devoted to functionalizing the carbon matrix.73–75 Amongst them, the most commonly used and effective strategy is heteroatom doping. The foreign atoms can be chemically introduced into the carbon scaffolds via either in situ doping with carbon precursors during the synthesis of carbon materials or post-treatment of preformed carbon materials with dopants.76Via these methods, carbon-based materials can be doped with both mono- and multiple heteroatom(s). So far, many non-metal atoms have been successfully doped into carbon skeletons to improve the ORR/OER performance of carbon materials, including the extensively-reported nitrogen (N), boron (B), fluorine (F), phosphorous (P), and sulfur (S). Doping heteroatoms into carbon can regulate charge distribution in the sp2 electronic configuration of the pristine carbons.77 Given that the differences in the atomic size, binding state, and electronegativity between carbon atoms and heteroatoms, the charge and spin distribution can be refined through the delocalization of π electrons of carbon atoms near the heteroatom dopants to impart new properties to carbon materials, including the highly enhanced ORR/OER catalytic activities for ZABs.78

3.1.1. Mono-heteroatom-doping strategy. 
N atoms have a similar atomic size to that of carbon that allows its facile replacement of the carbon atoms without significant lattice distortion. The electronically modified structures of the N-doped carbon materials are favorable for various electrocatalytic applications,77,79 making them the most extensively studied metal-free catalysts. However, the higher content of N dopants in the carbon matrix does not necessarily lead to better catalytic performance. Combining the first-principle density functional theory (DFT) calculations with experimental results, Kwak et al. have proposed that N content above 30 at% would destroy the hexagonal graphene framework while simultaneously become ORR-inactive.80 For example, as a recently popular semiconducting material, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is restricted by its low conductivity in electrocatalytic application.81,82 As a result, the carbons with a N doping of below 10 at% retain both conductivity and activity, thereby being favorable for ORR and OER.
As well-known now, in situ N doping strategies allow the direct use of precursors containing both C and N elements, such as organic biomass,87 industrial wastes,83 and a variety of chemical products, including melamine,88 ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA),89 and dicyandiamide (DCDA),90 to straightforwardly introduce N atoms into the carbon matrix (Fig. 3a). Moreover, polymerization of C and N co-contained monomers, such as dopamine (polydopamine),84 aniline (polyaniline),91 and melamine (melamine resin),92,93 in the presence of templates (e.g., silica nanoparticles) is also extensively utilized to achieve the homogeneous distribution of N. After proper pyrolysis under a protective atmosphere, these precursors can be converted into N-doped carbons (Fig. 3b). On the other hand, in the post-treatment strategies, the N-doped carbons are prepared by treating mixtures of crude carbons and reactive N sources at high temperatures (Fig. 3c), such as aniline, melamine, urea, DCDA, nitric acid and ammonia.85,94,95 Unlike the in situ N doping strategies, the carbon substrates are firstly prepared, followed by introducing N heteroatoms from the N-containing sources into the carbon network. Apart from the chemical vapor deposition (CVD), plasma treatments are also useful methods to directly incorporate N atoms into carbon skeletons (Fig. 3d).86,96,97 To address the role of Fe in the Fe–N–C catalysts (vide infra), N-doped carbon on pure alumina with and without impregnated Fe or Ni (remaining metal contamination is lower than 1 ppm) was reported by Ozkan's group in 2006 to be active towards acidic ORR, though the exact role of N was unknown and the possible effect of the metal residual could not be ruled out.98 In 2009, a breakthrough was achieved by Dai et al.,99 who have first reported vertically aligned N-doped carbon nanotubes (VA-NCNTs) that can act as a metal-free catalyst for ORR in alkaline media (Fig. 4a). The ORR activity, durability, and tolerance to CO-poisoning and MeOH-crossover effects of the VA-NCNTs even outperformed those of the state-of-the-art Pt/C benchmark. Their quantum mechanism calculations revealed the high positive charge density of carbon atoms adjacent to N doped atoms (Fig. 4b), which induced the change of chemisorption mode of O2 reactant from the end-on to side-on (Fig. 4c) and thus effectively promoted the cleavage of O–O bonds. This work has inspired worldwide investigations on heteroatom doped carbon catalysts for ORR and beyond.100–102
 Fig. 3  The schemes for (a) direct in situ N doping strategy (reproduced with permission from ref. 83; Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society). (b) Polymerization-pyrolysis strategy (adapted with permission from ref. 84; Copyright©2014 Wiley-VCH). (c) Post-treatment strategies with ammonia atmosphere (reprinted with permission from ref. 85; Copyright©2009 American Chemical Society). (d) Plasma treatments for N doping (reproduced with permission from ref. 86; Copyright©2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 4  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry for ORR evaluation in 0.1 M KOH at the commercial Pt (1), N-free carbon nanotubes (2), and N-containing carbon nanotubes (3). (b) Calculated charge density distribution for the NCNTs. (c) Scheme of possible adsorption modes of an O2 molecule at the N-free (top) and N-containing (bottom) CNTs (reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright©2009 AAAS). (d) Different N species at the various location of graphitic carbon (reprinted with permission from ref. 103; Copyright©2015 Springer). (e) Results of CO2-TPD for the HOPG catalysts. (f) ORR performance of pyridinic and graphitic N-doped HOPG catalysts (adapted with permission from ref. 108, Copyright©2016 AAAS). (g) Scheme of ORR and OER at the n- and p-type spots of the N-doped carbon catalyst. (h) N K-edge XANES spectra of the pristine (black line) N-doped carbon catalyst, along with those after ORR (yellow line) and after OER (blue line). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51; Copyright©2016 AAAS.) 
Before further promoting the N-doped carbons for oxygen catalysis in ZABs, efforts have been made to unravel the origin of catalytic activity in N-doped carbon materials. As is well known, the N dopants in carbon-based materials are mainly existed in four different forms,100–103 namely graphitic N (quaternary-N), pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, and oxidized N at pyridinic sites (Fig. 4d). These N dopants are often simultaneously presented in carbon-based catalysts, while their contents strongly depend on the chemical nature of the precursors and the pyrolysis temperatures used to prepare the carbon catalysts. In an investigation of identifying active sites for ORR and OER in N-doped hollow mesoporous carbon spheres (NHCSs), it was found that the NHCSs-1000 (annealed at 1000 °C) exhibited better ORR activity in basic media than its counterparts derived at lower-temperatures.101 The activity enhancement was ascribed to the higher relative contents of graphitic N and pyridinic N in NHCSs-1000, as the pyrrolic N moieties have been partially transformed into the graphitic N and pyridinic N species at high temperatures (>800 °C). Besides, by systematically controlling the types of N species on the carbon matrix, a subsequent study further confirmed that graphitic and pyridinic N-doped carbon catalysts could better catalyze the ORR process than the pyrrolic N-doped ones.104 Similarly, Yang and co-workers have further improved the N content to 9.69 at% with a high percentage of graphitic N and pyridinic N (69.2%) in 3D N-doped reduced graphene,105 which exhibited favorable ORR performance and enhanced stability compared with that of commercial Pt/C (20 wt%). By contrast, some investigations also suggested that the ORR activity of N-doped carbon was determined by pyrrolic N.106,107 The debates were ongoing for a long time until Nakamura and co-workers used highly oriented pyrolitic graphite (HOPG) as a model to produce pyridinic N-dominated HOPG (pyri-HOPG), graphitic N-dominated HOPG (grap-HOPG), and N-free HOPG for identifying active sites (Fig. 4e and f).108 These authors observed an increased limiting current density and positively-shifted onset potential towards ORR with increased pyridinic N content in N-doped HOPGs, demonstrating that pyridinic N rather than graphitic N mainly contributed to the ORR activity. Meanwhile, the CO2 temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) depicted the Lewis basicity of pyridinic N-HOPG, further revealing that the ORR active sites are induced by pyridinic N (Fig. 4e). Encouraged by this study, Lv et al. recently developed a pure pyridinic N-doped graphdiyne with a high N content of 7.3 wt%.109 As expected, its onset potential, half-wave potential (E1/2), and limiting current density for ORR were 1.0 V, 0.84 V, and 5.5 mA cm−2 in alkaline electrolyte, respectively, even overwhelming the Pt/C benchmark. The excellent catalytic activity led to well-performed rechargeable ZABs with a high power density (130 mW cm−2) and long-term cycling stability (150 h). Nevertheless, some other studies also suggested that the ORR activity of N-doped carbon was determined by pyrrolic N.106,107 Thus, the debate on the active N types still remain, though the pyridinic N being a more favorable ORR active site.
Compared with ORR-active N-doped carbon catalysts, the mechanistic investigations on the OER capability for N-doped carbon are less reported. Nakanishi and co-workers firstly reported a N-doped carbon material that was capable of efficiently catalyzing OER in alkaline media.110 The N-rich polymer-derived catalyst exhibited a low over-potential for 10 mA cm−2 OER current (EOER:j=10) of 1.61 V, which was comparable to that of Ir-based catalysts. Also, it has been uncovered that the OER activity could be accordingly enhanced with the enrichment of pyridinic and graphitic N contents, indicating that pyridinic and graphitic N would be responsible for the OER activity in N-doped carbons. Likewise, the multi-walled carbon nanotubes doped with N heteroatoms were also demonstrated to show a low EOER:j=10 of 1.55 V in 1.0 M NaOH electrolyte, and the appealing OER performance was also attributed to the electronic effects induced by pyridinic N moieties.111 To elucidate the independent role of the different types of N dopants, Liu and co-workers proposed that quaternary N (graphitic N) sites were responsible for ORR due to their electron-donating nature, while the electron-withdrawing pyridinic N acted as OER active sites (Fig. 4g) in alkaline media, as evidenced by the change of XANES spectra for N K-edge before and after ORR/OER (Fig. 4h).51 By optimizing the distribution of quaternary and pyridinic N in graphene nanoribbon networks, exceptional rechargeable ZABs were developed with an open-circuit voltage of 1.46 V, the specific capacity of 873 mA h g−1, and a 30 hour stable recharge cycling. Similar findings are also experimentally confirmed by Yang's group.112
The above fundamental studies have further promoted the application of N-doped carbons for bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysis and rechargeable ZABs. In this context, Yu's group carried out alkali activation and N doping to produce edge-rich N-doped carbon materials (NKCNPs-900), which displayed bifunctional oxygen electrocatalytic activities in alkaline media (Fig. 5a).113 Moreover, defective structures, including the edge-defects, have been recently demonstrated as active sites for oxygen electrocatalysis, which could also tune the electronic and chemical properties of carbon materials. In the above-mentioned work, the edge defects of carbon atoms offer a portion of the active unpaired π electron to effectively boost electron transfer. The N-doping near the edge sites further contributes to the overall electrocatalytic ability, thus enhancing both ORR and OER activities and affording a relatively low ΔE, the difference between EOER:j=10 and half-wave potential for ORR (EORR:half-wave), of 0.92 V. As a result, a good rechargeable ZAB performance with a peak power density of 131.4 mW cm−2, the energy density of 889.0 W h kg−1, and stable 575 charge–discharge cycles were achieved (Fig. 5b and c). In other similar but independent experiments, N-doped carbon materials with bifunctional ORR and OER activities have also been successfully developed (Fig. 5d–f) for rechargeable ZABs with comparable performance to that of the Pt/C.109,114 However, the rechargeable ZABs using N-doped carbons mostly suffer from a large over-potential for the charging process (OER), requiring voltages over 2.0 V for substantially charging the battery. The high over-potential for OER is therefore regarded as one of the major challenges for the application of N-doped carbon catalysts in rechargeable ZABs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Overall LSV curves of NKCNPs-900 toward ORR and OER. (b) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the primary ZAB. The inset is a graph for two ZABs in series powering a red LED. (c) Recharging performance of the NKCNPs-900 (reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society). (d) Assembled ZAB setup powering the LEDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 114; Copyright©2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (e) Diagram for ORR occurring on the pyridinic N-doped carbon. (f) Cycling performance of the ZAB at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 109; Copyright©2020 Elsevier.) 
As aforementioned, the N-doping-induced charge redistribution can reduce the adsorption energy for reactant/reaction intermediates.51,99 Apart from N, therefore, all atoms more electronegative than C atom could in principle be used as effective dopants to activate graphitic carbon materials into metal-free catalysts. Insights thus gained can be used to guide the design and development of other heteroatom-doped carbon-based catalysts. Indeed, a F-doped carbon catalyst prepared by ion-exchanging, coupled with the pyrolysis of the Vulcan carbon and ammonium fluoride mixture, displayed the Pt/C-comparable ORR performance with a high current density (ca. 6.0 mA cm−2) and long-term operation stability (12000 cycles) in alkaline electrolyte.115 Besides, a simulation revealed that S-doped carbons were also potentially active towards ORR, though S has almost the same electronegativity as that of C, and hence with no doping-induced charge transfer.116 Unlike F and N, the role of S for improving ORR activity was basically attributed to the high spin density on the nearby carbon atoms (Fig. 6a).117–120
 Fig. 6  (a) Spin density distributions on S-doped graphene at the zigzag edge (reprinted with permission from ref. 117; Copyright©2014 American Chemical Society). (b) Molecular orbitals of O2 adsorbed on B-doped CNT (reproduced with permission from ref. 123; Copyright©2011 Wiley-VCH). (c) Mechanism for OER of S-doped CNTs (adapted with permission from ref. 126; Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH). (d) Nitrobenzene-doped graphene model for ORR. The zigzag edge, armchair edge, and opposite-side edges are colored with green (active edges) and pink-red (non-active edges). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 128; Copyright©2016 American Chemical Society.) 
Doping atoms with a lower electronegativity than that of C were also discovered to promote the ORR activity. For example, doping B atoms into carbon backbones showed an excellent electrocatalytic activity towards ORR in alkaline media.121,122 Given that B atom has a lower electronegativity than carbon atoms, the theory of electron-withdrawal effects induced positive-charged carbon atoms as active sites become hardly applicable for B-doped carbon catalysts. Nevertheless, there are two possible explanations:123 firstly, the electro-neutrality-breaking strategy is still applicable and the electron-deficient B dopants served as positively polarized centers for O2 adsorption. Secondly, the π electrons transfer from carbon to vacant 2pz orbitals of B atoms thereafter helping with the ORR process (Fig. 6b). Similar to B dopants, P atoms were also considered as the active sites, which adsorbed oxygen molecules with a side-on mode and thereby weakened the O–O bonds via an electron donation from P atoms to 2π* states of O2.124 Experimentally, a P-doped graphite layer realized by the pyrolysis of triphenylphosphine and toluene was thus highly active for electrochemical ORR in alkaline media compared with the P-free carbon counterpart.125 Compared with B, however, the P dopants with a stronger affinity to O atoms possibly are existed as phosphate, phosphite and/or other oxyphosphorus species in carbon backbones. In this case, the specific roles of P dopants for ORR in carbons call for further elucidation.
Similarly, the non-N doping strategy has also been used for improving OER performance. Suib's group reported a S-doped carbon nanotube-graphene nanolobe catalyst prepared via a sequential two-step method for OER and ORR in alkaline electrolytes.126 Like the ORR mechanism, carbon atoms near the heterocyclic sulfur dopants at the edge sites were attributed as the active species for OER, facilitating the formation of peroxide intermediates and thus promoting the overall oxygen evolution (Fig. 6c). Moreover, an edge-selectively phosphorus-doped graphene catalyst was also developed by Wang et al., which only required 330 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH.127 They suggested that the enhanced OER activity was related to the P dopants, though the specific role of the P atoms remained unknown.
Notably, the defects (edges) were also recognized and considered as contributors to OER performance in the above work, and the heteroatoms preferentially located at the edges were revealed as OER-active sites.126,127 Similarly, it was found that the zigzag edges and doped armchair edges (Fig. 6d) with high asymmetry spin/charge densities are highly active towards ORR, according to the first-principles calculations.128 Meanwhile, the formation of such armchair and zigzag edges is significantly dependent on the morphology and porosity control, which not only provides numerous accessible reaction sites and accelerates the diffusion process but also generates more edges in the carbon framework. Thus, defect and porosity engineering is also of great importance for improving ORR, OER, and the performance of ZABs. In this regard, the metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are also excellent precursors for the syntheses of N-doped carbon catalysts.129–131 By taking advantage of the low evaporation temperature for the Zn metal in Zn-based MOFs, metal-free catalysts of porous N-doped carbons are ready prepared via a facile pyrolysis process. With evaporation of the Zn metal during thermal treatments, numerous porous and accessible carbon structures can be created, which are considered to be beneficial for both ORR and OER. For instance, the N-doped carbon catalyst derived from SCUT-11 showed a superior ORR activity with the high onset and half-wave potentials (1.0 and 0.88 V)132 attractive for potential applications in ZABs.
Although the defects may not be regarded as heteroatom dopants, the preparation of the heteroatom-doped carbon materials would inevitably introduce defects into the carbon framework and the introduced defects are usually active towards ORR. The defect-induced catalytic activities are also arising from a non-homogenous charge/spin distribution associated with the introduction of defects, as is the case for heteroatom-doping. Thus, the defect engineering is also important in heteroatom-doped carbon for ORR/OER and ZABs.
As can be seen from the above discussions, the mono-non-metal doping can significantly enhance the catalytic activity of the pristine carbons by breaking the electro-/spin-neutrality, which thereby improves ORR and OER performance to a large extent, as compared to non-doped carbons. Consequently, the excellent catalytic activity enables their applications in primary and rechargeable ZABs. With the exception of N-doped carbons, however, the use of heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts in rechargeable ZABs is still limited by the lack of a good OER activity. So far, only very few B-doped and P-doped carbons have been reported for ZABs, especially for rechargeable ones.133,134 Moreover, unlike N-doped carbons, the identification of active sites for S-, P- and B-doped carbons and the origin of activity remain unclear. To further enhance the overall catalytic performance, the textural and defect engineering can be used to modify the electronic configuration of carbon and to enrich active sites. Nevertheless, it is clear that most non-N-doped carbon catalysts are inactive towards OER, which would restrict the application of these carbon-based materials in rechargeable ZABs. Thus, the multi-doping strategies employing more than one heteroatoms would be promising to extend the catalytic capabilities of doped carbon materials towards ORR, OER, and hence rechargeable ZABs.


3.1.2. Multi-atom-doped strategy. 
Based on the progress of the mono-heteroatom-doped carbons, multiple (binary, ternary and more) doping strategies have also been conducted to further boost electrocatalytic activities of carbon-based materials (Fig. 7a). To gain mechanistic insights into the ORR and OER bifunctional electrocatalysis of multi-doped carbon catalysts, Dai and co-workers have carried out DFT calculations on N,P co-doped carbon (NPMC) to determine the modified electronic structures of the N,P co-doped active centers.26Fig. 7b and c show the resultant volcano plots for ORR and OER, revealing the minimum overpotentials for ORR (OER) of 0.44 (0.41), 0.47 (0.49), and 0.47 (0.39) V for the N-doped, P-doped, and N,P-coupled structures, respectively. Therefore, the overall minimum overpotentials of N,P co-doped graphene for ORR and OER were determined to be 0.44 and 0.39 V, respectively, which even outperformed the precious metal-based counterparts (Pt for ORR and RuO2 for OER). Following the calculations, these authors used aniline (N source) as the monomer for polymerization in the presence of phytic acid (P source) with proper pyrolysis (Fig. 7d) to produce the three-dimensional N,P co-doped mesoporous carbon foam (NPMC-1000) with a porous texture and a specific surface area as high as 1663 m2 g−1. The NPMC-1000 exhibited extraordinary bifunctional ORR and OER activities in alkaline electrolyte, which made it an excellent metal-free bifunctional catalyst for the air cathode in rechargeable ZABs with a high open-circuit voltage of 1.48 V, high energy density of 835 W h kgZn−1, and stable charge–discharge cycling for over 240 h at 2 mA cm−2, though the output power density was relatively low (55 mW cm−2) (Fig. 7e and f). Later, these authors further promoted the peak power density of rechargeable ZABs based on the N,P co-doped carbon catalysts up to 79 mW cm−2via a templating morphology control.135
 Fig. 7  (a) N,P substituted graphene structure at the armchair sites. ORR (b) and OER (c) volcano plots of overpotential η for N-doped, P-doped and N,P-codoped graphene versus ΔGO* and the (ΔGO*–ΔGOH*), respectively. (d) Schematic diagram of the preparation for the NPMC. (i) Aniline (ii) phytic acid and (iii) formed complex. (e) The configuration of three-electrode ZABs with NPMC catalysts. (f) Cycling curves of the ZAB with NPMC-1000 (reprinted with permission from ref. 26; Copyright©2015 Nature Publishing Group). 
Meanwhile, Zhang et al. developed the N,S dual-doped carbon networks with the hierarchically porous structure, which displayed good ORR performance with an onset potential of 0.97 V and a half-wave potential of 0.85 V and consequently delivered a high open-circuit voltage of 1.51 V, a large peak power density of 221 mW cm−2 and an energy density of 905 W h kgZn−1 in primary ZABs.136 Besides, metal-free carbon catalysts with N and B dual-dopants can also provide excellent ORR and OER performance with high activity and stability,137 while B and N possess a lower and higher electronegativity compared to that of C atoms, respectively. The ΔE of the B,N-doped carbon catalyst was only 0.712 V, which was much lower than those of most heteroatom-doped carbon materials (see Table 1). The constructed ZABs exhibited a low charge and high discharge potentials of 1.86 and 1.12 V, respectively, with an outstanding peak power density (143 mW cm−2) and a long-term stability for cycling (over 2000 min).
Table 1 Bifunctionality and Zn–air batteries performances of previously-reported metal-free heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts




Air catalysts
ΔE (V)
Peak power density (mW cm−2)
Specific capacity (mA h gZn−1)
Energy density (W h kgZn−1)
Cycling stability
Ref.




N-Doped porous carbon
—
149.9
—
—
200 min

87



N-Doped carbon nanoparticles
0.92
131.4
—
889.0
575 cycles

113



N-Doped vertical carbon nanotubes

ca. 1.06

ca. 65
—
—
40 h

114



Pyridinic N-doped graphdiyne
—
136
647
∼744.05
150 h

109



N-Doped graphene
0.75
65
873
—
>150 h

51



P-Doped carbon nanosheets
0.74
—
—
—
1000 cycles

133



B-Doped graphene hydrogel
0.73
112
687
810
100 h

134



N,P-Codoped porous carbon spheres
0.86
79
684
848
55 h

135



N,P-Doped carbon foam
—
55
735
835
100 h

26



N,S dual-doped carbon nanosheets
—
221
742
905
—

136



B,N codoped nanocarbon
0.712
143
—
—
2000 min

137



B,N doped ultrathin carbon nanosheets
—
115
—
802
14 days

140



N,F,B doped carbon fibers
—
—
555
—
800 min

138



N,P,S-Doped graphene-like carbon
—
151
686
805
—

139





Aside from the binary doping, ternary doped carbon catalysts have also been demonstrated and employed in ZABs. In particular, Wang et al. reported that N, F, and B heteroatoms were successfully doped into carbon fibers (TD-CFs) via an electrospinning and annealing method, leading to an exceptional catalytic activity towards ORR, overwhelming the N-doped CFs.138 More significantly, the primary and rechargeable ZABs with TD-CFs air-cathode exhibited a remarkable reversibility and stability over continuous charge–discharge cycles for 130 h. In another study, Zheng et al., reported a N, P, and S tri-doped graphene-like carbon catalyst (NPS-G) derived from onium salts via a one-step pyrolysis method.139 The optimized NPS-G catalyst showed a significantly enhanced electrochemical activity towards alkaline ORR, as compared with its mono-doped counterparts. Specifically, the NPS-G exhibited a considerably high half-wave potential of 0.857 V for ORR, approaching that of the Pt/C. Furthermore, ZABs with the NPS-G air cathode delivered a high open-circuit voltage of 1.372V, power density of 151mW cm−2, and specific capacity of 686mA h gZn−1, which were sufficiently good among the multi-doped carbon materials. Through XPS analysis and DFT studies, the authors attributed the enhanced catalytic activity to the promoted adsorption of oxygen-containing intermediates (*OOH, *O and *OH) at the dopant sites in the NPS-G catalysts. Furthermore, as computationally indicated by a dominant role of the heteroatom edge-doping (N,P-co-doping) for high bifunctional OER/ORR catalytic activities (Fig. 8a), the control of dopant location was also critical to efficient electrocatalysis for specific reactions.135 The calculations suggested that the heteroatom dopants located at the edges can offer a lower overpotential for ORR and OER with respect to their inner doped counterparts, as is the case in the mono-doped carbons as aforementioned. Therefore, compared with mono-atom-doped carbons, the multi-doped carbon generally showed better catalytic activities in ZABs, as summarized in Table 1, while the peak power density and rechargeable stability still need to be further promoted.
 Fig. 8  (a) Differential charge density of N,P-codoped graphene at the edges. (b) Diagram of the solid-state ZAB and its stability when applied mechanical bending. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 135; Copyright©2019 Elsevier.) (c) Photograph of the all-solid-state rechargeable ZAB along with a powered blue LED (3.0 V) by four ZABs in series (adapted with permission from ref. 50; Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Diagram of a flexible rechargeable ZAB with B,N-doped ultrathin carbon nanosheet, and the photograph of a red LED bulb powered by two ZABs in series while bent at various angles (Reproduced with permission from ref. 140; Copyright©2020 Elsevier.) 
The development of carbon-based catalysts has also promoted the implementation of flexible ZABs. Based on the catalysts with N,P co-doping on the edges, an all-solid-state ZAB was assembled (Fig. 8b), which even showed a lower potential gap than that of Pt and RuO2. More importantly, no obvious potential decay can be spotted when bending at different angles. Besides, the electrospinning technique was innovatively used by Wang and co-workers to fabricate heteroatom-doped carbon films, which can directly function as an air electrode for ZABs.50 The N-doped carbon catalyst of carbon film was made of carbon fiber by electro spinning. The as-prepared air electrode exhibited an outstanding flexibility, which powered a blue LED (3.0 V) without any performance decay during mechanical bending (Fig. 8c). Recently, Huang and co-workers assembled B,N-doped ultrathin carbon nanosheets into an all-solid-state flexible ZAB (Fig. 8d).140 Although the open-circuit voltage (1.3 V) was lower than that of its counterpart in a liquid configuration, a long-time rechargeable stability could be achieved. The assembled ZABs were used to power a red LED bulb (3.0 V) with a constant brightness even under mechanical bending, indicating their potentials for wearable devices.
As mentioned above, the oxygen catalytic performance of mono-atom-doped carbon materials can be explained by doping-induced charge/spin redistribution. However, when it comes to multi-atom-doped carbons, the explanations are rather ambiguous, especially for the carbon catalysts with both electron-rich and -deficient atoms (e.g., N,B-doped carbons). Therefore, the fundamental understanding of the active sites in oxygen electrocatalysis remains unclear. Also, recent investigations on multi-heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts attributed the enhanced activity to the increased amount of active sites and/or defects.136,137,141 The reported synergistic effects between the doped atoms and carbon hosts might also facilitate the intrinsic activity for oxygen electrocatalysis.138,140 To elucidate the roles of heteroatoms, by employing the heteroatom-doped graphene models, Wei and co-workers proposed a “triple effect” theory to interpret the origin of the catalytic activity, as shown in Fig. 9.142 The triple effect consists of three components, including charge density, spin density, and ligand effect (i.e., coordination effect), which all would tune the binding with reaction intermediates. The charge density has been discussed throughout the previous section, which can be divided into negative charge effects (e.g., N-doped carbon) and positive charge effects (e.g., B-doped carbon), both of which would modify the adsorption of OOH and OH intermediates. Similarly, spin density associated with the lone electrons can also influence the catalytic activity from two aspects, i.e., the low spin density effect and high spin density effect. Lowering spin density can weaken the binding energy of OOH and vice versa. As per the ligand effect, it is usually induced by coordination unsaturation (defects) and lattice disorder induced by the heteroatom doping. The contribution of three effects towards ORR by enhancing the binding energies of *OOH or *OH increases in the order of negative charge effect < positive charge effect < low spin effect < ligand effect < high spin effect. Therefore, it is achievable to intentionally introduce two or even three effects in the heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts to tune their catalytic reactivities and even generate bi/multifunctional properties.
 Fig. 9  (a) Correlation between ORR overpotential versus ΔG*OOH for all the carbon active sites by taking the charge, spin, and ligand effects into account. The distribution of ΔG*OOH for the carbon active sites with independent effect from (b) charge effect, (c) ligand effect, and (d) spin density effect (reproduced with permission from ref. 142, Copyright©2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Therefore, doping more heteroatoms into carbon catalysts could further enhance the ORR activity when compared with the mono-doped ones. Nevertheless, most of the non-metal-doped carbon-based ZABs show relatively low peak power densities (mostly below 150 mW cm−2), and some of them even lack the good rechargeable stability, especially for those with non-N-doped carbon cathodes. To better understand the underlying mechanisms for the non-metal-doped carbons, an electro-neutrality-breaking theory and more comprehensive triple-effect theory are proposed to elucidate the prompting effects of non-metal dopants. It was found that the spin effect can tune the binding of OOH intermediate to a large extent, implying that ORR/OER and ZABs performance can be substantially enhanced by modifying the spin density. Moreover, the spin density of doped carbons can be usually engineered and influenced by the electronic structure of transition metal heteroatoms, which brings us to another episode of ZAB catalysts, cataloged as metal-doped carbon catalysts.

3.2. Metal-doped carbon catalysts
One of the main shortcomings of the metal-free doped carbon catalysts is that most of them are insufficiently active towards OER in basic medium. Transition metal compounds, such as layered double hydroxides (LDHs), metal sulphides, and phosphides,62,143–145 often show better OER activities with a higher current density compared with that of metal-free doped carbons. Nevertheless, few of these metal compound catalysts are able to efficiently catalyze ORR, due to the deficiency in conductivity.145 Therefore, researchers consider incorporating metal atoms into the carbon matrix to achieve good bifunctional ORR/OER catalysts for ZABs. Unlike transition metal compounds, the metal-doped carbons can achieve almost 100% utilization of the metal atoms, while only the surface atoms are accessible for catalytic reactions in transition metal compounds. Besides, the metal dopants in carbon will generate an under-coordination environment, which thereafter provides dangling locations for reaction intermediates with tuned adsorption energy.146 Moreover, the introduction of metal atoms can modulate the spin redistribution, which can also enhance the intrinsic activity of OER and ORR for carbon catalysts.142 Owing to the single atomic presence of metal atoms, metal atom-doped catalysts are regarded as single atomic catalysts (SACs).147 However, direct fabrication of metal atom-doped carbon materials (M-doped carbon SACs) using the aforementioned in situ or post-treatment strategies would generally lead to the formation of metal and/or metal carbide nanoparticles due to the high surface energy of isolated metal atoms.148 Creating strong interaction between isolated metal atoms and targeted doped carbons is the key to acquiring high-performance M-doped carbon SACs.
To stabilize single metal atoms in carbons, various strategies, including bottom-up and top-down methods, have been developed to prepare SAC. Detailed descriptions of the SAC preparation methods are comprehensively summarized in a previous review article.148 As an important class of SACs, metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) catalysts have received increasing attention, due to their extraordinary electrochemical activities for ZABs. In the M–N–C catalysts, N atoms possess lone pairs of electrons, which can form strong interaction with metal atoms to facilitate the immobilization of metal atomic dopants in carbon skeleton.148 Because of the spin density and charge density modification induced by metal and N atoms in the carbon framework, the catalytic capability of resultant catalysts would be significantly promoted. Thus, recent advances for M–N–C catalysts will be mainly discussed in this subsection.

3.2.1. Metal–N–C single atomic catalysts. 
The discovery of M–N–C catalysts and their application for ORR can be traced back to decades ago,149 when researchers attempted to replace the precious metals in fuel cells, due to their high price, poor stability, and vulnerability to fuel crossover effects. In the initial exploration, transition metal phthalocyanine was found to show an excellent ORR activity. Subsequent work on promoting the stability of phthalocyanine led to improved catalytic activity and durability towards ORR by the derived transition metal and N-doped carbons.150 As revealed by the further analysis of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), Mössbauer spectroscopy, and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), the coordinated metal–Nx complex was recognized to function as the ORR-active sites in the thermally-treated phthalocyanine, as shown in Fig. 10.151 To fabricate the M–N–C materials, researchers have recently developed several methods using inorganic metal precursors and N-containing chemicals, such as aforementioned MOFs, covalent organic framework (COFs) and polymer monomers, to replace expensive macrocyclic compounds. The harvested materials are M–N–C catalysts with N-coordinated metal sites in carbon backbones after proper pyrolysis. Compared with non-metal-doped carbon catalysts, M–N–C catalysts usually show better ORR performance in alkaline electrolytes.152 Given the promising bifunctional ORR and OER activities, M–N–C catalysts are potentially capable of being air electrode catalysts for rechargeable ZABs, leading to many related research activities.
 Fig. 10  Typical characterizations for SACs: (a) high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of the Fe–N–C catalysts. (b) EELS spectra of atomic Fe sites. (c) TEM image of Fe–N–C catalysts. (d–h) EELS mappings of C, Fe, N, and overlapping patterns. (i) XAS spectra and (j) Fourier transforms of EXAFS at Fe K-edge. (k) Mössbauer spectroscopy for the Fe–N–C sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151; Copyright©2018 National Academy of Sciences. 
Amongst the M–N–Cs, the iron–N–C (Fe–N–C) generally offers the best ORR activity, followed by Co, copper (Cu), manganese (Mn), and nickel (Ni), as demonstrated in Fig. 11a.153 In the initial endeavor, porous carbon nanofibers doped with Fe (0.56 at%) and N (HP-Fe–N/CNFs) were fabricated using facile pyrolysis methods.154 The HP-Fe–N/CNFs consequently displayed excellent ORR performance with a comparable onset and half-wave potential to those of commercial Pt/C catalyst in alkaline media. Consequently, it showed good primary ZAB performance with a peak power density of 135 mW cm−2 and a specific capacity of 701 mA h gZn−1. The Fe–Nx species are believed to play a vital role in catalyzing the ORR, leading to improved primary ZAB performance. Therefore, Feng and co-workers have recently developed hierarchical porous carbon catalysts (SA-Fe-NHPC) with enriched Fe–Nx moieties (1.25 wt%) via a zinc-mediated template synthesis.155 The obtained SA-Fe-NHPC exhibited an outstanding ORR activity with the onset and half-wave potentials of 1.01 and 0.93 V, respectively. Besides, as shown in Fig. 11b–e, a primary ZAB based on the SA-Fe-NHPC catalyst delivered a high peak power density of 266.4 mW cm−2 and a large specific capacity of 795.3 mA h gZn−1. Similarly, other Fe–N–C electrocatalysts were also demonstrated and applied in primary ZABs with satisfying performance.156–159
 Fig. 11  (a) The activities of different transition metal catalysts for alkaline ORR. (Reprinted with permission from ref.153; Copyright©2014 American Chemical Society). (b) The SA-Fe-NHPC-based ZAB setup and the open-circuit voltage (ca. 1.51 V). (c) Discharging curves and calculated the power density of the ZABs. (d) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the ZAB. (e) The rechargeable ZAB by replacing Zn anode and electrolyte (reproduced with permission from ref. 155; Copyright©2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
While these Fe–N–C catalysts showed good ORR activities, their OER catalytic ability was rarely reported. Thus, commercial precious-metal-based catalysts (IrO2 or RuO2) have been blended with the Fe–N–C catalysts and drop-cast onto carbon paper or carbon cloth as the air electrode to realize rechargeable ZABs. Peng et al. have fabricated a Fe–N–C catalyst (pfSAC-Fe-0.2) through combining Fe phthalocyanine with a fully closed π-conjugated COF and then mixed with commercial iridium oxide (IrO2) to assemble a rechargeable ZAB.160 The constructed ZAB offered a high peak power density of 123.43 mW cm−2, a large specific capacity of 732 mA h gZn−1, and a cycling rechargeable stability for over 30 h, as shown in Fig. 12a–c. Except for IrO2, ruthenium oxide (RuO2) has also been adopted to construct rechargeable ZABs with Fe–N–C catalysts.161 In prolonged operation of rechargeable ZABs, however, noble-metal-based catalysts are usually unstable, which would render a severely decreased voltaic efficiency in cycling tests.162 Thus, to achieve rechargeable ZABs with only Fe–N–C catalysts, the OER activity of Fe–N–C needs to be further improved. To this end, Wei and co-workers encapsulated Fe atomic species within the interior cavities of a ZIF host, and subsequently obtained Fe–N–C catalysts with a high metal content of 3.8 wt%.163 The resultant Fe–N–C catalyst exhibited an enhanced ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.895 V in alkaline electrolytes, which outperformed the commercial Pt/C benchmark. Despite the OER activity was still far from satisfactory, the optimized Fe–N–C catalysts (Fe–N–C-1/30) have been used in rechargeable ZABs, exhibiting a stable performance for 50 cycles (Fig. 12d–f). However, due to the relatively low OER activity of the Fe–N–C catalysts, most of the ZABs with Fe–N–C catalysts required a high charging voltage (>2.0 V), which inhibits their application in rechargeable ZABs.162,163 Also, Fe–N–C catalysts may suffer from the severe deactivation in long-term operations, particularly due to the Fenton reaction between the Fe species and H2O2 by-product, leading to a destruction of the Fe–Nx active sites and oxidation of carbon supports, and therefore accelerated deactivation and even failure of the ZABs.164,165
 Fig. 12  (a) Polarization and power density curves of the Pt/C and pfSAC-Fe-0.2 for ZAB discharging. (b) Continuous discharging of the ZAB until the complete consumption of Zn anodes. (c) Long-term recharging performance of ZABs with different catalysts. The inset is the voltage efficiency of ZAB with pfSAC-Fe-0.2 (adapted with permission from ref. 160; Copyright©2019 AAAS). (d) Discharging and calculated power density curves of the ZAB with different catalysts. (e) Galvanostatic discharge curves. (f) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of ZABs with the Fe–N/C-1/30 (reprinted with permission from ref. 163; Copyright©2018 Elsevier). 
Unlike Fe–N–C materials, Co-based catalysts are relatively inert to Fenton reaction and can stably function under the ZAB operating conditions.165 Thus, Co–N–C catalysts have been developed to fulfill the stability needs for practical ZABs. Compared with the Fe–N–C counterparts, the Co–N–C catalysts can deliver considerable OER activity, though their ORR activity may still be slightly inferior. In previous studies, MOFs (e.g., ZIF-67) have been utilized as precursors for the fabrication of Co–N materials (Fig. 13a).152 ZIF-67 could be converted into Co–N–C atomic catalysts through proper pyrolysis and chemical leaching of residual Co nanoparticles. The resultant Co–N–C catalysts thus produced a desirable bifunctional ORR and OER activity with a small ΔE of around 0.75 V.166 As a result, the Co–N–C catalysts are believed as better air catalysts for rechargeable ZABs than Fe–N–C catalysts (Fig. 13b).167,168 Furthermore, Qiu et al. applied the MOF-derived Co–N-doped graphitic carbon (Co–NGC) as the electrocatalyst in an aqueous planar rechargeable ZABs (Fig. 13c), offering an open-circuit voltage of 1.45 V, a peak power density of 109 mW cm−2, and a large specific capacity of 617 mA h gZn−1 at a current density of 2 mA cm−2.169 Consequently, the ZABs can continuously undergo charge–discharge cycles for 56 h with a charge voltage of ca. 1.9 V and discharge voltage of 1.3 V. Similar battery performance was also recently realized using Co–N–C atomic catalysts even at a higher cycling current density (10 mA cm−2).170 Like the Fe–N–C catalysts, it is widely believed that Co–Nx centers are the active species for the oxygen electrocatalysis. In this case, Wu et al. dedicated to further promote the ZAB performance of Co–N–C materials (SCoNC) by enriching the population of Co atomic sites in the carbon matrix.171 A salt-templating method was adopted to prepare the monodispersed atomic Co on a N-doped graphene-like carbon with a record high Co content of 15.3 wt%. Owing to the densely populated Co isolated sites, the resultant catalyst not only outperformed the Pt/C towards ORR but also overwhelmed IrO2 for OER under the same conditions, resulting in the lowest ΔE of 0.63 V reported so far. Its excellent bifunctionality for oxygen electrocatalysis endows the as-constructed ZAB with a high peak power density (194 mW cm−2), large specific capacity (690 mA h gZn−1) and durable cyclicality (20 h), as shown in Fig. 13d–h.
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of Co–N materials derived from MOFs (reprinted with permission from ref. 152; Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society). (b) Bifunctional ORR/OER activity of the Co–N–C catalysts. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 167; Copyright©2019 Elsevier.) (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Co–NGC catalysts. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 169; Copyright©2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (d) Diagram of a home-made ZAB. (e) Polarization and power density curves of the primary ZAB using Pt/C and SCoNC. (f) Discharge curves of primary ZABs with SCoNC until the complete consumption of Zn anodes. (g) Images of a blue LED (ca. 2.5 V) powered by two ZABs in series. (h) Recharging cycling curves of the ZABs using the SCoNC and Pt/C in 2-electrode setup, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 171; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
Given the outstanding rechargeable ZAB performance in the aqueous planar configuration, the Co–N–C catalysts were subsequently used in solid-state/flexible ZABs. For example, Mu and co-workers installed a solid-state planar ZAB with Co–Nx/C nanorod arrays derived from 3D ZIF nanocrystals (Fig. 14a).172 The assembled solid-state ZAB displayed a good battery performance with an open-circuit voltage of 1.265 V (Fig. 14b). Nevertheless, the performance of solid-state ZAB was inferior to the aqueous ZAB in terms of open-circuit potentials (aqueous ZAB: 1.42 V), which was attributed to the poor-contact, high viscosity, and ion conductivity of electrolyte gel. Meanwhile, cycling stability is another issue for the solid-state ZAB with Co–Nx/C nanorod arrays. It was severely deteriorated with a discharging retention of 51.3% only, while the aqueous ZAB can carry out 80 h cycling with negligible deactivation. As a more advanced design for solid-state ZABs, the wearable ZABs require a good flexibility for all constituent components of ZABs and efficient function of air catalysts under mechanical deformations, which is highly challenging. To this end, Pennycook and co-workers packed a binder-free Co–N–C air cathode with Zn foil anode into a flexible solid-state ZAB.173 Although the assembled ZAB showed a good open-circuit voltage of 1.41 V, the stability of charge–discharge cycling is still far from satisfactory, especially during the bent-flat transition (Fig. 14c). Based on this design, Tang et al., additionally pressed a Ni foam as the current collector to improve the open-circuit voltage of ZAB to 1.439 V.174 Also, the cycling profile of bent-flat shift can be significantly promoted in a 1 h practice, as shown in Fig. 14d. To improve the contact in the electrolyte/air electrode interfaces and facilitate the gas diffusion, more flexible and stretchable carbon cloth was employed as the catalyst support. Two different schemes, including planar175 and cylinder-like solid-state ZABs,176 were reported. These novel designs allowed the batteries to deliver a good rechargeable stability during the bent-flat shift (Fig. 14e). On the other hand, instead of using the regular press procedure to pack ZABs, Guo and co-workers wove the electrolyte gel, Zn anode, and current collector with free-standing Co–N–C flake array catalyst, and thereafter sewed the ZAB on the woven glove (Fig. 14f and g).177 The woven ZAB not only exhibited a high open-circuit voltage of 1.41 V and a large specific capacity of 530.17 mA h gZn−1, but also well-alleviate the mechanical shape change for over 8000 s cycling operation.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schemes of a solid-state ZAB with the Co–N–C catalyst layers. (b) The open-circuit voltage of the assembled ZABs and photograph of a lighted LED powered by three ZABs in series. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 172; Copyright©2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (c) Cycling stability of the ZAB under continuous mechanical flat and bent changes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173; Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society.) (d) Galvanostatic cycling curves of the ZAB under bending at 1.0 mA cm−2. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 174; Copyright©2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (e) Cycling curves of the planar-like solid-state ZAB at different bending angles. (Adapted with permission from ref. 175; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (f) Schematics of the preparation process of flexible and wearable ZABs with free-standing Co–N–C flake arrays catalyst. (g) The flexibility of the assembled ZABs under rolling, bending and twisting. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 177; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
Aside from the Fe– and Co–N–C catalysts, attempts have also been made to introduce other transition metals, such as Mn, Zn, and Cu, into N-doped carbon frameworks.178–181 Although most of them showed attractive ORR performance, the OER activity was hardly improved. Thus, the Zn, Mn, and Cu–N–C catalysts have been reported to be only feasible for primary ZABs till now.178,179,181 By contrast, Ni–N–C catalysts can provide both ORR and OER activities for rechargeable ZABs, as exemplified by a CVD-generated Ni and N co-doped graphene with an ultra-high Ni content of 23 wt%.182 As a result, the OER and ORR performance of the Ni–N–C catalyst was comparable to and even outperformed the commercially-available precious metal catalysts with a ΔE as small as ca. 0.60 V. Consequently, the assembled solid-state ZAB delivered an approximately 45 h long-term rechargeable stability and 3 h bending stability. Therefore, there are great opportunities to further modify Ni–N–C along with Zn and Cu–N–C catalysts for future rechargeable ZABs.
As compared with non-metal-doped carbon catalysts for ZABs, the metal-doped carbons tend to offer better ORR activities, thus resulting in a leap in the maximum power density output of ZABs (usually above 200 mW cm−2), as listed in Table 2. The M–Nx moieties embedded in the carbon matrix are commonly recognized as active sites in M–N–C catalysts for the outstanding catalytic activity,160–164 and the critical role of metal centers has been unveiled by poison experiments using strong metal-chelating agents (e.g., CN− and SCN−) to deactivate the ORR activity of the M–N–C catalysts.183,184 As is the case with non-metal-doped carbon catalysts, the enhanced catalytic activity for the M–N–C catalysts is caused by the tuned adsorption of reaction intermediates, including *O, *OOH, and *OH, on the metal sites. The ORR mechanism on the M–N–C catalysts involves the following sequence: O2 → *OOH → *O → *OH → OH− in alkaline solution (Fig. 15a), and the reverse reaction occurs for OER.161,166,169,170 Therefore, the adsorption of these intermediates on metal sites is the main factor that governs the catalytic activity of M–N–C catalysts for ORR and OER. Besides, the use of different transition metal centers leads to different ORR/OER activities.20
Table 2 Performance of aqueous rechargeable ZABs with metal-doped carbon catalysts




Air catalysts
Active sites
Electrolytes
Open-circuit voltage (V)
Power density (mW cm−2)
Capacity (mA h gZn−1)
Energy density (W h kgZn−1)
Cycling stability
Ref.




Single-atom iron catalysts (SA-Fe/NC)
Fe-Pyrrolic–N species
6 M KOH with 0.2 M ZnO
—
91
—
—
20 h (with IrO2)

151



Fe–N–C–rich pyrolysis-free COF network
Fe–N–C centers
8 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO
1.41
123.43
732
∼578.3
300 (with IrO2)

160



3.5 wt% Fe SAs/N–C
Fe–N4
6 M KOH saturated with O2
—
225
636
∼795
260 h (with RuO2)

161



Fe-MOF@CNTs–G hybrids
Fe–Nx
6M KOH and 0.2M Zn(Ac)2
1.414
95.3
637.4
734.1
2000 min cycles

162



Fe–TPP⊂rho-ZIF-derived Fe–N–C
Fe–N4
6M KOH and 0.2M Zn(Ac)2
1.525
121.8
—
—
50 cycles

163



Fe,N co-doped carbon fibers (FeNCF)
Fe–N4
6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.48
145
784.3
713.9
100 cycles

164



Co SA confined in ultrathin N-doped porous carbon
Co–N4
6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.48
—
860.95
∼1067.6
44 h

170



Densely populated, Co (15.3 wt%) on N-doped graphene
Co–N4
6 M KOH
1.49
194
690
945
20 h

171



Co–Nx/C nanorod array
Co–N coupling centers
6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.42
193.2
—
853.12
80 h

172



Co/N/O tri-doped graphene
Co–Nx–C
6 M KOH and 0.2 M ZnCl2
—
152
750
840
60 h

174



Single atoms Co catalysts on N-doped porous carbon
Co atomic sites
6.0M KOH and 0.2M ZnCl2
1.46
105.3
897.1
∼1013.7
83 h

175



Single-atom Co on N-doped graphitic nanosheet
Co–N4
6M KOH and 0.2M ZnO
1.51
115
730
671
100 h

176



Co nanoislands rooted Co–N–C nanosheets
Co0 and Co–N–C
6.0 M KOH and 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2
—
132
—
—
330 h

200



Vertically MoS2 nanosheet wrapped Mo–N/C framework
MoS2 and Mo–N
6.0 M KOH
1.46
196.4
—
846.07
12 h

203



S,N-Fe/N/C–CNT hybrids
Fe–Nx
6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.35
102.7
—
—
100 cycles

27



Atomic Fe on N, P and S co-doped hollow carbon
Single-atom Fe center
6 M KOH
1.45
195
—
—
200000 s

205



Single Fe atom on porous S,N-codoped Nanocarbon
Synergistic Fe–N3|S sites
6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.53
225.1
740.8
∼1000.1
65 h

206



Fe–Ni atom pairs in N-doped carbon
Ni–Fe dual-metal pairs
6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.41
220
721.5
932.66
100 h

20



Binary Co–Ni sites in N-doped hollow carbon nanocubes
Neighboring Co–Ni dual metal center
6.0 M KOH/0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.45
101.4
750.9
886.1
1900 min

214



Fe, Mn, and N-doped fish gill derived carbon
Fe–Mn binary sites
6.0 M KOH/0.2 M Zn(Ac)2
1.41
220
—
—
770 min

215



Binary NixFe100−x-NC (x = 0–100) materials
Ni(N3)–Fe(N3)–Cn
6.0 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(OAC)2
1.44
140.1
765.5
∼903.3
334 h

213





 Fig. 15  (a) The mechanisms for ORR (clockwise) and OER (anticlockwise) over CoN4 active site (reprinted with permission from ref. 166; Copyright©2019 Elsevier). (b) Volcano plot for ORR activity vs. both the O and the OH binding energy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 57; Copyright©2004 American Chemical Society.) (c) The scheme of d–p coupling and bond structure between metal and oxygen. (d) Potentials at 25 μA cmox−2 as a function of eg orbital in perovskite-based oxides (reproduced with permission from ref. 187; Copyright©2011 Springer Nature). 
To explain the origin of the different activities, the Gibbs free energy of intermediates adsorption (ΔG) is often used as a descriptor to estimate the electrochemical activity in many studies.161,165,166,169,170 The optimal ΔG is expected to be moderate, which is denoted as the Sabatier Principle, as either too strong or too weak adsorption of intermediates on catalytic active sites is unfavorable to the reaction. This principle consequently leads to the birth of volcano-plot relationship profiling the linear correlation between different transition metals and catalytic activities, as shown in Fig. 15b.57 To further demonstrate the correlation between activities and intrinsic physical properties of metal centers, the d-band theory was proposed.185 It reveals the underlying relationship between the adsorption energies of intermediates and the electronic structure of metals. Specifically, for oxygen electrocatalysis, once the O-containing intermediates formed and adsorbed onto the catalytic metal sites, the 2p electrons from O could be coupled with 3d electrons of metals generating chemical binding with different strengths to form the so-called p–d coupling. The p–d hybridization leads to the formation of bonding (σ) and antibonding states (σ*), as shown in Fig. 15c. The filling of σ states strengthens the interaction between metals and intermediates, while the filling of the σ* states would destabilize the binding. As for 3d metals (Fe, Co, Ni, etc.), the σ state is full, while the filling of the σ* state depends on the local electronic configuration of metal atoms. Therefore, based on the theory, with respect to Fermi level (EF), the relative position of the d-band center (ED) conclusively affects the filling of the σ* state and thereby tunes the ΔG. As a result, the different catalytic performance delivered by M–N–Cs can be attributed to the distinct d band structures of metals. Then, what is the best relative position of EF and ED for oxygen electrocatalysis? To quantitatively answer this question, Yang and co-workers hypothesized an appealing eg-filling theory to further enrich the d band theory for ORR and OER in the ABO3-type perovskite scheme.186,187 Generally, d-orbital of central metals is split into 2 energy levels, i.e., eg and t2g orbitals. In their scheme, the transition metal sites (B sites) are assumed to absorb O-containing groups and eg strongly govern the σ and σ* bonding. Thus, the eg occupancy of B-site metals well determines the adsorption strength of intermediates, and thereby the catalytic activity. According to their results, the value of ca. 1 for the eg-filling indicates the best ORR activity (Fig. 15d). However, this hypothesis is based on the perovskite models, which endows well-defined crystalline structures and long-range order textures. However, the heteroatom-doped carbon materials are lack of the ordered lattice with various underlying adsorption sites being obstacle for the application of the eg-filling theory. Thus, the wide adoption of this theory to M–N–C catalysts still requires more investigations.
Since there would be an optimal d-band structure or eg-filling value for transition metal catalysts, how to manipulate it chemically becomes the focus of research. It is found that the d-band structures of central metals in M–N–C catalysts can be regulated by altering their coordination environments,188 which can be realized by varying the preparation conditions, including temperatures, gas atmospheres, and precursors. Except for the thermodynamically unstable M–N1 model, other M–N2–6 models have also been reported in the literature, as shown in Fig. 16. The presence of the Fe–N2 in the edge sites and in-plane sites were also experimentally and theoretically verified.188–190 It was found that the Fe–N2 sites can strongly adsorb oxygen with longer O–O bonds, indicating higher ORR activities due to the easier cleavage of O–O bonds. The bi-N-coordinated metal sites were also discovered in Co–N–C and Cu–N–C catalysts.191–193 Besides, the well-known M–N4 structure is widely used to elucidate the reaction mechanism for M–N–C catalysts.161–164,170,171 According to previous reports, the M–N4 moieties can be divided into two configurations. One is the porphyrin-like M–N4 structure in-plane of the carbon matrix, while the other is the M–N2+2 complex in the edges (Fig. 16b),194 and both of them can efficiently catalyze ORR in alkaline electrolytes. The M–N4 structure can modulate the chemisorption bond strength of oxygen molecules and other intermediates via the modified eg-orbital, endowing better ORR activity. Notably, the M–Nx (x = 2–4) structures possibly exist in the catalysts simultaneously with different proportions. Thus, it would be difficult to clarify the intrinsic activity for each M–Nx site.192 Although being rarely reported, M–N5 and M–N6 configurations (Fig. 16c and d) have been recognized as the active sites for oxygen electrocatalysis in previous literature.195,196 It is worth pointing out that the M–Nx complexes are all reported to be active for ORR, while their roles for OER are barely studied, which requires further elucidation.
 Fig. 16  (a) Proposed coordination structure of the Fe–N2 catalytic site (reproduced with permission from ref. 189; Copyright©2002 American Chemical Society). (b) Structural models of Fe–N2+2 and Fe–N4 active site structures (reprinted with permission from ref. 194; Copyright© 2013 American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic diagram of the Fe–N5 structure for FePc-Py-CNTs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 196; Copyright©2013 Springer Nature.) (d) Possible Fe–N6 complex structure (reproduced with permission from ref. 195; Copyright©2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) Trends in adsorption energies of the ORR intermediates in graphitic materials with M–N4 sites (adapted with permission from ref. 197; Copyright©2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Compared with the non-metal-doped carbon catalysts, therefore, the M–N–C catalysts present their superiority in ORR and OER, ensuring the improved peak power density and rechargeable stability of both aqueous (Table 2) and solid-state ZABs (Table 3). The enhanced activity of M–N–C is usually attributed to the optimized adsorption of O2 and reaction intermediates of the oxygen electrocatalysis on the active metal sites, regulated by the d-band configurations. While the adsorption of reaction intermediates is modulated by the coordination configuration of metal atoms in M–N–C catalysts, the binding of O-containing intermediates follows the Scaling relations (Fig. 16e).197–199 It suggests that the binding strengths of *O, *OOH, and *OH on the metal sites can be adjusted simultaneously, which is because if the binding of one intermediate gets stronger, the other intermediates would bind stronger as well and vice versa. Thus, it is possible when the weak binding of one intermediate is strengthened intentionally, the binding of other intermediates may become too strong to undergo ORR/OER efficiently. Apart from this thermodynamic bottleneck, the unsatisfied OER activity is another shortcoming needed to be addressed in future research.
Table 3 Performance of solid-state rechargeable ZABs with metal-doped carbon catalysts




Air catalysts
Open-circuit voltage (V)
Peak power density (mW cm−2)
Electrolyte
Cycling stability
Flexibility
Ref.




Co–Nx/C nanorod array
1.27
—
0.1 M KOH, 0.02 M Zn(Ac)2 and PVA
60 h
No

172



Co on N-doped porous carbon nanoflake arrays
1.41
20.9
11.25 M KOH and 0.25 M ZnO in PAA
2500 min
Yes

173



Co/N/O tri-doped graphene
1.439
>27
18.0 M KOH, 0.1 M ZnCl2 and PVA
>60 min
Yes

174



Single atoms Co catalysts on N-doped porous carbon
1.40
—
9 M KOH with PVA
1000 min
Yes

175



Single-atom Co on N-doped graphitic nanosheet
—
28
18 M KOH with 0.02 M Zn(COOH)2 in PVA
300 min
Yes

176



Co on N-doped carbon flake arrays
1.41
—
18 M KOH with 0.02 M Zn(COOH)2 in PVA
90 cycles
Yes

177



N and Ni codoped np-graphene
1.35
83.8
7 M KOH, 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2 and PVA
43 h
Yes

182



Co nanoislands rooted Co–N–C nanosheets
1.41
—
12 M KOH with 0.2 M ZnAc in PVA
10 h
Yes

200



Vertically MoS2 nanosheet wrapped Mo–N/C framework
—
—
0.1 M KOH/0.02 M ZnAc in PVA
48 h
No

203



Binary Co–Ni in N-doped carbon
—
—
9 M KOH in PVA
400 min
Yes

214







3.2.2. Metal-doped carbon catalysts beyond M–N–Cs. 
Based on the substantial progress achieved on M–N–C catalysts, researchers have made efforts to further enhance the ORR activity of M–N–C materials as well as their OER performance for rechargeable ZABs. Inspired by the outstanding OER activity of metal compounds (metals and metal sulphides), bifunctional electrocatalysts have been developed by combining ORR-active M–N–C catalysts with OER-active metal compounds.200 Meanwhile, the underlying synergy between the metal compounds and M–N–C species may further promote the intrinsic activity of both.201,202 In this regard, Zhang and co-workers combined OER-active Co4N nanoparticles and ORR-active Co–N–C on carbon fibers as a free-standing and flexible electrode for flexible ZABs (Fig. 17a).47 Besides, Fu and co-workers synthesized Co nanoislands planted on carbon nanosheets with abundant Co–Nx complex (Co/Co–N–C),200 which showed an excellent OER activity, while the Co–N–C nanosheets delivered superior ORR performance at the same time. Thus, the Co/Co–N–C represented a bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst with good ORR and OER activities, ensuring better battery performance for the aqueous ZAB (a stable 1000 charge–discharge cycles for around 330 h and a peak power density of 132 mW cm−2) than those of the Co–N–C control sample. By using the ORR and OER bifunctional electrocatalyst of Co/Co–N–C, a cable-type solid ZAB was assembled to exhibit a high open-circuit voltage of 1.41 V and 10 h cycling robustness even under continuous mechanical bending, as shown in Fig. 17d–i. Likewise, a combination of molybdenum (Mo)–N–C and MoS2 (Mo–N/C@MoS2) was also reported by Amiinu et al.203 As an OER and ORR-bifunctional catalyst for a solid-state ZAB, Mo–N/C@MoS2 showed a high open-circuit voltage of 1.342 V and a stable cycling profile with charge and discharge potentials of around 1.99 and 1.24 V, respectively, which outperformed the commercial benchmarks with Pt/C for ORR and IrO2 for OER.203
 Fig. 17  (a) Free-standing N-doped carbon fiber consisting of Co4N and Co–N–C for flexible ZABs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 47; Copyright©2016 American Chemical Society.) (b) XANES at the Fe K-edge of the FeNC and FeNPC samples; the inset is the magnified pattern of the pre-edge part and the schematics of octahedral FeNPC, Fe (orange), N (blue), C (grey), O (red), P (yellow) and H (white). (c) Fourier transforms at the Fe K-edge of the different samples along with foil reference and their first-shell fitting in R space. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 204; Copyright©2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.) Schematics (d) and cycling stability (e) of the assembled ZAB. Schematic diagram (f) and cycling performance (g) of the flexible solid ZAB. (h) Photograph of the LED screen powered by three flexible ZABs in series. (i) Recharging stability of the ZAB tested under different bending states. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 200; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
Another feasible way to further improve the M–N–C catalysts is to introduce more heteroatoms (non-metal atoms) into the carbon backbone, as commonly adopted in metal-free heteroatom-doped carbons. For example, Chen et al., doped extra N and S into a carbon matrix embedded with Fe–Nx species.27 The synergy between N,S co-doped carbon, and Fe–Nx sites further improved the intrinsic activities for bifunctional electrocatalysis of ORR and OER. Therefore, the aqueous ZAB employed with this catalyst displayed a good peak power density of 102.7 mW cm−2 and a stable charge–discharge capability (over 100 cycles). Similarly, Li and co-workers developed single Fe atomic sites supported on the N, P, and S co-doped hollow carbon polyhedron (Fe-SAs/NPS-HC) derived from a combination of metal–organic framework and polymer composite.205 As evidenced by XAS analysis, the P and S dopants were mainly located in the vicinity of Fe–Nx moieties. More interestingly, the electron donation from the surrounding S and P to the metal center Fe (Feδ+) was revealed and consequently made the Fe less positively charged, thus altering the combination with OH intermediate and leading to an enhanced ORR activity. Although the OER activity of the Fe-SAs/NPS-HC catalyst has yet been thoroughly studied, a ZAB with the Fe-SAs/NPS-HC catalyst already showed a good peak power density of 195.0 mW cm−2 and stable charging/discharging stability without any variation in voltage for 200000 s. In addition to the synergistic effect on the M–Nx sites, the intrinsic activity of M–N–C moieties could be further enhanced via the formation of M–N–X–C (X = P and S) structures by doping with extra heteroatoms to coordinate with metal centers. In this context, Amal and co-workers reported an ORR and OER-active carbon hollow spheres with highly dispersed N and P co-coordinated iron atoms (FeNPC).204 As revealed by XAS and XPS, the doping of P led to extra coordination with Fe–N4 moieties, forming the FeN4P1 complex to act as active-sites in catalyzing ORR and OER, as evidenced in Fig. 17b and c. The ZABs based on the FeNPC bifunctional catalyst exhibited a high peak power density of 233.2 mW cm−2 and an excellent cycling stability for over 15 h. Other studies have also shown that the non-N heteroatom dopants could likely substitute the N atoms in Fe–N4 sites, thus generating Fe–N3S and Fe–N3P moieties in the carbon framework.206,207 According to Yuan and co-workers,207 carbon nanosheets embedded with P and N dual-coordinated with Fe active sites (Fe–N/P–C) were prepared and the 4-coordinated FeN3P1 atomic species possibly existed. Their combined experimental and theoretical results indicated that the replacement of P for N in the pristine Fe–N4 complex could kinetically accelerate the O2 sorption process, which therefore promoted the oxygen electrocatalysis for ZABs. Consequently, ZABs with the optimized Fe–N/P–C-700 catalyst exhibited an impressive open-circuit voltage of 1.42 V, a large specific capacity of 723.6 mA h gZn−1, and a maximum power density of 133.2 mW cm−2 at a current density of 219.6 mA cm−2, which largely outperformed those of the commercial Pt/C benchmark.
Another class of metal-doped carbon catalysts was developed very recently by introducing secondary active metal (M2) into M–N–C catalysts. After the introduction of an M2, it would be very likely to form another M2–N–C embedded in the carbon framework with a different M–N–C complex (M1–N–C). For instance, Jiang and co-workers used DCDA and carbon nanotubes as the precursor and conductive support to fabricate bimetallic Ni and Fe atomic catalysts for both ORR and OER in alkaline solutions (Fig. 18a).208 XAS analysis unraveled that both Fe and Ni atoms in the as-prepared catalysts were immobilized by the coordination of nitrogen, and there was an interaction between Fe–Nx and Ni–Nx as evidenced by a positive shift of Ni L-edge absorption peak. As a result, the catalysts showed outstanding performance for reversible OER and ORR, achieving a small ΔE of 0.81 V. Recently, Chen et al. allocated single atomic Ni and Fe sites on the inner and outer walls of graphene hollow nanospheres (Ni–N4/GHSs/Fe–N4), integrating ORR-active Fe and OER-active Ni to form a Janus catalyst (Fig. 18b).209 As evidenced by EXAFS, the atomic Ni and Fe sites were coordinated with four N atoms in a manner of planar Ni–N4 and Fe–N4. Unlike other dual SACs, the competition between the rate-limiting steps of ORR and OER can be balanced via the separation of Fe and Ni species, thus displaying a good bifunctional catalytic ability and excellent performance for rechargeable ZABs.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram of the bimetallic FeNi-based SACs. The red ball indicates Fe atoms, and the green ball indicates Ni atoms. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 208; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Configuration of the assembled ZAB with the Ni–N4/GHSs/Fe–N4 catalyst. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 209; Copyright© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (c) Configuration of the lab-made ZAB set-up with Fe–NiNC catalyst. (d) Polarization, power density, and (e) galvanostatic discharge curves of the ZABs. (f) Specific capacity of ZABs. (g) A comparison of the reported catalysts by their peak power densities and specific energy densities. (h) A 100 h cycling test of the ZAB. (i) Picture of a LED bulb (∼2.0 V) powered by two ZABs in series. Stepwise mechanisms for ORR (j) and OER (k). The black, blue, green, golden, red, and pink balls represent C, N, Ni, Fe, O, and H atoms, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 20; Copyright©2020 Elsevier). 
However, both the M–N–X–C and the M1–N–C + M2–N–C catalysts are essentially single atomic M–N–C catalysts with heteronuclear or modified metal centers. Although the M1–N–C + M2–N–C catalysts can provide additional adsorption and reaction site for intermediates, these sites on the two separated different-type catalysts (i.e., M1 and M2) would independently undergo the reactions because the adsorbed intermediates hardly move between them due to their long separation distance, and hence the Scaling relations cannot be overcome in the M1–N–C + M2–N–C catalysts. Therefore, they are still limited by the linear scaling relationship among different adsorption energies of reaction intermediates (*OH, *O, and *OOH), which thereafter become a fundamental limitation to the overall catalytic performance and further applications.210 To address this problem, innovative M1–M2–N–C models with M1–M2 dual-metal pairs stabilized via N-coordination in carbon backbones have been proposed. As compared with the M1–N–C + M2–N–C catalysts, the reaction intermediates are adsorbed on the dual-metal sites, rather than single atomic metal sites, in the M1–M2–N–C catalysts. Hence, the catalysts can provide dual-sites for intermediates in different adsorption manners, and meanwhile, the strong synergy between the metal atoms can largely regulate the adsorption behaviors. Thus, the development of M1–M2–N–C catalysts would be a practical solution to break the Scaling Relation restriction associated with M–N–C SACs. However, the preparation of M1–M2–N–C catalysts is the main challenge due to the electro-repulsion between metal ions during one-pot strategies. In order to prepare M1–M2–N–C dual-metal catalysts, some novel wet-chemistry methods have been developed. For instance, Lu et al. firstly synthesized an isolated Zn–Co dual-metal pairs in N-doped carbon catalyst (Zn/CoN–C) derived from chitosan.211 The Zn–Co bimetal bonding enhanced the adsorption of oxygen and activated the O–O bonds, thus exhibiting an excellent ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.861 V. Besides, the primary ZAB assembled with the Zn/CoN–C catalyst exhibited a peak power density of 230 mW cm−2. Meanwhile, Wang et al. also developed a Fe–Co dual-metal pair carbon catalyst ((Fe,Co)/CNT), which was used as the air catalyst in ZABs, due to its outstanding ORR performance with a half-wave potential of 0.954 V.212 The resultant ZAB showed a peak power density as high as 260 mW cm−2 and a specific capacity of 774 mA h gZn−1. Our previous work extended the application of M1–M2–N–C atomic catalysts to both ORR and OER by embedding atomic Fe–Ni dual metal pairs into N-doped carbon hollow spheres (Fe–NiNC-50) through dual-solvent methods.20 Excellent ORR and OER bifunctional catalytic performance was achieved, delivering a small ΔE of 0.72 V in alkaline electrolytes. Consequently, a rechargeable ZAB with an optimized Fe–NiNC-50 catalyst for ORR and OER was constructed (Fig. 18c), showing a high peak power density of 220 mW cm−2 and large specific capacity of 752.14 mA h gZn−1 (energy density: 932.66 W h kgZn−1) (Fig. 18d–f), outperformed other peer catalysts (Fig. 18g). More significantly, the rechargeable cycles were able to be stably carried out for over 100 h without any obvious deactivation and continuously powered an LED light, as shown in Fig. 18h and i. Although it was also revealed that the neighboring Fe and Ni sites of Fe–Ni dual-metal pairs in the Fe–NiNC-50 catalysts acted as ORR and OER reaction active sites, respectively (Fig. 18j and k), both of which were involved in the adsorption of intermediates. Thus, their binding can be regulated separately free of the Scaling relations.20 Following this work, another Fe–Ni embedded N-doped carbon was further fabricated for rechargeable ZABs, affording a high specific power density and good cycling stability.213 Since then, several dual-metal atomic catalysts, including Fe–Mn and Co–Ni, have been developed for rechargeable ZABs.214,215
Obviously, unlike M1–N–C + M2–N–C catalysts, reaction intermediates can be adsorbed on nearby metal atoms in the M1–M2–N–C catalysts with desirable binding energies, and thereby overcome the limitation of Scaling relations. Therefore, the development of dual-metal pair-doped carbon catalysts could address the drawbacks of M–N–C SACs, which will become a new frontier in the design and development of heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts. Till now, the investigation of dual-metal atomic catalysts is still at its early stage as a comparison with the big family of M–N–C catalysts. However, we believe that dual-metal atomic catalysts have great prospects for rechargeable ZABs in the future.

4. Theoretical predictions
Uncovering the ORR/OER mechanisms in heteroatom-doped carbon is important, which has been supported by numerous experimental observations and theoretical calculations, as the same principle could be applied to the development of various high efficient ORR/OER bifunctional carbon-based cathodes for ZABs. Taking ORR as a probe reaction, the texture and origin of the catalytic activity for different heteroatom (B, N, O, P, and S)-doped graphene catalysts (Fig. 19a and b) have been investigated.78,216 The graphene samples doped with different heteroatoms exhibited various electrochemical activities towards ORR, depending strongly on the nature of the dopants. The theoretically predicted exchange current density (j0) for heteroatom-doped graphene (X-graphene) should be at the top of the volcano (Fig. 19b, defined by the cross-over point of the red lines), which is ca. 6 times that of Pt/C catalyst (blue line), indicting that heteroatom-doped carbon nanomaterials hold great promise for producing efficient carbon catalysts to substitute the noble metal catalysts.
 Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of the multi-heteroatom (N, O, B, P, and S) doped graphene. (Adapted with permission from ref. 78; Copyright©2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (b) Red dashed line is the volcano plot between jtheory0 and ΔGOOH* with a charge-transfer coefficient of 0.5. Blue hollow squares stand for jexpt0 obtained from Tafel plots and ΔGOOH* (derived from DFT) for the different heteroatom-doped graphene. Blue dashed line shows the jexpt0 value for Pt. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 216; Copyright©2014, American Chemistry Society.) (c) Calculation models for N-doping of graphene at armchair and zigzag sites. The symbols a′, b′, c′, d′, e′, and f′ denote reaction sites apart from the substitution sites marked as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. The derived volcano plots for OER (d) and ORR (e) on the sites in (c). (Adapted with permission from ref. 217; Copyright©2014, Elsevier.) (f) The lower limit of OER/ORR overpotentials for N-, and X-doped, and N–X codoped graphene structures vs. descriptor Φ. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 220; Copyright©2016, American Chemistry Society). (g) The configurations and formation energies (Ef) of CoNx-gra. (h) Free energy diagrams of CoNx-gra for OER and ORR at the U = 0 V. The rate limiting steps for ORR and OER are marked with blue and the green dot-lines, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 223; Copyright©2018 Elsevier.) (i) The mechanism of oxygen electrocatalysis of the NiCo/Pyri-NG. the central Co is in a manner of three-fold coordination with pyridinic N. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 224; Copyright©2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
Further DFT calculations indicate that the location of the heteroatoms (e.g., N) plays an important role in enhancing the OER/ORR performance simultaneously. Xia and co-workers have demonstrated theoretically that the substitution of carbon at graphene edge by nitrogen results in the best performance in terms of overpotentials (Fig. 19c).217 Specifically, the OER active sites were identified on the armchair nanoribbons at the carbon atoms near the nitrogen atom, while the ORR active sites are those on the edge carbon near the nitrogen atom. The armchair nanoribbons with N dopants near the edge have the minimum theoretical OER overpotential, which was estimated to be 0.405 V, while the minimum overpotential for ORR was calculated to be 0.445 V (Fig. 19d and e). These values of ORR and OER overpotentials are comparable to those of precious metal-based catalysts (Pt for ORR and IrO2 for OER), suggesting that engineering the edge structures can increase the efficiency of the heteroatom-doped carbon electrocatalysts for efficient OER/ORR in ZABs.
Doping carbon materials (e.g., CNTs, graphene, even graphite) with different heteroatoms, including electron-donating atoms (e.g., P) and electron-accepting atoms (e.g., N), to induce synergistic effects associated with the electronic interactions between different heteroatoms and surrounding carbon atoms is one of the most effective strategies to create effective bifunctional electrocatalysts for ORR and OER.135,218,219 To quantitatively predict bifunctional ORR/OER activities of dual-element doped C-MFECs, Xia and co-workers introduced an activity descriptor associated with the intrinsic material property, which is defined as the product of electronegativity (EX) and electron affinity (AX): Φ = (EX/EC) × (AX/AC), a dimensionless factor, to represent the effect of these characteristics, where the subscript represents the element.220 By calculating overpotentials for all the doping structures, i.e., single N, single X, and N–X clusters (X = N, B, P, S, Cl, etc.), over the co-doped graphene network, the lowest value was chosen as the lower limit of the overpotentials (Ulimit) for the co-doping structure defined by the corresponding descriptor. Compared with the mono element doping, the overpotentials for the N–X (X = N, B, P, S, Cl, etc.) codoping were reduced by 10–40%, depending on the type of co-dopants. Interestingly, when normalized by the overpotential for N–N doping, the overpotentials for N–X codoping clusters vs. the descriptor Φ yielded an inverted volcano relationship (Fig. 19f), indicating co-doing vs. mono-doping can significantly reduce the overpotential to facilitate the reaction.220 In general, the larger the difference in Φ between the “N” and co-dopant “N–X” cluster is, the lower the overpotential becomes. Moreover, it is also important to control the distance between the two dopants in co-doped carbon-based catalysts to create the synergistic effect for efficient multifunctional electrocatalysis.221,222 These findings provide a powerful guidance to design and develop various new high-performance bifunctional OER/ORR catalysts from earth-abundant carbon materials and heteroatom dopants.
For metal-atom doped carbon materials, the performance of the active sites in the carbon skeleton can be further tuned by the coordination environment of metal ions (Fig. 19g and h). Using the first-principles methods based on DFT, Zhang et al. demonstrated that the activity on Co site of CoNx-gra towards ORR and OER would be affected by both the N-dopant concentration and configuration.223 The origin of the activity stems from the moderate hybridization between the Co 3d orbital and p-orbital from O species, governed by the neighboring N coordination environment. The overpotential values for both ORR and OER were roughly reduced with increasing the doping concentration of N, and were also dependent on the doping configuration (Fig. 19h). Among all the CoNx-gra (x = 1, 2, 3, 4, Fig. 19g), the CoN4-gra is identified as the best candidate with the calculated overpotential of 0.69 and 0.47 eV for the OER and ORR, respectively. The results for density of states (DOS) also indicate that the hybridization interaction between the Co-d and O-p states is more pronounced for the CoN4-gra than for other catalysts investigated. These results might be potentially helpful to design the bifunctional ORR/OER catalysts based on the transition metals. In addition to the effect of coordination elements on the activity of the active sites, the introduction of other foreign metal elements can also lower the reaction energy barrier and further improve catalytic performance. For the hybrid catalyst of NiCo/Pyri-NG, the surface Co and its neighboring Ni synergistically promote the efficiency for both ORR and OER (Fig. 19i).224 The optimized hybrid manifests outstanding reversible oxygen electrocatalytic activities, leading to an overpotential different ΔE among the lowest value for highly efficient bifunctional catalysts, surpassing most of the reported bi-functional electrocatalysts. This will promote the rational design of efficient hybrid electrocatalysts at the atomic level for diverse applications in renewable energy storage and conversion.
5. Outlook
Compared with the great commercial success achieved by Li-ion batteries, the ZABs are still demanding substantial progress to further enhance their performance for practical applications. This review summarizes the development of heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts and their outstanding applications for ORR and OER in ZABs. Recent progress in the M–N–C materials promotes all-solid-state and flexible ZABs for portable and wearable applications. Meanwhile, the mechanism of ORR and OER on various carbon-based catalysts is comprehensively highlighted to uncover the underlying relationship between the structure of active sites and their reactivity for ORR and OER. Recent research efforts are concentrated on the promotion of catalytic activities via the modification of the coordination structure of the heteroatom (including metal)-doped sites to tune the charge/spin redistributions and to break the restriction of Scaling relations.
Despite the extensive efforts and progress that were discussed, however, there are still spacious potentials for further improvement of rechargeable ZABs. Specific challenges and innovative approaches to advanced electrocatalysts are briefly described below:
(1) Bifunctional doped-carbon-based catalysts for efficient ORR and OER. The improvement of their intrinsic activity can further facilitate the sluggish ORR/OER. Moreover, the nature of dopants and doping content should be carefully considered, when developing a bifunctional oxygen catalyst. Also, enriching the population of the single atomic sites in M–N–C catalysts is verified as a feasible method to promote the overall performance of ZABs. Besides, incorporating noble metal atoms in the M–N–C configuration would be an attractive option as it can not only largely reduce the cost but also further boost their excellent intrinsic activity. Simulations and theoretical calculations would also help with the design and optimization of the catalysts. Furthermore, defect and porosity engineering are considered as feasible strategies not only to benefit the diffusion of reactants/products/electrolytes but also to increase the number of active sites for ORR and OER from the properly located defects.
(2) The fabrication of dual-metal catalysts and other novel catalysts are worthwhile to be explored. The M1–M2–N–C catalysts are developed to break the restriction of Scaling relations, which thermodynamically limits the further enhancement of the activity for M–N–C catalysts. The investigation of M1–M2–N–C catalysts is still at its early stage, extensive work is strongly encouraged to achieve the high power density, stability, and high round-trip efficiency of ZABs. Meanwhile, based on either the M–N–C or M1–M2–N–C configuration, the proper coordination modification is also an effective approach to regulate the electronic structure of the metal atoms, and thereby improve their catalytic activities.
(3) The further elucidation of the reaction mechanism for ORR/OER by combining advanced techniques with DFT simulations. Although various theories and hypotheses have been proposed to explain the correlation between the coordination environment and the catalytic performance, the favorable electronic configurations of the metal sites and suitable coordination structures are still unclear and inapplicable in some scenarios. For example, the eg-filling theory requires a well-defined crystalline structure like metal oxides, but M–N–C catalysts are often lack of the long-range order. Furthermore, some studies also revealed that the coordination structures of the metal atoms are actually under dynamically changes during the reactions.20,225 It indicates the simultaneous variation of the electronic configurations with the adsorption of intermediates. Therefore, the fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanism and the preferred coordination is strongly required through utilizing in situ and operando techniques in conjugation with theoretical calculations. Also, the change in the density of states during reactions remains to be further unveiled. The elucidation of the dynamic change for the d band structure of active sites would lead to an in-depth understanding of the correlation between the band structure and activity.
(4) Battery constructing protocols and key indicators of battery tests. Zn–air batteries reported in literature are constructed in different configurations and sealed with varied electrolytes, thus it is very challenging to carry out the performance comparisons due to the lack of a universal standard. Therefore, it is highly encouraged to specify the assembly and test conditions for a more objective comparison, including the type of the separator, gas flow rate, operating temperature, electrode distance, reaction area of the electrode, and the volume of the electrolyte used in the cell.226 For battery testing, apart from the conventionally used indicators, such as open-circuit potential, peak power density, and specific capacity (energy density), it is highly recommended to evaluate some important descriptors, including (a) round-trip efficiency, (b) gravimetric and volumetric energy densities, (c) parameters of cycling measurements [e.g., a proper current density (10–20 mA cm−2), discharge/charge period (above 1 hour) and cycling duration (above 20 cycles) for accurately depicting the real cycling ability of the rechargeable ZABs], (d) averaged Coulombic efficiency,227 and (e) failure time of the batteries. Furthermore, the maximal number of cycles (or duration) before the failure of batteries could be considered as an important descriptor to estimate the lifetime of the ZABs. The evaluation of these key indicators would help researchers to test ZABs thoroughly and objectively.
(5) The air catalysts should be fabricated into a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) for practical applications in solid-state ZABs. Most of the carbon-based catalysts are generally coated on conductive substrates when constructing ZABs, while limited research is conducted towards MEAs for ZABs. One of the main reasons is the lack of good MEAs consisting of both solid-state electrolytes and catalysts. Notably, the performance of the solid-state ZABs is considerably inferior to their aqueous counterparts, predominately due to the ill-contact between electrolytes and catalysts. Therefore, feasible and efficient methods for the fabrication of MEAs and the preparation of binder-free catalysts are highly desirable.
(6) Aside from the air electrodes, optimizations of Zn anodes and solid-state alkaline electrolytes for ZABs are also worthwhile to be accomplished. Specifically, the uneven current density at electrodes results in the formation of Zn dendrites, which may destroy separators and even short-circuit the whole batteries. Thus, the composition modification, structural adjustment, and surface engineering of the Zn electrodes are highly demanding. In addition, the fabrication of solid-state alkaline electrolytes is also important for flexible and wearable ZABs (Table 3). Furthermore, the development of rational ZAB design and packing configurations for further enhancing battery performance is also encouraged.
Owing to the low-cost, safety, and high energy density, ZABs are becoming the most likely candidate for replacing lithium-ion batteries as one of the sustainable energy storage technologies. The extension from the liquid-phase ZABs to the solid-state ZABs exclusively ensures the commercialization of ZABs for wearable and portable applications. Therefore, sufficient efforts from the academic and industrial sectors are highly encouraged to promote the transition from a fossil fuel-dependent economy to a green and low carbon emssion based on ZABs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) under the Laurate Fellowship Scheme (FL-140100081, FL 190100126) and Discovery Early Career Researcher Award DE170100375.
Notes and references
V. Caramia and B. Bozzini, Mater. Renew. Sustain. Energy, 2014, 3, 28 CrossRef .
J.-S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N.-S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Y. Y. Xu, H. Yang, Z. Dong, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700691 CrossRef .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Zhou, Y. Tang, L. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 8924–8929 RSC .
R. V. Noorden, Nature, 2014, 507, 26–28 CrossRef .
Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1370–1377 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604685 CrossRef .
K. Harting, U. Kunz and T. Turek, Z. Phys. Chem., 2012, 226, 151–166 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Battery Handbook, McGraw-Hill,  2001 Search PubMed .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
A. R. Mainar, E. Iruin, L. C. Colmenares, A. Kvasha, I. De Meatza, M. Bengoechea, O. Leonet, I. Boyano, Z. Zhang and J. A. Blazquez, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 15, 304–328 CrossRef .
M. A. Rahman, X. Wang and C. Wen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1759–A1771 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, D. Zhang, C.-J. Chen, Q. Zhang, R.-S. Liu, Z. Xia, L. Dai, R. Amal and X. Lu, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104597 CrossRef CAS .
A. Smee, Philos. Mag., 1840, 16, 315–321 Search PubMed .

          L. Maiche, French Pat., 127069,  1878 Search PubMed .

          G. W. Heise, US Pat., 1899615,  1933 Search PubMed .

          P. Kurzweil and J. Garche, Lead-Acid Batteries for Future Automobiles, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 27–96 Search PubMed .
A. H. Tullo, Chem. Eng. News, 2017, 95, 21–22 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, T. Zhou, L. Xing, K. Xu, Y. Tong, H. Xie, L. Zhang, W. Yan, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 610–614 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pei, K. Wang and Z. Ma, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
S. Zhu, Z. Chen, B. Li, D. Higgins, H. Wang, H. Li and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5080–5084 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736–11758 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, M. M. Gross, S. Wang and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602454 CrossRef .
P. Arora and Z. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419–4462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, H. Zhang, W. Cai, M. Ni, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2056–2080 RSC .
J. E. Park, M. S. Lim, J. K. Kim, H. J. Choi, Y.-E. Sung and Y.-H. Cho, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 69, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Li, A. Li, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33590 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, L. Guo, X. Liao, J. Liu, J. Sun and X. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1700238 CrossRef .
E. Deiss, F. Holzer and O. Haas, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3995–4010 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, H. Li and B. Wang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 3843–3851 CrossRef CAS .
P.-C. Li, Y.-J. Chien and C.-C. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 313, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, M. Park, G. Nam, J.-S. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1396–1401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. Gong, Y. Liang, J. Feng, J.-E. Kim, H. Wang, G. Hong, B. Zhang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1805 CrossRef .
Z. Cao, H. Hu, M. Wu, K. Tang and T. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17581–17593 RSC .
Y.-J. Wang, J. Qiao, R. Baker and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5768–5787 RSC .
J. Fu, J. Zhang, X. Song, H. Zarrin, X. Tian, J. Qiao, L. Rasen, K. Li and Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 663–670 RSC .
Y. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Pei, Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhu, J. Fan, Q. Dai, M. Zhang, L. Dai and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802288 CrossRef .
F. Meng, H. Zhong, D. Bao, J. Yan and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Dai and J. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3000–3006 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501122 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, J.-M. Chen, Q.-J. Li, C.-Y. Su, A.-N. Chen, J.-X. Zhang, Z.-Q. Liu and Y. Tong, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11596–11599 RSC .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Wang, Y. Peng, C.-Y. Jung, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700544 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, R. Amal and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 1804524 CrossRef .
S.-W. Kim, Y. Son, K. Choi, S.-I. Kim, Y. Son, J. Park, J. H. Lee and J.-H. Jang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 4203–4208 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
S. Guo, S. Zhang and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jörissen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 23–32 CrossRef .
X. Cai, L. Lai, J. Lin and Z. Shen, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 945–976 RSC .
J. Pan, X. L. Tian, S. Zaman, Z. Dong, H. Liu, H. S. Park and B. Y. Xia, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 336–347 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600621 CrossRef .
K. Elumeeva, J. Masa, D. Medina, E. Ventosa, S. Seisel, Y. U. Kayran, A. Genç, T. Bobrowski, P. Weide, J. Arbiol, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21122–21129 RSC .
Y. Pei, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, W. Smith, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23220–23243 RSC .
X. Ma, K. Li, X. Zhang, B. Wei, H. Yang, L. Liu, M. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14904–14915 RSC .
Y. Yang, R. Zeng, Y. Xiong, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19241–19245 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Tareen, G. S. Priyanga, K. Khan, E. Pervaiz, T. Thomas and M. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3941–3954 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Jin and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5002–5008 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, X. Guo, J. Zhang, G. Han, D. Gao and X. Gao, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 38, 34–40 CrossRef .
H.-C. Li, Y.-J. Zhang, X. Hu, W.-J. Liu, J.-J. Chen and H.-Q. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702734 CrossRef .
Y. J. Lee, S. H. Park, S. H. Kim, Y. Ko, K. Kang and Y. J. Lee, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2923–2934 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, G. Lin, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Shan, M. Yang and J. Wang, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 78 CrossRef .
A. B. Jorge, R. Jervis, A. P. Periasamy, M. Qiao, J. Feng, L. N. Tran and M.-M. Titirici, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902494 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Jian, L. Fang, J. Li, Z. Fang, Z. Yuan, L. Dai, X. Chen and D. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16217–16222 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mo, J. Jian, J. Li, Z. Fang, Z. Zhao, Z. Yuan, M. Yang, Y. Zhang, L. Dai and D. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3334–3341 RSC .
L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H.-J. Choi and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823–4892 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Shui, L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Liu, L. Dai and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804799 CrossRef .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804672 CrossRef .
Y. Ji, H. Dong, C. Liu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13489–13508 RSC .
D. Kwak, A. Khetan, S. Noh, H. Pitsch and B. Han, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2662–2670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Yu, C. Jiang and B. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701503 CrossRef .
W. Chen, G. Zhang, D. Li, S. Ma, B. Wang and X. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7447–7456 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, H. Liang, K. Parvez, X. Zhuang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1570–1574 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS .
G. Panomsuwan, S. Chiba, Y. Kaneko, N. Saito and T. Ishizaki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18677–18686 RSC .
C. Zhao, G. Liu, N. Sun, X. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1270–1280 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. He, K. Shen, Y. Liu and S. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 760, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. Yang, J. Jiang, Y. Chi and T. Yu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 32791–32795 RSC .
Y. Hu, H. Liu, Q. Ke and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11753–11758 RSC .
W. Liu, Q. Ru, S. Zuo, S. Yang, J. Han and C. Yao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 269–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, B. Zhang, J. Shi and Q. Yang, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7413–7420 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, Y. Zhou, R. Ma, Z. Zhou, G. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18134–18142 RSC .
A. Ilnicka, J. P. Lukaszewicz, K. Shimanoe and M. Yuasa, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 1612–1624 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhao, J. Masa, W. Schuhmann and W. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24283–24291 CrossRef CAS .
P.-X. Hou, H. Orikasa, T. Yamazaki, K. Matsuoka, A. Tomita, N. Setoyama, Y. Fukushima and T. Kyotani, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5187–5193 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Li, K. Prabakar, A. Kaneko, H. Park and T. Ishizaki, Catal. Today, 2019, 337, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Matter and U. S. Ozkan, Catal. Lett., 2006, 109, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS .
R. Paul, Q. Dai, C. Hu and L. Dai, Carbon Energy, 2019, 1, 19–31 CrossRef .
T. Zhou, Y. Zhou, R. Ma, Z. Zhou, G. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu and J. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 114, 177–186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and L. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16064 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mamtani and U. S. Ozkan, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 436–450 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, Y. Zhou, P. Li, Y. Chen, J. Wang and Q. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Yang, N. Zhao, J. Huang, Y. Zhou, K. Xu and N. Zhao, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 534, 30–39 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Unni, S. Devulapally, N. Karjule and S. Kurungot, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23506–23513 RSC .
W. Ding, Z. Wei, S. Chen, X. Qi, T. Yang, J. Hu, D. Wang, L.-J. Wan, S. F. Alvi and L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11755–11759 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lv, N. Wang, W. Si, Z. Hou, X. Li, X. Wang, F. Zhao, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang and C. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, R. Nakamura, K. Kamiya, S. Nakanishi and K. Hashimoto, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2390 CrossRef .
F. Davodi, M. Tavakkoli, J. Lahtinen and T. Kallio, J. Catal., 2017, 353, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. Wang, L. Ge, L. Xiao, H. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Zhang, M. An and P. Yang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 19665–19670 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, Y. Zhu, H. Wang, J. Feng, G. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Li, B. Nan, Q. Feng, Z. Lu and H. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29448–29456 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, B. Y. Xia, J. Franklin, B. Li, X. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Chen, J. Lin, L. Lai and Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2488–2495 RSC .
X. Sun, Y. Zhang, P. Song, J. Pan, L. Zhuang, W. Xu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1726–1729 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tavakol and F. Keshavarzipour, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 63084–63090 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Niu, M. Li and Z. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3545–3553 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Niu, L. Dai and Z. Xia, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7542–7550 CrossRef CAS .
I.-Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H.-J. Choi, J.-M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6138–6145 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Sheng, H.-L. Gao, W.-J. Bao, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 390–395 RSC .
X. Bo and L. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2459–2465 RSC .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132–7135 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Lu, Z. Fu, Y. Tang, D. Ma and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-W. Liu, F. Peng, H.-J. Wang, H. Yu, W.-X. Zheng and J. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3257–3261 CrossRef .
A. M. El-Sawy, I. M. Mosa, D. Su, C. J. Guild, S. Khalid, R. Joesten, J. F. Rusling and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501966 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, X. Huang, L. Xu, D. Yan, J. Huo and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13008–13011 RSC .
M. Jiao, W. Song, K. Li, Y. Wang and Z. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8804–8812 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Nai, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2017, 1, 77–107 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, L. Xu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2067–2080 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, M. Weng, D. Liu, X. He, L. L. Cui and T. Asefa, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18912–18925 CrossRef CAS .
A.-D. Tan, Y.-F. Wang, Z.-Y. Fu, P. Tsiakaras and Z.-X. Liang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, Y.-P. Deng, G. Li, Z. P. Cano, X. Wang, D. Luo, Y. Liu, D. Wang and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2464–2472 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Tam, S. G. Kang, M. H. Kim, S. G. Lee, S. H. Hur, J. S. Chung and W. M. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900945 CrossRef .
S. Chen, L. Zhao, J. Ma, Y. Wang, L. Dai and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 536–544 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. He, H. Zheng, R. Li and X. Gou, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 7464–7476 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, J. Wang, C. Qiu, X. Ling, B. Tian, W. Chen and C. Su, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800036 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Wu, Z. Wei, C. Cui, M. Mao, J. Zhang, X. Han, Q. Liu and J. Ma, Small, 2018, 14, 1800737 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, J. Wu, X. Cao, J. Abbott, C. Jin, H. Wang, P. Strasser, R. Yang, X. Chen and G. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 442–451 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, Q. Li, Z. Chen, V. Jose, X. Jiang, G. Fu, J.-M. Lee and S. Huang, Carbon, 2020, 164, 398–406 CrossRef CAS .
K. Preuss, A. M. Siwoniku, C. I. Bucur and M.-M. Titirici, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 457–464 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, L. Li, J. Li, W. Ding and Z. Wei, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5795–5804 RSC .
H. Wang, S. Zhu, J. Deng, W. Zhang, Y. Feng and J. Ma, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.cclet.2020.02.018 .
A. Parra-Puerto, K. L. Ng, K. Fahy, A. E. Goode, M. P. Ryan and A. Kucernak, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11515–11529 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv and X. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 3676–3691 RSC .
X. Tian, X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2020, 4, 45–68 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215–2264 RSC .
R. Jasinski, Nature, 1964, 201, 1212–1213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pylypenko, S. Mukherjee, T. S. Olson and P. Atanassov, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7875–7883 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, D. Cheng, H. Xu, X. Zeng, X. Wan, J. Shui, Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 6626–6631 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dilpazir, H. He, Z. Li, M. Wang, P. Lu, R. Liu, Z. Xie, D. Gao and G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, F. Liu, X. Liu, S. Liao, C. You, X. Tian, H. Nan, F. Luo, H. Song, Z. Fu and P. Huang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3797–3805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Q. Lai, Y. Wang, J. Zhu and Y. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16178–16186 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, P. Liu, Z. Liao, F. Sun, Y. He, H. Zhong, T. Zhang, E. Zschech, M. Chen, G. Wu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907399 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Chen, W. Li, R. Wu, S. Ibraheem, J. Li, W. Ding, L. Li and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15504–15509 RSC .
Z. K. Yang, C.-Z. Yuan and A.-W. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2383–2389 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jia, Q. Xu, F. Zhao, H.-X. Gao, J. Song, P. Chen, Z. An, X. Chen and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4982–4990 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Yang, C.-Z. Yuan and A.-W. Xu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16145–16152 RSC .
P. Peng, L. Shi, F. Huo, C. Mi, X. Wu, S. Zhang and Z. Xiang, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Zhu, Z. Li, W. Chen, W. Wei, T. Yuan, Y. Qu, Q. Xu, C. Zhao, X. Wang, P. Li, Y. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2158–2163 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Chen and J. Jia, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12934–12937 RSC .
W. Wei, X. Shi, P. Gao, S. Wang, W. Hu, X. Zhao, Y. Ni, X. Xu, Y. Xu, W. Yan, H. Ji and M. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Yu, M. Huang, C. Wu, C. Jin and L. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23182–23190 RSC .
M. Chen, Y. He, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1619–1633 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. Sun, S. Gu, Z. Liang, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Deng, P. Wei, J. Peng, Y. Xu, C. Fang, Q. Li, J. Han, Z. Jiang and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 245–250 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, R. Qin and R. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117778 CrossRef .
B.-Q. Li, C.-X. Zhao, S. Chen, J.-N. Liu, X. Chen, L. Song and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900592 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Zhou, F. Yu, M. Yu, C.-Y. Chiang, W. Zhou, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700874 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, B. Yu, K. Liu, X. Yang, M. Liu, T.-S. Chan, X. Qiu, J. Li and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2131–2139 RSC .
J. Wu, H. Zhou, Q. Li, M. Chen, J. Wan, N. Zhang, L. Xiong, S. Li, B. Y. Xia, G. Feng, M. Liu and L. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900149 CrossRef .
I. S. Amiinu, X. Liu, Z. Pu, W. Li, Q. Li, J. Zhang, H. Tang, H. Zhang and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704638 CrossRef .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, B. Wang, H.-F. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703185 CrossRef .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ji, L. Fan, L. Li, S. Peng, D. Yu, J. Song, S. Ramakrishna and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808267 CrossRef .
J. Li, S. Chen, N. Yang, M. Deng, S. Ibraheem, J. Deng, J. Li, L. Li and Z. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, W. Sun, H. Shang, W. Chen, T. Sun, H. Li, J. Dong, J. Zhou, Z. Li, Y. Wang, R. Cao, R. Sarangi, Z. Yang, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3508–3514 RSC .
J. Li, M. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Wang, B. Li, K. Liu, S. Karakalos, M. Lucero, H. Zhang, C. Lei, H. Xu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. Feng, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, Z. Wang and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 935–945 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, H. Li, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, J. Xiao, S. Xie, R. Si, F. Yang, S. Miao, X. Guo, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3736–3745 RSC .
H.-J. Qiu, P. Du, K. Hu, J. Gao, H. Li, P. Liu, T. Ina, K. Ohara, Y. Ito and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900843 CrossRef .
K. M. Palanivelu, V. Prabhakaran, V. K. Ramani and K. Ramanujam, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F475–F482 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Yi, R. Xu, Q. Wu, T. Zhang, K.-T. Zang, J. Luo, Y.-L. Liang, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 883–889 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Advances in Catalysis, Academic Press,  2000, 45, 71–129 Search PubMed .
W. T. Hong, R. E. Welsch and S.-H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and S.-H. Yang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, E. Gracia-Espino, J. Ma, H. Tang, X. Mamat, T. Wagberg, G. Hu and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre, J. P. Dodelet and P. Bertrand, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 8705–8713 CrossRef .
P. Song, Y. Wang, J. Pan, W. Xu and L. Zhuang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, S.-J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2263–2269 RSC .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 CrossRef .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, G. Wan, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Song, H. Zhou, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, D. Su and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801956 CrossRef .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443–15449 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, B. Zhang, X. Liu, D.-W. Wang and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10673–10677 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, R. Thapa, H. Kim, X. Xu, M. Gyu Kim, Q. Li, N. Park, M. Liu and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2076 CrossRef .
F. Calle-Vallejo, J. I. Martínez and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15639–15643 RSC .
F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Greeley, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, T. R. Munter, P. G. Moses, E. Skúlason, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016105 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Fernández, P. G. Moses, A. Toftelund, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Kleis, B. Hinnemann, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4683–4686 CrossRef .
P. Yu, L. Wang, F. Sun, Y. Xie, X. Liu, J. Ma, X. Wang, C. Tian, J. Li and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901666 CrossRef .
L. Chen, L. L. Cui, Z. Wang, X. He, W. Zhang and T. Asefa, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 13147–13158 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Cui, X. Ge, N. Yue, X. He, W. Zhang and T. Asefa, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 27230–27243 CrossRef .
I. S. Amiinu, Z. Pu, X. Liu, K. A. Owusu, H. G. R. Monestel, F. O. Boakye, H. Zhang and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702300 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, X. Tan, K.-H. Wu, C.-L. Chiang, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-G. Lin, D.-W. Wang, S. Smith, X. Lu and R. Amal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14732–14742 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W.-C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Zeng, J. Chen, L. Qiu, H. Zhou, C. Sun, Y. Yu, C. Zhu and Z. Zhu, Small, 2019, 15, 1900307 CrossRef .
K. Yuan, D. Lützenkirchen-Hecht, L. Li, L. Shuai, Y. Li, R. Cao, M. Qiu, X. Zhuang, M. K. H. Leung, Y. Chen and U. Scherf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2404–2412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. He, J.-P. Veder, R. De Marco, S.-Z. Yang and S. Ping Jiang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3478–3487 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, H. Li, C. Fan, Q. Meng, Y. Tang, X. Qiu, G. Fu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003134 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Zeradjanin, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 9, 214–223 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .
M. Ma, A. Kumar, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Jia, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Yan and X. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 119091 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. Biswas, T. Purkait, M. Das, N. Kamboj and R. S. Dey, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 5194–5205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4394–4403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Niu and Z. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, M.-M. Titirici and Q. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1077–1093 CrossRef .
C. Hu, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell, H.-M. Cheng, Y. Gogotsi, M.-M. Titirici and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806128 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao and Z. Xia, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1553–1558 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tabassum, R. Zou, A. Mahmood, Z. Liang and S. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16469–16475 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, W. Qian and Z. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201–1204 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Lu and W. Wang, Carbon, 2018, 130, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
X.-R. Wang, J.-Y. Liu, Z.-W. Liu, W.-C. Wang, J. Luo, X.-P. Han, X.-W. Du, S.-Z. Qiao and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800005 CrossRef .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, H. Hafiz, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, G. Wu, B. Barbiellini, A. Bansil, E. F. Holby, P. Zelenay and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12496–12505 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiao, Z. Ma, J. Li, Y. Han, J. Mao, T. Ling and S. Qiao, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 44, 1–7 CrossRef .
D. Stock, S. Dongmo, J. Janek and D. Schröder, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1287–1300 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Xiaofeng Zhu
	Xiaofeng Zhu received the BS degree in Materials Science & Engineering and the MS degree in Materials Science from Wuhan University of Technology, China in 2014 and 2017, respectively, under supervision of Prof. Jiaguo Yu. He is currently a PhD candidate in School of Chemical Engineering at University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia, under supervision of Scientia Prof. Rose Amal and Dr Xunyu Lu since 2017. His current research focuses on the design, synthesis as well as performance improvement and reaction mechanism investigation of carbon-based catalysts for high performance fuel cells and Zn–air batteries.

Chuangang Hu
	Dr. Chuangang Hu is a Research Associate in Prof. Liming Dai's group at University of New South Wales, Australia. He received his MS from Henan Normal University in 2011, and his PhD from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2015. After receiving PhD degree, he had continued the postdoctoral studies for 4 years (2015–2019) in Prof. Liming Dai's group at Case Western Reserve University, USA. His research interests focus on carbon-based materials for energy conversion and storage.

Rose Amal
	Prof. Rose Amal is an ARC Laureate Fellow and UNSW Scientia Professor who leads the Particles and Catalysis Research Group at the University of New South Wales. Prof. Amal's current research focuses on designing nanomaterials for solar and chemical energy conversion applications (including photocatalysis for water and air purification, water splitting, development of indoor self-cleaning materials, low-temperature catalytic reactions, and utilization of CO2) and engineering systems for solar induced processes, using the sun's energy as a clean fuel source.

Liming Dai
	Prof. Liming Dai joined University of New South Wales in 2020 as a Scientia Professor and an Australian Laureate Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering. From 2009–2019, he was the Kent Hale Smith Professor in the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering, and Fellow of the International Association of Advanced Materials. Prof. Dai's expertise covers the synthesis, functionalization, and device fabrication of conjugated polymers and carbon nanomaterials for energy-related and biomedical applications.

Xunyu Lu
	Dr. Xunyu Lu is currently a Senior Lecturer and Scientia Fellow at the School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia. He obtained his PhD degree at the School of Chemistry, UNSW, in 2014. His research is mainly focused on the rational design and preparation of cost-effective and active catalysts for electrochemical energy conversion reactions; design and fabrication of energy devices based on the novel catalyst materials and integration of the energy devices with state-of-the-art photovoltaic cells to realize the production of renewable chemicals and fuels with high energy conversion efficiency, high selectivity, and low cost.

Broader context
Due to their low-cost, high energy density, and eco-friendliness, Zn–air batteries (ZABs) have gained extensive interest from both academic and industrial communities in recent years. With the combined features of fuel cells and lithium-ion batteries, the ZABs provide a promising solution to future sustainable and clean energy storage, especially in portable and flexible devices. To overcome the sluggish kinetics associated with the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), heteroatom-doped carbon materials are widely used as catalysts in ZABs. As the thermodynamic properties and catalytic capabilities of the carbon materials are largely governed by the heteroatom dopants, the rational doping strategies and the elucidation of the underlying mechanism are of significant importance. In the present review, the application of bifunctional heteroatom-doped carbon catalysts for aqueous and solid-state/flexible ZABs is discussed, and the development of corresponding theories and mechanisms for ORR and OER in rechargeable ZABs is also highlighted. By reviewing this emerging field, we hope to offer critical insights to guide the future development of ZABs as well as other related energy researches.


 	Fig. 1  A general scheme of heteroatom-doped carbon materials for ZABs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The assembly parts and reaction mechanism of ZABs (reproduced with permission from ref. 51; Copyright©2016 AAAS). (b) Schematic diagram of aqueous planar ZABs (reprinted with permission from ref. 34; Copyright©2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (c) Configuration of solid-state/flexible ZABs (adapted with permission from ref. 52; Copyright©2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
Zn + 2OH− ↔ ZnO + H2O + 2e−	(1)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− ↔ 4OH−	(2)
O2 + 2Zn ↔ 2ZnO	(3)
O2(g) + * → O2*	(4)
O2* + H2O(l) + e− → HOO* + OH−	(5)
HOO* + e− → O* + OH−	(6)
O* + H2O(l) + e− → OH− + HO*	(7)
HO* + e− → OH− + *	(8)
OH− + * → HO* + e−	(9)
HO* + OH− → O* + H2O(l) + e−	(10)
2O* → O2(g) + 2*	(11)
O* + OH− → HOO* + e−	(12)
HOO* + OH− → * + O2(g) + H2O + e−	(13)

 	Fig. 3  The schemes for (a) direct in situ N doping strategy (reproduced with permission from ref. 83; Copyright©2020 American Chemical Society). (b) Polymerization-pyrolysis strategy (adapted with permission from ref. 84; Copyright©2014 Wiley-VCH). (c) Post-treatment strategies with ammonia atmosphere (reprinted with permission from ref. 85; Copyright©2009 American Chemical Society). (d) Plasma treatments for N doping (reproduced with permission from ref. 86; Copyright©2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry for ORR evaluation in 0.1 M KOH at the commercial Pt (1), N-free carbon nanotubes (2), and N-containing carbon nanotubes (3). (b) Calculated charge density distribution for the NCNTs. (c) Scheme of possible adsorption modes of an O2 molecule at the N-free (top) and N-containing (bottom) CNTs (reprinted with permission from ref. 99, Copyright©2009 AAAS). (d) Different N species at the various location of graphitic carbon (reprinted with permission from ref. 103; Copyright©2015 Springer). (e) Results of CO2-TPD for the HOPG catalysts. (f) ORR performance of pyridinic and graphitic N-doped HOPG catalysts (adapted with permission from ref. 108, Copyright©2016 AAAS). (g) Scheme of ORR and OER at the n- and p-type spots of the N-doped carbon catalyst. (h) N K-edge XANES spectra of the pristine (black line) N-doped carbon catalyst, along with those after ORR (yellow line) and after OER (blue line). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51; Copyright©2016 AAAS.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Overall LSV curves of NKCNPs-900 toward ORR and OER. (b) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the primary ZAB. The inset is a graph for two ZABs in series powering a red LED. (c) Recharging performance of the NKCNPs-900 (reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society). (d) Assembled ZAB setup powering the LEDs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 114; Copyright©2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.) (e) Diagram for ORR occurring on the pyridinic N-doped carbon. (f) Cycling performance of the ZAB at a current density of 2 mA cm−2. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 109; Copyright©2020 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Spin density distributions on S-doped graphene at the zigzag edge (reprinted with permission from ref. 117; Copyright©2014 American Chemical Society). (b) Molecular orbitals of O2 adsorbed on B-doped CNT (reproduced with permission from ref. 123; Copyright©2011 Wiley-VCH). (c) Mechanism for OER of S-doped CNTs (adapted with permission from ref. 126; Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH). (d) Nitrobenzene-doped graphene model for ORR. The zigzag edge, armchair edge, and opposite-side edges are colored with green (active edges) and pink-red (non-active edges). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 128; Copyright©2016 American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) N,P substituted graphene structure at the armchair sites. ORR (b) and OER (c) volcano plots of overpotential η for N-doped, P-doped and N,P-codoped graphene versus ΔGO* and the (ΔGO*–ΔGOH*), respectively. (d) Schematic diagram of the preparation for the NPMC. (i) Aniline (ii) phytic acid and (iii) formed complex. (e) The configuration of three-electrode ZABs with NPMC catalysts. (f) Cycling curves of the ZAB with NPMC-1000 (reprinted with permission from ref. 26; Copyright©2015 Nature Publishing Group).	 

N-Doped porous carbon	—	149.9	—	—	200 min	
87

N-Doped carbon nanoparticles	0.92	131.4	—	889.0	575 cycles	
113

N-Doped vertical carbon nanotubes	
ca. 1.06	
ca. 65	—	—	40 h	
114

Pyridinic N-doped graphdiyne	—	136	647	∼744.05	150 h	
109

N-Doped graphene	0.75	65	873	—	>150 h	
51

P-Doped carbon nanosheets	0.74	—	—	—	1000 cycles	
133

B-Doped graphene hydrogel	0.73	112	687	810	100 h	
134

N,P-Codoped porous carbon spheres	0.86	79	684	848	55 h	
135

N,P-Doped carbon foam	—	55	735	835	100 h	
26

N,S dual-doped carbon nanosheets	—	221	742	905	—	
136

B,N codoped nanocarbon	0.712	143	—	—	2000 min	
137

B,N doped ultrathin carbon nanosheets	—	115	—	802	14 days	
140

N,F,B doped carbon fibers	—	—	555	—	800 min	
138

N,P,S-Doped graphene-like carbon	—	151	686	805	—	
139


 	Fig. 8  (a) Differential charge density of N,P-codoped graphene at the edges. (b) Diagram of the solid-state ZAB and its stability when applied mechanical bending. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 135; Copyright©2019 Elsevier.) (c) Photograph of the all-solid-state rechargeable ZAB along with a powered blue LED (3.0 V) by four ZABs in series (adapted with permission from ref. 50; Copyright©2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (d) Diagram of a flexible rechargeable ZAB with B,N-doped ultrathin carbon nanosheet, and the photograph of a red LED bulb powered by two ZABs in series while bent at various angles (Reproduced with permission from ref. 140; Copyright©2020 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Correlation between ORR overpotential versus ΔG*OOH for all the carbon active sites by taking the charge, spin, and ligand effects into account. The distribution of ΔG*OOH for the carbon active sites with independent effect from (b) charge effect, (c) ligand effect, and (d) spin density effect (reproduced with permission from ref. 142, Copyright©2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  Typical characterizations for SACs: (a) high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of the Fe–N–C catalysts. (b) EELS spectra of atomic Fe sites. (c) TEM image of Fe–N–C catalysts. (d–h) EELS mappings of C, Fe, N, and overlapping patterns. (i) XAS spectra and (j) Fourier transforms of EXAFS at Fe K-edge. (k) Mössbauer spectroscopy for the Fe–N–C sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151; Copyright©2018 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The activities of different transition metal catalysts for alkaline ORR. (Reprinted with permission from ref.153; Copyright©2014 American Chemical Society). (b) The SA-Fe-NHPC-based ZAB setup and the open-circuit voltage (ca. 1.51 V). (c) Discharging curves and calculated the power density of the ZABs. (d) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the ZAB. (e) The rechargeable ZAB by replacing Zn anode and electrolyte (reproduced with permission from ref. 155; Copyright©2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Polarization and power density curves of the Pt/C and pfSAC-Fe-0.2 for ZAB discharging. (b) Continuous discharging of the ZAB until the complete consumption of Zn anodes. (c) Long-term recharging performance of ZABs with different catalysts. The inset is the voltage efficiency of ZAB with pfSAC-Fe-0.2 (adapted with permission from ref. 160; Copyright©2019 AAAS). (d) Discharging and calculated power density curves of the ZAB with different catalysts. (e) Galvanostatic discharge curves. (f) Galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves of ZABs with the Fe–N/C-1/30 (reprinted with permission from ref. 163; Copyright©2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of the fabrication of Co–N materials derived from MOFs (reprinted with permission from ref. 152; Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society). (b) Bifunctional ORR/OER activity of the Co–N–C catalysts. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 167; Copyright©2019 Elsevier.) (c) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Co–NGC catalysts. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 169; Copyright©2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (d) Diagram of a home-made ZAB. (e) Polarization and power density curves of the primary ZAB using Pt/C and SCoNC. (f) Discharge curves of primary ZABs with SCoNC until the complete consumption of Zn anodes. (g) Images of a blue LED (ca. 2.5 V) powered by two ZABs in series. (h) Recharging cycling curves of the ZABs using the SCoNC and Pt/C in 2-electrode setup, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 171; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schemes of a solid-state ZAB with the Co–N–C catalyst layers. (b) The open-circuit voltage of the assembled ZABs and photograph of a lighted LED powered by three ZABs in series. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 172; Copyright©2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (c) Cycling stability of the ZAB under continuous mechanical flat and bent changes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 173; Copyright©2018 American Chemical Society.) (d) Galvanostatic cycling curves of the ZAB under bending at 1.0 mA cm−2. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 174; Copyright©2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (e) Cycling curves of the planar-like solid-state ZAB at different bending angles. (Adapted with permission from ref. 175; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (f) Schematics of the preparation process of flexible and wearable ZABs with free-standing Co–N–C flake arrays catalyst. (g) The flexibility of the assembled ZABs under rolling, bending and twisting. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 177; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 

Single-atom iron catalysts (SA-Fe/NC)	Fe-Pyrrolic–N species	6 M KOH with 0.2 M ZnO	—	91	—	—	20 h (with IrO2)	
151

Fe–N–C–rich pyrolysis-free COF network	Fe–N–C centers	8 M KOH and 0.5 M ZnO	1.41	123.43	732	∼578.3	300 (with IrO2)	
160

3.5 wt% Fe SAs/N–C	Fe–N4	6 M KOH saturated with O2	—	225	636	∼795	260 h (with RuO2)	
161

Fe-MOF@CNTs–G hybrids	Fe–Nx	6M KOH and 0.2M Zn(Ac)2	1.414	95.3	637.4	734.1	2000 min cycles	
162

Fe–TPP⊂rho-ZIF-derived Fe–N–C	Fe–N4	6M KOH and 0.2M Zn(Ac)2	1.525	121.8	—	—	50 cycles	
163

Fe,N co-doped carbon fibers (FeNCF)	Fe–N4	6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.48	145	784.3	713.9	100 cycles	
164

Co SA confined in ultrathin N-doped porous carbon	Co–N4	6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.48	—	860.95	∼1067.6	44 h	
170

Densely populated, Co (15.3 wt%) on N-doped graphene	Co–N4	6 M KOH	1.49	194	690	945	20 h	
171

Co–Nx/C nanorod array	Co–N coupling centers	6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.42	193.2	—	853.12	80 h	
172

Co/N/O tri-doped graphene	Co–Nx–C	6 M KOH and 0.2 M ZnCl2	—	152	750	840	60 h	
174

Single atoms Co catalysts on N-doped porous carbon	Co atomic sites	6.0M KOH and 0.2M ZnCl2	1.46	105.3	897.1	∼1013.7	83 h	
175

Single-atom Co on N-doped graphitic nanosheet	Co–N4	6M KOH and 0.2M ZnO	1.51	115	730	671	100 h	
176

Co nanoislands rooted Co–N–C nanosheets	Co0 and Co–N–C	6.0 M KOH and 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2	—	132	—	—	330 h	
200

Vertically MoS2 nanosheet wrapped Mo–N/C framework	MoS2 and Mo–N	6.0 M KOH	1.46	196.4	—	846.07	12 h	
203

S,N-Fe/N/C–CNT hybrids	Fe–Nx	6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.35	102.7	—	—	100 cycles	
27

Atomic Fe on N, P and S co-doped hollow carbon	Single-atom Fe center	6 M KOH	1.45	195	—	—	200000 s	
205

Single Fe atom on porous S,N-codoped Nanocarbon	Synergistic Fe–N3|S sites	6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.53	225.1	740.8	∼1000.1	65 h	
206

Fe–Ni atom pairs in N-doped carbon	Ni–Fe dual-metal pairs	6 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.41	220	721.5	932.66	100 h	
20

Binary Co–Ni sites in N-doped hollow carbon nanocubes	Neighboring Co–Ni dual metal center	6.0 M KOH/0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.45	101.4	750.9	886.1	1900 min	
214

Fe, Mn, and N-doped fish gill derived carbon	Fe–Mn binary sites	6.0 M KOH/0.2 M Zn(Ac)2	1.41	220	—	—	770 min	
215

Binary NixFe100−x-NC (x = 0–100) materials	Ni(N3)–Fe(N3)–Cn	6.0 M KOH and 0.2 M Zn(OAC)2	1.44	140.1	765.5	∼903.3	334 h	
213


 	Fig. 15  (a) The mechanisms for ORR (clockwise) and OER (anticlockwise) over CoN4 active site (reprinted with permission from ref. 166; Copyright©2019 Elsevier). (b) Volcano plot for ORR activity vs. both the O and the OH binding energy. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 57; Copyright©2004 American Chemical Society.) (c) The scheme of d–p coupling and bond structure between metal and oxygen. (d) Potentials at 25 μA cmox−2 as a function of eg orbital in perovskite-based oxides (reproduced with permission from ref. 187; Copyright©2011 Springer Nature).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Proposed coordination structure of the Fe–N2 catalytic site (reproduced with permission from ref. 189; Copyright©2002 American Chemical Society). (b) Structural models of Fe–N2+2 and Fe–N4 active site structures (reprinted with permission from ref. 194; Copyright© 2013 American Chemical Society). (c) Schematic diagram of the Fe–N5 structure for FePc-Py-CNTs. (Adapted with permission from ref. 196; Copyright©2013 Springer Nature.) (d) Possible Fe–N6 complex structure (reproduced with permission from ref. 195; Copyright©2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (e) Trends in adsorption energies of the ORR intermediates in graphitic materials with M–N4 sites (adapted with permission from ref. 197; Copyright©2011 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

Co–Nx/C nanorod array	1.27	—	0.1 M KOH, 0.02 M Zn(Ac)2 and PVA	60 h	No	
172

Co on N-doped porous carbon nanoflake arrays	1.41	20.9	11.25 M KOH and 0.25 M ZnO in PAA	2500 min	Yes	
173

Co/N/O tri-doped graphene	1.439	>27	18.0 M KOH, 0.1 M ZnCl2 and PVA	>60 min	Yes	
174

Single atoms Co catalysts on N-doped porous carbon	1.40	—	9 M KOH with PVA	1000 min	Yes	
175

Single-atom Co on N-doped graphitic nanosheet	—	28	18 M KOH with 0.02 M Zn(COOH)2 in PVA	300 min	Yes	
176

Co on N-doped carbon flake arrays	1.41	—	18 M KOH with 0.02 M Zn(COOH)2 in PVA	90 cycles	Yes	
177

N and Ni codoped np-graphene	1.35	83.8	7 M KOH, 0.1 M Zn(Ac)2 and PVA	43 h	Yes	
182

Co nanoislands rooted Co–N–C nanosheets	1.41	—	12 M KOH with 0.2 M ZnAc in PVA	10 h	Yes	
200

Vertically MoS2 nanosheet wrapped Mo–N/C framework	—	—	0.1 M KOH/0.02 M ZnAc in PVA	48 h	No	
203

Binary Co–Ni in N-doped carbon	—	—	9 M KOH in PVA	400 min	Yes	
214


 	Fig. 17  (a) Free-standing N-doped carbon fiber consisting of Co4N and Co–N–C for flexible ZABs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 47; Copyright©2016 American Chemical Society.) (b) XANES at the Fe K-edge of the FeNC and FeNPC samples; the inset is the magnified pattern of the pre-edge part and the schematics of octahedral FeNPC, Fe (orange), N (blue), C (grey), O (red), P (yellow) and H (white). (c) Fourier transforms at the Fe K-edge of the different samples along with foil reference and their first-shell fitting in R space. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 204; Copyright©2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.) Schematics (d) and cycling stability (e) of the assembled ZAB. Schematic diagram (f) and cycling performance (g) of the flexible solid ZAB. (h) Photograph of the LED screen powered by three flexible ZABs in series. (i) Recharging stability of the ZAB tested under different bending states. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 200; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram of the bimetallic FeNi-based SACs. The red ball indicates Fe atoms, and the green ball indicates Ni atoms. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 208; Copyright©2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). (b) Configuration of the assembled ZAB with the Ni–N4/GHSs/Fe–N4 catalyst. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 209; Copyright© 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (c) Configuration of the lab-made ZAB set-up with Fe–NiNC catalyst. (d) Polarization, power density, and (e) galvanostatic discharge curves of the ZABs. (f) Specific capacity of ZABs. (g) A comparison of the reported catalysts by their peak power densities and specific energy densities. (h) A 100 h cycling test of the ZAB. (i) Picture of a LED bulb (∼2.0 V) powered by two ZABs in series. Stepwise mechanisms for ORR (j) and OER (k). The black, blue, green, golden, red, and pink balls represent C, N, Ni, Fe, O, and H atoms, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 20; Copyright©2020 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of the multi-heteroatom (N, O, B, P, and S) doped graphene. (Adapted with permission from ref. 78; Copyright©2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (b) Red dashed line is the volcano plot between jtheory0 and ΔGOOH* with a charge-transfer coefficient of 0.5. Blue hollow squares stand for jexpt0 obtained from Tafel plots and ΔGOOH* (derived from DFT) for the different heteroatom-doped graphene. Blue dashed line shows the jexpt0 value for Pt. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 216; Copyright©2014, American Chemistry Society.) (c) Calculation models for N-doping of graphene at armchair and zigzag sites. The symbols a′, b′, c′, d′, e′, and f′ denote reaction sites apart from the substitution sites marked as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. The derived volcano plots for OER (d) and ORR (e) on the sites in (c). (Adapted with permission from ref. 217; Copyright©2014, Elsevier.) (f) The lower limit of OER/ORR overpotentials for N-, and X-doped, and N–X codoped graphene structures vs. descriptor Φ. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 220; Copyright©2016, American Chemistry Society). (g) The configurations and formation energies (Ef) of CoNx-gra. (h) Free energy diagrams of CoNx-gra for OER and ORR at the U = 0 V. The rate limiting steps for ORR and OER are marked with blue and the green dot-lines, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 223; Copyright©2018 Elsevier.) (i) The mechanism of oxygen electrocatalysis of the NiCo/Pyri-NG. the central Co is in a manner of three-fold coordination with pyridinic N. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 224; Copyright©2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
