Flexible graphene devices related to energy conversion and storage  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE03685A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE03685A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790-823Flexible graphene devices related to energy conversion and storage

        
          
            Xiluan 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gaoquan 
            Shi
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, People's Republic of China. E-mail: gshi@tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-10-6277-1149;   Tel: +86-10-62773743
Received 
      23rd November 2014
    , Accepted 7th January 2015First published on 7th January 2015AbstractGraphene is a unique and attractive energy material because of its atom-thick two-dimensional structure and excellent properties. Graphene sheets are also mechanically strong and flexible. Thus, graphene materials are expected to have wide and practical applications in bendable, foldable and/or stretchable devices related to energy conversion and storage. We present a review on the recent advancements in flexible graphene energy devices including photovoltaic devices, fuel cells, nanogenerators (NGs), supercapacitors (SCs) and batteries, and the devices related to energy conversion such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), photodetectors and actuators. The strategies for synthesizing flexible graphene materials will be summarized and the challenges facing the design and construction of the devices will be discussed.Xiluan WangXiluan Wang received her B. Eng. from the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2010. She is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Gaoquan Shi's Laboratory at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of chemically modified graphene.Gaoquan ShiProf. Gaoquan Shi received his BS degree (1985) and PhD degree (1992) from the Department of Chemistry, Nanjing University. Then he joined Nanjing University and was promoted to full professor in 1995. In 2000, he moved to Tsinghua University as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are focused on synthesis and applications of graphene materials and conducting polymers. He received the 2nd Grade Award of Natural Science of China and the Youth Knowledge Innovation Prize of the Chinese Chemical Society and BASF Company in 2004, and the 1st Grade Award of Natural Science of Chinese Education Ministry in 2013.

Broader context
Flexible devices related to energy conversion and storage have potential applications in wearable and portable electronics such as roll-up displays, electronic papers, touch screens, active radio-frequency identification tags, wearable sensors and implantable medical devices. Thus, they have attracted a great deal of attention in recent years from both academic and industrial aspects. Graphene is a unique and attractive material for this purpose because of its atom-thick two-dimensional structure and excellent properties. Particularly, the atom-thick structure allows graphene sheets to easily deform in the direction normal to their surface, providing them with good flexibility. This critical review will summarize the methods of synthesizing flexible graphene materials and their applications in energy related flexible devices including photovoltaic devices, organic light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, fuel cells, nanogenerators, supercapacitors and batteries. The challenges facing the design and construction of the devices will also be discussed.

1. Introduction
Flexible energy devices are devices that can convert or store energy upon repeated bending, folding and/or stretching without a dramatic decrease of their performances.1–4 These devices have attracted a great deal of attention because of their potential applications in wearable and portable electronics, such as roll-up displays, electronic papers, touch screens, active radio-frequency identification tags, wearable sensors and implantable medical devices.1,5–18 For applications in the repeatedly deformed state, each component of the device should be mechanically stable and flexible. Furthermore, the materials for energy applications usually should have high electrical and/or ionic conductivities, large specific surface areas and good chemical, photochemical and/or electrochemical stabilities.2,19,20 Graphene satisfies these requirements as it is a unique and attractive material because of its atom-thick two-dimensional structure, and excellent electrical, mechanical, optical and electrochemical properties.21–25 Actually, graphene, graphene derivatives and their composites have been explored for applications in flexible photovoltaics,2,26 batteries,1,3 fuel cells,20,27 SCs,5,28etc.
A photovoltaic device essentially consists of transparent electrodes, active layers of electron donors and acceptors and/or electrolytes.2 Upon illumination of light, the active layer generates excimers and then occurs charge separation at the p–n junctions formed by the electron acceptors and donors. To improve the charge separation and transportation, buffer layers for electrons and holes are usually applied. On the other hand, an energy storage device (e.g., batteries or SCs) essentially consists of current collectors, electrode materials, electrolytes and separators.3,28 Graphene materials can be used as flexible transparent conductive electrodes or electron acceptors for photovoltaic devices, and flexible current collectors, electrodes, active materials or conductive additives for energy storage devices.2,29–33 Compared with metals or metal oxides that are widely used in energy devices, graphene materials usually have lighter weight densities, better optical transparency and superior optical, chemical or electrochemical stabilities. Graphene materials also frequently have much larger specific surface areas, higher conductivities, flexibilities or optical transparencies than those of other carbon nanomaterials including activated carbons, carbon black and carbon nanotubes.31,34–36 Furthermore, a large-area or large amount of graphene can be easily prepared by chemical vapour deposition (CVD)37 or chemical oxidation–reduction of graphite.38 These graphene materials can be assembled into macroscopic materials through chemical, electrochemical, fluid or template induced self-assembly.39–41 These graphene assemblies can be directly used as electrodes or active materials for energy devices without using any conducting additive or binder.42 These facts explain why graphene materials have received extensive attention in flexible energy devices at both fundamental and applied levels.
Recently, several excellent reviews about flexible energy devices such as solar cells,33 lithium ion batteries (LIBs)1 or SCs5 have been published. However, a comprehensive review about graphene-based flexible energy devices has not yet appeared. This review article will summarize the synthesis of flexible graphene materials and their applications in flexible devices related to energy conversion and storage.
2. Flexible graphene materials
The inherent excellent mechanical and electronic properties of graphene make it an attractive material for applications in flexible energy devices. Graphene is an atom-thick two-dimensional (2D) carbon sheet. The σ carbon–carbon bond is the strongest single bond in nature, endowing graphene with high Young's modulus and tensile strength.43 The one-atom thick structure also allows graphene sheets to easily deform in the direction normal to their surface, providing them with good flexibility. Thus, graphene sheets, especially chemically modified graphenes (CMGs, e.g., graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO)) can also be assembled into various macroscopic flexible materials, such as fibres, thin films, and three-dimensional (3D) porous networks.5 Furthermore, graphene sheets are frequently blended with polymers or inorganic nanoparticles to form composites to improve their flexibility and/or extend their functions.44,45
2.1 Single and few-layer graphene sheets
A variety of methods have been developed to synthesize single or few-layer graphene sheets. Among them, mechanical exfoliation of graphite with scotch tape was first employed for this purpose and led to the discovery of graphene.46 This method can produce high-quality graphene sheets with small sizes in low yield for fundamental research; thus, it cannot be used to produce a large-amount of graphene for energy applications. Directly growing graphene via CVD is the most promising technique to produce large-area graphene sheets.47–49 In general, a transition metal (e.g., copper or nickel) film was first annealed in an Ar/H2 atmosphere at 900–1000 °C to remove its surface oxide and increase its grain sizes. Then, it was exposed to an H2/CH4 gas mixture to catalyze the decomposition of CH4 molecules into carbon atoms, forming a carbon–metal solid solution. Upon rapid cooling, the carbon atoms in the matrix of the metal diffused onto the metal surface to form mono- or few-layer graphene, depending on the cooling rate.47
On the other hand, oxidative exfoliation of natural graphite to GO followed by the reduction of GO is one of the most efficient methods for low-cost and large-scale production of single-layer graphene.50–52 The reduction of GO sheets to rGO can be carried out by using reducing chemical agents (e.g., hydrazine hydrate,53–55 sodium borohydride,56–58 active metals,59,60 vitamin C,61 hydroiodic acid62–64), thermal,65,66 photocatalytic,67–69 and electrochemical treatments,70 laser irradiation,71 hydrothermal/solvothermal reactions,72–74etc. GO/rGO sheets are dispersible in aqueous or organic media, enabling their fabrication or assembly into flexible films, fibres, and 3D networks. They can also be directly deposited onto flexible substrates to form flexible graphene materials.
Since rGO has structural defects and residual oxygenated groups, its electrical properties are much worse than those of pristine graphene. In order to address this issue, a mechanical exfoliation technique has been developed. Typically, graphite powder was sonicated in N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) or water containing a surfactant (e.g. sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS)) to produce a graphene dispersion.75 The exfoliated graphene nanosheets are nearly free of defects and oxygen-containing groups; thus they can be used to produce high-quality graphene materials for flexible devices.76 However, this technique can only produce suspensions of few-layer graphene sheets with low concentrations (<0.01 mg mL−1), limiting its practical applications.77–79
2.2 Flexible graphene films

2.2.1 CVD-graphene films on flexible substrates. 
To fabricate flexible devices, CVD-graphene sheets have to be transferred from the surfaces of catalytic metal films onto flexible target substrates.80 The typical transfer process can be accomplished by using a polymer coating such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as a provisional rigid support. This polymeric support layer prevents the folding or tearing of graphene sheets during the process of etching catalytic metal substrates (Ni, Cu). PMMA was successively removed by acetone, leaving a graphene film on the surface of the target substrate, such as poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET).81 High-quality, large-area graphene membranes are expected to be used as transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs) in bendable/stretchable energy devices. A typical few-layer graphene/PET film showed a sheet resistance of about 500 Ω sq−1 with a transmittance around 75% at 550 nm.49 The optoelectronic properties of the graphene/PET film remained virtually unperturbed upon several cycles of folding (180°) and decreased only by 7.9% after 100 bending cycles (0° → 150° → 0°).
The critical step of preparing flexible graphene electrodes is to transfer graphene from the metal substrate to the desired flexible substrate without degrading the quality of graphene. However, the widely used method described above suffers from residual PMMA on the graphene surface. The removal of PMMA by solvent rinsing possibly causes the tearing of graphene sheets, introducing structural discontinuities such as cracks. To address this problem, a cost- and time-saving roll-to-roll method was developed.82,83 In this case, the graphene film on a flexible copper foil was attached to a thermal release tape by applying a weak pressure (∼0.2 MPa) between two rollers (Fig. 1a). After etching away the copper foil, the graphene film on the tape can be transferred to the surfaces of any flexible substrate (Fig. 1b). This technique is scalable; a 30-inch multilayer graphene film has been successfully transferred to a roll of PET for the fabrication of touch-screen panels (Fig. 1c–e).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the roll-based production of the graphene film grown on a copper foil. (b) Roll-to-roll transfer of the graphene film from a thermal release tape to a PET film at 120 °C. (c) A transparent ultralarge-area graphene film transferred onto a 35-inch PET sheet. (d) An assembled graphene/PET touch panel showing outstanding flexibility. (e) A graphene-based touch-screen panel connected to a computer with control software. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. 
A unique “clean-lifting transfer” method without using any support has been used to transfer graphene films.84 This method is based on the electrostatic interaction between the graphene sheet and target substrate. First, charges were accumulated at the surface of the target substrate, then the CVD-graphene on a Cu foil was electrostatically attracted to its surface. Pressing the substrate can create uniformly distributed attachment sites between both surfaces. Successively, Cu foil was etched away using an iron nitrate solution, followed by rinsing with de-ionized water to remove any residue. This technique has been successfully applied for transferring large-area single layer graphene films onto flexible PET.


2.2.2 GO/rGO films on flexible substrates. 
Flexible graphene thin films can also be prepared by the deposition of multilayer GO/rGO sheets onto various substrates.85 Spin coating is the most convenient method to produce uniform thin films on a flexible substrate.24 Typically, an excess amount of GO solution was dropped onto a flexible substrate which was then rotated at a high speed to spread the fluid over its entire surface by a centrifugal force. The GO films prepared by spin coating are usually highly continuous, and their thicknesses can be easily controlled by modulating spin speeds and GO concentrations.86 Similar to spin coating, spray coating is a painting technique; the coating material is air sprayed onto the surface of a flexible substrate. This technique is fast, scalable and facile to operate. However, in many cases, the thickness varied largely across the film caused by the fast dynamics of deposition and the flexible nature of GO sheets. Moreover, it is very difficult to avoid partial aggregation and crumpling or wrinkling of GO/rGO sheets during the spin or spray coating process.
Dip coating is another popular technique used for preparing flexible thin films. It involves three steps, i.e., immersing a flexible substrate into a tank containing the coating material, removing the substrate from the tank, and drying of the coating material.85,87 During the process of dipping, part of graphene sheets were inevitably scrolled or folded, leading to a decrease of the transparency of the graphene film. To avoid the folding of graphene sheets, a layer-by-layer (LbL) sequential assembly of positively and negatively charged rGO sheets was developed based on dip coating.88,89 This approach relies on the electrostatic attraction between the oppositely charged rGO sheets, and enables the preparation of multilayer rGO films with tunable thicknesses, electrical resistances and transmittances by modulating the number of bilayers.90 For example, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA)-modified positively charged rGO was combined with negatively charged rGO to construct flexible thin films.91 This rGO-based thin film on the PET substrate showed a good conductivity retention after multiple cycles (30 cycles) of bending to a large angle of 180°.
The electrophoretic deposition technique is an efficient approach to decrease the aggregation of GO sheets for forming uniform films. In this case, GO sheets in their suspension migrated under the influence of a constant electrical field to deposit onto a conductive electrode.92 This technique has the advantages of high deposition rate, good thickness controllability and simplicity of scaling up. Nevertheless, it is limited to electrically conductive substrates, such as indium tin oxide (ITO) sheets. The obtained multilayered rGO films on ITO have to be transferred to other flexible substrates for maintaining their flexibility.


2.2.3 Free-standing graphene papers. 
Free-standing paper-like GO films can be prepared by vacuum filtration.52 GO sheets are hydrophilic because of their oxygenated functional groups; thus water molecules can readily intercalate into GO interlayer galleries. The layered GO paper consists of tightly packed interlocking sheets with an intersheet spacing of around 8.3 Å. By modulating the amount of GO sheets in their dispersion, the thickness of GO paper can be facilely controlled. The GO films thinner than 5 μm are semitransparent and thicker papers are fully opaque. GO papers are mechanically strong with Young's moduli ranging from 23–42 GPa,52,93,94 comparable to that of concrete,95 and tensile strengths ranging from 15–193 MPa,52,93,94,96 comparable to that of cast iron. Further modification of the functional groups on GO sheets could improve the mechanical properties of GO papers to some extent. For example, the treatment of GO papers with 1 wt% of divalent cations (Mg2+ or Ca2+) to crosslink the edge-bonded carboxylic acid groups of adjacent GO sheets can improve their Young's modulus by 10–40% and tensile strength by 10–80%.85
GO paper is inherently electronically insulating, limiting its energy applications. In addition, the presence of oxygenated functional groups makes GO thermally unstable. A GO paper can be converted into a conductive rGO paper by the treatment with an aqueous hydrazine solution at 90 °C for 1 h. This rGO paper is mechanically strong, showing a Young's modulus of ∼3.0 GPa and a tensile strength of ∼13.2 MPa.93 However, its electrical conductivity is relatively low (about 200 S cm−1).53 rGO papers prepared by self-assembling rGO sheets showed greatly improved properties including high Young's moduli (∼20.5 GPa) and tensile strengths (∼150 MPa), and good electrical conductivities (∼7200 S m−1). Dispersing rGO sheets to prevent their aggregation is the most critical issue to obtain high-quality flexible rGO films. This is mainly due to the fact that the contact resistances between rGO sheets would drastically decrease the conductivities of rGO films. For this purpose, some stabilizers have been used to stabilize the dispersions of rGO sheets. The typical stabilizers include poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS),97 poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO-PPO-PEO),98 isocyanates,99 quaternary amines,100 diazonium salts,101 sodium cholate,102 ionic liquids,103 and single-stranded DNA.104 Nevertheless, the blending of stabilizers negatively affects the conductivities and mechanical flexibility of rGO papers. Moreover, the electrical properties of rGO papers are also decreased by graphene defects and residual oxygen-containing groups.105,106 Thermal annealing can partly address these issues. For example, a flexible rGO paper treated by annealing at 500 °C has a more ordered microstructure and shows an electrical conductivity as high as 35000 S m−1.

2.3 Flexible graphene fibres
In virtue of their intrinsic 2D structure, graphene sheets have been assembled into 2D flexible materials such as papers, and conductive transparent membranes. Inspired by carbon fibres and carbon nanotube (CNT) yarns, the fabrication and applications of graphene-based 1D fibres have attracted intensive attention.5 Graphene fibres (GFs) possess the common characteristics of fibres, especially the mechanical flexibility of textiles. Furthermore, they are light, easy to functionalize and/or have good electrical conductivity. Unfortunately, directly assembling 2D microscopic graphene sheets into macroscopic fibres is a challenge because of the poor dispersibility and the irregular sizes/shapes of graphene sheets. Thus, most graphene fibres were prepared from their GO precursors.107–111
GO fibres have been prepared by wet-spinning the liquid-crystalline GO dispersion. In this case, liquid crystalline GO dispersion was continuously injected into a coagulation bath to form fibres with tunable diameters (50–100 μm) and several meters long fibres can be obtained within 10 min (Fig. 2a and b).112 After chemical reduction, GO fibres were converted into rGO fibres with good mechanical properties (∼140 MPa at an ultimate elongation of 5.8%) and high conductivity (∼2.5 × 104 S m−1). Notably, these GFs are flexible; can be fastened into tight knots without any breakage, or integrated into conductive patterned textiles with other threads (Fig. 2c–f).
 Fig. 2  (a) Four-metre-long GO fibre wound on a Teflon drum (diameter, 2 cm). SEM image of the fibre (b), and its typical tightened knots (c and d). (e) A Chinese character (“中”, Zhong) pattern knitted in the cotton network (white) using two graphene fibres (black). (f) A mat of graphene fibres (horizontal) woven together with cotton threads (vertical). Scale bars, 50 μm (b–d) and 2 mm (e and f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. 
Hydrothermally reducing a GO suspension sealed in a long and thin tube can also produce conductive rGO fibres.41 By using a glass pipeline of 0.4 mm inner diameter, 1 mL GO suspension (8 mg mL−1) can generate longer than 6 m rGO fibres (ca. 35 μm in diameter) with a density less than 1/7 that of conventional carbon fibres. The as-obtained GFs exhibited a tensile strength of up to 180 MPa and an elongation at break of 3–6%, comparable to those of CNT fibres.113,114 The strong and flexible GFs are wearable and shapeable and can be woven into engineered structures. Hollow graphene fibres can also be prepared by template guided assembling rGO sheets in a tube via a similar hydrothermal process.115 One removable metal wire (e.g., Cu) was placed in a glass pipeline and the hydrothermally reduced GO sheets were assembled around the wire to form a compact skin. Successively, the Cu wire was removed by etching to release a hollow rGO fibre. The as-prepared hollow GFs are mechanically stable and flexible, can be shaped to a specific geometry with required structure.
2.4 Graphene-based flexible 3D porous architectures
For the applications in energy devices, graphene sheets are frequently constructed into 3D porous architectures to provide conductive frameworks for electron transfer or loading other functional materials, and accessible surface areas for the adsorption/desorption of ions.116 The 3D graphene frameworks have unique properties including high porosity, huge specific surface area, light weight, and excellent electrical conductivity.117 Typical 3D graphene materials include hydrogels,22,63,72 aerogels,118,119 foams,19,120,121 sponges,122,123etc., however, only several of them were reported for flexible devices.
Graphene-based flexible 3D porous architectures were usually prepared via self-assembly of graphene sheets.117,124 A GO sheet can be considered as a 2D amphiphilic conjugated polyelectrolyte with a hydrophobic basal plane and hydrophilic oxygenated groups. Thus, the self-assembly behavior of GO sheets in aqueous media is mainly controlled by the balance between the inter-planar van der Waals force and electronic repulsion of GO sheets. Moreover, in many cases, dipole and hydrogen bonding interactions are also the driving forces of self-assembly. Hydrothermal reduction of GO dispersion with a concentration higher than about 1 mg mL−1 can produce a mechanically strong, electrically conductive and thermally stable rGO hydrogel.72 This hydrogel can be converted to an aerogel by freeze or supercritical drying. However, these hydrogels or aerogels are usually brittle, cannot be stretched or compressed.119,125,126 By carefully controlling both the amount of oxygen-containing groups of GO sheets and freezing conditions, a cork-like graphene macroporous structure was obtained.127 This graphene monolith exhibited a good elasticity; it can sustain its structural integrity under a load 50000 times its own weight and can rapidly recover from a compression strain <80%. This pioneering work opened a door to obtain self-standing graphene flexible materials with 3D porous microstructures. Nevertheless, this process is time-consuming for large scale production. We have employed a rapid template method to fabricate macroporous graphene monoliths from an aqueous emulsion of GO containing hexane droplets.128 In this case, GO sheets were reduced by hydrothermal treatment and assembled around hexane droplets to form a 3D network (Fig. 3a). Then the hydrogel was immersed in 80 °C water for 1 h to evaporate hexane and fill water into the graphene pores. Successively, the rGO hydrogel was freeze dried followed by annealing in moisture to form a flexible aerogel (Fig. 3b). The density and conductivity of these rGO aerogels can be modulated by the concentrations of feeding GO dispersions. They are light (6.73–12.32 mg cm−3), conductive (0.48–1.76 S m−1), and have excellent elasticity. The aerogel prepared from 5 mg mL−1 GO can recover to its initial shape upon repeated compression up to 30% strain for 300 cycles (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a macroporous graphene monolith (MGM). (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a MGM. (c) Resistance response of a MGM prepared from 5 mg mL−1 GO to compression recorded during 300 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. 
rGO foams can be prepared by chemical reduction of GO papers with hydrazine vapor at an elevated temperature (e.g. 90 °C for 1 h).120 GO papers obtained by filtration have a layered structure. The reduction of a GO paper releases gaseous species such as H2O and CO2 and will result in formation of pores in the rGO matrix.53,129,130 The microstructure of this rGO film is just like that of a “leavened bread”, having open pores and continuous cross-links. The as-obtained rGO foams are conductive and flexible. They showed a tensile strength of about 3.2 MPa and a Young's modulus of 7 MPa.
A “breath-figure” method has been developed to self-assemble chemically functionalized rGO sheets into large-area flexible porous films.131–133 For example, polystyrene-grafted GO sheets were dispersed in benzene, and then cast onto a flexible PET substrate and exposed to a stream of humid air.134 Endothermic evaporation of the volatile benzene resulted in the spontaneous condensation and close packing of aqueous droplets. Subsequent drying and pyrolysis resulted in formation of a 3D macroporous film of polymer-grafted rGO on the substrate. This film is mechanically robust and flexible.
Recently, laser-scribed graphene (LSG) attracted special attention for flexible energy devices.135–137 This graphene material was prepared by the irradiation of a GO film on the PET substrate with an infrared laser inside a commercial LightScribe CD/DVD drive, reducing GO to LSG with a porous network. The conductivity after 1000 bending cycles (curvature radius = 5 mm).
The LSG film showed a high conductivity (1738 S m−1) and excellent mechanical flexibility, exhibiting only ∼1% change in it. The simple direct fabrication of LSG on a flexible substrate simplifies the development of lightweight devices, such as flexible capacitors,137 gas sensors,135 and actuators.136
2.5 Flexible graphene composites

2.5.1 Composites with carbon nanotubes. 
An rGO/CNT composite paper was prepared by casting the mixed dispersion of GO and functionalized CNTs followed by thermal reduction.138 This hybrid paper was mechanically stable and it can recover to its original shape by releasing from its twisted or bent state. The electrical resistivity of this paper (3 × 10−4 Ω cm) was measured to be about one order of magnitude lower than that of an rGO paper (4.26 × 10−3 Ω cm).
For applications as flexible transparent conducting electrodes, CVD-graphene is a better choice than rGO sheets as the starting material for preparing graphene/CNT composites. A transparent flexible graphene/CNT membrane was fabricated by covering a CVD-graphene sheet onto the surface of a large-area CNT thin film.139 This as-prepared vein-membrane-like hybrid film showed elastic features at strains smaller than ∼2% and plastic features at strains from ∼2–30% before breaking. Besides, this ultra-thin film (sub-nanometer thick graphene on tens of nanometers thick CNT) is transparent (52.5% at 600 nm) and has a low sheet resistance (573 Ω sq−1). A transparent conductive thin film called “rebar graphene” was prepared by simply annealing dodecyl-functionalized single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) on a Cu foil without introducing an extraneous carbon source.140 The SWCNTs were partially unzipped to form a seamless 2D conjoined graphene/SWCNT hybrid. Thus CNTs act as reinforcing bars (rebar), toughening graphene through both regional π–π stacking and covalent bonding. The “rebar graphene” membranes can float on water and then be transferred onto flexible substrates. These membranes showed a low sheet resistance (∼600 Ω sq−1) and high transmittance (95.8% at 550 nm). Furthermore, after transferring onto a PET substrate, this “rebar graphene” membrane is an ideal material for flexible transparent electrodes, and can be repeatedly bent to large angles without mechanical failures.
3D macroporous architectures of CNTs or graphene have been extensively studied.141–144 Actually, CNTs and graphene sheets are theoretically considered as the best building blocks to construct ultralight yet elastic and conductive aerogels.145–148 A graphene coated CNT aerogel showed super elasticity and complete fatigue resistance to large cyclic strains (1 × 106 cycles), whereas its weight density (ρ) was increased from 8.8 to 14.0 mg cm−3.149 Furthermore, an ultra-flyweight CNT/graphene hybrid aerogel with a ρ of ∼0.16 mg cm−3 was reported, and this value is even smaller than that of air under ambient conditions (ρ = 1.2 mg cm−3).150 The procedures for preparing ultralight CNT/graphene composites are briefly described as follows. The mixed aqueous dispersion of CNTs and giant GO sheets (average size ∼18.5 μm) was poured into a mould followed by freeze-drying for 2 days. After reducing with hydrazine vapour at 90 °C for 24 h, the mixture was vacuum-dried at 160 °C for 24 h to yield the CNT/graphene aerogel. This super elastic hybrid aerogel can keep its original thickness, macroscopic shape and porous 3D microscopic structure after a fatigue test of 1000 cycles. Another straightforward approach to prepare CNT/graphene foam is growing a CNT forest or array on a 3D graphene framework.151,152 CVD-graphene was firstly deposited in a Ni foam to form a 3D porous structure, then the CNT forest was grown on graphene. Finally, the Ni foam was removed to release a CNT/graphene foam. The good connection between graphene and CNTs provide the composite foam with robust and flexible mechanical properties.


2.5.2 Composites with polymers. 
Graphene materials are frequently blended with polymers to form functional composites. The polymer component can improve the processability and/or flexibility of graphene materials, and also possibly provide them with new functions such as pseudocapacitances or electrocatalytic activities.27,153–155 Our group reported strong flexible composite films of GO or rGO with PVA or chitosan.156,157 These films were prepared by vacuum filtrating the mixed solutions of both components and showed layered microstructures because of directional fluid induced parallel orientation of graphene sheets. These composite papers can be bent into large angles or be shaped into various desired structures. Similarly, we also prepared rGO/polyaniline nanowire composite films by vacuum filtration and used as flexible electrodes for electrochemical capacitors.158 A more convenient method was drop casting graphene/polymer composite solution onto a rigid substrate and then peeling off the film into a free-standing state after drying. We have prepared rGO/poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) flexible films on supported graphite foils in this way and applied them in flexible SCs as electrodes.159
On the other hand, the blending of large amounts of polymers will greatly decrease the conductivity, moduli and tensile strengths of graphene films. Recently, we developed a gel-film transformation (GFT) method to prepare paper-like films of GO and silk fibroin (SF). In this case, composite films were formed by facile solution casting of the soft GO/SF composite hydrogel, and the film containing 85 wt% GO showed mechanical strength that surpasses that of natural nacre.160 This GFT technique has been extended to prepare rGO films containing trace amounts (<8%, by weight; wt%) of poly(acrylic acid-co-(4-acrylamidophenyl)boronic acid) (PAPB0.2, the subscript refers to the molar ratio of carboxylate groups amidated with 3-aminophenylboronic acid, Fig. 4a–d).161 The film with 4 wt% PAPB0.2 exhibited an electrical conductivity of 337 ± 12 S cm−1, a tensile strength of 381.78 ± 11.83 MPa, and a toughness of 7.50 ± 0.40 MJ m−3 (Fig. 4e and f). Particularly, it delivers a high gravimetric specific strength (208 N m g−1) comparable to those of widely used metals or alloys such as stainless steel, Al, Mg and Ti alloys.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of GO and rGO films by the GFT method; they are nominated as g-GO and g-rGO, respectively. (b) Photographs of g-GO (top) and g-rGO (bottom) films, showing their flexibility. (c) SEM images of the fractured cross sections of g-GO (top) and g-rGO (bottom) films, exhibiting their laminated structures. (d) Photograph of a large-area g-GO film. (e) Typical stress–strain curves of the rGO films prepared by the GFT method, or reducing the GO film prepared by evaporation of GO dispersion (e-rGO). The percentages are the polymer weight contents relative to GO. (f) Electrical conductivities of e-rGO and g-rGO films with the compositions as indicated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. 
Graphene/polymer composites can also be synthesized by in situ growth of polymers in graphene matrices. This technique is effective in forming composites with uniform distributions of both components.162,163 For example, graphene composites with conducting polymers such as polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole are usually prepared by in situ polymerization.164–167 Particularly, a flexible graphene/PANI composite film was obtained by in situ growing PANI on a graphene film, and it can be folded into a 3D structure.168 Upon folding to a large angle of 180° and further compressing to 50% of its original length, this composite film can maintain its physical integrity. Furthermore, its thermoelectric properties were improved as a result of the formation of an electrically connected structure between adjacent folded layers. Except conducting polymers, an electroactive polymer, polyselenophene (PSe), has also been introduced to GO by in situ polymerization to form a composite and its GO component was successively reduced to rGO.169 The resulting rGO/PSe nanohybrid electrode could be folded or repeatedly bent without introducing any structural defects.
Highly ordered ultrathin graphene/polymer composite membranes (several to hundreds of nanometers in thicknesses) showing high elasticity and robustness can be fabricated using LbL assembly.170–173 For example, negatively charged GO layers were incorporated into positively charged polyelectrolyte multilayers.174 The polyelectrolyte multilayers were formed by alternately spin-coating positively charged poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) layers and negatively charged poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) (PSS) layers. In order to deposit negatively charged GO layers, the polyelectrolyte multilayer was terminated with a positively charged PAH layer. The elastic modulus of the polymer film (thickness = 50 nm) was increased by about one order of magnitude from 1.5 to about 20 GPa for the composite with 8.0 vol% GO. These tough composite films can be freely suspended over a copper substrate with a 150 μm aperture and sustain large mechanical deformations. A similar strategy has been used to prepare a multilayer hybrid film of the poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV)/rGO composite membrane on a PET substrate.175 These LbL assembly strategies effectively prohibited the aggregation of graphene sheets, and improved the transparencies and decreased the thicknesses of the composite films.
The flexibility of a graphene/polymer composite can be improved by optimizing the interfacial interaction between its components. An example is the formation of efficient crosslinking between hyperbranched polyurethane (NHPU) chains with aliphatic hydroxyl groups decorated to GO sheets.176 The resulting GO/NHPU composite exhibited a 98% shape recovery and 93% shape retention as it was used as a shape memory material.


2.5.3 Composites with inorganic nanoparticles. 
Flexible composites of graphene and inorganic nanoparticles have also been extensively studied. These flexible composites are widely employed in portable and wearable devices, such as solar cells,45 OLEDs,177 fuel cells,178 SCs,179 LIBs,180 and sensors.181 A variety of inorganic nanostructures have been blended with graphene and its derivatives, including metals: Pt,182 Pd,183 Ag,184 Si,180 and Cu;178 oxides: RuO2,185 MnO2,186 V2O5,187 Mn3O4,188 Co3O4,189 SnO2,190 TiO2,191 NiO,192 Fe3O4,193 ZnO194 and BaTiO3;195 compounds: InN,196 CdS,197 and CdSe;198 and bimetallic hybrids: Al–TiO2,199 Fe2O3–SnO2,200 Au–Pt201 and Cu–Ag.202 The methods used to synthesize these types of composites can be simply classified as ex situ and in situ hybridizations. In the following section, we give several examples of preparing flexible graphene/metal or oxide composites.

Ex situ hybridization usually involves using the mixed solutions of graphene sheets and pre-synthesized nanoparticles as the starting materials. LbL deposition has been widely used for ex situ fabricating layered thin films on flexible substrates.203,204 Following this approach, a Au nanoparticle/graphene composite film has been successfully fabricated. First, Au nanoparticle monolayers were prepared by dipping203 or electrophoretic deposition.204 Then the Au monolayers and rGO sheets alternately deposited on the PET substrate to form multi-layered films. Interestingly, a 2D array of Au nanoparticles at oil–water interfaces could be transferred onto flexible GO paper by dip coating, forming a monolayer of densely packed gold nanoparticles on GO paper.205 A similar approach has also been used to assemble Au@Pt core–shell nanoparticles on flexible rGO paper.201 A graphene/WS2 composite film can be fabricated by transferring a CVD graphene film onto a polymer substrate and then depositing a WS2 layer onto the surface of graphene.206 This procedure was repeated 4 times to achieve a flexible and robust composite film. Similarly, graphene/Ag nanowire composite films on flexible PET substrates were also prepared.207 These films were fabricated by depositing Ag nanowires on the surface of CVD-grown graphene films or transferring graphene films onto Ag nanowire networks. All of these composite films showed good mechanical flexibility and stretchability.
Although ex situ hybridization is able to pre-select nanostructures with desired functionalities; however it sometimes suffers from the low loadings and non-uniform coverages of the nanostructures on graphene surfaces. In contrast, in situ hybridization can form uniform surface coverage of nanocrystals by controlling the nucleation sites on graphene surfaces. Chemical reduction is the most popular strategy for the synthesis of metal nanostructures. Precursors of noble metals, such as HAuCl4, AgNO3, K2PtCl4 and H2PtCl6, can be simply in situ reduced by reducing agents such as amines, NaBH4, and ascorbic acid.208 For example, a mixed aqueous solution of GO, ascorbic acid and metal precursors such as Ag(COOCH3) or HAuCl4, or HPtCl4 was ultrasonicated and heated at 90 °C for 45 min.209 Then a stable suspension of metal particle/rGO dispersion was filtered with a porous membrane to form flexible metal (Ag, Au and Pt)/rGO composite papers. Another chemical method for in situ synthesis of inorganic nanocrystals is hydrothermal reduction.210 The hydrothermal process can produce nanostructures with higher crystallinity compared with chemical reduction without post-synthetic annealing or calcination. GO can be reduced to rGO during the hydrothermal process. An example is a flexible N-doped graphene/SnO2 composite paper obtained by hydrothermal treatment of the mixed solution of SnCl4·5H2O and GO at 180 °C for 24 h followed by vacuum filtration of the reaction solution.190 In addition, direct electrochemical deposition of inorganic crystals on graphene-based flexible substrates is an attractive approach without the requirement for post-synthetic transfer of the composite solution and filtration. This technique has been used to load MnO2 nanoparticles on a flexible 3D CVD-grown graphene network.211 The 3D MnO2/graphene hybrid network was bendable and foldable, little change (less than 1%) in electrical resistance was observed after bending for 500 cycles to different angles ranging from 0° to 180°.

3. Flexible devices related to energy conversion
Flexible graphene materials and their composites, including 1D fibres, 2D films and 3D networks, have wide applications in flexible, portable, and wearable energy devices.212–215 For example, transparent and electrical conductive graphene thin films can replace the traditional rigid electrodes in optoelectronic devices such as organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs),33,212 dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),182,216 organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)217,218 and photodetectors.219,220 Graphene catalysts are expected to be applied in fuel cells.19 Graphene based actuators221,222 and nanogenerators (NGs)25,223 have light weight, good flexibility and promising performances. The devices described above are related to energy conversion, and their recent advancements and challenges will be discussed in the following section.
3.1 Optoelectronic devices
Flexible optoelectronic devices are expected to be widely used in our daily lives, such as bendable, foldable and/or stretchable displays, OPV cells and touch panels.33 The key component of these devices is flexible electrodes that can be stretched and/or bent without compromising their conductivities and transparencies. Indium-tin-oxide (ITO) electrodes have conventionally been used as transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs).224 They exhibit a transparency of >90% in the ultraviolet-visible light region and a sheet resistance of 10–30 Ω sq−1. However, ITO electrodes have drawbacks of brittleness and high cost, making them unsuitable for flexible devices.225Among various materials for replacing ITO, graphene has emerged as a good candidate, because it possesses most of the features required for electrode materials for flexible optoelectronic devices.2,226 Monolayer graphene is transparent with a transmittance exceeding 97%, and it also has a high carrier concentration with mobility in the order of 106 with remarkable flexibility (elastic modulus ≈ 1 TPa).2 Graphene TCEs have been applied in a variety of flexible optoelectronic devices, such as OPV devices, OLEDs and photodetectors (Table 1).24,227,228
Table 1 Graphene materials and their flexible optoelectronic devices




Graphene material
Synthesis method
Device
Performance
Flexibility
Ref.



ρ

 (Ω sq−1)

T

 (%)
PCEc (%)





a 
ρ – resistance.
b 
T – transmittance at 550 nm.
c PCE – power conversion efficiency.
d 
r – curvature radius.
e CE – current efficiency.
f LE – luminous efficiency.
g 
F – fluorescence.
h 
P – phosphorescence.





rGO film
Spin-coating/annealing
OPV
3200
65
0.78
1000 bending cycles (rd = 5 mm)

234



LrGO film
Spin-coating/laser-irradiation
OPV
700
44
1.10
Bending angles up to 135°

24



Graphene film
CVD growth/transferring
OPV
230
72
1.18
Bending angles up to 138°

49



Graphene film
CVD growth/inkjet printing
OPV
12
73
2.90
500 bending cycles (rd = 4 mm)

45



Graphene/PEDOT:PSS/Au film
CVD growth/transferring
OPV
158 ± 30
90
3.20
1000 bending cycles (rd = 1.5 mm)

227



Graphene/PEDOT:PSS film
CVD growth/LbL
OPV
36.6
85
4.33
Bendable

48



Graphene/PEDOT film
CVD growth/in situ polymerisation
DSSC




6.26
10 bending cycles (rd = 4.7 mm)

243







Graphene material
Synthesis method
Device

ρ

 (Ω sq−1)

T

 (%)
CEe (cd A−1)
LEf (lm W−1)
Flexibility
Ref.




Graphene/PEDOT:PSS/perfluorinated ionomer film
CVD growth/spin-coating
OLED
30



F

 30.2 Ph 98.1

F

 37.2 Ph 102.7
1000 bending cycles (rd = 7.5 mm)

249



Graphene/CNT film
CVD growth/LbL
OLED
76
89.13

P

 14.7

P

 9.2
Bending angles up to 90° for hundreds of cycles

250



Graphene film
CVD growth/transferring
OLED
750
96.6

P

 11.44

P

 2.24

r

 = 0–0.72 cm

251



Graphene film
CVD growth/LbL
OLED
40–60
80

P

 >250

P

 >160
Bending at rd = 0.5 cm

252







Graphene material
Synthesis method
Device
Responsivity (A W−1)
Flexibility
Ref.




Doped graphene film
CVD growth/transferring
Photodetector
120 (>780 nm)
Bending number >20 angles: 30, 60, 70 and 80°

219



CdSe NB/graphene film
CVD growth/transferring
Photodetector
8.7 (633 nm)
Bendable

260



Graphene/PbS QD film
CVD growth/transferring
Photodetector
107 (895 nm)
1000 bending cycles (rd = 7 mm)

263



rGO film
Drop-casting/thermal annealing
Photodetector
∼0.7 (895 nm)
1000 bending cycles (rd = 7 mm)

264






3.1.1 Organic photovoltaics. 
OPV devices are solar cells that can produce electricity by converting solar energy using conjugated polymer-based p–n junctions or heterojunctions. They are usually cheap, lightweight, and possibly flexible. To date, graphene materials have been utilized as transparent electrodes, electron acceptors or hole transport layers for OPV devices.2,229–232 Whereas, in flexible OPV devices, graphene materials are mostly used as TCEs.
Recently, rGO films have been explored as transparent bottom electrodes for OPV devices.233 These graphene TCEs were fabricated by coating GO films on rigid substrates (e.g., glass and Si/SiO2), followed by the reduction with hydrazine vapor or annealing. Because flexible polymeric substrates (e.g., PET) cannot stand high temperatures (<140 °C), this technique is unsuitable for preparing flexible TCEs. However, rGO films can be transferred to PET substrates to make the electrodes flexible.234 Actually, a 16 nm thick rGO film with a transmittance of 65% was used to fabricate a flexible OPV device, and this device can sustain a thousand cycles of bending (curvature radius = 5 mm) at a tensile strain of ∼2.9%. Unfortunately, the obtained devices exhibited a low power efficiency (PCE) of 0.78% because of the large sheet resistance of rGO TCE (3.2 kΩ sq−1). The PCE of a flexible OPV device was greatly improved to 1.27% by replacing the rGO film with an rGO/CNT composite film following a similar fabrication procedure.225
A laser reduction technique was used to convert the spin-coated GO film on PET to a flexible TCE (Fig. 5a and b).24 A 20 nm thick laser reduced GO (LrGO) film showed a sheet resistance of 700 Ω sq−11 and a transmittance of 44%. A flexible OPV device with this LrGO TCE exhibited a high PCE of 1.1%, an order of magnitude higher than that of its counterpart with a chemically reduced GO electrode. This OPV device can be bent to angles up to 135° without decreasing its performance. In comparison, the devices with ITO/PET TCEs can partly maintain their functions at the bending angles ≤45°, and they failed completely at a bending angle of 65°.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental technique used for the reduction of GO films on PET substrates. (b) Picture of a flexible PET/rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al photovoltaic device. (c) Photograph of a graphene-coated PET substrate, and schematic diagram of the fabrication steps involved in preparing a DSSC with a graphene/PEDOT counter electrode on a PET substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24 and 243. 
As described above, the PCEs (<2%) of the OPV devices with rGO electrodes are usually lower than those of the devices with ITO electrodes (5–10%). This is mainly due to the low conductivities of graphene electrodes. High-quality, large-area graphene films with relatively low sheet resistances and high optical transparencies can be obtained via a CVD approach. A flexible OPV device with a CVD-graphene based bottom TCE (thickness: 1–3 nm, sheet resistance: 230 Ω sq−1) showed a maximum PCE of 1.18%. These flexible devices can work at bending angles up to 138°.49 Whereas, an ITO-based device fabricated under the same conditions (PCE: 1.27%) displayed cracks and irreversible failure at bending to 60°.
Introducing metal grids (e.g., Au, Ag, Ti, Cu, Ni, Al) into the CVD-graphene/PET electrode can further reduce its sheet resistance.45,236 For example, the composite film of an inkjet printed Ag grid and CVD-graphene exhibited a sheet resistance of 12 Ω sq−1 and 73% transparency at 550 nm.45 This thin film was used to fabricate a flexible OPV device with a high PCE of 2.9%. More importantly, this thin film showed no increase in its resistance even after 500 bending cycles (curvature radius = 4 mm). In comparison, the resistance of the ITO/PET film increased rapidly exceeding 1 kΩ after only a few bending cycles, and reached around 30 kΩ after several hundreds of bending cycles.
In order to improve the conductance of graphene films, blending conducting polymers such as poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was another choice. Because PEDOT:PSS has a higher surface work function (energy to remove electrons from the surface) than that of graphene, electrons would transfer from graphene to the PEDOT component. Thus the graphene film will be doped with holes and the sheet resistance of the graphene film was decreased by more than 75%.48 These composite films were applied in flexible OPV devices. A bendable device with an electrode consisting of three layered graphene on PET showed a high PCE of 4.33%, and this value is among the highest efficiencies attained for OPV devices with CVD-graphene electrodes.
Semitransparent OPV devices are useful for some special applications, such as tinted thin films coated on electronics and OLEDs.237,238 Graphene is a candidate material for the top electrodes of these devices. This is mainly due to the fact that a large-area graphene film can be easily transferred to a flexible substrate. For example, a hybrid CVD-graphene film was used as the transparent top electrode in a flexible OPV device on a polyimide (PI) substrate.227 This composite film was prepared by coating a layer of PEDOT:PSS and Au nanoparticles on a CVD-graphene film. The PEDOT:PSS and Au nanoparticles are p-type dopants of graphene because they can withdraw electrons from graphene. Thus the sheet resistance of four-layer graphene was decreased from 220 Ω sq−1 (undoped) to 68 Ω sq−1 (doped). The transmittance of the doped graphene film was measured to be about 90%, comparable to that of the ITO electrode. The double-layer graphene based flexible OPV device showed a maximum PCE of 3.2%, and it decreased for only about 8% after 1000 bending cycles (curvature radius = 1.5 mm).


3.1.2 Dye-sensitized solar cells. 
DSSCs have attracted significant interest because of their low costs and relatively high PCEs.239 A typical DSSC device consists of a dye-modified TiO2 photoanode, Pt counter electrode, and iodide electrolyte. The photoexcitation of the molecular dye under light induces electron transfer to the photoelectrode. The collected electrons in the photoelectrode are transported through an external circuit to the counter electrode. The development of next-generation flexible DSSCs is focused on replacing platinum for commercial use. Owing to its high conductivity and flexibility, graphene offers an attractive option of flexible and conductive counter electrodes for DSSCs.239,240 In 2008, we used pyrene butylate functionalized graphene as the counter electrode for DSSCs and showed a low PCE around 2%.241 Then, we improved the performance of the electrode by blending graphene with PEDOT:PSS and spin coated onto the ITO substrate, and the DSSC device showed a PCE (4.5%) comparable to that of its counterpart with the Pt counter electrode (6.3%).242 Following this method, Lee et al. spin coated the graphene/PEDOT film on a plastic substrate to fabricate a flexible DSSC (Fig. 5c),243 showing a PCE of 6.26%. In comparison, the efficiencies of the DSSCs with Pt/ITO and pure PEDOT counter electrodes are 6.68% and 5.62%. The low costs and easy processing of graphene counter electrodes make them have practical importance in the development of new flexible DSSCs. More importantly, these graphene electrodes maintained their functions after a symmetric bending for 10 cycles (bending radius = 0.47 mm).


3.1.3 Organic light-emitting diodes. 
OLEDs can convert electrical energy to light, having applications in panel displays and solid-state lighting with high luminous efficiency and flexibility.244 The simplest OLED has an organic emissive layer sandwiched between two electrodes.245 Electrons and holes are injected into the emissive layer from the cathode and anode, respectively. The energy released by electron–hole quenching can excite the fluorescent molecules of the emissive layer to emit light. This mechanism is opposite to that of OPV devices. Thus, like OPV devices, the performances of OLEDs also strongly depend on the properties of their TCEs. Graphene materials offer an excellent option as TCEs for OLEDs.246 Solution processed graphene247 and CVD-graphene248 multilayer films have been explored for this purpose. However, the OLEDs with these TCEs exhibited a current efficiency (CEs) of only around 1 cd A−1, much lower than those of the devices with ITO electrodes. This is mainly due to their relatively low work functions (∼4.4 eV) and higher sheet resistances (>300 Ω sq−1) compared with those of ITO (4.7–4.9 eV and 10 Ω sq−1). The low work function of graphene causes inefficient charge injection from the graphene electrode into the organic layer. The low conductivity of pristine graphene films also limits the luminous efficiencies (LEs) of the devices. To overcome these issues, high-quality CVD-graphene films were doped with HNO3 or AuCl3 to decrease their sheet resistances to ∼30 Ω sq−1 and spin coated with conducting polymers (PEDOT:PSS and perfluorinated ionomer) to increase their work function to ∼5.95 eV.249 This high work function enables holes to be efficiently injected into the organic layer from graphene, thus improving the efficiency of light emission. A fluorescent OLED with HNO3 or AuCl3 doped four-layer graphene exhibited a high CE of 30.2 cd A−1 (LE ∼ 37.2 lm W−1), and a phosphorescent counterpart showed a CE as high as 98.1 cd A−1 (LE ∼ 102.7 lm W−1) (Fig. 6a and b). These efficiencies are significantly higher than those of the similar optimized devices with ITO anodes (24.1 lm W−1 for fluorescent OLEDs, and 85.6 lm W−1 for phosphorescent OLEDs). The devices based on graphene electrodes demonstrated excellent bending stability and maintained their performances even after 1000 repeated bending cycles (curvature radius = 7.5 mm). In comparison, the devices with the ITO electrode completely failed their function after only 800 times of bending. This is a pioneering study on flexible OLEDs based on graphene anodes with performances surpassing those with ITO anodes. For commercial application, this technique has some drawbacks: HNO3 doping is unstable and the performance of the doped graphene TCE decays with time. On the other hand, AuCl3 doping causes large surface roughness of the graphene electrode, increasing the risk of short circuit in the OLED devices.
 Fig. 6  (a) Digital image of light emission from a flexible fluorescent green OLED with a four-layered graphene anode doped with HNO3. (b) Current efficiencies of OLED devices using various graphene layers (doped with HNO3 or AuCl3) or ITO as the anode. (c) Pictures of flexible OLEDs on the plastic substrate with the SLG electrode. (d) PE and CE of green OLEDs on single layer graphene (SLG) and ITO with enhanced coupling structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249 and 252. 
To improve the chemical stability of graphene TCEs, graphene films supported on SWCNT arrays were fabricated as anodes in OLEDs.250 After introducing CNT arrays, the graphene films showed a low sheet resistance of 76 Ω sq−1 and a high transmittance of 89%. The performances of the OLEDs with graphene-on-CNT hybrid electrodes were tested to be comparable to those of the devices with ITO electrodes. Most importantly, the graphene-on-CNT hybrid electrodes can be transferred onto plastic substrates to construct highly flexible devices. They can emit uniform green light at bending angles up to 90° and even can sustain hundreds of bending cycles. However, in this case, residual PMMA resulting from the graphene transfer process may lead to the structural discontinuity of graphene films decreasing their performance. A clean graphene film can be transferred onto a flexible substrate by inserting an organic small molecular buffer layer (2-(diphenylphosphoryl) spirofluorene (SPPO1)) between PMMA and graphene. The generation of PMMA residue on graphene was avoided due to the superior solubility of SPPO1 in solvent (e.g., acetone).251 As-prepared OLED devices based on clean graphene films exhibited better performances than those of their counterparts fabricated from the films transferred via a conventional process. Moreover, the flexibility of these OLEDs is much better than that of the devices with ITO electrodes. The sheet resistance of the graphene electrode increased by 1.2 times as its curvature increased from 0 to 0.72 cm−1, while that of the ITO electrode increased by 10.4 times under the same conditions.
Graphene TCEs suffer from the drawbacks of significant light absorption (2.3–3% for each monolayer) as they are used in OLEDs. To minimize this negative effect, a monolayer graphene film was used to fabricate a flexible OLED with an efficiency sufficiently high for general lighting.252 Single-layer graphene was grown by CVD and transferred onto a plastic substrate. By soaking the graphene sample in 1 mg mL−1 triethyloxonium hexachloroantimonate/dichloroethene solution, a charge transfer complex was produced. Successively, the graphene complex was spin coated with a thin layer of PEDOT:PSS and a thermally deposited MoO3 layer. This two-step modification reduced the sheet resistance of monolayer graphene to 40–60 Ω sq−1 and increased its work function to 6.7 eV, outperforming those of ITO deposited on a plastic substrate. Thus, the performance of a green OLED was improved by its high efficient hole injection from a modified graphene layer to light-emitting layer (Fig. 6c). The flexible devices showed PE > 160 lm W−1, and LE > 250 cd A−1, respectively (Fig. 6d). The PE of white OLEDs reached 80 lm W−1 at 3000 cd m−2, comparable to those of the most efficient lighting technologies. Furthermore, the device exhibited the same performance before and after bending to a radius of 0.5 cm, implying its promising application in portable electronics.


3.1.4 Photodetectors. 
Photodetectors can convert light into electrical signals, and they have applications in imaging, optical communications, and future intra-chip optical interconnects.253–255 Upon the excitation of light, the electrons and holes generated by the incident photons move in opposite directions, yielding a photocurrent correlated with light intensity. Recently, flexible and transparent photodetectors built on lightweight and bendable plastic substrates have received increasing attention compared with conventional rigid photodetectors. This is mainly due to their potential applications in flexible phones, curved digital cameras and foldable displays.
Graphene has a strong and broadband light adsorption, covering ultraviolet light to terahertz.256 Together with its extremely high carrier mobility, graphene films are expected to have practical applications in ultrafast broadband photodetectors with good flexibility.257,258 The IBM group reported the first graphene-based photodetectors with operating wavelengths ranging from 300 nm to 6 μm.259 The ultrafast graphene photodetector was confirmed to be able to work at high frequencies up to 40 GHz.258 However, the weak light absorption (∼2.3% per layer) and short photocarrier lifetime of graphene cause the photoresponsivity of the device to be low (5 × 10−4 mA W−1). Moreover, the gapless nature of graphene usually results in strong dark current and low photosensitivity.
Recently, an n-type dopant (2-(2-methoxyphenyl)-1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazole (o-MeO-DMBI)) was incorporated into CVD-graphene to produce a fully transparent and flexible IR photodetector (Fig. 7a).219 The doped graphene induced a large number of electron–hole pairs, and increased the responsivity of the photodetector up to 120 A W−1 at the wavelengths >780 nm. This graphene photodetector also showed good reproducibility and stability when repeatedly bent back and forth numerous times (>20) to different angles: 33, 60, 70 and 80° (Fig. 7b). However, the photosensitivity (photocurrent vs. dark current ∼5.0%) of the device is still relatively low because of the zero bandgap of graphene.
 Fig. 7  (a) Photos showing the transparency and flexibility of the graphene photodetector built on PET substrates. (b) Photoresponses of the metal-based photodetectors (top, channel length ∼3 μm; bottom, channel length ∼50 μm) on a PET substrate at different bending angles. (c) Schematic diagram of a graphene transistor modified with PbS QDs under light illumination. (d) Responsivity of the photoconductor as a function of light irradiation characterized before and after a bending test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219 and 263. 
Incorporating with semiconductor materials can modulate the bandgaps of graphene materials improving the performances of graphene based photodetectors,260,261 For example, the CdSe nanobelt/graphene composite was coated onto a PET substrate to fabricate high-performance photodetectors.260 The CdSe semiconducting nanobelts have a bandgap of 1.74 eV; thus this component can suppress the dark current caused by graphene. Besides, these nanobelts have excellent flexibility; thus they are promising for applications in flexible devices. The flexible photodetector with this transparent composite showed an ultrahigh photosensitivity (photocurrent vs. dark current ∼1.2 × 105%) upon 633 nm light illumination.
Quantum dot (QD)-based photodetectors usually exhibit strong photocurrent responses (103 AW−1); thus QDs have also been blended with graphene materials to further increase the light absorption of photodetectors.262 Strong and tunable light absorption in the QD layer can transfer electrons to graphene, thereby enhancing the photoresponse. For example, an infrared photodetector based on the composite of PbS QDs and single layer CVD-graphene (Fig. 7c) exhibited an ultrahigh responsivity of ∼107 A W−1, even after bending (curvature radius = 7 mm) 1000 times (Fig. 7d).263
Except CVD-graphene, rGO has also been used to fabricate flexible photodetectors. Drop cast GO films were annealed at 150 °C for different times to control their contents of oxygenated defects. The few-layer rGO films were transferred onto plastic substrates to fabricate flexible infrared photoconductors with responses in the range of 0.01 to 0.7 A W−1.264 These values are among the highest for the photodetectors based on graphene or graphene composites. More importantly, flexible infrared photoconductor devices showed no obvious degradation of photoresponse even after 1000 bending cycles (curvature radius = 7 mm). The solution-processable approach opens up a high throughput technology for graphene based flexible photodetectors.
Challenges. 
Thanks to the unique atom-thick two-dimensional electronic structure, superior transparency and high flexibility of graphene sheets, graphene based thin films are promising for the construction of flexible optoelectronic devices.33,265 Actually, graphene based touch panels have been successfully integrated into mobile phones which are already selling in the market. The flexibility, neutral colour, and ambient stability of graphene–TCEs are unique and surpass those of ITO–TCEs. However, several challenges still remain. (1) Unsatisfactory electrical conductivity and transparency: this is currently the major issue for the commercial use of graphene–TCEs in optoelectronic devices. Extensive efforts have been devoted to improving the properties of graphene–TCEs, including the synthesis of high-quality graphene,249 post-treatment of graphene,247 hybrids with conducting polymers,242,243,266 nanocrystals45 or CNTs.235,250 Nevertheless, the performances of most graphene–TCEs are still not comparable to that of ITO. (2) The surface work functions and wettability of graphene thin films: in order to minimize the energy barrier at the electrode, the work function of a graphene thin film should be tuned by interfacial modification. Hydrophobic properties of graphene thin films are also need be changed to improve their solution processability. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop effective interfacial modification methods for functionalizing graphene electrodes. (3) Transferring graphene materials to flexible substrates: most of the graphene thin films cannot be directly deposited onto flexible plastic substrates. This is mainly due to the fact that CVD-graphene can only be grown on catalytic metal substrates, and plastic substrates cannot resist the high-temperatures required for annealing rGO films.267 Thus, the process of transferring graphene onto a flexible substrate is necessary and two strategies have already been developed: (i) attaching graphene to the target substrate directly with chemical glues coated on the surfaces of target substrates; and (ii) introducing new supporting layers for the easy removal of graphene sheets. However, there are still some obstacles, e.g., the transfer of graphene films using strategy (i) needs chemical glues for special target substrates. Strategy (ii) requires removal of the supporting layer through a complicated process. For conventional ITO substrates, the post-cleaning treatment in organic solvents upon ultrasonication is efficient. Unfortunately, the graphene film is too thin and fragile to stand any harsh cleaning processes. The disadvantages existing in conventional graphene transferring techniques seriously impede the development of high performance optoelectronic devices. (4) Instability of doping: this is a bottleneck for the commercialization of graphene-based transparent electrodes. Because pristine graphene has a low charge concentration, chemicals must be used to increase the conductivity of graphene films. Unfortunately, commonly used dopants such as HNO3 or AuCl3 were found to be volatile, resulting in a rapid decrease of the doping level of graphene upon exposure to air.232 New dopants are urgently needed for achieving stable and efficient doping.219,268 (5) Large scale and low cost production: although the CVD method shows great potential for fabrication of high quality transparent and conductive graphene materials, the cost of production is always the problem. Solution processing of GO/rGO dispersions provides an opportunity to solve the problem. However, the practical applications of CMG-based devices are still limited, largely because of the difficulties associated with controlling the defects of CMG sheets.
Although the performances of graphene based optoelectronic devices are mostly worse than those of their counterparts with ITO electrodes, it is believed that its excellent flexibility should make graphene a promising material for flexible optoelectronic devices. A few graphene materials showed performances superior to that of ITO in optoelectronic devices, reflecting their bright future.

3.2 Fuel cells
Fuel cells can efficiently generate clean, reliable electrical power from chemical fuels. Flexible fuel cells have a wide range of portable applications from bendable batteries to intelligent vehicles. Typically, the electricity is generated via electrochemical oxidation of fuel (e.g., hydrogen, methanol) by oxygen or other oxidizing agents. At the anode and cathode of a cell, fuel and oxygen undergo oxidation and reduction reactions, respectively. An electrolyte is required to transfer protons and electrons resulting from the redox reaction. Electrons are drawn from the anode to the cathode through an external circuit, producing direct current electricity. In order to initiate and accelerate the electrochemical reactions, an appropriate catalyst is required.
Flexible graphene materials can act as catalytic supports for fuel cells because of their large specific surface area, chemical stability, high electrical conductivity, and electrochemical catalytic activity.269–271 The light-weight graphene materials also provide a new opportunity of portable fuel cells. Flexible graphene paper with electrodeposited Cu nanocubes was directly used as the anodes for hydrazine fuel cells.178 A graphene coated carbon fibre (CF) paper can also be used as a flexible support for catalysts in anodes.272 After electrodepositing porous Pd nanocatalysts on the rGO/CF paper, the hybrid catalyst exhibited high catalytic activity and stability toward ethanol oxidation. Graphene materials were also used in flexible fuel cells as catalyst supports of cathodes. For example, a nitrogen doped rGO/CNT/Co3O4 paper was fabricated for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).273 Apart from the role of the catalyst support, the incorporation of nitrogen atoms into graphene can provide catalytic sites for the ORR. CNTs were sandwiched between graphene nanosheets to prevent the restacking of graphene sheets and improve the electrical conductivity of the cathode. The flexible catalyst paper showed better durability and tolerance to methanol poisoning effects than that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst.
More recently, graphene materials have also been explored for use in flexible microbial fuel cells, bacteria within the microbial fuel cell naturally decompose the organic wastes in water to generate electricity.19,274 For example, Hussain et al. reported a micrometer-sized microbial fuel cell comprised of a graphene anode, an air cathode, and a rubber substrate for flexibility.274 The as-fabricated microbial fuel cell was able to generate 1 nW of power from microliters of liquid. Another example is a rGO/nickel foam (NF) anode material used to fabricate microbial fuel cells (Fig. 8a–e).19 The rGO/NF anode was prepared by refluxing a NF in an aqueous GO solution at 120 °C in an autoclave, followed by annealing at 400 °C. This rGO–NF anode provided not only a large surface area for microbial colonization and electron mediators, but also a uniform macro-porous scaffold for effective mass diffusion of the culture medium. The 3D flexible microbial fuel cell produced a power density of 661 W m−3, and this value is one of the highest for microbial fuel cells. This cell is highly bendable, foldable and scalable.
 Fig. 8  (a) A schematic diagram illustrating the preparation of the rGO–Ni anode. (b and c) SEM images and digital pictures (insets) of plain NF and rGO–NF. Scale bars are 200 μm. (d) Digital picture of a curved rGO–NF. Inset: rGO–NF rolled up into a cylindrical shape. (e) Maximum volumetric power densities collected for MFC devices with rGO–X–Ni electrodes as anodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19. 

Challenges. 
Flexible liquid fuel cells are expected to have potential applications in hybrid vehicles and portable electric devices. However, the development of these cells is hindered by the lack of appropriate flexible catalyst supports and packaging materials. In order to practically achieve portable fuel cells used in vehicles and electronics, the designs of electrodes need to be innovated greatly. Furthermore, the safe and continuous feeding of liquid fuels into the cells is a big challenge. Fuel cells with large and stable energy outputs are also urgently required for practical applications. To satisfy this requirement, efficient catalysts with large accessible surface areas, good stability and strong activities need to be developed.

3.3 Actuators
An actuator is a mechanical device for moving or manipulating a system; it can convert external energy to mechanical energy. Actuators have been adopted in various flexible devices, including medical devices,275 switches,276 microrobotics,277 artificial muscles,278,279 shape memory materials,28,280etc. Traditional actuation materials such as memory alloys and piezoelectric ceramics have restrictions in flexible devices. In recent years, several groups have developed graphene-based flexible actuators that are responsive to electrical,281,282 electrochemical,193,283 acoustic,284,285 humid,286 pH,287 thermal,288 and optical289,290 stimuli.
Carefully controlling the folding and unfolding of crumpled graphene films is a facile way to design a flexible actuator. For example, a graphene–polymer laminate was fabricated by transferring a graphene thin film onto a stretched elastomer film (pre-strain 200–400%).291 Upon relaxing the elastomer, a graphene layer with wrinkles and delaminated buckles was formed (Fig. 9). The flexibility restored in crumpled graphene enables fabrication of an artificial-muscle actuator. After stretching the elastomer film to a pre-strain of 450%, two thin graphene films were transferred on its top and bottom surfaces. Then the elastomer film was relaxed to a strain of 300%. Successively, a direct-current voltage was applied between graphene films, the elastomer developed an electric field generating an electrostatic stress. This stress deformed the laminate by reducing its thickness and increasing its area for over 100%. Once the voltage was withdrawn, the graphene–elastomer laminate is restored to its unstrained state. The transmittance of the laminate varied between 40 and 60% during actuation, yielding an artificial muscle with tunable transparency. By controlling the microscopic morphology of graphene, this flexible graphene-based actuator can make a visible nanoscale movement.
 Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM images of patterns developed on the graphene sheet: first wrinkles form (a), then delaminated buckles as the substrate is uniaxially relaxed, (b) followed by crumples as the substrate is biaxially relaxed, (c) which unfold as the substrate is biaxially stretched back (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 291. 
Ionic polymer/metal composites are a representative class of materials for electrochemically stimulated actuators. In a typical device, an ion-exchange polymer membrane was sandwiched between two noble metal electrodes. During the actuation process, ion migration upon the driving of applied electric field caused the swelling of the cathode side, and the contraction of the anode side; thus the actuator bends. However, the traditional ionic polymer/metal composite based actuators are usually unstable because of the cracking of metallic electrodes. An ionic polymer–graphene actuator with asymmetric graphene paper electrodes is developed to solve this durability problem.136 The asymmetric graphene paper has a smooth outer surface without apparent cracks during a long-term test. One side of the rGO paper was further reduced by laser-scribe to form a rough inner surface, making the actuator has an unsymmetrical structure. The performance of the actuator was stable even after 2000 cycles of bending with a radius of 10 mm, which is superior to those of traditional ionic polymers. We also designed flexible polypyrrole (PPy)/sulfonated graphene (SG)/rGO tri-layer films as an asymmetric actuator.292 PPy and rGO acted as actuation and conductive inert layers. The SG layer was used to enhance the interfacial interactions. The flexible graphene based actuator exhibited stable actuating performance for over 1000 actuation cycles, and the lifetime of the actuator was tested to be about 5000 cycles. The bending angle of the actuator is larger than 360° and its movement rate was higher than 150° s−1.
Photo-induced actuation technology offers many advantages over traditional electrically driven actuators, such as remote energy transfer, better scalability, low electromagnetic noise, easy construction, and the capability of working in harsh environments. The excellent optical properties of graphene thin films render them great potential for the fabrication of optical actuators.293–295 For example, a graphene/chitosan solution was coated onto a polyethylene (PE) film, forming a homogeneous brown and nearly transparent strip.289 The transparency of the film ensures the interaction of photons. Graphene efficiently harvested infrared (IR) light, which was converted to thermal energy. In this actuator, the difference of thermal expansion of polymers provided the driving force for actuation as shown in Fig. 10a. The on–off switching of IR light led to the switching of the motion states for the head and rear edge of the strip under the periodically external stimulation, exhibiting a worm-like motion (Fig. 10b). Moreover, the graphene-based transparent actuator is flexible even under rapid stimuli. Upon the excitation of 10 mW cm−2 infrared light at a frequency of 1 Hz, this actuator could be repeated for movement for at least 1000 times, with only about 15% fading in the recovery rate.
 Fig. 10  (a) The photographs show the microrobot picking, lifting, moving, and placing the object to a nearby container by turning on and off the infrared light. (b) Time course of the typical walking worm due to the on–off switching modulation of the friction modes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 289. 

Challenges. 
Graphene materials showed great application potential in flexible actuators simulated by temperature,286,288 pH,287 voice,284etc. However, compared with other fields of graphene research, the studies of graphene-based flexible actuators are still insufficient. The actuation mechanisms need to be investigated more clearly for the design of new actuators with practical importance. Furthermore, the performances of most graphene-based actuators are still unsatisfactory; their actuation strains, energy conversion efficiencies and lifetime are required to be improved. With the progress in material optimization and novel device design, graphene-based flexible actuators are expected to have a wide range of applications, including artificial muscles, robots, micro-electromechanical systems, etc.

3.4 Nanogenerators
Nanogenerators (NGs) have been developed on the basis of piezoelectric or pyroelectric effects of nanomaterials to effectively harvest energy.296,297 These materials can convert mechanical or thermal energy into electrical energy for portable electronic devices that require low power. For this purpose, piezoelectric semiconductors such as ZnO, CdS, and GaN have been intensively studied and demonstrated in prototype devices.197,298,299 However, these inorganic nanomaterials usually have short lifetime upon repeated deformation. Besides, the opaque property of traditional piezoelectric materials is an obstacle for the application in touch screens and wearable skins. The atomically layered structure of two-dimensional graphene sheets with high mechanical elasticity and high transparency make them promising for preparing flexible and/or rollable transparent piezoelectric power generators.300–302
PVDF–graphene composite films were prepared by casting PVDF/GO solution and successively treated by thermal reduction.303 The dielectric constant of the composite prepared from the blend containing 0.1 wt% GO is much higher than that of PVDF. The PVDF/rGO-based NG generated a maximum power of 36 nW. In order to further improve the performance of this NG, CVD-grown graphene films were transferred onto the both surfaces of a poly(vinylidene fluoride trifluoroethylene) [P(VDF-TrFE)] layer.304 This NG is flexible for energy harvesting: rollable, stretchable, foldable, and twistable. When the NG was exposed to sound waves, piezoelectric voltages were generated because of sound pressures. These voltages drive carriers from the graphene electrodes to the external circuits to form measurable currents. The output power of the stretchable NG was 30 times higher than that of a normal graphene NG on a poly(ethylene naphthalate) (PEN) substrate under the same input sound pressure.
Most of the flexible NGs are designed for harvesting mechanical energy, however, a few of them are able to harvest thermal energy. Recently, Kim, et al.305 fabricated a highly stretchable NG collecting both mechanical and thermal energies because of the high electrical and thermal conductivities of graphene. A micro-line patterned Si wafer was used to deposit the composite film of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and CNTs. Then, this composite film was peeled off into a free-standing state and spin-coated with a layer of P(VDF-TrFE). Successively, a CVD-grown graphene was deposited onto the P(VDF-TrFE)-CNT/PDMS layer (Fig. 11a). The NG based on this multilayer composite film is highly stretchable (Fig. 11b) and compatible with different parts of the human body (Fig. 11c), making it suitable for applications in robotics, and wearable or biomedical devices. The graphene layer generated pyroelectric output signals driven by a temperature gradient, and it can also collect the piezoelectric output induced by stretching/releasing (Fig. 11d). Importantly, this NG is stable as it was stretched for 30%, making it promising for applications in wearable electronic devices and artificial skins. In addition to PVDF, some other piezoelectric materials such as semiconductor ZnO306,307 and PZT materials308 also showed great potential for applications in graphene based flexible NGs.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the device. (b) Photo image of the HSNG. (c) Photo images of the HSNG at various locations of the human body, showing good compatibility of the device with various parts of body, and (d) piezoelectric output voltage from the HSNG under stretch-release conditions, and pyroelectric output voltage under a thermal gradient (heat and cool). Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. 
Recently, a new type of power-generating device that can convert mechanical energy into triboelectricity has also been explored.223 Flexible triboelectric NGs based on monolayer and few-layer CVD-grown graphene have been fabricated, and their output voltages and output current densities were measured under mechanical strains. Initially, the device is electrically neutral and no charge is generated on the surfaces of PET and graphene. When a vertical compressive force was applied to the top surface of the device, the surface of the PET layer rubbed that of the graphene layer. Thus, triboelectric charges with opposite signs were generated because of the electron injection from graphene to PET induced by the thermal energy caused by rubbing contact. The monolayer graphene flexible device exhibited a high output voltage and output current density of 5 V and 500 nA cm−2, respectively. This graphene NG showed high flexibility, stretchability, and adjustability of graphene because of its crumpled substrate.

Challenges. 
Graphene-based NGs provide an important route to develop durable energy sources for various flexible, stretchable and wearable electronic devices. However, these devices are mainly based on the composites with traditional piezoelectric materials, some of them are fragile and unstable. The fabrication processes of these NGs are still too complicated to scale up into industrial levels. Thus, a facile and cheap technique that can produce flexible graphene materials for constructing NG devices is urgently required. For practical portable and flexible applications, the output power and voltage of the NGs need to be greatly increased and their long-term mechanical and electrical stability requires to be improved. New strategies toward the design and package of graphene based NGs are also important in the aspects of science and technology.

4. Flexible graphene devices for energy storage
The production, storage, and consumption of sustainable energies are big challenges faced by human beings. For this purpose, a great deal of effort has been devoted to increasing the efficiencies of energy storage.31,309,310 Graphene and its composites have superior electrical and mechanical properties, large SSAs, good chemical stability and broad electrochemical windows.311 Therefore, they have great potential for applications in the devices of energy storage such as SCs and LIBs.1,31,213 Furthermore, the excellent flexibility of graphene materials possibly can provide the devices with good performances under deformed conditions.215 In the following section, we will summarize the advancements and discuss the challenges of graphene devices for energy storage (Table 2).
Table 2 Graphene materials and their flexible SCs




Graphene material
Synthesis method
Performance
Flexibility
Ref.



C




P




E








a 
C – specific capacitance.
b 
P – power density.
c 
E – energy density.





rGO film
Brush-coating/annealing
81.7 F g−1
1.5 kW kg−1
7.13 W h kg−1
Bendable

317



rGO/cellulose paper
Thermal expansion/filtration
120 F g−1
60 μW cm−2
15 μW h cm−2
1000 bending cycles r = 4 mm

318



rGO/CNT
Electrophoretic deposition
151.0 F g−1
5.8 W kg−1
14.5 W h kg−1
Bending angle: 120°

319



rGO/Nafion/RuO2
Casting
160 F g−1




1000 bending cycles (r = 2.2 mm)

322



MnO2–rGO/CFP
Spray-coating
393 F g−1




Bendable

323



rGO fibre
Wet-spinning/annealing
409 F g−1
25 kW kg−1
14 W h kg−1
Can be woven

329



rGO fibre
Spinning/laser irradiation
1.2 mF cm−2
3.6–9 × 10−2 W cm−2
2–5.4 × 10−4 W h cm−2
160 bending cycles

326



GF/3D graphene network fibre
Electrochemical deposition
1.7 mF cm−2
10−4 W cm−2
1.7 × 10−7 W h cm−2
500 bending cycles (r = 2 mm)

111



Polymer-wrapped rGO fibre
Wet-spinning
269 mF cm−2
0.02 mW cm−2
5.91 μW h cm−2
1000 bending cycles, bending angles 180°

331



rGO paper
Hard templating/vacuum filtration
92.7 F g−1




Bendable

332



MnO2/graphene paper
Hard templating/vacuum filtration
389 F g−1
25 kW kg−1
44 W h kg−1
Bendable

333



rGO paper
Water templating/vacuum filtration
215.0 F g−1
776.8 kW kg−1
150.9 W h kg−1
Bendable

334



rGO foam paper
Leaven strategy/vacuum filtration
110 F g−1




Twisted or bent

120



CNF/rGO paper
CNF spacer/vacuum filtration
207 F g−1




Bending angle 180°

336



CNF/rGO paper
LbL assembly
1.73 mF cm−2




Bendable

337



rGO/CNT paper
Vacuum filtration
265 F g−1




Bendable

339



rGO/PANI nanofibre paper
Vacuum filtration
210 F g−1




Bent or be shaped

158



rGO/MnO2 paper
Template free
243 F g−1
3.8 mW cm−2
11.5 μW h cm−2



343



Graphene/CNFs/ MnO2 network
CVD growth/microwave heating
946 F g−1


53.4 W h kg−1
100 bending cycles from 0° to 180°

351



rGO and graphene film
CVD growth/LbL assembly
394 μF cm−2







354



rGO film
Electrophoretic photolithography
285 F g−1
324 W cm−3
31.9 mW h cm−3
Bending distance 2.2–1 cm

355



MnO2/rGO film
Vacuum filtration
267 F g−1
2520 W kg−1
17 W h kg−1



356



rGO/GO film
Drop-casting/laser-scribing
2.35 F cm−3
200 W cm−3


1000 bending cycles (r = 7 mm) and 1000 twisting cycles (angle = 90°)

137





4.1 Supercapacitors
Nowadays, energy storage devices are creating new services and products to revolutionize our daily life.5,312 Among various flexible energy storage technologies, SCs (also called electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors) have been considered as one of the most promising candidates because of their high specific power density (>10000 W kg−1), fast charge–discharge processes (within a second) and long cycling life (>105). SCs can be classified into double layer SCs and pseudocapacitors. SCs store charges at the interfaces of the electrodes and electrolyte to form electrical double layers. Alternatively, the pseudocapacitors store energies by reversible redox reactions at the surfaces of their electrode materials. Flexible SCs usually require integration of thin-film electrode materials on flexible substrates, exhibiting not only excellent electrochemical performances, but also high mechanical integrity upon bending, folding and/or even rolling.
Typically, a flexible SC consists of a bendable plastic package, positive/negative electrodes (symmetric or asymmetric),313,314 an electrolyte (liquid or solid),22,315,316 and a separator (the bottom of Fig. 12). In comparison with the conventional SCs (the top of Fig. 12), flexible SCs have been simplified by removing independent current collectors, conductive additives and binders for connecting electroactive powder materials. Graphene-based fibres, free-standing films and 3D porous architectures have been explored for applications in flexible SCs as electrode materials. The graphene component provides flexible electrode materials with highly conductive scaffolds for charge transfer and large specific surface area for the access of the electrolyte or immobilizing other functional materials. The high mechanical properties of graphene materials also provide flexibility and stability to SCs.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustrations of (a) the typical components of conventional SCs and (b) carbon-based flexible SCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. 

4.1.1 Substrate supported graphene electrodes. 
Graphene flexible electrodes can be prepared by depositing graphene materials on flexible substrates such as papers, sponges, and textiles. This is a simple and cheap process that can be easily scaled up into industrial levels. Yan et al.317 fabricated graphene electrodes simply by brush-coating GO inks on cotton cloth and further treated by annealing. The flexible SC with these electrodes showed a specific capacitance of 81.7 F g−1 (calculated from the CV curve at 10 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte). Similarly, graphene/cellulose paper composites have been prepared by filtering the suspension of rGO sheets into the pores of filter papers.318 The flexible SC based on these electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of 120 F g−1 (calculated from the CV curve at 1 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte) with a >99% capacitance retention for over 5000 cycles. In addition, the membrane inherited the superior mechanical flexibility of filter paper, and its resistivity showed only 6% increase after bending to a radius of curvature of 4 mm 1000 times.
The incorporation of CNTs into rGO can partly prevent the restacking of graphene sheets; thus increasing the SSA of the electrode material. A rGO/CNT composite was coated on the surface of a carbon cloth (CC) by electrophoretic deposition.319 The specific capacitance of the SC with rGO/CNT/CC electrodes was 151.0 F g−1 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte), which was 2.5 times higher than that of the rGO/carbon cloth electrode (58.8 F g−1). The performances of the SC before and after the bending (around 120°) were measured to be nearly identical, indicating the flexibility of this device. Transition-metal oxides such as RuO2, NiO, and MnO2 (ref. 192, 320 and 321) have been studied extensively as electrode materials for SCs because of their large pseudocapacitances. However, the low conductivities of these materials limit their practical applications. Therefore, graphene/metal oxide composites have been widely explored for flexible SCs. The typical composites electrodes include rGO/RuO2 films on PET (Fig. 13a and b)322 and rGO/MnO2 films on carbon fibre paper (Fig. 13c and d).323 The SCs maintained the flexibility of graphene materials and exhibited improved specific capacitances attributed to redox reactions.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photograph of a flexible CMG-SC and a schematic diagram of a SC device. (b) CVs of the CMG-SC at the bent and relaxed states with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (c) Top: low magnification SEM image of MnO2–rGO coated on CFP. Bottom: A 2 × 14 cm all-solid-state prototype of the MnO2–rGO/CFP SC supplying electricity to a 3 V spinning motor. (d) Capacity retention of as-prepared electrodes over 2000 cycles of galvanostatic charge–discharge tests. Reprinted with permission from ref. 322 and 323. 


4.1.2 Fabric graphene electrodes. 
The recent developments of portable electronics demand a high integration level of different components. For this purpose, fibre based devices are highly expected. GFs are usually strong, light, bendable, and chemically or electrochemically inert under ambient conditions. Thus, GFs can be woven into wearable textiles as electrodes.107,319,324–329 GFs can be prepared by wet-spinning or via a hydrothermal reduction of GO solutions and they showed high flexibility. These GF electrodes were further assembled into a yarn SC, showing a high specific capacitance of 409 F g−1 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte).329
Integrating the major components of a SC into one block is a developing trend for portable devices. A flexible single fibre SC has been fabricated through regional reduction of a spun GO fibre by laser irradiation. The rGO–GO–rGO triple layers combined major components of a SC into one fibre; rGO layers were used as the electrodes and the current collectors, GO layers were used as a solid electrolyte and separator.326 The as-prepared fibrous SC inherited the mechanical flexibility of fibres, and also exhibited a high areal specific capacitance of 1.2 mF cm−2 at a current density of 80 mA cm−2 in the case of using 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid as the electrolyte. The capacitance of this fibre SC showed only a slight fading after bending for over 160 cycles. Thus, it can be woven into the textile for wearable electronics and beyond.
A porous structure can increase the SSA of the electrode, thus improving the performance of the SC.111 A GF with a unique core–sheath hierarchical structure has been fabricated by electrochemical deposition of rGO sheets around a rGO fibre formed by hydrothermal reduction of GO dispersion. In this fibre, the rGO sheath has a 3D porous structure. An all-solid-state fibrous SC based on these fabric electrodes showed a good elasticity like a spring, highly compressible and stretchable. It showed a gravimetric capacitance of 25–40 F g−1 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at current densities of 0.1–4 A g−1 in 1 M LiClO4 aqueous solution), and these values are close to the electric double layer capacitances of activated carbon textiles (25–70 F g−1).330 Moreover, this fibre SC in the bending (radius of ∼ 2 mm) state showed a capacitance comparable to that in the straight state during 500 cycles of bending and relaxing. These ultraelastic all-graphene fibres can also be woven into a textile for various wearable electronics on a large scale.
The GFs discussed above have naked surfaces; thus the GF-based SCs are easy to be short-circuited as the electrodes are contact with each other during the process of deformation. Although post-coating a layer of the PVA electrolyte can partly reduce the probability of short circuit, the coating process is complicated and time-consuming. Kou et al. prepared polymer-wrapped graphene core–sheath fibres, which can be directly used as safe electrodes for SCs (Fig. 14a–d).331 In a typical wet-spinning process, the aqueous GO solution from the inner channel and the sodium carboxymethyl cellulose aqueous solution from the outer channel were injected into the coagulating bath. As a result, the polymer wrapped GO fibres were shaped rapidly and further reduced to a polymer wrapped GF. The yarn SC based on this polymer wrapped GF with a liquid (or solid) electrolyte showed an ultra-high areal capacitance of 269 (177) mF cm−2 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 0.1 mA cm−2) and a high energy density of 5.91 (3.84) mW h cm−2 (Fig. 14e and f). Upon bending to different angles (e.g., 45°, 90° and 180°), the changes in capacitance are negligible, reflecting that the inner structures of fibre SCs are maintained well even at a large bending angle. Furthermore, the capacitance of this fibre SC decreased by only 2% after bending 200 times. Polymer wrapped GFs were also woven into cloth to form a bendable SC (Fig. 14g–i), promising for applications in garment devices and intelligent microsensors. This work developed a safe and scalable approach to fabricate flexible yarn SCs.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration showing the coaxial spinning process. (b) A single intact wet GO@CMC fibre and its magnified image (c). (d) Polarized-light optical microscopy image of the wet GO@CMC fibre indicating the core–sheath structure and the well-aligned GO sheets in the core part. (e) CV curves of RGO + CNT@CMC, scan rates increased from 10 to 20, 50, 80, 100, 150 and 200 mV s−1. (f) GCD curves of two-ply, all-solid-state, freestanding YSCs bended with different angles at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, and the insets are the digital photos of YSCs with different bending angles. (g) Two intact coaxial fibres woven with cotton fibres. (h) Optical macroscopic image of (a). (i) Cloth woven by two individual coaxial fibres. Scale bars, 1 cm (b and g) 100 μm (c) and 200 μm (h). Reprinted with permission from ref. 331. 


4.1.3 Paper-like graphene electrodes. 
Graphene papers have shown great potential as flexible electrodes because of their facile fabrication process, low cost, large-scale production, and superior flexibility. However, the graphene papers prepared by filtration usually have low SSAs caused by the irreversible agglomeration and restacking of graphene sheets driven by π–π stacking. This will inevitably result in slow down of the diffusion of the electrolyte ions, limiting the electrochemical performances of SCs. In order to address this issue, pores or spacers have been incorporated into graphene paper to increase its SSA and promote the transport efficiencies of the electrolyte ions.
A microporous graphene film was fabricated by using a hard template strategy.332 GO precursor and PMMA microspheres were orderly assembled by vacuum filtration, followed by pyrolysis to reduce GO into rGO as well as to remove the template. This microporous rGO paper showed a much higher specific capacitance compared with that of a compact counterpart. Huh et al.333 employed the same technique to fabricate macroporous graphene films by using polystyrene (PS) colloidal particles as the template. The porous graphene paper with a large SSA facilitates ionic transport within the electrode and increased the capacitances of SCs. Water has also been used an effective “spacer” to prevent the restacking of graphene sheets.334 A graphene paper solvated with water gave a specific capacitance of up to 215.0 F g−1 (calculated from the CV curve at 0.01 V s−1 in 1.0 M aqueous H2SO4 electrolyte). Autoclaved leavening and steaming of GO layered papers can produce lightweight and electrically conductive rGO foam-like papers.120 In this process, thermal steaming of GO papers with hydrazine was the key step to form rGO foams with open pores. The specific capacitance of the SC with these rGO foam electrodes was measured to be about 110 F g−1 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at a current of 0.5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte), and this value is much larger than that of the SC with the electrodes of compact rGO papers (17 F g−1). Furthermore, the flexible rGO foams coated onto PET sheets acted as both current collectors and the SC can be twisted or bent without decreasing its performance.
To prevent the restacking of rGO sheets, carbon black (CB),335 cellulose nanofibres (CNFs),336,337 and CNTs338,339 were also intercalated into graphene papers as spacers. For example, cellulose nanofibres were blended into a CNF/rGO hybrid aerogel by supercritical CO2 drying.336 The SC based on this three-component composite paper has a specific capacitance as high as 207 F g−1 (calculated from the CV curve at 5 mV s−1 in H2SO4–PVA gel electrolyte), and its performance was nearly unchanged upon bending to 180°. Furthermore, a transparent rGO/CNF composite paper was prepared by LbL deposition of GO sheets and CNFs, and further treated by reduction.337 The SC based on these composite electrodes also showed good flexibility, without decreasing its performance upon bending. Other examples are free-standing rGO/CNT composite films prepared by in situ thermal338 or chemical reduction of GO/CNT precursors.339 In these electrodes, CNTs served not only as the spacers and the conducting bridges, but also as reinforcement fillers to improve their flexibility and electrochemical properties.
Electroactive materials are commonly used for increasing the capacitances and energy densities of graphene paper-based flexible SCs. Polyaniline (PANI),158,340,341 polypyrrole (PPy),155 and transition metal oxides or hydroxides (RuO,185 MnO2,186 V2O5,187 Mn3O4,188 Co3O4 (ref. 189)) have been explored for this purpose. We fabricated PANI nanofibre/rGO composite papers by vacuum filtration.158 A SC device based on this conductive flexible paper showed a high specific capacitance (210 F g−1 at 0.3 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte) and good flexibility. Hollow PPy spheres have also been sandwiched between graphene layers to form a sandwich porous composite.342 This graphene/PPy nanoarchitecture delivered an excitingly high specific capacitance of 504.5 F g−1 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 5 A g−1 in 2 M H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte), about 5 times that (93.1 F g−1) of pure rGO paper even after charging/discharging for 10000 cycles. Among the pseudocapacitive oxides of transition metals, MnO2 has been paid the most intensive attention because of its low cost, environmental friendliness and high theoretical specific capacitance (1370 F g−1).186,333,187,343,344 Lee et al. reported the fabrication of a flexible rGO/MnO2 paper electrode by vacuum filtration.343 The specific capacitance of this electrode was measured to be as high as 897 mF cm−2 (243 F g−1) (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 50 mA g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte), which is among the highest values of other flexible carbon-based and MnO2/carbon-based electrodes.21,121,179,312,344–346 Moreover, these graphene paper electrodes exhibited remarkable flexibility, making them bendable to any desired angles. The performance of this device remained unchanged even if it was bent to a radius of 1.2 cm.


4.1.4 Graphene electrodes with 3D porous architectures. 
Recently, to further improve the performance of flexible SCs, a great deal of attention has been paid to graphene-based 3D porous architectures such as hydrogels, aerogels, foams and sponges.117,118,122,137,347–350 These 3D macrostructures, consisting of micro-, meso- and even macropores, can provide electrodes with high SSAs, light weight, and fast ion/electron transport. However, most of these materials are too fragile to be used in bendable and stretchable SCs. He et al.351 fabricated a freestanding, lightweight, flexible and mechanically robust 3D graphene material. In this case, CNT arrays were deposited onto 3D graphene networks by a CVD method, and then their surface was decorated with MnO2 nanosheets (Fig. 15a and b). Simultaneously, the interconnected porous 3D structure of graphene/CNT/MnO2 provided uninterrupted accessible surfaces for forming electrical double layers and transporting both electrons and electrolyte ions to minimize electron accumulation and ion-diffusing resistances. Thus, the SC with these electrodes showed a high specific capacitance of 946 F g−1 (calculated from the CV curve at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 in 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte) (Fig. 15c). This flexible SC provided a maximum energy density of 53.4 W h kg−1, which can drive a digital clock for 42 min. Inspiringly, its performance showed little changes (less than 1%) at bending from 0° to 180° or to 90° for 100 bending/releasing cycles (Fig. 15b).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of a 3D micro/nanointerconnected structure as a flexible SC electrode. (b) Electrical resistance for 3D graphene/CNF networks at the different bending angles. The inset shows the digital photographs of the 3D graphene/CNF networks with different bending shapes. (c) CVs of a 3D graphene/CNFs/MnO2 composite electrode with a fixed areal mass density of 0.1 mg cm−2 at different scan rates. (d) Schematic structure of the flexible SC consisting of a polymer separator, two PET membranes, and two asymmetric graphene-based electrodes. The left bottom digital photograph shows the flexibility of the device during bending operations. The right bottom digital photograph shows a digital clock driven by the flexible SC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. 


4.1.5 Planar SCs (microcapacitors). 
Conventional micro-fabrication techniques have proven to be cumbersome in building cost-effective micro-devices, thus limiting their practical applications. Recently, considerable efforts have been made for synthesizing flexible micro-SCs for emerging electronic devices.352,353 Planar SCs are regarded as a novel type of micro-SC, requiring integration of the electrode material, electrolyte, and current collector onto the same plane. The planar configuration designs offer planar channels for electrolyte ions, facilitating fast ion transport in the 2D electrodes. Furthermore, the planar configuration would not affect the ion transport when the SCs are folded or rolled. Yoo et al.354 reported the first “in-plane” ultrathin SCs comprised of pristine graphene and multilayer rGO. Specifically, the pristine CVD-graphene and rGO films were alternately deposited onto a flexible copper foil by LbL deposition. The large conductive planar sheet of graphene was then separated into two electrodes with a physically created micrometer-sized gap by cutting with a pair of scissors. A polymer gel electrolyte served as both an ionic electrolyte and a separator. Such planar SC devices are compact, ultrathin, flexible, and optically transparent. The ultrathin architecture of graphene edges enabled the formation of a thinnest device, consisting of 1–2 graphene layers, to achieve a specific capacitance up to 80 μF cm−2 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 281 nA cm−2). Furthermore, a much higher specific capacitance (394 μF cm−2) was obtained by using multilayered graphene electrodes. This planar SC established a pioneering example of designing chip-scale energy devices with portable and flexible applications. Furthermore, an all-solid-state planar SC based on micro-patterned ultrathin rGO electrodes was developed.355 A SC with a length of 2.2 cm did not show a significant change in its capacitance after bending to a state with a two-end distance of 1.0 cm.
Ultrathin 2D nanomaterials represented a promising platform to realize highly flexible planar energy storage devices as the power suppliers for stretchable/flexible electronic devices. A high-performance planar SC based on the hybrid nanostructures of 2D ultrathin MnO2/graphene was reported by Peng and co-workers.356 The planar structures based on the MnO2 nanosheets integrated on graphene sheets not only introduced more electrochemically active species, but also brought additional interfaces at the hybridized interlayer areas. The MnO2/graphene film was deposited onto a PET substrate and it was scrapped with narrow gaps to form separated electrodes. This planar SC showed performance superior to that of a graphene-only device, exhibiting a high specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 (calculated from the charge–discharge curve at 0.2 A g−1 in the PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte), and a capacitance retention of 92% after charging/discharging for 7000 cycles. Moreover, the high malleability of this planar SC provided it with excellent flexibility and robust cyclability, yielding capacitance retention over 90% after 1000 times of folding/unfolding.
A scalable fabrication of planar SCs over large areas was achieved by direct laser writing on GO films using a LightScribe DVD burner (Fig. 16a).137,267 The conductive rGO electrodes were separated by insulating GO lines on a PET substrate. After introducing the electrolyte and encapsulation with Kapton tape, a plane of multisites of SCs was obtained. This technique can produce more than 100 micro-SCs on a single disc within 30 min (Fig. 16b).137 Remarkably, miniaturizing devices to the microscale resulted in an enhancement of the charge-storage capacity and improvement in the rate capability of these SCs. This is mainly due to the fact that the microscale structure minimized the distances of ion diffusion from the electrolyte to the electrode materials. Furthermore, the more the electrodes per unit area, the more the power and energy that can be delivered by these micro-devices. These micro-SCs demonstrated a power density of ∼200 W cm−3, which is among the highest values achieved for any SC. This device showed a capacitance retention of 97% after bending to a radius of 7 mm for 1000 cycles, followed by another 1000 cycles of twisting to 90° (Fig. 16e and f). This single-step fabrication technique avoids the time consuming and labor-intensive process of conventional microfabrication. Furthermore, these microcapacitors can be directly integrated on-chip, allowing them to extract energies from solar, mechanical and thermal sources.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram showing the fabrication process for an LSG micro-SC. (b) This technique has the potential for the direct writing of micro-devices with high areal density. More than 100 micro-devices can be produced on a single run. The micro-devices are completely flexible and can be produced on virtually any substrate. (c) A digital photograph of the laser-scribed micro-devices with 4, 8 and 16 interdigitated electrodes. (d) A tilted-view (45°) SEM image shows the direct reduction and expansion of the GO film after exposure to the laser beam. Scale bar, 10 μm. (e, f) Bending/twisting the device has almost no effect on its performance, as can be seen from these CVs collected under different bending and twisting conditions at 1000 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. 
Challenges. 
Recent advancements in flexible SCs have inspired the exploration of new graphene electrode materials with superior electrochemical performances and excellent mechanical strengths and good flexibility. Several strategies have been developed to improve the performances of SCs: (1) reducing the thicknesses of electrode materials to attain high gravimetric capacitance; (2) increasing the accessible SSAs of electrodes to provide more reaction sites, and accumulate more charges in electrical double layers; (3) optimizing the microchannels for the facile diffusion of ions. However, the optimization of the whole configuration of a SC including its electrodes, electrolyte, and current collectors is also important. Various methods have been developed for decreasing the thicknesses of SCs to improve their flexibility and specific capacitances; however, the problem of short circuits in the devices without separators cannot be absolutely avoided. Moreover, effectively maintaining the performance of a flexible SC at serious deformations still remains a big challenge.

4.2 Lithium batteries
Flexible lithium batteries (LIBs) are attractive power sources of foldable or wearable electronic devices because of their high energy and power densities, and long-term stability.1,4 They are expected to have practical applications in roll-up displays, touch screens, conformable active radio-frequency identification tags, wearable sensors and implantable medical devices.1 High-performance LIBs should have small sizes, lightweight and long cycling lives. Therefore, active electrode materials should have high energy densities and the amounts of non-active additives in the whole cells should be minimized. Thus, flexible electrodes are usually made from various functional organic and/or inorganic materials immobilized on flexible conductive membrane substrates without conductive additives and binders. Flexible polymer solid membranes are commonly used as both separators and electrolytes. Packing materials for flexible LIBs are usually thin polymer films. The selection, assembly and suitable layout of electrode materials, the separator and packages are central issues in developing high-performance flexible LIBs. Although a great deal of effort has been devoted to developing flexible LIBs, this field still remains in its early stage, and a suitable selection and integration of component materials has not yet been demonstrated. To synthesize flexible LIBs, flexible electrodes are needed to be able to deliver a capacity beyond a certain level to operate conventional portable devices, and reversibly deform without decreasing their performance. Major technical barriers of changing conventional LIBs into flexible counterparts are summarized as follows. (1) Intrinsically powdery properties of electrode materials; (2) poor contacts between constituent materials; (3) low loading amounts of electrode materials; and (4) electrolyte leakage. To address these issues, graphene materials are a promising option and we summarize the progress in graphene based flexible LIBs in this section (Table 3).
Table 3 Graphene materials and their flexible LIBs




Flexible material
Synthesis method
Capacity
Flexibility
Ref.




rGO paper
Vacuum filtration
214 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1
Bendable

359



rGO/CNT paper
Vacuum filtration and annealing
375 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1
Bendable

360



rGO paper
Nitric acid under sonication and vacuum filtration
400 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1
Bendable

361



rGO paper
Vacuum filtration and laser reduction
370 mA h g−1 at 1.86 A g−1
Bendable

362



rGO paper
Freeze-drying and pressing
864 mA h g−1 1 at 100 mA g−1
Bendable

363



rGO/DODA film on PET
Coating and breath figure
1600 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1
Bendable

364



Graphene on Cu foil
CVD growth
0.06 mA h cm−2 at 100 mA cm−2
Bendable (r<1 mm)

366



rGO/Si hybrid paper
Vacuum filtration
>2200 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1
Bendable

370



rGO/Si hybrid paper
Vacuum filtration
3200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
Bendable

372



rGO/TiO2 hybrid paper
Hydrothermal treatment
175 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1
Bendable

191



V2O5/rGO paper
Filtration and annealing
283 mA h g−1
Bendable

385



V2O5/rGO paper
Filtration
806.6 mA h g−1
Bendable

309



FeF3/rGO paper
Vacuum filtration and photothermal reduction
587 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1
Bendable

386



3D graphene foam
Hydrothermal treatment
170 mA h g−1 at 145 mA g−1
Bendable (r = 5 mm)

387



rGO paper
Vacuum filtration
1393 mA h g−1
Bendable

399



Graphene foam
Electrochemical leavening and annealing
340 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1



400






4.2.1 Anodes. 
Graphene papers fabricated by vacuum filtration of rGO aqueous dispersions were the most widely used graphene flexible electrode materials.52,357 Wallace's group firstly used these materials as anodes for flexible LIBs,358 and they delivered a reversible capacity of approximately 240 mA h g−1.309,358 A lightweight non-annealed graphene anode was prepared by hydrazine reduction of a GO paper.359 Although the cycling stability of the rGO electrode was improved, its capacity and rate capability were still unsatisfactory. rGO sheets tended to agglomerate during the process of reducing and drying GO paper because of the π-stacking interaction. The stacking of rGO sheets greatly reduced the accessible surface area of the electrode to electrolyte. To address this problem, CNTs were introduced into graphene sheets to prevent rGO restacking, allowing more effective contact between the electrolyte and graphene in the interior of the graphene anode, increasing the conductivity of rGO paper and simultaneously storing Li atoms.360
Holey graphene sheets have been synthesized by the treatment of GO sheets with nitric acid under sonication.361 The pores improved the access of the electrolyte to the interior of the graphene anode and thus enhanced the kinetics of electrochemical reactions. Koratkar et al. also reported a laser-reduced graphene paper as a high-rate anode for LIBs.362 These techniques induced micro-pores, cracks, and inter-sheet voids in graphene paper.
As a result, lithium ions can easily diffuse into the graphene anode from the electrolyte, enhancing lithium intercalation kinetics even at ultrafast charge/discharge rates, showing a maximum capacity of 370 mA h g−1. Liu et al. prepared a folded graphene paper with an interconnected porous network by mechanically pressing a graphene aerogel.363 The first charge and discharge capacities of this graphene paper were measured to be as high as 1091 and 864 mA h g−1. After 100 charging/discharging cycles, a reversible capacity of 568 mA h g−1 was maintained. Yin et al. assembled graphene sheets into honeycomb structures through a “breath figure” approach (Fig. 17a), which showed high conductivity, porosity, robustness and mechanical stability.364 This honeycomb graphene electrode exhibited a large reversible capacity (1600 mA h g−1, and 1150 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles), highlighting the advantages of bioinspired hierarchical structures for high-performance LIBs. Porosity is important for improving the capacity and cycling performance of a disordered carbon anode material, because a porous framework can significantly decrease the diffusion distance of lithium ions into the disordered graphene layers; thus enhancing the charge/discharge rate performance of rechargeable LIBs (Fig. 17b–f). Furthermore, the flexible PET substrate contributed to the bendable use of these films.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic drawing of the preparation of the honeycomb structured film based on GO. (b) Photograph of the honeycomb film on the glass. (c) Photograph of the honeycomb-patterned film on the copper foil. (d and e) SEM images of the honeycomb-patterned film prepared from 1 mg mL−1 of the GO/DODA complex on the silicon wafer. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of the honeycomb-patterned film on the copper foil. Reprinted with permission from ref. 364. 
CVD-graphene films were also used to fabricate flexible anodes because of their high electrical conductivity and few structural defects.365,366 A mechanically flexible all-solid-state battery was made by using monolayer graphene grown directly on Cu foil.366 The total thickness of the resulting battery was around 50 μm. Such an ultrathin battery showed a high volumetric energy density of 10 W h L−1 and a high power density of 300 W L−1. It also showed an excellent cycling stability, maintaining a discharge current density of 100 μA cm−2 and an aerial capacity >0.02 mA h cm−2 for 100 cycles. The flexible graphene anode on Cu foil can be bendable (radius of less than 1 mm) and twisted with negligible change in its performance.
On the other hand, graphene paper/film anodes usually suffer from a large irreversible capacity, low initial efficiency and fast capacity fading. This is mainly due to the re-stacking of graphene sheets and side reactions between graphene and electrolytes arising from the functional groups and defects of graphene sheets. The discharge curves of graphene anodes also cannot give voltage plateaus for providing stable potential outputs. Thus, there is a large hysteresis (strong polarization) between the charge–discharge curves. To address this problem, an electrochemically active component with high capacity and good cycling stability has to be introduced to the graphene anode.367
This technique at least has two advantages: (1) the blended electroactive material can not only suppress the agglomeration and re-stacking of graphene sheets, but also increase the accessible surface area for electrochemical reactions, enhancing the electrochemical activity; (2) the second electroactive material can be uniformly immobilized on the graphene surface, leading to fast ion transport and consequently improving the electrochemical/mechanical performances.
Si is one of the most promising anode materials for LIBs because of its abundance in nature, low cost, low discharge potential and a high theoretical specific capacity of 4200 mA h g−1.368,369 Thus, Si nanoparticles loaded on a graphene 3D network as the anode for LIBs showed a high Li storage capacity and cycling stability.370 The assembled LIB exhibited a capacity of 2200 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles and 1500 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles, decreasing by <0.5% per cycle. In this case, the graphene network functioned as a flexible mechanical support for strain release, offering electrically conducting channels. The nanosized silicon provided a higher stable capacity (708 mA h g−1) than that of the cell with pure graphene (304 mA h g−1).371 Further treatment of graphene by acid-sonication can introduce more vacancies to immobilize more Si nanoparticles.372 In this film anode, Si nanoparticles were encapsulated into the graphene porous scaffold. The flexible graphene anode material showed an extremely high reversible capacity of 3200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 with a 99.9% retention for over 150 cycles. Particularly, this anode has a high rate capacity, it can be charged within 8 min, among the highest performance of graphene-based LIBs. Si nanowires (NWs) are able to accommodate large strain without pulverization, providing good electronic contacts with the current collector, and displaying short lithium insertion distances because of their 1D nanostructures.368 A self-supporting flexible anode paper was prepared by filtration and reduction of the mixed dispersion of GO sheets and Si NWs.373 In this composite paper, overlapped graphene sheets were coated on Si NWs as adaptable sealed sheaths, preventing the direct exposure of encapsulated Si NWs to the electrolyte and enabling the structural stabilization of this material. As-prepared flexible LIBs based on this anode exhibited a high reversible specific capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1, and 80% capacity retention after 100 cycles.
Metal oxide particles that can store lithium through conversion reactions have also attracted a great deal of interest because of their high specific capacities.374–376 Transition metal oxides such as Fe2O3 nanoparticles,376 Fe3O4 spindles,377 Co3O4 nanosheets378 and MnO2 nanotubes379 were homogeneously incorporated with graphene sheets through vacuum filtration to prepare flexible hybrid films. These hybrid papers were used as anodes in flexible LIBs, and exhibited high specific capacity, good rate capability and promising cycling stability. This is mainly due to the tight interfacial adhesion of the additives to the graphene conductive network, providing porosity for both buffering volume expansion and rapid ion transport.
Another lithium storage mechanism of metal oxides is based on a lithium ion intercalation reaction, and TiO2 is a typical example.380,381 Lithium intercalation and extraction with a small lattice change (less than 4%) ensured the structural stability and cycling life. Hu et al. reported a novel ex situ approach to fabricate flexible graphene/TiO2 hybrid paper with a high mass loading of oxide.191 The intercalation of TiO2 nanoparticles into a solvated graphene paper led to the formation of an open 3D porous structure with a well maintained paper geometry and flexibility. As-fabricated LIBs using a hybrid paper electrode showed a stable specific capacity of 122 mA h g−1 after 100 charge/discharge cycles at a current rate of 2 A g−1.


4.2.2 Cathodes. 
One of the bottlenecks for the development of high-performance LIBs is the low capacities of their cathodes.382,383 Thus, a variety of oxides have been explored as the cathode materials; however the low conductivities of oxides strongly decrease their performances. V2O5 is a typical intercalation compound because of its layered structure. It is also cheap and abundant, and has a high energy density.384 A free-standing, flexible V2O5/graphene composite film was prepared by simple filtration and annealing, and it has been used as the cathode material for LIBs.385 V2O5 nanowires were preferentially oriented along the plane of the film as they were sandwiched between stacked graphene sheets in the composite film. In a LIB cell, a composite film containing 75.8 wt% V2O5 delivered a discharge capacity of 283 and 252 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 in the first and 50th cycles, respectively. This good performance results from the integrated structure of the V2O5 network embedded in graphene materials. In this case, V2O5 acted as a Li+ host and graphene acted a conductive component. Graphene materials can be used in both the cathode and the anode of a fully flexible LIB.309 A graphene-based LIB was fabricated using flexible graphene and V2O5/graphene composite papers as the anode and cathode, respectively. The composite was prepared by pulsed laser deposition.309 The integration of graphene into the electrodes ensured not only the possibility of operating the LIB under deformation, but also provided it with electrochemical performance superior to that of the devices with conventional electrodes.
FeF3 is also an attractive cathode material of LIBs because of its high theoretical capacity (712 mA h g−1) and redox potential. A facile photothermal reduction route was developed to synthesize free-standing, flexible FeF3/graphene paper.386 This paper contains well-dispersed FeF3 nanoparticles and has a porous electrically conducting network of graphene sheets. It demonstrated promising applications as a cathode in high-energy density Li-ion batteries with a stable capacity of 580 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles at 100 mA g−1.


4.2.3 Current collectors. 
Flexible 3D graphene frameworks can be used as current collectors to load electroactive materials. In comparison with conventional metal current collectors, graphene collectors have larger specific surface areas, smaller volumes and lighter weights. For example, Li et al. fabricated a flexible LIB using Li4Ti5O12 and LiFePO4 loaded on flexible graphene foams as the anode and cathode, respectively.387 A 3D flexible and conductive interconnected GF network acted as both a highly conductive pathway for electrons/lithium ions and light current collector. The assembled flexible battery showed a high capacity (170 mA h g−1), a good rate capability and long cycling life even under repeated bending to a radius of 5 mm. The fabrication of GF and subsequent loading of active materials can be easily scaled up, indicating the possibility for large-scale fabrication of high-performance flexible batteries.

4.3 Other batteries
LIBs have achieved a great success in the past three decades, especially for portable electronic devices. However, state-of-the-art LIBs still cannot meet the crucial demands of reducing sizes, weights and costs of batteries in emerging applications, such as electric vehicles and grid-level energy storage.388 Recently, lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries are recognized as the next generation rechargeable batteries because of their high theoretical specific capacity (1672 mA h g−1) and energy density (2600 W h kg−1).389,390 However, the practical application of Li–S batteries has been plagued by several issues including the low electrical conductivity of S (5 × 10−30 S cm−1), the dissolution of soluble polysulfides in the electrolyte and the large volume change (80%) of S, leading to a low sulfur utilization efficiency and poor cycling stability.391,392 To overcome these problems, carbon materials, such as carbon nanotubes/nanofibres,393 porous carbon,394,395 hollow carbon spheres,396 and graphene397,398 have been used to immobilize S for enhancing the electrical conductivity of the S electrode and preventing the dissolution of polysulfides. Among all of these carbon materials, graphene has attracted special interest, due to its high electrical conductivity, strong mechanical properties and good chemical stability.
Free-standing graphene–sulfur composite films have been prepared via a sulfur vapor treatment of mesoporous graphene papers. They can be directly applied as electrodes of Li–S batteries without using a binder, conductive additives or an extra current collector (Fig. 18a and b).399 The porous graphene networks facilitated electron transfer and electrolyte diffusion. The Li–S battery with this sulfur–graphene paper as a cathode delivered a high discharge capacity of 1393 mA h g−1 with an enhanced cycling stability and good rate performance (Fig. 18c).
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of mesoporous graphene paper–sulfur electrodes and application as cathodes in lithium–sulfur batteries. (b) Digital photographs of the MGP paper, exhibiting an intact paper-like flexible property. (c) The cycling performance of the MGP-S and pure S electrodes. The cells were cycled at 0.1 C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 399. 
Li–O2 batteries are also one of the most promising candidates for the next generation energy storage system because of their high theoretical specific energy density (about 3500 W h kg−1). This value is one order of magnitude higher than today's LIB batteries (around 380 W h kg−1). Yan et al. developed an electrochemical leavening strategy to fabricate 3D graphene foams, further treated by inert gas reduction.400 The few structural defects in treated graphene foams are crucial to the structural stability of the O2 electrode and to acceleration of charge transfer. Thus the treated graphene foam electrode annealed at 800 °C delivered a round-trip efficiency of up to 80% compared with untreated graphene foam with an efficiency of 51%. Such few defect graphene foams were bendable for use in flexible Li–O2 batteries.

Challenges. 
Single-component electrodes such as graphene papers have been extensively explored for applications in flexible batteries. However, graphene composite electrodes are expected to have larger capacities and higher energy densities. Maintaining the performances of the composite electrodes with rigid inorganic components in their deformed state is still a topic requiring systematic studies. On the other hand, flexible graphene electrodes were often tested only in half-cells, and many full LIB cells were examined by simply bending without quantitative analysis. Therefore, in-depth performance analyses combined with mechanical tests are needed for better understanding and evaluating flexible LIBs. The fabrication of batteries with high energy/power densities, operational safety and excellent cyclic stability is still a great challenge. Lightweight, thin, flexible, stable packaging materials with excellent barrier properties are also needed to protect battery materials, electrolytes and electrochemical reactions from being affected by the external environment.

5. Integrated flexible energy systems
Integrated flexible energy systems (IFESs) have attracted increasing attention because of their diversified functions.215,401 The typical IFESs include a NG combined with a metal-ion-based wireless detector,402,403 an OPV device with the capability of energy storage,404 a LED integrated with a bendable LIB,405 and a LIB powered by a piezoelectric NG.406,407 For example, Lee et al. prepared an all-in-one flexible LED system integrated with a bendable LIB wrapped with polymers.405 A flexible photodetector based on a SnO2 cloth powered by a flexible LIB has also been reported.408 However, these devices are still too rigid and too bulky to construct lightweight and compact IFESs with satisfactory flexibility. Thus, their performances need to be improved by using new flexible materials with excellent properties such as graphene. However, graphene-based integrated flexible energy systems have rarely been reported. One typical example is the integration of a SC and a photodetector on a single fibre.409 In this system, a fibre-shaped flexible SC was used as the energy storage device, using Ti/Co3O4 wires as the positive electrode, and graphene coated on carbon fibres as the negative electrode. Graphene on carbon fibres also acted as the photosensitive material. Upon the adsorption of light, the electron–hole pairs generated in graphene were separated under the external field produced by the graphene SC. Then, the electrons and holes were transported to the positive and negative electrodes correspondingly. Therefore, the integrated self-powered sensors can be operated without an external power source. Such IFESs are important for special applications, such as wireless environmental sensing and in situ medical monitoring.
Challenges
The study on graphene-based IFESs is in its early stage and far from mature. For practical applications of these systems, at least, the following issues need to be addressed. (1) All the components in an IFES must be shape-conformable; thus, flexible graphene materials with good interfacial compatibility with other functional components are required. (2) The performances of these systems under large deformations still need improvements. (3) New packaging materials that can prevent the damage of the system integrity under deformation are expected.
6. Conclusions and perspectives
Nowadays, energy devices, in particular portable, flexible and stretchable devices, are creating new services and products to change our daily life. Under the background of the quick development of lightweight, flexible, and wearable electronic devices in our society, flexible and highly efficient energy strategies are urgently needed. As the thinnest material ever known in the universe, graphene has been attracting tremendous attention in multidisciplinary subjects because of its unique structure and excellent properties. An increasing market demand for versatile flexible and sustainable energy devices has stimulated huge opportunities for graphene materials and their assemblies or composites. In this critical review, we have covered recent studies on the synthesis of graphene-based materials and their applications in flexible devices related to energy conversion including OPV devices, OLEDs, solar cells, photodetectors, fuel cells, actuators and NGs, and those for energy storage including SCs and LIBs. In the end, we also prospected the integrated energy devices for flexible use.
The progress in energy related flexible graphene devices is rapid and great achievements have been made in recent years. However, there are still many challenges to be addressed for realizing their practical applications. The problems in a special area have been summarized at the end of each section, thus only several common issues are listed as follows. First, large scale production of graphene materials with uniform structures and high qualities is still a challenging target. Although many devices work well in lab tests, it is difficult to scale up these devices to industrial levels because of the lacking of cheap and convenient techniques for the mass-production of high-quality graphene materials. Single layer graphene sheets can only be produced by expensive CVD techniques. Furthermore, most of the obtained graphene membranes have to be transferred onto other flexible substrates. The complicated transfer processes heavily limit the wide applications of single-layer graphene. On the other hand, chemical methods can produce a large amount of rGO at a relatively low cost; however, these techniques suffer from complicated procedures of synthesis and purification, and have a heavy environmental duty. Furthermore, rGO sheets have relatively low electrical conductivities caused by their structural defects and residual oxygenated groups. Second, individual graphene sheets with a large theoretical surface area can hardly be completely transformed into corresponding macroscopic graphene materials because of their irreversible aggregation and stacking. Thus, porous graphene materials including graphene nanomesh, crumpled graphene and graphene foam have attracted tremendous interest. However, the fabrication of graphene frameworks with precisely controlled microstructures and compositions is a big technical challenge. Third, the performances of flexible graphene devices strongly depend on their structural configurations. Thus, the working mechanisms of the devices need to be revealed more clearly. The interfacial interactions between the graphene component and other functional materials require systematic studies. Effective techniques that can be used to assemble graphene devices with super-elasticity, small sizes and/or smart performances are expected. Nevertheless, accompanying with the technical breakthroughs in graphene production and device design, we believe flexible graphene devices and system will be seen in our daily lives.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (2012CB933402, 2013CB933001) and the Natural Science Foundation of China (51161120361, 51433005).
Notes and references
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
S. Das, P. Sudhagar, Y. S. Kang and W. Choi, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 299–319 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Seo, E. Jung, S. J. Seo, H. Chae, H. K. Chung and S. M. Cho, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 143505 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gwon, J. Hong, H. Kim, D.-H. Seo, S. Jeon and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 538–551 CAS .
Y. He, W. Chen, C. Gao, J. Zhou, X. Li and E. Xie, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8799–8820 RSC .
S. Park, G. Wang, B. Cho, Y. Kim, S. Song, Y. Ji, M. H. Yoon and T. Lee, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 438–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. LeMieux and Z. N. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 585–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Lu and Y. N. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 163–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, M. Vosguerichian and Z. A. Bao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1727–1752 RSC .
A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, S. Lee, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, D. Chu, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. A. J. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486–1517 CrossRef .
H. Ko, R. Kapadia, K. Takei, T. Takahashi, X. Zhang and A. Javey, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344001 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, B. Nie, P. Digiglio and T. Pan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6195–6203 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, J. Viventi, J. J. Amsden, J. Xiao, L. Vigeland, Y. S. Kim, J. A. Blanco, B. Panilaitis, E. S. Frechette, D. Contreras, D. L. Kaplan, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, K. C. Hwang, M. R. Zakin, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 511–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishide and K. Oyaizu, Science, 2008, 319, 737–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Gelinck, H. E. A. Huitema, E. Van Veenendaal, E. Cantatore, L. Schrijnemakers, J. Van der Putten, T. C. T. Geuns, M. Beenhakkers, J. B. Giesbers, B. H. Huisman, E. J. Meijer, E. M. Benito, F. J. Touwslager, A. W. Marsman, B. J. E. Van Rens and D. M. De Leeuw, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 106–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, N. Bramnik, S. Roy, G. Di Benedetto, J. L. Zunino III and S. Mitra, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 210–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nyholm, G. Nyström, A. Mihranyan and M. Strømme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751–3769 CAS .
H. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Ling, F. Qian, Y. Song, X. Lu, S. Chen, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10283–10290 RSC .
W. Cai, T. Lai, W. Dai and J. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 170–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
C. C. Huang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kymakis, K. Savva, M. M. Stylianakis, C. Fotakis and E. Stratakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2742–2749 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, S. Ma, H. M. Zhao, C. Wu, J. Ge, D. Xie, Y. Yang and T. L. Ren, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8951–8957 RSC .
Y. H. Wang, K. Bian, C. G. Hu, Z. P. Zhang, N. Chen, H. M. Zhang and L. T. Qu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 35, 49–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. He, J. W. Xue and T. T. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 2478–2482 RSC .
C. Yan, J. H. Cho and J.-H. Ahn, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4870–4882 RSC .
D. Spirito, D. Coquillat, S. L. De Bonis, A. Lombardo, M. Bruna, A. C. Ferrari, V. Pellegrini, A. Tredicucci, W. Knap and M. S. Vitiello, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 061111 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, F. Zhao, Z. P. Zhang, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3112–3126 RSC .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
J. Kwon, B. K. Sharma and J.-H. Ahn, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 06GA02 CrossRef .
K. Rana, J. Singh and J.-H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2646–2656 RSC .
H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Seresht, M. Jahanshahi, A. Rashidi and A. A. Ghoreyshi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 276, 672–681 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Elias, J. A. Jaszczak and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3992–4012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Xu and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3311–3323 RSC .
Z. L. Dong, C. C. Jiang, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and S. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Quang, S. Ramasundaram, S. W. Hong and N.-E. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3438–3445 CrossRef .
Y. H. Kahng, M. L. Kim, J.-H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, N. Kim, D.-W. Park and K. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 86–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, S. H. Bae, T. H. Han, K. G. Lim, J. H. Ahn and T. W. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 014012 CrossRef PubMed .
L. G. De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wang, L. Y. Jiao, K. X. Sheng, C. Li, L. M. Dai and G. Q. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1996 Search PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, L. B. Alemany, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679–1682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Fan, W. Kai, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi, J. Feng, Y. Ren, L. P. Song and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 5, 191–198 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Mei and J. Ouyang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5389–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Fernandez-Merino, L. Guardia, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, P. Solis-Fernandez, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. Tascon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6426–6432 CAS .
S. F. Pei, J. P. Zhao, J. H. Du, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17206–17212 CAS .
K. X. Sheng, H. Bai, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5567–5572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 323–327 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Jung, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4283–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan and E. Ghaderi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20214–20220 CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Guo, X. F. Wang, Q. Y. Qian, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653–2659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Sokolov, K. R. Shepperd and T. M. Orlando, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2633–2636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Xu, K. X. Sheng, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Q. Bao, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Zhong and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2950–2956 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choucair, P. Thordarson and J. A. Stride, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 30–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Biro, P. Nemes-Incze and P. Lambin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1824–1839 RSC .
W. J. Jie and J. H. Hao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6346–6362 RSC .
W. Li, C. Tan, M. A. Lowe, H. D. Abruna and D. C. Ralph, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2264–2270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6792–6797 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Ritter and J. W. Lyding, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 015704 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yan, L. Fu, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2263–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kwak, D. S. Choi, Y. N. Kim, H. Kim, D. H. Yoon, S. S. Ahn, J.-W. Yang, W. S. Yang and S. Seo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 37, 82–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, M. Bando, N. Kimura, K. Shimizu, K. Kadono, N. Umezu, K. Miyahara, S. Hayazaki, S. Nagai, Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Murakami and D. Hobara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 023112 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Wang, I. S. Huang, P. H. Ho, S. S. Li, Y. C. Yeh, D. W. Wang, W. L. Chen, Y. Y. Lee, Y. M. Chang, C. C. Chen, C. T. Liang and C. W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4521–4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. B. Zheng, Z. G. Li, J. H. Yang and J.-K. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 64, 200–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, G. L. Guo, Y. Liu, Q. H. Chang and W. Z. Shi, MRS Bull., 2013, 48, 4163–4167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yun, D. H. Kim, B. Kim, H. H. Park and H.-J. Jin, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 1364–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, J. Y. Han, H. Yoon, P. Joo, T. Lee, E. Seo, K. Char and B.-S. Kim, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4515–4531 RSC .
X. L. Wang, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6338–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Lee, T.-K. Hong, D. Kang, J. Lee, M. Heo, J. Y. Kim, B.-S. Kim and H. S. Shin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3438–3442 RSC .
J. Zhu and J. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3558–3566 RSC .
Z. Niu, J. Du, X. Cao, Y. Sun, W. Zhou, H. H. Hng, J. Ma, X. Chen and S. Xie, Small, 2012, 8, 3201–3208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Compton, D. A. Dikin, K. W. Putz, L. C. Brinson and S. T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 892–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, K. S. Lee, G. Bozoklu, W. Cai, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 572–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Brunetaud, L. Divet and D. Damidot, Cem. Concr. Res., 2008, 38, 1343–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wang, H. Bai, Y. Y. Jia, L. J. Zhi, L. T. Qu, Y. X. Xu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2154–2160 RSC .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Q. Chen, N. Q. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
S. Z. Zu and B. H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13651–13657 CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3342–3347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, D. Q. Wu, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lomeda, C. D. Doyle, D. V. Kosynkin, W. F. Hwang and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16201–16206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, P. J. King, U. Khan, S. De and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3155–3162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Yang, C. S. Shan, F. H. Li, D. X. Han, Q. X. Zhang and L. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3880–3882 RSC .
A. J. Patil, J. L. Vickery, T. B. Scott and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3159–3164 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Valles, J. D. Nunez, A. M. Benito and W. K. Maser, Carbon, 2012, 50, 835–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4370–4378 RSC .
R. Jalili, S. H. Aboutalebi, D. Esrafilzadeh, R. L. Shepherd, J. Chen, S. Aminorroaya-Yamini, K. Konstantinov, A. I. Minett, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5345–5354 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Xiang, C. C. Young, X. Wang, Z. Yan, C. C. Hwang, G. Cerioti, J. Lin, J. Kono, M. Pasquali and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4592–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Meng, Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, Z. P. Zhang, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2326–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 571 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Vigolo, A. Penicaud, C. Coulon, C. Sauder, R. Pailler, C. Journet, P. Bernier and P. Poulin, Science, 2000, 290, 1331–1334 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2004, 306, 1358–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. C. Jiang, C. G. Hu, Z. L. Dong, J. L. Xue, Y. N. Meng, N. Zheng, P. W. Chen and L. T. Qu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2406–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1922–1945 RSC .
C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher Jr and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, P. Li and C. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7103–7113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu, Z. He, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Feng, Y. Ma, Q. Fan, L. Wang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1079–1085 RSC .
J. Ge, H. B. Yao, W. Hu, X. F. Yu, Y. X. Yan, L. B. Mao, H. H. Li, S. S. Li and S. H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 505–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. X. Huang, D. B. Li, H. Q. Yu and L. Yan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21619–21624 RSC .
L. B. Zhang, G. Y. Chen, M. N. Hedhili, H. N. Zhang and P. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7038–7045 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Sui, B. Xu, S. Yue, Y. Luo, W. Zhan and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6494–6497 RSC .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Z. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. R. Li, J. Chen, L. Huang, C. Li, J. D. Hong and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4789–4793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Gao, J. Jang and S. Nagase, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 832–842 CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
G. Widawski, M. Rawiso and B. Francois, Nature, 1994, 369, 387–389 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boker, Y. Lin, K. Chiapperini, R. Horowitz, M. Thompson, V. Carreon, T. Xu, C. Abetz, H. Skaff, A. D. Dinsmore, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 302–306 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yabu and M. Shimomura, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5231–5234 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim, J. O. Hwang, W. J. Lee, J. Kwon, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10084–10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strong, S. Dubin, M. F. El-Kady, A. Lech, Y. Wang, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J.-H. Jeon, H.-J. Kim, H. Lim and I.-K. Oh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2986–2997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Tristán-López, A. Morelos-Gómez, S. M. Vega-Díaz, M. L. García-Betancourt, N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, H. Muramatsu, R. Cruz-Silva, S. Tsuruoka, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayahsi, K. Kaneko, M. Endo and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10788–10798 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lin, P. Liu, Y. Wei, Q. Li, J. Wang, Y. Wu, C. Feng, L. Zhang, S. Fan and K. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2920 Search PubMed .
Z. Yan, Z. Peng, G. Casillas, J. Lin, C. Xiang, H. Zhou, Y. Yang, G. Ruan, A. R. O. Raji, E. L. G. Samuel, R. H. Hauge, M. J. Yacaman and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5061–5068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, D. Q. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 849–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin, Z. Niu and X. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 2458–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, D. Yuan, J. Liu, W. Leng and T. E. Kopley, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3325–3329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, L. Wang, L. Yao and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5016–5018 RSC .
J. H. Zou, J. H. Liu, A. S. Karakoti, A. Kumar, D. Joung, Q. A. Li, S. I. Khondaker, S. Seal and L. Zhai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7293–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Cao, P. L. Dickrell, W. G. Sawyer, M. N. Ghasemi-Nejhad and P. M. Ajayan, Science, 2005, 310, 1307–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, D. N. Futaba, T. Yamada, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Science, 2010, 330, 1364–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Hashim, N. T. Narayanan, J. M. Romo-Herrera, D. A. Cullen, M. G. Hahm, P. Lezzi, J. R. Suttle, D. Kelkhoff, E. Munoz-Sandoval, S. Ganguli, A. K. Roy, D. J. Smith, R. Vajtai, B. G. Sumpter, V. Meunier, H. Terrones, M. Terrones and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 363 Search PubMed .
K. H. Kim, Y. Oh and M. F. Islam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 562–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Yang, Y. F. Zhao, Q. Q. Xiao, Y. X. Zhang, L. Jing, Y. M. Yan and K. N. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8497–8504 CAS .
X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044–17048 RSC .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 CAS .
Z. D. Huang, R. Liang, B. Zhang, Y. B. He and J. K. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 88, 126–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, K. Xia, L. Li, S. Shang, Q. Guo and G. Yan, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 908 CrossRef .
Y. X. Xu, W. J. Hong, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wang, H. Bai, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9032–9036 RSC .
Q. Wu, Y. Y. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, A. R. Liu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1963–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 968–974 CAS .
L. Huang, C. Li, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3780–3786 RSC .
M. Zhang, L. Huang, J. Chen, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7588–7592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
Y. Q. Sun and G. Q. Shi, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 231–253 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Zhou, T. B. Wu, B. J. Hu, G. Y. Yang and B. X. Han, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3663–3665 RSC .
K. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, X. S. Zhao and J. S. Wu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1392–1401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, T. Wei, B. Shao, Z. J. Fan, W. Z. Qian, M. L. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 487–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wang, Q. L. Hao, X. J. Yang, L. D. Lu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 821–828 CAS .
J. Xiang and L. T. Drzal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 593, 109–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Park, S. J. Park, O. S. Kwon, C. Lee, J. Jang, J. Jang, J. W. Park, S. J. Park, C. Lee and O. S. Kwon, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2354–2360 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, K. D. Hrabak, K. McEnnis and P. T. Hammond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17228–17234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Tang, N. A. Kotov, S. Magonov and B. Ozturk, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 413–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kharlampieva, V. Kozlovskaya, R. Gunawidjaja, V. V. Shevchenko, R. Vaia, R. R. Naik, D. L. Kaplan and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 840–846 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gunawidjaja, C. Y. Jiang, S. Peleshanko, M. Ornatska, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2024–2034 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Kulkarni, I. Choi, S. Singamaneni and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4667–4676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-H. Wee and J.-D. Hong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4657–4666 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mahapatra, M. S. Ramasamy, H. J. Yoo and J. W. Cho, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15146–15153 RSC .
F. Li, Z. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Wu and T. Guo, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2139–2143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, Y. Wang, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7719–7725 CAS .
Q. Chen, Y. N. Meng, C. G. Hu, Y. Zhao, H. B. Shao, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 32–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, Y. Jia and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1470–1474 RSC .
L. Yan, Y. N. Chang, W. Yin, X. Liu, D. Xiao, G. Xing, L. Zhao, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1576–1582 RSC .
P. Zhai, Y. H. Chang, Y. T. Huang, T. C. Wei, H. Su and S. P. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 186–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Chung, D. H. Kim, D. K. Seo, T. Kim, H. U. Im, H. M. Lee, J.-B. Yoo, S.-H. Hong, T. J. Kang and Y. H. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 169, 387–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhi, W. Zhao, X. Y. Liu, A. R. Chen, Z. Q. Liu and F. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2013–2019 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, S. J. Chang, H.-W. Kang, P. P. Chan, H. J. Kim, W. H. Hong, S. G. Lee and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4983–4988 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Mi, X. Liu, S. Liu, S. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14706–14711 RSC .
S. D. Perera, M. Rudolph, R. G. Mariano, N. Nijem, J. P. Ferraris, Y. J. Chabal and K. J. Balkus Jr, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 966–975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Ying, L. Sun and X. Peng, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 16374–16379 RSC .
C. Yuan, L. Yang, L. Hou, J. Li, Y. Sun, X. Zhang, L. Shen, X. Lu, S. Xiong and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Z. Cai, Y. Tian, L. Li, J. Geng and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12148–12155 CAS .
T. Hu, X. Sun, H. Sun, M. Yu, F. Lu, C. Liu and J. Lian, Carbon, 2013, 51, 322–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuan, X. Zhang, L. Su, B. Gao and L. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5772–5777 RSC .
J. Liang, Y. Huang, J. Oh, M. Kozlov, D. Sui, S. Fang, R. H. Baughman, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3778–3784 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Park, M. Lee, Y. Liu, S. Moon, G. T. Hwang, G. Zhu, J. E. Kim, S. O. Kim, D. K. Kim, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2999–3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Huang, J. H. Song, C. M. Tsai, W. F. Lee, D. H. Lien, Z. Y. Gao, Y. Hao, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4008–4013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Lin, J. Song, Y. Ding, S. Y. Lu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3127–3130 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jing, X. Feng, W. Jun, Q. Khan, Z. Yidan, L. Wei, S. Li and Z. Yan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 441–443 RSC .
D. Zhang, F. Xie, P. Lin and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1740–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, R. Wang, M. Liu, J. Luo, X. Jin, J. Sun and L. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4598–4604 CAS .
X. L. Zan, Z. Fang, J. Wu, F. Xiao, F. W. Huo and H. W. Duan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 49, 71–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, X. Lu and X. Zheng, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 174–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Han, Y. Zhou, C. Wang, L. He, W. Zhang and V. A. L. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Niu, J. J. Du, X. B. Cao, Y. H. Sun, W. Y. Zhou, H. H. Hng, J. Ma, X. D. Chen and S. S. Xie, Small, 2012, 8, 3201–3208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiao, J. Song, H. Gao, X. Zan, R. Xu and H. Duan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 100–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Georgiou, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, Y.-J. Kim, A. Gholinia, S. J. Haigh, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and A. Mishchenko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 100–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Lee, K. Lee, S.-Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Park, K.-H. Choi, H.-K. Kim, D.-G. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, S. Nam and J.-U. Park, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2814–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuang and W.-B. Hu, J. Inorg. Mater., 2013, 28, 235–246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, S. Cai, W. Yang, L. Gao, W. Tang, J. Xie, J. Zhi and X. Ju, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4648–4654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ferey, M. Haouas, T. Loiseau and F. Taulelle, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 299–309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. He, W. J. Chen, X. D. Li, Z. X. Zhang, J. C. Fu, C. H. Zhao and E. Q. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Gao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 530–546 RSC .
J. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Yin, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3480–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Feng and J. Li, Small, 2014, 10, 2165–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 CAS .
M. Tathavadekar, M. Biswal, S. Agarkar, L. Giribabu and S. Ogale, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. N. Bao, Z. F. Liu, Y. S. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 43–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Meng, J. Luo, W. Wang, Z. Shi, Q. Niu, L. Dai and G. Qin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3324–3328 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, H. Tian, G. Schwartz, J. B. H. Tok, T.-L. Ren and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3702–3708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Zhang, T. Liu, B. Meng, X. Li, G. Liang, X. Hu and Q. J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1811 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kong and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1025–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Song, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3520–3536 CAS .
S. Kim, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, A. Sohn, T. Y. Kim, K.-S. Shin, D. Kim, S. K. Kim, K. H. Lee, H.-J. Shin, D.-W. Kim and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3918–3925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Layani, A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5581–5591 RSC .
J. Du, S. Pei, L. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1958–1991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, D. Wu, Z. Cui, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, B. Du and Q. Wei, Anal. Lett., 2013, 46, 1–17 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, J. Li and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4296–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2824–2860 RSC .
Q. Zhang, X. J. Wang, F. Xing, L. Huang, G. K. Long, N. B. Yi, W. Ni, Z. B. Liu, J. G. Tian and Y. S. Chen, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 478–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Na, Y. J. Noh, S. Y. Son, T. W. Kim, S. S. Kim, S. Lee and H. I. Joh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 043304 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263302 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Özyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1514–1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. Long, L. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3308–3311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Yin, S. Y. Sun, T. Salim, S. X. Wu, X. A. Huang, Q. Y. He, Y. M. Lam and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5263–5268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Huang, J. H. Fang, C. C. Liu and C. W. Chu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6262–6271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, Z. Sun, Z. Yan, Z. Jin and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6472–6479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Li, Z.-H. Sun, G. Tai, S.-P. Lau and F. Yan, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 810–818 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Seo, T. S. Oh, S. J. Chae, A. H. Park, K. J. Lee, Y. H. Lee and E.-K. Suh, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 50, 125103 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Sun and G. Q. Shi, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 231–253 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, H. B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Hong, Y. X. Xu, G. W. Lu, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1555–1558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Y. Lee, J. H. Ahn and J. H. Park, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 379–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yeh and P. Yeh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 421–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Lo and P. L. Burn, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1097–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Seidler, K. Walzer, B. Lussem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Agrawal, H. A. Becerril, Z. Bao, Z. Liu, Y. Chen and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2009, 4, 43–48 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sun, Z. L. Wang, Z. J. Shi, G. Z. Ran, W. J. Xu, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Z. Li, L. Dai and G. G. Qin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 133301 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Han, Y. Lee, M. R. Choi, S. H. Woo, S. H. Bae, B. H. Hong, J. H. Ahn and T. W. Lee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, E. Jung, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, E. J. Park, S. M. Cho and K. P. Loh, Small, 2014, 10, 944–949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, K. Ruan, L. Cui, Y. Wang, L. Liao, Z. Wang and J. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 201–207 RSC .
N. Li, S. Oida, G. S. Tulevski, S. Han, J. B. Hannon, D. K. Sadana and T. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2294 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y. Y. Lu, R. U. Kumar, R. Sankar, C. D. Liao, K. B. Moorthy, C. H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2591–2610 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mueller, F. N. A. Xia and P. Avouris, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mueller, F. Xia and P. Avouris, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, W. Jin, Y. Zhou, Y. Dai, B. Yu, C. Liu, W. Xu, Y. Li, H. Peng, Z. Liu and L. Dai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5576–5581 RSC .
K. K. Manga, S. Wang, M. Jaiswal, Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5265–5270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nano, 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Liu, J. Li, G. Tai, S.-P. Lau and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5878–5883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang, Z. H. Sun, M. Saito, Q. H. Yuan, H. Zhang, J. H. Li, Z. C. Wang, T. Fujita, F. Ding, Z. J. Zheng, F. Yan, H. K. Wu, M. W. Chen and Y. Ikuhara, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6310–6320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Wang, Q. Wang, K. G. Zhou and H. L. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1266–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Lee, J. H. Lee, Y. H. Kahng, N. Kim, Y. J. Kim, J. Lee, T. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1847–1856 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Hsu, C. T. Lin, J. H. Huang, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5031–5039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Sahoo, Y. Pan, L. Li and S. H. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4203–4210 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 10142–10148 RSC .
Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Y. Yao and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740–4742 RSC .
M. Sawangphruk, A. Krittayavathananon and N. Chinwipas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1030–1034 CAS .
S. S. Li, H. P. Cong, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7534–7541 RSC .
J. E. Mink, R. M. Qaisi and M. M. Hussain, Energy Technol., 2013, 1, 648–652 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Heo, T. Kan, E. Iwase, K. Matsumoto and I. Shimoyama, Micro Nano Lett., 2013, 8, 865–868 CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Hou and C. Dong, International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear, 2012, 22, 1019–1035 CrossRef .
M. Karpelson, G. Y. Wei and R. J. Wood, Sens. Actuators, A, 2012, 176, 78–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Ji, X. Shi, F. You, F. Fu, R. Liu, J. Xia, N. Wang, J. Bai, Z. Wang, X. Qin and X. Dong, Bio-Med. Mater. Eng., 2013, 23, S569–S575 Search PubMed .
B. K. S. Woods, M. F. Gentry, C. S. Kothera and N. M. Wereley, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2012, 23, 327–343 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Pagounis, R. Chulist, M. J. Szczerba and M. Laufenberg, Scr. Mater., 2014, 83, 29–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Min, J. Y. Jung, T. H. Han, Y. Park, C. Jung, S. M. Hong and C. M. Koo, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2011, 539, 260–265 CAS .
G. W. Rogers and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1250–1255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Rogers and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10858–10863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Shin, J. Y. Hong and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8527–8529 RSC .
J. Park, G. Gu, Z. Wang, D. Kwon and K. L. DeVries, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 539, 350–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. An, J. W. Suk and R. S. Ruoff, Small, 2010, 6, 210–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, R. Li, L. Zhang, H. Chen, W. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Wu, X. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and J. Gao, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7231–7239 RSC .
G. Sun, Y. Pan, Z. Zhan, L. Zheng, J. Lu, J. H. L. Pang, L. Li and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23741–23744 CAS .
C. Wu, J. Feng, L. Peng, Y. Ni, H. Liang, L. He and Y. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18584–18591 RSC .
S. Ansari, M. M. Neelanchery and D. Ushus, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 130, 3902–3908 CAS .
J. Zang, R. S. Ryu, P. Nicola, Q. Wang, T. Q. Tu, M. J. Buehler and X. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 321–325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Liu, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6307–6312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hwang, H.-Y. Kwon, J.-S. Oh, J.-P. Hong, S.-C. Hong, Y. Lee, H. R. Choi, K. J. Kim, M. H. Bhuiya and J.-D. Nam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 023106 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Loomis, B. King, T. Burkhead, P. Xu, N. Bessler, E. Terentjev and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 045501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Liang, Y. F. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. F. Ma, F. F. Li, T. Y. Guo and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921–9927 CAS .
K. Y. Lee, B. Kumar, J. S. Seo, K.-H. Kim, J. I. Sohn, S. N. Cha, D. Choi, Z. L. Wang and S. W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1959–1964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Tian, H. Sun, R. J. Xu, Y. Shua and T. L. Ren, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 2115–2118 RSC .
M. P. Lu, J. Song, M.-Y. Lu, M. T. Chen, Y. Gao, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, C. H. Lai, Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Xu, R. L. Snyder, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 475401 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Valentini, S. B. Bon and J. Kenny, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 1028–1032 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Gupta, J.-H. Lee, K. Y. Lee and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8932–8939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zelisko, Y. Hanlumyuang, S. Yang, Y. Liu, C. Lei, J. Li, P. M. Ajayan and P. Sharma, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4284 Search PubMed .
M. A. Rahman, B. C. Lee, D.-T. Phan and G.-S. Chung, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 22, 085017 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, B. Kumar, T. Nguyen Thanh, N. E. Lee and S. W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 169–175 CAS .
J. H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D. Y. Lee, J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C. Y. Kang, S. J. Yoon, J. B. Yoo and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 765–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hussain, M. A. Abbasi, Z. H. Ibupoto, O. Nur and M. Willander, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, K. Y. Lee, H.-K. Park, S. J. Chae, Y. H. Lee and S.-W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4197–4204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, W. Seung, B. K. Sharma, S.-W. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8970–8975 CAS .
H. Gwon, H. S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D. H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y. S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277–1283 CAS .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X. B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 CAS .
J. M. MacLeod and F. Rosei, Small, 2014, 10, 1038–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. L. Peng, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
X. Zhao, B. M. Sanchez, P. J. Dobson and P. S. Grant, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 839–855 RSC .
Y. Cheng, H. Zhang, S. Lu, C. V. Varanasi and J. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1067–1073 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
J. Chen, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1244–1253 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Yan, J. Lang, C. Peng and Q. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17245–17253 RSC .
Z. Weng, Y. Su, D. W. Wang, F. Li, J. Du and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 917–922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang and R. A. W. Dryfe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5279–5283 CAS .
A. L. M. Reddy and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7727–7734 CAS .
J. Yan, Z. J. Fan, T. Wei, W. Z. Qian, M. L. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825–3833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, Y. S. Huh, W. H. Hong, D. Erickson and H. S. Park, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3976–3981 RSC .
M. Sawangphruk, P. Srimuk, P. Chiochan, A. Krittayavathananon, S. Luanwuthi and J. Limtrakul, Carbon, 2013, 60, 109–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Sheng, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 291–293 RSC .
D. Zhang, M. Miao, H. Niu and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4571–4579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, H. Cheng, F. Zhao, N. Chen, L. Jiang, Z. Feng and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6448–6451 RSC .
J. Smithyman and R. Liang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2014, 184, 34–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Aboutalebi, R. Jalili, D. Esrafilzadeh, M. Salari, Z. Gholamvand, S. A. Yamini, K. Konstantinov, R. L. Shepherd, J. Chen, S. E. Moulton, P. C. Innis, A. I. Minett, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2456–2466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bao and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3246–3252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, T. Huang, B. Zheng, Y. Han, X. Zhao, K. Gopalsamy, H. Sun and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3754 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, Q. Zhang, C. Huang, X. Zhao, B. Zhang, Q. Kong, M. Wang, Y. Yang, R. Cai and D. Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7149–7151 RSC .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Wang, J. C. Chen, J. Y. Cao, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. H. Ouyang and D. C. Jia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 269–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gao, Z. Shao, J. Li, X. Wang, X. Peng, W. Wang and F. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 63–67 CAS .
K. Gao, Z. Shao, X. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Wang and F. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5307–5311 RSC .
Q. Su, Y. Liang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8279–8281 RSC .
X. Lu, H. Dou, B. Gao, C. Yuan, S. Yang, L. Hao, L. Shen and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5115–5121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, F. Li, J. Zhao, W. Ren, Z. Chen, J. Tan, Z. Wu, I. Gentle, G. Lu and H. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1745–1752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, J. Chen, J. Yang, Q. Xue and P. Miele, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2521–2529 CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yu, L. Liu and Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3052–3057 RSC .
A. Sumboja, C. Y. Foo, X. Wang and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2809–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, H. Chen, M. Chen, N. Liu and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3408–3416 CAS .
G. Yu, L. Hu, N. Liu, H. Wang, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yang, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4438–4442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1245–1251 RSC .
D. A. C. Brownson, L. C. S. Figueiredo-Filho, X. Ji, M. Gomez-Mingot, J. Iniesta, O. Fatibello-Filho, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5962–5972 CAS .
J. Chen, K. X. Sheng, P. H. Luo, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4569–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Sheng, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 Search PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, J. Zhou, X. Li, P. Tang, Z. Zhang, J. Fu and E. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 210–218 CAS .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
J. P. Alper, S. Wang, F. Rossi, G. Salviati, N. Yiu, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1843–1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, K. Balakrishnan, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter, A. Srivastava, M. Conway, A. L. M. Reddy, J. Yu, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, L. Zhang, L. Liu, B. Zhu, H. Dong and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4035–4042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604–2606 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abouimrane, O. C. Compton, K. Amine and S. T. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12800–12804 CAS .
Y. Hu, X. Li, J. Wang, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8739–8749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mukherjee, A. V. Thomas, A. Krishnamurthy and N. Koratkar, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7867–7878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Song, D. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Kong, C. Zou, C. M. Li, X. Lu, J. Ma, F. Y. C. Boey and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3831–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Ning, C. G. Xu, Y. M. Cao, X. Zhu, Z. M. Jiang, Z. J. Fan, W. Z. Qian, F. Wei and J. S. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 408–414 CAS .
D. Wei, S. Haque, P. Andrew, J. Kivioja, T. Ryhanen, A. Pesquera, A. Centeno, B. Alonso, A. Chuvilin and A. Zurutuza, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3177–3181 CAS .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Zhu and Y. Hou, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10307–10318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, G. Liu, K. Mcilwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025–2027 RSC .
J. Z. Wang, C. Zhong, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1467–1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1079–1084 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, M. Jin, M. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437–1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, G. Zhou, Z. Weng, X. Y. Shan, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2014, 67, 500–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, C. H. Xu, J. Sun, L. Gao and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1794–1800 CAS .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Gao and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6960–6967 RSC .
A. Yu, H. W. Park, A. Davies, D. C. Higgins, Z. Chen and X. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1855–1860 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. García and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862–865 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818–837 CAS .
D. Wei, P. Andrew, H. Yang, Y. Jiang, F. Li, C. Shan, W. Ruan, D. Han, L. Niu, C. Bower, T. Ryhanen, M. Rouvala, G. A. J. Amaratunga and A. Ivaska, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9762–9767 RSC .
G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1986–2002 CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251–2269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian, A. Vu, W. Smyrl and A. Stein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1135–A1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9909–9911 RSC .
N. Li, Z. P. Chen, W. C. R. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xi, P. R. Kidambi, R. Chen, C. Gao, X. Peng, C. Ducati, S. Hofmann and R. V. Kumar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5746–5753 RSC .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 153–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Seh, W. Li, J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. McDowell, P. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Li, B. Wang, D. Su, J. Park, H. Ahn and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 389–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Xu and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4288–4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Ryu, J. W. Park, J. Park, J.-P. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, T.-H. Nam, G. Wang and H.-J. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1573–1578 CAS .
H. Ye, Y. X. Yin, S. Xin and Y. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6602–6608 CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, B. Sun, K. Li, S. Chen and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13484–13489 CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Ang, Y. Zeng, N. Xiao, Y. Gao, W. Liu, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9651–9658 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Lin, G. Zhu, Y. S. Zhou, Y. Yang, P. Bai, J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5065–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6408–6413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Guo, X. Y. Xue, S. H. Wang, C. J. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520–2523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Koo, K.-I. Park, S. H. Lee, M. Suh, D. Y. Jeon, J. W. Choi, K. Kang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4810–4816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, S. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5048–5054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, P. Deng, S. Yuan, Y. Nie, B. He, L. Xing and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2615–2620 CAS .
X. J. Hou, B. Liu, X. F. Wang, Z. R. Wang, Q. F. Wang, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7831–7837 RSC .
X. F. Wang, B. Liu, R. Liu, Q. F. Wang, X. J. Hou, D. Chen, R. M. Wang and G. Z. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1849–1853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Xiluan Wang	Xiluan Wang received her B. Eng. from the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at the Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2010. She is currently a PhD candidate in Prof. Gaoquan Shi's Laboratory at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. Her research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of chemically modified graphene.
Gaoquan Shi	Prof. Gaoquan Shi received his BS degree (1985) and PhD degree (1992) from the Department of Chemistry, Nanjing University. Then he joined Nanjing University and was promoted to full professor in 1995. In 2000, he moved to Tsinghua University as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are focused on synthesis and applications of graphene materials and conducting polymers. He received the 2nd Grade Award of Natural Science of China and the Youth Knowledge Innovation Prize of the Chinese Chemical Society and BASF Company in 2004, and the 1st Grade Award of Natural Science of Chinese Education Ministry in 2013.

Broader context
Flexible devices related to energy conversion and storage have potential applications in wearable and portable electronics such as roll-up displays, electronic papers, touch screens, active radio-frequency identification tags, wearable sensors and implantable medical devices. Thus, they have attracted a great deal of attention in recent years from both academic and industrial aspects. Graphene is a unique and attractive material for this purpose because of its atom-thick two-dimensional structure and excellent properties. Particularly, the atom-thick structure allows graphene sheets to easily deform in the direction normal to their surface, providing them with good flexibility. This critical review will summarize the methods of synthesizing flexible graphene materials and their applications in energy related flexible devices including photovoltaic devices, organic light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, fuel cells, nanogenerators, supercapacitors and batteries. The challenges facing the design and construction of the devices will also be discussed.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the roll-based production of the graphene film grown on a copper foil. (b) Roll-to-roll transfer of the graphene film from a thermal release tape to a PET film at 120 °C. (c) A transparent ultralarge-area graphene film transferred onto a 35-inch PET sheet. (d) An assembled graphene/PET touch panel showing outstanding flexibility. (e) A graphene-based touch-screen panel connected to a computer with control software. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Four-metre-long GO fibre wound on a Teflon drum (diameter, 2 cm). SEM image of the fibre (b), and its typical tightened knots (c and d). (e) A Chinese character (“中”, Zhong) pattern knitted in the cotton network (white) using two graphene fibres (black). (f) A mat of graphene fibres (horizontal) woven together with cotton threads (vertical). Scale bars, 50 μm (b–d) and 2 mm (e and f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 112.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a macroporous graphene monolith (MGM). (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a MGM. (c) Resistance response of a MGM prepared from 5 mg mL−1 GO to compression recorded during 300 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of GO and rGO films by the GFT method; they are nominated as g-GO and g-rGO, respectively. (b) Photographs of g-GO (top) and g-rGO (bottom) films, showing their flexibility. (c) SEM images of the fractured cross sections of g-GO (top) and g-rGO (bottom) films, exhibiting their laminated structures. (d) Photograph of a large-area g-GO film. (e) Typical stress–strain curves of the rGO films prepared by the GFT method, or reducing the GO film prepared by evaporation of GO dispersion (e-rGO). The percentages are the polymer weight contents relative to GO. (f) Electrical conductivities of e-rGO and g-rGO films with the compositions as indicated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161.	 



rGO film	Spin-coating/annealing	OPV	3200	65	0.78	1000 bending cycles (rd = 5 mm)	
234

LrGO film	Spin-coating/laser-irradiation	OPV	700	44	1.10	Bending angles up to 135°	
24

Graphene film	CVD growth/transferring	OPV	230	72	1.18	Bending angles up to 138°	
49

Graphene film	CVD growth/inkjet printing	OPV	12	73	2.90	500 bending cycles (rd = 4 mm)	
45

Graphene/PEDOT:PSS/Au film	CVD growth/transferring	OPV	158 ± 30	90	3.20	1000 bending cycles (rd = 1.5 mm)	
227

Graphene/PEDOT:PSS film	CVD growth/LbL	OPV	36.6	85	4.33	Bendable	
48

Graphene/PEDOT film	CVD growth/in situ polymerisation	DSSC	
	
	6.26	10 bending cycles (rd = 4.7 mm)	
243


Graphene/PEDOT:PSS/perfluorinated ionomer film	CVD growth/spin-coating	OLED	30	
	
F

 30.2 Ph 98.1	
F

 37.2 Ph 102.7	1000 bending cycles (rd = 7.5 mm)	
249

Graphene/CNT film	CVD growth/LbL	OLED	76	89.13	
P

 14.7	
P

 9.2	Bending angles up to 90° for hundreds of cycles	
250

Graphene film	CVD growth/transferring	OLED	750	96.6	
P

 11.44	
P

 2.24	
r

 = 0–0.72 cm	
251

Graphene film	CVD growth/LbL	OLED	40–60	80	
P

 >250	
P

 >160	Bending at rd = 0.5 cm	
252


Doped graphene film	CVD growth/transferring	Photodetector	120 (>780 nm)	Bending number >20 angles: 30, 60, 70 and 80°	
219

CdSe NB/graphene film	CVD growth/transferring	Photodetector	8.7 (633 nm)	Bendable	
260

Graphene/PbS QD film	CVD growth/transferring	Photodetector	107 (895 nm)	1000 bending cycles (rd = 7 mm)	
263

rGO film	Drop-casting/thermal annealing	Photodetector	∼0.7 (895 nm)	1000 bending cycles (rd = 7 mm)	
264


 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental technique used for the reduction of GO films on PET substrates. (b) Picture of a flexible PET/rGO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/Al photovoltaic device. (c) Photograph of a graphene-coated PET substrate, and schematic diagram of the fabrication steps involved in preparing a DSSC with a graphene/PEDOT counter electrode on a PET substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24 and 243.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Digital image of light emission from a flexible fluorescent green OLED with a four-layered graphene anode doped with HNO3. (b) Current efficiencies of OLED devices using various graphene layers (doped with HNO3 or AuCl3) or ITO as the anode. (c) Pictures of flexible OLEDs on the plastic substrate with the SLG electrode. (d) PE and CE of green OLEDs on single layer graphene (SLG) and ITO with enhanced coupling structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249 and 252.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photos showing the transparency and flexibility of the graphene photodetector built on PET substrates. (b) Photoresponses of the metal-based photodetectors (top, channel length ∼3 μm; bottom, channel length ∼50 μm) on a PET substrate at different bending angles. (c) Schematic diagram of a graphene transistor modified with PbS QDs under light illumination. (d) Responsivity of the photoconductor as a function of light irradiation characterized before and after a bending test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219 and 263.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A schematic diagram illustrating the preparation of the rGO–Ni anode. (b and c) SEM images and digital pictures (insets) of plain NF and rGO–NF. Scale bars are 200 μm. (d) Digital picture of a curved rGO–NF. Inset: rGO–NF rolled up into a cylindrical shape. (e) Maximum volumetric power densities collected for MFC devices with rGO–X–Ni electrodes as anodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 19.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–d) SEM images of patterns developed on the graphene sheet: first wrinkles form (a), then delaminated buckles as the substrate is uniaxially relaxed, (b) followed by crumples as the substrate is biaxially relaxed, (c) which unfold as the substrate is biaxially stretched back (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 291.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The photographs show the microrobot picking, lifting, moving, and placing the object to a nearby container by turning on and off the infrared light. (b) Time course of the typical walking worm due to the on–off switching modulation of the friction modes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 289.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the device. (b) Photo image of the HSNG. (c) Photo images of the HSNG at various locations of the human body, showing good compatibility of the device with various parts of body, and (d) piezoelectric output voltage from the HSNG under stretch-release conditions, and pyroelectric output voltage under a thermal gradient (heat and cool). Reprinted with permission from ref. 305.	 



rGO film	Brush-coating/annealing	81.7 F g−1	1.5 kW kg−1	7.13 W h kg−1	Bendable	
317

rGO/cellulose paper	Thermal expansion/filtration	120 F g−1	60 μW cm−2	15 μW h cm−2	1000 bending cycles r = 4 mm	
318

rGO/CNT	Electrophoretic deposition	151.0 F g−1	5.8 W kg−1	14.5 W h kg−1	Bending angle: 120°	
319

rGO/Nafion/RuO2	Casting	160 F g−1	
	
	1000 bending cycles (r = 2.2 mm)	
322

MnO2–rGO/CFP	Spray-coating	393 F g−1	
	
	Bendable	
323

rGO fibre	Wet-spinning/annealing	409 F g−1	25 kW kg−1	14 W h kg−1	Can be woven	
329

rGO fibre	Spinning/laser irradiation	1.2 mF cm−2	3.6–9 × 10−2 W cm−2	2–5.4 × 10−4 W h cm−2	160 bending cycles	
326

GF/3D graphene network fibre	Electrochemical deposition	1.7 mF cm−2	10−4 W cm−2	1.7 × 10−7 W h cm−2	500 bending cycles (r = 2 mm)	
111

Polymer-wrapped rGO fibre	Wet-spinning	269 mF cm−2	0.02 mW cm−2	5.91 μW h cm−2	1000 bending cycles, bending angles 180°	
331

rGO paper	Hard templating/vacuum filtration	92.7 F g−1	
	
	Bendable	
332

MnO2/graphene paper	Hard templating/vacuum filtration	389 F g−1	25 kW kg−1	44 W h kg−1	Bendable	
333

rGO paper	Water templating/vacuum filtration	215.0 F g−1	776.8 kW kg−1	150.9 W h kg−1	Bendable	
334

rGO foam paper	Leaven strategy/vacuum filtration	110 F g−1	
	
	Twisted or bent	
120

CNF/rGO paper	CNF spacer/vacuum filtration	207 F g−1	
	
	Bending angle 180°	
336

CNF/rGO paper	LbL assembly	1.73 mF cm−2	
	
	Bendable	
337

rGO/CNT paper	Vacuum filtration	265 F g−1	
	
	Bendable	
339

rGO/PANI nanofibre paper	Vacuum filtration	210 F g−1	
	
	Bent or be shaped	
158

rGO/MnO2 paper	Template free	243 F g−1	3.8 mW cm−2	11.5 μW h cm−2	
	
343

Graphene/CNFs/ MnO2 network	CVD growth/microwave heating	946 F g−1	
	53.4 W h kg−1	100 bending cycles from 0° to 180°	
351

rGO and graphene film	CVD growth/LbL assembly	394 μF cm−2	
	
	
	
354

rGO film	Electrophoretic photolithography	285 F g−1	324 W cm−3	31.9 mW h cm−3	Bending distance 2.2–1 cm	
355

MnO2/rGO film	Vacuum filtration	267 F g−1	2520 W kg−1	17 W h kg−1	
	
356

rGO/GO film	Drop-casting/laser-scribing	2.35 F cm−3	200 W cm−3	
	1000 bending cycles (r = 7 mm) and 1000 twisting cycles (angle = 90°)	
137


 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustrations of (a) the typical components of conventional SCs and (b) carbon-based flexible SCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photograph of a flexible CMG-SC and a schematic diagram of a SC device. (b) CVs of the CMG-SC at the bent and relaxed states with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (c) Top: low magnification SEM image of MnO2–rGO coated on CFP. Bottom: A 2 × 14 cm all-solid-state prototype of the MnO2–rGO/CFP SC supplying electricity to a 3 V spinning motor. (d) Capacity retention of as-prepared electrodes over 2000 cycles of galvanostatic charge–discharge tests. Reprinted with permission from ref. 322 and 323.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration showing the coaxial spinning process. (b) A single intact wet GO@CMC fibre and its magnified image (c). (d) Polarized-light optical microscopy image of the wet GO@CMC fibre indicating the core–sheath structure and the well-aligned GO sheets in the core part. (e) CV curves of RGO + CNT@CMC, scan rates increased from 10 to 20, 50, 80, 100, 150 and 200 mV s−1. (f) GCD curves of two-ply, all-solid-state, freestanding YSCs bended with different angles at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, and the insets are the digital photos of YSCs with different bending angles. (g) Two intact coaxial fibres woven with cotton fibres. (h) Optical macroscopic image of (a). (i) Cloth woven by two individual coaxial fibres. Scale bars, 1 cm (b and g) 100 μm (c) and 200 μm (h). Reprinted with permission from ref. 331.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of a 3D micro/nanointerconnected structure as a flexible SC electrode. (b) Electrical resistance for 3D graphene/CNF networks at the different bending angles. The inset shows the digital photographs of the 3D graphene/CNF networks with different bending shapes. (c) CVs of a 3D graphene/CNFs/MnO2 composite electrode with a fixed areal mass density of 0.1 mg cm−2 at different scan rates. (d) Schematic structure of the flexible SC consisting of a polymer separator, two PET membranes, and two asymmetric graphene-based electrodes. The left bottom digital photograph shows the flexibility of the device during bending operations. The right bottom digital photograph shows a digital clock driven by the flexible SC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram showing the fabrication process for an LSG micro-SC. (b) This technique has the potential for the direct writing of micro-devices with high areal density. More than 100 micro-devices can be produced on a single run. The micro-devices are completely flexible and can be produced on virtually any substrate. (c) A digital photograph of the laser-scribed micro-devices with 4, 8 and 16 interdigitated electrodes. (d) A tilted-view (45°) SEM image shows the direct reduction and expansion of the GO film after exposure to the laser beam. Scale bar, 10 μm. (e, f) Bending/twisting the device has almost no effect on its performance, as can be seen from these CVs collected under different bending and twisting conditions at 1000 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137.	 

rGO paper	Vacuum filtration	214 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1	Bendable	
359

rGO/CNT paper	Vacuum filtration and annealing	375 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	Bendable	
360

rGO paper	Nitric acid under sonication and vacuum filtration	400 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1	Bendable	
361

rGO paper	Vacuum filtration and laser reduction	370 mA h g−1 at 1.86 A g−1	Bendable	
362

rGO paper	Freeze-drying and pressing	864 mA h g−1 1 at 100 mA g−1	Bendable	
363

rGO/DODA film on PET	Coating and breath figure	1600 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1	Bendable	
364

Graphene on Cu foil	CVD growth	0.06 mA h cm−2 at 100 mA cm−2	Bendable (r<1 mm)	
366

rGO/Si hybrid paper	Vacuum filtration	>2200 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1	Bendable	
370

rGO/Si hybrid paper	Vacuum filtration	3200 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	Bendable	
372

rGO/TiO2 hybrid paper	Hydrothermal treatment	175 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1	Bendable	
191

V2O5/rGO paper	Filtration and annealing	283 mA h g−1	Bendable	
385

V2O5/rGO paper	Filtration	806.6 mA h g−1	Bendable	
309

FeF3/rGO paper	Vacuum filtration and photothermal reduction	587 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1	Bendable	
386

3D graphene foam	Hydrothermal treatment	170 mA h g−1 at 145 mA g−1	Bendable (r = 5 mm)	
387

rGO paper	Vacuum filtration	1393 mA h g−1	Bendable	
399

Graphene foam	Electrochemical leavening and annealing	340 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	
	
400


 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic drawing of the preparation of the honeycomb structured film based on GO. (b) Photograph of the honeycomb film on the glass. (c) Photograph of the honeycomb-patterned film on the copper foil. (d and e) SEM images of the honeycomb-patterned film prepared from 1 mg mL−1 of the GO/DODA complex on the silicon wafer. (f) Cross-sectional SEM image of the honeycomb-patterned film on the copper foil. Reprinted with permission from ref. 364.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of mesoporous graphene paper–sulfur electrodes and application as cathodes in lithium–sulfur batteries. (b) Digital photographs of the MGP paper, exhibiting an intact paper-like flexible property. (c) The cycling performance of the MGP-S and pure S electrodes. The cells were cycled at 0.1 C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 399.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
