Defect engineering of oxide perovskites for catalysis and energy storage: synthesis of chemistry and materials science  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00639D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00639D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10116-10211Defect engineering of oxide perovskites for catalysis and energy storage: synthesis of chemistry and materials science

        
          
            Hamidreza 
            Arandiyan†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Sajjad 
            S. Mofarah†
*c, 
      
        
          
            Charles C. 
            Sorrell
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Esmail 
            Doustkhah
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Baharak 
            Sajjadi
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Derek 
            Hao
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *bg, 
      
        
          
            Hongyu 
            Sun
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Bing-Jie 
            Ni
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Mehran 
            Rezaei
          
        
      i, 
      
        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *jk and 

        
          
            Thomas 
            Maschmeyer
          
          
        
      a
aLaboratory of Advanced Catalysis for Sustainability, School of Chemistry, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. E-mail: hamid.arandiyan@sydney.edu.au
bCentre for Applied Materials and Industrial Chemistry (CAMIC), School of Science, RMIT University, 124 La Trobe Street, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. E-mail: yuan.wang@rmit.edu.au
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: s.seifimofarah@unsw.edu.au
dNational Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA
fSchool of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia
gSchool of Chemistry, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
hDepartment of Micro- and Nanotechnology, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby 2800, Denmark
iCatalyst and Nanomaterials Research Laboratory (CNMRL), School of Chemical, Petroleum and Gas Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran
jWA School of Mines: Minerals, Energy and Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6845, Australia. E-mail: zongping.shao@curtin.edu.au
kState Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, 210009, China
Received 
      21st November 2020
    First published on 25th August 2021AbstractOxide perovskites have emerged as an important class of materials with important applications in many technological areas, particularly thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and energy storage. However, their implementation faces numerous challenges that are familiar to the chemist and materials scientist. The present work surveys the state-of-the-art by integrating these two viewpoints, focusing on the critical role that defect engineering plays in the design, fabrication, modification, and application of these materials. An extensive review of experimental and simulation studies of the synthesis and performance of oxide perovskites and devices containing these materials is coupled with exposition of the fundamental and applied aspects of defect equilibria. The aim of this approach is to elucidate how these issues can be integrated in order to shed light on the interpretation of the data and what trajectories are suggested by them. This critical examination has revealed a number of areas in which the review can provide a greater understanding. These include considerations of (1) the nature and formation of solid solutions, (2) site filling and stoichiometry, (3) the rationale for the design of defective oxide perovskites, and (4) the complex mechanisms of charge compensation and charge transfer. The review concludes with some proposed strategies to address the challenges in the future development of oxide perovskites and their applications.
Hamidreza Arandiyan
Hamidreza Arandiyan received his PhD from Tsinghua University in 2014. He was awarded a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellowship in the School of Chemical Engineering from UNSW Sydney in 2015. He was awarded a University of Sydney Senior Fellowship in the School of Chemistry in 2018. Currently, he is a Senior Research Fellow in the Applied Chemistry & Environmental Science at RMIT University, Melbourne. His research interests lie in heterogeneous catalysis for environmental remediation and energy applications.
Sajjad S. Mofarah
Sajjad S. Mofarah obtained his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, in 2020, with a focus on the defect structures of functional oxide materials for energy and environmental applications. He was appointed as a Research Associate at the same institution in 2019, expanding his work on advanced characterisation of 2D heterojunction materials based on ultrathin metal-based coordination polymers for catalysis and energy storage. Since April 2020, he has been a Research Associate studying the cyclic reprocessing of battery materials. His research interests include layered oxides, defect creation and characterisation, batteries and supercapacitors, and related thermodynamics.
Charles C. Sorrell
Charles C. Sorrell has been the Professor of Ceramic Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) Sydney since 1987. He obtained his BSc degrees in Ceramic Engineering (1977) and Chemistry (1980) from the University of Missouri-Rolla, his MSc degree in Ceramic Science (1980) from the Pennsylvania State University, and his PhD degree in Ceramic Engineering (1987) from the University of New South Wales. His principal research foci are ceramic processing and phase equilibria, which have been applied across many areas. At present, his main work is on catalysis, biomaterials, geopolymers, and waste utilisation.
Esmail Doustkhah
Esmail Doustkhah received his PhD in 2017. During his PhD studies, he was awarded several prizes, scholarships and internships, including visiting research position and an internship at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. In 2018, he was accepted as a post-doctoral researcher at NIMS, working on mesoporous and 2D materials. In late 2019, he was awarded the JSPS fellowship in Japan. His current research interests are focused on the development of new porous and layered materials and studying their (photo)(bio)catalytic features.
Yuan Wang
Yuan (Helena) Wang received her PhD degree from the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney in 2018. She was appointed as a Research Assistant at the National Research Center for Geoanalysis, Chinese Academy of Geological Science in 2013. She was a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the School of Chemistry, UNSW Sydney. Currently, she is a Research Fellow in the Applied Chemistry & Environmental Science at RMIT University, Melbourne. Her research interests focus on the development and characterisation of nanoporous materials for energy-related applications.
Zongping Shao
Zongping Shao is a Professor of Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia, and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China, in 2000. He worked as a Visiting Scholar at the Institut de Researches sur la Catalyse, CNRS, France, and as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the California Institute of Technology, USA, from 2000 to 2005. His research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and low-temperature energy-conversion devices. He has been recognised as a Highly Cited Researcher in the Energy section by Elsevier since 2015. He has also been selected as a World Highly Cited Researcher by (Thomson Reuters) Clairvate Analytics for the year, 2014, 2017, 2018, and 2019.
Thomas Maschmeyer
Thomas Maschmeyer is a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Sydney, co-founder of three companies Avantium (2000), Licella (2006) and Gelion (2015) and inventor of the Cat-HTRTM recycling and the ENDURE battery technology. He is Fellow of four academies, serves on the boards of six international journals and has received many awards, including most recently the David Craig Medal from Australian Academy of Science (2021), Prime Minister's Prize for Innovation (2020), the Federation of Asian Chemical Societies’ Contribution to Economic Development Award (2019) and the Eureka Prize for Leadership in Innovation and Science (2018).
1. Introduction
Perovskite was initially identified as a mineral of the chemical formula CaTiO3 in 1839 by the Russian mineralogist Gustavus Rose (1798–1873). It was named in honour of the Russian mineralogist Lev Alekseyevich von Perovski (1792–1856).1 Since the first publications on perovskites in 19112 and the upswing in publications in the 1960s, the term perovskite has been used for a large range of complexes that are defined in terms of the molecular formula ABX3, where A and B are cations and X is an anion,3,4 as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Crystal structure of a cubic ABX3 perovskite. 
In the ABX3 structure, A is a larger cation that forms a cubic sublattice and B is a body-centred cubic smaller cation. The ideal cubic perovskite structure has the A cation in 12-fold octahedral coordination and B in 6-fold cubic coordination. X generally is oxygen, but it can also be a halogen (F, Cl, Br, I), B, C, N, P, or S. This variety of potential ionic candidates facilitates the existence of a large number of perovskite structures, the number of which has significantly increased from partial substitution at both A and B sites.3Fig. 2 illustrates this flexibility, incorporating the basic concepts of cation and anion substitutional solid solution formation by acceptor, donor, and neutral dopants plus the resultant charge compensation through redox, ionic, and electronic mechanisms.
 Fig. 2  Conceptual summary of mechanisms to modify physicochemical properties through defect engineering (ICC = ionic charge compensation, ECC = electronic charge compensation, redox = redox charge compensation). 
This range of compositions gives rise to an equally broad range of chemicophysical properties, including ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, semiconductivity, superconductivity, thermal conductivity, photovoltaic properties, and catalytic properties.5 Perovskites have particularly important applications as heterogeneous catalysts for many catalytic reactions, including gas–solid reactions (e.g., CO oxidation, CO2 reduction, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) conversion) and liquid–solid based reactions (e.g., photodegradation of organic pollutants, photocatalytic water splitting), owing to their versatile advantages including excellent oxygen mobility, thermal stability, oxygen vacancies, electron mobility, redox behaviour, mixed ion and electron conduction, surface/bulk oxygen evolution, and energy band structure.6 Regarding the energy storage field, perovskites are broadly used as anodes in air–metal batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors.7 The realisation of specific catalytic functions from perovskites depends on the design of specific surface sites. Kröger and Vink8 first formalised the standard method for the description of lattice defects in defective solids, which are more catalytically active than their defect-free counterparts. However, this approach has the limitation that it treats solids as homogeneous, but it is known that the surfaces of materials have higher activities than the bulk.9
The purpose of the present work is to provide a comprehensive overview of the different types of structural defects in perovskites, as summarised schematically in Fig. 3. The text considers the design and engineering of defects to generate properties applicable to catalysis and energy storage, and it canvasses an extensive range of recent experimental and modelling work on the resultant properties. The present work goes beyond the boundaries of current recent and older reviews in that it provides a state-of-the-art assessment of both fundamental and applied characteristics of perovskites for catalysis (electrocatalysis, thermocatalysis, photocatalysis) and energy conversion and storage applications. The present work aims to integrate these fundamental and applied aspects of perovskites from the perspectives of chemistry, chemical engineering, and materials science. It should be of particular interest to researchers as an introduction to defects and their impacts on the properties and performance of all materials, using perovskites as a model.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of defective perovskites for catalysis and energy storage. 
2. Perovskite catalysts
2.1. Crystalline perovskite structures
The control of the architecture and dimensionality of perovskites, which can be varied from 0D (quantum dots) to 3D (bulk), necessitates a comprehensive understanding of cation sizes and valences, crystal structures, defect chemistry, and stoichiometries. As suggested, the term perovskite is used for any inorganic or hybrid inorganic/organic compound with the stoichiometry ABX3. The cation valence permutations include the range from A1+B5+X32− to A5+B1+X32−, where X is oxygen for oxide perovskites. However, halide perovskites are limited to A1+B2+X3, where X is a halide. Partial substitution at both A and B sites by other cations is pervasive as this allows compositional and property tuning.10 When no replacement is attempted, these are known as single perovskites and, when substitution for A, B, or both A and B is attempted, these are known as double perovskites.11 The most common valence combination for single oxide perovskites is A3+B3+O3, and the most common variant of double perovskites is A(BB′)O3 or A2+(B3+,B5+)O3, although (AA′)BO3 or (A3+,A2+)B3+O3 perovskites are also known.12 More broadly, of the 2346 possible single oxide perovskites, only ∼265 have been synthesised and reported.12 However, when the 1536 possible halide and other feasible types of A1+B2+X3 perovskites are considered, the total number of potential single perovskites rises to 3882.
The idealised perovskite exhibits a cubic Bravais lattice of space group Pm3m.13 As shown in Fig. 4a, the structure consists of a central A ion located within a cubic B sublattice, where each B cation is coordinated by six octahedral X ions.14 As the unit cell is defined by the B cubic sublattice, the B–X distance is one half the unit cell. Fig. 4b and c illustrates the individual layers within the structure, which are layered in a BAB sequence in the (001) direction, where the B layer is BO2 and the A layer is AO. An alternative setting for this structure is suggested by Fig. 4d, which shows a (111) projection that reveals an AO3 layer normal to this orientation. The stacking of these layers, their close interatomic proximity, and the higher-order hexagonal symmetry enable shear of this plane. As a result, it is possible to form polytypes comprised of differently layered sequences of BO6 octahedra in hexagonal (H), rhombohedral (R), and cubic (C) symmetries.15 When the BO6 octahedra share only opposite faces, the stacking sequence is H; when they share only corners, the stacking sequence is C; and when faces and corners are shared, the stacking sequence is R or a mixture of H and C. The most commonly observed polytypes are 6H (e.g., BaCrO3), 2H (e.g., BaMnO3), and 9R (e.g., BaIrO3).16–18
 Fig. 4  (a) Perspective view of the 3D perovskite structure, (b) BO6 layer (purple plane in (a)), (c) AO layer (orange plane in (a)), and (d) (111) projection of the perovskite structure. 
The idealised perovskite has a Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) of 1.19 However, distorted perovskites with values outside of the range 0.7 ≤ t ≤ 1.0 have been observed.20 In these cases, the mismatched ionic radii result in distortion of the BO6 octahedra, which facilitates phase transformation to another polymorph.20 The origin of these phase transformations is the existence of an A/B ratio smaller than that of the idealised perovskite structure, as in the case of SrTiO3, which causes the BO6 to tilt to accommodate the structural contraction in the orthogonal directions by optimising the nearest-neighbour bonding with A (viz., A–X).21 This ready deformability has resulted in perovskite materials being considered to be soft ionic structures.22 The twenty-three possible variants of the discrete extents of tilt cited by Glazer21 are condensed to sixteen according to symmetry. In subsequent works by Shojaei23 and Yin,12 these sixteen variants, with some differences, were reduced to fifteen variants to characterise the permutations for eighteen alkali halides. However, in reality, 90% of such perovskites exhibit only four types of Glazer tilt, these being of the space groups Pnma (69%), R3c (14%), Pm3m (12%), and I4/mcm (5%).12 Elimination of equivalent space groups reduces the total to fourteen permutations, as given in Table 1.
Table 1 Perovskite tilt system permutations according to Glazer21




Tilt system
Crystal structure
Space group symmetry
Space group number
Example perovskites
Ref.




0-Tilt
Cubic

Pm3m
221
CaTiO3, SrTiO3

21



1-Tilt
Tetragonal

P4/mbm
127
NaNbO3

21



2-Tilt
Monoclinic

C2/m
12
PrAlO3

21 and 24



Orthorhombic

Cmcm

63
NaNbO3

21



Orthorhombic

Immm

71
Sr3CoSb2O9, Sr2CoSbO6

25



Orthorhombic

Imma

74
PrAlO3

21 and 24



3-Tilt
Triclinic

P
2
CaSiO3

26



Monoclinic

P21/m
11
Sr2Ta2O7

27



Monoclinic

B2/b
15
Pb2MnTeO6

28



Orthorhombic

Pmmm

59
NaNbO3

21



Orthorhombic

Pnma

62
SmAlO3, BaCeO3, GdFeO3

21



Orthorhombic

Immm

71
La2LiHO3

29



Trigonal

Rc
167
LaCoO3, BiFeO3, LiNbO3

21



Cubic

Im3
204
Na0.69WO3

30





2.2. Dimensionality of perovskites
Deviation in the dimensionality of the idealised 3D structure of perovskites is achieved by extending the concept of the tilting of the BO6 octahedra to the breakage of the B–O bonds binding the octahedra together. This results in either complete isolation or partial sharing of BO6, with cleavage of the 3D perovskite along one of its crystallographic planes. Consequently, the concept of soft perovskites also applies to the ease of bond manipulation. When this breakage is engineered, lower-dimensional structures of newly spatially arranged BO6 octahedra are formed.31 The resultant new bonding of the BO6 octahedra results in the conversion of a 3D structure (Fig. 5a) to establish three potential dimensionalities: (2D) – edge-shared octahedra, resulting in stratified configurations, i.e., nanosheets (Fig. 5b);32 (1D) – corner-, edge-, or face-shared octahedra, resulting in linear and zigzag configurations, i.e., nanowires (Fig. 5c);33 and (0D) – isolated octahedra, without electron sharing, i.e., quantum dots (Fig. 5d).34 While perovskite quantum dots have been examined for applications involving optoelectronics and photovoltaics,35 the high surface/volume ratios of the other two low-dimensionality perovskite structures underpin their potential applications in catalysis and energy storage.
 Fig. 5  (a) Three-dimensional bulk perovskite oxide, (b) two-dimensional layered perovskite oxide, (c) one-dimensional perovskite oxide, and (d) zero-dimensional perovskite oxide. 

2.2.1. 3D perovskite structures. 
The infinite corner-sharing of the BX6 octahedra establishes an extensive network to form a bulk perovskite in 3D. The presence of cations in which the tolerance factor falls outside of the range 0.8 ≤ t ≤ 1 can result in the formation of lower dimensionalities. This unlimited corner-sharing results in the formation of direct band gaps (Egs) within the semiconducting range of 1–3 eV. As a result, the crystal structure plays a key role in the catalytic and electronic properties.36 The reason for this is that corner-sharing destabilises the unpaired electrons in the B cation orbitals, which allows band engineering of the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) through hybridisation of the respective metal d orbitals and oxygen p orbitals.37 The functionality of perovskites can be expanded through alteration of the corner-sharing by tilting of the BX6 octahedra, which can be initiated by, inter alia, substitution to introduce defects and atmosphere control. Low-dimensional (LD) perovskites are of considerable interest because of their tunable optical and electrical properties.38 These materials qualify as LD when at least one of the physical dimensional parameters is ≤100 nm.39 While 1D perovskites can be synthesised by self-assembly, 2D perovskites usually are synthesised by exfoliation of 3D structures.40 As oxide perovskites tend to exfoliate at A sites occupied by small BX6 interlayer cations, organic–inorganic perovskites exfoliate owing to the larger interlayer spacing resulting from the presence of large organic chains.41


2.2.2. 2D perovskite structures. 
State-of-the-art 2D nanosheets generally are synthesised using two main strategies, viz., top-down (exfoliation) and bottom-up (assembly).42 The latter approach involves oriented lateral growth with limited outward growth. This method suffers from low yields and constraints on applicability from procedural complexities.43 In contrast, the former strategy involves exfoliation of stratified/layered bulk structures. Perovskites with 2D layered structures are based on [An−1BnO3n+1]2− layers, where n is the number of layers and charge balance is achieved by the presence of one or two interlayer metal (M, M2, or M2O2) cations. The interlayer cations generally are exchanged with protons in acidic solutions to form H[An−1BnO3n+1] and H2[An−1BnO3n+1].44 This facilitates the cleavage necessary to exfoliate the stratified structures and create 2D structures with tailored thicknesses. These bulk layered perovskites generally are one of three types, including Ruddlesden–Popper, Dion–Jacobson, and Aurivillius phases, as shown in Fig. 6. While the configurations of the layers of the Ruddlesden–Popper and Aurivillius phases are similar,45 Dion–Jacobson phases have half as many interlayer cations. The high surface areas, high densities of active sites, and outstanding stability arising from their low ionic diffusivity and good resistance to water penetration highlight the potential of these 2D perovskites in energy and environmental applications.46 The orthogonal preferred cleavage planes in 3D perovskites lead to the formation of (100)-, (110)-, or (111)-oriented layered perovskites.45
 Fig. 6  Schematics of principal bulk layered perovskite structures. 
2.2.2.1. Ruddlesden–Popper phases. 
The Ruddlesden–Popper phases have the general formula M2[An−1BnO3n+1], where M and A typically are alkali, alkaline earth, or rare earth metals (where the two M ions are interlayer exchangeable cations); and B is a transition or post-transition metal; and n ≥ 1.47 When high-temperature processing is used, phases with n > 3 generally are unstable.48 However, room-temperature precipitation from solution can yield phases with n = 5, low-temperature layer-by-layer methods can produce phases of n = 6, and epitaxial films can result in phases with n as high as 10. The first such phases, Sr2TiO4, Ca2MnO4, and (LaSr)AlO4, were synthesised in 1957.47Fig. 6 shows a representation of the 2D layered architecture of Ruddlesden–Popper phases, which are of the K2NiF4 structure group, with a tetragonal Bravais lattice and space group I4/mmm.49 As indicated above, the interlayer A site, with coordination number 9, is occupied by an alkali, alkaline earth, or rare earth element, while the B-site, at the centre of the octahedra and so of coordination number 6, is occupied by transition or post-transition metals.50 There may also be two M ions that are interlayer exchangeable cations in the form of alkali, alkaline earth, or rare earth. In this case, the formula M2A2B3O10 corresponds to a type of Ruddlesden–Popper phase with n = 3. This is characterised by the original perovskite block inserted into the rock salt layer, where the larger cation (M+) is located, such as the structures Na2Nd2Ti3O10,51 A2Ln2Ti3O10 (A = K, Rb; Ln = La),52 and MLa2Ti2TaO10 (M = Cs, Rb).53 The Ruddlesden–Popper phases can be exfoliated to form 2D structures in a number of ways, the most common of which is ion exchange using a proton in order to lower the energy requirement for cleavage,54,55 as shown in Fig. 7. Fukuda et al.56 reported a multiple-step fabrication process containing ion exchange of Cs in Cs6+xW11O36 with intercalated H+, swelling the resultant H2.10Cs3.90W11O36·6H2O through intercalation of the strong organic base tetra(n-butyl)ammonium hydroxide (TBA+OH−), and applying mechanical stress by intermittent shaking for 10 days. The rationale for using TBA+OH− is its ability to cause a 50-fold increase in interlayer spacing.57 This work was inspired by an earlier effort by Ebina et al.,58 where HCa2Nb3O10·1.5H2O was intercalated with TBA+OH−. While protonated Ruddlesden–Popper phases would be expected to preclude intercalation and exfoliation owing to the small resultant interlayer spacing, the success of these preliminary studies suggests that another factor is relevant to exfoliation, which is the chemistry of the intercalating ion and its ability to reduce the activation energy for intercalation.54,55 The means by which this is achieved is neutralisation of the acidic protons by the strong organic base. This has been confirmed by the work of Schaak et al.,59 who used TBA+OH− to tailor the exfoliation of the Ruddlesden–Popper tantalates and titanotantalates H2[An−1BnO3n+1] (A = Na, Ca, Sr, La; B = Ta, Ti) into atomically thin single and thicker multiple layers. Fig. 7 illustrates the basic principles behind the self-assembly of perovskite nanosheets, and the process can be refined to generate more sophisticated structures. For example, Liu et al.60 reported the layer-by-layer assembly of 2D Ruddlesden–Popper nanosheets consisting of alternating C8H17NH3-capped CsPb2Br7 nanosheets, which were then converted into layered (C8H17NH3)2CsPb2Br7 superlattice nanocrystals. Further, they demonstrated that the exfoliation of these 2D nanostructures was reversible by exfoliating the superlattice nanocrystals back into monolayer building blocks by sonication in toluene. Since most transition-metal-based Ruddlesden–Popper phases are not ion-exchangeable, probably owing to the high electronegativities of the transition metals, these phases remain in the form of 3D bulk layered structures. However, the existing interlayer gaps facilitate charge carrier intercalation, which makes these materials suitable as anodes for Li- and Na-ion batteries.61
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the mechanism of exfoliation through ion exchange and reassembly of bulk layered perovskites. 
2.2.2.2. Dion–Jacobson phases. 
Another family of perovskite compounds is the Dion–Jacobson phases, which have the general formula M[An−1BnO3n+1], where M and A typically are an alkali or alkaline earth ion (where the single M is an interlayer exchangeable cation) and B is a transition or post-transition metal.62,63 For instance, M[Ca2Nb3O10], which is of the K2NiF4 structure type and where M is Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, NH4, or Ti, was synthesised by Dion et al.62 Subsequently, Jacobson et al.22 used ion exchange to convert K[Ca2Nb3O10] to H[Ca2Nb3O10] in order to vary the layer thickness. The resultant low interlayer charge density allows these acid-exchanged Dion–Jacobson phases to be exfoliated easily to form monolayer colloids.64 The structures consist of triple perovskite sheets interleaved with M sheets. Depending on the nature of the M ion, the relative displacements of adjacent triple perovskite sheets, which are parallel to (001), are O, b/4, or (a + b)/4.22 In common with the Ruddlesden–Popper phases, Dion–Jacobson layered perovskites, such as acid-exchanged HCa2Nb3O10 and HLa2Ti2NbO10, exfoliate into nanoscale colloidal sheets when reacted with a bulky organic base.59 This is a reflection of the fundamental acid–base chemistry of these layered solids. Of the layered transition metal oxides, titanates are less acidic than both niobates and tantalates, which is reflected in the periodic electronegativity trends.65 This suggests that Group 6 cations are more acidic than those of Groups 4 and 5, and so the former would be exfoliated more readily.66
One study of note reported a rapid and simplified strategy for the simultaneous exfoliation of Dion–Jacobson perovskites and surface modification of the resultant nanosheets using a fast microwave-assisted reaction.67 This work involved the simultaneous synthesis of the bulk layered CsLnNb2O7 (Ln = La, Pr) perovskite and surface modification by tetra(n-butyl)ammonium (TBA+), followed by protonation to form HLnNb2O7 nanosheets. The TBA+ surface groups were then replaced with different n-alkyl alkoxy and n-alkylammonium groups by microwave reaction (≤1 h). This work exposed the potential for surface modification of perovskite nanosheets with a wide range of organic ligands containing hydroxyl or amine functional groups. Another study of note reported the synthesis of CsBa2Ta3O10 and its exfoliation to nitride Ba2Ta3O10 using a nitridation–protonation–intercalation–exfoliation process.68 This allowed the engineering of lateral sizes ranging from several hundred nanometres to a few micrometres and heights of ∼2 nm. The band alignment indicated that these materials would be suitable for visible-light-driven photocatalytic water splitting. Interestingly, CsBa2Ta3O10 exhibited two different Ta–O bond lengths, which effectively stretched the TaO6 octahedron. The flexibility of these layered perovskites can be exploited readily using thin-film techniques, such as laser-deposition or molecular beam epitaxy, which allow the synthesis of multiple-layer structures. In contrast with high-vacuum techniques, ultrathin films from suspensions can be controllably restacked by Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) deposition.69 For example, Li et al.70 used LB deposition to synthesise ultrathin films of the Dion–Jacobson phase Ca2Nam−3NbmO3m+1, where the number of layers (m) varied in the range 3–6, as shown in Fig. 8a. The atomic force microscopy (AFM) results, shown in Fig. 8b–e, reveal the 2D morphology with respective average thicknesses of 1.85, 2.30, 2.74, and 3.20 nm. The high dielectric constants (k) of these ultrathin-film ferroelectric perovskites suggest their suitability for efficient energy storage. In another study, a colloidal suspension of the Dion–Jacobson phase KCa2Nb3O10 was initially exfoliated into 2D nanosheets of Ca2Nb3O10 and then self-assembled into ultrathin films of different numbers of layers (m) and corresponding thicknesses, where m = 5 (7.5 nm), m = 10 (15 nm), and m = 15 (22.5 nm).69
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of Ca2(NbmNam−3)O3m+1 nanosheets (m = 3–6) and (b–e) AFM images of individual nanosheets of (b) Ca2Nb3O10, (c) Ca2NaNb4O13, (d) Ca2Na2Nb5O16, and (e) Ca2Na3Nb6O19 (reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
2.2.2.3. Aurivillius phases. 
The face-centred orthorhombic Aurivillius phases have the general formula [Bi2O2]2+[An−1BnO3n+1)]2−, where A is an alkali or alkaline earth ion or a post-transition metal ion and B is a transition metal.71 In these structures, the A sites are 8–12 coordinated with oxygen and the B sites occupy two octahedral nonequivalent positions.72 These structures have highly anisotropic 2D structures that link Bi2O2 layers with perovskite BO6 layers by weak van der Waals bonding. A promising Aurivillius phase is Bi2MoO6, where the fluorite-type Bi2O22+ block and the MoO42− perovskite block arrangement exhibits high electron and ionic conductivity, which makes this material attractive for catalysis and energy storage applications.73 The layered Aurivillius phase [Bi2O2]2+[W2O7]2− has been protonated by selective acid leaching (3 days) to form H2W2O7.66 An alternative to protonation is Li+ intercalation, which has been applied to the Aurivillius-type layered perovskite Bi4Ti3O12 to form Li2Bi4Ti3O12, which was exfoliated upon Li removal by intercalation of H2O.74 This technology has the advantage of avoiding the use of acidic media for protonation. This exfoliation approach has been applied to the optoelectronic materials WS2 and MoS2.75 The preceding materials represent single-layered perovskites in that the structures contain a single perovskite block. However, there is a group of more complex double-layered perovskites, one of which has the general formula M′[(La, Sr)(Nb2−xMx2+)O9], where interlayer M′ is Na1+ or Cs1+, M2+ is a transition metal ion with two valences (Co, Ni, Cu), and [(La, Sr)(Nb2−xMx2+)O9]1− is the double perovskite block.76 The partial substitution of Nb5+ by the M2+ ion at the B-site is responsible for the formation of oxygen vacancies, which act as active sites for catalysis for metal–air batteries. Another notable feature of these structures is that, when the large ion Cs (0.174 nm) is the interlayer M′, a 2D structure is formed, while in the presence of small Na (0.102 nm) as the interlayer M′, the cubic 3D structure is retained. The thickness of the nanosheets of CsLaSrNb2(M2+)O9 can be tailored through the use of different intercalating ions. The role of the ionic radii of these intercalating ions in the cleavage of the 3D structure into 2D has been investigated by Uma et al.77 where CsCa2Nb2AlO9 formed a layered 2D structure with proton intercalation and ion-exchange between the anionic slabs. In contrast, intercalation of K+ followed by protonation failed to exfoliate owing to suppression of proton diffusion and ion-exchange, thereby resulting in the retention of a 3D bulk structure.


2.2.3. 1D perovskite structures. 
Strategies for the preparation of 1D structures as nanowires generally rely on control of the growth kinetics, often by the use of mineralisers for the enhancement of growth in a single direction78 or by the use of a capping agent to constrain growth in the complementary directions.79 For example, Magrez et al.80 reported the growth of highly uniform single-crystal KNbO3 nanowires of aspect ratio ∼100 and diameter ∼60 nm with the assistance of the KOH mineraliser during hydrothermal synthesis. The structure was orthorhombic, with the (110) nanowire growth direction. Mao et al.81 obtained high yields of single-crystal nanowires of BaTiO3 and SrTiO3 of aspect ratio >25 and ∼65 nm diameter. The fabrication method was described as a solid-state reaction at 820 °C in the presence of NaCl and a nonionic surfactant (nonylphenyl ether), which resulted in the directed growth of the perovskites in the (100) direction. However, other techniques, such as vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth82 and soft chemistry,83 have also been reported. Further, synthesis can be done through self-assembly of nanoparticles to yield self-assembled 1D polycrystalline perovskites. A more direct method to fabricate 1D nanofibres is sol–gel electrospinning. George et al.84 synthesised highly crystalline SrMnO3 perovskite nanofibres by this technique, followed by calcination at different temperatures. The nanofibres were polycrystalline and porous, with a randomly oriented grain size of ∼30 nm. The pore and grain sizes could be altered by changing the calcination temperature, which had a significant effect on the electrochemical properties of the nanofibres, which were developed for application as an electrode material for supercapacitors. The electrochemical capacitance reached 321.7 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.5 A g−1, retaining 87% after 5000 cycles. The full-cell supercapacitor exhibited energy and power densities reaching 37.3 W h kg−1 and 400 W kg−1, respectively. Ma et al.85 used the same electrospinning technique to prepare (La1−xSrx)(Mn0.9Ni0.1)O3 nanofibres in order to examine the effects of oxygen vacancies on the electrochemical performance. This work revealed an optimal performance window as a function of increasing Sr content in which corresponding oxygen vacancy formation increased the specific capacitance, after which lattice distortion decreased it. The maximal specific capacitance of 113.9 F g−1 corresponded to the composition (La0.85Sr0.15)(Mn0.9Ni0.1)O3.


2.2.4. 0D perovskite structures. 
The size of semiconductor crystallites strongly affects the electronic and optical properties of these 0D materials. This is an effect of the natural length scale of the electron–hole pair, which is known as the exciton Bohr radius (rBohr).86 The spatial confinement of the electron and hole wavefunctions, i.e., quantum confinement, results in quantisation of the electronic band structure into discrete energy levels.87 The key outcomes of this are that the catalytic activity increases significantly despite a significant simultaneous increase in the Eg.88 This equates to performance commensurate with the surface rather than the bulk. Semiconductor materials are classified into different categories, depending on confinement in other spatial directions:89 3D – confinement in no dimensions; 2D – confinement in one dimension; 1D – confinement in two dimensions; 0D – confinement in all three dimensions. The existing shortcomings in bulk layered perovskites, such as their lacklustre stability, can be addressed by lower-dimensional perovskite derivatives. Several methods have been developed to synthesise 0D perovskites, including hot-injection colloidal and solvent-based synthesis methods, which are based on three-dimensional isolation of [BX6]4− octahedra from the inorganic A-cation.34 Although these 0D materials can have a physical dimension of several millimetres or larger, similar to bulk materials, they act as bulk quantum materials owing to their intrinsic confined nature.90 The most extensive work has been done on the 0D inorganic perovskite Cs4PbBr6. These 0D materials exhibit unique properties of incorporated organic molecules and inorganic semiconductor materials. These properties include intrinsic Pb2+ ion emission, large exciton binding energy, and a small amount of polaron formation upon photoexcitation. They also exhibit anomalous green photoluminescence with improved stability and high quantum yield, which arise from the localisation of carriers on the [BX6]4− cluster and the formation of defect-assisted emission.91

2.3. Heterojunction nanostructures
The fabrication of heterostructures can generate new electronic states at the interfaces between phases, thereby offering the potential to create novel materials of unusual properties.92 Consequently, this approach represents an advanced strategy to modify the electronic band structure of oxide and other materials for energy and environmental applications. Heterojunctions can be viewed in terms of two nanostructural classifications: (1) intrinsic heterostructures, which are heterojunctions formed between (i) chemisorbed structural sheets in lattices and superlattices disrupted by planar dislocations, significant lattice mismatch, etc. or (ii) physisorbed immiscible solid solutions; and (2) extrinsic heterostructures, which are heterojunctions formed between two mutually physisorbed nanoparticles. One study of note of an intrinsic heterostructure reported a relatively simple method of forming a series of perovskite superlattices through the layer-by-layer assembly of the Dion–Jacobson phases LaNb2O7 and Ca2Nb3O10 as building blocks.93 It is not possible to create the resultant LaNb2O7/Ca2Nb3O10 as a 3D bulk structure. The resultant superlattice layers established ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic coupling at the interface, which suggests potential applications in multiferroics.
Another study of note of an intrinsic heterostructure reported the synthesis of monolayers of anionic sheets derived from HCa2Nb3O10, HSr2Nb3O10, HCaLaNb2TiO10, and HLaNb2O7 grown on cationic substrates. Combinations of these phases were used to synthesise multilayer films with an interleaving organic polycation. This layer-by-layer chemical adsorption is a convenient way to fabricate thin films of materials of specific stacking sequences.64 A study of note of an extrinsic heterostructure reported the fabrication of 2D/2D heterojunction photocatalysts consisting of g-C3N4 and exfoliated ultrathin KCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets.94 Effective electron–hole charge separation deriving from the synergistic effects of nanosheet heterojunctions appeared to enhance the effectiveness of photocatalytic degradation of the refractory antibiotic tetracycline hydrochloride. A second study of note of an extrinsic 2D/1D heterostructure reported data for a p–n junction heterostructure combining p-type double perovskite (Ba, Pr)(Mn1.75Co0.25)O5+δ nanosheets with n-type nitrogen-doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes (NCNTs).95 Interestingly, the oxygen nonstoichiometry of nanosheets derived from the partial substitution of Ba2+ by Pr3+ at the A site and the charge-compensating creation of oxygen interstitials. This heterojunction exhibited significant enhancement in bifunctional oxygen electrocatalytic activity. The optimisation of the band alignment and the consequent charge transfer from the perovskite to NCNTs offers a new path to facilitate redox oxygen activation. A proof-of-concept rechargeable Zn–air battery with a cathode of 90 wt% perovskite + 10 wt% NCNT has demonstrated a specific discharge capacity of 789.2 mA h gzn−1 and cyclic stability for 85 h at a current density of 5 mA cm−2. While the preceding are examples of oxide–oxide heterojunctions, there are also many metal–oxide systems that have been investigated.96 Gao et al.97 prepared the perovskite composition La(Mn0.9Pt0.075Ni0.025)O3−δ as a catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in alkaline solution. Pt3Ni nanoparticles were exsolved in situ on the surfaces upon reduction, thereby yielding the heterostructure. The catalytic activity was found to improve, which was attributed to the synergy between the host perovskite and nanoparticulate precipitates. Beyond these effects across interfaces, there are also other considerations that apply within and across grains, which are relevant to double perovskites and two mutually contacting perovskites. These involve the potential for electron exchange between materials, which can take place by several processes: (1) intrinsic ionisation – in the case of double perovskites, the electron exchange occurs between ions, which are intrinsic to the composition, at the B site, as in, e.g., Fe3+ + Co2+ → Fe2+ + Co3+; (2) intervalence charge transfer (IVCT)98–100 – in the case of two mutually contacting single perovskites, electron exchange occurs between a matrix ion of one perovskite and that of another perovskite, thus representing an extrinsic effect for both structures, as in LaMnO3 and SrNbO3, giving Mn3+ + Nb4+ → Mn2+ + Nb5+; and (3) multivalence charge transfer (MVCT)101,102 – in the case of two mutually contacting perovskites, one (or both) of which is a double perovskite, electron exchange occurs between multiple matrix ions of one perovskite and the ion(s) of another perovskite, again an extrinsic effect, as in SrMoO3 and (La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.8Mn0.2)O3, giving Mo4+ + Co3+ + Mn3+ → Mo6+ + Co2+ + Mn2+.

Fig. 9a and b show the electronic band structure of a heterojunction between the single perovskites ABO3 and AB′O3.103 The electronic structure is altered at the interface owing to the mismatch in Fermi energies (Efs), thereby resulting in increased charge transfer by establishing a local potential (ΔΦ) across the interfacial region. In another work,104 density functional theory (DFT) simulation indicated that electron exchange occurred owing to differences in electronegativity of the B-site ions in the superlattice of Sr2VO4 and Sr2MnO4, which resulted in hole doping of the VO2 layer and electron doping of the MnO2 layer (Fig. 9c). However, in contrast with the authors’ explanation, an interpretation based on IVCT based on electronic charge compensation could be examined experimentally from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data. Table 2 summarises the range of single and double perovskites of different dimensionalities for catalysis and energy applications.
 Fig. 9  Schematics of heterostructure effects: (a and b) energy band alignment at the interface of two single perovskites (reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Physical Society), and (c) Sr2VO4 and Sr2MnO4 (reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from American Physical Society). 
Table 2 Summary of perovskites of different dimensionalities




Perovskite
Dimensionality
Synthesis process
Applications
Ref.




(La0.7Sr0.3)CoO3−δ
3D hollow fibre
Sol–gel
Removal of organic pollutants

105



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3
3D ordered mesoporous
Emulsion polymerisation + sol–gel
Li–air batteries

106



Pr2BaNiMnO7−δ
3D Ruddlesden–Popper
Citric acid–nitrate gel combustion
Photocathode in solid oxide fuel cells

107



Sr(Ir1−xMx)O3 (M = 3d transition metal)
3D Ruddlesden–Popper
Solid-state reaction
Not given

108



Bi2MoO6
3D Aurivillius
Hydrothermal
Reactive oxygen species photogeneration

73



Bi3Ti0.6Cr0.2Nb1.2O9
3D Aurivillius
Solid-state reaction
Photocatalytic hydrogen production

109



Bi4Ti2.95(B1/3Nb2/3)0.05O12 (B = Mg, Zn, Cu)
3D Aurivillius
Solid-state reaction
Enhanced electrical conductivity

110



Ca2Nb3O10
2D Ruddlesden–Popper
Wet chemistry and protonation with organic phase
Organic light-emitting device

111



H3.6IrO4 3.7H2O
2D Ruddlesden–Popper
Solid-state reaction
Oxygen evolution reaction

112



Ca2Nan−3NbnO3n+1
2D Dion–Jacobson
Not given
Solar-hydrogen water splitting

113



RbSr2Nb3O10
2D Dion–Jacobson
Microwave heating
Not given

114



Cs6W11O36
2D Dion–Jacobson
Soft-chemical process
Photochromic activity

56



Bi2WO6
2D Aurivillius
Hydrothermal
Photocatalysis

115



Bi2WO6
2D Aurivillius
Hydrothermal
Photocatalysis

116



Sr2Bi2Nb2TiO12
2D Aurivillius
Mineraliser-assisted soft chemical process
CO2 photoreduction activity

117



LaNiO3
2D single perovskite
Sol–gel
Supercapacitor

118



PrBaMn2O5+δ
2D double perovskite

In situ annealing of (Pr0.5Ba0.5)MnO3−δ
Solid oxide fuel cell

119



(YxSr1−x)SnO3+δ
2D double perovskite
Low-temperature solution-deposition
Solar cell

120



(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO2.91
1D nanowire
Multistep microemulsion
Li–air batteries

121



(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO2.91
1D nanowire
Electrospinning
Li–air batteries

122



(La0.75Sr0.25)MnO3
1D nanotube
Integrated electrospinning with heating
Li–air batteries

123



(p-type) Na0.5Bi3.25La1.25Ti4O15
2D/2D heterojunction
Sol–gel conjugated with layer-by-layer annealing
Energy storage

124



(n-type) BaBi3.4Pr0.6Ti4O15
2D/2D heterojunction
Sol–gel conjugated with layer-by-layer annealing
Energy storage

124





3. Defects
3.1. Classification of point defects
The different types of defects and their equilibria typically are expressed in terms of the Kröger–Vink notation.125,126 This notation indicates the type of solid solution (substitutional solid solubility (SSS) or interstitial solid solubility (ISS)), the lattice ions, the identities of defects, the locations of defects, valences of all species, and whether there is ionic charge compensation (ICC) or electronic charge compensation (ECC). More broadly, these defects are defined in terms of whether they involve only their own lattice species (viz., intrinsic defects) or they involve species that are not part of the base chemical system (viz., extrinsic defects). These features are incorporated in representative reactions that describe the defect equilibria, which must maintain mass and charge balance. A final point about these equilibria is that when ICC is involved, the stoichiometry matches that of the dopant; when ECC is involved, the stoichiometry matches that of the lattice. The common descriptors used in the Kröger–Vink notation are as follows:

: metal ion at a metal sublattice site (M), hence of no net charge (×)

: oxygen at an oxygen sublattice site (O), hence of no net charge (×)

: metal ion (acceptor dopant) substituting in the metal sublattice (M), with one net negative charge (′)

: metal ion interstitial (i), with one net positive charge (˙)

: substituted metal ion, replaced at its lattice site, that has diffused to the surface (S), hence of no net charge (×)

: metal (M) vacancy, with one net negative charge (′)

: oxygen (O) vacancy, with two net positive charges (˙˙)
e′: electron, with one net negative charge (′)
h˙: hole, with one net positive charge (˙)

Table 3 gives some examples of the relevant defect equilibria.
Table 3 Examples of Kröger–Vink notation used to describe common defect equilibria




Intrinsic defect equilibria
Eqn




Metal vacancy formation A site oxidation
ICC



(1)


ECC



(2)


Metal vacancy formation
ICC



(3)


A and B site reduction
ECC



(4)


B cation redox  formation
ICC



(5)


B cation redox h˙ formation
ECC



(6)


Intrinsic ionisation B site redox
ICC



(7)






Extrinsic defect equilibria
Eqn




Donor cation dopant B site substitution
SSS



(8)


ICC


SSS



(9)


ECC


Acceptor cation dopant B site substitution
SSS



(10)


ICC


SSS



(11)


ECC


Donor cation dopant B cation interstitial
ISS



(12)


ICC


ISS



(13)


ECC


Acceptor cation dopant B cation interstitial
ISS



(14)


ICC


ISS



(15)


ECC


Acceptor anion dopant O anion interstitial
ISS



(16)


ICC


ISS



(17)


ECC




It is implicitly clear that intrinsic ionisation for a single structure is similar to IVCT and MVCT, although the latter two are extrinsic effects as they involve two structures. However, in addition to these sources of defects, there is another source of defects, i.e. F0, F+, or F++ colour centres, which are represented as , , or , respectively.127,128 These Kröger–Vink symbols represent oxygen vacancies with two, one, or no electrons, respectively. Colour centres have been identified in layered rubidium tungstate Rb4−xW11O35, which has a 2D bronze-type tunnel structure.129 This tungstate exfoliated into nanosheets (3 nm thickness and average lateral dimension of 400 nm) and intercalated with TBA cations. The highly efficient photochromic behaviour was attributed to the presence of colour centres, although it is possible that it also resulted from quantum confinement effects.
3.2. Point defects in perovskites
Although single perovskites do not involve substitutional solid solubility, this is the norm for double perovskites, which have isovalent cations at the A site but isovalent and/or heterovalent cations at the B site.130 The structural flexibility of these soft ionic perovskites allows their physicochemical, electronic, and other properties to be modified and tuned according to the nature and extent of substitution. Electron exchange by ionic and electronic charge compensation, IVCT and MVCT, and colour centre formation are sources of active sites that may be beneficial for catalytic and energy storage applications.131Fig. 10 shows the three principal solute ordering patterns that are observed in double perovskites; all of these can exhibit ordering at the A or B sites, which results in reduced symmetry.12 In the very common rock salt pattern, ordered B site substitution is more likely than A site ordering owing to the high strain between neighbouring A cations.132 The resultant ordering pattern exhibits alternating B and B′ patterns that interleave through the structure in 3D. This perovskite is defined as A2BB′X6. The driving force to form the rock salt pattern is governed by the valence difference (ΔV) between B and B′, where a random pattern results when ΔV ≤ 3 and the rock salt pattern results when 3 < ΔV ≤ 6; the layered pattern occurs when ΔV = 2.133 It has been suggested that Jahn–Teller distortion of either the BO6 or B′O6 octahedron favours the layered pattern.134 As indicated in eqn (1)–(17), it is possible to have defects on and within both cation and anion sublattices as vacancies and interstitials, respectively.
 Fig. 10  Schematics of cation ordering schemes in perovskites (reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 

3.2.1. A Site deficiency. 
Eqn (1)–(4): A1−xBO3 structures can exhibit a wide range of stoichiometries, which makes them suitable as anode materials in Li-ion and Na-ion batteries.136 In the extreme, when the A site is entirely unoccupied, a new BX3 structure forms, which is a ReO3-type perovskite, where the B site cation alters valence from 3+ or 4+ to 6+.137 There are many BX3 perovskites of this structure, from WO3 to highly complex structures, such as CoPt(CN)6, where the bridging octahedral anion CN is polyatomic.138


3.2.2. B Site deficiency. 
Analogues of eqn (1)–(4): vacancies at the B-site (AB1−xO3) are energetically unfavourable unless there are compensating factors, such as B–B interactions.139 However, another class of perovskites is hexagonal, such as Ba3Re2O9 and Ba5Nb4O15, which enable B site vacancies.140


3.2.3. A or B interstitial. 
Eqn (12)–(15): for A1+xBO3 or AB1+xO3, although it is commonly assumed that substitutional solid solubility follows from stoichiometry compensation and equilibration, the fact that solute ordering at 50 mol% does not always occur demonstrates that some of the solute ions are located interstitially. This can have a significant effect on the defect equilibria.


3.2.4. O Site deficiency. 
Eqn (5): oxygen vacancies (ABO3−δ), which are well known as catalytically active sites,141,142 can be generated by substitutional solid solubility using what is effectively an acceptor dopant. In some cases, the oxygen vacancy concentration can be high enough to result in the ordering of these anion defects, which is the case in brownmillerite, CaFeO2.5. Although this oxygen vacancy concentration is 16.67 mol%, thus suggesting that the ordering is layered since this would involve one-sixth of the oxygen sites, ordered rows in the (110) direction have been reported for other perovskites.143


3.2.5. O Site interstitial. 
Eqn (16) and (17): in other cases (ABO3+δ), such as LaMnO3+δ, oxygen interstitials can form, where charge compensation probably occurs by La or Mn vacancy formation.144 However, it is also possible that this is affected by Mn valence increase. One of the techniques to achieve oxygen injection is by cleaving the perovskite on the (100) planes, which has been done for perovskites in the Sr–Ti–O and La–Ni–O systems.15

3.3. Classification of structural defects
Defects are classified according to several categories. As shown in the representative examples of Fig. 11, there are many types, including intrinsic and extrinsic. They may also be classified according to dimensions or locations. By dimension, they can be 0D, 1D, 2D, or 3D. By location, they may be external (viz., surface) defects145 or internal (viz., bulk) defects.146 While the 0D, 1D, and 2D defects are small and are considered to be atomic-scale defects or microdefects, the 3D defects are larger and so are considered to be macrodefects.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of representative types of intrinsic and extrinsic defects in perovskites. 

3.3.1. 0D point defects. 
Strictly speaking, 0D structural defects are point defects. In addition to the previously mentioned vacancies and interstitials, there are several other common types of defects:147
• Schottky pair: simultaneous formation of a cation site vacancy and charge-compensating anion site vacancies or an anion site vacancy and charge-compensating cation site vacancies.
• Frenkel defect: movement of a cation or an anion from its lattice site to an interstice, with no charge compensation requirement.
• Antisite defect: transposition of two lattice ions, including cation–cation and cation–anion, with no charge compensation requirement.


3.3.2. 1D linear defects. 
1D defects are known as linear defects or dislocations. They are well known as the sources of plastic deformation in metals, although they also occur commonly in ceramics.147 The two types of such defects are edge dislocations and screw dislocations, with both consisting of regions of lattice disregistry. An edge dislocation can be visualised as a partially inserted plane (thus causing compression) or removed plane (thus causing tension) of ions in the lattice. In contrast, a screw dislocation is equivalent to partial shearing of the lattice along a plane. The extent and direction of the disregistry in terms of the number of lattice spacings is known as the Burger's vector.


3.3.3. 2D planar defects. 
2D defects are known as planar defects or interfacial defects. There are many types of these, the principal types of which are as follows:148,149
• Surface: interface between solid/liquid, liquid/gas, or solid/gas.
• Phase boundary: interface between two materials of different chemistries and/or structures.
• Grain boundary: interface between two discrete grains, whether of the same or different materials.
• Low-angle grain boundary: interface between grains in which the angular mismatch is ≤15°, although this varies according to crystallography and lattice spacing; also known as subgrain boundary.
• High-angle grain boundary: interface between grains in which the angular mismatch is >15°, although this varies according to crystallography and lattice spacing.
• Coherent twin boundary: interface of arbitrary orientation that forms a mirror image in which all adjacent ions are matched.
• Incoherent twin boundary: interface of arbitrary orientation in which adjacent ions are partially but regularly matched.
• Antiphase boundary: interface effectively comprised of antisite orientation (i.e., identical adjacent ion pairs rather than adjacent cation–anion pairs).
• Domain boundary: interface between magnetic domains.
• Slip (glide) plane: interface between two regions in a crystal that have sheared along a plane.
• Stacking fault: crystallographic plane present or absent that alters the periodicity of the lattice.
The Ruddlesden–Popper, Dion–Jacobson, and Aurivillius perovskites are examples of materials in which stacking faults play key structural roles.150,151 For instance, the Ruddlesden–Popper defect is expected to become a candidate for electrochemical energy equipment, due to its superconductivity, catalytic activity, photocatalytic activity, structural characteristics, and certain unique characteristics (including oxygen migration anisotropy and controllable stoichiometry, controllable oxygen excess stoichiometry and oxygen deficiency). Besides, the ability to inject molecules into their interlayer spaces, the ion-exchange capacity, and ability to exfoliate into nanosheets can be important features of Ruddlesden–Popper oxides widely used in energy conversion and storage applications, for example, (La2−ySmy)NiO4+δ,152 NaLnTiO4 titanates (Ln = Nd, La)153 and Lan+1NinO3n+1.154 Compared to the perovskite structure, this structure also has higher redox stability, rapid surface oxygen exchange, and oxygen permeability, for instance, (La0.6Sr1.4)MnO4+δ,155 (LaxSr3−x)Fe2O7−δ,156 (La2−xSrx)(Cu1−y(Mg, Al)y)O4,157 and (La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.7Mn0.3)O3.158


3.3.4. 3D volumetric defects. 
3D defects are known as volumetric defects. The most common of these are as follows:159
Micropore: void of diameter <2 nm
Mesopore: void of diameter 2–50 nm
Macropore: void of diameter >50 nm
Pit: surface void, often formed by etching
Cluster: localised agglomeration of multiple vacancies or ions within a grain
Inclusion: discrete secondary phase present intergranularly or intragranularly as solid, liquid, or gas
Microcrack: intergranular or transgranular fracture surface requiring electron microscopy to detect
Crack: intergranular or transgranular fracture surface requiring optical microscopy or visual inspection to detect
Order–disorder: transformation between more-ordered and less-ordered lattice states

Table 4 summarises the defective perovskite catalysts, highlighting the dominant defects that have been detected and the characterisation techniques used to identify them.
Table 4 Defective perovskite catalysts, with their dominant defects and the techniques used to identify them




Catalyst
Synthesis method
Application
Defect type
Characterisation
Ref.




(La0.5Ba0.5)(CoxMn1−x)O3−δ
Sol–gel
Wastewater decontamination
Oxygen vacancies
EPR, XPS, FESEM

160



MnxCo3−xO4
Thermal calcination
Zn–air batteries
Mn and Co vacancies
XAFS, XPS, ICP-OES

161



Sr3Fe2O7−δ
Polymerised complex
NOx oxidation
Oxygen vacancies
SEM, DRIFT

162



(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ
Sol–gel
OER
Surface vacancies
TEM, EDS, XPS

163



La(CoxAl1−x)O3
Sol–gel
Soot oxidation
Oxygen vacancies
XPS, NOx-TPD

164



Nb/Bi2WO6
Hydrothermal reaction
Photocatalysis
Oxygen vacancies/Nb5+ dopants
TEM, XPS, Raman, UV-vis

165



BaTiO3
Electrospinning
Dielectric and energy storage
Surface defect
HRTEM, XPS

166



LaKCoO3
Dip-coating
Soot combustion
Oxygen vacancies
XPS, SEM, EDS

167



LaNiO3
Sol–gel
Oxygen redox processes
Cation defect
XPS, SEM, EDS, DFT

168



LaCoO3
Sol–gel
Propane oxidation
Disordered, P dopants
XANES, XPS, DFT

169



La(CoxMn1−x)O3−δ
Template-free self-assembly
Li–O2 batteries
Oxygen vacancies
HRTEM, EDS, SEM, XPS

170



(La0.8Sr0.2)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ
Molten salt
OER
Surface reconstruction
SEM, EDS, XPS

171



(LaxSr1−x)CoO3−δ
Sol–gel
CO oxidation
Oxygen vacancies
HAADF-STEM, EXAFS, DFT

172



LaNiO3
Sol–gel
CO2 hydrogenation
Structural defect
XPS, TEM, EDS

173



CsTaO3
Sol–gel
Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
Lattice defects
EELS, EDS, PL, XPS, ESR

174



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Cr0.8Co0.2)O3
Impregnation
CO2 splitting and syngas production
Surface reconstruction
HAADF-STEM, EDS, XPS

175



CaTiO3
Hydrothermal reaction
Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
Surface oxygen vacancies
EPR, HRTEM, XPS, DFT

176



LaFeO3
Not given
CO oxidation
La defects
DFT

177



(La0.8Sr0.2)CoO3
Sol–gel
CO oxidation
Oxygen vacancies
HRTEM, EPR, XPS, DFT

178



La1.5Sr1.5Mn1.5Ni0.5O7±δ
Pechini
Methane steam reforming
Exsolution
HAADF, TEM, EDS

179



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.7Mn0.3)O3
Sol–gel
CO2 electrolysis to CO
Ruddlesden–Popper defects
SEM, TEM, EDS, XANES

158



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ
Glycine–nitrate combustion
ORR
Surface defects
XPS, TEM

180



Ba(CuxFe1−x)O3
Citrate sol–gel
Soot oxidation
Lattice defects
ICP-OES, XRD, XPS

181



PrBaMn1.7Co0.3O5+δ
Pechini sol–gel
Dry reforming of methane
Schottky defects
SEM, HAADF, EDS

182



Sr(Ti0.75Co0.25)O3−δ
Solid-state
CO oxidation
Schottky defects
SEM, HRTEM, DFT, EDS

183



(La0.5Ba0.5)MnO3−δ
Pechini
Solid oxide fuel cells
Exsolution
HAADF-STEM, EDS, XPS

184



LaFeO3
Citrate sol–gel
CO oxidation
Ruddlesden–Popper defects
DFT, TEM

185



SrTiO3
Incipient wetness impregnation
Oxidative coupling of methane
Oxygen vacancies
Raman, TPD

186



Sr(Fe0.7Ti0.3)O3−δ
Solid-state reaction
Solid oxide fuel cells
Oxygen vacancies
HRTEM, EDS

187



La(Fe0.9Ni0.1)O3
Citrate
Dry reforming of ethane
Oxygen vacancies
HRTEM, ex situ XRD

188



(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ
Sol–gel
CO oxidation
Oxygen vacancies
XANES, EXAFS, XPS

189



LaNiO3
Hydrothermal
Not given
Structural defects
STEM, EELS, EDS

190



La(CuxFe1−x)O3
Citrate
Three-way catalysts
Anionic defects
XPS, SEM

191



SrTiO3
Hydrothermal
2-Propanol reaction
Surface reconstruction
XPS, DFT

192



(Pr1−xCax)MnO3
Wet chemistry
OER
Ruddlesden–Popper defects
HAADF-STEM, EELS

151



(La0.8Sr0.2)CoO3−δ
EDTA–citric acid
OER
Oxygen vacancies
TEM, XPS

193



SrCoO3−δ
Ultrasonic
Nanoelectronics
Strain
XRD, DFT

194



NdTiO3
Molecular beam epitaxy
Nanoionics
Linear defects
STEM, DFT, EELS

195






3.4. Strategies for defect generation

3.4.1. Solid solubility. 
The prognosis to achieve substantial substitutional or interstitial solubility usually is considered in terms of Hume-Rothery's rules,196 although these are for close-packed metals rather than ceramics. These rules, which may be used as general guidelines, are as follows:197
Substantial substitutional solid solubility. 
Crystal structure rule: the crystal structures of the dopant and matrix lattices are identical.
Size rule: the crystal radii of the two cations differ by ≤15%.
Valence rule: identical or near-identical cation valences can result in complete solid solubility but, when they differ, a solute cation of valence higher than that of the solvent cation exhibits greater solubility.
Electronegativity rule: the electronegativities of the two cations should be similar.
Substantial interstitial solid solubility. 
Solubility range rule: the solubility range of the solid solution should be relatively large.
Size rule: the crystal radius of the solute cation should be smaller than that of the solvent cation.
Valence rule: the extent of solubility decreases with divergence between the valences of the two cations.
Electronegativity rule: the electronegativities of the two cations should be similar.
The creation of oxygen vacancies in perovskites, which requires acceptor doping (p-type semiconductor), is often assumed through what is assumed to be substitutional solid solubility. However, as stated previously, this may not be the case. A preliminary consideration of these procedures requires assessment of the solubility limits of dopants, which rarely are known and vary according to the processing temperature. Further, exsolution may occur upon cooling. A third preliminary consideration is the uncertainty of the A- and B-site cation valences, which may vary according to precursor valence, oxygen partial pressure (pO2), achievement or nonachievement of equilibrium, IVCT/MVCT, and/or the formation of colour centres. When stoichiometric compensation of the composition is used (Ma1−xMbx) and failure to achieve substitution occurs, the possible alternative outcomes are:
• Interstitial solid solubility: charge compensation typically would be expected to take the form of cation vacancy formation (reduction is also possible) but certainly not oxygen vacancy formation.
• Mixed solid solubility: the charge-compensation outcome is dependent on the dominant vacancy-formation mechanism (cation or oxygen).
• Overcompensated/complete insolubility: upon exceeding the solubility limit, the resultant A- or B-site cation deficiency would be expected to lead to the formation of oxygen vacancies for charge compensation.
When stoichiometric compensation is not used (viz., direct addition of the dopant), then all of the preceding outcomes are possible.
It is important to consider these issues when interpreting data outputs because the prognosis for substitutional solid solubility can be subjected to preliminary consideration in terms of Hume-Rothery's rules and potential defect equilibria. When the actual solid solubility mechanism is unknown, assessment of the data in light of these considerations may reveal the existing or dominant mechanism.


3.4.2. Defects from doping. 
The substitution of La3+ by Ag+ in La(Mn0.9Co0.1)O3 resulted in a decrease in the cation valence of the A site and consequent increases in both Mn2+ and Co2+ valences.198 In addition, charge compensation involved oxygen vacancy formation to maintain the electrical neutrality. Similar B site substituted perovskites, including La(Cr0.9Ni0.1)O3,199 La(Co0.75M0.25)O3 (M = Cu, Mn, Fe),200 and La(Fe0.9Ni0.1)O3,201 exhibited symmetry reductions that generated perfect cubic perovskite structures. In addition to cation doping, anion doping of perovskites is also capable of generating high concentrations of oxygen vacancies, as in the case of replacement of lattice oxygen with nitrogen, as has been done with CaTaO2N,202 NaTaON,203 and LaTiO2N.204 In these cases, the substitution of two O2− by two N3− generates an oxygen vacancy .


3.4.3. Defects from reduction. 
Thermal reduction by heating in a reducing atmosphere, where the pO2 at sea level is <21.16 kPa, is a commonly used strategy to generate surface defects in perovskites. This generally involves the use of overpressures of reducing gases (e.g., H2, NH3 and CO) or inert gases (e.g., He, Ar) or heating under vacuum. Also, chemical reduction through the use of reducing agents is another such strategy for defect generation. This process involves the action of an electron donor, which causes the agent to oxidise and the perovskite to reduce. Good reducing agents are species that readily give up electrons, including ions and elements of large sizes, low electronegativities, low ionisation energies, and/or highly negative reduction potentials. The strongest reducing agents, therefore, are the alkali and alkaline earth elements, the first-row transition metals, the first three or four elements of the second- and third-row transition metals, the lanthanides (rare earths), and the actinides.
High concentrations of oxygen vacancies have also been generated in SrTiO3205 and Co3O4/kaolinite201 nanostructures by solid-state reaction using the reducing agent NaBH4. In addition to such solid-state reducing agents, there are also reducing solvents.206 These solvents generally are aprotic, so they are capable of donating an electron. As they facilitate hydrogen bond formation, they generally lack O–H or N–H bonds that would act as proton (H+) sources rather than electron sources. The most effective aprotic solvents tend to possess intermediate to high dielectric constants and large dipole moments. Such solvents include water, alcohols, and carboxylic acids.
The double-layered perovskite PrBaMn2O6−δ with high oxygen vacancy concentration was fabricated by hydrogen reduction at 800 °C, and it demonstrated high gravimetric and volumetric capacitances.207 Thermal treatment under argon at 950 °C created oxygen vacancies in non-stoichiometric (Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ.208 This promoted defect formation in the local tetrahedral and square planar sites during which the perovskite deviated quickly from the ideal structure Pm3m to a highly oxygen-deficient limonite phase of space group Pcmn.208 A novel flame reduction strategy has been used to generate a controlled amount of oxygen vacancies in Fe2O3, TiO2, ZnO, and BiVO4 thin films.209 Also, phosphorus-doped cobalt oxide with abundant surface defects has been synthesised using a microwave-induced plasma.210 Similarly, Xu et al.211 designed Co3O4 nanosheets with high oxygen vacancy concentrations by simple plasma treatment. Sn(Co0.9Fe0.1)(OH)6 perovskite hydroxide was used as a precursor to produce a high concentration of Sn vacancies on the surface layer by energetic Ar plasma treatment.212 Wang et al.213 demonstrated the synthesis of Co3O4 mesoporous nanosheets with controllable oxygen vacancy concentrations by annealing Co3O4 with NaH2PO2·H2O in an Ar atmosphere at 250 °C. During the annealing process, the decomposition of NaH2PO2·H2O released the reducing gas PH3, thus generating the oxygen vacancies.


3.4.4. Defects from other methods. 
Kwon et al.214 suggested that the oxygen vacancy concentration could be increased by the application of a low electrical potential (±1.5 V) and low temperatures (≤150 °C). The potential exhibited reversible drift and the oxygen vacancies coalesced into 2D planar defects. Another recently developed technique is proton-assisted oxygen vacancy creation (PAOCV),215,216 where the introduction of protons (H+) or the formation of hydroxyl groups (OH−) significantly lowers the energy of formation of oxygen vacancies. The defect equilibria for these processes are as follows:
Acidic media  
Basic media  

3.5. Stoichiometry and defects

Fig. 2 shows that there are numerous ways in which perovskite stoichiometries can be altered for the purpose of modifying the physicochemical properties through the generation of defects. This usually is done through compensated stoichiometries that are based on the assumption that the solubility mechanism is substitutional, although this is not confirmed regularly. Table 5 demonstrates both the resultant stoichiometries and defect types that are generated by the principal approaches of A site, B site, and A and B site substitutions. This information shows that one of the principal methods by which defects can be generated and carefully controlled is through extrinsic doping by donors and/or acceptors. Success in these are contingent upon the achievement of homogeneous distribution of the solute dopant ions, which may be difficult to achieve in practice owing to limitations in mixing and thermal gradients in the solids. However, the information in Table 3 indicates the second principal method by which both intrinsic and extrinsic approaches can be used to generate defects. That is, the existence of variable cation valences and O2(g) in equilibrium shows that the equilibrium can be altered and carefully controlled through the application of oxidising or reducing atmospheres for both undoped and doped perovskites. Again, success is contingent upon the achievement of homogeneity, which may be handicapped by low diffusivity, localised atmospheric variations (e.g., top vs. bottom of solid), and thermal gradients.
Table 5 Principal stoichiometries generated from substitution of prototype SrTiO3 perovskite and various dopants with ionic charge compensation (□ = vacancy)




Type of doping
Dopant type
Charge compensation
Stoichiometry




A site substitution
Acceptor (K+)
Oxygen vacancies
(Sr1−x2+Kx+)TiO3−½x2− □½x




Donor (Al3+)
Sr vacancies
(Sr1−x2+□½(1−x)Alx3+)TiO3




Donor (Al3+)
O interstitials
(Sr1−x2+Alx3+)TiO3+½x




Neutral (Ba2+)
None
(Sr1−x2+Bax2+)TiO3


B site substitution
Acceptor (Cr3+)
Oxygen vacancies
Sr(Ti1−y4+Cry3+)O3−½y2−□½y




Donor (V5+)
Ti vacancies
Sr(Ti1−y4+□¼(1−y)Vy5+)O3




Donor (V5+)
O interstitials
Sr(Ti1−y4+Vy5+)O3+½y




Donor (V5+)
Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction







Neutral (Zr4+)
None
Sr(Ti1−y4+Zry4+)TiO3


A and B site substitution
Acceptors (K+ & Cr3+)
Oxygen vacancies
(Sr1−x2+Kx+)(Ti1−y4+Cry3+)O3−½(x+y)2−□½(x+y)




Donors (Al3+ & V5+)
Sr & Ti vacancies
(Sr1−x2+□½(1−x)Alx3+)(Ti1−y4+□¼(1−y)Vx5+)TiO3




Neutral (Ba2+ & Zr4+)
None
(Sr1−x2+Bax2+)(Ti1−y4+Zry4+)TiO3




It can be seen that if mixed donor and acceptor ions are substituted at the A and B sites, then the charge-compensation mechanisms, where K+ would generate oxygen vacancies and V5+ would generate Ti vacancies (ignoring the potential for oxygen interstitials), effectively would create Schottky defects plus a residual of one or the other defect, depending on whether x > y or x < y. This information also indicates that when the B site consists of an ion capable of reaching a higher valence state, such as Mn3+, then Mn3+ → Mn4+ oxidation (rather than the shown example of Ti reduction) can occur. Further, if the extrinsic influence of atmospheric control is applied, then the resultant valence alteration from redox reaction, IVCT, MVCT, and/or colour centre formation can generate charge-compensating defects.
Although Table 5 assumes ionic charge compensation, this is not necessarily the case as electronic charge compensation as well as mixed charge compensation217 could also be possible. However, it is relatively easy to interpret these defect equilibria accordingly, where vacancies such as anion vacancies (e.g., ) and cation vacancies (e.g., ) are replaced by 2h˙ and 2e′, respectively.
Although defect equilibria involving valence changes are described in terms of integral changes, there are many XPS reports that are interpreted in terms of fractional valence changes.98–100 This apparent anomaly can be explained by the effects of electronegativity, which result in alteration of the distribution of the electron cloud of adjacent ions. Consequently, the introduction of dopants with electronegativities that are higher or lower than those of the intrinsic lattice cations (or anion) has the potential for further nuanced refinement of the charge-compensation mechanisms and the associated performance. Some introductory examples of the preceding approaches follow.
3.6. Self-charge-compensating Schottky defects and Frenkel defects
The preceding text generally has considered ionic defects in isolation. However, each ionic species in perovskites plays a generic role. That is, A-site substitution usually is used to enhance the catalytic activity, but B-site and anion substitution usually are used to direct the selectivity.3 Consequently, consideration of these ionic defects can be done using CaTiO3 as an example consistent with Fig. 11:
Schottky pair formation
Ionic charge compensation (A site)  
Frenkel defect formation
Cation interstitial (B site)  
Anion interstitial  
These defect equilibria can be extended to Schottky pair and Frenkel defect formation involving both A and B sites simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 11. These defect equilibria demonstrate that the formation of Schottky defects with acceptor dopants can generate oxygen vacancies. In the former case, Table 6 summarises the number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule that can be generated. These equilibria also point out that anion Frenkel defects can also generate oxygen vacancies. In contrast, cation Frenkel defects would generate cation vacancies, not oxygen vacancies. Since Schottky and Frenkel defects require the removal of lattice ions from their equilibrium sites, they are often generated with the use of high-energy beam sources, such as X-rays, neutrons, and gamma irradiation,218 although heating is another source.219
Table 6 Potential level of oxygen vacancy concentration from acceptor doping of perovskites as a function of dopant valence (ionic charge compensation)




Formula
Example
Dopant valencea


1+
2+
3+
4+
5+





a With neutral dopants, no vacancies form; with donor dopants, cation vacancies form; these cases apply to ionic charge compensation. With electronic charge compensation, there is no vacancy formation. Substitution of O by N will generate 0.5 of an oxygen vacancy and interstitial N solubility will generation 1.5 oxygen vacancies.





A1+B5+O32−
NaTaO3
Number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule


A-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0


B-Site substitution
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0


A- and B-Site substitution
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0


A2+B4+O32−
SrTiO3
Number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule


A-Site substitution
0.50
0
0
0
0


B-Site substitution
1.50
1.00
0.50
0
0


A- and B-Site substitution
2.00
2.00
0.50
0
0


A3+B3+O32−
LaMnO3
Number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule


A-Site substitution
1.00
0.50
0
0
0


B-Site substitution
1.00
0.50
0
0
0


A- and B-Site substitution
2.00
1.00
0
0
0





Table 6 makes it clear that maximisation of  derives from doping with monovalent ions. The disadvantages of this approach are that (i) these ions are corrosive and hence tend to corrode the supports on which they are equilibrated and (ii) they have high vapour pressures and so tend to volatilise, thereby making control of the stoichiometry difficult.220
Bak et al.221 reported B-site substitution in LnNiO3 (Ln = La, Pr, Nd) with Fe. A stepwise mechanism appears to have occurred. In this case, the electrochemical technique used involved the dissolution of Ni and the resultant formation of Ni vacancies , which were then charge-compensated by oxygen vacancies . The authors considered these defect pairs to be Schottky defects, with a stoichiometric ratio of 2/3 being required for charge balance.
Liu et al.222 examined the decomposition of NO over the Ag/(La0.6Ce0.4)CoO3 perovskite and speculated that the Ag1+ loading partially substituted for La3+ and that this was charge compensated by  formation, thereby effectively forming a Schottky pair. Co 2p XPS data indicated that the increasing Ag level resulted in an increase in valence. These issues are consistent with a different type of dual charge compensation mechanism for (La2−xRbx)CuO4−δ223 and (La1−xKx)CoO3:167 (i) oxygen vacancy formation (ionic charge compensation) –  and (ii) IVCT – La3+ + Co3+ → La2+ + Co4+. However, the well known ease of Ce4+ ↔ Ce3+ redox switching offers216 another alternative for charge transfer.
Liu et al.224 used the DFT calculations to examine the intrinsic point defects of SrTiO3 under various chemical conditions. In stoichiometric SrTiO3, stable Schottky defects consisted of Sr, Ti, and O vacancies, which would form in the stoichiometric ratio 1/1/3, respectively. The formation energy per defect was relatively low at 1.64 eV, which was significantly less than that required for Frenkel and antisite defect formation. The authors inferred that the compositional homogeneity of this perovskite could be monitored through the detection of the different types of point defects as variations in the SrO and TiO2 contents favoured the formation of different types of defects.
DFT studies of LaMnO3,225 LaFeO3,226 and LaGaO3227 have indicated that Schottky defect formation energies are less than those required for A-site, B-site, or oxygen Frenkel defects. This observation implies that the intrinsic defects in such perovskites are likely to be vacancies rather than interstitials.
3.7. Charge compensation and charge transfer
The assumption of ionic charge compensation is a commonly held but often incorrect assumption as there are alternative mechanisms in the form of electronic charge compensation and redox charge compensation. As has been noted, another phenomenon that is often overlooked is IVCT, which is a form of electronic stabilisation, arising from electronegativity differences, that results in changes in valence. This explains the frequently observed shifts in XPS peak binding energies, which reveal increasing valence with increasing binding energy and decreasing valence with decreasing binding energy. As the defect equilibria formalisms as a function of solubility mechanism, charge compensation, and type of dopant generally are derived, Table 7 provides a comprehensive description of these formalisms as a guide to the derivation of the various forms of charge compensation and charge transfer using Cr doping as a prototype as it exhibits valences in the range 2+ to 6+ and CeO2 as the lattice for the sake of simplicity.
Table 7 Different charge compensation and charge transfer mechanisms




Substitutional solid solubility
Interstitial solid solubility




Type
Valence
Ionic charge compensation


Acceptor
2+








3+








Neutral
4+








Donor
5+








6+








Type
Valence
Electronic charge compensation


Acceptor
2+








3+








Neutral
4+








Donor
5+








6+








Type
Valence
Redox charge compensation


Acceptor
2+








3+








Neutral
4+








Donor
5+








6+









Type


Intervalence charge transfer


Acceptor
4+/3+








Donor
3+/5+










3.8. Microscopy-based techniques for the characterisation of defects
Although determination of the type, amount, and distribution of defects can be a critical stage in the characterisation of functional materials, each technique that is applied has specific limitations. Nonetheless, several microscopy- and spectroscopy-based techniques have emerged to address these issues. Microscopy is a direct-imaging technique that is a powerful tool for the characterisation of defects and related features of materials, which are critical for catalyst design and to understand the achievement of outstanding catalytic performance. Some advanced microscopy technologies for defects are summarised as follows.

3.8.1. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
TEM is the most commonly used technique for the detection of both bulk and surface defects, including vacancies, dopants, amorphous phases, pores, etc. owing to the penetration depth of the electron beam.228 In addition to the imaging of nanostructural features, its capacity for selected area electron diffraction (SAED) allows the identification of phases and the determination of crystallographic characteristics.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation interstitials and vacancies), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
A TEM is generally equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) and a camera for obtaining SAED. The former provides information regarding the chemistry and distribution of ions even at very low concentrations, while the latter gives data about the crystal structure, crystallinity, and lattice distortion. TEM images can be analysed further using standard microscopy software, the principal variants of which convert images into simulated diffraction patterns (viz., fast Fourier transform (FFT)) and provide particle size distributions. Therefore, the TEM package is very useful for obtaining data on the crystal structure, dominant facets, morphologies, single-crystal size variations, particle size distributions, thicknesses (of films), and phase chemistries (including heteroatoms, segregation, and solid solutions).
Challenges. 
TEM imaging is not suitable for perovskites that are unstable under high-voltage and electron-beam irradiation; such perovskites include halide perovskites. One strategy for TEM characterisation of unstable perovskites is the use of a low-temperature stage (viz., liquid nitrogen) to reduce reactivity. More broadly, while TEM characterisation of powders is relatively straightforward, the imaging of films may be problematic owing to the thickness, which must be thin enough to transmit electrons. Generally, samples of ≤100 nm thickness are required, although this decreases as the atomic weight increases. Traditionally, the achievement of such thicknesses was done by progressive cutting, mechanical grinding, mechanical polishing, dimpling, and ion beam milling. More recently, the availability of focussed ion beam (FIB) milling has obviated the need for ion beam milling, thus accelerating the process significantly.
Examples. 
Dong et al.229 used high-resolution HRTEM, SAED, and FFT to characterise single-crystal double-perovskite (Pr,Ba)Fe2O5+δ, in which the presence of oxygen hypostoichiometry is confirmed indirectly through lattice distortion. In another study, Kim et al.230 examined the microstructure, crystallographic orientation, and strain state of a cubic Sr(Ti,Fe)O3 film grown epitaxially on a (100)-oriented CeO2 on a Y2O3-stabilised ZrO2 buffer layer on an Si substrate. In this work, HRTEM, SAED, and FFT were applied across the interfacial region in order to investigate the preferred growth direction of the perovskite crystal facets and the effect of substrate orientation on the growth.


3.8.2. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). 
STEM images by the two modes of high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) and low-magnification annular bright field (ABF). STEM is effective in distinguishing bulk defects from surface defects, which is difficult using TEM.231 Lattice ions and ionic defects in crystalline materials can be differentiated by their differences in brightness, where intrinsic defects are detected on the basis of brightness distribution irregularities, and extrinsic defects are detected on the basis of brightness differences resulting from differing atomic weights.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries), and 3D defects (e.g., superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
STEM imaging enables the detection of essentially all 0D and 1D defects. This method is suitable for semi-quantitative defect concentration analysis, where the number of defects can be counted and extrapolated for the entire material. STEM also yields images of higher resolution and magnification compared to those obtained using TEM. Further, owing to the capacity to change the probe convergence angle, STEM imaging has greater lateral and depth resolutions compared to HRTEM.
Challenges. 
Similar to TEM, sample preparation and the previously mentioned limitations with unstable perovskites under the electron beam are equally relevant.
Examples. 
Liu et al.232 used STEM-HAADF and STEM-ABF to determine the homogeneity and lattice positions across the NaNbO3/(Na1−xNb)O3+δ interface of perovskite thin films grown on single-crystal Sr(Ti1−xNbx)O3−δ. The effect of Nb doping of the substrate on the thin films was analysed. The resultant defects at the interfacial region of the thin film included dislocations and Na/Nb antisite substitution.


3.8.3. Atomic force microscopy (AFM)/Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). 
The probe tip used in AFM is sensitive to materials with demonstrated sub-nanometre resolution, so it can be used to detect the presence of defects.233 While KPFM is similar to AFM, it offers the additional ability to map the chemical potential of perovskites alone or relative to that of the substrate. KPFM can also determine the work function change, which enables the determination of the position of the conduction band. So the combination of KPFM with ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectrophotometry, which provides the band gap, allows determination of the valence band. Further, the combination of KPFM, UV-vis, and XPS, the last of which provides the relative positions of the valence band and Fermi level, then allows the assignment of the absolute Fermi level.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
Although there are many variant modes of AFM, the contact AFM method, where the probe is in direct contact with the material, is commonly used for thickness and particle size measurements. It is particularly useful in the characterisation of 2D materials. It provides atomic-resolution 2D and 3D topographical images of surfaces. AFM/KPFM offers a field of view (∼20 μm2) that is larger than those of TEM and STEM. The height resolution is ∼0.5 nm. In contrast, non-contact AFM (nc-AFM) allows direct imaging of domain structures and point charge potential with sub-nanometre resolution. Since AFM/KPFM is not constrained by the requirement of electrical conductivity, it can be applied to all types of perovskite materials, including conducting, semiconducting, and insulating materials. Other advantages are that it requires only simple sample preparation, it can be carried out in air and controlled atmospheres, heating and cooling stages can be used, and sample sizes up to several centimetres can be examined.
Challenges. 
This method is limited to bulk and 2D materials of lateral size no more than several microns as well as of limited roughness (≤500 nm). It is important to match the type of probe to the nature of the substrate as the shape of the former can determine the precision of measurement. A major shortcoming is that, until recently, the area probed could not be observed directly, so siting on a specific location was very difficult. However, systems that integrate AFM and SEM have recently become available in order to overcome this shortcoming. Also, the analyses can be time consuming, particularly when high resolutions are required for defect detection. Further, the relatively rapid probe deterioration tends to make the technique expensive. Finally, KPFM has the limitation that a conducting substrate is required, and its work function and that of the probe must be known.
Examples. 
Leng et al.234 reported in-depth characterisation of a stratified Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite using simultaneous nc-AFM and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM). This work reported the relaxation of the organic chains of the perovskite upon the application of thermal stress by laser irradiation. More importantly, in situ reconstruction of the surface atomic assembly and the formation of vacancies were observed during heat treatment of the perovskite.


3.8.4. Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). 
STM can image at atomic resolution, but it requires a conductive material for electron tunnelling from the tip of the scanning probe to the sample.235,236 STM can be used to detect surface molecular compounds and surface defects as well as to measure the band gaps of semiconductors.237
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., lattice distortion, superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
The STM method can provide topographical images of atoms, growth artefacts, crystal interfaces, and atomic arrangements with subnanometre resolution. STM is one of the most powerful tools for the determination of local crystallographic and defect data.
Challenges. 
The sample preparation process is demanding as it requires extremely clean and stable surfaces, sharp probe tips, excellent vibration isolation, and sophisticated electronics. Nonetheless, many STM units are built in-house rather than being purchased. Cross sectional STM of heterostructures is handicapped by the necessity of having sufficiently large and discrete terraces present on cleaved surfaces, which typically are rough owing to induced strains. The tip represents a third challenge to STM since, with surfaces with an unpinned Fermi level, the presence of the tip and the voltage applied to the tunnelling contact significantly modify the spectral positions of observed electronic states and bands.238
Examples. 
Liu et al.239 used combined STM and DFT simulation to characterise the nature of intrinsic defects formed on the surface of the halide perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3 and their role in stability. It was found that decomposition occurs more readily in the presence of surface vacancies for Br or Br-methylammonium (Br-MA) rather than with pristine sites. The STM images showed that the pristine single-crystal CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite with the preferred (010) growth plane was stable against adsorption by molecules and atoms, whereas the defective CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite exhibited significantly increased adsorption energies for water, oxygen, and acetonitrile molecules. Similarly, She et al.240 reported combined STM and DFT in the surface analysis of the atomic structure of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite. The STM results showed variations in the dipole pattern of surface methylammonium (CH3NH3) and its interactions with surface iodine anions, both of which played critical roles in the stability of the surface structure.


3.8.5. Aberration corrected transmission electron microscopy (ACTEM). 
ACTEM is one of the most sensitive atomic-resolution techniques for the identification and mapping of ions and their bonding in three dimensions. ACTEM is a TEM with objective lens correction, which significantly improves the resolution of TEM images by eliminating the spherical aberration of some defect structures.241,242 Detailed measurements by ACTEM show a remarkable signal-to-noise ratio, resolution, and sensitivity, which allow detailed calculation of extrinsic interstitial and intrinsic vacancy concentrations. Further, ACTEM is suitable for complex non-periodic structures, where there is a wide range of atomic interfaces, dopants, and point defects.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., lattice distortion, superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
ACTEM is relatively easy to operate, and the data are straightforward to interpret. It provides direct images with atomic-scale sensitivity, so it can detect single ions. It is distinguished from other analytical tools in that it can image both cations and anions, and the detection extends to lithium. It can be operated in situ with heating and cooling stages and it can be operated in gaseous and liquid environments. Sample heating by the electron beam can be mitigated through the use of a single-electron camera. Magnetic materials can be examined as well. Its greatest power comes when it is coupled with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), where elemental, defect, and band gap mapping are possible.
Challenges. 
Outside of the considerable expense of the unit, its principal limitation is that grain sizes and thin film thicknesses are limited to ∼40–50 nm. Further, the lateral sample size is limited by the requirement of a grid of dimensions 3 mm × 3 mm. A final issue of concern is the importance of sample cleanliness, where adsorbed organics and other species must be avoided. In particular, when a Ga-based FIB is used for sample thinning, the sample is likely to be contaminated by Ga. The alternative is the use of a Xe-based FIB.
Examples. 
Nelson et al.243 used spherical ACTEM to study the polarisation of the ferroelectric (001)-oriented BiFeO3 affected by electric boundary conditions across the interfacial region with (001)-oriented insulating TbScO3. The ACTEM images, with <10−10 m resolution, showed that an oxygen ion in the octahedral position and an Fe cation at the A site of the rhombohedral BiFeO3 crystal were displaced along one of the 〈111〉 directions relative to the centre of the A-site Bi sublattice (i.e., Frenkel defect). This was shown to be followed by counterrotation of the oxygen (13.8°) around the 〈111〉 axes. This resulted in alteration of the polarisation direction, thus changing the local ferroelectric properties of the BiFeO3 perovskite.243 In this study, the TEM focal series was used in order to image light oxygen ions in the presence of strongly scattering heavy Bi. In another study, Jia et al.244 used negative spherical ACTEM to demonstrate electric dipoles formed in response to the relative displacement of Zr/Ti cation columns and oxygen anion columns in a SrTiO3/Pb(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3/SrTiO3 thin film heterostructure. The work suggested the feasibility of imaging the local polarisation of dipoles and quantitative measurement of the local polarisation in order to investigate possible mechanisms of polarisation switching and resultant properties, including coercive field and ferroelectric fatigue.

3.9. Spectroscopy-based techniques for the characterisation of defects
As previously discussed, the observation of structural defects can be done using microscopy methods involving nanoscale imaging of crystal structures. In contrast, spectroscopic methods do not involve direct imaging and provide indirect analyses of structure, chemistry, electronic states, valence, bonding, and defects.

3.9.1. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 
XPS has emerged as one of the most useful and hence commonly used techniques for the characterisation of surface and near-surface chemistries.245 The principal data provided by XPS are the direct identification of surface and sub-surface ions and their valences as well as the indirect identification and quantification of cation and anion vacancies through the assumption of charge-compensating redox effects. Hence, this facility provides a powerful tool for characterisation relevant to surface catalysis. Since the mean free path of electrons is sub-nanometre, ultra-high-vacuum conditions are required. However, near-ambient pressure XPS (NAPXPS) can be used to characterise materials in controlled ambient environments, thereby allowing monitoring of the surface properties of materials under in situ conditions.246 Further, deep XPS can be applied for in-depth quantitative analysis of elements in perovskites, which represents a powerful tool for mapping defect concentration variations between the surface and inner layers. As mentioned earlier, XPS valence band measurements are a variant tool for XPS that can (1) derive the difference between the energy levels of the valence band and the Fermi level and (2) derive the midgap states formed from the presence of defects in the system.
Types of defects. 
Indirect identification and semi-quantification of 0D point defects (e.g., extrinsic cation and anion interstitials and substitutionals, intrinsic cation and anion vacancies, Schottky pairs) and 2D defects (e.g., segregation).
Advantages. 
A major advantage of XPS is that it analyses over a very wide field of view (500 μm2), so it provides relatively representative data. The technique is sensitive, providing reliable data to 0.01 at% precision. It also detects fractional valence changes, which are a reflection of sample inhomogeneity. XPS also has the advantage that it allows differentiation between the surface composition (using ionic data) and the sub-surface composition (using ion-oxygen data). The requirement of vacuum can be overcome through the use of NAPXPS, which uses soft X-ray irradiation; here, the sample is placed inside a cell with controlled gas pressure (typically up to 25 mbar) and the use of a heating/cooling stage in the range 0–700 °C enables in situ analyses, which are extremely useful in energy and catalysis applications.
Challenges. 
The analyses are limited to the surface and sub-surface of perovskites unless deep XPS is used. However, the ablation required for this variation can alter the perovskite by reduction and hence increase the oxygen vacancy concentration. General analyses by XPS must be done in the knowledge that the technique cannot differentiate between intrinsic surface solutes and extrinsic precipitates. The analyses are often hindered by overlap of peaks for different valences of individual ions, so clear identification is often precluded. A similar limitation arises from the fact that the XPS database is of limited size. Also, NAPXPS requires an electrically conducting solid, so insulating samples cannot be examined.
Examples. 
Vovk et al.247 used in situ XPS under vacuum to analyse the binding energies for the 2p and 3d orbitals of O and Ni, respectively, in LaNiO3 and La(Ni0.4Cr0.6)O3 perovskites during Ni2+ ↔ Ni3+ redox cycling. The shifts in binding energies and broadening of the peaks for the La 3d, Ni 3p, O 2p, and Cr 3s orbitals indicated delocalisation of their electronic states, resulting in the formation of midgap states. Merino et al.248 used XPS for the quantitative analysis of surface oxygen vacancies in (La1−xCax)CoO3−δ. This was done through comparative XPS analyses of the O 1s orbital in pristine LaCoO3, (La0.8Ca0.2)CoO3−δ, (La0.6Ca0.4)CoO3−δ, and (La0.5Ca0.5)CoO3−δ.


3.9.2. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR). 
EPR, which is also known as electron spin resonance (ESR), characterises the types of oxidation states and defects in the bulk. The magnetic field relative to the EPR peak signal indicates the type of defect, and the intensity of the peak signal indicates the defect concentration.249 The latter is obtained by integration of the vacancy peaks, which are generated by the unpaired electrons of the oxygen vacancies.250 This technique is widely used for transition metal perovskites owing to the redox flexibility.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects with unpaired electrons (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs).
Advantages. 
A great advantage of EPR is its high penetration depth, which enables true bulk analysis; the procedures are also relatively rapid and uncomplicated. Its identification and quantification of point defects are very sensitive, being ∼1000 times more sensitive than nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). This sensitivity derives from the flipping of the electron spins in EPR rather than the excitation of atomic nuclei in NMR, so the former yields larger quanta of energy absorbed in given magnetic fields. In addition, EPR is widely used to study polymeric chain growth and depolymerisation reactions.251
Challenges. 
The principal limitation of EPR is that only defects with unpaired electrons are EPR-active. Since most stable molecules exhibit paired electrons, EPR is less widely used than NMR. Another issue for consideration is that the measurement of defect concentrations is dependent on the loading mass of the sample, so comparative data must begenerated using samples of identical masses. Analyses are often hindered by the existing database, which is limited to simple structures, thus favouring comparative rather than absolute experimental approaches.
Examples. 
Eichel252 reported a perspective study on the defect structures of multivalent transition-metal-doped oxide perovskites using multi-frequency and pulsed EPR. The data revealed the formation of defect complexes between acceptor-type transition-metal centres in combination with either single  or multiple . Such defect complexes orientated along the polarisation direction and dynamically altered their orientation in terms of domain switching upon application of high electric fields. Further, the multivalent nature of the manganese provided trapping centres for electronic and ionic charge carriers (e′, ) such that valency-altered  acceptor states or  defect complexes were formed. Additionally, the trapping of charge carriers at the intrinsic reduced B-site ions,  and , was observed by EPR.


3.9.3. Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS). 
PALS is an atomic-resolution method that utilises positrons (antimatter counterparts of electrons) to release radiation from solids, thereby providing information about vacancies and their relative concentrations from the positron lifespan.253 Following injection, positrons are thermalised (thermal equilibration) and annihilated, resulting in the release of gamma radiation. At the moment of annihilation, the lifetimes of positrons are obtained by calculating the local electron densities of defects, including vacancies, dislocations, and voids.254 It effectively provides a comparative measure of lattice perfection vs. imperfection.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation vacancies, charge-compensating anion vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., lattice distortion, superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
PALS can be done in air at room temperature and ambient pressure. It is highly sensitive to cation type and vacancy concentration, with a sensitivity of the order of 0.1 ppm.255–257 It can be used for depth profiling and, on a coarser scale, it can resolve voids (<1 nm) in metals, semiconductors, and polymers.
Challenges. 
The limitations of PALS include weak positron production and slow acquisition rates, where typical measurements require ∼5–10 days. The general technique is one of bulk measurement without depth resolution capability, although equipping with variable-energy capability can overcome this limitation. Further, relatively large samples, typically >1.27 cm diameter, are required in order to provide complete coverage of the instrument's necessarily large aperture.
Examples. 
There are many studies reporting the use of PALS to assess vacancy-related defects in oxide perovskites. Measurements on ferroelectric PbTiO3, Pb(Zr0.42Ti0.58)O3,255,256 SrTiO3 thin film, and Nb-doped SrTiO3 single crystals257,258 have shown close agreement in the experimental and DFT results for positron lifetimes for two types of cation vacancies. The negatively charged cation vacancy at the octahedrally coordinated B-site typically has a positron lifetime of 180–195 ps, which can be differentiated from the lifetime of 280–290 ps of the larger 12-coordinated A-site vacancy.255–258 Keeble et al.259 reported in-depth PALS characterisation of donor-doped SrTiO3 perovskites, where La3+ was substituted partially at A sites (Sr). The dominant positron trapping vacancy defect was shown to be charge-compensating Sr vacancies. The concentration of the Sr vacancies was calculated using a defect-specific trapping coefficient, and the corresponding La substitutional concentration was determined from this. These measurements also revealed the presence of a vacancy cluster defect in the upper layers (∼20–50 nm) of the films.


3.9.4. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). 
EDS is an X-ray fluorescence technique used for the elemental detection of dopant and matrix ions by point and line scanning and areal mapping. It invariably is integrated with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) or TEM.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, extrinsic antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., extrinsic induced line defects), 2D defects (e.g., grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
EDS is capable of scanning large areas, so it is particularly useful for bulk analyses. Line scanning is often used for chemical analyses across interfaces, thereby providing not only chemical data but also nanostructural information. Examination of the cation:anion stoichiometry can provide approximations of both the compound identity and defect concentrations.
Challenges. 
EDS has several major limitations. The first is that it is of relatively low sensitivity so that analyses should not be considered more than semi-quantitative. The second is that it extends only to carbon. The third is that the X-ray beam penetrates below the surface, thus analysing volumetrically. Consequently, quantitative data are accurate only with full dense and single-phase materials. Further, while the beam in SEM is relatively wide and so lacks resolution, the beam in TEM is narrow and so provides good resolution.
Examples. 
Zhong et al.260 reported the use of TEM EDS line scanning and mapping applied to pristine and defective SrTaO2N. The results of the line scanning revealed that the SrTaO2N heat-treated in H2 exhibited a lower oxygen concentration owing to the formation of oxygen vacancies. This result was confirmed by corresponding higher bulk electrical conductivity. Furthermore, TEM EDS mapping was used to indicate the atomic positions of Sr and Ta.


3.9.5. X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). 
XAS is a core-level spectroscopic technique used to examine the chemical structures and electronic states of materials using a form of inelastic scattering of X-rays.261,262 This method is very sensitive and can characterise crystalline and amorphous materials at subatomic resolution with considerably more sensitivity than XPS. X-Ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) data (≤40 eV) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) data (>40 eV) can be extracted from XAS data. All these types of data are exceptional in that they provide information about interatomic distances, coordination types and numbers, bond densities, and atomic disorder.263 Owing to the importance of the defects in the catalytic performance of perovskites, XAS, XANES, and EXAFS are used increasingly for the in-depth characterisation of catalytic materials. XANES provides information about the valence state, energy bandwidth, and bond angles in a structure, while EXAFS, which has 10−11 m resolution, is widely used for the analysis of single-atom catalysts.
Types of defects. 
Indirect identification of 0D point defects (e.g., ordered and non-ordered cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., lattice distortion, superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
This powerful technique provides information on pre-catalysts, intermediate reactants, and reaction mechanisms. It typically is equipped with a synchrotron radiation source, allowing it to capture the electronic structures and local environments of perovskites. The emerging operando XAS techniques have been shown to yield valuable information regarding the chemical, electronic, and structural alterations, chemical bonding, and oxidation states of perovskites during the reactions.264 A major advantage of EXAFS analysis is that it can be applied for the calculation of average particle size. This can apply to particles of <5 nm, where the coordination number has a nonlinear relationship with the particle size diameter.265
Challenges. 
The application of soft XAS in liquid cells is limited since such characterisation requires vacuum conditions, owing to the absorption of generated photons, within the soft X-ray energy range, by water and air. To overcome such limit, the perovskite powder should be pressed into a pellet followed by mechanical fracture under UH-vacuum conditions (∼10−10 mbar).266
Examples. 
Guan et al.267 examined oxygen-vacancy-ordered RBaCo2O5.5+δ, where R is La, Pr, Sm, and/or Gd, using soft XAS spectra at the Co-L2,3 edges in the surface-sensitive total electron yield (TEY) mode. The purpose was to obtain information about the electronic structures and local coordination environments at the near-surface (∼5 nm). For these compositions, δ was determined by measuring the oxidation state of Co from the Co-L2,3 data. The results showed that despite the consistent 3+ valence of all A-site species, the charge-compensating Co oxidation state varied. That is, the authors noted that the corresponding oxygen vacancy concentration increased with decreasing ionic radius corresponding to the sequence of substitutions. However, as ionic size does not lead to an obvious mechanism, an alternative explanation can be proposed. That is, as the electronegativities of the dopants increase slightly with this progression, their substitution provides an additional component to remove electrons from oxygen, thereby introducing progressively greater acceptor-like behaviour and increasing the oxygen vacancy concentration in addition to the same effect by cobalt. The same authors268 reported combined XAS and DFT studies in the attempt to optimise Co-based perovskites for HER performance as a function of A-site ionic electronegativity (AIE). It was found that in order to fulfil Sabatier's principle, the most efficient electron exchange interactions between A- and B-sites were obtained with an AIE value of ∼2.33, which correlated with (Gd0.5La0.5)BaCo2O5.5+δ.


3.9.6. Low energy ion scattering spectroscopy (LEIS). 
LEIS spectroscopy is used to examine the outermost (∼1–3 nm) and outer layers (∼10 nm) of the composition and structure of surfaces.269 In this technique, the surface is bombarded by noble gases, such as 4He+ and 20Ne+, at energies in the range 1–10 keV. Owing to the probability of ionic neutralisation at a surface, the probe depth of LEIS can be as little as one or two atomic surface layers, making LEIS one of the most surface-sensitive analytical tools.
Types of defects. 
Indirect identification and semi-quantification of 0D point defects including cationic and anionic vacancies, extrinsic substitution, Frenkel, Schottky, molecular and bonding variations.
Advantages. 
The biggest advantage of LEIS is that it provides averaged but sensitive information across a few nanometres (∼3–5 atomic layers) of the surface. This is in contrast to XPS and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), which have limited capacity to provide definitive information about the outermost atomic layers of a material. Consequently, LEIS is useful for monitoring phenomena such as catalysis, wetting, diffusion, adhesion, and adsorption. Dynamic depth profiling can also be done using LEIS equipped with a sputter gun. Using this approach, quantification of the surface elements can be done as there is no matrix effect in LEIS, and so the signal is directly proportional to the surface coverage of elements.
Challenges. 
LEIS provides no information about molecules and oxidation states and it is an expensive characterisation technique (as expensive as XPS and ToF-SIMS). LEIS analysis, which is from the outermost layer of a material, can be super challenging since any exposure to the atmosphere contaminates a surface with adventitious carbon, typically hydrocarbons.
Examples. 
The importance of using LEIS in perovskite characterisation is based on the significant role of contaminant diffusion from the bulk to the surface at elevated temperatures, viz., segregation, which can affect adversely the catalytic performance of perovskites. Consequently, characterisation of the terminating layer and defining the dominant species at the surface are of considerable importance for understanding the ionic conductivity and related performances of perovskites.269 Druce et al.270 used deep-profiling in situ LEIS measurement on three polycrystalline perovskites, including A- and B-site substituted (La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.2Fe0.8)O0.3−δ, A-site substituted (GdxBa1−x)Co2O5+δ, and Ruddlesden–Popper La2NiO4+δ. The results revealed that Sr, Ba, and La, respectively, were the dominant elements in the terminating layers. Further, at the outer surface of La2NiO4+δ, a small Pb peak was detected, revealing its segregation to the surface.


3.9.7. Laser Raman microspectroscopy (Raman). 
Laser Raman microspectroscopy is another widely used method to determine defects in materials and analyse chemical bonding energies on the surfaces of perovskite materials.271 Raman patterns of defective materials reveal the presence of peaks specific to oxygen vacancies, the area under which is proportional to the concentration.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., lattice distortion, superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
There are numerous advantages of Raman analyses, such as (1) no sample preparation or alteration is required; (2) there are no size, type (powder or film), or mass limitations; (3) the process is very rapid, requiring seconds to minutes; (4) the analyses are done in air; (5) operation of the instrument is straightforward, with little training required; (6) the laser beam used for detection has a relatively large diameter of ∼1 μm; (7) it has confocal imaging capability, so subsurface features in transparent materials can be detected; (8) it is highly sensitive to the detection of impurities; (9) multiple lasers can be selected for greater detection sensitivity for different materials; (10) peak shifts can be used to detect residual surface stress; (11) it can be fitted with heating and cooling stages as well as controlled-atmosphere chambers for in situ reaction assessment; and (12) the database of patterns is large and growing.
Challenges. 
Raman analyses are limited to crystalline ceramics and polymers. Metals and amorphous materials generally are not examined using Raman, and similarly, some organic-based perovskites are not suitable as some possess organic bonds that are Raman-inactive. In such cases, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is recommended as a complementary analytical technique. As the laser is a source of energy and heating, it can degrade and oxidise materials, especially if the intensity is increased in order to enhance sensitivity. It can also induce some phase transformation, as in the case of anatase → rutile.
Examples. 
Kumar et al.272 used Raman analyses to study a new Raman mode that appeared in orthorhombic B-site substituted Pr(Fe0.7Cr0.3)O3−δ. The Raman characterisation revealed that the electron–phonon coupling was highly sensitive to the presence of mixed Fe–Cr ions, while such multi-phonon scattering was absent in defect-free PrFeO3. The Raman results also showed variations in the peak intensities of the Raman octahedral breathing mode at ∼660 cm−1, in response to different excitation wavelengths, which was attributed to the lattice rearrangement arising from electron transfer from Cr3+(d3) to Fe3+(d5), thereby resulting in a new d2–d6 (Cr4+–O−2–Fe2+) configuration and consequent activation of a new Raman mode. Further, Dama et al.273 studied the structural alterations of AZrO3 perovskites using A-site substitutions by Ca, Sr, and Ba. This work showed that the number of Raman vibration modes decreased during the orthorhombic to cubic phase transition from Ca- to Sr- to Ba-substituted perovskites.


3.9.8. Photoluminescence (PL). 
PL represents a simple and quick characterisation method to determine defects, including colour centres and coordination changes in perovskites. The technique is based on the capture of the light generated from the transition of photons from the excited state to the ground state, where the optical properties, which are determined by the electronic and structural properties, are themselves determined by intrinsic and extrinsic defects affecting the long-range order and chemical bonding of perovskites.274 Similar to Raman analysis, the area under a peak is proportional to the concentration of the defect. Resonance Raman and PL imaging can also be used separately or together to reveal 0–3D defects, such as variation in localised coordination.
Types of defects. 
0D point defects (e.g., cation and anion interstitials and vacancies, antisite substitution, Frenkel pairs, Schottky pairs), 1D defects (e.g., line defects), 2D defects (e.g., twinning, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, grain boundaries, segregation), and 3D defects (e.g., lattice distortion, superlattices, precipitates, pores).
Advantages. 
There are numerous advantages of PL, such as (1) no sample preparation or alteration is required; (2) there are no size, type (powder or film), or mass limitations; (3) the process is very rapid, requiring seconds to minutes; (4) the analyses are done in air; (5) operation of the instrument is straightforward, with little training required; (6) the laser beam used for detection has a relatively large diameter of ∼1 μm; (7) it has confocal imaging capability, so subsurface features in transparent materials can be detected; (8) it is highly sensitive to the detection of impurities; (9) multiple lasers can be selected for greater detection sensitivity for different materials; (10) peak shifts can be used to detect residual surface stress; (11) it can be fitted with heating and cooling stages as well as controlled-atmosphere chambers for in situ reaction assessment; (12) the database of patterns is large and growing; (13) it can be used to determine the band gap; and (14) it provides comparative measurement of electron/hole recombination.
Challenges. 
Similar to Raman, the laser is a source of energy and heating, so the laser power must be held at relatively low power in order not to degrade or oxidise some materials. Another limitation is that many optical centres in materials have multiple excitation stages, which makes the interpretation of the peaks challenging.
Examples. 
Zhang et al.275 reported a fundamental study of the kinetics of the chemical transformation mechanisms in single-crystal CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) halide perovskite nanoplates through quantitative imaging of the anion exchange reaction using confocal PL microscopy. The anion exchange pathway on the nanoplates was shown to be dependent on the reaction time and the nanoplate thickness, both of which are governed by the crystal structure and the diffusion-limited transformation mechanism. Further, PL lifetime imaging microscopy was used to assess the stability of the optical characteristics of the perovskites, which was demonstrated by the recombination rates of the carriers and their lifetime distributions across the nanoplates during anion exchange. Further, Wang et al.131 indirectly demonstrated the presence of oxygen vacancies in a Ruddlesden–Popper Pr3+-doped Na2(Pr0.005La1.995)Ti3O10 layered perovskite using temperature- and high-pressure-dependent PL measurements. Kudo et al.276 undertook a comparative study on the luminescence properties (PL, phosphorescence, and thermoluminescence) of pristine K2La2Ti3010 and lanthanide-doped K2(Ln0.02 La1.98)Ti3O10 (Ln = Pr, Sm, Eu, Tb, Dy, Er, and Tm). The resultant hole trapping in both K2 Pr0.02(La1.98)Ti3O10 and K2(Tb0.02 La1.98)Ti3O10 led to the oxidation of Tb and Pr to a higher valence of 4+ and consequent long-term charge separation, a major advantage for the catalytic/electrocatalytic applications of perovskites.

3.10. Bulk analytical techniques
In addition to TEM, HAADF, and EPR (ESR), there are other well-established methods to detect the presence and concentrations of dopants. These include inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), inductively coupled plasma atomic absorption spectrometry (ICP-AES), and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). It is not uncommon for complementary bulk and surface analytical data to be provided as these may exhibit similarities as well as differences. In the same vein, real-time techniques, such as synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction (SPXRD) and Operando Raman, to generate and analyse defects are used.

Fig. 12 illustrates the range of typical beam diameters and penetration depths of these techniques. Table 8 lists the standard microscopy and spectroscopy techniques that are used to detect defective materials.
 Fig. 12  Imaging limitations of characterisation techniques applied to defects. 
Table 8 Analytical methods for the characterisation of defects




Analytical technique
Defect types
Description and applications
Ref.




High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM)
Dopants, vacancies, surface defects, edge dislocations
Local composition, surface morphology, electronic structure

277



Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)
Vacancies, surface defects, grain boundaries, surface reconstruction, lattice disorder
Local composition, defect structure

278



Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
Dopants, voids, edge dislocations, planar defects
Direct correlation of image and spectroscopic data, composition and distribution of dopants

278



Atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning force microscopy (SFM)
Surface point defects, antiphase boundaries, grain boundaries, volume defects
Topographical imaging, surface atomic defects, mineralogical analysis

233 and 279



Atomic electron tomography (AET)
Point defects, twin boundaries, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, surface reconstruction
Atomic displacements, 3D image reconstruction, 3D structural determination of crystal defects

280



Atomic-resolution spherical-aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy (ACTEM)
Point defects
Resolution of individual atoms (spatial resolution <0.05 nm)

241 and 242



Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)
Dopants, surface defects, Schottky pairs, Frenkel defects
Local defect structure, defect mobility, planar surfaces

235 and 236



High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)
Dopants, vacancies, voids, linear defects, planar defects, lattice disorder
Surface morphology, defect types and concentrations

169



X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), near ambient pressure XPS (NAPXPS)
Dopants, surface defects, other point defects, intrinsic defects, lattice disorder
Elemental composition of surface and near-surface region, valences

246



X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES), extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS)
Oxygen vacancies
Local composition, local arrangements of defects, coordination number, bond length and angle

261–263



Dilatometry
Vacancies, other point defects, dislocations
Macroscopic temperature- and defect-induced size changes

281



Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
Oxygen vacancies
Defect concentration from mass change upon heating

282



Optical absorption spectroscopy
Point defects
Spatial distribution of point defects, electronic structure, defect states

283



Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)
Oxygen vacancies
Determination of particle, isotope, and molecular compositions

284



Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS)
Vacancies, vacancy clusters, other point defects, dislocations
Defect types and concentrations

253, 254 and 285



Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR) or electron spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR)
Oxygen vacancies, other point defects
Unpaired electrons, valences, defect types and concentrations

250



Laser Raman microspectroscopy
Oxygen vacancies, disordered surfaces
Mineralogy, disordered structures, defect types and concentrations

271



Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), optical absorption spectrometry (ICP-AES), and mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
Dopants
Quantification analysis of dopants

286





3.11. Cautionary tales
Examination of the literature on the defect engineering of perovskites reveals that there are some frequently encountered issues that may cloud the rationale of the experimental design and the interpretation of the results:
• Reaction equilibrium: it is generally assumed that heat treatment at high temperatures achieves a thermodynamically equilibrium state. In reality, this is rarely the case, with relative states of nonequilibrium being the rule rather than the exception. Hence, alteration of the catalytic properties over time can be expected to result partly from the act of continued equilibration.
• Defect equilibrium: it is also commonly assumed that the diffusion of defects caused by substitution results in the exit of the substituted ion to the surface of the solid. However, under nonequilibrium conditions, this is not necessarily the case. Here, the cation would remain as an interstitial dopant, which would be ionically charge compensated by the annihilation of anion vacancies.
• Ionic radii: the publication by Shannon287 that sets out the standard database for ionic radii lists both crystal radii and ionic radii. However, although the publication states unambiguously that the crystal radii are to be used in solids, the ionic radii are regularly used in error.
• Cation solid solubility: substitutional cation solid solubility is assumed widely, and stoichiometric compensation is made accordingly. However, there are alternatives in the form of (i) interstitial solid solubility, (ii) insolubility, (iii) partial solubility, and (iv) chemical reaction. Although the Goldschmidt tolerance factor19 is commonly considered, Hume-Rothery's rules196 can also provide some guidance concerning the probability of substitutional vs. interstitial solid solubility and substantial vs. limited solubility. Data from X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction, and XPS can clarify the nature of the solid solubility mechanism.
• Anion solid solubility: although the substitution of anions, such as nitrogen, for oxygen is assumed widely, in fact, the oxide sublattice is so stable that it is quite difficult for such substitution to be effected. Thus, such solubility is frequently overestimated in that it may be very limited or non-existent. In such cases, such dopants are likely to act simply as reducing agents, thereby causing metal reduction and/or forming oxygen vacancies.
• Donor/acceptor: dopants can be electron donors, neutral, or electron acceptors. These distinctions are often not made, leading to misconceptions concerning the defect equilibria. In general, if ionic charge compensation occurs, then cation donor dopants generate cation vacancies, neutral dopants do not generate vacancies, and acceptor dopants generate anion vacancies. Anion interstitial formation upon donor doping is rare owing to the large radii of anions.
• Charge compensation: ionic charge compensation is assumed widely, and the defect equilibria assumed accordingly. However, there are alternatives in the form of (i) electronic charge compensation and (ii) redox charge compensation. The latter mechanism assumes increasing importance when transition metal and rare earth metals of stable valences are used as dopants. The conventional Kröger–Vink126 notation generally does not consider redox charge compensation.
• Charge transfer: the observation of altered and variable valence states is assumed widely to be associated with charge-compensating vacancy (or interstitial) formation. However, intervalence charge transfer288 and multivalence charge transfer101 as stabilisation mechanisms are often overlooked.
4. Defect engineering of perovskite thermocatalysts
Catalysis is the increase in the rate of chemical reaction with the use of a catalyst in any chemical process where high amounts and rates of conversion, selectivity, and stability are desired. Within the technical field of catalysis, thermal catalysis (also known as environmental catalysis) is defined as pure chemical catalysis at a certain temperature, where thermal energy initiates a reaction, such as hydrogenation or dehydrogenation, partial oxidation, or complete oxidation. One of the key determinants of catalytic behaviour is the presence of different types of structural defects, which may act as active sites. There are four categories of structural defects, which are point, line, surface, and volume.
4.1. Point defects
As mentioned previously, point defects can be divided into three categories: substitutionals, interstitials, and vacancies; a Schottky pair combines cation + anion vacancies and a Frenkel pair combines cation or anion interstitial + vacancy. Point defects can occur from the presence of impurities but, more particularly, from intentionally added dopants. Point defects typically play crucial roles in altering or controlling the electrochemical, mechanical, magnetic, electrical, and catalytic properties of perovskite materials. Point-defect models have been used successfully to explain oxygen nonstoichiometry in perovskites, including (La1−xSrx)FeO3−δ,289 (La1−xCax)AlO3−δ,290 LaMnO3+δ,291 LaMO3−δ (M = Mn, Fe, Co),292 and (La1−xSrx)CrO3−δ.293

4.1.1. Cation site substitution. 
Ionic substitution at the A and/or B sites is the most widely practised strategy for modification of the properties of perovskites, but the number and type of systematic trends that have been identified are very limited. More broadly, the guiding principles for the relevant considerations are provided in Section 3.4. However, another tool is crystal field theory, which describes the concepts of metal ions and their ligands, how the ligands coordinate with the metal ions, and the stability of these coordinations.
As shown in Fig. 13, metal ions have five d orbitals, where dxy, dxz, and dyz (t2g orbitals) are oriented between the subscripted axes and dx2−y2 and dz2 (eg orbitals) are oriented on the subscripted axes.294 In the absence of a ligand, the d orbitals are of equal energy. However, when ligands coordinate octahedrally or tetrahedrally, the orbitals split, viz., become degenerate, where the three t2g and the two eg orbitals are triply and doubly degenerate, respectively. The splitting energy is defined in terms of Δo (octahedral splitting) or Δt (tetrahedral splitting). The coordinating ligands are divided into weak-field (small Δ, high electronegativity) and strong-field (large Δ, low electronegativity), which are in the general order known as the spectrochemical series, which is given in Table 9. This ranks the most common ligands as is shown in Table 9.
 Fig. 13  Energy levels of the degenerate d orbital in octahedral and tetrahedral coordinations. 
Table 9 Spectrochemical series according to ligand strengths and principal bonding












Fig. 13 shows that the splitting of Δ differs between the coordination polyhedra, where the different electrons are stabilised (−Δ) or destabilised (+Δ) by different amounts, depending on the nature of the metal, the valence of the metal, the coordinating ligand, the coordination number, and the shape of the coordination polyhedron. These considerations can provide indication of the relative stability of structures differentiated by these parameters.
Of more direct relevance is the impact of the spectrochemical series on the ionic radii. Since the metal ions in oxide (and halide) perovskites are coordinated by oxygen (and halides), these structures involve weak field ligands. This differentiation can be helpful because d4 to d7 metals coordinated by weak-field ligands favour high-spin states, which are alternatives to the ionic radii from those of low-spin states (d1, d2, d8 to d10).295
4.1.1.1. A-Site substitution. 
The partial substitution of A-site cations is an established approach to improve the properties of perovskites in terms of decreasing the operating temperature,296,297 development of the active catalysts,298 and boosting the energy and power densities of batteries through enhancement of the electrical conductivity299 and cathodic overpotential.300 Defect generation by A-site substitution can affect functionality through various means, including introduction of active surface sites,3 facilitation of redox of B-site cations,133 creation of charge-compensating B-site cation vacancies (donor doping), creation of charge compensating oxygen vacancies (acceptor doping),134 reduction of the activation energy for cation, oxygen, or vacancy diffusion,301 cation diffusion,302 and reduction of the oxygen vacancy formation energy.303
4.1.1.2. B-Site substitution. 
As mentioned previously, although B-site deficiency is not energetically favourable, there are many studies of substitution for this site.304 Tan et al.305 stated that the electronic factor variation induced by B-site substitution of Sr2(Sn1−xRux)O4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) is significant for isopropanol conversion. Sr2(Ru0.7Sn0.3)O4 showed the best yield of acetone at atmospheric pressure in the temperature range of 280–320 °C. This is ascribed to the optimal eg filling state of the B-site for appropriate overlapping between B-element σ*-antibonding and O 2pσ orbitals.
4.1.1.3. Simultaneous A and B site substitution. 
Substitution of both A and B sites has also been applied frequently in order to modify the properties of catalysts. Rousseau et al.306 synthesised a series of (La1−xSrx)(Co1−yFey)O3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3, 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5) by the combined citrate–(ethylenedinitrilo)tetraacetic acid (EDTA) complexing method, using La3+, Sr2+, Co2+, and Fe3+ as starting ions, and calcining at 800 °C in air. Upon equilibration, it would be expected that the final valences would be La3+, Sr2+, Co3+, and Fe3+. They observed that the substitution of La3+ by Sr2+ (x = 0.3) and of Co3+ by Fe3+ (y = 0.2) enhanced the catalytic performance for the oxidation of toluene. Laser Raman microspectroscopy revealed strong dynamic structural distortion through the Jahn–Teller effect, and Mössbauer spectroscopy demonstrated the presence of Fe4+ cations. These results again can be interpreted in terms of a dual charge compensation mechanism of (i) oxygen vacancy formation (ionic charge compensation) –  and (ii) IVCT – Co3+ + Fe3+ → Co2+ + Fe4+. Although not noted by the authors, the XPS data revealed that Fe doping caused a reduction in the Co valence, consistent with the IVCT mechanism. The active species was suggested to be O−, which was identified by XPS. If this is correct, then this species, which corresponds to the F+ colour centre ,307 raises the possibility that instead of charge compensation between  and , it is between  and . The optimal composition of (La0.7Sr0.3)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3 + 5% Co (weight or atomic percent not specified, oxide assumed owing to calcining temperature) resulted in a decrease in T20% toluene conversion from 225° to 190 °C. However, without the 5% Co, the T20% conversion was at 243 °C. This observation suggests that the improved performance derived from heterojunction formation (Co oxide).


4.1.2. Anion substitution. 
Substitution in the oxygen sublattice in perovskites is limited to the Ruddlesden–Popper phases, which is discussed subsequently in Section 4.7.


4.1.3. Charge-compensating oxygen vacancies. 
Charge-compensating anion site vacancies, as well as intrinsic anion site vacancies, in perovskites are typical 0D point defects. They exhibit the capacity to adsorb reactant molecules and to form reactive oxygen species (ROS), including the radicals ˙O−, ˙O2−, and ˙O3−. Consequently, oxygen vacancies are important active sites for catalytic reactions.223 Oxygen vacancies are readily introduced into perovskites through various mechanisms, such as annealing in reducing atmospheres. Reducing or oxidising conditions can establish hypostoichiometric (LaMnO3−δ) or hyperstoichiometric (LaMnO3+δ) oxygen concentrations, respectively. However, it is common to generate these stoichiometries in perovskites by p-type acceptors (La3+(Mn1−x3+Cux2+)O3−δ2−) or n-type donors (La3+(Mn1−x3+Zrx4+)O3+δ2−), respectively. Using these approaches, modification of the catalytic efficiencies of many perovskites has been investigated through A-site and B-site doping and A- and B-site codoping.
However, another potential source of oxygen vacancies is the grain boundaries, which exhibit terminating dangling bonds associated with enhanced concentrations of both cation and oxygen vacancies,308 which are charge-compensated by the adjacent space charge layer. In this case, these defects do not derive from a chemical mechanism but a microstructural one. Therefore, this requires reporting of the relevant parameters, including surface area, although the grain size is often reported as an alternative. Further, it is well known that oxygen vacancies can also form irregular clusters as well as ordered arrays,143 which can affect the catalytic properties significantly.
O2 temperature-programmed desorption (O2-TPD) is usually used to determine the nature of oxygen species and hence the stoichiometries of defective perovskites. Through examination of the processes of oxygen transfer, three types and amounts of oxygen species can be detected by O2-TPD, which are chemically adsorbed oxygen (O2−), lattice oxygen (O2−), and adsorbed oxygen on the oxygen vacancy (O−).4 Further, XPS is also used to identify oxygen species but its accuracy in quantitative analysis is limited owing to the variability of sample morphologies. More sensitive techniques that are applied for such analyses include the synchrotron methods XAS, XANES, and EXAFS.
4.1.3.1. Organic oxidation. 
Luo et al.169 used a sol–gel method to synthesise what was considered to be B-site substituted La(Co1−xPx)O3 with phosphorus, followed by calcining in air at 500 °C. The source of phosphorus was ammonium dihydrogen phosphate. Abdel-Kader et al.309 studied the thermal decomposition of this material and observed its decomposition at ∼180 °C to release NH3, followed by continuous weight losses up to 600 °C, which were attributed to evolution of H2O. Further work by Pardo et al.310 clarified the matter by reporting that only nitrogenous species were released up to 430 °C; a very significant weight loss that was initiated at this temperature was not characterised. This point was elucidated by Su et al.,311 who used differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) to indicate the release of P2O5 and H2O at 430 °C. It is well known that P2O5 develops high vapour pressures at temperatures >200 °C, which cause a serious risk of mass loss by volatilisation. Consequently, it is possible that Luo et al.169 failed to incorporate phosphorus in their samples. Assuming that phosphorus was incorporated, further consideration of the nature of its incorporation is relevant. The ionic radius of sixfold-coordinated Co3+ is 0.075 nm (it would be expected to be in high spin as its electronic configuration is d6, as explained in Section 4.1.1) and that of the common valences of P3+ and P5+ is 0.058 and 0.052 nm, respectively. According to Hume-Rothery's rules for substantial solid solubility, the ionic size mismatches of 23% and 31% as well as the valence mismatch of 2 for P5+ (the electronegativities are relatively close) suggest that the potential for substitution can be questioned. Consequently, alternative mechanisms for phosphorus incorporation must be considered. One is A-site substitution, which is unlikely owing to the very large ionic radius of La3+ (0.1172 nm)287 and the valence difference. The second mechanism is interstitial solid solubility, which is feasible owing to the small ionic radii of P3+ and P5+. The third mechanism is anion substitution, which is also quite likely since the formation of phosphate glasses is well known.312 These points being made, it is also possible that phosphorus is insoluble in LaCoO3.
Luo et al.169 reported lattice expansion, suggesting phosphorus incorporation. However, phosphorus substitution for Co3+ would be expected to cause lattice contraction from size considerations. Further, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak shifts cannot be considered definitive because the authors did not use an internal standard or Rietveld refinement. The authors also concluded phosphorus incorporation on the basis of an XPS peak at 133.1 eV. This identification was based on the work of Wang et al.,313 who identified an XPS peak at 133.3 eV, which was attributed to surface-passivating phosphorus. Further, the standard XPS database of the National Institute of Standards and Testing (NIST) reveals that the peak locations for the intermediate and final reaction products (H3PO4, H4P2O7, HPO3, and P2O5311) exhibit XPS peaks only in the range 134.9–135.6 eV. In conclusion, the peak at 133.1 eV is unlikely to indicate P incorporation but rather more likely to demonstrate its redeposition on the surface following P2O5 volatilisation.
Luo et al.169 reported XPS and XANES data showing the presence of both Co2+ and Co3+ and attributed this to the high electronegativity of P relative to that of Co, thereby causing electron transfer to P. This is a driving force for the IVCT, which can be expressed as P5+ + 2Co2+ → P3+ + 2Co3+. IVCT does not alter defect formation or annihilation otherwise; it is a mechanism of structural stabilisation.98 However, Luo et al.169 suggested that phosphorus incorporation resulted in the formation of oxygen vacancies owing to the lattice distortion deriving from B-site (MO6) substitution to form the PO5 coordination polyhedron. However, structural distortion would occur from the introduction of any vacancy or interstitial. More convincing were the TPD data, which showed the presence of lattice oxygen vacancies. These were attributed to Co3+ → Co2+ reduction, which contradicts both the suggestion that this resulted from electronegativity differences and the corresponding IVCT reaction, which require Co oxidation, not reduction. Returning to the four possible mechanisms for phosphorus incorporation and the resultant formation of oxygen vacancies:
• A-Site substitution: this is unlikely owing to the ionic size and valence differences between La3+ and P5+.
• Interstitial solid solubility: the relevant representation of defect relations (assuming ionic charge compensation) would not involve oxygen vacancy formation:
• Co vacancy: 
• O interstitial: 
• Anion substitution: the relevant representation of the defect relations (assuming ionic charge compensation), where phosphorus acts as P3−, would involve oxygen vacancy formation:
• O substitution: 
• Phosphorus insolubility: the relevant elaborated defect equilibria (assuming ionic charge compensation) would involve oxygen vacancy formation:
Cation deficiency: 
In conclusion, examination of the published literature and consideration of the experimental data indicate that (i) phosphorus solid solubility is unlikely, and its volatilisation resulted in its removal from the composition and (ii) the stoichiometric compensation for phosphorus substitution created B-site hypostoichiometry, which was charge compensated by oxygen vacancies.
4.1.3.2. Carbon monoxide oxidation. 
High levels of ambient carbon monoxide represent significant health and environmental hazards, so many methods have been used to attempt to minimise the concentration of CO.314 Catalytic CO oxidation uses catalysis to oxidise toxic CO gas into nontoxic CO2.315,316 CO is present commonly due to sources such as industrial processes, vehicle exhaust emission,317 gaseous wastes in the petrochemical industry,318 by-product of ethanol and other fuel syntheses, and production of H2 in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells.319 In addition, owing to the uncomplicated reaction step of CO oxidation to CO2, this reaction has been used extensively as a probe in other complex oxidation reactions.
CO has been used commonly as a reducing agent to create oxygen vacancies in perovskites and their parent structural group of spinels, such as LaCoO3,320 Mn2O3,321,322 (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3,323 Co3O4,324 and Co3−xMnxO4.325 Xiao et al.326 reported that, relative to bulk LaCoO3, the increased surface area of porous LaCoO3 provided more accessible active Co sites, which improved the oxidising capacity and resulted in enhanced catalytic reactivity towards CO oxidation. From the temperatures of the lattice oxygen desorption of the determined O2-TPD spectrum, it was inferred that lattice oxygen is more active in porous LaCoO3 than in bulk LaCoO3.326 When an oxygen vacancy in a perovskite is filled, it can dissociate O2 into atomic O,327 thereby facilitating the CO + O → CO2 reaction. The role of oxygen vacancies in perovskites in facilitating CO oxidation has been demonstrated in many studies that examined the dependence of the CO oxidation in terms of the oxygen vacancy concentration.320,321,323,328 Consequently, the deliberate creation of oxygen vacancies in perovskites has become a standard strategy to attempt to increase the catalytic activity for CO oxidation.329
4.1.3.3. Carbon dioxide reforming. 
The carbon dioxide reforming of methane can produce syngas with a high hydrogen/carbon monoxide ratio according to the reaction CO2 + CH4 ↔ 2H2 + 2CO (ΔHo298 = 247 kJ mol−1, ΔG° = 61770–67.32T kJ mol−1330), which can be used effectively in the industrial production of many oxygenated compounds, including acetic acid, dimethyl ether, aldehydes, alcohols, etc.331 The majority of hydrogen produced by methane reforming is consumed in the production of ammonia332 and is used for different hydrogenation processes in oil refining and food production. Therefore, this reaction has a critical environmental footprint since both methane and carbon dioxide contribute to the greenhouse effect.333 Consequently, converting these gases into valuable raw materials can reduce significantly CO2 and CH4 emissions in the atmosphere.334 Many research groups have investigated perovskites for CO2 reforming, e.g., La(NixFe1−x)O3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1),335 (La1−xCax)(Al0.7Ni0.3)O3−δ,336 (SrxLa1−x)(Al0.7Ni0.3)O3−δ,336 (MxLa1−x)(Al0.7Ni0.3)O3−δ (M = Li, Na, K),337 LaM(AlxNi1−x)O3 (M = Pt, Pd, Ru, Rh, Ir),338 and La(MoxV1−x)On.339 These studies have shown that the catalytic activities can be enhanced by high surface areas rich in oxygen vacancies and that low-temperature operation is advantageous.340–345
Gómez-Cuaspud et al.346 fabricated the (La0.8Sr0.2)(Fe0.8Cr0.2)O3 perovskite by a polymerisation method, and the oxygen species adsorbed on the oxygen vacancies were detected by XPS. The oxygen vacancies that formed in (La0.8Sr0.2)(Fe0.8Cr0.2)O3 acted as active sites for the methane reforming reaction by adsorbing reactants, triggering the formation of intermediates, and dissociating products. Shetty et al.347 studied A-site substitution of LaCoO3 with Sr and observed efficient stabilisation of Co0 (from H2 reduction) and Co2+ active sites, which improved the hydrogenation performance of the C–O bonds. They found that the prevalence of Co0 sites influenced the C–C hydrogenolysis process at high temperature and that the Co2+ sites, which were associated with oxygen vacancies, showed extraordinary reactivity for C–O hydrogenolysis at low temperature.
During the reforming of alkanes over the La(Fe0.9Ni0.1)O3 perovskite, it was found that abundant oxygen vacancies facilitated the activation of CO2 and that metal sites promoted the activation of C–C and C–H bonds, resulting in good catalytic performance, anti-coking, and durability.188
4.1.3.4. Carbon dioxide reduction. 
From an environmental and economic point of view, closing the loop of carbon recycling through the catalytic reduction of CO2 into fuels and chemicals, such as methanol, hydrocarbons, formic acid, and ethylene, is important.348–350 However, owing to the high molecular stability of carbon dioxide (CO bond energy = 806 kJ mol−1), its chemical conversion is challenging, so effective catalysts are required.351
The oxygen vacancies in perovskite-type mixed oxides (A- and B-site substitution) have recently been shown to be active sites for the chemisorption of CO2 owing to the strong adsorption affinity of oxygen vacancies for nonpolar CO2, which is the basis for the high-temperature conversion of CO2 into useful products.352 Wang et al.351 prepared three-dimensional draped porous Ni-loaded Co3O4 (Ni/3DDP-Co3O4) catalysts, as shown in Fig. 14a, as the basis for low-cost transition-metal-based catalysts for CO2 reduction. The catalyst consisted of Ni clusters uniformly coated on the 3DDP-Co3O4 support, as shown in Fig. 14b–f. It was found that 3DDP-Co3O4 provided a large surface area, which was suitable for accommodation of Ni nanoclusters, facilitating Ni–Co interaction, and accommodating oxygen vacancies. Reduction by H2 caused electron transfer from Ni to 3DDP-Co3O4 and consequent oxygen vacancy formation, as shown in Fig. 14g, which was responsible for increased catalytic activity for CO2 reduction and CH4 selectivity, as shown in Fig. 14h.351
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the role of oxygen vacancies in three-dimensional draped porous Ni-loaded Co3O4 (Ni/3DDP-Co3O4), (b and c) TEM images of the catalyst, (d–f) EDS mapping of the catalyst, (g) comparison of the relative O1, O2, O3, and O4 levels on the surface of reduced (R) catalysts (O1, O2, O3, and O4 represent lattice oxygen, oxygen in hydroxyl groups, oxygen vacancies, and oxygen in water molecules, respectively), and (h) CH4 and CO selectivity (3DDP-Co3O4 = Ni-free Co3O4 catalyst, Ni/3DDP-NCO = Ni-loaded Ni-substituted (Ni0.5Co2.5)O4 catalyst, Ni/3DDP-Co3O4 = Ni-loaded Co3O4 catalyst) (reproduced from ref. 351 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 
4.1.3.5. Catalytic nitrogen oxide (NOx) decomposition. 
NOx are a major cause of photochemical smog and acid rain,353,354 and so strategies for the reduction of NOx emissions have been under intensive development.355 For example, the removal of NOx from mobile sources, NOx storage-reduction (NSR), and three-way catalysts (TWC) have been investigated. Selective catalytic reduction (SCR) and selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR) have also been used to remove NOx gas from fixed sources.356–359 Although the direct decomposition of NOx into N2 and O2 (2NO → N2 + O2, ΔGo298 = −86.6 kJ mol−1) has high negative Gibbs free energies,360 the respective reaction kinetics are slow (ΔHo298 = 90.2 kJ mol−1)361 and they have high activation energies (∼335 kJ mol−1).362 While many different catalyst materials have been studied with the aim of resolving these problems, perovskites have emerged as lead candidates for NOx decomposition catalysts owing to their flexible compositions and redox characteristics.363
Liu et al.223 showed that NO was readily activated by oxygen vacancies by directly correlating the volume of NO adsorbed with the oxygen vacancy concentration in (La2−xRbx)CuO4−δ perovskites. Partial replacement of La by Rb increased the Cu2+ → Cu3+ oxidation and formed oxygen vacancies. In effect, this process involved the two simultaneous mechanisms of charge compensation mentioned previously: (i) oxygen vacancy formation (ionic charge compensation) –  and (ii) IVCT – La3+ + Cu2+ → La2+ + Cu3+. The authors used in situ diffuse reflection infrared Fourier transformed (DRIFT) spectroscopy and TPD of NO coupled with mass spectrometry to show the dependence between the amount of Rb+ substitution, adsorption capacity of NO, and .223
Complementary results were obtained by Zhao et al.,364 who showed that NO dissociated at the oxygen vacancies of the (La0.1Sr0.9)NiO3 perovskite, which was suggested to exhibit two active sites in the form of the low-valent metal ions (Ni2+) and oxygen vacancies. The relevant redox reaction involved , which suggests two active sites as well as the liberation of O2. The authors also suggested that the oxygen vacancies increased the mobility of lattice oxygen, which not only promoted the NO redox reaction but also generation of active sites.364
4.1.3.6. Soot combustion. 
Soot, which is a fine black or brown powder produced by the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons, is a particulate pollutant that causes environmental and health hazards365 and so its removal has become a pressing safety issue.366 Catalytic soot oxidation is a very effective technique to reduce soot particle emissions using perovskite catalysts such as (Sr1−xKx)TiO3,365 La(CoxFe1−x)O3,367 (La1−xKx)(Co1−yFey)O3,368 (La1−xKx)MnO3,369 (La2−xRbx)CuO4−δ,223 (La1−xCsx)CoO3,370 and (La1.8K0.2)(Cu0.9V0.1)O4.371
Sun et al.372 prepared a hybrid core–shell material comprised of cobalt metal nanoparticles with the surface of layered (Pr0.5Ba0.5)(Mn0.9Co0.1)O3 perovskite, which exhibited high catalytic activity for soot combustion. The Co nanoparticles and oxygen vacancies in the defective perovskite exhibited synergism to activate O2 and form adsorbed ROS (O2−, O22−, O2−), which are known to be electrophilic. It was considered that the strengthening of C–O bonds and the breakage of C–C bonds underpinned the catalytic activity for soot oxidation.
Recently, Tang et al.167 produced a (La1−xKx)CoO3/γ-Al2O3/cordierite catalytic convertor and observed that the catalytic performance for soot combustion was improved owing to the formation of Co4+, high , and increased lattice oxygen mobility. As in the case of (La2−xRbx)CuO4−δ perovskites,223 the same charge compensation mechanisms are likely to have occurred: (i) oxygen vacancy formation (ionic charge compensation) –  and (ii) IVCT – La3+ + Co3+ → La2+ + Co4+. The catalytic convertor exhibited a 90% conversion rate at 390 °C, and the selectivity for carbon dioxide was 99.8%.167
Wang et al.373 conducted a study of soot and NOx removal using the (La1−xKx)CoO3 perovskite, and the results showed that the amount of adsorbed oxygen and the  increased with increasing K substitution. Again, the existence of oxygen vacancies was considered to increase the mobility of lattice oxygen and accelerate the generation of more oxygen vacancies; the oxygen vacancies also enhanced the activation of NO on the catalytic surface. Therefore, the catalytic activity was applicable simultaneously to both soot and NOx removal, yielding a CO2 selectivity of 98.4% and a NO to N2 conversion rate of 34.6%.373
The reported catalytic activities as a function of temperature for various perovskite and spinel catalysts are summarised in Table 10.
Table 10 Summary of catalytic activities as a function of temperature and microstructural characteristics for perovskite and spinel catalysts




Catalyst
Reaction conditions

T
10%


T
50%


T
90%

BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Oads/Olatt molar ratio

E
a (kJ mol−1)
Ref.




Bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78 vol% N2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)
562
672
749
2.6
—
0.81
91.4

374



3D (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78 vol% N2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)
437
566
661
42.1
0.151
1.22
56.6

374



(La0.5Sr0.5)MnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 4 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 45000 h−1)
498
691
710
12.2
N/A
0.31
N/A

375



LaMnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 4 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 45000 h−1)
502
586
726
8.8
N/A
0.23
N/A

375



NiFe2O4
1700 ppm toluene + air flowing at 100 mL min−1 (GHSV = 60000 mL h−1 g−1)
402
—
—
2.9
N/A
0.73
50.9

376



(Ni0.5Zn0.5)Fe2O4
1700 ppm toluene + air flowing at 100 mL min−1 (GHSV = 60000 mL h−1 g−1)
397
500
—
2.8
N/A
0.93
29.5

376



MnFe2O4
1700 ppm toluene + air flowing at 100 mL min−1 (GHSV = 60000 mL h−1 g−1)
225
284
473
3.1
N/A
0.74
11.1

376



3D LaCoO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
179
217
231
28
0.161
1.9
38.6

320



7.63Au/3D LaCoO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
136
188
202
24.2
0.104
3.2
31.4

320



7.56Au/bulk LaCoO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
194
268
283
5.8
N/A
1.8
49.7

320



Bulk LaCoO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
248
282
313
4.4
N/A
1.6
61.5

320



(La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
160
203
219
32.1
0.082
1.27
59

323



7.9Au/(La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
121
153
177
31.1
0.081
1.86
45

323



Bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
179
243
276
4.2
N/A
1.02
74

323



6.2Au/bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
198
219
243
4.8
N/A
1.51
55

323



Bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78% N2 (balance) (GHSV = ∼30000 mL h−1 g−1)
562
672
749
2.6
N/A
0.81
91.4

377



3D (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78% N2 (balance) (GHSV = ∼30000 mL h−1 g−1)
437
566
661
42.1
0.159
1.22
56.6

377



3.63Ag/3D (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3
2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78% N2 (balance) (GHSV = ∼30000 mL h−1 g−1)
361
454
524
41.5
0.165
2.01
37.5

377



3D Mn2O3
1.0 vol% CO + 20 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
144
168
180
37.7
0.185
0.95
80

321



5.8Au/3D Mn2O3
1.0 vol% CO + 20 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
−48
−19
−12
34.5
0.157
2.40
32

321



5.7Au/bulk Mn2O3
1.0 vol% CO + 20 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
−5
14
25
7.2
0.012
1.17
49

321



Meso Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
293
345
440
106.3
0.325
2.40
81.9

378



2.94Au0.5Pd/meso Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
230
280
324
114.5
0.382
6.15
44.4

378



1.48Au/meso Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
263
312
378
109.6
0.311
3.16
57.0

378



1.58Pd/meso Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
242
288
334
108.1
0.273
4.45
48.4

378



2.90Au0.5Pd/bulk Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)
269
321
397
8.6
0.039
3.31
58.3

378



Meso Co3O4
1000 ppm o-xylene + 20.0 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 191000 h−1)
237
254
260
95.1
0.23
0.86
126.7

379



Pd/meso Co3O4
1000 ppm o-xylene + 20.0 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 191000 h−1)
170
184
197
93.6
0.20
1.12
79.4

379



AuPd/3D Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
284
337
379
N/A
N/A
0.70
86

380



AuPd/0.40CoO/3D Co3O4
2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
260
312
341
N/A
N/A
0.85
63

380



AuPd/3.61CoO/3D Mn2O3
2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
365
430
500
N/A
N/A
0.92
101

380



AuPd/3.61CoO/3D Al2O3
2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)
420
543
625
N/A
N/A
1.63
132

380



3D (La0.7Ce0.3)CoO3
2 vol% CH4, 20 vol% O2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)
381
479
555
35.4
0.05
2.23
N/A

381



Bulk (La0.7Ce0.3)CoO3
2 vol% CH4, 20 vol% O2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)
436
564
662
2.8
N/A
0.88
N/A

381






4.2. 1D linear defects
Edge and screw dislocations, which are 1D linear defects,9 tend to form during crystal growth382 and upon stress application.383 They tend to occur simultaneously and, in fact, often appear as mixtures of the two types. These defects are illustrated schematically in Fig. 11. These defects are found in the bulk,384 2D and nanoscale structures,385 nanowires,386 and thin-films.387 These dislocations can have an impact on the performance of materials used in catalysis,388 solid oxide fuel cells,389 sensors,390 Li-ion batteries,391,392 ferroelectrics,393 photovoltaics and thermoelectrics,394 and optical devices.395 Dislocations have also been shown to improve the electrochemical performance by accelerating ion conduction (8Y-ZrO2/SrTiO3).396 Strain engineering applied to thin films, e.g., LaAlO3/SrTiO3,397 through lattice mismatch is used widely to manipulate and generate high concentrations of dislocations.
Szot et al.398 explained the nature of dislocations in SrTiO3 in terms of two potential mechanisms based on the intercalation of a half-plane of either SrO or TiO2. The half-planes alter the local atomic stacking arrangement, interatomic spacings, residual stress distribution, and chemical environment. The last of these effectively can result in enrichment in Sr or Ti.
Marrocchelli et al.399 illustrated the application of atomic simulations to show how edge dislocations affect the chemical properties of SrTiO3 through the defect equilibria and oxide ion transport. They found that the core of the dislocation was associated with undercoordinated oxygen ions (∼3 instead of 6), thereby creating oxygen vacancies of formation energies substantially lower than that of the intrinsic oxygen vacancies. When the concentration of the defects in the core of the dislocation was low, the accumulated oxygen vacancies increased the oxygen diffusion coefficient.
Ryu et al.400 demonstrated the use of metal seed-mediated growth in order to incorporate Ag into flaky mixed manganese oxides using an approach summarised in Fig. 15a and b. The resultant Ag2MnO4 nanoplates were highly defective, as shown by the TEM images, which revealed ordered (striped) Ag and Mn defects (Fig. 15c) and edge dislocations (Fig. 15d and e). While these defective nanostructures were highly stable, they were also found to be catalytically active for the ORR in alkaline media owing to high concentrations of active sites for ion adsorption, high electron-transfer rates, high electrical conductivity, and low electrode resistance.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Schematic diagrams of synthesis and defect formation, and (c–e) TEM images of silver manganate nanoplates with defects (reproduced from ref. 400 with permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
4.3. 2D planar defects
2D planar defects, the main types of which are summarised in Section 3.3.3, essentially represent interfaces, which are well known to be concentrated sources of defects.148,149 Consequently, in principle, they may have the potential to be beneficial to catalytic performance. However, when they are of coarse scale, as in the case of surfaces and grain boundaries, they may have the opposite effect because the associated space charge layer effectively obstructs charge carrier diffusion.
The terminology to define interfaces is given in terms of the extent of lattice mismatch:401
• Coherent: when the lattice spacings of two phases match perfectly or are sufficiently similar so that the strain is low enough to avoid the formation of dislocations.
• Semicoherent: when the lattice mismatch (viz., atomic mismatch strain) is in the range ∼5–25%, resulting in the formation of periodic dislocations.
• Incoherent: when the mismatch is >25% (i.e., a grain boundary).
Mariano et al.402 studied the electroreduction of CO2 to CO on films of polycrystalline Au with a large grain size of ∼200 μm. By annealing the films to produce larger grains, they reduced the relative proportion of the catalytically active grain boundary area, thus monotonically decreasing the electroreduction current density. Other studies have confirmed this linear relationship.403,404
4.4. 3D volumetric defects
3D defects have been mentioned previously in Section 3.3.4 and can be divided into the following categories:
• Negative large-scale defects: pores, pits, microcracks, and cracks
• Positive large-scale defects: inclusions and order–disorder transformations
• Negative small-scale defects: vacancy clusters
• Positive small-scale defects: cation clusters
Eom et al.405 reported the existence of oxygen vacancy clusters and their orientation along specific crystallographic directions in SrTiO3 thin films fabricated by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) under 1.3 × 10−8 kPa vacuum. Photoemission spectroscopy (PES) studies showed that annealing (200–500 °C under 1.33 × 10−3 kPa vacuum) resulted in the presence of Ti4+, Ti3+, and Ti2+, the last of which was associated with the presence of (001) ordered oxygen vacancy clustering in these highly reduced SrTiO3−δ films. The DFT studies of Cuong et al.406 support the conclusion that such linearly oriented oxygen vacancy clusters form in SrTiO3.
4.5. Exsolution and segregation
There are six main mechanisms that can be applied in order to impose nonstoichiometry by thermal and/or atmospheric processes during processing, which can result in the formation of heterojunctions, cocatalysts, lattice defects, and/or surface catalytically active sites:
• Normal exsolution: ejection of solute ions upon cooling such that the solute concentration exceeds the solubility limit at room temperature.
• Redox exsolution: ejection of solute ions upon cooling as a result of cation redox and associated alteration of the solubility limit.
• Schottky exsolution: ejection of lattice ions upon Schottky defect formation and subsequent migration to the surface.
• Normal segregation: diffusion of dopant (and impurity) ions from the lattice to the surface owing to structural stress imposed during heating.
• Mismatch segregation: diffusion of dopant (and impurity) ions from the lattice to the surface owing to structural stress imposed by lattice mismatch between the film and the substrate.
• Redox segregation: diffusion of dopant (and impurity) ions from the lattice to the surface owing to cation valence change and associated alteration of structural stress imposed during heating.
Exsolution has emerged as an innovative platform to synthesise novel nanostructures of high catalytic activity and reliability for many applications, including fuel cells,184 CO2 splitting and hydrogen production,407 CO2 reduction,408 CO oxidation,409 photocatalysis,410 CH4 conversion to syngas,411 membrane separation,412 methane steam reforming and CO methanation,413 chemical looping H2 production,414 CO2 methanation,348 and (co)electrolysis of H2O, CO2, and/or CH4.415 Over the last decade, researchers generally have focussed on B-site substitution owing to the combined effects of oxygen vacancy formation and IVCT. However, as suggested by Table 6, further benefits can be gained by A-site substitution, as indicated in studies on (La0.8Sr0.2)(ScxMn1−x)O3−δ,416 and (La0.7Sr0.3)(TiyCr1−y)O3−δ.417
Neagu et al.418 reported normal exsolution from A-site deficient (LaxSr1−3x/2)(Ti0.94M0.06)O3−δ (M = Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, Ce) through cyclic redox at 930–1100 °C under 5 vol% H2 or air. The exsolution of M ions resulted in surface restructuring, which facilitated a significant decrease in the temperature required for steam electrolysis potential, which varied depending on the type of the exsolved ion.
Nishihata et al.419 pioneered the redox exsolution of metal nanoparticles from perovskite lattices loaded on a honeycomb catalytic convertor. The authors examined reversible Pd exsolution from La(Fe1−x−yCoxPdy)O3 (x = 0.38, y = 0.05) exposed to alternating redox conditions from exhaust gas at 900 °C of different air-to-fuel ratios. Subsequent investigators have examined other perovskites and metals exsolved by redox, including Rh from La(RhxFe1−x)O3 (x = 0.05),420 Rh from A-site-deficient (LaxCa0.8−x)(Ti1−yRhy)O3 (x = 0.43, y = 0.06),421 and Fe2+/3+ from (La0.6Sr0.4)FeO3−δ).422
De Souza et al.225 used atomistic defect calculations according to Mott–Littleton principles to consider Schottky and Frenkel pair formation in (La1−xSrx)MnO3. They argued that the formation of oxygen vacancies precipitated the formation of isolated charge-compensating cation vacancies. Hence, their conclusion was that while both isolated La and Mn ions are exsolved, neither intrinsic Schottky nor Frenkel pairs are likely to form, thus necessitating electronic charge compensation. In contrast, exsolution from Schottky pair formation has been demonstrated in studies of Co from Sr(CoxTi1−x)O3−δ (x = 0.25),183 Ni from (LaxSr1−x)(NiyTi1−y)O3−δ) (x = 0.2, y = 0.1),423 and Ni from A-site-deficient (LaxSr0.8−x)(NiyTi1−y)O3−δ (x = 0.4, y = 0.06)424 The last study revealed that the diffusion mechanism was B-site hopping.
Both A-site and B-site cations in perovskites can undergo normal segregation and concentrate on the outer few monolayers of the surface, oxidising and forming secondary phases on the surface.425 The segregation of A-site cations has been reported in perovskites, including Sr2+ segregation in (La0.7Sr0.3)MnO3,426 (SrxSm1−x)CoO3,427 (SrxLa1−x)MnO3 (x ≤ 0.5),375 and (La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ;428 Ba2+ segregation in GdBaCo2O5+δ;429 and Pb2+ segregation in (La0.65Pb0.35)MnO3.430
Pecchi et al.431 investigated the effect of B-site substitution in La(NixFe1−x)O3 with Ni (x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3) on the catalytic performance for combustion of acetyl acetate and ethanol. They observed that the intrinsic activity was increased substantially upon Ni substitution but decreased with complete replacement of Fe by Ni. By analysing the changes in structure and catalytic activity, they concluded that the normal segregation of Ni occurred only with partial substitution with x > 0.1. Although the authors referred to a cooperative effect between the perovskite and the NiO that formed at the surface, this in effect is a heterojunction.
Jalili et al.432 prepared (La0.7Sr0.3)MnO3 thin films on (001) SrTiO3 and LaAlO3 substrates and complemented these data with DFT simulations. They concluded that oxygen vacancy formation resulted in the application of a tensile stress on the film by the substrate, which resulted in normal segregation of Sr. Sun et al.433 observed another fundamental cause of normal segregation, which is the stress associated with the presence of linear defects in the form of edge dislocations.
Lee et al.434 synthesised M-doped (Ln1−xMx)O3 (Ln = La, Sm; M = Ca, Sr, Ba) in the form of dense, epitaxial, thin films on (100) SrTiO3 substrates; complementary DFT simulations were also done. The authors observed both (i) normal segregation of the A-site dopant cations resulting from ionic size mismatch between dopant and lattice ions and (ii) mismatch segregation of the B-site dopant and lattice ions resulting from the strain between the substrate and the thin film.
Kwon et al.435 synthesised (Pr1−xBax)(Mn2−yMy)O5+δ layered perovskite powders (M = Fe, Co, Ni; x = 0.5, y = 0.3) by calcining at 950 °C in air. Reducing conditions were imposed by heating at 800 °C in humidified H2 (3 vol% H2O). The H2 treatment resulted in the reduction of the B-site cations, including Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni. These transition metals undergo reduction relatively readily at this temperature, leading to an increase in the ionic radius. These size increases precipitated the segregation of all four ions, although the authors referred to the process as exsolution.
4.6. Surface reconstruction
Surface reconstruction is the modification of surface microstructures during heating through the processes of436
• Point defect generation: cation and/or anion vacancies
• Surface area minimisation: faceting
• Crystal growth artifact formation: steps and kinks
As suggested in Section 4.5 on exsolution and segregation, the surfaces of perovskites can be modified by these alterations in stoichiometry. Further, surfaces are well known as sinks for structural defects,308 which differentiate them from the bulk. Also, during conventional heating, the presence of a thermal gradient within powder compacts results in grain size and bulk density variations from the bulk to the surface. Similarly, when heating in air, the bulk and the underside of the compact are starved of oxygen, which establishes redox gradients through the solid. These and other factors require that the surface of a solid be considered as possessing different characteristics compared to the bulk.
The detection of surface reconstruction remains a challenge in catalysis, which derives largely from applicability and sensitivity limitations of current techniques for the characterisation of surfaces in conditions that duplicate the operating conditions for catalysis.437 Some resolution of this problem has been addressed by the development of what are known as operando techniques, which are in situ microscopy and spectroscopy methods of analysis.
Near-ambient-pressure STEM, near-ambient SEM, in situ TEM, and infrared spectroscopy have provided unambiguous evidence of surface reconstruction.438 Also, DFT can be used to calculate activation energies for reconstructed surfaces.439 In general, DFT should be sufficient to cover considerations of the surface, subsurface, and bulk142 because it is capable of examining to a depth of 10–20 atomic layers.440 Time-resolved in situ XAS under practical operating conditions has been used to obtain complex local electron configurations and highly active oxygen evolution reaction (OER) data (Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ).441
Many studies have focussed on elucidating the effects of surface reconstruction on the catalytic performance before and after operation, including N2O decomposition (La(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3),442 OER (SrTiO3,439 SrIrO3,443 (Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ,441 and La2LiIrO6444), water adsorption (BaTiO3445 and SrTiO3446), CO oxidation ((LaxSr1−x)CoO3−δ, x = 0.3–0.7),172 and ethanol dehydrogenation (SrTiO3).447
Lee et al.448 used in situ mass spectrometry (XAS-DRIFTS-MS) measurements under reaction conditions to examine the oxidation state and coordination number of surface ions. Using a hybrid reactor configuration, the oxidation state of the catalyst (determined by XAS), the types of adsorbates (DRIFTS), and the formed gas phase components were monitored simultaneously in a sub-second time frame. The authors used time-resolved synchrotron XAS to reveal the reversible surface restructuring of nanoparticulate Pd to PdOx, where PdOx catalysed the oxidative dehydrogenation of crotyl alcohol, but metallic Pd catalysed the decarbonylation of crotonaldehyde.
Dagdeviren et al.449 combined Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), nc-AFM, and low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) to examine the surface reconstruction of SrTiO3(100) single crystals, where it was observed that the surface reconstruction was reversible by atmospheric redox (997 °C in O2vs. 1.07 × 10−8 kPa vacuum). AES revealed the relative surface concentrations of all three ions, which allowed assessment of the stoichiometries and the nature of the terminations. The nc-AFM revealed the surface roughness and step heights. LEED was used to determine the structural crystallography and the periodicity of the surface ions.
Wang et al.172 synthesised a series of (LaxSr1−x)CoO3−δ (n = 0.3–0.7) perovskites for the study of CO oxidation. They used XPS and XAFS to examine the results of surface reduction using KBH4 solution to generate oxygen vacancies and the reconstructed surface enriched in segregated Sr. This enrichment increased the , which in turn increased the number of active sites as well as the surface oxygen exchange.
Polo-Garzon et al.450 used HAADF-STEM, LEIS, and DRIFTS to examine the surface reconstruction of SrTiO3 and its effect on CH4 combustion. The catalytic performance was observed to depend on both the composition and morphology in that the rate of CH4 combustion was proportional to the amount of Sr surface segregation and the active sites were Sr step surfaces formed by reconstruction. Fig. 16a shows an HAADF-STEM image of SrTiO3, with Sr surface steps apparent. Fig. 16b shows LEIS data revealing that Sr segregation resulted from annealing at 750 °C. Fig. 16c and d show that CH4 conversion and CO2 selectivity, respectively, were enhanced by surface Sr.
 Fig. 16  (a) HAADF-STEM image of SrTiO3, showing surface steps on grains, (b) LEIS compositional depth profiles (STO = HNO3 etched, Sr/STO = Sr impregnated and HNO3 etched, Sr/STO 750 °C = Sr impregnated, HNO3 etched, and annealed at 750 °C for 5 h), (c) effect of the Sr level on CH4 conversion, and (d) effect of the Sr level on CO2 selectivity (reproduced from ref. 450 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
4.7. Ruddlesden–Popper phase defects
Unlike perovskites, whose point defects are limited to cation and anion vacancies, Ruddlesden–Popper phases exhibit both anion vacancies and interstitials.451 When the oxygen is hyperstoichiometric, these defects have the capacity to undergo oxygen ion diffusion, making them suitable in high-temperature solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) ((La1.2Sr0.8)MnO4+δ452 (La1.2Sr0.8)(Fe0.6Mn0.4)O4,453 (La0.75Sr0.25)(Cr0.5Mn0.5)O3−δ454 and La2NiO4+δ455) and sensors and ceramic membranes (LaSr(Fe0.75Ni0.25)O4456 and (Lan+1Nin)O3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3)457). Table 11 summarises the number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule that can be generated.
Table 11 Potential level of oxygen interstitial concentration from donor doping of Ruddlesden–Popper phases as a function of dopant valence (ionic charge compensation)




Formula
Example
Dopant valencea


1+
2+
3+
4+
5+
6+





a With neutral dopants, no interstitials form; with acceptor dopants, oxygen vacancies form; these cases apply to ionic charge compensation. With electronic charge compensation, there is no interstitial formation.





A2BO4 (n = 1)
SrCeO4
Number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule


A1+-Site substitution
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0


A2+-Site substitution
0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0


A3+-Site substitution
0
0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0


B2+-Site substitution
0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0


B3+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5


B4+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0.5
1.0


B5+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0
0.5


B6+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0
0


A3B2O7 (n = 2)
Sr3Ti2O7
Number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule


A1+-Site substitution
0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5


A2+-Site substitution
0
0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0


A3+-Site substitution
0
0
0
1.5
3.0
4.5


B2+-Site substitution
0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0


B3+-Site substitution
0
0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0


B4+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
1.0
2.0


B5+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0
1.0


B6+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0
0


A4B3O10 (n = 3)
Ca4Mn3O10
Number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule


A1+-Site substitution
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0


A2+-Site substitution
0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0


A3+-Site substitution
0
0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0


B2+-Site substitution
0
0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0


B3+-Site substitution
0
0
0
1.5
3.0
4.5


B4+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
1.5
3.0


B5+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0
1.5


B6+-Site substitution
0
0
0
0
0
0




Ruddlesden–Popper phases also have been studied as electrode materials (Sr3Fe2O7−δ,458 LaSr3Fe3O10,7 and Sr3Fe2O7−δ459), oxygen storage/release materials (Sr3Fe2O7−δ460 and Sr3(Fe0.8Mn0.2)2O7−δ461), catalysts for NO decomposition (Sr3Fe2O7462) and CO2 reduction to produce CO ((La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.7Mn0.3)O3158), as three-way catalysts (La(Fe1−xCux)O3 and La2CuO4191), and for their properties such as superconductivity ((La2−xSrx)CuO4,463 (La2−xSrx)NiO4±δ,464 La2CuO4.032,465 and (La1.85Sr0.15)CuO4466), magnetoresistance (La2CuO4467 and Sr3(Fe2−xCox)O7−δ468), and mixed ionic and electronic conductivity ((La1.9Sr0.1)NiO4+δ469 and Lan+1NinO3n+1470).
As indicated in Table 11, substitution by higher valence cations, especially at the A site, can be used to induce oxygen hyperstoichiometry and hence increase oxygen ion transport. However, Table 11 is based on ionic charge compensation, and electron charge compensation remains open as an alternative strategy, as in the case of La2NiO4+δ, which exhibits oxygen excess owing to the presence of Ni vacancies,471 the defect equilibria of which would be .
Huan et al.472 investigated Ruddlesden–Popper phases of the type An+1BnO3n+1 (A = La; B = Ni, Co, Mn, Cu; n = 1, 2, 3) for OER and ORR. The sample films were prepared by PLD at 600 °C under 1.33 × 10−3 kPa vacuum. The authors considered that reduction of the B-site cations enhanced lattice oxygen ion diffusion by hopping within the perovskite-like layer. Doping of these compositions with high-valence cations was considered to generate interstitial oxygen ions, which diffused in the rock salt layer. The observed high OER and ORR activities were attributed to high concentrations of interstitial oxygen and high ionic conductivity.
Conversely, Ruddlesden–Popper phases also have been studied for different applications due to their property of oxygen hypostochiometry, such as cathode materials for CO2 electrolysis in solid oxide electrolyte batteries (Co-loaded (La1.2Sr0.8)(Co0.4Mn0.6)O4)158 and anodes for solid oxide electrolysis ((La1.2Sr0.8)(Fe0.6Mn0.4)O4).157
Recently, Zhu et al.473 investigated perovskites, including single perovskite (SP) (La0.4Sr0.6)MnO3−δ, Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) (La0.4Sr1.6)MnO4−δ, and self-assembled heterostructure nanocomposite (SP-RP) (La0.4Sr1.05)MnOx, for peroxymonosulfate (PMS)-mediated phenol degradation, as shown in Fig. 17. Of these, the SP-RP (La0.4Sr1.05)MnO4−δ showed the best catalytic performance for phenol degradation. This was attributed to higher , stronger affinity of the highly positivity charged surface for the reactants, accelerated charge transfer between organics and PMS, reduced electron transfer distance, higher electron conduction efficiency, and non-release of radicals that would compete for oxidation with PMS. Consequently, all the oxidising strength of PMS was directed at organic oxidation by exchanging electrons with non-free-radical systems rather than using the catalyst in the redox cycle.
 Fig. 17  Mechanism of peroxymonosulfate (PMS) ternary activation and phenol oxidation on the (La0.4Sr0.6)MnO3−δ (SP) – (La0.4Sr1.05)MnO4−δ (RP) heterostructure nanocomposite catalyst (reproduced from ref. 473 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Rechargeable metal–air batteries have been developed Takeguchi et al.7 using Ruddlesden–Popper LaSr3Fe3O10. Fig. 18a shows OER and ORR performances at 60 °C for the charging (water electrolysis mode) and discharging reactions (fuel cell mode). These data revealed that the catalytic activity of Ruddlesden–Popper LaSr3Fe3O10 is significantly greater than that of the reference materials RuO2–IrO2474 and LaMnO3/LaNiO3.475 This was attributed to the readily labile oxygen ions, which were removed by heating at 800 °C under 1 × 10−2 to 1 × 102 kPa; charge compensation took place through Fe reduction.7
 Fig. 18  (a) Electrolysis mode (top black curve) and fuel-cell mode (bottom black curve) at 60 °C for Ruddlesden–Popper LaSr3Fe3O10 (reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from the American Chemical Society); TEM images of Ruddlesden–Popper LaFeO3 synthesised by (b) combustion (cs-LF), (c) sol–gel (sg-LF), and (d) coprecipitation (cp-LF); (e) atomistic space-filling model of LaFeO3; and (f) TEM simulated images of pristine LaFeO3 (reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Bornovski et al.185 studied the effect of the processing technique on the formation of stacking faults in otherwise stoichiometric Ruddlesden–Popper LaFeO3. Characterisation by TEM, EDS, and XPS, testing by CO-TPD, and simulations by DFT were used to explore the role of stacking faults, shown in Fig. 18b–f, in the adsorption and co-adsorption of CO, O, and O2 for CO oxidation. The authors suggested two possible mechanisms by which the stacking faults could modulate Co oxidation kinetics. The first case involves Sabatier's principle,476 where increased bonding energy between reactant and catalyst surface increases the reaction rate per site up to a maximum. The second case involves oxygen ion diffusion from the bulk to the surface of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase, where the anisotropic structure, which is capable of being both oxygen-deficient and oxygen-rich, enables the stacking faults to facilitate oxygen transfer.
Dama et al.477 investigated Ruddlesden–Popper Srn+1Tin−xNixO3n+1 (n = 1–3; x increased with increasing n) for CH4 steam and dry reforming using XRD, Raman, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and temperature-programmed reduction (TPR). The authors determined that the n value had a pervasive influence on all of the performance parameters, where increasing n was advantageous. They used the XRD data to establish, rather than assume, that Ni substitutional solid solubility occurred. Nickel substitution and charge-compensating oxygen vacancy formation influenced the catalytic activity for steam and dry reforming, which increased not only n but also x, thereby increasing the . It was considered that the oxygen vacancies were highly labile, which allowed them to diffuse from the bulk to the surface, thereby assisting in the removal of the formed coke. This Ruddlesden–Popper phase was also relatively stable in terms of its stability in steam, dry, or bi-reforming reactions.
4.8. Dion–Jacobson and Aurivillius phase defects
Owing to the large surface-to-volume ratios and distinct optical and electronic properties, the 2D layered Dion–Jacobson and Aurivillius phases and their derivatives show unique properties, including dielectric behaviour,478 colossal magnetoresistance,479 electronic/protonic-conductivity,480 luminescence,481 superconductivity,482 ionic conductivity,483 and photocatalysis.484 However, there appears to be no literature on the application of these phases in thermocatalysis. Therefore, they are not considered further.
5. Defect engineering of perovskite electrocatalysts
The recent demand for new technologies for energy conversion and environmental protection/remediation has driven developments in electrocatalytic research. The concept of electrocatalysis involves catalytic processes that occur at an electrode–electrolyte interface, where the electrode plays dual roles of electron donor/acceptor and catalyst.485 Therefore, an electrocatalyst must meet the requirements to perform two functions simultaneously. That is, it must (i) be conductive and so transfer electrons readily and (ii) effectively activate a reactant and catalyse an electrolytic reaction.
The most important electrocatalytic processes for the conversion of electrical energy to chemical energy are the OER and the ORR.486,487 These are essential processes for both energy conversion and its storage, and so they have broad applications in water splitting, metal–air batteries, and solar fuels.210,488,489 The rates of these reactions generally are the rate-limiting steps of these renewable technologies, but their generally sluggish kinetics require the application of high overpotentials in order to compensate.490 If devices designed to effect these reactions are to progress from laboratory to pilot-plant to industrial scale, then the development of efficient electrocatalysts represents a critical goal. At present, some noble materials, such as iridium and ruthenium, demonstrate excellent performance as OER electrocatalysts; platinum is known to be a very effective ORR electrocatalyst.491 However, the high cost of these metals is a serious hindrance to their application.492
Over the last decade, perovskites have attracted increasing attention as low-cost alternatives for electrocatalysts for OER and ORR owing to their tunable compositions, structures, and microstructures.493 A complementary aspect to addressing the demands of these technologies is an understanding of the mechanisms and pathways for OER and ORR, which can be developed through theoretical and experimental studies of electrocatalytic efficiency.

Fig. 19a–c illustrate a schematic of three proposed mechanisms for OER over a perovskite in an alkaline medium.494,495 The adsorbate mechanism is considered to be applicable in general to perovskites. The oxygen coupling mechanism accommodates situations that do not include the highly energetic hydroperoxide (–OOH) intermediates. The oxygen vacancy mechanism is similar to the oxygen coupling mechanism except that lattice oxygen vacancies are involved. All three mechanisms involve the same six processes:495 (i) OH− or H2O adsorption, (ii) intermediate formation that enhances charge transfer and catalysis (viz., activation), (iii) diffusion of surface ions and adsorbates, (iv) electron/hole and H+/OH− transfer to and from the surface, (v) O–O bond formation, and (vi) O2(g) release.
 Fig. 19  Proposed mechanisms for the OER over a perovskite in an alkaline medium: (a) adsorption mechanism, (b) oxygen coupling mechanism, and (c) oxygen vacancy mechanism (purple diamonds represent metal–ligand bonds) (reproduced from ref. 494 and 495 with permission from American Chemical Society); refined crystal structures of stoichiometric and nonstoichiometric CaMnO3−x: (d) stoichiometric CaMnO3.00, (e) CaMnO2.75, and (f) CaMnO2.50 (reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
The ORR over perovskites has two pathways, which are the two-electron and the four-electron496 pathways:
Two-electron reactionsO2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−
The peroxide ion can also be reduced to OH−:HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−
Alternatively, the peroxide ion can be disproportionated:HO2− → ½O2 + OH−
Four-electron reactionO2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−Generally, the four-electron pathway is more favourable as it is energetically more efficient.497
Du et al.303 examined the ORR and OER of a series of nonstoichiometric CaMnO3−δ (0 < δ ≤ 0.5) generated from 5 mol% H2/95 mol% Ar mixtures heated at 250–350 °C. The refined crystal structures are shown schematically in Fig. 19d–f. In the stoichiometric CaMnO3.00, B-site Mn4+ is coordinated by six oxygen ions to form MnO6 octahedra (Fig. 19d). For CaMnO2.75, the perovskite framework is retained, merely introducing oxygen vacancies (Fig. 19e). For CaMnO2.50, the MnO6 octahedra convert to MnO5 square pyramids (Fig. 19f). The authors’ experimental and DFT simulation work revealed that the highly defective CaMnO2.75 exhibited the best OER and ORR characteristics owing to the effects of enhanced oxygen activation and increased electrical conductivity deriving from Mn3+ → Mn2+ reduction and the formation of charge-compensating oxygen vacancies.
A summary of examples of the range of approaches that have been used to create defects in perovskite electrocatalysts and their applications are summarised in Table 12. With suitable defect engineering, the electrocatalytic activities of some perovskite catalysts can exceed those of the benchmark catalysts Pt, Ir and RuO2 owing to the ability to modify the crystal structure, increase the electrical conductivity, and generate greater densities of active sites.498 Successful defect engineering of perovskite electrocatalysts is aimed at the fabrication of devices of lower cost, higher efficiency, and greater stability, which will enable their implementation in many energy and environmental applications.
Table 12 Summary of defective perovskites for electrocatalysis




Perovskite catalyst
Application
Defect type
Method to generate defect
Ref.




NdNiO3
OER
Ni and O vacancies
Laser treatment

499



Sr1−x(Nb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2)O3−δ
OER
Sr and O vacancies
A-Site cation deficiency

500



LaCoO3
OER/ORR
La and O vacancies
A-Site cation deficiency

501



(La0.8Sr0.2)1+xMnO3
OER/ORR
Mn and O vacancies
B-Site cation deficiency

502



(Sr0.95Na0.05)RuO3
OER
Na dopant
Elemental doping

503



Gd(Fe1−xCux)O3
OER
Cu dopant
Elemental doping

504



Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co2−xNix)O5+δ
Zn–air batteries
Ni dopant
Elemental doping

505



Sr(Ti1−xIrx)O3
OER
Ir dopant
Elemental doping

506



(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.1Ir0.1)O3−δ
OER
Ir dopant
Elemental doping

507



(La0.3(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.7)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ
OER/ORR
La dopant
Elemental doping

508



La(Co0.8V0.2)O3
OER
V dopant
Elemental doping

509



La(NixM1−x)O3 (M = Co, Mn, Fe)
OER/ORR
Ni dopant
Elemental doping

510



(SrScx)(NbyCo1−x−y)O3−δ
OER
Sc, Nb codopants
Elemental doping

511



Ba(Bi0.05Co0.95−xNbx)O3−δ
OER/ORR
Nb dopant
Elemental doping

512



LaFeO3−3xCl3x
OER
Cl dopant
Elemental doping

513



(La0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25)CoO2.9−δF0.1
OER
F dopant
Elemental doping

514



Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6−x−δFx
ORR
F dopant
Elemental doping

515



5.84% S–LaMO3 (M = Co, Fe, Ni)
OER/ORR
S dopant
Elemental doping

516



Phosphorus-doped LaFeO3−δ
OER/ORR
P dopant
Elemental doping

517



Sr(Co0.9Ta0.1)O2.5+δ
OER
O vacancies
High-temperature treatment

518



(La0.7Sr0.3)CoO3−δ
OER
Lattice strain and O vacancies
Laser treatment

519



CaMnO3
OER/ORR
S dopant and O vacancies
Elemental doping

520



(Pr0.5Ba0.5)(Fe1−xNix)O3−δ
OER
Fe, Ni dopants and O vacancies
Elemental doping

521



CaMnO3−δ
OER/ORR
O vacancies
Heat treatment in H2/Ar

303



(Sr0.95Nb0.1)(Co0.9−xNix)O3−δ
OER/ORR/HER
O vacancies
Heat treatment in H2/N2

522



Ca2Mn2O5
OER
O vacancies
Heat treatment in H2/Ar

523



(Sm0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ
OER/ORR
O vacancies
Heat treatment

524



(La0.8Sr0.2)(CoxFe1−x)O3−δ
ORR
O vacancies
Elemental doping

496



(La1−xSrx)FeO3−δ
OER
Sr dopant and O vacancies
Elemental doping

525



Sr((Co0.8Fe0.2)0.95P0.05)O3−δ
Zn–air batteries
O vacancies
Elemental doping

526



LaMnO3
OER/ORR
O vacancies
Salt-assisted treatment

527



La(Mn0.75Co0.25)O3−δ
OER
O vacancies
Heat treatment in H2/Ar

528



Sr2Co2O5.5
OER
O vacancies
Chemical treatment

529



(La1−xSrx)CoO3−δ
OER
O vacancies
A-site substitution

530



SrMnO3−δ
OER
O vacancies
Heat treatment

531



Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co1.5Fe0.5)O3−δ
OER
O vacancies
Plasma treatment

532



LaNiO3 film on SrTiO3
OER
Ruddlesden–Popper defects
Lattice strain

533



La2NiMnO6
OER
Jahn–Teller distortion
Vibronic superexchange

534





5.1. Point defects

5.1.1. Cation site substitution. 
In common with perovskite thermocatalysts, modification of the properties of electrocatalysts has been investigated many times. The principal differences between these two technologies are that electrocatalysts (i) do not have structures with oxygen excess, and (ii) have structures that can include simultaneous cation and anion substitution.
5.1.1.1. A-Site substitution. 
Hyodo et al.535 prepared a series of A-site substituted (Pr1−xMx)MnO3 (M = Ca, Sr, Ba; x = 0–1.0) and examined their electrocatalytic activities as electrodes. The active sites for the 4-electron ORR were Mn3+ ions. More importantly, their activities increased significantly with electron exchange between Mn3+–Mn4+ pairs. While this exchange could be driven by electronegativity difference between the ions, it also could involve charge compensation by the reaction , where the oxygen vacancy was generated by the acceptor doping of Pr3+ by rare earths (2+). Another alternative would be through the generation of an F+ colour centre through the reaction .
Perovskites, such as SrFeO3, CaFeO3, and BaFeO3, potentially can exhibit oxygen vacancy ordering in the form of channels.536 While these ordered anionic deficiencies have been suggested to be responsible for high catalytic activities, they have also been found to be detrimental to OER catalysis, which is critical to metal–air batteries. One strategy to prevent the formation of ordered vacancies in BaFeO3 is substitution. Chen and Ciucii537 explored A- and B-site substitutions with the aim of disordering the oxygen vacancies. They determined that donor dopants tended to suppress oxygen vacancy ordering while acceptor and neutral dopants tended to enhance it.
Xu et al.502 coprecipitated A-site-excess (La1−xSrx)1+yMnO3−δ (x = 0.2; y ≤ 0.10), followed by calcination at 650 °C in air. The authors also undertook DFT calculations for a (001) slab using a stoichiometry of x = 0.25 and y ≤ 0.08 (the higher value was selected for computational cost considerations). Acceptor doping of the A site (and an increase in its effect owing to excess doping) would be charge compensated by oxygen vacancy formation. However, the excess A-site dopants could be charge-compensated by B-site vacancies. However, it is also possible that the oxygen vacancies generated by A-site doping could be neutralised by oxygen interstitial formation, which is an alternative charge-compensation mechanism for A-site excess. If this is the case, then this would require charge balance through IVCT since the cation stoichiometry is fixed, but the valence ratio (3/3) is not maintained owing to excess doping of A sites but constant B sites. Hence, the decrease in valence at the A site from acceptor doping would be balanced by the increase in valence at the B site by Mn3+ → Mn4+ oxidation. The experimental compositions revealed enhanced OER and ORR kinetics, which were attributed to the A-site excess or B-site deficiency. The authors evaluated by DFT the free energy profile of each reaction step of the 4-electron OER at room temperature (27 °C) and 1 atm pressure in alkaline media. They considered four adsorbates, which were *O, *OO, *OH, and *OOH on Mn. The results, which are shown in Fig. 20a and b, indicate that the endothermic (uphill) steps require an overpotential to drive the OER and make the reaction exothermic (downhill). The key comparative point of these figures is that alteration of the A/B ratio required a different overpotential to alter the OER kinetics (without altering the mechanism). It also can be seen that, following the rate-limiting step, the d-band centre (red horizontal line) is shifted more closely to the EF (red dashed line), which is a result of the reduced [Mn4+]/[Mn3+] ratio. Since this ratio does not agree with the scenario suggesting oxygen vacancy-interstitial annihilation, the Mn redox would require a synthesis of valence change/balance according to .
 Fig. 20  Free energy diagrams of four-electron OER for (001) slabs: (a) (La0.75Sr0.25)MnO3 and (b) (La0.75Sr0.25)Mn0.92O3 surface (reproduced from ref. 502 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
5.1.1.2. B-Site substitution. 
The B site is generally considered to be the active site for OER and ORR electrocatalysts.538 Sunarso et al.539 used sol–gel to synthesise LaMO3 (M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) and La(Ni1−xMx)O3 (where M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co; x = 0.5), followed by calcining at 1000 °C in air. As shown in Fig. 21a, the ORR current densities varied, depending on the ion at the B site, in the order Cr < Fe < Ni < Mn < Co. The effects of B-site substitution are shown in Fig. 21b, which show a trend for the substituting ion in the order Fe < Co < Cr < Mn. These do not correlate with either the ionic radii or electronegativities. The authors suggested that the synergy between the two transition metals enhanced the activity owing to the redox reactions during ORR, which is to say IVCT according to, for example, Mn3+ + Fe3+ → Mn4+ + Fe2+. Determination of which combination corresponds to the oxidised or reduced state could be done by comparison of the free energies of reaction, viz., 3Mn2O3 ↔ 2Mn3O4 + ½O2 (Mn oxidation) vs. Fe2O3 ↔ 2FeO + ½O2 (Fe reduction). These electron transfer reactions between two transition metals are equivalent to the intrinsic ionisation shown in eqn (7).
 Fig. 21  ORR current densities: (a) LaMO3 and (b) La(Ni1−xMx)O3 (reproduced from ref. 539 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Zhang et al.540 used sol–gel to synthesise La(Ni1−xFex)O3 (x ≤ 0.6), which was calcined at 750 °C in air, as a cathode for metal–air batteries. The absence of secondary phases was considered to support the view that Fe incorporation had occurred. However, as XRD generally has a limit of detection of ∼1 vol%,98,216 this is not definitive. Although the authors did not report peak shifts, the crystallinity increased with the increasing dopant level, which suggests that Ni defects acted as nucleation sites that facilitated recrystallisation;308 detection of Fe by XPS confirms its presence but not its incorporation as it is possible that it is located on the surfaces owing to insolubility. The authors observed that the surface was enriched in Ni, viz., NiO, which is inactive for both OER and ORR and so it can block the surface active sites. However, the authors also stated that Fe suppressed the formation of NiO, which was beneficial to the OER and ORR. The effect is an overt example of IVCT according to Ni2+ + Fe3+ → Ni3+ + Fe2+. This reaction is confirmed by the XPS data, which show an increase in Ni valence and a decrease in Fe valence with increasing Fe doping.

Table 13 summarises studies of cation substitution at the A- and B-sites.
Table 13 Summary of defective cation substitution on the A and B-sites




Double perovskite
Substitution site
Method
Applications
Ref.




(La0.7Sr0.3−xPdx)MnO3
Sr/Pd (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 2 h)
Al–air batteries

541



(La2−xMx)NiO4 (M = Ca, Ba)
La/Ca, Ba (A-site)
Microwave assisted combustion heat treatment (900 °C for 2 h)
Chemical looping reforming

542



(Sm0.92Bi0.08)FeO3
Sm/Bi (A-site)
Aqueous chemistry heat treatment (700 °C for 1 h)
Li-ion batteries

543



(La1−xCex)MnO3
La/Ce (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (800 °C for 5 h)
Zn–air batteries

544



(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95(Mn0.5Fe0.5)O3
La/Sr (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 4 h)
ORR, OER

545



Mn/Fe (B-site)


(Pr0.5Ba0.5)CoO3−δ
Pr/Ba (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (950 °C for 3 h)
Zn–air batteries

546



La(Mn0.8M0.2)O3 (M = Cu, Co)
Mn/Cu, Co (B-site)
Sol–gel combustion heat treatment (800 °C for 5 h)
Li–air batteries

547



BaPr(Mn1.75Co0.25)O5+δ
Mn/Co (B-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (950 °C for 5 h)
Zn–air batteries

95



Sr(Co1−xRux)O3−δ
Co/Ru (B-site)
Solid-state reaction heat treatment (1100 °C for 5 h)
OER

548



(La0.8Sr0.2)(Mn1−xNix)O3
Ni/Mn (B-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 4 h)
Li–air batteries

549



PrBa(Fe1.9Zn0.1)O5+δ
Zn/Fe (B-site)
Sol–gel combustion heat treatment (1100 °C for 2 h)
SOFCs

550



Sr2CoMoO6−δ
Co/Mo (B-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (900 °C for 10 h)
Pseudocapacitors

551



La2BMnO6 (B = Ni, Co, Cu)
B/Mn (B-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (800 °C for 4 h)
Pseudocapacitors

552



Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co2−xNix)O5+δ
Co/Ni (B-site)
Pechini heat treatment (1000 °C for 4 h)
Zn–air batteries

505



(PrBa0.5Sr0.5)0.95(Co1.5Fe0.5)O5+δ
Ba/Pr (A-site)
Electrospinning heat treatment (900 °C for 2 h)
ORR, OER, HER

553



Sr/Pr (A′-site)


Fe/Co (B-site)


(La1.5Sr0.5)(Ni0.5Mn0.5)(Ni0.5Ru0.5)O6
Sr/La (A-site)
Solid-state reaction heat treatment (1200 °C for 12 h)
ORR, OER

554



Ni/Mn (B-site)


Ni/Ru (B′-site)


(La0.8Sr0.2)(Co0.8Ni0.2)O3−δ
La/Sr (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (750 °C for 3 h)
Li–air batteries

555



Ni/Co (B-site)


Pr(Ba1−xCax)CoCuO5+δ
Br/Ca (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 7 h)
SOFCs

556



(Sr0.95Ag0.05)(Nb0.1Co0.9)O3−δ
Sr/Ag (A-site)
Solid-state reaction heat treatment (1200 °C for 10 h)
SOFCs

557



Nb/Co (B-site)


(Ba0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.79Fe0.21)O2.67
Sr/Ba (A-site)
Sol–gel heat treatment (950 °C for 5 h)
Zn–air batteries

558



Co/Fe (B-site)




5.1.1.3. Simultaneous A and B site substitution. 
Zhu et al.532 used solid-state synthesis to fabricate Pr(Ba1−xSrx)(Co1−xFex)O5+δ (x = 0.5), which was calcined at 1250 °C in air. The oxygen concentration was varied using post-treatment in an H2/Ar plasma. Although the  was not quantified, its formation was concluded on the basis of XRD peak shifts, which are not definitive since neither an internal standard nor Rietveld refinement was used; the XPS data showing Co3+ → Co2+ reduction; and the decrease in the lattice oxygen peak intensities in the O 1s XPS data. Although the role of A-site doping appears to be irrelevant since Sr is a neutral dopant for Ba, it could potentially cause structural distortion through valence and electronegativity differences. This could facilitate partial amorphisation and structural disorder, which create unsaturated terminal bonds associated with cation interstitials and anion vacancies. The authors reported that OER activity increased significantly with increasing , which was attributed to (i) alteration of the surface adsorption characteristics that activated the OER reaction path and (ii) improved decoupling of the proton and electron transfer processes.
Yan et al.559 used sol–gel to synthesise A-site-deficient (La1−xSrx)1−y(Mn1−yIry)O3 (x = 0.20, y = 0, 0.05), followed by calcining at 650 °C in air. Consideration of the ionic radii indicates that both dopant ions would be expected to cause expansion upon substitution. Incorporation of these was suggested by XRD peak shifts that indicated lattice expansion; again, these authors did not use an internal standard or Rietveld refinement. However, HAADF-EDS mapping confirmed the incorporation of Sr and Ir. This study provides a complement to previously discussed studies in that it reports A-site deficiency, rather than excess, and charge compensation would be required for substitution at the A-site but not the B-site. In this case, the strategy to generate oxygen vacancies is overt in that acceptor Sr substitution would be likely to generate oxygen vacancies, and the A-site deficiency would supplement the effect. However, XPS data for Mn revealed that Ir doping caused a decrease in Mn valence, which the authors suggested was charge compensated by oxygen vacancy formation. However, in light of the strong driving forces for oxygen vacancy formation through the doping and the low [Ir], it is more likely that these valence changes are, yet again, the result of IVCT, here Mn3+ + Ir3+ → Mn2+ + Ir4+. The authors concluded that the role of oxygen vacancies was dominant in the OER and ORR, where the electrocatalytic activity was improved significantly with codoping.
5.1.1.4. Simultaneous cation and anion substitution. 
Hua et al.514 used solid-state synthesis to fabricate (La1−xBax/2Srx/2)Co(O3−yFy) (x = 0.5, y = 0.1) at 1050 °C in air. STEM-EDS data confirmed incorporation of all dopants and SEM-EDS data supported the conclusion that fluorine incorporation was successful. The experimental results revealed that F doping caused the following: (i) lattice contraction, from Rietveld refinement of the XRD data, (ii) a decrease in Eg from 3.50 to 3.22 eV, as shown by UV-Vis spectroscopy, and (iii) a decrease in the Co3+/Co4+ ratio, as suggested by XPS data. Concerning the last effect, F doping cannot explain the increase in Co valence. Consequently, the charge balance must derive from the acceptor doping of La, which, again, can be viewed as a synthesis of valence change/balance according to , although only single alkaline earth may be involved. As shown in Fig. 22a and b, fluorine doping substantially improved both hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and OER, respectively. Fig. 22c shows that chronoamperometric test measurements indicated that F-doping in (La0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25)Co(O2.9F0.1) yielded much better durability than that of the control Pt/C(−)/RuO2(+) electrolyser. This study highlights the capacity to engineer defect types and concentrations through simultaneous substitution of cation sites (A-sites) and oxygen sites. That is, if only anion doping was implemented, then charge compensation would be likely to occur by cation vacancy formation and/or cation reduction. However, when anion doping is matched with cation doping, neither of these is required and a different mechanism result.
 Fig. 22  Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) data for (La1−xBax/2Srx/2)Co(O3−yFy) and (Pr1−xBax/2Srx/2)Co(O3−yFy): (a) LSV HER curves, (b) LSV OER curves, and (c) chronoamperometric tests of LBSCOF (LBSCOF: x = 0.5, y = 0.1; LBSCO: x = 0.5, y = 0; PBSCF: x = 0.5, y = 0.2; LBSCF: x = 0.5, y = 0.2; BSCF: x = 1.0, y = 0.2; LSCO: (La0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ) (reproduced from ref. 514 with permission from the Elsevier). 

5.2. Residual and imposed strain effects
The correlation between strain and electrocatalytic activity was established theoretically by Hammer and Nørskov.560 Experimentally, strain effects on the electrochemical properties of noble metals, alloys, and complex oxides have been studied extensively.561 Residual strain can alter both the surface energy and the lattice energy of perovskite materials, which correlate with key electrocatalytic processes, such as the absorption/desorption of reaction intermediates and the charge transfer.562 Since strain can be imposed controllably through different techniques, as described briefly in Section 4.5, it is a parameter that can be used to engineer the relevant properties of perovskites.

5.2.1. Size-induced residual strain. 
For a spherical nanoparticle with a free surface, the lattice is slightly contracted owing to the large surface/volume ratio; this contraction increases with decreasing particle size.563 Both crystallite size (which is identical to the grain size for single-crystal grains) and strain can be calculated from XRD patterns using the Williamson–Hall equation, which is βcosθ = kλ/d + 4εsinθ, where β is the peak broadening of full width at half maximum (FWHM), θ is the diffraction angle, k is a shape factor (0.89 for spherical particles), λ is the X-ray wavelength, d is the crystallite size, and ε is the strain.
Kumar et al.564 synthesised (Ba1−xSrx)MnO3 (x = 0.25) and (La1−xSrx)MnO3 (x = 0.30) perovskites using a combustion method, controlling crystallite size in the range ∼20–200 nm through temperature variation. The respective calculated ε values were in the range 0.4–0.1%. These relatively small values did not contribute significantly to the electrocatalytic performance. However, this size range may have been too large to yield a detectable effect as metallic particles of size <5 nm have been observed to exhibit significant increases in strain.565


5.2.2. Substrate-induced imposed strain. 
Herklotz et al.566 summarised the effects of oxygen vacancies on the residual strain in perovskites. In this review, the authors generalised that the functionalities and physical properties of perovskites could be tailored through strain engineering using control of the formation and migration of oxygen vacancies.
Lattice mismatch in the range ±3% between epitaxial films and single-crystal substrates is well known, although values as high as 6.6% have been recorded.567 As shown in Fig. 23a, Schlom et al.567 calculated lattice mismatches for a range of perovskite films deposited on many common substrates. Petrie et al.568 have hypothesised that the reason for greatly enhanced OER and ORR over LaNiO3 was compressive strain-induced splitting of the eg orbitals and the orbital occupancy (surface polarisation) (Fig. 13). They were able to control the biaxial strain of LaNiO3 thin films (∼10 nm thickness) between +2.7% tension and −1.2% compression, which the authors considered allowed them to tune to oxygen chemisorption. Fig. 23b shows how the OER and ORR required bifunctional overpotential decreased as the compressive strain increased.
 Fig. 23  (a) Pseudotetragonal or pseudocubic a axis lattice constants of some perovskites and common single-crystal cubic substrates (reproduced from ref. 567 and 569 with permission from the Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute), (b) effect of compressive strain on the required overpotential of LaNiO3 thin films (reproduced from ref. 568 with permission from the American Chemical Society), and (c) LaCoO3 thin films with moderate tensile strain (reproduced from ref. 570 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Stoerzinger et al.570 demonstrated that the OER and ORR over (001) LaCoO3 films were improved through modest tensile stresses and thinner films. The resultant strains changed the electronic structure and decreased the charge-transfer resistance to the electrolyte. These relations are shown schematically in Fig. 23c.
Liu et al.519 investigated the coupled effects of oxygen vacancy concentration and strain on the electrocatalytic activity of (La1−xSrx)CoO3−δ thin films on (100) SrTiO3 and (100) LaAlO3 substrates, with the  being controlled through vacuum annealing. In agreement with the preceding studies, the OER performance of films under compression was better than that of films under tension. However, these effects were reduced with increasing , which is consistent with the observation that tension enhanced the . DFT simulations indicated that the tension associated with increasing  caused greater occupancy of the eg states and an increase in the splitting energy Δ (Fig. 13).


5.2.3. Jahn–Teller distortion. 
Jahn–Teller distortion is based on the concept that if the ground state of a molecule is degenerate, it will distort in order to eliminate the degeneracy and make one energy level more stable,571 as shown in Fig. 24. The susceptibility of ions in octahedral or tetrahedral coordination is:
 Fig. 24  Distortion of coordination polyhedra and electron energy levels from Jahn–Teller distortion: (top) octahedral site elongated along the z axis and (bottom) octahedral site compressed along the z axis.571 
• Octahedral: d4, d9, and low-spin d7
• Tetrahedral: d3, d4, d8, d9
Tong et al.534 reported that with decreasing particle size to ∼33 nm, La2NiMnO6 double perovskite nanoparticles shifted from a static vibronic Ni2+–O–Mn4+ (Ni2+ = d8, Mn4+ = d3) to a vibronic superexchange interaction of Ni3+–O–Mn3+ (Ni3+ = d7, Mn3+ = d4), which resulted in strong Jahn–Teller distortion of the NiO6 and MnO6 octahedra, effectively lengthening the metal–oxygen bonds. The respective filling of the electron orbitals and the distortion are illustrated schematically in Fig. 25. The parallel between vibronic superexchange and IVCT is clear.
 Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of Jahn–Teller distortion of MnO6 and NiO6 octahedra in the La2NiMnO6 double perovskite (reproduced from ref. 534 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Guo et al.572 examined (Ca1−xYbx)MnO3−δ (x = 0, 0.1) and attributed improved OER to the effects of Jahn–Teller distortion. This study showed that Yb3+ substitution for Ca2+ caused (1) charge-compensating Mn4+ → Mn3+ reduction and (2) H2 reduction-induced oxygen vacancy formation. These two phenomena acted synergistically to alter the eg electron orbital filling, which elongated the Mn–O bonds. The key conclusion from this work was that this bond elongation facilitated the formation of oxygen vacancies during the H2 reduction that resulted without structural alteration otherwise. These outcomes increased both the electrical conductivity and the OER.
These two studies point to how Jahn–Teller distortion can be incorporated into a defect engineering strategy. That is, if B-site dopants are selected on the basis of the ability to adopt d4, d9, or low-spin d7 electronic configurations, it is possible that they can be induced to exhibit MO6 distortion, thereby increasing some of the M–O bond lengths. If a reduction system is then imposed, the removal of the more distant oxygen ions may be facilitated, thus generating oxygen vacancies more easily and above the concentration possible by charge compensation for acceptor doping. Depending on the how the degeneracy is broken by the stabilisation, the MO6 octahedron is elongated, increasing the M–O bond for two oxygen ligands, or compressed, increasing the M–O bond for twice as many oxygen ligands.

6. Defect engineering of perovskite photocatalysts
Photocatalysis involves the light-facilitated acceleration of a chemical reaction, where the catalyst typically is a solid semiconductor. In 1972, Fujishima and Honda573 were the first to report the ultraviolet (UV) irradiation of semiconducting TiO2 to generate electrons and holes with reducing and oxidising characteristics to decompose water into oxygen and hydrogen, respectively. The principles of the associated materials and processes were delineated comprehensively by Bak et al.574
Perovskites play a significant role in photocatalysis owing to their intrinsic capability to photogenerate electron–hole pairs (excitons). Perovskites have been utilised extensively as photocatalysts in many applications, including photocatalytic H2 generation, CO2 conversion, organic transformations, dye degradation, and pollutant photodegradation/oxidation.575 However, perovskites in the stoichiometric bulk form typically exhibit the disadvantages of being limited to selective UV absorption, large Eg, inappropriate band edge potential levels, inappropriate flat band potential, sluggish charge carrier separation mobility, and/or rapid charge carrier recombination.576 Consequently, perovskites have been subjected to modification by a range of methods, including generation of defects,577 heterojunction formation,530 and/or addition of a cocatalyst.576
Defect formation in perovskites has involved numerous strategies to modify and enhance photocatalytic activity. These may involve narrowing the band gap, aligning the band edges, shifting the flat band potential, and/or increasing charge carrier mobility, often with the aim of increasing radiation absorption into the visible range.578 Defects can transform an inactive perovskite into a photoactive semiconductor by enhancing the quantum efficiency (QE).579
In addition to this form of defect engineering, there is another approach, which is through the nanostructure. That is, these materials often are synthesised with different extents of crystallinity and grain size, where these variables are controlled by the heat treatment conditions of time, temperature, and atmosphere. That is, the effects of crystallinity can be viewed in terms of a continuum between crystalline and amorphous, where the latter involves 3D unformed bonds, which are not beneficial to photocatalysis. The effects of surface area, as exemplified typically through the grain size, also represent a continuum from a single crystal to individual precrystalline nuclei, where a grain boundary surface consists of an area of 2D dangling bonds that is rich in oxygen vacancies and dopant and lattice cation that may be beneficial (or detrimental) to photocatalysis. These considerations highlight the importance of suitable characterisation of the materials as a support to the interpretation of the causes of change in photocatalytic performance. Fig. 26 shows the relationships between the effect of doping on the grain size and photocatalytic performance.88 This schematic illustrates not only the significant impact that grain size and associated surface area (and hence active site concentration) have but also the phenomenon of quantum confinement (viz. quantum size effect), which is associated with a significant increase in performance but, paradoxically, a significant increase in the Eg.88 These data make it clear that the expectation of a linear relationship between grain size and photocatalytic performance would be misplaced. The schematic also reflects the common practice of doping studies to be limited to the effects between points C and D although the observation of a maximum in performance is also not uncommon.
 Fig. 26  Typical effects of doping on the grain size and resultant effects on photocatalytic performance for a full-scale doping study (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier). 
6.1. Defect-induced band-gap engineering
The broad intention of introducing defects is the alteration of the energy band structure, particularly to narrow the Eg by raising the VB and/or lowering the CB. However, charge carrier transport can also be facilitated by the introduction of midgap states associated with each type of intrinsic and introduced defect. Narrowing the band gap is effective in shifting the absorption edge, thereby increasing absorption of the light required for photocatalysis further into the visible range. The potential to achieve efficient activation of photocatalysts under sunlight would facilitate their application in renewable energy generation.
Narrowing the band gap through defect formation is a commonly used approach achieved by, as discussed previously, (1) substitution with cations and/or anions or (2) the use of reducing gases or solids. If the dopant is an electron acceptor, with p-type conductivity (e.g., Mg2+ for La3+), the CB may shift downward and, if the dopant is an electron donor, with n-type conductivity (e.g., N3− for O2−), the VB may shift upward; both cases narrow the Eg. Although a small Eg is desirable as this indicates that less energy is required to elevate an electron from the VB to the CB, the process is circumscribed by the requirement that the energy required for the target reaction must be located within the Eg and either the CB or VB should be in relatively close proximity to this energy.580 Consequently, in some cases, such as the oxynitride perovskites, band alignment requirements actually involve increasing the Eg.581Fig. 27 shows the band positions of a number of perovskite photocatalysts plus the redox potentials required for some of the most important reactions in renewable energy technologies.
 Fig. 27  Schematic of CB, VB, and band gap energy positions of some perovskites and redox potentials versus NHE (pH = 0) and vacuum relevant to renewable energy technologies.582–584 
6.2. Photolysis
The use of perovskite-based materials for solar water splitting is a key topic in contemporary research in the development of clean and efficient energy.585 Solar-driven water splitting falls into four general categories, which are (i) photoelectrocatalytic water splitting, (ii) thermophotocatalytic water splitting, (iii) solar-cell-powered electrochemical water splitting, and (iv) photocatalytic water splitting. As shown in Fig. 28, the required potential energy for photocatalytic water splitting is +1.23 eV,586 corresponding to a wavelength of ∼1000 nm in the infrared region of the solar energy, and so three criteria must be met: (i) the Eg should be larger than 1.23 eV, corresponding to a wavelength of ∼1000 nm in the infrared region of the solar energy, and so (ii) the CB should be above the H+/H2 redox potential for the 2H+ + 2e− → H2 (photo)cathodic reaction, and (iii) the VB should be below the H2O/O2 redox potential for the 2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+ photoanodic reaction.
 Fig. 28  Schematic of photocatalytic water splitting by a semiconductor loaded with co-catalysts for H2 and O2 evolution (reproduced from ref. 586 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 
6.3. Titanate-based perovskites

6.3.1. La titanates. 
There has been considerable work on the substitution of perovskites for photocatalytic water splitting.582 In an early study, Kim et al.587 investigated the effect of Ni doping on the photocatalytic water splitting of layered La2Ti2O7. They found that metallic Ni-loaded La2Ti2O7 exhibited a 275-fold increase over the performance of Degussa P25 TiO2 (1376 μmol h−1 g−1for doped La2Ti2O7).587 They attributed this photocatalytic enhancement to the reduction of H+ by NiO and the oxidation of OH− by the perovskite. Kim et al.588 also studied the effect of alkaline earth metal dopants (viz., Ca, Sr, and Ba) on the photocatalytic water splitting activity of A-site-doped La2Ti2O7. Of the three dopants, Ba exhibited the greatest effect in enhancing the photocatalytic activity ∼2.75 times over that of undoped La2Ti2O7 (2010 μmol h−1 g−1). This was attributed to the larger ionic radius of Ba compared to that of Sr and Ca. The amount of Ba substitution was important as BaTi4O9 and BaTiO3 were photocatalytic reaction products that also absorbed light and reduced the overall effect.
Hwang et al.589 reported that the B-site substitution of La2Ti2O7 with Cr (30 μmol h−1 g−1) or Fe (20 μmol h−1 g−1) evolved H2 from an H2O/methanol solution under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) while the undoped perovskite exhibited no photoactivity; a Pt cocatalyst was used for this work. Wang et al.590 reported that A-site substitution of La2Ti2O7 with Rh yielded a low H2 production rate of ∼4.9 μmol h−1 g−1. Other layered La titanates have also been investigated, including a comparative study of La2Ti3O9, La2TiO5, and La2Ti2O7, which revealed H2 production rates of 386, 442, and 478 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively. In contrast, bulk LaTiO3, with a three-dimensional orthorhombically distorted perovskite structure, exhibited a H2 production rate of 137 μmol h−1 g−1.


6.3.2. Sr titanates. 
SrTiO3 is another wide-band-gap semiconductor (3.18 eV or 390 nm591) with light absorption limited to the UV range (1.24–3.10 eV or 100–400 nm). However, the introduction of oxygen vacancies by acceptor substitution or reduction using NaBH4 has been found to be an effective strategy to enhance the photocatalytic activity by extending light absorption into the visible range.592 Konta et al.592 investigated the effect of Mn, Ru, Rh, or Ir substitution on the photocatalytic water splitting activity of SrTiO3. Mn- and Ru-doped SrTiO3 generated O2 with no H2 evolution in aqueous silver nitrate solution. In contrast, Rh-, Ir-, and Ru-doped SrTiO3 in the presence of Pt (as a cocatalyst) and methanol (as a sacrificial molecule) produced H2 under visible light irradiation (λ > 440 nm). They also observed that Rh-doped SrTiO3 with Pt cocatalyst gave the highest QE of 5.2% for H2 production, with a rate of 90 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light irradiation. Under UV irradiation, the H2 production rate for Rh-doped SrTiO3 was as high as 330 μmol h−1 g−1 while undoped SrTiO3 exhibited a rate of 166 μmol h−1 g−1.592 They subsequently demonstrated that the cathodic photocurrent of Rh-doped SrTiO3 suggested its applicability as a photocathode for photoelectrochemical water splitting.593
Kumar et al.594 performed a comprehensive DFT study on the effects of band (CB and VB) edge alignment of SrTiO3 through substitutional cation (Mn) doping, anion (N) doping, and codoping (Mn and N) on photocatalytic water splitting. The effects of the dopants considered on the Eg and band positions are shown in Fig. 29. The authors determined that substitution with Mn or N lowered the Eg to the visible region midgap states, but these acted as deep trapping sites and charge-carrier recombination centres. The most stable defect configuration arose from codoping, with a  defect configuration, which also lowered the Eg to the visible region. However, in this case, the resultant localised states were passivated and effectively formed a continuous band through the formation of shallower states with suitable band-edge positions, which did not hinder electron mobility.
 Fig. 29  Electronic band structures of Mn and O substitutional monodoping and codoping of SrTiO3, showing defect configurations, Eg, CB and VB band edges positions, and redox reaction potential for H2 and O2 generation (reproduced from ref. 594 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
As stated previously, oxygen-vacancy engineering of perovskites is a common method of modifying the catalytic properties.595 The kinetics of O2 reduction at the surface of Sr(Ti1−xFex)O3−δ have been observed to be accelerated with increasing . In addition to the effects on the band energies, the secondary effects of oxygen vacancies are (i) their role in charge separation as surface trapping sites and (ii) the enhanced charge transfer from the surface to an adsorbate.596 Further when the oxygen vacancy acts as an electron trapping site, it can alter the coordination number and the electronic state of the surface adsorbate, which can accelerate the production of ROS, which are essential for catalytic environmental remedation.597
The regulation of oxygen defect concentration can be used to improve the photocatalytic efficiency. The reduction of SrTiO3 with NaBH4 under Ar has been used to generate disordered surfaces rich in oxygen vacancies through Ti4+ reduction.577 The outcomes were lowering of the band gaps and, as shown in Fig. 30, darkening of the perovskites and increasing H2 generation rates. However, the latter trend exhibited a maximum owing to the effective partial amorphisation of the reactive surfaces owing to excessive .205
 Fig. 30  (a) Crystal structure of SrTiO3 with an oxygen-deficient surface, (b) digital photography of reduced SrTiO3 at different temperatures, and (c) comparison of the photocatalytic H2 production rates of SrTiO3 reduced at different temperatures (reproduced from ref. 577 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Layered Ruddlesden–Popper Sr2TiO4, with a crystal structure as shown in Fig. 31a, is a wide-band-gap semiconductor with an Eg of ∼3.5 eV, so it absorbs only in the UV region.598 B-Site Cr substitution enhanced electron transfer through the introduction of a Cr 3d midgap state, as shown in Fig. 31b, which the authors assumed to be a secondary VB. Substitutional codoping with La at the A sites and Cr at the B sites was also used to improve the photoactivity. Fig. 31c shows the hydrogen production kinetics data for these materials under UV + visible light, and Fig. 31d shows H2 production rates under both UV + visible light and visible light. The optimal Cr-substituted (5 mol%) sample showed the optimal H2 production rate, which was ∼98 μmol h−1 g−1, and a QE of 0.16% under UV + visible light for H2 production, which was attributed to a lowered Eg (indeterminate) and consequent visible light absorption. The optimal codoped sample (10 mol% La, 10 mol% Cr) showed a maximal H2 production rate of ∼39 μmol h−1 g−1 under UV + visible light, which was linked to a lowered Eg, in this case to ∼2.9 eV.
 Fig. 31  Photocatalytic Sr(Ti1−xCrx)O4−δ and (Sr1−xLax)(Ti1−xCrx)O4−δ: (a) crystal structure, (b) schematic band energies, (c) kinetics of photocatalytic H2 evolution from water splitting, and (d) comparison of photocatalytic H2 production rates (full range = UV + visible light) (reproduced from ref. 598 with permission from American Chemical Society). 


6.3.3. Ba titanates. 
A-Site substitutional doping of BaTiO3 with Rh has been found to be another practical pathway for enhancing the photocatalytic activity under visible-range irradiation. Nishioka and Maeda599 demonstrated that doping Rh in BiTiO3 leads to the uplifting of the VB by generating donor bands near the VB edge. This band gap narrowing has been found to be effective in enhancing the photoactivity in H2 evolution. The synthesis was simply achieved by hydrothermal treatment of Ba(OH)2, TiO2 and Rh3+ salt in an autoclave at 433 K for 24 h and subsequent calcination at higher temperature. Among the different calcined temperatures, 1127 K exhibited a higher H2 production rate (18 μmol h−1 g−1) which was ∼5-fold more elevated compared to that of the uncalcined sample. Furthermore, the utilization of TiO2 as a precursor for the synthesis of Rh-doped BiTiO3 had a crucial impact on the photoactivity, in which the P25 was better than others.599 It is noteworthy that the cocatalyst in this reaction was 0.5 wt% Pt.


6.3.4. Bi titanates. 
There are a number of Bi titanates, including Bi4Ti3O12, Bi20TiO32, Bi12TiO20, Bi2Ti2O7, and Bi2Ti4O11, that have been investigated for photocatalytic H2 evolution.600 Bi4Ti3O12 in the presence of a cocatalyst under UV light irradiation has been investigated601 as has B-site substitution of Bi4Ti3O12 with Cr.602 In the latter study,602 nanosheets of 20–30 nm thickness and 100–300 nm width were hydrothermally synthesised with NiO as the cocatalyst. Both dimensions decreased significantly with increasing Cr substitution, as shown in Fig. 32a and b. Fig. 32c and d show the effects of the levels of Cr substitution and NiO cocatalyst, with both showing maxima (∼98 μmol h−1 g−1 without cocatalyst; ∼148 μmol h−1 g−1 with cocatalyst) in terms of H2 production rates under visible light. Although the authors did not speculate, it is likely that the observed maxima resulted from blockage of active sites deriving from, in the first case, exsolution of Cr upon exceeding the solubility limit and, in the second case, reversal of the balance between the beneficial effect of the NiO cocatalysis and active site occlusion. The former could be examined by lattice parameter determination and the latter could be assessed by electrochemically active surface area (ECSA). The photocatalytic performance can be interpreted by photoluminescence through the determination of electron–hole recombination.
 Fig. 32  (a) SEM image of undoped Bi4Ti3O12, (b) SEM image of Cr-doped Bi4Ti3O12 (Bi4Ti2.6Cr0.4O12), (c) photocatalytic H2 production rates of Bi4Ti3O12 as a function of Cr substitution, and (d) photocatalytic H2 production rates of Bi4Ti3O12 as a function of NiO cocatalyst addition (reproduced from ref. 602 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 

6.4. Tantalate-based perovskites
Sr2InTaO6 and Ba2InTaO6 are tantalate perovskites that have been investigated for H2 production from photocatalytic water splitting.603 Lv et al.603 found that 10 mol% B-site substitution by Ni increased the H2 production rate under UV + visible light from ∼120 to ∼210 μmol h−1 g−1 for Sr2InTaO6 and ∼220 to ∼394 μmol h−1 g−1 for Ba2InTaO6 (QE = 2.75% for H2 production); these improvements were attributed to lowered Eg values. DFT simulations indicated that these results derived from the introduction of additional spin-polarised bands that reduced the threshold for light absorption.
Anion substitution has also been found to be a promising approach to enhance the photocatalytic activity under visible light for H2 production.604 Substitution of O by N in Dion–Jacobson layered La2Ta2O7 nanosheets (LaTa2O6.77N0.15), which had been exfoliated from bulk RbLaTa2O6.77N0.15, exhibited strong visible light absorption over the range 400–600 nm owing to hybridisation between the O 2p and N 2p orbitals, effectively raising the VB. The QE values under visible light of the nanosheets were 1.29% and 3.27% for photocatalytic H2 and O2 production, respectively, which were 300% and 700%, respectively, greater than that of their bulk counterparts. These performances were also attributed to the nature of the 2D nanosheets, which involved low thicknesses (∼2 nm), high surface areas, instantaneous charge generation at the surfaces, and minimal charge carrier diffusion distances.
6.5. Oxynitride-based perovskites
Oxynitrides have emerged as perovskites of considerable interest for photocatalytic oxygen evolution owing to their narrow Eg values, which generally are appropriate for visible light absorption.605 However, in most cases, particularly for water splitting, they require post-modification or the formation of heterojunctions because the potential energy levels of the CB and VB are not aligned with relevant redox potentials for H2 and O2 production, respectively.606 The low Eg values derive from the VB levels, which are comprised of hybridised O 2p and N 2p orbitals, which effectively raise the VB to a level higher than that of their oxide analogues, which have only O 2p orbitals.607 Wu et al.608 investigated A-site substitution of the Ruddlesden–Popper phase LaTiO2N with Ca since the undoped material exhibited no photocatalytic activity for H2 and O2 production. This study revealed that the composition (Ca0.7La0.3)Ti(O2.7N0.3) yielded a maximal H2 production rate of ∼67 μmol h−1 g−1 and a QE of 3.13% under visible light for O2 production. As suggested in Fig. 33a and b, Ca substitution resulted in significant alteration of the unit cell, which underwent considerable shrinkage. This substitution reflected the ability to tune the associated light absorption, [N], and [Ti3+]. Photoelectrochemical analyses revealed increased photocurrents, fewer defect states, lower electrical resistance, and longer electron lifetime. The improved photocatalytic performance, which is shown in Fig. 33c, was attributed to reduced surface [Ti3+], high charge mobility, and suitable surface texture.
 Fig. 33  Refined crystal structures of (a) La0.5Ca0.5TiO2.5N0.5 and (b) La0.3Ca0.7TiO2.7N0.3 (c) O2 production rates as a function of x in (La1−xCax)Ti(O2+xN1−x) (reproduced from ref. 608 with permission from Elsevier). 
Wang et al.609 codoped SrTiO2N with La (A-site) and Zr (B-site), calcined and equilibrated the samples for 10 h at 600 °C, observing an apparent solubility limit and maximal unit cell expansion at the composition (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N (x = 0.6). Fig. 34a illustrates the schematics of the crystal structures of undoped SrTiO2N and maximally doped (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N. The latter structure suggested that codoping increased the antiphase [001] tilting of the Ta(O,N)6 octahedra. It is difficult to rationalise the observations that there was no change in the Eg from ∼2.1 eV while the CB was lowered, but the VB remained unchanged, although the authors offered the comment that the structural changes from La and Zr codoping modified the electronic band structure; improved charge separation also resulted from codoping. Regardless, the data in Fig. 34b–e reveal significant improvements in photocatalytic performance as a function of the codoping level and Pt cocatalyst loading. Again, the detection of a maximum in the latter suggests the competition between cocatalysis and active site occlusion. The authors also commented that the correspondence between visible light absorbance and QE (maximum at 0.84% at 420 nm) as a function of excitation wavelength suggested that the H2 production is photon-driven. The aqueous durability of the material is suggested by the maintenance of the H2 production over three cycles under visible light.
 Fig. 34  (a) Refined crystal structures of SrTaO2N (top) and codoped (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N (bottom); kinetics of photocatalytic H2 evolution from water splitting as a function of (b) La and Zr codoping and (c) Pt cocatalyst loading of (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N. (d) Visible light absorbance and QE as a function of excitation wavelength (i.e., action spectrum) of (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N for H2 production (0.5 M Na2SO3 aqueous solution as a sacrificial agent, 0.5 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst), and (e) cyclic H2 production for (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N under visible light (reproduced from ref. 609 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 
6.6. Mutually soluble perovskites
Ueda et al.606,607 observed that complete LaTaON2–NaTaO3 solid solutions exhibited gradually decreasing photoactivity proportional to the extent of decreasing nitrogen content. The authors tuned the Eg resulted principally from the more positive VB, which shifted sufficiently far enough from the potential energy level of OER (H2O → O2). However, in the case of NaTaO3, oxygen evolution did not occur since its VB is significantly far from the required potential energy level, making NaTaO3 inapplicable for OER. Similar work by Kato et al.606 on the synthesis of complete LaTaON2–SrTiO3 solid solutions also revealed the capacity to tune the Eg. As shown in Fig. 35, decreasing LaTaON2 content blue-shifted the absorption edge and increased the Eg, with H2 production increasing with LaTaON2 content, minimal O2 production for LaTaON2, and maximal O2 production for 50LaTaON2–50SrTiO3. At the optimal composition of 50LaTaON2–50SrTiO3, the H2 produced was ∼7 μmol h−1 while the O2 produced was 104 μmol h−1; water splitting with pure LaTaON2 did not occur.
 Fig. 35  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of complete LaTaON2–SrTiO3 solid solutions and (b) tuning of the Eg and band edge modification through variation in the LaTaON2/SrTiO3 ratio (Sr25 = 75LaTaON2−25SrTiO3) (reproduced from ref. 606 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 

6.6.1. Water oxidation. 
6.6.1.1. Tantalum-based perovskites. 
The photocatalytic activity of SrTaO2N can be enhanced by substitution at both A sites and B sites.610 Na+ acceptor substitution for Sr2+ in this oxynitride perovskite, as shown in Fig. 36a, has been observed to improve the photocatalytic activity under visible light. The O2 produced with (Sr0.8Na0.2)TaO2.8N0.2 was found to be ∼220 μmol h−1 g−1 while that of undoped SrTaO2N was nil; both included 1 wt% Rh2O3 cocatalyst. Despite the strong absorption band in the visible range, with an Eg of 2.16 eV for the substituted sample (increased from 2.03 eV for the undoped sample; Fig. 36b), the QE was only 0.2%.
 Fig. 36  (a) Refined crystal structure and (b) energy band diagram for undoped and Na-doped SrTaO2N (reproduced from ref. 610 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry), (c) energy band diagram with secondary VBs for N-doped Sr4Nb2O9 calcined at different temperatures, (d) photocatalytic O2 production under visible light of N-doped Sr4Nb2O9 (reproduced from ref. 605 with permission from John Wiley & Sons), (e) energy band diagram for undoped and doped SrTaO2N, i.e., Sr(Nb1−xMgx)O2+yN1−y (x = 0.2), and (f) visible light absorbance and QE as a function of excitation wavelength (i.e., action spectrum) of Mg-doped Sr(Nb1−xMgx)O2+yN1−y (x = 0.2) (reproduced from ref. 611 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 
6.6.1.2. Niobate-based perovskites. 
Wu et al.605 studied the effect of nitrogen doping on the water oxidation of Sr4Nb2O9 with 3 wt% Rh2O3 cocatalyst under visible light. It was observed that nitrogen incorporation resulted in the formation of oxygen vacancies. These authors commented that the nitrogen caused the formation of a secondary VB, associated with lowering of the Eg (from ∼3.9 eV to ∼1.9 eV) and absorption in the visible range. The Eg depended on the calcination temperature, with the minimum at 900 °C, as shown in Fig. 36c. However, the greatest O2 production rate, which was ∼345 μmol h−1 g−1, as shown in Fig. 36d, was for the sample calcined at 1100 °C; the QE was ∼0.31%.
Although SrNbO2N has a low Eg of 1.8 eV, high defect concentrations result in poor photocatalytic activities.611 B-Site substitution by Mg allowed Eg tuning and blue shifting into the visible range, resulting in an Eg of 1.97 eV (as shown in Fig. 36e), a maximal O2 production rate of 65.19 μmol h−1 g−1, and a QE of 5.31% (as shown in Fig. 36f), for Sr(Nb0.8Mg0.2)O2+yN1−y with 1 wt% CoOx cocatalyst.
Wan et al.612 improved the water oxidation by LaNbON2 (with CoOx cocatalyst), which has a low Eg of 1.65 eV, by generating high levels of anion (both nitrogen and oxygen) vacancies by annealing in Ar at 700 °C. The increase in the O2 production rate from nil to 108 μmol h−1 g−1 was attributed largely to the increase of the Fermi level (EF) owing to the increase in donors in the form of anion vacancies.


6.6.2. Photoreduction of CO2 to fuel. 
Although CO2 is perceived as a deleterious greenhouse gas, it has the advantage that it can also be converted into fuels, including CO, CH4, HCHO, HCOOH, and CH3OH.613,614 However, current materials used for CO2 fixation and conversion suffer from low conversion rates and selectivity. Solar-driven photoreduction represents a promising solution for the challenge of CO2 remediation.615 This homogeneous catalytic process, using GaP, was reported initially by Halmann616 in 1978 and, since then, has been used with WO3,617 graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4),618 and perovskites.203,619 With perovskites, the rate of photoreduction depends not only on the capacity to photogenerate electrons but also on the extent of CO2 surface adsorption, both of which have been observed to be improved through the introduction of defects in perovskites.620 In contrast, perovskites of low defect concentrations exhibit little or no photoreduction of CO2.621 Consequently, various strategies have been developed in order to enhance the photocatalytic activity, particularly towards visible-range photoreduction. These strategies include the use of cocatalysts,622 formation of heterojunctions,623 and the introduction of defects.624 Although photoreduction can be done in both gaseous624 and liquid states, liquid-based photocatalysis has the limitation of the requirement of CO2 solubility across the gas–liquid interface.625 The principle of photoreduction for CO2 dissolved in aqueous solutions is shown in Fig. 37, which shows band energy conditions suitable for water oxidation (E vs. NHE = +0.82 V) and the conversion of CO2 into some fuels (E vs. NHE <−0.6 V).
 Fig. 37  Schematic representation of the band energy diagram for CO2 photoreduction in an aqueous medium (reproduced from ref. 614 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 
6.6.2.1. Titanate-based perovskites. 
Titanate-based perovskites, such as SrTiO3, have also been applied for photocatalytic CO2 reduction.620 SrTiO3 is a wide-band-gap semiconductor, with an Eg of 3.4 eV, which is considerably larger than the minimal required potential of ∼1.4 eV. As shown in Fig. 37, this minimum is between the limiting standard potential for CO2 reduction of −0.60 eV and the standard potential for water oxidation of +0.82 eV. Since the large Eg of SrTiO3 results in the absorption being limited to the UV range, its Eg must be reduced while maintaining suitable energy band positions. This strategy has been applied through the introduction of oxygen vacancies by high-temperature reduction under Ar and the use of 0.3 wt% Pt cocatalyst.626 A secondary benefit was that the reduced surfaces significantly enhanced the chemisorption of CO2, and so increased the photoactivity. An artificial photosynthesis technique involved a 2 vol% H2O/98 vol% Ar atmosphere to generate CH4 at a maximal QE of 0.21%. However, a challenge for such approaches is the effect of the chemisorption of CO2, which serves to annihilate oxygen vacancies, thereby reducing and eventually eliminating the active sites.621
6.6.2.2. Tantalate-based perovskites. 
Hou et al.203 synthesised NaTa(O3−xNx) by reductive hydrothermal synthesis using Ta3N5 in NaOH + NaBH4 aqueous solution, introducing charge-compensating oxygen vacancies, the structure of which is shown in Fig. 38a and the nanocubic morphology of which is shown in Fig. 38b. Fig. 38c shows that nitrogen substitution significantly lowered the Eg from 3.78 eV to 2.18 eV; DFT was used to determine the shifts in the band edges. While there was nil CO2 conversion for NaTaO3, the resultant CO and CH4 evolution rates under Xe light were 15 μmol h−1 g−1 and 5.2 μmol h−1 g−1, respectively, for NaTa(O3−xNx). These materials were improved yet more significantly with the use of graphene quantum dots (QDs) and nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (NQDs) for heterojunction formation. Comparative testing under Xe light with a 420 cut-off filter, the results of which are shown in Fig. 38d, revealed that nitrogen substitution in NaTaO3 doubled the CO and CH4 evolution rates, heterojunction formation with QDs tripled the rates, and heterojunction formation with NQDs quintupled the rates.
 Fig. 38  (a) Refined crystal structure of NaTa(O3−xNx; unstated stoichiometry) (colour: purple = Na, cyan (inside grey octahedra) = Ta, blue = N, red = oxygen, white = oxygen vacancy), (b) SEM image of NaTa(O3−xNx) nanocubes, (c) band edge energy diagram for NaTaO3 and NaTa(O3−xNx), and (d) comparative CO and CH4 evolution rates for perovskites and heterojunctions (reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier). 


6.6.3. Photocatalytic degradation of dyes. 
6.6.3.1. Cation site substitution. 
Ilanchezhiyan et al.627 hydrothermally synthesised B-site-substituted SmFeO3 with Er3+. Although the [Er3+] was not disclosed, EDS semiquantitative surface scans of the undoped and doped perovskite suggested that the [Er] was ∼1 at% and the [Fe] decreased by a similar amount upon doping, which imply that substitution occurred. Consideration of Hume-Rothery's rules indicates that substantial solid solubility is unlikely since the ionic radii of Fe3+ and Er3+ are 0.0785 nm (high spin, which is likely197) and 0.1004 nm, respectively (28% difference). In contrast, substantial interstitial solid solubility is favoured as the size rule is satisfied and the electronegativities are reasonably close, with values of Fe3+ = 1.9 and Er3+ = 1.3. Thus, only limited or no substitutional solid solubility would be anticipated while substantial interstitial solid solubility is more likely. Comparison of the indicative EDS data clarifies the matter as they show that the [O] increased significantly by 5–6 at%. Since all three cations have valence 3+, any substitutions are neutral and so cannot result in charge compensation through oxygen. The only way that this increase in [O] can be explained is by oxygen interstitial solid solubility. Consequently, it is concluded that the solid solubility involves interstitial O that charge compensates the interstitial Er3+. The analytical methods applied included XRD, Raman, SEM, XPS, PL, and UV-Vis; testing was by rhodamine-B (RhB) dye degradation under visible light. Both the undoped and doped materials were well crystallised, with an indication that the latter materials were less well crystallised (although it was not indicated if the XRD intensity ratios were identical) and the Raman data suggested that doping essentially did not alter the structure. The SEM images revealed that doping caused substantial coarsening. Most importantly, the XPS data revealed that doping caused Fe3+ → Fe2+ reduction. Since there is no driving force for this alteration, this is attributed to the effects of electronegativity, which is higher for Fe3+ relative to Er3+ and Sm3+ (this is not included in ref. 628 but the range of values for the rare earths is 1.1–1.3). Consequently, the electron transfer from the two rare earth ions to Fe3+ can explain the reduction. The PL intensity data suggested that Er suppressed the recombination of charge carriers through the formation of midgap states. The UV-vis data revealed that doping resulted in a decrease in the Eg from ∼2.25 eV to ∼1.88 eV. The dye degradation data showed a modest increase in photocatalytic activity of ∼10% after 3 h exposure. This was attributed to the role of the Eg in increasing the electrical conductivity, which enhanced charge transfer and hence reduced recombination.
Sun et al.629 used hydrothermal synthesis to fabricate PbTiO3, to which Li was added as a dopant without stoichiometric compensation. XRD peak shifts showing lattice contraction suggested substitution, although Li is a small ion with high field strength, so it is quite possible that it dissolved interstitially and caused lattice contraction. The authors considered that low [Li] involved A-site substitution for Pb and high [Li] involved interstitial solid solubility. If substitutional, the Li+ would act as an acceptor, but if interstitial, it would act as a donor. Assuming ionic charge compensation, the former would result in oxygen vacancies and the latter would result in cation vacancies, both of which would also be expected to cause lattice contraction. The ionic radius of Li+ in eightfold coordination (for comparison) is 0.106 nm, and that of eightfold Pb2+ is 0.143 nm.287 Also, the electronegativities of Li+ and Pb2+ are 1.0 and 1.7, respectively.628 According to Hume-Rothery's rules, substantial substitutional solid solubility is not favoured in terms of size (∼20% difference) or valence (∼41% difference); substantial interstitial solid solubility is not supported by the electronegativity rule. The XPS data revealed the formation of Ti3+, which was assumed to be linked to the formation of charge compensating oxygen vacancies. However, an alternative interpretation is based on redox, where interstitial Li+ is charge compensated by Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction, without the formation of oxygen vacancies. Methylene blue (MB) dye testing under visible light revealed that an increase in [Li+] resulted in increased degradation, which was attributed to Ti3+ and . However, examination of the SEM images (and XRD data) reveals that, while all of the materials were well crystallised, increasing [Li+] resulted in significant particle size reduction, so increased surface area may have been responsible for the improved photocatalytic performance. The preceding analysis shows the relevance of consideration of alternative scenarios for solubility and charge compensation as well as the usefulness of applying a structural and/or microstructural approach to the interpretation of the data as an alternative to semiconducting concepts alone.
Abirami et al.630 used hydrothermal synthesis to fabricate PbTiO3, to which Ag was added as a dopant without stoichiometric compensation. XRD peak shifts showing lattice expansion led the authors to conclude that Ag+ substituted for Pb2+ suggested substitution. Insofar as the respective ionic radii (0.142 nm vs. 0.163 nm)287 and electronegativities (1.9 vs. 1.7628) are close, this assumption appears to be justified. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images revealed that undoped PbTiO3 consisted of smooth but agglomerated grains, while all of the Ag-doped samples exhibited high densities of fine-scale surface pores. The XRD data indicated that the crystallite size increased with increasing [Ag+] (0.01–0.03 wt%). More importantly, these data indicated that Ag precipitated at the two highest (of three) dopant levels, suggesting its deposition on the grain surfaces. The UV-vis data showed that the Eg decreased with increasing [Ag+]. MB testing revealed that, at pH 6, the dye degradation under UV increased in proportion to the [Ag+], although only the highest concentration (0.03 wt%) was superior to the undoped PbTiO3. The authors interpreted the trend in performance in terms of the decoration of the surfaces by Ag, which assisted charge separation and hence reduced the recombination rate.
6.6.3.2. Anion site substitution. 
Huang et al.631 used solid-state synthesis to fabricate the Ruddlesden–Popper phase K2La2Ti3O10 and nitrogen-doped it by (i) protonation with NH4+ by soaking in HNO3, (ii) doping by soaking in an aqueous NH3 solution, and (iii) annealing in N2 at 400 °C for 1 h. Their designation of the resultant product as K2La2Ti3O10−xNx indicates the authors’ assumption of substitutional solid solubility, which was supported by a UV-vis red shift and Ti–O–N bonding in FTIR. Comparison of the undoped and N-doped materials revealed a significant decrease in crystallinity, a decrease in the Eg from 3.69 to 3.44 eV and an increase in surface area from 4.1 to 5.7 m2 g−1. The photocatalytic performance was assessed using the dyes methyl orange, Cibacron yellow, and erionyl red under visible light and an Hg lamp. These data revealed consistently improved photocatalytic activity with N doping, regardless of the light source or dye. These data highlight the contrasting contributory factors that the decreasing Eg and increasing surface area would be expected to increase the photocatalytic performance but that the decreasing crystallinity is associated with decreasing photocatalytic performance.88,288,632,633 However, when considering XRD data, peak broadening from increasing amorphisation also decreases the crystallite size, which is calculated from the Scherrer equation.634 Further, increasing amorphisation and decreasing crystallite size are associated with increasing defect densities associated with grain boundaries, which are sinks for structural defects,308 which have an effect opposite to that of amorphisation.
Cao et al.635 fabricated single-phase BaTiO3 by solid-state synthesis, and doped it with N by addition of urea, and considered the effects of increasing [N] (two levels of urea addition (20 and 40 wt%) to BaTiO3 (1 wt%)) and increasing calcining temperature (500°, 550°, 600 °C). The authors assumed N dissolution in light of (110) XRD peak shifts, which indicated lattice expansion. These shifts were supported generally by lattice parameter data, which also showed expansion. This was rationalised by consideration of the ionic radii, which, in fourfold coordination (for comparison), are O2− = 0.124 nm and N3− = 0.132 nm.287 However, the difference in electronegativity (O2− = 3.65 vs. N3− = 3.00628) provides a more significant influence on the size. UV-Vis data showed that the Eg decreased significantly with both increasing [N] and increasing calcining temperature, which was reflected in the RhB degradation data as a function of increasing [N]. However, these data were not consistent for the effect of increasing calcining temperature, which revealed a maximum in RhB degradation for calcination at 550 °C. Although the XRD patterns, which did not indicate that they were scaled to the same intensity ranges, revealed powders that were well crystallised approximately to the same extent, no data on the particle sizes or surface areas were provided, and the SEM images were not comprehensive, albeit illustrating the undoped and optimal (550 °C) powders. Comparison of these images revealed similar particle sizes but that the undoped powder sintered at 500 °C was sintered to a considerably greater extent than the powder calcined at 550 °C. This is likely to have resulted from microstructural disturbance from gas exudation from urea during calcination (absent for undoped powder) followed by densification, which was greater at 600 °C than at 550 °C. This may explain the non-trending RhB degradation data as a function of calcining temperature. If this is the case, then, again, the importance of simultaneously considering the effects of structure, microstructure, and semiconducting properties is highlighted.
6.6.3.3. Cation and anion codoping. 
Saai Harini et al.636 codoped (Sn + C) nanowire Bi4Ti3O12 (with secondary phases Bi12TiO20 and Bi2Ti2O7) with 0.025, 0.050, and 0.100 mol% of SnCl2 and urea (CH4N2O) using the Pechini method. The intention appears to have been to B-site substitute Sn4+ for Ti4+ and to dissolve C4+ interstitially. However, in light of the preceding discussion, it is possible that N substitution for O was another possible outcome. The materials were characterised by XRD, Raman, HRTEM, XPS, PL, UV-vis, surface area, and average pore size; testing involved malachite green dye degradation under sunlight and an Hg lamp. The PL data revealed that the codoped Bi4Ti3O12 was less defective than the undoped material, which the authors suggested reflected reduced , presumably from C (and possibly N) substitution for O. The XPS data did not indicate an associated Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction, but the observed Sn4+ → Sn2+ reduction represents a driving force for oxygen vacancy formation. However, reduction by carbon is a probable cause of both Sn reduction and direct oxygen vacancy formation. The authors attributed an XPS peak at 285.6 eV to C incorporation in the Bi4Ti3O12 lattice (without reference). However, the XPS peak for adventitious surface C in this range is well known.637 Both the surface area and average pore size increased, and the Eg decreased from 3.05 eV for undoped Bi4Ti3O12 progressively to 1.8 eV with the increasing codopant level as well. The photocatalytic data revealed that undoped Bi4Ti3O12 was photocatalytically inactive and that the increasing codopant level enhanced the dye degradation under both light sources. The authors attributed these outcomes to the reduced Eg and assumed decreased electron–hole recombination rate, presumably owing to the short diffusion length from the nanowire morphology. The mesoporous nature of the high-surface-area nanostructure was also considered to contribute to the enhanced photocatalytic activity of the codoped Bi4Ti3O12 compared to the undoped analogue.


6.6.4. Photodegradation of pollutants and VOCs. 
6.6.4.1. Cation site substitution. 
VOCs have been identified as some of the most critical agents of air pollution,88 which has resulted in considerable research in their oxidation. The achievement of this goal has proved elusive owing to the shortcomings in catalysts of low quantum efficiencies and difficulties in achieving complete degradation of these contaminants.638
Liu et al.639 used an NaCl–KCl molten-salt material to synthesise Au-loaded Fe3+-doped Bi4(Ti3−xFex)O12 (x = 0.2, 0.4, 0.6). Characterisation included XRD-EDS, SEM, TEM, HRTEM, XPS, PL, and UV-Vis; testing involved the degradation of aqueous solutions of phenol (C6H6O) and bisphenol A (C15H16O2) under visible light produced by a halogen source as well as transient photocurrent (i–V) measurements using chopped light under a Xe light. The XRD and SEM data revealed single-phase Bi4Ti3FeO12 of nanosheet shape, respectively. EDS, TEM, and HRTEM confirmed the successful loading of the Au nanoparticles. The XPS data are of limited use because the authors did not contrast the undoped with the doped materials. Consequently, the commonly observed Ti4+ → Ti3+ and Fe3+ → Fe2+ valence shifts cannot be examined, the generation of charge-compensating oxygen vacancies cannot be confirmed, and electron exchanges between dopant and matrix ions cannot be considered. These are relevant to the previously observed common dual charge-compensation mechanism involving (i) oxygen vacancy formation (ionic charge compensation) and (ii) IVCT. The UV-vis data revealed that Fe-doping resulted in a progressive decrease in Eg from 2.92 (undoped) to 2.28 eV (x = 0.06). The i–V and PL data revealed that the photocurrent density and charge-carrier separation, respectively, increased in the order undoped < doped < Au-loaded doped perovskites. Unsurprisingly, the extent of photodegradation of both phenol and bisphenol A followed the same order, with greater degradation for the latter. The identities of the reactive species were examined with the use of ammonium oxalate (hole (h˙) scavenger), isopropyl alcohol (˙OH hydroxyl radical scavenger), and benzoquinone (˙O2− superoxide anion scavenger). These data revealed that the contribution of the reactive species to the degradation was in the order ˙OH < ˙O2− < h˙. The authors speculate that there were five mechanisms behind these photocatalytic performances. First, the exposed (001) planes of the nanosheets enhanced charge-carrier separation through surface-charge anisotropy. Second, the anisotropic polarity of the nanosheets also enhanced charge-carrier separation. Third, Fe3+ can be oxidised by h˙ to Fe4+, which can trap h˙s, but Fe3+ can also be reduced by electrons (e−) to Fe2+, which can trap e−s; these processes enhance charge carrier separation by trapping the respective charge carriers. Fourth, the presence of defects introduced midgap states, which were shown to reduce the Eg. This is a misconception as midgap states do not reduce the Eg, which is established by the gap between the CB and VB. When shallow, midgap states may facilitate charge-carrier transition across the Eg. Fifth, light absorption was enhanced by surface plasmon resonance, which was affected by the Au loading. Other benefits from this phenomenon are promotion of the charge-carrier formation rate and the establishment of a Schottky barrier, which can enhance interfacial e− transfer. The mechanism at an atomistic level would have benefitted from some basic considerations of the nature of solid solubility and closer analysis of the data. The sixfold-coordinated ionic radii (for comparison) are Ti4+ = 0.0745 nm and Fe3+ (HS) = 0.0785.287 Hence, substitution might result in slight lattice expansion. However, if oxygen vacancies form by charge compensation, then this would be likely to provide the dominant effect of lattice contraction. If Fe3+ interstitials formed, then lattice constriction would be likely to cause expansion. However, an alternative is charge compensation by redox. If this were to occur, substitutional solid solubility would require Ti3+ (0.081 nm) → Ti4+ (0.0745 nm) oxidation and minor lattice expansion would be expected. In contrast, interstitial solid solubility charge-compensated by redox would require three Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction reactions, which would facilitate more substantial lattice expansion. An examination of the lattice parameters might have provided a basis for more grounded speculation of the solid solubility mechanism. This could have been confirmed through closer analysis of the XPS data, which would allow consideration of the redox reactions involving Ti and Fe through IVCT according to Ti3+ + Fe3+ ↔ Ti4+ + Fe2+ and/or Ti4+ + Fe3+ ↔ Ti3+ + Fe4+. This speculation is an alternative to the authors’ proposal of redox through e−s and h˙s. These comments also highlight the risks of assuming that  as it is clear that charge compensation by redox negates this proportionality.
6.6.4.2. Anion site substitution. 
In addition to cation site substitution with the aim of lowering the Eg in order to absorb visible light, an alternative strategy is modification of the electronic structure through anion site doping. There do not appear to be any reports of the experimental investigation of VOC degradation using perovskites doped solely by anions. However, more generally, although partial substitution of oxygen by carbon, fluorine, or sulphur has been reported to lower the Eg values of perovskites,640 more promising results have been reported for partial substitution by nitrogen,641 as indicated in Fig. 39. For example, Mukherji et al.642 synthesised layered Ba5Ta4(O15−xNx) by annealing at 900 °C under NH3, which resulted in nitrogen intercalation between the (111) planes. This resulted in a significant increase in visible light absorbance owing to a change in Eg from ∼4.06 to 1.76 eV. DFT simulations led the authors to attribute this to hybridisation of the N 2p and O 2p orbitals. The photocatalytic hydrogen generation under Xe light increased significantly, from ∼310 to ∼495 μM h−1.
 Fig. 39  (a) Eg values of various oxide (white) and oxynitride (coloured) perovskites having B-site occupation by Ti4+, Nb5+, or Ta5+ and (b) examples of colours displayed by a range of oxynitride perovskites (reproduced from ref. 203 and 641 with permission from Elsevier). 
Ji et al.643 reported visible-light-induced thermocatalytic, photocatalytic, and photothermocatalytic degradation of aromatic VOCs using 3 wt% Ag-loaded SrTi(O3−xFx) (F content not reported but batched F/(F + O) = 25 at%). The effect of F doping on the electronic structure was minimal, with an Eg change from ∼3.29 to ∼3.26 eV, which was attributed to increased Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction , which was charge-compensated by O2− substitution by F−. The degradation of gaseous toluene, benzene, and xylene at ≤90 °C using Xe light with a visible-light reflector revealed similar conversion trends, but the effectiveness of degradation was in the order thermocatalytic < photocatalytic < photothermocatalytic. The last process exhibited a monotonic increase in conversion efficiency over the increasing temperature range 45–90 °C. The results suggest that F doping had little effect on the performance and that the Ag cocatalyst provided the dominant effect.
6.6.4.3. A- and B-site substitution. 
Ramana et al.644 used solid-state reaction to synthesise the codoped Aurivillius phase (Bi4−xSmx)(Ti3−yVy)O12 (x = 0.75, y = 0.0375) for the purpose of photocatalytic degradation of NOx and improvement in ferroelectric properties, the latter of which required minimisation of the . Since it is unlikely that homogeneous doping at the very low level of y = 0.0375 could be achieved by solid-state reaction, the decreased lattice parameters could be explained by Sm substitution for Bi since the eightfold ionic radii (for comparison) are Sm3+ = 0.1219 nm and Bi3+ = 0.131 nm.287 However, since V5+ is a donor dopant, the formation of charge-compensating oxygen interstitials could cause lattice expansion, in contradiction to the observed lattice contraction. Even so, its substitution level probably is too low for this to have a significant effect. Also, the relatively high vapour pressure of Bi645 and its consequent volatilisation would result in the formation of charge-compensating oxygen vacancies, also contributing to lattice contraction. The latter possibility could be critical because oxygen vacancy formation would be very likely to be charge compensated by Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction and the associated expansion from sixfold coordinated ionic radii (for comparison) increase (0.0745 to 0.081 nm). As shown in Fig. 40a, the authors presented a band energy diagram, which included measured Eg and a calculated CB, which illustrated the Eg change from 2.88 to 2.02 eV upon codoping. Photocatalytic degradation of NOx using a solar simulator (Osram Ultra-Vitalux, 300 W) revealed that the codoped perovskite caused linear degradation of NOx (at the ppb concentration level) to a level of 12.5% over 60 min, as shown in Fig. 40b.
 Fig. 40  (Bi4−xSmx)(Ti3−yVy)O12 (x = 0.75, y = 0.0375): (a) schematic of the energy band diagram, incorporating a calculated CB and measured Eg, and (b) NOx photodegradation (reproduced from ref. 644 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry). 

7. Defective perovskites in energy storage
Owing to the imperatives to direct energy conversion from fossil fuels to renewables, the limitations of periodic solar, wind, and tidal energy sources have highlighted the importance of developing the means of energy storage that overcome the constraints of cost, energy and power densities, lifetime, safety, and environmental impact. To these ends, batteries and supercapacitors that contain perovskites as components are perceived widely as the most promising trajectories.
The current status of perovskite-containing energy-storage systems focuses on three key technical parameters: (i) energy density (specific capacity), (ii) power density (rate capability), and (iii) discharge time (C-rate). These data show that supercapacitors exhibit relatively low energy densities but very high power densities, which makes them applicable for applications requiring rapid charge/discharge. Also, metal-ion and metal–air batteries exhibit a relatively narrow range of high energy densities but relatively low power densities, which makes them applicable for longer operational times.
The lifetimes of batteries are determined by the impact of charge-carrier diffusion into the volumetric structure of the electrodes, ultimately resulting in failure owing to crystallographic phase transformation, chemical reaction, and/or microstructural alteration.646 In contrast, the lifetimes of supercapacitors are considerably longer than those of batteries because the relevant reversible chemical reactions occur at the electrode surface, which minimises long-term alteration.647
Concerning safety and environmental impact, each battery and supercapacitor type has its relative positives and negatives, depending largely on the nature of the cation chemistries. Further, the costs of these energy storage devices are quite variable and depend principally on the costs of raw materials and the synthesis methods.
7.1. Batteries

7.1.1. Electrodes. 
Metal-ion batteries, which generally have high energy densities, low self-discharge degrees, and high cyclability, attract considerable attention owing to the great potential for their use in mobile electronics and large energy storage systems.648 Further, new markets, such as electric vehicles, are driving research in higher power densities that may not be possible with metal-ion batteries. Consequently, the alternative metal–air batteries are subject to intensive development with the aim of meeting the requirement of existing, emerging, and future markets.649 Such batteries are likely to play key roles in the future integration of transient renewable energy systems with complementary energy storage systems. Hence, the development and optimisation of the key elements in a battery system, namely, the electrodes, electrolyte, and membrane, are essential to technical and commercial implementation.
A range of strategies have been applied to the goal of improving the performance of the electrodes and electrolytes in batteries. For example, the synthesis of electrodes of controlled structures and nanoscale morphologies, including nanowires, nanotubes, nanosheets, and complex hierarchical architectures, aims at decreasing charge-carrier diffusion lengths, accelerating charge-carrier transport, and increasing the density of accessible active sites.650 As the present work has emphasised, defect engineering to overcome performance limitations has emerged as the key strategy to this end. Table 14 summarises the state-of-the-art of the principal metal-ion and metal–air batteries that incorporate perovskites as elements in the battery design.
Table 14 Characteristics of main advanced battery types651–653




Battery
Li-ion
Na-ion
Li–air
Zn–air




Typical anode
Carbon-based materials, alloys, or perovskites
Carbon-based materials, alloys, or perovskites654
Li
Zn


Typical cathode
Li metal oxides or phosphates
Oxide, oxide perovskites
O2 + porous carbon and perovskite catalyst composite
O2 + porous carbon and perovskite catalyst composite


Typical electrolyte
Li salt dissolved in aprotic solvent
Alkaline aqueous solution
Nonaqueous (aprotic, similar to that of Li-ion batteries), aqueous, hybrid (nonaqueous/aqueous), or solid-state
Nonaqueous (aprotic), aqueous, hybrid (nonaqueous/aqueous), or solid-state


System configuration
Sealed
Sealed
Open, additional components, such as air dehydration membrane
Open, additional components such as air dehydration membrane


Theoretical gravimetric energy density (W h kg−1)
387
300
11140
1086655


Typical gravimetric energy density (W h kg−1)
150–200
75–150
900–1000
400–550


Operating voltage (V)
3.2–3.8656
3.7
3.0–3.2
1.65




7.1.1.1. Lithium-ion batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries are the current state-of-the-art technology for high-energy-density electrochemical storage.657–659 Commercial Li-ion batteries employ intercalating materials, as suggested in Section 2.2.2.1,660–662 which host Li-ions during battery charge and discharge, so charge transfer takes place through ionic conductivity. The energy and power densities are determined by the amount and kinetics of intercalation and deintercalation for these layered structures.
One of the most topical areas of perovskites used as anodes for Li-ion batteries is high-entropy perovskite oxides (HEPOs).663 Yan et al.664 used solid-state synthesis to fabricate [(Bi,Na)0.2(La,Li)0.2(Ce,K)0.2Ca0.2Sr0.2]TiO3 at 1000–1250 °C in air. The EDS data suggest that the Bi/Na, La/Li, and Ce/K molar ratios were 50/50. Excess Bi2O3 was added in order to attempt to compensate Bi loss by volatilisation. However, the A sites were intended to be populated with eight cations, of which four are known to exhibit high vapour pressures and consequent tendencies to volatilize. Although the stoichiometry appears to have remained relatively constant, any volatilisation would have resulted in A-site deficiency and probable consequent charge compensation by oxygen vacancy formation. It is clear that such a composition aims at the generation of oxygen vacancies as the eight A-site cations include one donor, two neutral, and five acceptor dopants. Further, the use of such a high number of cations is likely to impede recrystallisation and consequently enhance oxygen vacancy formation through structural disorder. XPS and EPR data revealed that this strategy was successful and that what were considered to be isolated oxygen vacancies were formed. It is probable that the  was relatively high as half-cell battery testing revealed a high initial discharge capacity of ∼125.9 mA h g−1, with excellent cycling stability; other attributes were an outstanding reversible capacity of 120.4 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of ∼100% at 1000 mA g−1 after 300 cycles. Even at a high current density of 3000 mA g−1, a reversible capacity of 70 mA h g−1 was retained, indicating excellent rate performance. These outstanding capacity retention and rate performances were attributed to the complex mixed heterovalent A-site cations and the charge compensation mechanism in HEPO, respectively. This work highlights the considerable potential of perovskite-based high-entropy oxides as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.
As stated previously, solid solutions exhibit a specific saturation solubility for each temperature. At very low dopant concentrations, the dopants are inhomogeneously and distantly separated, which hinders recrystallisation and effectively destabilises the structure.665 As the dopant concentration increases, the dopant distribution becomes more homogeneous, thereby assisting recrystallisation and enhancing crystallinity. When the saturation solubility is exceeded, the solid solution can become supersaturated, which again destabilises the structure. The alternative is that the dopant precipitates, which results in surface decoration by the dopant but retention of the saturated solution. As the defects associated with solid solution formation can enhance the electrical conductivity,666 a homogeneous distribution of these is facilitated by a homogeneous distribution of the dopant.
Although conventional cation-disordered perovskites have been considered for use in Li-ion batteries to control Li ionic conductivity,667 cation disorder appears to be deleterious to cathodes in Li-ion batteries since the octahedral site hopping mechanism of diffusional Li transport is limited by it.668 Consequently, the alternative strategies of cation ordering, anion ordering, vacancy ordering, and structural anisotropy potentially can be applied to increase the ionic conductivity.
Lee et al.668 circumvented the disadvantage of cation disorder by synthesising a disordered Li2MoO3 perovskite with excess Li (Li1.211Mo0.467Cr0.3O2). The formation of percolated diffusion channels facilitated Li diffusion that were modelled for both layered and fully disordered perovskites. These materials exhibited excellent cyclability, revealing a decrease in energy density of ∼7% from 280 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles.
Santibáñez-Mendieta et al.669 used solid-state synthesis to fabricate the (La1−xLix)WLiO6 (x = 0.5) double perovskite (A2BB′O6) with a rock salt structure. This material exhibited site ordering of both W6+ and Li+. DFT simulations also indicated A-site ordering of La3+ and Li+. This study suggested that the Li+ hopping diffusion mechanism was facilitated by localised Li+ hops between neighbouring A sites and exchange between the A and B sites. The testing results revealed that the activation energy barrier to Li+ hopping was comparable to that of the best Li+ ion conductors.
Anion ordering appears to be much less common than cation ordering. One of a few such studies is that of Gamon et al.,670 who used solid-state synthesis to produce the Na2Fe2OS2 antiperovskite (or inverse perovskite) in which the cations and anions are in reversed positions. This material exhibits the anti-K2NiF4 structure, and it corresponds to an anti-Ruddlesden–Popper phase of n = 1, with anion ordering of O2− by S2−. The authors reported a decrease in power density of 25% from 225 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles.
Ma et al.217 attempted to increase the electronic conductivity while maintaining the ionic conductivity of cation-deficient (La1−xLix−y)MO3 (M = Ti, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co; x = 0.45, y = 0.09), which was fabricated by solid-state synthesis at 1100° or 1200 °C in air. The results suggested that ordered La vacancies enhanced the Li percolation pathways and hence the Li+ diffusion in this anode material. The electronic and ionic conductivities were relatively high at 2.04 × 10−3 S cm−1 and 8.53 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively. The cyclability was excellent, revealing good energy density for the anode of 0.21 mA h cm−1 after 100 cycles.
Stratified perovskites, consisting of stacked layers of BO6 octahedra linked by Li substituted at the A-site, have been reported to enhance ionic conductivity. Zhang et al.136 reported A-site substitution in bulk layered (La1−xLix)TiO3 (x = 0.5) as a replacement for the widely used carbon-based anodes. This material was synthesised at 1250 °C in air, with 6.7 at% excess Li to compensate for volatilisation losses. Fig. 41a shows a schematic of the crystal structure, in which the A sites are shared between Li and La and Fig. 41b shows the results of DFT simulations, which indicated that Li+ diffusion was preferential in the x axis direction. The synthesised battery exhibited an average potential of ∼1.0V vs. Li+/Li and a high specific capacity of 225mA h g−1, sustaining 3000 cycles that involved a reversible phase transition. The latter observation is in contrast to benchmark layered materials, such as Li2TiSiO5, which exhibit irreversible phase separation and grain boundary movement during the charge/discharge process. These result in lattice mismatch and consequent cracking.
 Fig. 41  (a) Schematic of the crystal structure of stratified (La0.5Li0.5)TiO3 and (b) DFT simulation of the preferential Li+ diffusion path (yellow) in the x axis direction (reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group). 
7.1.1.2. Sodium-ion batteries. 
The implementation in Na in batteries is attractive as Na is abundant, easily extracted, and inexpensive.671 An advantage of its use in Na-ion batteries is that aluminium can be used as the anodic current collector because, unlike Li, Na does not react with or exhibit solid solubility with Al.672 Despite these advantages, challenges in developing Na intercalation materials capable of achieving high energy densities and cycling stability remain. However, the main concerns are the low extent of Na intercalation with the graphite cathode and thermodynamic instability of Na–graphite intercalation compounds.673Fig. 42 shows the energy density (capacity) of the materials that have been used in Na-ion batteries as both cathodes and anodes, although no perovskites are shown.
 Fig. 42  Plot of working potential against capacity (energy density) for electrode materials used in Na-ion batteries (reproduced from ref. 674 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Ti-Based perovskites, particularly Na2Ti3O7, with intercalated Na, low-voltage operation, and high capacity approaching ∼180 mA h g−1 have been reported.674,675 The high capacity are mainly due to the inherent ability to take up two Na+ ions per Ti3+ ↔ Ti4+ redox couple reaction.676 Other promising materials are trigonal Na4Ti5O12,677 monoclinic Na2Ti3O7,678 monoclinic Na2Ti6O13,679 monoclinic Li4Ti5O12,680 and spinel-type Na3LiTi5O12.681
The perovskite FeTiO3 (ilmenite) is significant because IVCT can take place between A site (Fe2+, Fe3+) and B site (Ti3+, Ti4+) cations, which is in contrast to the large majority of perovskites in which the A sites are occupied by univalent cations. Brugnetti et al.682 reported that FeTiO3 as the anode has a theoretical capacity of 530 mA g−1 and that the low electrical conductivity of this material could be modified by decorating it with carbon nanotubes. This resulted in a high energy density of 358.8 mA h−1 after 200 cycles at 100 mA g−1, an outstanding energy density of 201.8 mA h g−1 at 5000 mA g−1, and a high coulombic efficiency of ∼99%. This material can also be coupled with other perovskite cathodes, such as Na3V2(PO4)3, to make a full cell battery.683
Another example of a Ti-based perovskite with anodic properties is (Na1−xBix)TiO3 (x = 0.5), which exhibited rapid Na charge/discharge, a high capacity of ∼470 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, and a 100% energy density of ∼215 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1.684 These properties derived from 50 at% A-site substitution of Bi3+ by Na+, which was concluded to have resulted from the dual redox and ionic charge compensation mechanisms according to 2(Ti3+ → Ti4+) redox  and oxygen vacancy formation , as given in Table 7.
7.1.1.3. Lithium–air batteries. 
A schematic of the design of a typical Li–air battery is shown in Fig. 43. Such Li–air batteries possess a practical specific energy of ∼900 W h kg−1, which is an order of magnitude higher than that of Li-ion batteries.685,686 However, Li–air batteries currently face challenges in terms of low cyclability owing to parasitic reactions and poor coulomb efficiencies, which derive from sluggish OER and ORR on the cathode catalysts.
 Fig. 43  Schematic of the principle of an Li–air battery, with perovskite as the OER catalyst. 
The discharge process in Li–air batteries involves a half-cell oxidation reaction of Li, at the Li anode, to form Li+, and a half-cell reduction of O2 to form the superoxide radical ˙O2− by the reaction O2 + 2e− → ˙O2−, at the catalyst cathode/electrolyte interface.687 The cathodic reaction during the discharge process occurs at the surface of the cathode, between O2 and free Li+, resulting in the formation of LiO2, as encapsulated in Table 15 (reaction (1)). The formation of LiO2 by reduction of Li+ and O2 (reaction (1)) is a kinetically irreversible or quasi-reversible electrochemical process, resulting in high polarisation (thus requiring high overpotential) for the ORR. Subsequently, the LiO2 converts to Li2O2 through either chemical (reaction (2a)) or faradaic (reaction (2b)) reactions, which are competing alternatives. reaction (2a) involves a solution mechanism in which there is equilibrium between LiO2 solubility and adsorption on the cathode surface. In the latter case, Li2O2 grows in the solution and not on the surface. reaction (2b) involves a surface mechanism in which two soluble LiO2 molecules undergo a one-electron faradaic reaction at the surface. This results in the formation of a partial or continuous layer on the cathode surface, which results in low energy density, low power density, and short lifetime. However, individual Li2O2 particles for mass transfer are essential for high performance of a battery.688 In the ideal case, during the charging process, as-formed Li2O2 is reduced back to Li+ and superoxide. For a rechargeable battery, the OER involving oxidation of Li2O2 into Li+ and O2 is required. The two possible reactions are shown in reactions (3) and (4). Li–air batteries with aqueous electrolytes are encumbered by safety concerns owing to the generation of hydrogen gas as a result of the reaction between Li metal and water. However, the presence of oxygen can mitigate H2 generation. The corresponding ORR and OER reactions for Li–air batteries with an aqueous electrolyte are given in reactions (5)–(7).
Table 15 Charge–discharge reactions in Li–air batteries689





a Competitive alternative reaction pairs.
b Competitive alternative reaction pairs.





Nonaqueous (aprotic) electrolyte
Oxygen reduction reaction, discharge at cathode (ORR)
Li+ + e− + O2 → LiO2 (E0 = 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+)
Reaction (1)


2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2a (chemical reaction)
Reaction (2a)


LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2a (E0 = 2.96 V vs. Li/Li+)
Reaction (2b)


Oxygen evolution reaction, charge at cathode (OER)
Li2O2(s) → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2b (two-electron process)
Reaction (3)


Li2O2(s) → Li+ + e− + LiO2b (one-electron process)
Reaction (4)


Aqueous electrolyte
Oxygen reduction reaction, discharge at cathode (ORR)
4Li + O2 + 2H2O → 4LiOH (base electrolyte)
Reaction (5)


4Li + O2 + 4H+ → 4LiOH + 2H2O (acid electrolyte)
Reaction (6)


Oxygen evolution reaction, charge at cathode (OER)
4(LiOH + H2O) → 4Li + 6H2O + O2
Reaction (7)




Although noble metal oxide catalysts, such as IrO2 and RuO2, accelerate the kinetics and reduce the overpotential, their high costs limit their applicability. The most promising alternatives have been shown to be perovskites since they exhibit stoichiometric, structural, and electrical flexibility, low costs, and high surface-to-volume ratios.690 The role of the perovskite catalyst in Li–air batteries is to form O2 at the cathode surface through the OER, which is critical to the battery performance. The perovskite addresses the well-known shortcoming of the OER, which is the slow kinetics owing to the four-electron oxidation process, which necessitates a high overpotential.691 While regular shortcomings of Li–air batteries are low capacity retention during cycling and high required overpotentials, Mn-based perovskites as heterogeneous electrocatalysts have been shown to ameliorate these problems considerably.692 The A site can be substituted partially or fully in AMnO3 perovskites, where A generally is a rare-earth element. These perovskites have the advantage of being able to accommodate high concentrations of oxygen vacancies without structural change, which enhances the mobility of lattice oxygen and thus results in increased cathode conductivity and cycling stability.693
Cong et al.694 used solid-state synthesis to fabricate (separately) cation-deficient (La1−x)FeO3−δ (x = 0.15) and Fe2O3 by sol–gel, followed by calcining at 600° or 900 °C. Apparently, the authors also fabricated a mechanical mixture of LaFeO3 and Fe2O3. It appears that the latter was intended to replicate the phase assemblage of LaFeO3 and Fe2O3 that formed following calcination, although it is inexplicable why sintering was not done for the mechanical mixture. The authors proposed a mechanism of segregation based on oxygen vacancy formation, migration, and aggregation, followed by interaction with the Fe2O3 secondary phase and its reconstruction, as shown in the upper part of Fig. 44a. However, this process cannot involve segregation as this phenomenon involves cation diffusion driven by lattice stress, so it is not possible to segregate (deformable) oxygen vacancies. Consequently, the performance of this material is likely to derive from the formation of heterojunctions by the Fe2O3 reaction product formed during calcining. This material exhibited a discharge energy density of 500 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and a capacity retention for α-Fe2O3–LaFeO3−δ of 108 cycles, which can be compared to those for α-Fe2O3 of 21 cycles and (La1−x)FeO3−δ of 51 cycles. This heterojunction structure also exhibited a low required overpotential, enhanced power density, and long cycling stability, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 44a.
 Fig. 44  (a) Proposed mechanism of Fe2O3 surface reconstruction and polarisation curves of La0.85FeO3−δ electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 with an energy density of 500 mA h g−1 (reproduced from ref. 694 with permission from American Chemical Society) and (b) charge/discharge resulting in decomposition/formation of Li2O2 for LaNi(O3−xNx) electrodes (reproduced from ref. 695 with permission from American Chemical Society). 
Zhang et al.695 synthesised N-doped LaNi(O3−xNx) by sol–gel synthesis, sintering at 750 °C in oxygen and nitriding at 450 °C under NH3. The authors concluded that N substitution resulted in an increase in the concentrations of Ni3+ and oxygen vacancies at the surface. Although this cannot be explained by ionic, electronic, or redox charge compensation, the nitridation process is likely to have caused Ni3+ → Ni2+ reduction, with Ni2+ being identified by XPS. As this would involve an ionic radius size increase from 0.70 nm (d8 – low spin) to 0.83 nm, this would provide the driving force for segregation. A high concentration of surface oxygen vacancies derived from the enhanced nitridation at the surface would be expected. The high concentration of surface oxygen vacancies facilitated the decomposition of Li2O2, as shown by the schematic of the mechanism in Fig. 44b, which improved the OER/ORR catalytic activity, discharge capacity, and cyclability.
Hegde et al.696 reported the synthesis of the defect-rich CaMnO3 perovskite using sol–gel, calcining at 900 °C, and oxygen vacancy formation by heating at 300 °C under H2. The observation of Mn3+ in the XPS data indicates that Mn4+ → Mn3+ reduction  occurred, but H2 reduction could also have resulted in the formation of oxygen vacancies , as indicated by TGA, XRD, and TEM. As these are charge compensating defects, one caused the other. This dual charge compensation is shown by the defect equilibria . In addition, although not considered, it is likely that IVCT plays a key role in the performance of this perovskite as a cathode catalyst for Li–air batteries through the reversible electron exchange reaction Mn3+ + Li+ ↔ Mn4+ + Li0. This material exhibited improved OER/ORR activity, a high power density of 500 mA g−1, a high energy density of 500 mA h g−1, a low required overpotential, and improved cyclability.
7.1.1.4. Zinc–air batteries. 
Zn–air batteries are promising largely owing to several advantages. First, they have a theoretical energy density of 1086 W h kg−1, which is approximately five times that of Li-ion batteries owing to the fact that they can be operated in air.697 Second, the appropriate operating voltage (∼1.65 V) of Zn–air batteries is insufficient to induce the electrolysis of the water of the aqueous electrolyte. Third, the crustal abundance of Zn and the free supply of oxygen for the air cathode allow Zn–air batteries to be manufactured very economically (<US$10 kW−1 h−1 for Zn–air batteries vs. US$400–800 kW−1 h−1 for Li-ion batteries). The electrochemical reactions that occur at the anode and cathode sides in Zn–air batteries are given in Table 16.
Table 16 Charge–discharge reactions in Zn–air batteries698




Zn–air batteries
Electrochemical reaction




Anode (Zn)
Zn + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e−


Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−


Cathode (perovskite + oxide)
O2 + 4e− + 2H2O → 4OH−


Full-cell reaction
2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO


Parasitic reaction
Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2




At the perovskite cathode, penetration of the surrounding air into the porous electrode results in the electrochemical reduction of oxygen at the interface between the cathode and the electrolyte.699 The ORR that takes place at the air electrode is similar to that in alkaline hydrogen fuel cells, where hydroxide ions are the primary product.700 Consequently, these two energy-conversion systems share correspondingly similar electrode architectures and catalyst material design principles. Thus, many ORR catalysts applicable to fuel cells are promising candidates for Zn–air batteries. However, Zn–air batteries have the disadvantage that, during the discharge cycle, an undesired parasitic reaction between Zn and H2O results in H2 evolution, which is responsible for gradual self-corrosion at the Zn anode surface.701 This has the effect of scavenging active sites and reducing efficiency.
Qian et al.702 used sol–gel and calcination at 600 °C to synthesise single-phase Ce-doped LaCoO3 (4.2–5.6 at% Ce-doped but without stoichiometric compensation), as shown in Fig. 45a. The refined crystal structure, shown in Fig. 45b, indicated that the solid solubility mechanism was Ce substitution for La, thus giving the stoichiometry (La1−xCex)CoO3. Hence, since Ce is a donor dopant, charge compensation cannot be by oxygen vacancy formation. Therefore, it is by redox, giving the defect equilibria . These equilibria were confirmed by the identification of Co2+ by XPS and EELS, as shown in Fig. 45c. This perovskite exhibited enhanced OER/ORR activity, which was attributed to the strengthening of the binding of oxygen-related groups on the Co sites owing to the existence of an intermediate spin state, which can occur in 3d4 to 3d6 transition metal ions.703 The conversion from low spin to intermediate spin causes increased overlap from Co d and O p orbital hybridisation and occupied states near the Fermi level, as suggested in Fig. 45d and e, which leads to redistribution of some electrons from the t2g to the eg orbitals, as indicated in Fig. 45f. The (La0.994Ce0.056)CoO3 perovskite exhibited the most improved properties, including outstanding OER/ORR activity, a low required overpotential of 0.96 V, an ultrahigh specific capacity of 783 mA h g−1, an excellent durability of ∼100% capacity retention after 160 h, and a good discharge rate.
 Fig. 45  Ce-Doped LaCoO3: (a) XRD data, (b) refined crystal structure, (c) EELS analysis for Co L-edge, (d) density of states (DOS) for undoped and Ce-doped LaCoO3, (e) orbital overlap of low-spin (LS) and intermediate-spin (IS) states of Co 3d with that of O 2p, and (f) EELS analysis for O K-edge (reproduced from ref. 702 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 
The performances of some recently reported perovskite electrocatalysts in different batteries are summarised in Table 17.
Table 17 Performances of recently reported perovskite electrocatalysts in different batteries




Perovskites
Battery/electrode
Battery performance
Ref.




(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3
Li–air
Capacity = 6890 mA g−1

704



Capacity retention = 98.9% after 30 cycles


Specific capacity limit = 1000 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1


(La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3−δ
Li–air
Capacity = 4895 mA g−1

705



Capacity retention = ∼100% after 30 cycles


Specific capacity limit = 500 mA h g−1


Coulombic efficiency = ∼82%


(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ
Li–air
Capacity = 5799 mA h g−1

706



Capacity retention = 50 cycles at 0.1 mA cm−1


Upper-limit capacity = 500 mA h g−1


(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.8Mn0.2)O3
Li–air
Capacity = ∼12742 mA h gcarbon−1

707



Heterojunction with RuO2
Capacity = 500 mA h g−1 (voltage range 2.6–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li)


(La0.8Sr0.2)(Mn0.6Ni0.4)O3
Li–air
Capacity = 5364 mA h gcarbon−1 at 50 mA gcarbon−1

549



Initial discharge–charge voltage gap = 1.39 V


LaNiO3
Li–air
Capacity = 3407 mA h gcarbon−1

708



Capacity = 1000 mA h g−1 (voltage range 2.0–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li)


La(Ni0.85Mg0.15)O3
Li–air
Capacity = 620 mA h g−1

709



Plateau discharge voltage = 2.7 V


(La0.56Li0.33)1.005(Ti0.99Al0.01)O3
Li–air
Discharge capacity = 796 mA h gC+CoO−1 at 25 °C

710



Discharge capacity = 4035 mA h gC+CoO−1 at 100 °C


Limited capacity mode = 500 mA h gC+CoO−1 at 0.3 mA cm−1


(La0.75Sr0.25)MnO3
Li–air
Capacity = 1000 mA h g−1 after 124 cycles

711



Coulombic efficiency = ∼100%


(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ
Zn–air
Power density = 127 mW cm−1

712



Operating voltage = 1.25 V vs. Li+/Li


La(Co0.71Ni0.25)0.96O3−δ
Zn–air
Specific energy density = ∼846 mA h g−1 gZn−1

713



Power density = 127 mW cm−1


Capacity retention = 100% after 114 cycles (10 h)


Operating voltage = 1.25 V vs. Li+/Li


5.6% Ce/LaCoO3
Zn–air
Capacity = 783 mA kg−1

714



Pt/Sr(Co0.8Fe0.2)0.95P0.05O3−δ
Zn–air
Capacity = 790.4 mA gzn−1 at 5 mA cm−2

715



La(Ti0.65Fe0.35)O3−δ
Zn–air
Capacity = 440 mA h g−1 for >12 h

716



Plateau discharge voltage = 1.16 V


Na0.44MnO2
Na-ion/cathode
Capacity = 96 mA h g−1 at 10 °C

717



Capacity retention = 97.8% after 100 cycles at 0.5C


Na4Fe3(PO4)–P2O7 + reduced graphene oxide
Na-ion/cathode
Capacity = 78 mA h g−1 at 20C and 30 °C

718



Capacity retention = 83% after 300 cycles at 20C


Coulombic efficiency = 97.5%


FeTiO3
Na-ion/anode
Capacity = 358.8 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1

683



Capacity retention = 90% after 200 cycles at 100 mA g−1


Coulombic efficiency = ∼99%


(Bi0.5Na0.5)TiO3
Na-ion/anode
Capacity = ∼470 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1

684



Capacity retention = 46% after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1


Coulombic efficiency = ∼98% (50 cycles)


Na4Ti5O12 + carbon nanotube
Na-ion/anode
Capacity retention = 44.2 mA h g−1 after 3000 cycles at 1 A g−1

719



Coulombic efficiency = ∼100%


(La0.56Li0.34)TiO3
Solid-state electrolyte
Ionic conductivity = 2.0 × 10−5 S cm−1

720



Capacity = 145 mA h g−1 (41 μm thickness)


Capacity retention = 86.2% after 50 cycles (41 μm thickness)


Al–Li7La3Zr2O12
Solid-state electrolyte
Ionic conductivity = 9.9 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 25 °C

721



Ionic conductivity = 5.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C


Li1.4(Ti1.6Al0.4)(PO4)3
Solid-state electrolyte
Ionic conductivity = 5.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C

722



Coulombic efficiency = ∼94.4% (36 mA h g−1 for 50 cycles)






7.1.2. Solid-state electrolytes. 
The flammable liquid electrolyte in Li-ion batteries and the associated safety concern has led to the development of alternatives, particularly all-solid-state lithium batteries (ASSLBs), which exhibit a discharge capacity comparable to that of traditional Li-ion batteries.723 These devices incorporate solid-state electrolytes for batteries, which must be designed to exhibit high ionic conductivity at room temperature and to operate safely.724,725 (La1−xLax)TiO3 perovskites have emerged as outstanding solid-state electrolytes owing to their superior ionic conductivity, wide and stable potential windows, low interfacial resistance, excellent thermal stability, high elastic moduli, low costs, and environmental friendliness. A disadvantage of these and similar perovskites is their greater bulk densities (typically >5000 kg m−3) relative to that of the competitor polyethylene oxide (PEO) electrolyte (typically <1000 kg m−3). Ideally, the mass of a perovskite electrolyte should be equivalent to that of the sum of the masses of the competitor electrolyte and the membrane separator that isolates the cathode from the anode.
The energy densities of ASSLBs depend largely on microstructure (grain size), macrostructure (thickness), and electrical properties (conductivity, impedance, band gap, etc.), and defect equilibria of their components.726–728 Outside of the intrinsic properties, the preceding characteristics depend to a large extent on the extrinsic effects of processing. Solid oxide electrolytes generally are densified by pressureless sintering or hot pressing to yield thicknesses typically in the range of 200–1000 μm.729,730 In order to avoid limited ionic diffusion through the membrane separator in thick solid-state electrolytes, the technique of phase inversion has been developed.731 In this method, a mixture of perovskite and a solution of dissolved polymer is immersed in another solution that is not a solvent for the polymer. This results in the precipitation of the polymer in the perovskite matrix. Subsequent oxidation removes the polymer, leaving behind a continuous fine-scale pore network.
Tape casting recently has been shown to be capable of large-scale production of freestanding solid electrolyte films with minimal thicknesses.732 Even more recently, Jiang et al.733 reported the synthesis of (La0.56Li0.34)TiO3 films as thin as ∼29 μm using tape casting. In this method, a slurry containing the perovskite powder, triethanolamine dispersant, benzyl butyl phthalate plasticiser, polyvinyl butyral binder, and ethanol solvent was tape cast onto a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) release film. Two layers of the tape-cast films were joined by hot pressing at 100 °C and 10 MPa, followed by organic oxidation at 500 °C, heating at 1050 °C to prevent reformation of Li2CO3, and final sintering at 1260 °C. SEM images of the ultrathin solid oxide electrolyte are shown in Fig. 46a–c. Although the Li ionic conductivity of this electrolyte was shown to be mid-range at 2.0 × 10−5 S cm−1, the discharge capacity was relatively high at 145 mA h g−1 and the capacity retention ratio was high at 86.2% after 50 cycles, as shown in Fig. 46d, while exhibiting the galvanostatic charge–discharge behaviour for the full cell battery shown in Fig. 46e. Finally, the flexural strength was high at 264 MPa.
 Fig. 46  (La0.56Li0.34)TiO3 tape-cast films of ∼29 μm thickness: (a) cross sectional SEM image before sintering, (b) cross-sectional SEM image after sintering at 1260 °C, (c) SEM image of the surface after sintering at 1050 °C, (d) cycling performance at 0.1C (inset: images of pasted cathode and anode), and (e) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the Li/PEO/(Li0.34La0.56)TiO3/LiFePO4 full cell battery at 65 °C (reproduced from ref. 733 with permission from John Wiley & Sons). 

7.2. Supercapacitors
Although rechargeable batteries usually possess high energy densities, the power densities and long-term stability are often insufficient for many applications.734 Supercapacitors are alternative energy-storage devices that have been used extensively in a wide range of portable and size-limited devices.215,735 Supercapacitors are categorised into three mechanistic areas, which area summarised in Table 18. They differ in their operational mechanisms in that electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) store energy through electrostatic adsorption over the electrode surface. Pseudocapacitors utilise electrochemical redox reactions of the electrode materials during charging and discharging, and intercalation pseudocapacitors store energy by rapid intercalation and deintercalation of ionic charge carriers through atomic channels.
Table 18 Summary of types of supercapacitors




Type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Typical electrode materials




Electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLC)
Ultrahigh power densities
Low energy densities
Carbon-based materials


Pseudocapacitors
Higher energy densities
Low capacitance retention
Metal oxides


Lower power densities
Conductive polymers


Intercalation pseudocapacitors
High power densities
Limited to specific material structures
Perovskites


Highest energy densities
Nb, Ru, W oxides




Although the applicability of perovskites as anodes for supercapacitors emerged only in 2014,736 this work has generated considerable subsequent investigations using other perovskites. Defective perovskite pseudocapacitors with high concentrations of oxygen vacancies have exhibited improved electrical conductivity and energy-storage capacity relative to those of stoichiometric perovskites owing to bulk intercalation/deintercalation of oxygen species at the vacancy sites.736–738 In contrast to metal–oxide pseudocapacitors, high capacitance is determined not principally by the surface area but largely by the rate and depth of intercalation. However, the large radii of oxygen species relative to those of other charge carriers reduce their diffusivity and have a greater impact on the structural stability of perovskites. In effect, the diffusivity of the oxygen species in intercalation pseudocapacitor electrodes is determined by the perovskite architectures and the densities of oxygen vacancies.
Mefford et al.736 reported work on LaMnO3±x (x = 0.09) and showed for the first time that the oxygen-deficient LaMnO2.91 provided a specific structural architecture of cations that facilitated a charge storage mechanism consisting of intercalation of oxygen species under electrical polarisation, occupation of oxygen vacancies, and oxygen mobility by hopping.
Owing to the fact that intercalation perovskites generally are immersed in a strong alkaline electrolyte (KOH or NaOH) during charge/discharge, the resultant chemical reactions may alter the bulk phase structures, stoichiometries, defect concentrations, surface areas, and surface compositions of the perovskites. Further, the use of such strong electrolytes suggests the advisability of being aware of the susceptibility to leaching of both lattice ions and substitutional solutes and its effect on the structural and performance stability.
Liu et al.739 reported a comparative study of the anion-intercalation supercapacitors SrCoO3−δ and (Sr1−xBax)(Co1−yFey)O3−δ (x = 0.5, y = 0.2); data for Co3O4 were also included. Although the rationale for Ba substitution for Sr was not stated, the intention may have been to cause structural destabilisation and associated defect formation owing to ionic radii difference. In order for charge-compensating oxygen vacancies to result from Fe substitution for Co, the latter ion must be an acceptor. Although XPS data for Co revealed the presence of Co2+, Co3+ (principal valence), and Co4+, the absence of XPS data for Fe precludes assessment of whether Fe acted as an acceptor dopant. As shown in Fig. 47, the results for gravimetric capacitance showed that SrCoO3−δ exhibited a value ∼56% of that of (Sr1−xBax)(Co1−yFey)O3−δ after 70 cycles. However, with increasing number of cycles, the former increased to a maximum at 3000 cycles, followed by slow deterioration. The latter rapidly increased over 70 cycles, deteriorated by ∼15% over the immediately following cycles, and then deteriorated approximately linearly over 5000 cycles. The significant increase in the electrochemical performance for SrCoO3−δ is attributed to the increased surface area based on data, provided in Fig. 47, for the direct leaching in KOH of Sr. It is also likely that the increasing performance of the more stable SrCoO3−δ derived from the preferential leaching of Sr from the A sites with minimal structural deterioration and the resultant generation of charge-compensating oxygen vacancies. The subsequent decrease in performance could be interpreted in terms of structural deterioration following long-term testing. In contrast, although the data for less stable (Sr0.5Ba0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ during the first 70 cycles were not explained, the relatively low surface areas of these samples suggest that the rapid increase in performance derived not from the achievement of surface wetting and saturation by KOH but from increasing intercalation. The rapid subsequent decrease could be interpreted in terms of reduction in surface area due to agglomeration740 or structural destabilisation through the B site. The subsequent linear decrease is likely to have resulted from the gradual leaching of Sr and Ba at the A site.
 Fig. 47  Effect of cycling on the gravimetric capacitance of SrCoO3−δ and (Sr0.5Ba0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ (reproduced from ref. 739 with permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Forslund et al.741 reported a comparative study between stoichiometric and oxygen-deficient variants of the perovskite CaMnO3−δ and the Ruddlesden–Popper structure Ca2MnO4−δ. The authors used an overpressure of H2 at 325 °C to generate mutually charge-compensating Mn reduction and oxygen vacancy formation. This work revealed that the main charge/discharge mechanism is affected by the crystal structures of these two perovskites, which were differentiated by rock-salt layers in Ca2MnO4−δ. While oxygen transport occurred through oxygen lattice diffusivity via the oxygen vacancies for both perovskites, the oxygen transport also took place via oxygen ions intercalated in the interstitial sites of the rock-salt layers of Ca2MnO4−δ. Fig. 48a and b show the peak current variations against scan rate (v1/2 and v) during charge/discharge through cyclic voltammetry analyses for anion intercalation/deintercalation. For CaMnO3−δ, the peak current varied linearly against v (R2 = 1.00) indicating that the dominant mechanism for such rapid charge/discharge processes is capacitive and so the redox reaction occurred mainly on the surface or near-surface of the perovskite. However, for Ca2MnO4−δ, the peak currents were proportional to v1/2 (R2 ≥ 0.99), indicating that the charge/discharge process is governed principally by diffusion rather than a capacitive mechanism. Fig. 48c shows oxygen intercalation in the perovskites, and Fig. 48d shows the deintercalation. These data reveal that the intercalation diffusion rates were superior for (i) the reduced variants relative to the oxidised variants of both perovskites and (ii) both types of CaMnO3−δ relative to the Ruddlesden–Popper Ca2MnO4−δ. This counter-intuitive outcome was explained in terms of the scan rates during charge/discharge. That is, with slow scan rates, interstitial intercalation of oxygen contributes significantly to the increased capacitance of the Ruddlesden–Popper Ca2MnO4−δ. With fast scan rates, there is insufficient time for this mechanism to be effected.
 Fig. 48  Dependence of the peak current density on the scan rate for (a) CaMnO3−δ, (b) Ca2MnO4−δ (measured at potentials of −0.10 V (black lines) and −0.25 V (red lines)), (c) intercalation rates of oxygen for all four perovskite variants, and (d) deintercalation rates of oxygen for all four perovskite variants (diffusion rates measured using a bounded diffusion model) (reproduced from ref. 741 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
As another example of the pseudocapacitors, Guo et al.742 used plasma etching with and without H2 + Ar in order to generate high oxygen vacancy concentrations (∼8–10%) in LaCoO3−δ. An asymmetric supercapacitor was fabricated using the highly defective LaCoO3−δ as the cathode and graphene oxide as the anode. The device produced an energy density of 47.64 W h kg−1 at a power density of 804.4 W kg−1 and a capacitance retention of 96% after 4000 cycles at 5 A g−1.
Liu et al.207 used sol–gel and sintering in air at 950 °C to prepare the A-site-substituted (Pr1−xBax)MnO3−δ (x = 0.5) single perovskite; heating under H2 at 800 °C was used to convert (Pr0.5Ba0.5)MnO3−δ to the A-site-substituted double perovskite (Pr1−xBax)2Mn2O6−δ (x = 0.5). The layered structure resulted in both high oxygen diffusion rates and oxygen vacancy concentration, resulting in a very high gravimetric capacitance of 1034.8 F g−1 and an excellent volumetric capacitance of ∼2535.3 F cm−3 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The mechanism for the intercalation of oxygen was investigated using ex situ near-edge X-ray adsorption fine structure (NEXAFS) for both charged and discharged double perovskite, as shown in Fig. 49a. The Mn L-edge spectra are differentiated into two multiplets of L3-edge positioned at 640–645 eV and L2-edge positioned at 650–655 eV. For the L3-edge, the predominance of Mn4+ and Mn3+ during charging is clear, although the L2-edge is non-indicative. During discharging, the L3- and L2-edges shifted to lower energies, suggesting a general decrease in the Mn valence. Accordingly, the increased Mn3+ peak intensity, the decreased Mn4+ peak intensity, and the unchanged Mn2+ peak intensity show that the dominant redox reactions are Mn3+ → Mn4+ upon charging and Mn4+ → Mn3+ upon discharging. Fig. 49b shows a schematic of oxygen ion diffusion (i) along the interlayer spaces and (ii) through the vacancies. Fig. 49c and d show DOS results obtained by DFT simulations of the cubic and hexagonal polymorphs that were identified by XRD, where the single perovskite consisted of both cubic and hexagonal polymorphs, but the double perovskite consisted solely of the cubic polymorph. These data show that the cubic polymorph exhibited no Eg but that the hexagonal polymorph had an Eg of 1.39 eV. The authors attributed the excellent electrochemical performance to the high electrical conductivity implied by the absent Eg for the single crystal structure of the double perovskite.
 Fig. 49  (a) NEXAFS spectra obtained at the Mn 2p adsorption edge, (b) refined crystal structure of (PrBa)Mn2O6−δ, showing oxygen intercalation during charging. DFT+U calculated density of states (DOS) for (c) cubic and (d) hexagonal PBM (reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Finally, defective oxide perovskites can also perform as electrodes for cation intercalation/deintercalation. In these oxygen-deficient perovskites, the positively charged oxygen vacancies serve to establish associated electric fields as shown in Fig. 50, which act as fast-ion transport channels for Li+ intercalation/deintercalation. Pan et al.737 fabricated oxygen-deficient BiFeO3−δ by electrochemical deposition on N-doped carbon fibres, immersion in melamine, and calcination at 800 °C under N2. This anode was incorporated in a battery–supercapacitor hybrid (BSH) and the electrochemical testing revealed an excellent capacity of 155 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and a high cycling stability of 92.6% after 10000 cycles at an operating voltage of 1.9 V in a LiCl electrolyte. Such outstanding performance was ascribed to the rapid Li+ intercalation/deintercalation in the BiFeO3 structure accompanied by simultaneous reversible lattice distortion.
 Fig. 50  Refined crystal structures of BiFeO3−δ during charging (left) and discharging (right), showing electric fields around oxygen vacancies (δ) in red and the surrounding electric field for Li+ transport in green (reproduced from ref. 737 with permission from Elsevier). 
8. Defect engineering of perovskites in other applications
There have been many successful investigations to improve the activity and stability of oxide perovskites through defect engineering for applications such as chemical looping, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC), protonic ceramic electrochemical cells (PCECs), and ceramic membrane reactors. The A-site and B-site cations in oxide perovskites play critical roles in determining the catalytic activity. Different A-site and B-site cations can induce different crystal structures, structural distortion, defect concentration changes, and variations in the ionic valences.
The present section reviews some experimental studies relevant to the preceding principal applications as well as complementary computational approaches, particularly the Nernst–Planck–Poisson (NPP) model, to characterise defect transport in electrolyte membranes in protonic ceramic fuel cells and electrolysers. This section also discusses the role of defects and how their tuning can be used to improve catalytic properties.
8.1. Chemical looping
The concept of chemical looping refers to the deconstruction of a chemical reaction into multiple subreactions. The chemical looping process involves the circulation of an oxygen carrier between a reduction reactor (also known as a fuel reactor) and an oxidation reactor (also known as an air reactor) to close the loop.743 A critical aspect of this technology is the reduction and regeneration of an oxygen carrier material, which usually is a metal oxide. Owing to their unique abilities to accommodate different cationic dopants at the A and/or B sites, to create resultant charge-compensating and cation and/or oxygen vacancies, and to cause redox charge compensation, oxide perovskites can be tailored to act as oxygen carriers and redox catalysts.3,4 Some perovskites used in the chemical looping process include Sr(Mn1−xNix)O3−δ,744 (La1−xSrx)FeO3,745 (La1−xCex)BO3−δ (B = Co, Mn),746 Ca(Ti0.125Mn0.875)O3−δ,747 Ca(Mg0.1Mn0.9)O3−δ,748 (Sr0.2La0.8)(Co0.2Fe0.8)O3,749 and Ca(MxMn1−x)O3−δ (M = Ti, Fe, Mg).750
Strontium lanthanum ferrite perovskites ((SrxLa1−x)FeO3−δ) have been investigated widely as oxygen carriers in chemical looping for the partial oxidation of CH4 to syngas.751–753 Syngas is a fuel gas mixture consisting primarily of hydrogen and carbon monoxide. In this process, CH4 adsorbs onto surface-Fe sites and dissociates stepwise into CH3, CH2, CH, and C. The dissociated hydrogen ions undergo reductive coupling at the Fe sites to form H2. At the same time, subsurface O ions diffuse to the vacancy sites (formed in the defective perovskite), and they form bonds with the adsorbed C radicals, ultimately releasing CO. In addition to syngas, methane also can be converted to other value-added chemicals. Oxidative coupling of methane (OCM) involves the direct conversion of natural gas (primarily methane) into the C2 hydrocarbons C2H6 and C2H4.754 In chemical looping for OCM, CH4 first dissociates into CH3 and H; two CH3 groups then form C2H6. Subsequently, C2H6 undergoes homogeneous or heterogeneous dehydrogenation to give C2H4. It has been reported that increasing the concentration of oxygen vacancies serves to lower the activation barriers for C–H and Fe–C bond cleavage and thus favours CH4 activation and partial oxidation.751,755,756
Zhang et al.757 recently investigated the role of A-site cations in modulating the oxygen capacity of iron-based perovskites in chemical looping for syngas production from methane. They reported that doping substitution of La by Sr to form (SrxLa1−x)(Al0.2Fe0.8)O3 significantly nearly tripled the oxygen capacity from 1.0 mmol g−1 (x = 0.1) to 2.7 mmol g−1 (x = 0.5). This also increased the oxygen vacancy concentration, resulting in enhanced CO selectivity to >94% and suppressed coke deposition over reduced oxygen carriers. Characterisation demonstrated that the dynamic crystal reconstruction of Ruddlesden–Popper (SrLan)(AlxFen−x)O3n+1 (n = 1 and 2) exhibited good methane activation and oxygen transport properties.
8.2. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs)
The SOFC system, which consists of a cathode, an anode, and an electrolyte, is an alternative concept for off-grid, distributed, electric power generation.758 However, manufacturing cost-competitive SOFCs with appropriate power outputs, lifetimes, and reliability at minimal working temperatures, which currently require >1000 °C, remains a challenge.
Intermediate-temperature SOFCs are solid electrochemical cells that can convert the chemical energy contained in gaseous fuels into electrical energy and heat at operating temperatures of 700–1000 °C.759 Further, these devices have very low environmental emissions and exhibit high chemical-to-electrical energy conversion efficiencies.760 Recent research has focused on perovskite-based materials as alternatives to the favoured yttria-stabilised zirconia (YSZ) and gadolinium-doped ceria (GCO) as electrodes.761,762 In 1994, Ishihara et al.763 reported high oxide ion conductivity in (SrxLa1−x)(Mg1−yGay)O3−δ. The ionic conductivity was increased by co-doping the A-site with Sr and B-site with Mg as acceptor substitutionals, both of which would generate oxygen vacancies. Higher-order Ruddlesden–Popper phases (n > 1) have also been investigated as SOFC cathodes. Amow and Skinner152 prepared Ruddlesden–Popper Lan+1NinO3n+1 (n = 2 or 3) phases, which yielded anion deficient La3Ni2O7−δ or La4Ni3O10−δ, respectively. These materials exhibited improved electrical conductivity, thermal stability, and electrode performance.
Cobalt-based oxide perovskites have been studied widely as cathode materials in SOFCs, including (Sr0.4La0.6)CoO3764 and (Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.2Co0.8)O3−δ,765 owing to the high concentrations of oxygen vacancies. There is extensive interest in mixed ionic–electronic conducting cathode materials for SOFCs that operate below 600 °C, including (Sm0.5Sr0.5)CoO3,766 (Sr0.4La0.6)1−x(Co0.2Fe0.8)O3,767 (Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.2Co0.8)O3−δ,768 and (Sm0.5Sr0.5)CoO3.769
Xia et al.770 prepared anodic materials that combined defect design and catalyst impregnation. In this study, a porous A-site deficient perovskite (Sr0.15La0.57)TiO3 was synthesised by a modified polyacrylamide gel route, which was used to impregnate the pores with 3.4–8.3 wt% (Gd0.1Ce0.9)O2−δ and 2.0–6.3 wt% Ni/Cu, as an alternative anode for SOFCs. The electrodes were prereduced at 900 °C for 12 h in H2 before impregnation, thus facilitating oxygen vacancy formation. The results revealed that the lowest anodic polarisation resistances of 0.5 Ω cm2 and 0.73 Ω cm2 at 900 °C and 800 °C, respectively, were obtained for the (Sr0.15La0.57)TiO3 anode impregnated with 3.9 wt% Ni and 6.6 wt% Ce0.9Gd0.1O2−δ.770

Table 19 summarises the performances of various perovskite cathodes and anodes in fuel cells in terms of the peak power densities (PPDs).
Table 19 Performance of perovskites in solid oxide fuel cells and dominant defects




Cathode/electrolyte
Anode
Defect type
Fuel (vol%)
Temp. (°C)
PPD (W cm−2)
Time (h)
Ref.




GCO: Gd0.2Ce0.8O1.9, SDC: Sm0.2Ce0.8O2−δ, ScSZ: (Sc2O3)0.1(ZrO2)0.9.




(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ
(La0.75Sr0.25)0.9(Cr0.5Mn0.5)O3
A-Site vacancies
3% H2O + CH4
900
0.2
7

761



(La0.85Sr0.15)MnO3/YSZ
(Sm0.2Ce0.8)O2−δ/Ni/YSZ
Sm substitutional
25% CH4 + 75% air
700
0.3
500

771



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ/GCO
Ba–(Ni0.53Cu0.47)Ox/GCO
Ba dopant
Dry CH4
750
0.31
200

772



(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ
4 wt% Au–NiO/GCO
Au dopant
CH4:H2O (2:1)
850
0.41
200

773



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.2Fe0.8)O3–SDC/YSZ
Sm0.2(TixCe1−x)0.8O1.9/Ni/YSZ
Ti substitutional
Dry H2
700
0.38
80

774



(La0.85Sr0.15)0.9MnO3−δ–SDC/YSZ
(Sm0.2Ce0.8)O2−δ/Ni/YSZ
Sm substitutional
Dry H2
800
0.52
70

775



(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ
10 wt% CeO2–25 wt% Ni/YSZ
Ce dopant
Dry CH4
800
0.48
5

776



(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ
LiLaNi–Al2O3 + Cu–Ni/YSZ
Cu dopant
CH4:O2 (2:1)
850
1.08
300

777



(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/ScSZ
LiLaNi–Al2O3/Ni–ScSZ
Ni dopant
CH4:H2O (2:1)
850
0.53
10

778



(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/ScSZ
7 wt% Ni–Al2O3/Ni–ScSZ
Ni dopant
CH4:O2 (4:1)
850
0.38
25

779



(Pr0.7Ca0.3)MnO3/ScSZ
Cu–CeO2/Ni/YSZ
Cu dopant
C2H5OH + H2O
800
0.56
80

780



(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ
Cu–Ni/YSZ
Cu dopant
Dry CH4
800
0.44
25

781



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ/GCO
NiCu/GCO
Gd dopant
Dry CH4
800
0.32
1300

782



(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.2Fe0.8)O3/GCO
(Fe0.1Ni0.9)/GCO
Gd dopant
Dry CH4
650
0.34
50

783





8.3. Protonic ceramic electrochemical cells (PCECs)
Intermediate-temperature protonic ceramic electrochemical cells (PCECs) represent an emerging technology that can produce hydrogen and generate electricity in a single device in the temperature range (400–600 °C) lower than that required for SOFCs. PCECs also offer other advantages, such as high efficiencies, longer system durability, and less expensive materials.784 The principle is based on the application of a solid-state electrolyte with high proton conductivity that results from low activation energy for proton conduction.785,786
Tang et al.787 used a wet-chemistry self-combustion method to synthesise what was considered to be A-site cation ordered and deficient (Pr(Ca0.2Ba0.8))0.95Co2O6−δ layered perovskite, followed by calcining in air at 1000 °C for 4 h. The layered structure resulted in both high oxygen diffusivity and oxygen vacancy concentrations, which were facilitated by the A-site deficiency. A high electrolysis current density of −0.72 A cm−2 at 1.3 V and a peak power density of 0.540 W cm−2 were achieved at 600 °C. The long-term stability testing of the cell in fuel cell mode at 0.7 V and in electrolysis mode at 1.3 V at 500 °C for 160 h showed no observable degradation.
8.4. Ceramic membrane reactors

8.4.1. Background. 
The oxide perovskites used for membrane reactor applications are typically mixed ionic–electronic conducting (MIEC) materials. It is possible for perovskites to exhibit multiple simultaneous forms of conductivity, which can be electronic (electrons e−, electron holes h˙, delocalised small polarons ) and ionic (cations, anions, anion vacancies, protons in , oxygen vacancies ).785,788–790 It is well known that many semiconducting materials exhibit electrical conductivity at room temperature, while ionic conductivity requiring high temperatures at ≥500 °C under oxygen (O2), water vapour (H2O), or hydrogen (H2) partial pressures. The type of defects and their concentrations are the determining factors in the ionic conductivity and thus performance of the membrane. At high temperatures, both conductivity mechanisms operate, which may not be desirable, although one or the other tends to be predominant.791 This becomes more critical when using defective perovskites as protonic conducting fuel cells (PCFCs). The formation of protonic conductivity is contingent upon the simultaneous presence of an oxygen vacancy in the lattice and water vapour.792 The water dissociates upon incorporation in a perovskite to form a hydroxyl group and proton. The hydroxyl group then occupies the vacancy site, and the remaining hydrogen ion forms a covalent bond with a surface oxygen ion. The relevant reaction is (18)
As these hydrogen ions are mobile, they can contribute to the bulk conductivity of perovskites, as shown in Fig. 51. While these ionic defects give rise to conductivity, the defects are specifically protonic defects, and hence the conductivity is protonic.
 Fig. 51  Proton conductivity of various oxides calculated from data for proton concentrations and mobility according to Norby and Larring.798 
As discussed previously, B-site substitution with cations of lower oxidation states (viz., acceptors) results in the formation of oxygen vacancies from ionic charge compensation. Therefore, it is possible for perovskites to act as protonic conductors when water vapour is incorporated in the lattice at intermediate temperatures, typically 500°–600 °C.789Eqn (18) indicates that the proton conductivity is proportional, in principle, to the , which depends on both the amount and valence of the dopant.793 While the  is determined by the amount and valence of the dopant, the charge-carrier density is determined by the extent of lattice hydroxylation. Further, although A-site substitution generally has only a minimal effect on the proton transfer, it can assist the process indirectly by being used to minimise structural distortion.794 This has been confirmed through a study of B-site substitution in the perovskite Ba(Y0.2Zr0.8)O3−δ, which exhibited increasing protonic conductivity with increasing substitution up to a maximum at 20 at% Y, at which point it decreased owing to structural distortion, although excessive [H+] was offered as an alternative explanation.795 Chen et al.796 studied the lattice expansion from A-site substitution of La3+ (0.172 nm) by Sr2+ (1.32 nm) and consequent equilibrium oxygen vacancy formation in (SrxLa1−x)CoO3−δ, where x = 0.2, 0.4, or 0.7. The resultant nonlinear trend was attributed to relaxation of the lattice expansion from substitution by the introduction of lattice-contracting oxygen vacancies.
Although the more commonly applied B-site substitution is expected to enhance the performance of protonic conducting perovskites, very low proton conductivity at low dopant concentrations has been observed. Mather et al.797 reported computational calculations for lattice simulations using the Born model (based on the potential energy of the system in terms of atomic coordinates), energetics of defects, oxygen migration, and dopant incorporation. This study revealed that dilute substitution of trivalent cations (Nd3+, Gd3+) in the perovskite Sr(Yb0.1Ce0.9)O3−δ is more energetically favourable at the A site (Sr) rather than the B site (Ce). This would have the significant effect of causing the dopant to act as a donor rather than an acceptor, so it would annihilate oxygen vacancies and so inhibit proton uptake. This study reiterates the previously mentioned caution concerning the potentially incorrect assumption that the targeted substitution will take place.


8.4.2. Measurement of ionic conductivity. 
Perovskites of the general formula of A2+B4+O3, where the A site is occupied by Sr, Ba, or Ca, and the B site is occupied by Ce or Zr, have shown proton conductivity at high temperatures. As discussed previously, the introduction of an acceptor dopant at the B site yields greatly improved proton conductivity and chemical stability.
The contributions of charge carriers vary depending on the working temperature (T), oxygen partial pressure (PO2), and hydrogen partial pressure (PH2). Nomura and Kageyama799 used comprehensive impedance and conductivity measurements to investigate the predominant variations in the type of defect charge carriers, including proton, oxide ion, and hole conduction domains, for the Ba(Y0.2Zr0.8)O3−δ perovskite as a function of T, PO2, and PH2. For the data obtained under controlled atmospheres in the range 150–1000 °C, the results yielded an informative charge carrier map for PH2vs. PO2 at 400°, 500°, and 600 °C, indicating the predominant H+, O2−, and h˙ conduction domains. This was overlaid with lines for the ionic transference numbers tH+ = tO2− = 0.5 at three values of PH2O at 600 °C.
Below 600 °C in the presence of H2O and/or H2 gas, the predominant conduction mechanism was by protons, the conductivity of which at 600 °C was 4.2 × 10−3 S cm−1; the apparent activation energy at 500–600 °C in 40% H2 (PH2O = 0.042 atm) was 0.38 eV.799 In contrast, at 1000 °C under dry and low PO2 conditions, the predominant conduction mechanism was by O2− ions; the apparent activation energy at this temperature was 0.75 eV. This higher activation energy was proposed to originate from the local distortion of the BO6 octahedra owing to the ionic mismatch between larger Y3+ (0.090 nm) and smaller Zr4+ (0.072 nm) as well as due to the tendency of the Y3+ ions to form a C-type (cubic) rare earth structure.
Temperature programmed desorption (TPD) is an alternative method that can be used to evaluate the proton conductivity of defective oxide perovskites. This method is based on the estimation of the proton concentration from the amount of evolved water vapour, where the mobility of protons can be predicted from the temperature of the maximal peak.784 The TPD method is a diffusion-controlled technique, so the thickness of the sample affects these data. Hibino et al.800 reported an in-depth analysis of the relationship between the TPD peak temperature and the sample thickness, confirming that TPD data can be applied for the quantitative analysis of proton conductivity.


8.4.3. Computational calculations. 
Based on the conductivity values obtained through experimental studies, extensive computational calculations aiming to incorporate defect thermodynamics and defect diffusion coefficients under equilibrium and nonequilibrium conditions have been done. The Nernst–Planck–Poisson (NPP) approach initially was implemented computationally by Cohen and Cooley.801 The NPP equation generally is used to determine defect transport fluxes, including diffusion (concentration polarisation) and migration (electrostatic potential gradient). The defects are protons , oxygen vacancies , delocalised small polarons , electrons (e−), and/or holes (h˙). In order to capture fully the transport of these charged defects, the model formulates and solves coupled defect-conservation equations and reactions for all of the mobile charged species, with the defect fluxes being represented using the NPP equations.
In oxide perovskite proton conducting membranes, the computational approach involves the assumption that the defective perovskites at the membrane surfaces are in equilibrium with the gas phase, thus establishing boundary conditions for the transport equations.801 Internal electric potential gradients are formed within the membrane in order to maintain electroneutrality. Thus, the defect fluxes are affected by both concentration polarisation and local electric fields. The membrane performance depends on physical parameters, including defect mobility and equilibrium constants for the gas/surface defect reactions. The steady-state one-dimensional system of governing equations forms an ordinary-differential-equation boundary-value problem, which is solved computationally using finite-volume discretisation. The NPP process then is formulated in terms of mass and charge conservation equations.
Kee et al.790 simulated defect concentrations and conductivity of dense defective Ba(Y0.2Zr0.8)O3−δ electrolyte membranes using NPP models, both with and without trapping of O-site small polarons . Fig. 52 shows the flux variations of defects and gases in a tube configuration with a fixed gas composition of 98 mol% H2, 2 mol% H2O, and trace O2 (10−6 mol%) inside the tube, while the gas outside the tube was comprised of Ar, trace H2O (10−6 mol%), and O2 of variable concentrations of 1 × 10−5, 1 × 101, and 2 × 101 mol%, as shown by the respective blue, green, and red colour coding. Fig. 52a illustrates both positive (radially outward) and negative (radially inward) calculated fluxes of the potential defects and gases through the tube wall at 750 °C. These data indicate that the proton flux  is positive and increases significantly with increasing [O2] outside the tube, increasing from ∼0.7 to ∼1.4 mol S−1 m−2 for [O2] increasing from 1 × 10−5 to 1 × 101 mol%. Simultaneously, both h˙ and  fluxes were calculated to be negative. Also, the trend in the h˙ flux is proportional to the [O2]. The small  flux at 1 × 10−5 mol% O2 disappeared entirely at higher [O2]. Similar to , both H2 and H2O have positive fluxes and the former increases with increasing [O2].
 Fig. 52  Predictions of (a) defect and gas fluxes inside the tube, (b) defect concentration and electrostatic potential as a function of tube radius, and (c) defect and gas fluxes outside the tube (positive flux = radially outward; negative flux = radially inward; OH˙ concentrations for 1 and 2 × 101 mol% overlap) (reproduced from ref. 790 with permission from the Electrochemical Society). 
Further, the calculated radial concentration profiles and electrostatic potentials of the defects for gas equilibrium inside and outside the tube are shown in Fig. 52b. These data show that (with two exceptions), with increasing outward distance through the tube wall, the  decreases significantly, the [h˙] increases very significantly, and the  decreases slightly. The two exceptions are the  at the lowest [O2], which shows little change, and the [h˙], which shows a slight increase at the lowest [O2]. For proton conductivity by diffusion, the key parameters are the  and the . This study show that, while the [O2] has little effect on the , its contribution is small. In contrast, the [O2] has a significant effect on the . Further, when the  diffusion (via defect polarisation) is insignificant, the migration (via electrostatic potential) becomes the dominant mechanism in proton conductivity. Consequently, these data allow the system design to be engineered to leverage the optimal proton conductivity from both mechanisms. That is, the conditions to achieve a requisite high defect concentration and a low electrostatic potential are determined by the relative scales and slopes of the curves. So the approximately constant slope for the  curve under vacuum (1 × 10−5 mol% O2) indicates that diffusion is minimal, which means that the proton conductivity depends almost solely on the migration. Fig. 52a shows that the  flux is low, so vacuum conditions are undesirable. In contrast, going to positive-pressure conditions (1 and 2 × 101 mol% O2) has a significant effect on the , although there is little difference between the two [O2]. In this case, the greater slopes of the  curves relative to those of the electrostatic potential curves indicate that diffusion has the dominant effect. Since Fig. 52a shows that the flux is greatest for positive-pressure conditions, it can be concluded that diffusion is the desirable mechanism and, since this depends on the , optimising these represents a key engineering strategy. Additionally, Fig. 52b illustrates the potential to engineer a wall thickness that is commensurate with the maximum in the combined diffusional and migrational proton conductivity. A similar consideration is likely to be the case for the [O2], although the nature of the interpolation is unknown.
Concerning Fig. 52c (outside the tube), the similarity in trends to those in Fig. 52a (inside the tube) for all of the defect fluxes (, , h˙) reflects the relatively low thickness of the tube wall relative to its inner radius (i.e., 20 μm vs. 1 cm). These data allow the conclusion that the computational results for the tubular configuration should be essentially the same for a planar configuration.
Other researchers have applied experimental ionic and electronic conductivity in extensive computational calculations in order to generate defect thermodynamics and defect diffusion coefficients. Zhu et al.795 predicted the concentrations and conductivity of defects in dense defective Ba(Y0.2Zr0.8)O3−δ electrolyte membranes using NPP models, with and without the trapping of O-site small polarons. Fig. 53a and b show equilibrium defect concentrations as a function of temperature, and Fig. 53c shows the variations for defect conductivity relative to temperature.
 Fig. 53  Predicted equilibrium defect concentrations, electrical conductivity, and transference numbers as a function of temperature, with (solid lines) and without (dashed lines) polaron trapping (gas phase = 80.0 mol% O2 and 20.0 mol% H2O) (reproduced from ref. 795 with permission from the Electrochemical Society). 
The polaron trapping weakly affects the  and  but decreases the untrapped polaron concentration  by approximately four orders of magnitude. As the temperature increases, the proton concentration  decreases while the oxygen vacancy concentration  increases. Fig. 53b shows that increasing temperature decreases the trapped polaron concentration  and increases the untrapped O-site polaron concentration . Fig. 53c illustrates that the immobilisation of the polarons has a negligible effect on each defect's partial conductivity. These data further show that increasing temperature would enhance the defect conductivity; this enhancement is more significant for the polaron defects than the proton and oxygen vacancy defects.

Fig. 53d compares the defect transference numbers. At 500 °C, the polaron contribution to the total conductivity is ∼35.0% but it increases to 57.0% at 600 °C and to 72.8% at 700 °C. As discussed subsequently, the increasing contribution of the O-site polaron  conductivity acts to reduce significantly the faradaic efficiency of the proton transport in electrolysis cells.795
The concentration of untrapped O-site polarons, which is the electronic leakage, significantly influences potential membrane or fuel-cell applications. In another study by Zhu et al.,802 these authors incorporated the experimental conductivity into NPP models in order to calculate the faradaic efficiency. In protonic-ceramic fuel cells and electrolysers, the latter parameter represents the proton conducting effectiveness and is the ratio of the H2 production flux against the imposed electric current density. The results suggested that increasing electronic leakage caused by increasing working temperature significantly reduced the faradaic efficiencies of both fuel cell and electrolyser.
As mentioned previously, another approach to computation is the incorporation of experimental data on lattice strain and structural distortion resulting from defect formation. Taghikhani et al.792 developed an electro-chemo-mechanical computational model based on an extended NPP formulation to predict transient defect concentration profiles and stress states as a function of electrical current density in a thin (10 μm) dense Ba(Y0.1Zr0.9)O3−δ perovskite supported by a thick porous Ni/Ba(Y0.2Zr0.8)O3−δ composite electrode.792 In this work, all three charged defects (protons, O-site polarons, oxygen vacancies) were considered to be incorporated through equilibrated defect-incorporation reactions.
In contrast, another simulation approach to model defect transport through the protonic conducting membranes is the integral formulation method, where the defect fluxes are evaluated analytically based on experimental thermodynamic data and gas-phase compositions. In contrast to the NPP method, which requires the computational solution of boundary-value problems, the integral formulation method relies on the assumption of electroneutrality. Vøllestad et al.803 reported a comparative study of the two simulation methods to calculate defect fluxes in mixed-conduction materials. The results revealed that both models deliver quantitatively similar results in some conditions. However, in cases where there is exposure to large and/or multiple partial-pressure gradients, the predicted fluxes differ. It was concluded that the deviations originate from the different assumptions of the physical properties and mathematical simplifications of the two models.


8.4.4. Defective perovskites for protonic conducting fuel cells (PCFCs). 
Protonic conducting perovskites are suitable for applications where hydrogen transport is of high priority. Oxide perovskites with high proton conductivity and low electronic conductivity are advantageous as electrolytes in solid oxide fuel cells,804 while materials with mixed ionic and electronic conductivity are potential membrane materials for the separation of hydrogen from gas mixtures.
The perovskite Ba(Y1−xZrx)O3−δ possesses high, medium, and low values of proton, oxygen-ion, and electronic conductivity, respectively. However, multiple B-site substitutions with transition metals (e.g., Co and Fe) significantly enhance the electronic conductivity while maintaining the ionic conductivity. Duan et al.805 developed a protonic ceramic fuel cell (PCFC) cathode by multiple substitutions (Co, Fe, and Y) at the Zr sites of BaZrO3. The stoichiometry of Ba(Co0.4Fe0.4Y0.1Zr0.1)O3−δ exhibited an outstanding power density of 1.4 W cm−2 in CH4 at a very low temperature of 350 °C. This material offers a new generation of PCFC cathodes with triple conducting properties with the advantage of instantaneous proton, oxygen-ion, and electron–hole conductivity. The Ba(Co0.4Fe0.4Zr0.1Y0.1)O3−δ structure successfully eliminated the triple-phase boundary constraints associated with conventional composites, where either electron conductivity or mixed oxygen/proton ion conductivity was feasible for cathodes. While this operating temperature is significantly lower than the >700 °C reported for the best Ba(Y1−xZrx)O3−δ type materials, it was also reported subsequently to exhibit long-term durability (<1.5% reduction after >1000 h).806

Tables 20 and 21 provide selected data for commonly used ionic-conducting perovskites in fuel cells and membranes, respectively.
Table 20 Commonly used ionic-conducting perovskites as ceramic electrodes in fuel cells




Perovskite
Ionic properties
Applications
Ref.




Ba(Y0.15Zr0.85)O3−δ
High proton conductivity, even at intermediate temperatures (500–800 °C)
Separator in high-drain electrochemical applications, including fuel cells, electrochemical reactors, and/or sensors

807



High thermodynamic stability upon exposure to CO2, SO3, or H2O


High resistance (low conductivity) across grain boundaries
High-temperature proton conductor (HTPC)


Challenges in fabrication of high-density materials


Ba(Y0.1Zr0.9)O2.95
High hole (h˙) and low proton  conductivities under oxidising conditions at high PO2 in range 1–21 kPa
Fuel cell electrolyte at 700 °C with ionic transport number ∼0.8

808



Nearly 100% proton conductivity under reducing conditions
Suitable for hydrogen injection into inert gas streams under reducing condition


Pr(Ni0.5Co0.5)O3−δ
Triple ionic–electronic conductor (simultaneous transport of electrons and two ionic species)
High activity in water oxidation reaction (WOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)

784



Large water insertion capability of 0.055% ± 0.003% (hydration for 15 h at 500 °C in wet air)
PCEC (used as oxygen electrode with self-sustainable and reversible properties, exhibiting high electrochemical performance at intermediate temperature range of 400–600 °C).


Dense Pr(Ni0.5Co0.5)O3−δ membrane with high H2 permeation flux of 1.5 × 10−7 and 0.4 × 10−7 mol cm−2 s−1 at 500 °C in dry and wet 3% H2, respectively
High current density of −1.7 A cm−2 at 600 °C


Open-circuit potential of 1.06 V at 600 °C


High durability and thermal cycling stability as PCEC


NiO + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)Co2O5+δ
Lab-scale synthesis of triple-layer membrane, including:
Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)Co2O5+δ as cathodic electrode in intermediate-temperature protonic ceramic membrane fuel cell (IT-PCMFC)

809



(1) Anode: NiO (60 wt%) + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ (40 wt%)
Open-circuit potential of 1.005 V at 700 °C


(2) Electrolyte: Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ (∼20 μm thickness)
Maximal power density of 520 mW cm−2 at 700 °C


(3) Cathode: Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)Co2O5+δ (∼50 μm thickness)
Low electrode polarisation resistance of 0.12 Ω cm2 at 700 °C


Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ as mixed ionic and electronic conducting material


NiO + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1CeO0.7)O3−δ Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1CeO0.7)O3−δ Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ
Synthesis of triple-layer membrane, including:
Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ as cathodic electrode in intermediate-temperature protonic solid oxide fuel cell (IT-SOFC)

810



(1) Anode: NiO (65 wt%) + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1Ce00.7)O3−δ (35 wt%)
Long-term power density stability of 0.6 V at 750 °C for 500 h


(2) Electrolyte: Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1Ce00.7)O3−δ (∼15 μm thickness)
Power densities of 1710 and 690 mW cm−2 at 750 °C and 600 °C, respectively


(3) Cathode: Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ (∼14 μm thickness)
Ohmic and polarisation resistances of 0.063 Ω cm2 and 0.046 Ω cm2, respectively, at 750 °C


Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ as mixed ionic–electronic conducting material


Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Co0.4Fe0.4)O3−δ
Triple conductor (simultaneous transport of oxygen, proton, and hole species)
Potential use as PCFC cathode in ORR

811



Proton conductivity of 1.73 S cm−1 at 600 °C in dry air (0% H2O)


Proton conductivity of 1.69 S cm−1 at 600 °C in partially wet air (10% H2O)


Proton surface exchange coefficient (Kδ) of 3.85 × 10−6 at 500 °C




Table 21 Commonly used ionic-conducting perovskites for ceramic membranes




Perovskite
Synthesis
Characteristics
Applications
Ref.




(Sr0.2La0.8)(Fe0.4Co0.6)O3−δ
Coprecipitation
O2 permeation flux of 1 × 10−7 mol cm−2 at 950 °C through 1.85 mm thickness in O2/N2 + He
Oxidative coupling of methane

812



(Sr0.4La0.6)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ
Inverse sequential tape casting
O2 permeation flux of 13.3 mL min−1 cm−2 at 1000 °C through 30 μm thickness in O2/Ar
O2 permeation

813



(Sr0.5La0.5)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ
Spray deposition of perovskite on porous α-Al2O3 tube
O2 permeation flux of 2.5 × 10−7 mol cm−2 s−1 at 850 °C through 2 mm thickness in He (1 Pa)
CH4 conversion

814



Ba(Zr0.1Fe0.9)O3−δ
Complexing EDTA–CA method or solid-state synthesis
O2 permeation flux of 1.95 × 10−4 mol cm−2 s−1 at 800 °C through 1.1 mm thickness in 50 mol% H2O and 30 mol% H2 at inlets of feed and sweep sides, respectively, ethane conversion of 79%, ethylene yield of 74%, and ethylene selectivity of 93% at 850 °C in CH4/Ar
Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane into ethylene

815



(Sr0.4La0.6)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ
Combined phase inversion/sintering
O2 permeation flux of 2.2 × 10−4 mol m−2 Pa−1 s−1 at 970 °C in air stream; C2 yield of 15.3% and C2 selectivity of 43.8% at 950 °C in CH4/Ar
Oxidative coupling of methane to C2

816



(Sr0.5Ba0.5)(Fe0.2Co0.8)O3−δ
Complexing EDTA–CA method
With La–Sr/CaO catalyst: C2 yield of ∼13–15%, and C2 selectivity of 54–88% at 775–900 °C
Oxidative coupling of methane to C2

817



Ba(CoxFeyZr1−x−y)O3−δ
Phase-inversion spinning + sintering
H2 production rate of 1.2 cm3 min−1 cm−2 at 800 °C, ethane conversion of 59%, ethylene selectivity of 89% at 800 °C, ethylene yield of ∼55%
Water splitting and ethane dehydrogenation into ethylene

818



Ba(CoxFeyZr1−x−y)O3−δ
Hydrolysis in NH4OH + ball milling + coating with Au paste + sintering
Ethane conversion of 35%, ethylene selectivity of 41%, methane selectivity of 24% at 725 °C
Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane into ethylene

819



Ba(Ce0.7Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1)0.95Ni0.05O3−δ
Complexing EDTA–CA method
H2 permeation flux of 0.42 mL min−1 cm−2 at 800 °C through 0.45 mm thickness in 10% H2 + N2/Ar
H2 permeation

820






9. Summary and outlook
9.1. Summary
The present work surveys five broad themes that are focussed on oxide perovskites. These materials are of considerable interest owing to their applications in many technological areas, particularly catalysis and energy storage. This review is distinguished by its multidisciplinary approach that integrates different technical fields with the aim of being more than the sum of its parts. In this sense, it attempts to blend both fundamental and applied information in order to elucidate a number of mechanisms that may not be immediately familiar to the intended readership. These five broad themes are
• Approach: integration of chemistry and materials science of defect-related concepts and strategies.
• Science: fundamental and applied aspects of defect equilibria in oxide perovskites.
• Mechanisms: strategies to engineer the generation and control of defects in oxide perovskites.
• Applications: thermocatalysis, electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and energy storage using oxide perovskites.
• Background: survey of experimental and simulation studies of defective oxide perovskite synthesis and performance.
In regard to the mechanisms that may be less familiar to readers, extensive examination of the published literature has uncovered a number of key technical issues that appear to be subject to unverified assumption, misunderstanding, and/or gaps in knowledge. Some of these are related to preconceptions that may not be justified. Some are related to information that is well known to one field but much less so to another. Some are related to the scientific approach toward the technology itself. These problematic areas for which greater advantages can be leveraged are:
• Doping: advantage of the use of more informed approaches (size, valence, structural, and chemical) leading to a better grasp of the probabilities and outcomes of the mechanisms and extent of solid solubility.
• Lattice sites: advantage of the clarification and confirmation of the nature of site filling and attained stoichiometry (hypo, equilibrium, and hyper) associated with intended A-, B-, and oxygen-site substitution.
• Defects: advantage of the implementation of the rationale for the design, imposition, modification, and control of defect types, concentrations, and specific function, which may be contradictory for different catalytic pathways and applications.
• Charge: advantage of the utilisation of experimental data and defect equilibria in order to assess and interpret mechanisms of charge compensation and charge transfer.
9.2. Outlook
As in any field, the future is broad. This is particularly the case for oxide perovskites as there are several thousand of these from which to choose. The potential to modify these through defect engineering extrapolates this number literally to infinity. However, the design, fabrication, modification, and application of these materials present many challenges, and their resolution depends significantly on the potential to harness existing technologies for synthesis, characterisation, and simulation and to develop new ones. The present work suggests that the trajectory for perovskites is likely to focus on their continued development as catalysts and energy-storage devices that potentially may benefit from implementation of the following strategies:
• Defects: integration of experimental data, advanced analytical techniques, and simulations of defective oxide perovskites and associated defect equilibria.
• Synthesis: development of techniques that lead to thermodynamic equilibration and the achievement of steady-state performance.
• Characterisation: development of techniques for in situ characterisation and testing in service.
• Optimisation: control and maximisation of appropriate types and concentrations of defects as active sites
• Reliability: structural and microstructural stabilisation of surfaces and local defects.
• Surface vs. bulk: development of techniques for surface engineering that are decoupled from those used for bulk processing.
List of acronyms and abbreviations

ACTEMAberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy

E
a
Activation energy
ASSLBAll-solid-state lithium battery
APXPSAmbient pressure XPS
ABFAnnular bright field
AQEApparent quantum efficiency
AIEA-site ionic electronegativity
AETAtomic electron tomography
AFMAtomic force microscopy
AESAuger electron spectroscopy

E
g
Band gap
BJHBarrett–Joyner–Halenda
BSHsBattery–supercapacitor hybrids

r
Bohr
Bohr radius
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
CBMConduction band minimum
CBConduction band
DFTDensity functional theory
DOSDensity of states

k
Dielectric constant
DSCDifferential scanning calorimetry
DRIFTSDiffuse reflection infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy
EDLCsElectrochemical double layer capacitors
ECSAElectrochemically active surface area
PEOElectrolyte polyethylene oxide
EELSElectron energy loss spectroscopy
EPRElectron paramagnetic resonance
ESRElectron spin resonance
ECCElectronic charge compensation
EDSEnergy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FFTFast Fourier transform

E
f
Fermi energy
FESEMField emission scanning electron microscopy
FIBFocussed ion beam
FTIRFourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
FWHMFull width at half maximum
GHSVGas hourly space velocity

t
Goldschmidt tolerance factor
GQDGraphene quantum dot
HMTAHexamethylenetetramine
HAADFHigh-angle annular dark field
HEPOHigh-entropy perovskite oxides
HRSEMHigh-resolution scanning electron microscope
HRTEMHigh-resolution transmission electron microscope
HERHydrogen evolution reaction
HORHydrogen oxidation reaction
ICP-AESInductively coupled plasma atomic absorption spectrometry
ICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
ICP-OESInductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
ISSInterstitial solid solubility
IVCTIntervalence charge transfer
ICCIonic charge compensation
KPFMKelvin probe force microscopy
LBLangmuir–Blodgett
RamanLaser Raman spectroscopy
LDHLayered double hydroxide
LSVLinear sweep voltammetry
LiPONLithium phosphorus oxynitride
LABLithium–air battery
LIBLithium-ion battery
LDLow-dimensional
LEEDLow-energy electron diffraction
LEISLow-energy ion scattering
MGMalachite green
MOFMetal organic framework
MBMethylene blue
MIECMixed ionic–electronic conducting
MVCTMultivalence charge transfer
NISTNational Institute of Standards and Testing
NAPXPSNear ambient pressure XPS
NEXAFSNear-edge X-ray adsorption fine structure
NPPNernst–Planck–Poisson
NQDNitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots
NCNTNitrogen-doped multiwalled carbon nanotube
nc-AFMNoncontact atomic force microscopy
NHENormal hydrogen electrode
NSRNOx storage-reduction
NMRNuclear magnetic resonance
OCMOxidative coupling of methane
OadsOxygen adsorption
OEROxygen evolution reaction
OlattOxygen lattice

pO2Oxygen partial pressure
ORROxygen reduction reaction
O2-TPDOxygen temperature-programmed desorption
PDOSPartial density of states
PMSPeroxymonosulfate
PESPhotoemission spectroscopy
PLPhotoluminescence
PGMPlatinum group metals
PEOPolyethylene oxide
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PALSPositron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy
PASPositron annihilation spectroscopy
PEMProton exchange membrane
PAOCVProton-assisted oxygen vacancy creation
PCECsProtonic ceramic electrochemical cells
PCFCProtonic ceramic fuel cell
PLDPulsed laser deposition
QEQuantum efficiency
ROSReactive oxygen species
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
RhBRhodamine-B
RPRuddlesden–Popper
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SFMScanning force microscopy
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
STMScanning tunnelling microscopy
SIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometry
SAEDSelected area electron diffraction
SCRSelective catalytic reduction
SNCRSelective non-catalytic reduction
SPSingle perovskite
SIBSodium-ion battery
SOFCsSolid oxide fuel cells
SVSpace velocity
SSSSubstitutional solid solubility
SPXRDSynchrotron powder X-ray diffraction
NH3-TPDTemperature-programmed desorption of ammonia
TPRTemperature-programmed reduction
TBA+OH−Tetra(n-butyl)ammonium hydroxide
TBATetra(n-butyl)ammonium
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
DDPThree-dimensional draped porous
TWCThree-way catalysts
TRFSTime-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy
TMOHTransition metal oxide hydroxide
TMPTransition metal phosphide
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
TOFTurnover frequency
UVUltraviolet
UV-VisUltraviolet-visible
VBMValence band maximum
VBValence band
ΔVValence difference
VLSVapour–liquid–solid
VOCVolatile organic compound
WORWater oxidation reaction
EXAFSX-Ray absorption fine structure
XANESX-Ray absorption near edge structure
XASX-Ray absorption spectroscopy
XRDX-Ray diffraction
XPSX-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy
YSZYttria stabilised zirconia
ZABZinc–air battery

Author contributions
H. Arandiyan and S. S. Mofarah conceived the structure of the paper, C. C. Sorrell focussed the approach, and H Arandiyan was in charge of overall logistics for its execution. S. S. Mofarah and B. Sajjadi wrote the Introduction section. S. S. Mofarah and C. C. Sorrell wrote the Perovskite catalysts section. S. S. Mofarah and C. C. Sorrell wrote the Defects section. H. Arandiyan, Y. Wang, and M. Rezaei wrote the Defect engineering of perovskite thermocatalysts section. E. Doustkhah and C. C. Sorrell wrote the Defect engineering of perovskite photocatalysts section. H. Arandiyan, D. Hao, and B. J. Ni wrote the Defect engineering of perovskite electrocatalysts section. S. S. Mofarah and H. Y. Sun wrote the Defective perovskites in energy storage section. S. S. Mofarah, H. Arandiyan, and C. C. Sorrell wrote Defect engineering of perovskites in other applications section. H. Arandiyan and C. C. Sorrell wrote the Summary and outlook section. T. Maschmeyer, C. C. Sorrell, Z. P. Shao, and Y. Wang coordinated the cooperation of all co-authors and generated the final draft. S. S. Mofarah and H. Arandiyan proofread the final draft and finalised the submission. S. S. Mofarah and H. Arandiyan assisted in the graphic design. H. Arandiyan and C. C. Sorrell provided the funding requirements. All authors contributed to the draft revisions.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
Hamidreza Arandiyan acknowledges financial support through the University of Sydney Research Fellowship (G197582). The authors also acknowledge The University of Sydney Nano Institute (Sydney Nano). Charles C. Sorrell acknowledges financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC Grant DP170104130).
References
H. Zhu, P. Zhang and S. Dai, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6370–6385 CrossRef CAS .
O. B. Boggild, Z. Krystallog., 1911, 50, 349–429 Search PubMed .
S. Royer, D. Duprez, F. Can, X. Courtois, C. Batiot-Dupeyrat, S. Laassiri and H. Alamdari, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10292–10368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhong, P. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2917–2940 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, G. Zhao, G. Wang and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3623–3637 RSC .
M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981–2018 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Takeguchi, T. Yamanaka, H. Takahashi, H. Watanabe, T. Kuroki, H. Nakanishi, Y. Orikasa, Y. Uchimoto, H. Takano, N. Ohguri, M. Matsuda, T. Murota, K. Uosaki and W. Ueda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11125–11130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. A. Kröger and H. J. Vink, in Solid State Physics, ed. F. Seitz and D. Turnbull, Academic Press,  1956, vol. 3, pp. 307–435 Search PubMed .
L. Ran, J. Hou, S. Cao, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Zhang, P. Zhai and L. Sun, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900487 CrossRef CAS .
J. Simböck, M. Ghiasi, S. Schönebaum, U. Simon, F. M. F. de Groot and R. Palkovits, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 652 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Morrow, M. A. McGuire, J. Yan and P. M. Woodward, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 2989–3001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, B. Weng, J. Ge, Q. Sun, Z. Li and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 442–462 RSC .
S. C. Tidrow, Ferroelectrics, 2014, 470, 13–27 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, in Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Technology, ed. K. Huang and J. B. Goodenough, Woodhead Publishing,  2009, pp. 1–9,  DOI:10.1533/9781845696511.1 .

          C. N. R. Rao, in Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology, ed. R. A. Meyers, Academic Press, New York, 3rd edn,  2003, pp. 707–714 DOI:10.1016/B0-12-227410-5/00554-8 .
B. L. Chamberland, J. Solid State Chem., 1983, 48, 318–322 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Cussen and P. D. Battle, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
J.-G. Cheng, J. A. Alonso, E. Suard, J.-S. Zhou and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7461–7469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hafiz, A. I. Khair, H. Choi, A. Mueen, A. Bansil, S. Eidenbenz, J. Wills, J.-X. Zhu, A. V. Balatsky and T. Ahmed, npj Comput. Mater., 2018, 4, 63 CrossRef .
A. M. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1972, 28, 3384–3392 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903249 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shojaei and W.-J. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15214–15219 CrossRef CAS .
B. Andrzejewski, D. Pawlak, T. Klimczuk and S. TurczzDski, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 2012, 121, 1315–1317 CrossRef CAS .
V. Primo-Martín and M. Jansen, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 157, 76–85 CrossRef .
S. Akber-Knutson, M. S. T. Bukowinski and J. Matas, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2002, 29, 4-1–4-4 CrossRef .
N. Yamamoto, K. Yagi, G. Honjo, M. Kimura and T. Kawamura, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1980, 48, 185–191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Retuerto, S. Skiadopoulou, M.-R. Li, A. M. Abakumov, M. Croft, A. Ignatov, T. Sarkar, B. M. Abbett, J. Pokorný, M. Savinov, D. Nuzhnyy, J. Prokleška, M. Abeykoon, P. W. Stephens, J. P. Hodges, P. Vaněk, C. J. Fennie, K. M. Rabe, S. Kamba and M. Greenblatt, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4320–4329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ų. S. Fjellvåg, J. Armstrong, W. A. Sławiński and A. O. Sjåstad, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 11123–11128 CrossRef PubMed .
I. V. Isakov, A. I. Kalyukanov, V. L. Volkov, R. P. Ozerov and L. E. Fykin, Crystallogr. Rep., 2011, 56, 420–424 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, S. Li, Y. Jiang, C. Qin, M. Cui, L. Qiao, H. Xu, J. Yang, R. Long, H. Wang and M. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, M. Eguchi and T. Oshima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13164–13168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Liang, H. Wu and X. Zhu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 121 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Almutlaq, J. Yin, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4131–4138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Riesen, M. Lockrey, K. Badek and H. Riesen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3925–3932 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Mao, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 56–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tang, Z. Xiao and J. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6688–6694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, X. Feng, Y. Han, Z. Fan and Y. Lu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 781–788 RSC .
C. A. Amarnath, S. S. Nanda, G. C. Papaefthymiou, D. K. Yi and U. Paik, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2013, 38, 1–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mofarah, E. Adabifiroozjaei, R. Pardehkhorram, M. H. N. Assadi, M. Hinterstein, Y. Yao, X. Liu, M. B. Ghasemian, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, R. Mehmood, C. Cazorla, R. Shahmiri, G. Bahmanrokh, S. Bhattacharyya, M. C. Spadaro, J. Arbiol, S. Lim, Y. Xu, H. Arandiyan, J. Scott, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905288 CrossRef .
H. Chen, J. Lin, J. Kang, Q. Kong, D. Lu, J. Kang, M. Lai, L. N. Quan, Z. Lin, J. Jin, L.-W. Wang, M. F. Toney and P. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay4045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Tan, X. H. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. Y. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Z. Chen, W. Zhao, S. K. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani and P. O'Brien, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 89, 411–478 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sugimoto, M. Shirata, Y. Sugahara and K. Kuroda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11601–11602 CrossRef CAS .
R. Uppuluri, A. Sen Gupta, A. S. Rosas and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2401–2430 RSC .
P. Zhang, F. Wang, M. Yu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7426–7451 RSC .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1957, 10, 538–539 CrossRef CAS .
L. Glasser, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 8920–8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. V. Beznosikov and K. S. Aleksandrov, Crystallogr. Rep., 2000, 45, 792–798 CrossRef .
G. Nirala, D. Yadav and S. Upadhyay, J. Adv. Ceram., 2020, 9, 129–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Richard, L. Brohan and M. Tournoux, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 112, 345–354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gopalakrishnan and V. Bhat, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26, 4299–4301 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hong, C.-H. Han and K. Kim, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 158, 290–298 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, J. Solid State Chem., 2001, 161, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tahara, T. Ichikawa, G. Kajiwara and Y. Sugahara, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2352–2358 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, K. Akatsuka, Y. Ebina, R. Ma, K. Takada, I. Nakai and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1689–1695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, N. Iyi, T. Hoshide, T. C. Ozawa, Y. Ebina, R. Ma, N. Miyamoto and T. Sasaki, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17068–17071 RSC .
Y. Ebina, T. Sasaki and M. Watanabe, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 151, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3427–3434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Siron, D. Lu, J. Yang, R. dos Reis, F. Cui, M. Gao, M. Lai, J. Lin, Q. Kong, T. Lei, J. Kang, J. Jin, J. Ciston and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13028–13032 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eguía-Barrio, E. Castillo-Martínez, M. Zarrabeitia, M. A. Muñoz-Márquez, M. Casas-Cabanas and T. Rojo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 6988–6994 RSC .
M. Dion, M. Ganne and M. Tournoux, Mater. Res. Bull., 1981, 16, 1429–1435 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Jacobson, J. W. Johnson and J. T. Lewandowski, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 3727–3729 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2513–2516 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gordy and W. J. O. Thomas, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 439–444 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Schaak and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Commun., 2002, 706–707 RSC .
S. Akbarian-Tefaghi, T. Rostamzadeh, T. T. Brown, C. Davis-Wheeler and J. B. Wiley, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 538–550 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hojamberdiev, M. F. Bekheet, E. Zahedi, H. Wagata, Y. Kamei, K. Yubuta, A. Gurlo, N. Matsushita, K. Domen and K. Teshima, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 2302–2308 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osada, K. Akatsuka, Y. Ebina, H. Funakubo, K. Ono, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5225–5232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-W. Li, M. Osada, Y.-H. Kim, Y. Ebina, K. Akatsuka and T. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10868–10874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Isupov, Inorg. Mater., 2006, 42, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Lomanova, V. L. Ugolkov, V. V. Panchuk and V. G. Semenov, Russ. J. Gen. Chem., 2017, 87, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, F. Qin, H. Zhao, J. Ding, Y. Liu and R. Chen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3180–3192 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, I. Chung, J.-H. Choy and G.-S. Park, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2759–2761 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zou, F. Li, M. A. Bissett, F. Kim and L. J. Hardwick, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135284 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gopalakrishnan, S. Uma, N. Y. Vasanthacharya and G. N. Subbanna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 2353–2354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uma and J. Gopalakrishnan, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 907–912 CrossRef CAS .

          W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to ceramics, Wiley, New York,  1976 Search PubMed .
C. M. Phan and H. M. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 3213–3219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magrez, E. Vasco, J. W. Seo, C. Dieker, N. Setter and L. Forró, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 58–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mao, S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15718–15719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. I. Givargizov, J. Cryst. Growth, 1975, 31, 20–30 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. R. R. K. Biswas, Essentials of Inorganic Materials Synthesis,  2015, pp. 57–95 DOI:10.1002/9781118892671.ch10 .
G. George, S. L. Jackson, C. Q. Luo, D. Fang, D. Luo, D. Hu, J. Wen and Z. Luo, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 21982–21992 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Ma, B. Zhu, N. Lei, Y. K. Liu, B. Yu, Q. L. Lu, J. M. Dai, S. H. Li and G. H. Jiang, Mater. Lett., 2019, 252, 23–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Worku, Y. Tian, C. Zhou, H. Lin, M. Chaaban, L.-J. Xu, Q. He, D. Beery, Y. Zhou, X. Lin, Y.-F. Su, Y. Xin and B. Ma, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz5961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 16338–16346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, P. Koshy, W.-F. Chen, S. Qi and C. C. Sorrell, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 325, 340–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Manna, A. Cabot, Z. Hens, D. V. Talapin, C. R. Kagan, V. I. Klimov, A. L. Rogach, P. Reiss, D. J. Milliron, P. Guyot-Sionnnest, G. Konstantatos, W. J. Parak, T. Hyeon, B. A. Korgel, C. B. Murray and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1012–1057 CrossRef CAS .
S. Seth and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 176–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhaumik, A. Bruno and S. Mhaisalkar, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 13431–13436 RSC .
M. B. Ghasemian, M. Mayyas, S. A. Idrus-Saidi, M. A. Jamal, J. Yang, S. S. Mofarah, E. Adabifiroozjaei, J. Tang, N. Syed, A. P. O'Mullane, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901649 CrossRef .
B.-W. Li, M. Osada, T. C. Ozawa, Y. Ebina, K. Akatsuka, R. Ma, H. Funakubo and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6673–6680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, T. Wang, Q. Xu, D. Li, S. Meng and M. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 201, 617–628 CrossRef CAS .
R. Majee, S. Mondal and S. Bhattacharyya, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8277–8280 RSC .
M. Andrä, C. Funck, N. Raab, M.-A. Rose, M. Vorokhta, F. Dvorák, B. E. Šmíd, V. Matolín, D. N. Mueller, R. Dittmann, R. Waser, S. Menzel and F. Gunkel, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900808 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, J. Wang, Y.-Q. Lyu, K. Lam and F. Ciucci, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6399–6404 RSC .
G. Bahmanrokh, C. Cazorla, S. S. Mofarah, R. Shahmiri, Y. Yao, I. Ismail, W.-F. Chen, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4916–4934 RSC .
Z. Liu, W.-F. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11781–11790 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, W.-F. Chen, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 5266–5279 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, P. Koshy, F. Cao and C. C. Sorrell, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 8071–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-F. Chen, S. S. Mofarah, D. A. H. Hanaor, P. Koshy, H.-K. Chen, Y. Jiang and C. C. Sorrell, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 7279–7289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhong and P. Hansmann, Phys. Rev. X, 2017, 7, 011023 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, H. Park, A. J. Millis and C. A. Marianetti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 245138 CrossRef .
N. Han, S. Wang, Z. Yao, W. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Zeng and R. Chen, EcoMat, 2020, 2, e12044 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, Y. Jiang, L. Zou, M. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, B. Chi, J. Pu and L. Jian, ChemistryOpen, 2019, 8, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. Hou, Y. Fan, X.-A. Xi, J. Li, Y. Lu, G. Huo, L. Shao, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7704–7712 RSC .
I. Qasim, B. J. Kennedy and M. Avdeev, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3127–3132 RSC .
L. Jiang, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 342–352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Fan, G. Dong and Z. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2016, 174, 242–245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohisa, T. Hikichi, Y.-J. Pu, T. Chiba and J. Kido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27885–27893 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, P. E. Pearce, V. Pimenta, J. Cabana, H. Li, D. Alves Dalla Corte, A. M. Abakumov, G. Rousse, D. Giaume, M. Deschamps and A. Grimaud, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3499–3509 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Aziza, C.-W. Chang, A. Mohapatra, C.-W. Chu, C.-C. Kaun and Y.-H. Su, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 6367–6375 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Adhikari and L. J. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17548–17559 CrossRef CAS .
F. Amano, K. Nogami, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9320–9326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Zhang, E. Gao, D. Jiang, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1873–1877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, J. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Yang, K. Han, F. Dong, T. Ma and H. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3880–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Zhang, H. Wang and B. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 561–570 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengodan, S. Choi, A. Jun, T. H. Shin, Y.-W. Ju, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, J. T. S. Irvine and G. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Huang, J. Yang, B. Wang, Y. Li, L. Wang, X. Niu and Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Xu, L. Mai, C. Han, Q. An, X. Xu, X. Liu and Q. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 19569–19574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, J. Zhang, Q. Yu, J. Qiao, Z. Wang, D. Rooney, W. Sun and K. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Xu, D. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, H.-G. Wang, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3887–3890 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Z. Tang, B. Yang and S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8010–8019 RSC .
T. Norby, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2010, 47, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maier, Solid State Ionics, 1989, 32-33, 727–733 CrossRef .
H. R. Khakhal, S. Kumar, S. N. Dolia, B. Dalela, V. S. Vats, S. Z. Hashmi, P. A. Alvi, S. Kumar and S. Dalela, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 844, 156079 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Popov, E. A. Kotomin and J. Maier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2010, 268, 3084–3089 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fukuda, K. Akatsuka, Y. Ebina, M. Osada, W. Sugimoto, M. Kimura and T. Sasaki, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1540–1543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Yang and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1809–1815 RSC .
Y. Wang, V. Tsiumra, Q. Peng, H. Liang, Y. Zhydachevskyy, M. Chaika, P. Dlużewski, H. Przybylińska and A. Suchocki, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 4021–4033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. King and P. M. Woodward, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5785–5796 RSC .
M. T. Anderson, K. B. Greenwood, G. A. Taylor and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1993, 22, 197–233 CrossRef CAS .
K. Samanta and T. Saha-Dasgupta, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 235102 CrossRef .

          Y. Shimakawa, Handbook of Solid State Chemistry,  2017, pp. 221–250,  DOI:10.1002/9783527691036.hsscvol1014 .
L. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Tian, Q. Zhang, M. Knapp, H. Ehrenberg, G. Chen, Z. Shen, G. Yang, L. Gu and F. Du, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, F. Calle-Vallejo, M. B. Mogensen and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7526–7533 RSC .
H. A. Evans, Y. Wu, R. Seshadri and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 196–213 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Hardin, J. T. Mefford, D. A. Slanac, B. B. Patel, X. Wang, S. Dai, X. Zhao, R. S. Ruoff, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3368–3376 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Chamberland and F. C. Hubbard, J. Solid State Chem., 1978, 26, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mofarah, E. Adabifiroozjaei, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, R. Pardehkhorram, Y. Yao, M. H. N. Assadi, R. Mehmood, W.-F. Chen, C. Tsounis, J. Scott, S. Lim, R. Webster, V. Zhong, Y. Xu, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4753–4763 RSC .
R. Mehmood, S. S. Mofarah, W.-F. Chen, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 6016–6027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Becerro, F. Langenhorst, R. J. Angel, S. Marion, C. A. McCammon and F. Seifert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 3933–3941 RSC .
L. Malavasi, C. Ritter, M. Cristina Mozzati, C. Tealdi, M. Saiful Islam, C. Bruno Azzoni and G. Flor, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 2042–2049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiong, J. Di, J. Xia, W. Zhu and H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801983 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, W. Lai, Y. Dong, Z. Chen, X. Yi and W. Fang, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 5625–5631 RSC .

          L. E. Murr, Handbook of Materials Structures, Properties, Processing and Performance, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, pp. 235–271,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-01815-7_15 .

          L. E. Murr, Handbook of Materials Structures, Properties, Processing and Performance, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, pp. 273–312,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-01815-7_16 .

          D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy: A Textbook for Materials Science, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2009, pp. 419–439,  DOI:10.1007/978-0-387-76501-3_25 .
P. Szuromi, Science, 2017, 358, 1143–1145 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Mierwaldt, V. Roddatis, M. Risch, J. Scholz, J. Geppert, M. E. Abrishami and C. Jooss, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700109 CrossRef .
G. Amow and S. J. Skinner, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2006, 10, 538–546 CrossRef CAS .
O. Silyukov, M. Chislov, A. Burovikhina, T. Utkina and I. Zvereva, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2012, 110, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhu, X. Xu, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 2719–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, G. Chen, K. Wu and Y. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 418–425 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, F. Wang, Y. Okamoto, T. Nakamura and K. Amezawa, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 288, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Raj, K. F. E. Pratt, S. J. Skinner, I. P. Parkin and J. A. Kilner, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3351–3355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, Y. Kim, H. Han, Y. S. Chung, W. Yoon, J. Choi and W. B. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .

          L. E. Murr, Handbook of Materials Structures, Properties, Processing and Performance, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2015, pp. 313–324,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-01815-7_17 .
Y. Wang, Z. Chi, C. Chen, C. Su, D. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Duan and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118972 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, R. Zhang, R. Gao, G.-Q. Shen, L. Pan, Y. Yao, K. Yu, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 536–545 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tamai, S. Hosokawa, H. Okamoto, H. Asakura, K. Teramura and T. Tanaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26985–26993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Z. Zhang, Y. Gong, H. Wang, R. Wang, L. Zhao and B. He, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 4210 CrossRef .
Q. N. Tran, F. Martinovic, M. Ceretti, S. Esposito, B. Bonelli, W. Paulus, F. Di Renzo, F. A. Deorsola, S. Bensaid and R. Pirone, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 589, 117304 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Pang, Q. Shen, Y. Yu, Y. Su, J. Wang, F. Zhang and H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 22559–22566 RSC .
B. Wan, H. Li, Y. Xiao, S. Yue, Y. Liu and Q. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 501, 144243 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, Z. Zhao, K. Li, X. Yu, Y. Wei, J. Liu, Y. Peng, Y. Li and Y. Chen, Catal. Today, 2020, 339, 159–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, R. Gao, W. Yang, L. Huang, Q. Mao, J. Yang, L. Sun, Z. Hu and X. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1864–1875 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Y. Zheng, X. Feng, D. Lin, Q. Qian, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, Q. Chen and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23789–23799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Qian, G. Han, B. Sun, P. Zuo, C. Du, Y. Ma, H. Huo, S. Lou and G. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10452–10460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, N. Li, R. Zhang, Z. Zhu, J. Lin, K. Zhang and C. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47858–47867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Huang, J. Qian, Y. Cong, C. Ge and S. Feng, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 658–664 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tsounis, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, R. J. Wong, C. Y. Toe, R. Amal and J. Scott, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 409 CrossRef CAS .
K. Edalati, K. Fujiwara, S. Takechi, Q. Wang, M. Arita, M. Watanabe, X. Sauvage, T. Ishihara and Z. Horita, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1710–1718 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Carrillo, K. J. Kim, Z. D. Hood, A. H. Bork and J. L. M. Rupp, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4569–4579 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, A. Cao, J. Huang, W. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Jiang and X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118378 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, I. A. W. Filot, Y.-Q. Su, J.-X. Liu and E. J. M. Hensen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 7290–7298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, S. Hu, Y. Fang, S. Hoang, L. Li, W. Yang, Z. Liang, J. Wu, J. Hu, W. Xiao, C. Pan, Z. Luo, J. Ding, L. Zhang and Y. Guo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9751–9763 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vecino-Mantilla, P. Gauthier-Maradei, M. Huvé, J. M. Serra, P. Roussel and G. H. Gauthier, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4631–4641 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ou, C. Yang, Y. Liang, N. Hussain, B. Ge, K. Huang, Y. Xu, H. Wei, R. Zhang and H. Wu, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800279 CrossRef .
C. Moreno-Marcos, V. Torregrosa-Rivero, V. Albaladejo-Fuentes, M. S. Sánchez-Adsuar and M. J. Illán-Gómez, Top. Catal., 2019, 62, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
S. Joo, O. Kwon, K. Kim, S. Kim, H. Kim, J. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, S. Sengodan, J. W. Han and G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-R. Jo, B. Koo, M.-J. Seo, J. K. Kim, S. Lee, K. Kim, J. W. Han, W. Jung and B.-J. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6690–6697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hou, T. Yao, P. Li, X. Yao, T. Gan, L. Fan, J. Wang, X. Zhi, Y. Zhao and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6995–7005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bornovski, L.-F. Huang, E. P. Komarala, J. M. Rondinelli and B. A. Rosen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33850–33858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, F. Polo-Garzon, Z. Bao, S. Luo, B. M. Moskowitz, H. Tian and Z. Wu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 2107–2117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, H. E. Troiani, L. V. Mogni, M. Han and S. A. Barnett, Joule, 2018, 2, 478–496 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, B. Yan, S. Yao, Z. Xie, Q. Wu, R. Ran, D. Weng, C. Zhang and J. G. Chen, J. Catal., 2018, 358, 168–178 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Huang, W. Ma, Y. Cong, C. Ge and S. Feng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, E. Prestat, L.-F. Huang, J. M. Rondinelli, S. J. Haigh and B. A. Rosen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 10080 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Schön, J.-P. Dacquin, C. Dujardin and P. Granger, Top. Catal., 2017, 60, 300–306 CrossRef .
F. Polo-Garzon, S.-Z. Yang, V. Fung, G. S. Foo, E. E. Bickel, M. F. Chisholm, D.-E. Jiang and Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9820–9824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lam, Y. Gao, J. Wang and F. Ciucci, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 244, 139–145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, Y. Wang, C. Cazorla and J. Seidel, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 708–717 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jeong, M. Topsakal, P. Xu, B. Jalan, R. M. Wentzcovitch and K. A. Mkhoyan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6816–6822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hume-Rothery, Indian J. Phys., 1969, 11, 74 Search PubMed .
W.-F. Chen, H. Chen, P. Koshy, A. Nakaruk and C. C. Sorrell, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 205, 334–346 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dinamarca, X. Garcia, R. Jimenez, J. L. G. Fierro and G. Pecchi, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 81, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sfeir, P. A. Buffat, P. Möckli, N. Xanthopoulos, R. Vasquez, H. Joerg Mathieu, J. Van Herle and K. Ravindranathan Thampi, J. Catal., 2001, 202, 229–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, L. Li, B. Chu, Y. Yi, Z. Qin, M. Fan, Q. Qin, H. He, L. Zhang, L. Dong, B. Li and L. Dong, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 568, 43–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Mawdsley, J. T. Vaughey and T. R. Krause, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4830–4838 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yoshitomi, K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13092–13097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, S. Cao, Y. Wu, F. Liang, L. Ye, Z. Lin and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 59–68 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, K. Wu, R. Sa, Q. Li, C. He and Z. Yi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 980–989 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, Z. Zhao, W.-B. Zhu, E. N. Coker, B. Li, M. Zheng, W. Yu, H. Fan and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19184–19190 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Peover and B. S. White, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1061–1067 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Wang, J.-P. M. Veder, Z. Xu, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, M. O. Tade, S. Wang and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702604 CrossRef .
J.-I. Jung, S. Park, M.-G. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501560 CrossRef .
I. S. Cho, M. Logar, C. H. Lee, L. Cai, F. B. Prinz and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 24–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, X. Chen, T. Zhao, X. Bo, Z. Su and C. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9971–9978 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, M. Qiao, Y.-R. Lu, L. Hao, D. Liu, C.-L. Dong, Y. Li and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8691–8696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Fu, Q. Wang, Z. Dong, X. Wang, A. Hu, W. Wang and S. Yang, Crystals, 2020, 10, 720 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kwon, A. A. Sharma, J. A. Bain, Y. N. Picard and M. Skowronski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2876–2883 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mofarah, E. Adabifiroozjaei, Y. Yao, P. Koshy, S. Lim, R. Webster, X. Liu, R. Khayyam Nekouei, C. Cazorla, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, N. Lambropoulos and C. C. Sorrell, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2594 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, S. S. Mofarah, R. Mehmood, C. Cazorla, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 102–123 RSC .
S. B. Ma, H. J. Kwon, M. Kim, S.-M. Bak, H. Lee, S. N. Ehrlich, J.-J. Cho, D. Im and D.-H. Seo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001767 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Dubinko,  2002, arXiv: cond-mat/0212154 .
Q. Miao, L. Wang, Z. Liu, B. Wei, J. Wang, X. Liu and W. Fei, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 5877 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Muan and E. F. Osborn, Phase-equilibria among oxides in steelmaking, Addison-Wesley, Pergamon, Reading, Mass, Oxford,  1965 Search PubMed .
J. Bak, H. Bin Bae and S.-Y. Chung, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2713 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Hao, L. Fu and T. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 44, 355–370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Zhao, C.-M. Xu, A.-J. Duan and G.-Y. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5930–5941 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, V. R. Cooper, H. Xu, H. Xiao, Y. Zhang and W. J. Weber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15590–15596 RSC .
R. A. De Souza, M. Saiful Islam and E. Ivers-Tiffée, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1621–1627 RSC .
A. Jones and M. S. Islam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4455–4462 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. De Souza and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 740–748 RSC .
E. J. Jang, J. Lee and J. H. Kwak, Catal. Today, 2020, 352, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, C. Yang, F. He, Y. Jiang, C. Ren, Y. Gan, M. Lee and X. Xue, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 22649–22661 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, L. Bi, H. Paik, D.-J. Yang, Y. C. Park, G. F. Dionne and C. A. Ross, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Z. Qi, Z. Wu, Y. H. Lui, T.-H. Kim, X. Tang, L. Zhou, W. Huang and S. Hu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Wu, K. P. Ong, T. Yang, P. Yang, P. K. Das, X. Chi, Y. Zhang, C. Diao, W. K. A. Wong, E. P. Chew, Y. F. Chen, C. K. I. Tan, A. Rusydi, M. B. H. Breese, D. J. Singh, L.-Q. Chen, S. J. Pennycook and K. Yao, Science, 2020, 369, 292–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Zhong, J. Zhang, X. Jin, J.-Y. Liu, Q. Li, M.-H. Li, W. Cai, D.-Y. Wu, D. Zhan and B. Ren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16609–16617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leng, I. Abdelwahab, I. Verzhbitskiy, M. Telychko, L. Chu, W. Fu, X. Chi, N. Guo, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, Q.-H. Xu, J. Lu, M. Chhowalla, G. Eda and K. P. Loh, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 908–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Rasool, E. B. Song, M. Mecklenburg, B. C. Regan, K. L. Wang, B. H. Weiller and J. K. Gimzewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12536–12543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zaera and M. Salmeron, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 1312–1319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tison, H. Lin, J. Lagoute, V. Repain, C. Chacon, Y. Girard, S. Rousset, L. Henrard, B. Zheng, T. Susi, E. I. Kauppinen, F. Ducastelle and A. Loiseau, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7219–7226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Garleff, A. P. Wijnheijmer and P. M. Koenraad, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2011, 26, 064001 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, K. Palotas, X. Yuan, T. Hou, H. Lin, Y. Li and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2060–2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. She, M. Liu and D. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1126–1131 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ge, Y. Wang, Y. Chang and Y. Yao, Microsc. Microanal., 2014, 20, 1447–1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ogiit, M. L. Machala, A. Leen Koh, R. Sinclair and W. C. Chueh, Microsc. Microanal., 2015, 21, 1055–1056 CrossRef .
C. T. Nelson, B. Winchester, Y. Zhang, S.-J. Kim, A. Melville, C. Adamo, C. M. Folkman, S.-H. Baek, C.-B. Eom, D. G. Schlom, L.-Q. Chen and X. Pan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 828–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Jia, S.-B. Mi, K. Urban, I. Vrejoiu, M. Alexe and D. Hesse, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 57–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Liu, Y.-W. Chen, T.-S. Lin and C.-Y. Mou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6862–6869 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Wu, B. Eren, H. Bluhm and M. B. Salmeron, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1150–1157 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vovk, X. Chen and C. A. Mims, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2445–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Merino, B. P. Barbero, P. Grange and L. E. Cadús, J. Catal., 2005, 231, 232–244 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Howe, Colloids Surf., A, 1993, 72, 353–363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Jia, H. Liu, C. Wang, J. Zhong, Q. Xiao, J. Yang, S. Duan, K. Feng, N. Liu, W. Duan, H. Lin and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12727–12735 CrossRef .

          S. Schlick and G. Jeschke, Polymer Science: A Comprehensive Reference, ed. K. Matyjaszewski and M. Möller, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2012, pp. 221–253,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-53349-4.00027-3 .
R.-A. Eichel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 368–384 RSC .
S. Ghosh, G. G. Khan, K. Mandal, A. Samanta and P. M. G. Nambissan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 8458–8467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Jean, Microchem. J., 1990, 42, 72–102 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Keeble, S. Singh, R. A. Mackie, M. Morozov, S. McGuire and D. Damjanovic, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 144109 CrossRef .
R. A. Mackie, A. Peláiz-Barranco and D. J. Keeble, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 024113 CrossRef .
D. J. Keeble, S. Wicklein, R. Dittmann, L. Ravelli, R. A. Mackie and W. Egger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 226102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Mackie, S. Singh, J. Laverock, S. B. Dugdale and D. J. Keeble, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 014102 CrossRef .
D. J. Keeble, B. Jalan, L. Ravelli, W. Egger, G. Kanda and S. Stemmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 232905 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, Z. Li, X. Zhao, T. Fang, H. Huang, Q. Qian, X. Chang, P. Wang, S. Yan, Z. Yu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7156–7163 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Beitel, A. Laskov, H. Oosterbeek and E. W. Kuipers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 1996, 100, 12494–12502 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bauer, R. Schoch, L. Shao, B. Zhang, A. Knop-Gericke, M. Willinger, R. Schlögl and D. Teschner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22375–22385 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, C. Li, H. Chen, D. Su, B. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Wang, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1040–1046 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun and W. Zhou, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 5716–5737 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Weng, Y. Wu, M. Wang, J. Jiang, K. Yang, S. Huo, X.-F. Wang, Q. Ma, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista, Y. Liang, Z. Feng and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 415 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, Z. Hu, Y. Zhu, Z.-G. Chen, Y. Zhong, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, L. H. Tjeng, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9854–9859 RSC .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Z. Hu, W. Zhou, X. Xu, Y. Zhong, B. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Xu, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, J.-Q. Wang and Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900704 CrossRef .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, J.-Q. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3755 CrossRef PubMed .
C. V. Cushman, P. Brüner, J. Zakel, G. H. Major, B. M. Lunt, N. J. Smith, T. Grehl and M. R. Linford, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 3419–3439 RSC .
J. Druce, H. Téllez, M. Burriel, M. D. Sharp, L. J. Fawcett, S. N. Cook, D. S. McPhail, T. Ishihara, H. H. Brongersma and J. A. Kilner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3593–3599 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Wei, F. Gao, L. Kovarik, R. A. L. Baylon, C. H. F. Peden and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3006–3012 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, S. Umrao and P. R. Sagdeo, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2020, 51, 1210–1218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dama, S. R. Ghodke, R. Bobade, H. R. Gurav and S. Chilukuri, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 146–158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raj, M. Kumar, D. Mishra and A. Anshul, Opt. Mater., 2020, 101, 109773 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. Lu, M. Gao, M. Lai, J. Lin, T. Lei, Z. Lin, L. N. Quan and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 12648–12653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 1995, 99, 15963–15967 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coll, L. López-Conesa, J. M. Rebled, C. Magén, F. Sánchez, J. Fontcuberta, S. Estradé and F. Peiró, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9300–9304 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cherns, I. J. Griffiths, L. Jones, D. M. Bishop, M. A. Lloyd and B. E. McCandless, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6260–6267 CrossRef .
J. M. Helt and J. D. Batteas, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 633–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, P. Ercius and S. J. L. Billinge, Science, 2016, 353, aaf2157 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sprengel, B. Oberdorfer, E. M. Steyskal and R. Würschum, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 7921–7925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsushima, N. Kakinuma, H. Takahashi, A. Kondo, K. Maeda, T. Suzuki and S. Kambe, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 308, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
E. Poli, J. D. Elliott, S. K. Chulkov, M. B. Watkins and G. Teobaldi, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Han, R. Wang, L.-T. Weng, A. Serrano-Lotina, M. A. Bañares, Q. Wang and K. L. Yeung, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 275, 119121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. Fan, R. An, Q. Cheng, J. Xie, M. Zhou, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411–10417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Kuo, C.-R. Kao, W.-J. Chen, M.-Y. Lu, D. A. Cullen, B. T. Sneed, Y.-C. Chuang, C.-C. Yu and C.-H. Kuo, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4448–4458 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
W.-F. Chen, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 16215–16229 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizusaki, M. Yoshihiro, S. Yamauchi and K. Fueki, J. Solid State Chem., 1985, 58, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizusaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 467 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. M. van Roosmalen and E. H. P. Cordfunke, J. Solid State Chem., 1994, 110, 109–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. M. Van Roosmalen and E. H. P. Cordfunke, J. Solid State Chem., 1991, 93, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mizusaki, S. Yamauchi, K. Fueki and A. Ishikawa, Solid State Ionics, 1984, 12, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .

          R. R. Crichton, in Biological Inorganic Chemistry, ed. R. R. Crichton, Elsevier, Oxford, 2nd edn,  2012, pp. 21–34 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-53782-9.00002-4 .

          F. D. Bloss, Crystallography and crystal chemistry, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York,  1971 Search PubMed .
H. Arandiyan, H. Chang, C. Liu, Y. Peng and J. Li, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 378, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Liu, B. Bai, Y. Wang, X. Li, S. Xie and J. Li, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 327–339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, K. Ji, H. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Li, Small, 2015, 11, 2366–2371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, S. Sun, Q. Wang, Z. Dong and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10595–10626 RSC .
T. Ishihara, T. Kudo, H. Matsuda and Y. Takita, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1519–1524 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, L. Bi, J. Zhang, H. Cao and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1408–1428 RSC .
M. Palcut, K. Wiik and T. Grande, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 2299–2308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, T. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Chu, Z. Wu and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 9106–9114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, T. Zhang, N. Yu, X. Chen, M. Miao and T. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 348, 136351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tan, F. Sayed, S. Yang, Z. Li, J. Wu and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 230–236 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rousseau, S. Loridant, P. Delichere, A. Boreave, J. P. Deloume and P. Vernoux, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 88, 438–447 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24287–24293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. D. Kingery, Introduction to Ceramics, John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Abdel-Kader, A. A. Ammar and S. I. Saleh, Thermochim. Acta, 1991, 176, 293–304 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pardo, J. Romero and E. Ortiz, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2017, 935, 012050 CrossRef .
C.-H. Su, C.-C. Chen, H.-J. Liaw and S.-C. Wang, Procedia Eng., 2014, 84, 485–490 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Brow, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 263–264, 1–28 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, C. Jin, J. Sui, C. Li and R. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 20727–20733 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Soliman, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2019, 8, 2395–2407 CrossRef CAS .
A. Biabani-Ravandi and M. Rezaei, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 184, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Amini, F. Meshkani and M. Rezaei, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2019, 42, 2443–2449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rodhe, Science, 1990, 248, 1217–1219 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Finlayson-Pitts and J. N. Pitts, Science, 1997, 276, 1045–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Al Soubaihi, K. M. Saoud and J. Dutta, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 660 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Liu, S. Xie, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, G. Guo and H. Arandiyan, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 965–975 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, H. Dai, J. Deng, H. Yang, W. Han, H. Arandiyan and G. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 279, 392–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, J. Deng, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, Y. Jiang, H. Arandiyan, H. Dai and C. T. Au, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 507, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Dai, J. Deng, X. Li, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, S. Xie, H. Yang and G. Guo, J. Catal., 2013, 305, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, J. Deng, S. Zang, H. Yang, G. Guo, H. Arandiyan and H. Dai, J. Catal., 2015, 322, 38–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, Y. Liu, Y. Liang, Y. Peng, S. Bartlett, H. Dai, S. Rostamnia and J. Li, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3429–3434 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, J. Zhu, H. Li, W. Jiang, T. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhao and J. Li, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1774–1781 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hinuma, T. Toyao, T. Kamachi, Z. Maeno, S. Takakusagi, S. Furukawa, I. Takigawa and K.-I. Shimizu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 29435–29444 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fattah, M. Rezaei, A. Biabani-Ravandi, A. Irankhah and H. R. Arandiyan, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2016, 203, 200–209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angel, J. Neises, M. Dreyer, K. Friedel Ortega, M. Behrens, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, C. Schulz and H. Wiggers, AIChE J., 2020, 66, e16748 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Fan, A. Z. Abdullah and S. Bhatia, ChemCatChem, 2009, 1, 192–208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rezaei, S. M. Alavi, S. Sahebdelfar, P. Bai, X. Liu and Z.-F. Yan, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 77, 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hao, C. Liu, G. Jia, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, W. Wei and B.-J. Ni, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1014–1029 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, H. A. Tahini, J. Scott, X. Tan, H. Dai, J. D. Gale, A. L. Rohl, S. C. Smith and R. Amal, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Nedolivko, G. O. Zasypalov, A. V. Vutolkina, P. A. Gushchin, V. A. Vinokurov, L. A. Kulikov, S. V. Egazar’yants, E. A. Karakhanov, A. L. Maksimov and A. P. Glotov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 2020, 93, 765–787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arandiyan, J. Li, L. Ma, S. M. Hashemnejad, M. Z. Mirzaei, J. Chen, H. Chang, C. Liu, C. Wang and L. Chen, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2012, 18, 2103–2114 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khalesi, H. R. Arandiyan and M. Parvari, Chin. J. Catal., 2008, 29, 960–968 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khalesi, H. R. Arandiyan and M. Parvari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 5892–5898 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arandiyan, Y. Peng, C. Liu, H. Chang and J. Li, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2014, 89, 372–381 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Arandiyan and M. Parvari, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2008, 17, 213–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, J. Scott, A. Bagheri, H. Dai and R. Amal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8825–8846 RSC .
H. Arandiyan, Y. Wang, H. Sun, M. Rezaei and H. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6484–6502 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, J. Scott, M. Akia, H. Dai, J. Deng, K.-F. Aguey-Zinsou and R. Amal, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6935–6947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rastegarpanah, M. Rezaei, F. Meshkani, K. Zhang, X. Zhao, W. Pei, Y. Liu, J. Deng, H. Arandiyan and H. Dai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 581–593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rastegarpanah, M. Rezaei, F. Meshkani, K. Zhang, X. Zhao, W. Pei, Y. Liu, J. Deng, H. Arandiyan and H. Dai, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 515–525 CrossRef CAS .
N. Habibi, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan and M. Rezaei, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3600–3610 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Gómez-Cuaspud, C. A. Perez and M. Schmal, Catal. Lett., 2016, 146, 2504–2515 CrossRef .
M. Shetty, D. Zanchet, W. H. Green and Y. Román-Leshkov, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2171–2175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arandiyan, Y. Wang, J. Scott, S. Mesgari, H. Dai and R. Amal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16352–16357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Wang, S. Xie and J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10748–10750 RSC .
J. Chen, H. Arandiyan, X. Gao and J. Li, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2015, 19, 140–171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, J. Scott, H. Dai and R. Amal, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700119 CrossRef .
V. Shapovalov and H. Metiu, J. Catal., 2007, 245, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Deng, S. Xie, X. Zhao, Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, H. Arandiyan, G. Guo and H. Dai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 403, 590–600 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hao, Y. Liu, S. Gao, H. Arandiyan, X. Bai, Q. Kong, W. Wei, P. K. Shen and B.-J. Ni, Mater. Today, 2021, 46, 212–233 CrossRef CAS .
P. Forzatti, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 222, 221–236 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, J. Li, J. Yuan, L. Chen, Y. Dai, H. Arandiyan, J. Xu and J. Hao, Catal. Today, 2013, 201, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, S. Yang, L. Ma, Y. Peng, A. Hamidreza, H. Chang and J. Li, Catal. Lett., 2013, 143, 697–704 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, L. Chen, H. Chang, L. Ma, Y. Peng, H. Arandiyan and J. Li, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, J. Li, H. Arandiyan, W. Shi, C. Liu and L. Fu, Catal. Today, 2012, 184, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Z. Wang, D. Wang, Z. Hong, M. Zhou and X. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 4563–4575 RSC .
F. Garin, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 222, 183–219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haneda and H. Hamada, C. R. Chim, 2016, 19, 1254–1265 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Peck, C. A. Roberts and G. K. Reddy, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 561 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, X. Yang and Y. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 1996, 8, 281–297 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, N. Feng, F. Fang, G. Liu, L. Chen, J. Meng, C. Chen, L. Wang, H. Wan and G. Guan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 5462–5472 RSC .
J. Liu, Z. Zhao, J. Xu, C. Xu, A. Duan, G. Jiang and H. He, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11119–11121 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, J. Zheng, G. Zhang, A. Duan and G. Jiang, Catal. Today, 2010, 153, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Z. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Jing, A. Duan and G. Jiang, J. Rare Earths, 2009, 27, 955–960 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Z. Zhao, C.-M. Xu and J. Liu, Catal. Lett., 2005, 102, 251–256 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Hong and G.-D. Lee, Catal. Today, 2000, 63, 397–404 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fino, P. Fino, G. Saracco and V. Specchia, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 43, 243–259 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Sun, J.-H. Li, Y.-Q. Zhang, B. Hua and J.-L. Luo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2710–2714 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Zhao, P. Liang, C. Xu, A. Duan, G. Jiang, J. Xu and J. Liu, Catal. Lett., 2008, 124, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Liu, B. Bai, Y. Wang, X. Li, S. Xie and J. Li, J. Catal., 2013, 307, 327–339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ponce, M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2000, 24, 193–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. Florea, M. Alifanti, V. I. Parvulescu, D. Mihaila-Tarabasanu, L. Diamandescu, M. Feder, C. Negrila and L. Frunza, Catal. Today, 2009, 141, 361–366 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arandiyan, H. Dai, J. Deng, Y. Wang, H. Sun, S. Xie, B. Bai, Y. Liu, K. Ji and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14913–14928 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, J. Deng, Y. Liu, S. Xie, Y. Jiang, X. Zhao, J. Yang, H. Arandiyan, G. Guo and H. Dai, J. Catal., 2015, 332, 13–24 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Deng, J. Yang, X. Zhao, Z. Han, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan and H. Dai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 806–816 RSC .
S. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Deng, S. Zang, Z. Zhang, H. Arandiyan and H. Dai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 2271–2279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arandiyan, J. Scott, Y. Wang, H. Dai, H. Sun and R. Amal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2457–2463 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ondry, M. R. Hauwiller and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3178–3189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Khanikar, A. Kumar and A. Subramaniam, Philos. Mag., 2011, 91, 730–750 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, X. Yang, J. Zhang, A. Hu, P. Ji, Y. Feng, L. Guo, C. He, L. Zhang, F. Xu, N. Tang, X. Wang and B. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34108–34114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar and A. Subramaniam, Philos. Mag., 2012, 92, 2947–2956 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, C. Huang, J. Guo, J. T. Dong, R. F. Klie, L. J. Lauhon and D. N. Seidman, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3730–3738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sandiumenge, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 13 CrossRef .
S. Singh, D. Zubenko and B. A. Rosen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4199–4205 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wachsman, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 773–779 CrossRef CAS .
M. D’Acunto, D. Moroni, A. Puntoni and O. Salvetti, J. Marine Sci. Eng., 2020, 8, 132 CrossRef .
A. Düvel, L. M. Morgan, C. V. Chandran, P. Heitjans and D. C. Sayle, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 2093–2099 CrossRef .
J. Chen, B. Zhang, L. Qian, H. Wan, T. Yu, Z. Wei, Z. Wang, S. Luo, H. Arandiyan, Y. Liu and H. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 850, 156858 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimada, T. Xu, Y. Araki, J. Wang and T. Kitamura, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2674–2680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. McKenna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18859–18865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Garcia-Barriocanal, A. Rivera-Calzada, M. Varela, Z. Sefrioui, E. Iborra, C. Leon, S. J. Pennycook and J. Santamaria, Science, 2008, 321, 676–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Chang, M. W. Chu, H. T. Jeng, S. L. Cheng, J. G. Lin, J. R. Yang and C. H. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3522 CrossRef .

          K. Szot, G. Bihlmayer and W. Speier, in Solid State Physics, ed. R. E. Camley and R. L. Stamps, Academic Press,  2014, vol. 65, pp. 353–559 Search PubMed .
D. Marrocchelli, L. Sun and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2015, 137, 4735–4748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, H. Jang, J. Park, Y. Yoo, M. Park and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3715 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Vailionis, H. Boschker, Z. Liao, J. R. A. Smit, G. Rijnders, M. Huijben and G. Koster, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 131906 CrossRef .
R. G. Mariano, K. McKelvey, H. S. White and M. W. Kanan, Science, 2017, 358, 1187–1192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Jiang, S. Fan and M. W. Kanan, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasdi and H. Alamdari, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 148, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eom, E. Choi, M. Choi, S. Han, H. Zhou and J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3500–3505 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Cuong, B. Lee, K. M. Choi, H.-S. Ahn, S. Han and J. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 115503 CrossRef .
A. J. Carrillo, K. J. Kim, Z. D. Hood, A. H. Bork and J. L. M. Rupp, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(5), 4569–4579 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, Q. Wu, J. Cen, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, D. Su, X. Chen, J. B. Parise, E. Stach, A. Orlov and J. G. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 1003–1011 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neagu, E. I. Papaioannou, W. K. W. Ramli, D. N. Miller, B. J. Murdoch, H. Ménard, A. Umar, A. J. Barlow, P. J. Cumpson, J. T. S. Irvine and I. S. Metcalfe, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1855 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. Sun, Y.-L. Yang, J. Chen, M. Li, Y.-Q. Zhang, J.-H. Li, B. Hua and J.-L. Luo, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1505–1508 RSC .
K. Kousi, D. Neagu and I. S. Metcalfe, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 468 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dimitrakopoulos, A. F. Ghoniem and B. Yildiz, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2347–2355 RSC .
R. Thalinger, M. Gocyla, M. Heggen, R. Dunin-Borkowski, M. Grünbacher, M. Stöger-Pollach, D. Schmidmair, B. Klötzer and S. Penner, J. Catal., 2016, 337, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hosseini, F. Donat, P. M. Abdala, S. M. Kim, A. M. Kierzkowska and C. R. Müller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18276–18284 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kyriakou, D. Neagu, E. I. Papaioannou, I. S. Metcalfe, M. C. M. van de Sanden and M. N. Tsampas, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengodan, J. Kim, J. Shin and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B1373 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oishi, K. Yashiro, K. Sato, J. Mizusaki and T. Kawada, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 3177–3184 CrossRef CAS .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nishihata, J. Mizuki, T. Akao, H. Tanaka, M. Uenishi, M. Kimura, T. Okamoto and N. Hamada, Nature, 2002, 418, 164–167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, M. Taniguchi, M. Uenishi, N. Kajita, I. Tan, Y. Nishihata, J. I. Mizuki, K. Narita, M. Kimura and K. Kaneko, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5998–6002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kyriakou, D. Neagu, G. Zafeiropoulos, R. K. Sharma, C. Tang, K. Kousi, I. S. Metcalfe, M. C. M. van de Sanden and M. N. Tsampas, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1278–1288 CrossRef CAS .
T. Götsch, L. Schlicker, M. F. Bekheet, A. Doran, M. Grünbacher, C. Praty, M. Tada, H. Matsui, N. Ishiguro, A. Gurlo, B. Klötzer and S. Penner, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 3120–3131 RSC .
H. Han, J. Park, S. Y. Nam, K. J. Kim, G. M. Choi, S. S. P. Parkin, H. M. Jang and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1471 CrossRef .
D. Neagu, T.-S. Oh, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard, S. M. Bukhari, S. R. Gamble, R. J. Gorte, J. M. Vohs and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8120 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Chen, B. Yu, Y. Chen and M. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6345–6378 RSC .
R. Bertacco, J. P. Contour, A. Barthélemy and J. Olivier, Surf. Sci., 2002, 511, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Fullarton, J. P. Jacobs, H. E. van Benthem, J. A. Kilner, H. H. Brongersma, P. J. Scanlon and B. C. H. Steele, Ionics, 1995, 1, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Druce, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 893–896 CrossRef CAS .
H. Téllez, J. Druce, J. A. Kilner and T. Ishihara, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 145–157 RSC .
C. N. Borca, B. Xu, T. Komesu, H. K. Jeong, M. T. Liu, S. H. Liou and P. A. Dowben, Surf. Sci., 2002, 512, L346–L352 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pecchi, P. Reyes, R. Zamora, L. E. Cadús and J. L. G. Fierro, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 905–912 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jalili, J. W. Han, Y. Kuru, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 801–807 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, D. Marrocchelli and B. Yildiz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, J. W. Han, Y. Chen, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7909–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kwon, S. Sengodan, K. Kim, G. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, Y.-W. Ju, J. W. Han and G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Montero, M. A. Isaacs, A. F. Lee, J. M. Lynam and K. Wilson, Surf. Sci., 2016, 646, 170–178 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Weckhuysen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 4351–4360 RSC .
J. Resasco, S. Dai, G. Graham, X. Pan and P. Christopher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25143–25157 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. P. Martirez, S. Kim, E. H. Morales, B. T. Diroll, M. Cargnello, T. R. Gordon, C. B. Murray, D. A. Bonnell and A. M. Rappe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2939–2947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Noguera, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2001, 08, 121–167 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B.-J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin, L. Wiles, M. Pertoso, N. Danilovic, K. E. Ayers and T. J. Schmidt, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Cordier, E. Berrier, N. Nuns, C. Dujardin and P. Granger, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 140–141, 151–163 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Seitz, C. F. Dickens, K. Nishio, Y. Hikita, J. Montoya, A. Doyle, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic, H. Y. Hwang, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2016, 353, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Grimaud, A. Demortière, M. Saubanère, W. Dachraoui, M. Duchamp, M.-L. Doublet and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16189 CrossRef .
N. Z. Koocher, J. M. P. Martirez and A. M. Rappe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3408–3414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Hao, S. Gerhold, Z. Novotny, C. Franchini, E. McDermott, K. Schulte, M. Schmid and U. Diebold, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26060–26069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Foo, Z. D. Hood and Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 555–565 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Lee, C. V. Ellis, J. N. Naughton, M. A. Newton, C. M. A. Parlett and K. Wilson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5724–5727 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Dagdeviren, G. H. Simon, K. Zou, F. J. Walker, C. Ahn, E. I. Altman and U. D. Schwarz, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 195303 CrossRef .
F. Polo-Garzon, V. Fung, X. Liu, Z. D. Hood, E. E. Bickel, L. Bai, H. Tian, G. S. Foo, M. Chi, D.-E. Jiang and Z. Wu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10306–10315 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee and H. N. Lee, Materials, 2017, 10, 368 CrossRef .
T. Broux, C. Prestipino, M. Bahout, O. Hernandez, D. Swain, S. Paofai, T. C. Hansen and C. Greaves, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4053–4063 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Chung, T. Kim, T. H. Shin, H. Yoon, S. Park, N. M. Sammes, W. B. Kim and J. S. Chung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6437–6446 RSC .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, J. Canales-Vázquez, B. Ballesteros-Pérez, J. Peña-Martínez, D. Marrero-López, J. T. S. Irvine and P. Núñez, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 27, 4223–4227 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Woolley and S. J. Skinner, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 790–795 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Zhong, G. Yang, J. Qu and Z. Shao, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2378–2384 CrossRef CAS .
G. Amow, I. J. Davidson and S. J. Skinner, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 1205–1210 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Yang, S. P. Shafi, L. Bi, Z. Wang, R. Peng, C. Xia, W. Liu and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8405–8412 RSC .
D. Huan, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, R. Peng, C. Xia and Y. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4592–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Beppu, S. Hosokawa, K. Teramura and T. Tanaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13540–13545 RSC .
K. Beppu, S. Hosokawa, A. Demizu, Y. Oshino, K. Tamai, K. Kato, K. Wada, H. Asakura, K. Teramura and T. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 11186–11193 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tatsumi, S. Yusuke, G. Kazuya, N. Noriko, I. Hideharu and M. Hiroshige, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 318–319 CrossRef .
V. Balédent, B. Fauqué, Y. Sidis, N. B. Christensen, S. Pailhès, K. Conder, E. Pomjakushina, J. Mesot and P. Bourges, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 027004 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Cava, B. Batlogg, T. T. Palstra, J. J. Krajewski, W. F. Peck, A. P. Ramirez and L. W. Rupp, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 43, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chaillout, S. W. Cheong, Z. Fisk, M. S. Lehmann, M. Marezio, B. Morosin and J. E. Schirber, Phys. C, 1989, 158, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Meyer, L. Jiang, S. Park, T. Egami and H. N. Lee, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 126102 CrossRef .
J. K. Perry, J. Tahir-Kheli and W. A. Goddard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 144510 CrossRef .
G. M. Veith, R. Chen, G. Popov, M. Croft, Y. Shokh, I. Nowik and M. Greenblatt, J. Solid State Chem., 2002, 166, 292–304 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aguadero, M. J. Escudero, M. Pérez, J. A. Alonso and L. Daza, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2006, 4, 294–298 CrossRef .
M. Burriel, G. Garcia, M. D. Rossell, A. Figueras, G. Van Tendeloo and J. Santiso, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4056–4062 CrossRef CAS .
L. Minervini, R. W. Grimes, J. A. Kilner and K. E. Sickafus, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2349–2354 RSC .
Y. Huan, S. Chen, R. Zeng, T. Wei, D. Dong, X. Hu and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901573 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, J. Miao, D. Guan, Y. Zhong, R. Ran, S. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6033–6042 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuasa, M. Nishida, T. Kida, N. Yamazoe and K. Shimanoe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A605 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Wang, N. Wan and Z. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 400–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Voss, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dama, S. Ghodke, R. Bobade, H. Gurav and S. Chilukuri, J. Catal., 2018, 360, 27–39 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fang, C. H. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1519–1525 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Geselbracht, H. K. White, J. M. Blaine, M. J. Diaz, J. L. Hubbs, N. Adelstein and J. A. Kurzman, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 398–406 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobayashi, J. A. Schottenfeld, D. D. Macdonald and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 3185–3191 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ida, C. Ogata, M. Eguchi, W. J. Youngblood, T. E. Mallouk and Y. Matsumoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7052–7059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kato, Y. Imai, T. Kajita, Y. Takarabe, T. Minakawa, K.-I. Nemoto, H. Tezuka, T. Noji and Y. Koike, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 148, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 174, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, Y. Ebina, S. Ikeda, A. Tanaka, J. N. Kondo and K. Maruya, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Arandiyan, K. Dastafkan, Y. Li and C. Zhao, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 360–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Liu, X. Shen, H. Arandiyan, T. Zhao, Y. Li, M. Garbrecht, Z. Su, L. Han, A. Tricoli and C. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003759 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Shen, H. Arandiyan, Y. Yin, F. Sun, X. Chen, M. Garbrecht, L. Han, G. G. Andersson and C. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 228748 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, J.
V. Patil, H. Arandiyan and C. K. Hong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17516–17528 RSC .
S. S. Mali, J. V. Patil, H. Arandiyan, R. Luque and C. K. Hong, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2019, 8, Q111–Q117 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Yan, Y. X. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. M. Dai and S. Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 20 Search PubMed .
Y.-J. Wang, N. Zhao, B. Fang, H. Li, X. T. Bi and H. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3433–3467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Spoeri, P. Briois, N. Hong Nhan, T. Reier, A. Billard, S. Kuehl, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 6653–6663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2017, 358, 751–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Rong, J. Parolin and A. M. Kolpak, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
D. Antipin and M. Risch, J. Phys.: Energy, 2020, 2, 032003 CAS .
A. Safakas, G. Bampos and S. Bebelis, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Wang, M. Zhou, P. Choudhury and H. M. Luo, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 16, 56–71 CrossRef .
Y. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, X. J. Wang, T. Yao, T. L. Gao, J. C. Han, X. H. Zhang, Y. M. Zhang, P. Xu and B. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 8 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, X. F. Ding, L. X. Wang, D. Ding, S. H. Zhang and G. L. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Wang, X. Q. Chen, D. Huang, M. Zhou, D. Ding and H. M. Luo, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2768–2775 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Xu, N. Apodaca, H. Z. Wang, L. T. Yan, G. Chen, M. Zhou, D. Ding, P. Choudhury and H. M. Luo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5074–5083 CrossRef CAS .
M. Retuerto, L. Pascual, F. Calle-Vallejo, P. Ferrer, D. Gianolio, A. G. Pereira, A. Garcia, J. Torrero, M. T. Fernandez-Diaz, P. Bencok, M. A. Pena, J. L. G. Fierro and S. Rojas, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Omari and M. Omari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28769–28779 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, O. Gwon, C. Lim, J. Kim, O. Galindev and G. Kim, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3154–3159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, L. Shi, Y. P. Liu, H. Chen, R. Si, W. S. Yan, Q. Zhang, G. D. Li, L. Yang and X. X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7631–7635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, D. Lin, W. Zhan, W. Zhang, L. Tang, J. Luo, Z. Gao, P. Jiang, M. Wang and L. Y. Hao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(7), 7149–7158 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Jung, H. Y. Jeong, J. S. Lee, M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4582–4586 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Sun, Z. H. Zhao, S. Wu, W. J. Li, B. Wu, G. N. Liu, G. H. Chen, B. Xu, B. T. Kang, Y. Li and C. H. Li, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2671–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lopez, G. Park, H. J. Sun, J. C. An, S. Eom and J. Shim, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 313–323 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, M. W. Zhao, F. L. Liang, S. C. Smith and Z. H. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 495–501 RSC .
K. M. Li, M. Y. Yin, Z. G. Wang, X. Y. Chen, T. L. Zhu, J. Wang, N. Dewangan, Y. Yu, Q. Zhong and S. Kawi, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 12424–12429 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Z. Wang, D. Qi, Y. Yin, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Shao and H. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 52, 115–120 CrossRef .
B. Hua, M. Li, W. Y. Pang, W. Q. Tang, S. L. Zhao, Z. H. Jin, Y. M. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz and J. L. Luo, Chem, 2018, 4, 2902–2916 CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Sun, C. Xu, R. Ren, J. Qiao, Z. Wang and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14091–14098 RSC .
J. Ran, T. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Xu, S. Xi and D. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3439–3446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Li, L. Lv, J. S. Wang, X. Ao, Y. J. Ruan, D. C. Zha, G. Hong, Q. H. Wu, Y. C. Lan, C. D. Wang, J. J. Jiang and M. L. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 199–209 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Jin, J. Wang and K. Huang, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 309, 48–57 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Zheng, Z. Guo, Y. Zhu, H. Chen, F. Li, P. Liu, B. Yu, X. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Chen and M. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801898 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Peng, X. P. Han, L. L. Li, S. L. Chou, D. X. Ji, H. J. Huang, Y. H. Du, J. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 11 Search PubMed .
L. Gui, Z. Huang, G. Li, Q. Wang, B. He and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 240–246 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Islam, R. Majee and S. Bhattacharyya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19453–19464 RSC .
J. Kim, X. Yin, K. C. Tsao, S. H. Fang and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14646–14649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, O. Gwon, K. Choi, L. J. Zhang, J. Zhou, J. Park, J. W. Yoo, J. Q. Wang, J. H. Lee and G. Kim, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4664–4670 CrossRef CAS .
S. X. She, J. Yu, W. Q. Tang, Y. L. Zhu, Y. B. Chen, J. Sunarso, W. Zhou and Z. P. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11715–11721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Wang, J. Sunarso, Q. Lu, Z. L. Zhou, J. Dai, D. Q. Guan, W. Zhou and Z. P. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 10 Search PubMed .
A. Ashok, A. Kumar, J. Ponraj, S. A. Mansour and F. Tarlochan, Catal. Today, 2021, 375, 484–493 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bian, Z. Li, N. Li and C. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 8208–8214 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Wu, Y. Q. Guo, H. F. Liu, J. Y. Zhao, H. D. Zhou, W. S. Chu and C. Z. Wu, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2296–2301 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Mefford, X. Rong, A. M. Abakumov, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, A. M. Kolpak, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Hona and F. Ramezanipour, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 4685–4692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Zhong, S. Jin, H. Chen, Z. He, Q. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10957–10965 RSC .
J. Bak, H. B. Bae, C. Oh, J. Son and S.-Y. Chung, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(17), 7253–7260 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, J. C. Wu, P. Z. Chen, H. F. Liu, W. S. Chu, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11165–11169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hyodo, M. Hayashi, S. Mitsutake, N. Miura and N. Yamazoe, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1997, 105, 412–417 CrossRef CAS .
H. Falcón, M. J. Martinez-Lope, J. A. Alonso and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2000, 26, 131–142 CrossRef .
C. Chen and F. Ciucci, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7058–7065 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sunarso, A. A. J. Torriero, W. Zhou, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5827–5834 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Song, Z. Du, L. Wang, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9421–9426 RSC .
Y. Xue, S. Sun, Q. Wang, H. Miao, S. Li and Z. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 418–427 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. B. A. Medeiros, V. R. M. Melo, D. M. A. Melo, H. P. Macedo, G. T. Moure, I. Adánez-Rubio, M. A. F. Melo and J. Adánez, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1681–1696 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, E. Sheha, S. I. El-Dek, D. Goonetilleke, M. Harguindeguy and N. Sharma, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 6165–6172 RSC .
Y. Zhang, F. Feng, C. Zhang, Q. Zheng, C. Wang, H. Hu, M. Wu and Y. Guo, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 10170–10177 CrossRef CAS .
R.-h. Yuan, Y. He, W. He, M. Ni and M. K. H. Leung, Appl. Energy, 2019, 251, 113406 CrossRef .
L. Gui, Z. Wang, K. Zhang, B. He, Y. Liu, W. Zhou, J. Xu, Q. Wang and L. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 266, 118656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, Z. Li, Y. Yu, J. Yin, K. Song, B. Yang, L. Yuan and X. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 801, 19–26 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dai, Y. Zhu, Y. Yin, H. A. Tahini, D. Guan, F. Dong, Q. Lu, S. C. Smith, X. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Small, 2019, 15, 1903120 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. You, J. Yuan, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-T. Li, S. Xin and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6520–6528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ren, Z. Wang, X. Meng, C. Xu, J. Qiao, W. Sun and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23959–23967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Tomar, A. Joshi, S. Atri, G. Singh and R. K. Sharma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15128–15137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Bavio, J. E. Tasca, G. G. Acosta, M. F. Ponce, R. O. Fuentes and A. Visintin, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 699–710 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bu, H. Jang, O. Gwon, S. H. Kim, S. H. Joo, G. Nam, S. Kim, Y. Qin, Q. Zhong, S. K. Kwak, J. Cho and G. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2048–2054 RSC .
M. Retuerto, F. Calle-Vallejo, L. Pascual, G. Lumbeeck, M. T. Fernandez-Diaz, M. Croft, J. Gopalakrishnan, M. A. Peña, J. Hadermann, M. Greenblatt and S. Rojas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21454–21464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, Z. Wang, L. Zou, M. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Dong, Y. Jiang, Y. Huang, N. Nakashima and B. Chi, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 831, 154728 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pang, J. Xu, Y. Su, G. Yang, M. Zhu, M. Cui, X. Shen and C. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, R. Ran, Y. Chen, Z. Shao and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
R. Majee, Q. A. Islam and S. Bhattacharyya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35853–35862 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, Y. Lin, X. Yu, W. Xu, T. Salas, H. Smallidge, M. Zhou and H. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23820–23827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, in Advances in Catalysis, Volume 45: Impact of Surface Science on Catalysis, ed. B. C. Gates and H. Knozinger, Elsevier Academic Press Inc., San Diego,  2000, vol. 45, pp. 71–129 Search PubMed .
T. Wu, M. Sun and B. Huang, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 715–734 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, Z. Feng, N. Charles, X. R. Wang, D. Lee, K. A. Stoerzinger, S. Muy, R. R. Rao, D. Lee, R. Jacobs, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 100–118 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Williamson and W. H. Hall, Acta Metall., 1953, 1, 22–31 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Kumar, M. Singh and A. K. Singh, in 2nd International Conference on Condensed Matter and Applied Physics, ed. M. S. Shekhawat, S. Bhardwaj and B. Suthar, Amer Inst Physics, Melville,  2018, vol. 1953 Search PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. H. Liang and D. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6275–6277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Herklotz, D. Lee, E.-J. Guo, T. L. Meyer, J. R. Petrie and H. N. Lee, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 493001 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Schlom, L.-Q. Chen, C. J. Fennie, V. Gopalan, D. A. Muller, X. Pan, R. Ramesh and R. Uecker, MRS Bull., 2014, 39, 118–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Petrie, V. R. Cooper, J. W. Freeland, T. L. Meyer, Z. Zhang, D. A. Lutterman and H. N. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2488–2491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, W. Chen, B. Wang and Y. Zheng, Materials, 2014, 7, 6502–6568 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Stoerzinger, W. S. Choi, H. Jeen, H. N. Lee and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 487–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. G. Burns, in Mineralogical Applications of Crystal Field Theory, ed. R. G. Burns, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2nd edn,  1993, pp. 7–43,  DOI:10.1017/CBO9780511524899.004 .
Y. Guo, Y. Tong, P. Chen, K. Xu, J. Zhao, Y. Lin, W. Chu, Z. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5989–5994 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Wang and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5951–5984 RSC .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar and V. Krishnan, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10253–10315 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, Z. Zhao, W.-B. Zhu, E. N. Coker, B. Li, M. Zheng, W. Yu, H. Fan and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19184–19190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. H. Hanaor and C. C. Sorrell, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 855–874 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maarisetty and S. S. Baral, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18560–18604 RSC .
W.-N. Wang, J. Soulis, Y. J. Yang and P. Biswas, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2014, 14, 533–549 CrossRef CAS .
B. Siritanaratkul, K. Maeda, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700126 CrossRef .
S. Balaz, S. H. Porter, P. M. Woodward and L. J. Brillson, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3337–3343 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8396–8415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, P. Liu, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 9208–9221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
J. Kim, D. W. Hwang, H.-G. Kim, S. W. Bae, S. M. Ji and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2488–2489 RSC .
J. Kim, D. W. Hwang, H. G. Kim, S. W. Bae, J. S. Lee, W. Li and S. H. Oh, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 295–303 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Hwang, H. G. Kim, J. S. Jang, S. W. Bae, S. M. Ji and J. S. Lee, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 845–850 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Moriya, K. Maeda and K. Domen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2098–2103 RSC .
H. Irie, Y. Maruyama and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1847–1852 CrossRef CAS .
R. Konta, T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8992–8995 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwashina and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13272–13275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, P. Basera, S. Saini and S. Bhattacharya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10272–10279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang and Y. Guo, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 252–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. Staykov, H. Téllez, T. Akbay, J. Druce, T. Ishihara and J. Kilner, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8273–8281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhang, J. Niu and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5164–5173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Y. Xie, F. Wu, H. Chen, M. Lv, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7445–7453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishioka and K. Maeda, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 100123–100128 RSC .
W. Wei, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5658–5663 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and W. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 3041–3047 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, R. Cao, Z. Wang, S. Jiao and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7296–7301 RSC .
M. Lv, Y. Wang, L. Lu, R. Wang, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 21491–21499 RSC .
M. Lv, X. Sun, S. Wei, C. Shen, Y. Mi and X. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11441–11448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, M. Lv, X. Sun, Y. Xie, H. Chen, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 615–623 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Ueda, M. Kobayashi and M. Kakihana, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11824–11829 RSC .
K. Ueda, H. Kato, M. Kobayashi, M. Hara and M. Kakihana, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3667–3674 RSC .
F. Wu, G. Liu and X. Xu, J. Catal., 2017, 346, 10–20 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, G. Lin and X. Xu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 2343–2351 RSC .
F. Wu, X. Sun, G. Liu and X. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4640–4647 RSC .
X. Sun, G. Liu and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10947–10957 RSC .
L. Wan, F.-Q. Xiong, B. Zhang, R. Che, Y. Li and M. Yang, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 367–371 CrossRef .
T. Kong, Y. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6579–6591 RSC .
X. Jiao, K. Zheng, L. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6592–6604 RSC .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115–116 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Tan, X. Jiao, H. Ju, Z. Qi, J. Zhu and Y. Xie, Joule, 2018, 2, 1004–1016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Xia, X. Bai, Z. Ge, Q. Yang, C. Yin, S. Kang, M. Dong and X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shyamal, S. K. Dutta, T. Das, S. Sen, S. Chakraborty and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 3608–3614 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Wei, J. Xiong, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhao, J. Liu and J. Li, J. Catal., 2019, 377, 309–321 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Zhang, B. Deng, J. Jin, C. Xu and Y. Zhang, Catal. Commun., 2020, 138, 105955 CrossRef CAS .
E. Liu, L. Qi, J. Bian, Y. Chen, X. Hu, J. Fan, H. Liu, C. Zhu and Q. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 68, 203–209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Do, Y. Im, B. S. Kwak, S.-M. Park and M. Kang, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 5942–5951 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Khalid, E. Ahmed, Z. Hong, M. Ahmad, Y. Zhang and S. Khalid, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 7107–7113 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Xu, X.-D. Wang, J.-F. Liao, B.-X. Chen, H.-Y. Chen and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1801015 CrossRef .
K. Xie, N. Umezawa, N. Zhang, P. Reunchan, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4211–4219 RSC .
P. Ilanchezhiyan, G. Mohan Kumar, C. Siva, H. D. Cho, S. Tamilselvan, S. Seal, T. W. Kang and D. Y. Kim, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2020, 9, 12585–12594 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Smith, J. Chem. Educ., 1990, 67, 911 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, S. Deng, Y. Yang, G. Xu, R. Zhao, G. Shen and G. Han, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2017, 320, 527–530 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abirami, T. S. Senthil, S. Kalpana, L. Kungumadevi and M. Kang, Mater. Lett., 2020, 279, 128507 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Wei, S. Cheng, L. Fan, Y. Li, J. Lin and J. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 761–766 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Kwong, A. Nakaruk, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17766–17776 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W.-F. Chen, G. Bahmanrokh, V. Kumar, N. Ho, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2020, 24, 100557 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Patterson, Phys. Rev., 1939, 56, 978–982 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, Y. Ji, C. Tian and Z. Yi, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 615, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saai Harini, D. Easwaramoorthy, V. Sai Muthukumar, R. Gowrishankar and S. Anandan, Environ. Nanotechnol., Monit. Manage., 2019, 12, 100228 Search PubMed .
G. Greczynski and L. Hultman, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 107, 100591 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Parmar and N. N. Rao, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 39, 41–78 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, G. Zhu, J. Gao, M. Hojamberdiev, R. Zhu, X. Wei, Q. Guo and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 72–82 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5018–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 92, 33–63 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukherji, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15674–15678 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ji, T. Shen, J. Kong, Z. Rui and Y. Tong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 12766–12773 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Ramana, N. V. Prasad, D. M. Tobaldi, J. Zavašnik, M. K. Singh, M. J. Hortigüela, M. P. Seabra, G. Prasad and M. A. Valente, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9680–9692 RSC .
A. K. Fischer, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 45, 375–377 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Kwabi, Y. Ji and M. J. Aziz, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6467–6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, X. Cui, W. Chen and D. G. Ivey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1697–1721 RSC .
Y. Liang, H. Dong, D. Aurbach and Y. Yao, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1370–1377 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Fu, S. P. Kammampata, D. W. McOwen, A. J. Samson, L. Zhang, G. T. Hitz, A. M. Nolan, E. D. Wachsman, Y. Mo, V. Thangadurai and L. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 4257–4300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1151–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Ju, S. Yoo, L. Guo, C. Kim, A. Inoishi, H. Jeong, J. Shin, T. Ishihara, S.-D. Yim and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2651–A2655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mussa, F. Ahmed, M. Arsalan and E. Alsharaeh, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1882 CrossRef CAS .
M. Á. Muñoz-Márquez, D. Saurel, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700463 CrossRef .
J. Hao, X. Li, X. Zeng, D. Li, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3917–3949 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. P. Wang, M. T. Sougrati, Z. Feng, Y. Leconte, A. Fisher, M. Srinivasan and Z. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601424 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. Zhang, N. Jiang, W. Zhang, H. Arandiyan, Z. Wang, S. Luo, F. Fang and H. Sun, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 834, 155030 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Arandiyan, H. Yang, L. Bai, J. Mujtaba, Q. Wang, S. Liu and H. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 240–246 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Kuai, Y. Liu, P. Wang, H. Arandiyan, S. Cao, J. Zhang, F. Li, Q. Wang, B. Geng and H. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mujtaba, H. Sun, G. Huang, Y. Zhao, H. Arandiyan, G. Sun, S. Xu and J. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 31775–31781 RSC .
H. Wan, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, W. Zhang, N. Jiang, Z. Wang, S. Luo, H. Arandiyan, H. Liu and H. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Mujtaba, F. Fang, M. Ahmad, H. Arandiyan, H. Yang, G. Sun and H. Sun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 91574–91580 RSC .
E. Lökçü, Ç. Toparli and M. Anik, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23860–23866 CrossRef .
J. Yan, D. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Du, X. Liu, J. Zhang and X. Qi, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 6942–6951 CrossRef CAS .
W.-F. Chen, P. Koshy, Y. Huang, E. Adabifiroozjaei, Y. Yao and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 19025–19056 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maki, Y. Ito, H. Matsunaga and H. Mori, Scr. Mater., 2013, 68, 777–780 CrossRef CAS .
A. Urban, A. Abdellahi, S. Dacek, N. Artrith and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 176402 CrossRef .
J. Lee, A. Urban, X. Li, D. Su, G. Hautier and G. Ceder, Science, 2014, 343, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Santibáñez-Mendieta, C. Didier, K. K. Inglis, A. J. Corkett, M. J. Pitcher, M. Zanella, J. F. Shin, L. M. Daniels, A. Rakhmatullin, M. Li, M. S. Dyer, J. B. Claridge, F. Blanc and M. J. Rosseinsky, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7833–7851 CrossRef .
J. Gamon, A. J. Perez, L. A. H. Jones, M. Zanella, L. M. Daniels, R. E. Morris, C. C. Tang, T. D. Veal, L. J. Hardwick, M. S. Dyer, J. B. Claridge and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20553–20569 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Wan, H. Zhang, J. Chen, F. Fang, N. Jiang, W. Zhang, F. Zhou, H. Arandiyan, Y. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Luo, X. Chen and H. Sun, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3892–3903 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Murray, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 1983, 4, 407–410 CrossRef .
Z.-L. Xu, J. Park, G. Yoon, H. Kim and K. Kang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800227 CrossRef CAS .
P. Senguttuvan, G. Rousse, V. Seznec, J.-M. Tarascon and M. R. Palacín, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4109–4111 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rudola, K. Saravanan, C. W. Mason and P. Balaya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2653–2662 RSC .
P. J. P. Naeyaert, M. Avdeev, N. Sharma, H. B. Yahia and C. D. Ling, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7067–7072 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Woo, Y. Park, W. Y. Choi, N.-S. Choi, S. Nam, B. Park and K. T. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A2016–A2023 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, L. Lu, N. Li and C. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3085–3090 CrossRef CAS .
O. Cech, K. Castkova, L. Chladil, P. Dohnal, P. Cudek, J. Libich and P. Vanysek, J. Energy Storage, 2017, 14, 391–398 CrossRef .
P. J. P. Naeyaert, M. Avdeev and C. D. Ling, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 353, 115375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitta, T. Kojima, R. Kataoka, K. Yazawa and K. Tada, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9322–9331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Brugnetti, M. Fiore, R. Lorenzi, A. Paleari, C. Ferrara and R. Ruffo, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1713–1722 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, J. Liu, X. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Hu, J. Liu, L. Ouyang, L. Yang and M. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5120–5129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Bharathi, B. Moorthy, H. K. Dara, L. Durai and D. K. Kim, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 13236–13246 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Imanishi and O. Yamamoto, Mater. Today Adv., 2019, 4, 100031 CrossRef .
A. C. Luntz and B. D. McCloskey, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11721–11750 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Johnson and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 882–888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Wang, L. Cao, C. Shang, Z. Wang, H. Wang, L. He, J. Yang, H. Cheng, J. Li and Z. Lu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 2495–2510 RSC .
L. Zhu, R. Ran, M. Tadé, W. Wang and Z. Shao, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 11, 338–369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
Y. Cong, Z. Geng, Y. Sun, L. Yuan, X. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Zhang, K. Huang and S. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25465–25472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, W. Li, Q. Guo, H. Gao, Y. You, Y. Li, Z. Cui, K.-C. Jiang, H. Long, D. Zhang and S. Xin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5543–5550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Hegde, A. Ghosh, R. Badam, N. Matsumi and R. Sundara, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1338–1348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Yuan, J. Liu, B. Liu, X. Chen, J. Ding, X. Han, Y. Deng, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4767 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, K. Zhang, D. Tang, W. Liu, F. Meng, Q. Huang and J. Liu, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, D. Higgins and Z. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3057–3065 CrossRef CAS .
E. Davari and D. G. Ivey, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 39–67 RSC .
J. Qian, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Li and D. Gao, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104948 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Lamonova, E. S. Zhitlukhina, R. Y. Babkin, S. M. Orel, S. G. Ovchinnikov and Y. G. Pashkevich, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13596–13604 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu, Y. Wang, C. Jin, F. Li, R. Yang and F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 726–733 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sennu, V. Aravindan, K. S. Nahm and Y.-S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18029–18037 RSC .
G. Liu, H. Chen, L. Xia, S. Wang, L.-X. Ding, D. Li, K. Xiao, S. Dai and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22478–22486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Gong, S. Li and C. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7737–7747 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, Z. Liu and W. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, P. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Lu, J. B. Goodenough, J. Zhang and D. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 265, 91–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. T. Le, D. T. Ngo, P. N. Didwal, J. G. Fisher, C.-N. Park, I.-D. Kim and C.-J. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3150–3160 RSC .
J.-J. Xu, D. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, H.-G. Wang, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3887–3890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bu, O. Gwon, G. Nam, H. Jang, S. Kim, Q. Zhong, J. Cho and G. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11594–11601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vignesh, M. Prabu and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6019–6031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Li and D. Gao, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104948 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Sunarso, Q. Lu, Z. Zhou, J. Dai, D. Guan, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903271 CrossRef .
M. Prabu, P. Ramakrishnan, P. Ganesan, A. Manthiram and S. Shanmugam, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 92–103 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, J. Wang, B. Qiu, E. Paillard, C. Ma, X. Cao, H. Liu, M. C. Stan, H. Liu, T. Gallash, Y. S. Meng and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 602–610 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, X. Wu and P. Shen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6268–6278 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, L. Kong and S. Gao, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 19340–19343 RSC .
Z. Jiang, S. Wang, X. Chen, W. Yang, X. Yao, X. Hu, Q. Han and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1906221 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Im, D. Park, H. Kim and J. Lee, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1501–1508 CrossRef .
Y. Meesala, C.-Y. Chen, A. Jena, Y.-K. Liao, S.-F. Hu, H. Chang and R.-S. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14383–14389 CrossRef CAS .
A. La Monaca, A. Paolella, A. Guerfi, F. Rosei and K. Zaghib, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 104, 106483 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Sun, Z. Wang, D. Song, H. Zhang, X. Shi, C. Li, L. Zhang and L. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 456, 227997 CrossRef CAS .
P. Oh, H. Lee, S. Park, H. Cha, J. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000904 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, J. Yue, S. Liu, J. Tu, F. Han, P. Liu and C. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1073–1079 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Rao, Z. Cheng, L. Yuan, Z. Li and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902767 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, K. Chen, C. Liang, C.-W. Nan, R. Ishikawa, K. More and M. Chi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1638–1642 RSC .
M. Kotobuki, H. Lei, Y. Chen, S. Song, C. Xu, N. Hu, J. Molenda and L. Lu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 11670–11675 RSC .
Z. Jiang, H. Xie, S. Wang, X. Song, X. Yao and H. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801433 CrossRef .
H. Lee, M. Yanilmaz, O. Toprakci, K. Fu and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3857–3886 RSC .
R. K. Nishihora, P. L. Rachadel, M. G. N. Quadri and D. Hotza, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 38, 988–1001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, S. Wang, X. Chen, W. Yang, X. Yao, X. Hu, Q. Han and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC .
C. Wu, X. Lu, L. Peng, K. Xu, X. Peng, J. Huang, G. Yu and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2431 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Mefford, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 726–732 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, C. Yang, Q. Jia, W. Qi, H. Wei, M. Wang, S. Yang and B. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125524 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, L. Shi, J. Zhao, S. Zhou, Y. Li and J. Guo, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 205306 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Dinh, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23774–23783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, R. K. Singh, A. R. Vaz, R. Savu and S. A. Moshkalev, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8880–8890 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Forslund, J. Pender, C. T. Alexander, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21222–21231 RSC .
G. Guo, K. Ouyang, J. Yu, Y. Liu, S. Feng and M. Wei, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 300–308 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, K. Li, L. Neal and F. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8213–8236 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ksepko, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 8126–8137 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, X. Li, K. Zhao, Z. Huang, G. Wei and H. Li, Fuel, 2013, 108, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sarshar, F. Kleitz and S. Kaliaguine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4258–4269 RSC .
H. Leion, Y. Larring, E. Bakken, R. Bredesen, T. Mattisson and A. Lyngfelt, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 5276–5283 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. de Diego, A. Abad, A. Cabello, P. Gayán, F. García-Labiano and J. Adánez, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 87–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Readman, A. Olafsen, Y. Larring and R. Blom, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1931–1937 RSC .
P. Hallberg, D. Jing, M. Rydén, T. Mattisson and A. Lyngfelt, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 1473–1481 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Neal, A. Shafiefarhood and F. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3560–3569 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chang, E. Bjørgum, O. Mihai, J. Yang, H. L. Lein, T. Grande, S. Raaen, Y.-A. Zhu, A. Holmen and D. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3707–3719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, N. Galinsky, Z. Wang and F. Li, Fuel, 2014, 134, 521–530 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Chung, W. K. Wang, S. G. Nadgouda, D. S. Baser, J. A. Sofranko and L.-S. Fan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 12750–12764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, L. Qin, M. Guo, M. Xu, J. A. Fan and L.-S. Fan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 32418–32428 RSC .
Z. Cheng and C. S. Lo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 15447–15454 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Wu, Y. Hu, C. Huang, Y. Zhu, M. Tian, Y. Kang, X. Pan, Y. Su, J. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9420–9430 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Jacobson, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 660–674 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Medvedev, J. G. Lyagaeva, E. V. Gorbova, A. K. Demin and P. Tsiakaras, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 75, 38–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, J. Canales-Vázquez, C. Savaniu, D. Marrero-López, W. Zhou and J. T. S. Irvine, Nature, 2006, 439, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 320–323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Atkinson, S. Barnett, R. J. Gorte, J. T. S. Irvine, A. J. McEvoy, M. Mogensen, S. C. Singhal and J. Vohs, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 17–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishihara, H. Matsuda and Y. Takita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3801–3803 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Yoo and G. M. Choi, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 27, 4211–4214 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Z. Shao, R. Ran, P. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Jin and N. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, W. Rauch, F. Chen and M. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 149, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Wang and M. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 457–462 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 431, 170–173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Robertson, S. Yick, C. Deĉes-Petit, E. Styles, W. Qu, Y. Xie, R. Hui, J. Roller, O. Kesler, R. Maric and D. Ghosh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1211–1216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xia, A. Brüll, A. Grimaud, S. Fourcade, F. Mauvy, H. Zhao, J.-C. Grenier and J.-M. Bassat, Solid State Sci., 2014, 35, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Yun, S. P. Yoon, H. S. Kim, J. Han and S. W. Nam, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 4356–4366 CrossRef CAS .
D. La Rosa, A. Sin, M. L. Faro, G. Monforte, V. Antonucci and A. S. Aricò, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 160–164 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Niakolas, J. P. Ouweltjes, G. Rietveld, V. Dracopoulos and S. G. Neophytides, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7898–7904 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Chen, W. Wang, D. Ding and J. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4987–4991 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Gao, M. Liu and C. Xia, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 482, 168–172 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, N. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Mao, K. Sun and Y. Yuan, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 729–739 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. Su, R. Ran, H. J. Park, C. Kwak and Z. Shao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5632–5643 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, R. Ran and Z. Shao, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 90–97 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, W. Zhou, R. Ran, R. Cai and Z. Shao, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 194–197 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Ye, S. R. Wang, Z. R. Wang, L. Xiong, X. F. Sun and T. L. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
S. Islam and J. M. Hill, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5091–5094 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sin, E. Kopnin, Y. Dubitsky, A. Zaopo, A. S. Aricò, D. La Rosa, L. R. Gullo and V. Antonucci, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kan and H. Lee, Catal. Commun., 2010, 12, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, W. Wu, C. Jiang, Y. Ding, W. Bian, B. Hu, P. Singh, C. J. Orme, L. Wang, Y. Zhang and D. Ding, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, R. Kee, H. Zhu, N. Sullivan, L. Zhu, L. Bian, D. Jennings and R. O’Hayre, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 230–240 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, N. Xu, L. Zhang and K. Huang, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 694–697 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, H. Ding, W. Bian, W. Wu, W. Li, X. Liu, J. Y. Gomez, C. Y. Regalado Vera, M. Zhou and D. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14600–14608 RSC .
M. Dippon, S. M. Babiniec, H. Ding, S. Ricote and N. P. Sullivan, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 286, 117–121 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, S. Ricote, W. G. Coors and R. J. Kee, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 49–74 RSC .
R. J. Kee, H. Zhu, B. W. Hildenbrand, E. Vøllestad, M. D. Sanders and R. P. O’Hayre, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F290–F300 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bonanos, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53–56, 967–974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Taghikhani, A. Dubois, J. R. Berger, S. Ricote, H. Zhu and R. J. Kee, Membranes, 2021, 11, 378 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, D. Pergolesi, S. Licoccia and E. Traversa, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1043–1051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Papac, V. Stevanović, A. Zakutayev and R. O’Hayre, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 301–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, S. Ricote, C. Duan, R. P. O’Hayre, D. S. Tsvetkov and R. J. Kee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F581–F588 CrossRef CAS .
Yu and S. B. Adler Chen, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4537–4546 CrossRef .
G. C. Mather and M. S. Islam, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1736–1744 CrossRef CAS .
T. Norby and Y. Larring, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1997, 2, 593–599 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura and H. Kageyama, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 661–665 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hibino, K. Mizutani, T. Yajima and H. Iwahara, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 57, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cohen and J. W. Cooley, Biophys. J., 1965, 5, 145–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, S. Ricote, C. Duan, R. P. O’Hayre and R. J. Kee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F845–F853 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vøllestad, H. Zhu and R. J. Kee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 161, F114–F124 CrossRef .
A. K. E. Andersson, S. M. Selbach, C. S. Knee and T. Grande, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 2654–2661 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, J. Tong, M. Shang, S. Nikodemski, M. Sanders, S. Ricote, A. Almansoori and R. O’Hayre, Science, 2015, 349, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, R. J. Kee, H. Zhu, C. Karakaya, Y. Chen, S. Ricote, A. Jarry, E. J. Crumlin, D. Hook, R. Braun, N. P. Sullivan and R. O’Hayre, Nature, 2018, 557, 217–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Babilo and S. M. Haile, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2362–2368 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schober and H. G. Bohn, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 127, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding and X. Xue, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2486–2490 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. Sengodan, G. Kwon, D. Ding, J. Shin, M. Liu and G. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2811–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, T. Hong, P. Wang, K. Brinkman, J. Tong and J. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 440, 227122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Y. S. Lin and S. L. Swartz, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 150, 87–98 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Serra, J. Garcia-Fayos, S. Baumann, F. Schulze-Küppers and W. A. Meulenberg, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 447, 297–305 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Ritchie, J. T. Richardson and D. Luss, AIChE J., 2001, 47, 2092–2101 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Schucker, G. Dimitrakopoulos, K. Derrickson, K. K. Kopeć, F. Alahmadi, J. R. Johnson, L. Shao and A. F. Ghoniem, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 7989–7997 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan and K. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Cong and W. Yang, Catal. Today, 2005, 104, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, Z. Cao, S. Schirrmeister, T. Schiestel and J. Caro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5656–5660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Czuprat, S. Werth, S. Schirrmeister, T. Schiestel and J. Caro, ChemCatChem, 2009, 1, 401–405 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, F. He, C. Zhou, F. Dong, G. Yang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 620, 118980 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Hamidreza Arandiyan and Sajjad S. Mofarah contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Hamidreza Arandiyan
	Hamidreza Arandiyan received his PhD from Tsinghua University in 2014. He was awarded a Vice-Chancellor's Research Fellowship in the School of Chemical Engineering from UNSW Sydney in 2015. He was awarded a University of Sydney Senior Fellowship in the School of Chemistry in 2018. Currently, he is a Senior Research Fellow in the Applied Chemistry & Environmental Science at RMIT University, Melbourne. His research interests lie in heterogeneous catalysis for environmental remediation and energy applications.

Sajjad S. Mofarah
	Sajjad S. Mofarah obtained his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, in 2020, with a focus on the defect structures of functional oxide materials for energy and environmental applications. He was appointed as a Research Associate at the same institution in 2019, expanding his work on advanced characterisation of 2D heterojunction materials based on ultrathin metal-based coordination polymers for catalysis and energy storage. Since April 2020, he has been a Research Associate studying the cyclic reprocessing of battery materials. His research interests include layered oxides, defect creation and characterisation, batteries and supercapacitors, and related thermodynamics.

Charles C. Sorrell
	Charles C. Sorrell has been the Professor of Ceramic Engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) Sydney since 1987. He obtained his BSc degrees in Ceramic Engineering (1977) and Chemistry (1980) from the University of Missouri-Rolla, his MSc degree in Ceramic Science (1980) from the Pennsylvania State University, and his PhD degree in Ceramic Engineering (1987) from the University of New South Wales. His principal research foci are ceramic processing and phase equilibria, which have been applied across many areas. At present, his main work is on catalysis, biomaterials, geopolymers, and waste utilisation.

Esmail Doustkhah
	Esmail Doustkhah received his PhD in 2017. During his PhD studies, he was awarded several prizes, scholarships and internships, including visiting research position and an internship at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan. In 2018, he was accepted as a post-doctoral researcher at NIMS, working on mesoporous and 2D materials. In late 2019, he was awarded the JSPS fellowship in Japan. His current research interests are focused on the development of new porous and layered materials and studying their (photo)(bio)catalytic features.

Yuan Wang
	Yuan (Helena) Wang received her PhD degree from the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney in 2018. She was appointed as a Research Assistant at the National Research Center for Geoanalysis, Chinese Academy of Geological Science in 2013. She was a Postdoctoral Research Associate in the School of Chemistry, UNSW Sydney. Currently, she is a Research Fellow in the Applied Chemistry & Environmental Science at RMIT University, Melbourne. Her research interests focus on the development and characterisation of nanoporous materials for energy-related applications.

Zongping Shao
	Zongping Shao is a Professor of Chemical Engineering at Curtin University, Australia, and Nanjing Tech University, China. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China, in 2000. He worked as a Visiting Scholar at the Institut de Researches sur la Catalyse, CNRS, France, and as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the California Institute of Technology, USA, from 2000 to 2005. His research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and low-temperature energy-conversion devices. He has been recognised as a Highly Cited Researcher in the Energy section by Elsevier since 2015. He has also been selected as a World Highly Cited Researcher by (Thomson Reuters) Clairvate Analytics for the year, 2014, 2017, 2018, and 2019.

Thomas Maschmeyer
	Thomas Maschmeyer is a Professor of Chemistry at the University of Sydney, co-founder of three companies Avantium (2000), Licella (2006) and Gelion (2015) and inventor of the Cat-HTRTM recycling and the ENDURE battery technology. He is Fellow of four academies, serves on the boards of six international journals and has received many awards, including most recently the David Craig Medal from Australian Academy of Science (2021), Prime Minister's Prize for Innovation (2020), the Federation of Asian Chemical Societies’ Contribution to Economic Development Award (2019) and the Eureka Prize for Leadership in Innovation and Science (2018).

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structure of a cubic ABX3 perovskite.	 

 	Fig. 2  Conceptual summary of mechanisms to modify physicochemical properties through defect engineering (ICC = ionic charge compensation, ECC = electronic charge compensation, redox = redox charge compensation).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of defective perovskites for catalysis and energy storage.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Perspective view of the 3D perovskite structure, (b) BO6 layer (purple plane in (a)), (c) AO layer (orange plane in (a)), and (d) (111) projection of the perovskite structure.	 

0-Tilt	Cubic	
Pm3m	221	CaTiO3, SrTiO3	
21

1-Tilt	Tetragonal	
P4/mbm	127	NaNbO3	
21

2-Tilt	Monoclinic	
C2/m	12	PrAlO3	
21 and 24

Orthorhombic	
Cmcm
	63	NaNbO3	
21

Orthorhombic	
Immm
	71	Sr3CoSb2O9, Sr2CoSbO6	
25

Orthorhombic	
Imma
	74	PrAlO3	
21 and 24

3-Tilt	Triclinic	
P	2	CaSiO3	
26

Monoclinic	
P21/m	11	Sr2Ta2O7	
27

Monoclinic	
B2/b	15	Pb2MnTeO6	
28

Orthorhombic	
Pmmm
	59	NaNbO3	
21

Orthorhombic	
Pnma
	62	SmAlO3, BaCeO3, GdFeO3	
21

Orthorhombic	
Immm
	71	La2LiHO3	
29

Trigonal	
Rc	167	LaCoO3, BiFeO3, LiNbO3	
21

Cubic	
Im3	204	Na0.69WO3	
30


 	Fig. 5  (a) Three-dimensional bulk perovskite oxide, (b) two-dimensional layered perovskite oxide, (c) one-dimensional perovskite oxide, and (d) zero-dimensional perovskite oxide.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematics of principal bulk layered perovskite structures.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the mechanism of exfoliation through ion exchange and reassembly of bulk layered perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematics of Ca2(NbmNam−3)O3m+1 nanosheets (m = 3–6) and (b–e) AFM images of individual nanosheets of (b) Ca2Nb3O10, (c) Ca2NaNb4O13, (d) Ca2Na2Nb5O16, and (e) Ca2Na3Nb6O19 (reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematics of heterostructure effects: (a and b) energy band alignment at the interface of two single perovskites (reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Physical Society), and (c) Sr2VO4 and Sr2MnO4 (reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from American Physical Society).	 

(La0.7Sr0.3)CoO3−δ	3D hollow fibre	Sol–gel	Removal of organic pollutants	
105

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3	3D ordered mesoporous	Emulsion polymerisation + sol–gel	Li–air batteries	
106

Pr2BaNiMnO7−δ	3D Ruddlesden–Popper	Citric acid–nitrate gel combustion	Photocathode in solid oxide fuel cells	
107

Sr(Ir1−xMx)O3 (M = 3d transition metal)	3D Ruddlesden–Popper	Solid-state reaction	Not given	
108

Bi2MoO6	3D Aurivillius	Hydrothermal	Reactive oxygen species photogeneration	
73

Bi3Ti0.6Cr0.2Nb1.2O9	3D Aurivillius	Solid-state reaction	Photocatalytic hydrogen production	
109

Bi4Ti2.95(B1/3Nb2/3)0.05O12 (B = Mg, Zn, Cu)	3D Aurivillius	Solid-state reaction	Enhanced electrical conductivity	
110

Ca2Nb3O10	2D Ruddlesden–Popper	Wet chemistry and protonation with organic phase	Organic light-emitting device	
111

H3.6IrO4 3.7H2O	2D Ruddlesden–Popper	Solid-state reaction	Oxygen evolution reaction	
112

Ca2Nan−3NbnO3n+1	2D Dion–Jacobson	Not given	Solar-hydrogen water splitting	
113

RbSr2Nb3O10	2D Dion–Jacobson	Microwave heating	Not given	
114

Cs6W11O36	2D Dion–Jacobson	Soft-chemical process	Photochromic activity	
56

Bi2WO6	2D Aurivillius	Hydrothermal	Photocatalysis	
115

Bi2WO6	2D Aurivillius	Hydrothermal	Photocatalysis	
116

Sr2Bi2Nb2TiO12	2D Aurivillius	Mineraliser-assisted soft chemical process	CO2 photoreduction activity	
117

LaNiO3	2D single perovskite	Sol–gel	Supercapacitor	
118

PrBaMn2O5+δ	2D double perovskite	
In situ annealing of (Pr0.5Ba0.5)MnO3−δ	Solid oxide fuel cell	
119

(YxSr1−x)SnO3+δ	2D double perovskite	Low-temperature solution-deposition	Solar cell	
120

(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO2.91	1D nanowire	Multistep microemulsion	Li–air batteries	
121

(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO2.91	1D nanowire	Electrospinning	Li–air batteries	
122

(La0.75Sr0.25)MnO3	1D nanotube	Integrated electrospinning with heating	Li–air batteries	
123

(p-type) Na0.5Bi3.25La1.25Ti4O15	2D/2D heterojunction	Sol–gel conjugated with layer-by-layer annealing	Energy storage	
124

(n-type) BaBi3.4Pr0.6Ti4O15	2D/2D heterojunction	Sol–gel conjugated with layer-by-layer annealing	Energy storage	
124


Metal vacancy formation A site oxidation	ICC	

	(1)
ECC	

	(2)
Metal vacancy formation	ICC	

	(3)
A and B site reduction	ECC	

	(4)
B cation redox  formation	ICC	

	(5)
B cation redox h˙ formation	ECC	

	(6)
Intrinsic ionisation B site redox	ICC	

	(7)

Donor cation dopant B site substitution	SSS	

	(8)
ICC
SSS	

	(9)
ECC
Acceptor cation dopant B site substitution	SSS	

	(10)
ICC
SSS	

	(11)
ECC
Donor cation dopant B cation interstitial	ISS	

	(12)
ICC
ISS	

	(13)
ECC
Acceptor cation dopant B cation interstitial	ISS	

	(14)
ICC
ISS	

	(15)
ECC
Acceptor anion dopant O anion interstitial	ISS	

	(16)
ICC
ISS	

	(17)
ECC

 	Fig. 10  Schematics of cation ordering schemes in perovskites (reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of representative types of intrinsic and extrinsic defects in perovskites.	 

(La0.5Ba0.5)(CoxMn1−x)O3−δ	Sol–gel	Wastewater decontamination	Oxygen vacancies	EPR, XPS, FESEM	
160

MnxCo3−xO4	Thermal calcination	Zn–air batteries	Mn and Co vacancies	XAFS, XPS, ICP-OES	
161

Sr3Fe2O7−δ	Polymerised complex	NOx oxidation	Oxygen vacancies	SEM, DRIFT	
162

(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ	Sol–gel	OER	Surface vacancies	TEM, EDS, XPS	
163

La(CoxAl1−x)O3	Sol–gel	Soot oxidation	Oxygen vacancies	XPS, NOx-TPD	
164

Nb/Bi2WO6	Hydrothermal reaction	Photocatalysis	Oxygen vacancies/Nb5+ dopants	TEM, XPS, Raman, UV-vis	
165

BaTiO3	Electrospinning	Dielectric and energy storage	Surface defect	HRTEM, XPS	
166

LaKCoO3	Dip-coating	Soot combustion	Oxygen vacancies	XPS, SEM, EDS	
167

LaNiO3	Sol–gel	Oxygen redox processes	Cation defect	XPS, SEM, EDS, DFT	
168

LaCoO3	Sol–gel	Propane oxidation	Disordered, P dopants	XANES, XPS, DFT	
169

La(CoxMn1−x)O3−δ	Template-free self-assembly	Li–O2 batteries	Oxygen vacancies	HRTEM, EDS, SEM, XPS	
170

(La0.8Sr0.2)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ	Molten salt	OER	Surface reconstruction	SEM, EDS, XPS	
171

(LaxSr1−x)CoO3−δ	Sol–gel	CO oxidation	Oxygen vacancies	HAADF-STEM, EXAFS, DFT	
172

LaNiO3	Sol–gel	CO2 hydrogenation	Structural defect	XPS, TEM, EDS	
173

CsTaO3	Sol–gel	Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution	Lattice defects	EELS, EDS, PL, XPS, ESR	
174

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Cr0.8Co0.2)O3	Impregnation	CO2 splitting and syngas production	Surface reconstruction	HAADF-STEM, EDS, XPS	
175

CaTiO3	Hydrothermal reaction	Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution	Surface oxygen vacancies	EPR, HRTEM, XPS, DFT	
176

LaFeO3	Not given	CO oxidation	La defects	DFT	
177

(La0.8Sr0.2)CoO3	Sol–gel	CO oxidation	Oxygen vacancies	HRTEM, EPR, XPS, DFT	
178

La1.5Sr1.5Mn1.5Ni0.5O7±δ	Pechini	Methane steam reforming	Exsolution	HAADF, TEM, EDS	
179

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.7Mn0.3)O3	Sol–gel	CO2 electrolysis to CO	Ruddlesden–Popper defects	SEM, TEM, EDS, XANES	
158

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ	Glycine–nitrate combustion	ORR	Surface defects	XPS, TEM	
180

Ba(CuxFe1−x)O3	Citrate sol–gel	Soot oxidation	Lattice defects	ICP-OES, XRD, XPS	
181

PrBaMn1.7Co0.3O5+δ	Pechini sol–gel	Dry reforming of methane	Schottky defects	SEM, HAADF, EDS	
182

Sr(Ti0.75Co0.25)O3−δ	Solid-state	CO oxidation	Schottky defects	SEM, HRTEM, DFT, EDS	
183

(La0.5Ba0.5)MnO3−δ	Pechini	Solid oxide fuel cells	Exsolution	HAADF-STEM, EDS, XPS	
184

LaFeO3	Citrate sol–gel	CO oxidation	Ruddlesden–Popper defects	DFT, TEM	
185

SrTiO3	Incipient wetness impregnation	Oxidative coupling of methane	Oxygen vacancies	Raman, TPD	
186

Sr(Fe0.7Ti0.3)O3−δ	Solid-state reaction	Solid oxide fuel cells	Oxygen vacancies	HRTEM, EDS	
187

La(Fe0.9Ni0.1)O3	Citrate	Dry reforming of ethane	Oxygen vacancies	HRTEM, ex situ XRD	
188

(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ	Sol–gel	CO oxidation	Oxygen vacancies	XANES, EXAFS, XPS	
189

LaNiO3	Hydrothermal	Not given	Structural defects	STEM, EELS, EDS	
190

La(CuxFe1−x)O3	Citrate	Three-way catalysts	Anionic defects	XPS, SEM	
191

SrTiO3	Hydrothermal	2-Propanol reaction	Surface reconstruction	XPS, DFT	
192

(Pr1−xCax)MnO3	Wet chemistry	OER	Ruddlesden–Popper defects	HAADF-STEM, EELS	
151

(La0.8Sr0.2)CoO3−δ	EDTA–citric acid	OER	Oxygen vacancies	TEM, XPS	
193

SrCoO3−δ	Ultrasonic	Nanoelectronics	Strain	XRD, DFT	
194

NdTiO3	Molecular beam epitaxy	Nanoionics	Linear defects	STEM, DFT, EELS	
195


 		 

 		 

A site substitution	Acceptor (K+)	Oxygen vacancies	(Sr1−x2+Kx+)TiO3−½x2− □½x

	Donor (Al3+)	Sr vacancies	(Sr1−x2+□½(1−x)Alx3+)TiO3

	Donor (Al3+)	O interstitials	(Sr1−x2+Alx3+)TiO3+½x

	Neutral (Ba2+)	None	(Sr1−x2+Bax2+)TiO3
B site substitution	Acceptor (Cr3+)	Oxygen vacancies	Sr(Ti1−y4+Cry3+)O3−½y2−□½y

	Donor (V5+)	Ti vacancies	Sr(Ti1−y4+□¼(1−y)Vy5+)O3

	Donor (V5+)	O interstitials	Sr(Ti1−y4+Vy5+)O3+½y

	Donor (V5+)	Ti4+ → Ti3+ reduction	



	Neutral (Zr4+)	None	Sr(Ti1−y4+Zry4+)TiO3
A and B site substitution	Acceptors (K+ & Cr3+)	Oxygen vacancies	(Sr1−x2+Kx+)(Ti1−y4+Cry3+)O3−½(x+y)2−□½(x+y)

	Donors (Al3+ & V5+)	Sr & Ti vacancies	(Sr1−x2+□½(1−x)Alx3+)(Ti1−y4+□¼(1−y)Vx5+)TiO3

	Neutral (Ba2+ & Zr4+)	None	(Sr1−x2+Bax2+)(Ti1−y4+Zry4+)TiO3

 		 

 		 

 		 



A1+B5+O32−	NaTaO3	Number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule
A-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0
B-Site substitution	2.00	1.50	1.00	0.50	0
A- and B-Site substitution	2.00	1.50	1.00	0.50	0
A2+B4+O32−	SrTiO3	Number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule
A-Site substitution	0.50	0	0	0	0
B-Site substitution	1.50	1.00	0.50	0	0
A- and B-Site substitution	2.00	2.00	0.50	0	0
A3+B3+O32−	LaMnO3	Number of oxygen vacancies per perovskite molecule
A-Site substitution	1.00	0.50	0	0	0
B-Site substitution	1.00	0.50	0	0	0
A- and B-Site substitution	2.00	1.00	0	0	0

Type	Valence	Ionic charge compensation
Acceptor	2+	

	


3+	

	


Neutral	4+	

	


Donor	5+	

	


6+	

	


Type	Valence	Electronic charge compensation
Acceptor	2+	

	


3+	

	


Neutral	4+	

	


Donor	5+	

	


6+	

	


Type	Valence	Redox charge compensation
Acceptor	2+	

	


3+	

	


Neutral	4+	

	


Donor	5+	

	


6+	

	



Type	
	Intervalence charge transfer
Acceptor	4+/3+	

	


Donor	3+/5+	

	



 	Fig. 12  Imaging limitations of characterisation techniques applied to defects.	 

High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM)	Dopants, vacancies, surface defects, edge dislocations	Local composition, surface morphology, electronic structure	
277

Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)	Vacancies, surface defects, grain boundaries, surface reconstruction, lattice disorder	Local composition, defect structure	
278

Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)	Dopants, voids, edge dislocations, planar defects	Direct correlation of image and spectroscopic data, composition and distribution of dopants	
278

Atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning force microscopy (SFM)	Surface point defects, antiphase boundaries, grain boundaries, volume defects	Topographical imaging, surface atomic defects, mineralogical analysis	
233 and 279

Atomic electron tomography (AET)	Point defects, twin boundaries, edge dislocations, screw dislocations, surface reconstruction	Atomic displacements, 3D image reconstruction, 3D structural determination of crystal defects	
280

Atomic-resolution spherical-aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy (ACTEM)	Point defects	Resolution of individual atoms (spatial resolution <0.05 nm)	
241 and 242

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)	Dopants, surface defects, Schottky pairs, Frenkel defects	Local defect structure, defect mobility, planar surfaces	
235 and 236

High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)	Dopants, vacancies, voids, linear defects, planar defects, lattice disorder	Surface morphology, defect types and concentrations	
169

X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), near ambient pressure XPS (NAPXPS)	Dopants, surface defects, other point defects, intrinsic defects, lattice disorder	Elemental composition of surface and near-surface region, valences	
246

X-Ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES), extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS)	Oxygen vacancies	Local composition, local arrangements of defects, coordination number, bond length and angle	
261–263

Dilatometry	Vacancies, other point defects, dislocations	Macroscopic temperature- and defect-induced size changes	
281

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)	Oxygen vacancies	Defect concentration from mass change upon heating	
282

Optical absorption spectroscopy	Point defects	Spatial distribution of point defects, electronic structure, defect states	
283

Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)	Oxygen vacancies	Determination of particle, isotope, and molecular compositions	
284

Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS)	Vacancies, vacancy clusters, other point defects, dislocations	Defect types and concentrations	
253, 254 and 285

Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR) or electron spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR)	Oxygen vacancies, other point defects	Unpaired electrons, valences, defect types and concentrations	
250

Laser Raman microspectroscopy	Oxygen vacancies, disordered surfaces	Mineralogy, disordered structures, defect types and concentrations	
271

Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), optical absorption spectrometry (ICP-AES), and mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)	Dopants	Quantification analysis of dopants	
286


 	Fig. 13  Energy levels of the degenerate d orbital in octahedral and tetrahedral coordinations.	 




 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the role of oxygen vacancies in three-dimensional draped porous Ni-loaded Co3O4 (Ni/3DDP-Co3O4), (b and c) TEM images of the catalyst, (d–f) EDS mapping of the catalyst, (g) comparison of the relative O1, O2, O3, and O4 levels on the surface of reduced (R) catalysts (O1, O2, O3, and O4 represent lattice oxygen, oxygen in hydroxyl groups, oxygen vacancies, and oxygen in water molecules, respectively), and (h) CH4 and CO selectivity (3DDP-Co3O4 = Ni-free Co3O4 catalyst, Ni/3DDP-NCO = Ni-loaded Ni-substituted (Ni0.5Co2.5)O4 catalyst, Ni/3DDP-Co3O4 = Ni-loaded Co3O4 catalyst) (reproduced from ref. 351 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

Bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78 vol% N2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)	562	672	749	2.6	—	0.81	91.4	
374

3D (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78 vol% N2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)	437	566	661	42.1	0.151	1.22	56.6	
374

(La0.5Sr0.5)MnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 4 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 45000 h−1)	498	691	710	12.2	N/A	0.31	N/A	
375

LaMnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 4 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 45000 h−1)	502	586	726	8.8	N/A	0.23	N/A	
375

NiFe2O4	1700 ppm toluene + air flowing at 100 mL min−1 (GHSV = 60000 mL h−1 g−1)	402	—	—	2.9	N/A	0.73	50.9	
376

(Ni0.5Zn0.5)Fe2O4	1700 ppm toluene + air flowing at 100 mL min−1 (GHSV = 60000 mL h−1 g−1)	397	500	—	2.8	N/A	0.93	29.5	
376

MnFe2O4	1700 ppm toluene + air flowing at 100 mL min−1 (GHSV = 60000 mL h−1 g−1)	225	284	473	3.1	N/A	0.74	11.1	
376

3D LaCoO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	179	217	231	28	0.161	1.9	38.6	
320

7.63Au/3D LaCoO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	136	188	202	24.2	0.104	3.2	31.4	
320

7.56Au/bulk LaCoO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	194	268	283	5.8	N/A	1.8	49.7	
320

Bulk LaCoO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	248	282	313	4.4	N/A	1.6	61.5	
320

(La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	160	203	219	32.1	0.082	1.27	59	
323

7.9Au/(La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	121	153	177	31.1	0.081	1.86	45	
323

Bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	179	243	276	4.2	N/A	1.02	74	
323

6.2Au/bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	Toluene concentration = 1000 ppm, toluene/O2 molar ratio = 1/400 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	198	219	243	4.8	N/A	1.51	55	
323

Bulk (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78% N2 (balance) (GHSV = ∼30000 mL h−1 g−1)	562	672	749	2.6	N/A	0.81	91.4	
377

3D (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78% N2 (balance) (GHSV = ∼30000 mL h−1 g−1)	437	566	661	42.1	0.159	1.22	56.6	
377

3.63Ag/3D (La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3	2 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 78% N2 (balance) (GHSV = ∼30000 mL h−1 g−1)	361	454	524	41.5	0.165	2.01	37.5	
377

3D Mn2O3	1.0 vol% CO + 20 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	144	168	180	37.7	0.185	0.95	80	
321

5.8Au/3D Mn2O3	1.0 vol% CO + 20 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	−48	−19	−12	34.5	0.157	2.40	32	
321

5.7Au/bulk Mn2O3	1.0 vol% CO + 20 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	−5	14	25	7.2	0.012	1.17	49	
321

Meso Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	293	345	440	106.3	0.325	2.40	81.9	
378

2.94Au0.5Pd/meso Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	230	280	324	114.5	0.382	6.15	44.4	
378

1.48Au/meso Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	263	312	378	109.6	0.311	3.16	57.0	
378

1.58Pd/meso Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	242	288	334	108.1	0.273	4.45	48.4	
378

2.90Au0.5Pd/bulk Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4 + 20 vol% O2 + 77.5 vol% N2 (SV = ∼20000 mL h−1 g−1)	269	321	397	8.6	0.039	3.31	58.3	
378

Meso Co3O4	1000 ppm o-xylene + 20.0 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 191000 h−1)	237	254	260	95.1	0.23	0.86	126.7	
379

Pd/meso Co3O4	1000 ppm o-xylene + 20.0 vol% O2 + N2 (balance) (GHSV = 191000 h−1)	170	184	197	93.6	0.20	1.12	79.4	
379

AuPd/3D Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	284	337	379	N/A	N/A	0.70	86	
380

AuPd/0.40CoO/3D Co3O4	2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	260	312	341	N/A	N/A	0.85	63	
380

AuPd/3.61CoO/3D Mn2O3	2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	365	430	500	N/A	N/A	0.92	101	
380

AuPd/3.61CoO/3D Al2O3	2.5 vol% CH4, CH4/O2 = 1/4 (SV = 20000 mL h−1 g−1)	420	543	625	N/A	N/A	1.63	132	
380

3D (La0.7Ce0.3)CoO3	2 vol% CH4, 20 vol% O2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)	381	479	555	35.4	0.05	2.23	N/A	
381

Bulk (La0.7Ce0.3)CoO3	2 vol% CH4, 20 vol% O2 (GHSV = 30000 mL h−1 g−1)	436	564	662	2.8	N/A	0.88	N/A	
381


 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Schematic diagrams of synthesis and defect formation, and (c–e) TEM images of silver manganate nanoplates with defects (reproduced from ref. 400 with permission from Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) HAADF-STEM image of SrTiO3, showing surface steps on grains, (b) LEIS compositional depth profiles (STO = HNO3 etched, Sr/STO = Sr impregnated and HNO3 etched, Sr/STO 750 °C = Sr impregnated, HNO3 etched, and annealed at 750 °C for 5 h), (c) effect of the Sr level on CH4 conversion, and (d) effect of the Sr level on CO2 selectivity (reproduced from ref. 450 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 



A2BO4 (n = 1)	SrCeO4	Number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule
A1+-Site substitution	0	1.0	2.0	3.0	4.0	5.0
A2+-Site substitution	0	0	1.0	2.0	3.0	4.0
A3+-Site substitution	0	0	0	1.0	2.0	3.0
B2+-Site substitution	0	0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0
B3+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0.5	1.0	1.5
B4+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0.5	1.0
B5+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0	0.5
B6+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0	0
A3B2O7 (n = 2)	Sr3Ti2O7	Number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule
A1+-Site substitution	0	1.5	3.0	4.5	6.0	7.5
A2+-Site substitution	0	0	1.5	3.0	4.5	6.0
A3+-Site substitution	0	0	0	1.5	3.0	4.5
B2+-Site substitution	0	0	1.0	2.0	3.0	4.0
B3+-Site substitution	0	0	0	1.0	2.0	3.0
B4+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	1.0	2.0
B5+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0	1.0
B6+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0	0
A4B3O10 (n = 3)	Ca4Mn3O10	Number of oxygen interstitials per Ruddlesden–Popper molecule
A1+-Site substitution	0	2.0	4.0	6.0	8.0	10.0
A2+-Site substitution	0	0	2.0	4.0	6.0	8.0
A3+-Site substitution	0	0	0	2.0	4.0	6.0
B2+-Site substitution	0	0	1.5	3.0	4.5	6.0
B3+-Site substitution	0	0	0	1.5	3.0	4.5
B4+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	1.5	3.0
B5+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0	1.5
B6+-Site substitution	0	0	0	0	0	0

 	Fig. 17  Mechanism of peroxymonosulfate (PMS) ternary activation and phenol oxidation on the (La0.4Sr0.6)MnO3−δ (SP) – (La0.4Sr1.05)MnO4−δ (RP) heterostructure nanocomposite catalyst (reproduced from ref. 473 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Electrolysis mode (top black curve) and fuel-cell mode (bottom black curve) at 60 °C for Ruddlesden–Popper LaSr3Fe3O10 (reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from the American Chemical Society); TEM images of Ruddlesden–Popper LaFeO3 synthesised by (b) combustion (cs-LF), (c) sol–gel (sg-LF), and (d) coprecipitation (cp-LF); (e) atomistic space-filling model of LaFeO3; and (f) TEM simulated images of pristine LaFeO3 (reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  Proposed mechanisms for the OER over a perovskite in an alkaline medium: (a) adsorption mechanism, (b) oxygen coupling mechanism, and (c) oxygen vacancy mechanism (purple diamonds represent metal–ligand bonds) (reproduced from ref. 494 and 495 with permission from American Chemical Society); refined crystal structures of stoichiometric and nonstoichiometric CaMnO3−x: (d) stoichiometric CaMnO3.00, (e) CaMnO2.75, and (f) CaMnO2.50 (reproduced from ref. 303 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 
O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−
HO2− → ½O2 + OH−
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−

NdNiO3	OER	Ni and O vacancies	Laser treatment	
499

Sr1−x(Nb0.1Co0.7Fe0.2)O3−δ	OER	Sr and O vacancies	A-Site cation deficiency	
500

LaCoO3	OER/ORR	La and O vacancies	A-Site cation deficiency	
501

(La0.8Sr0.2)1+xMnO3	OER/ORR	Mn and O vacancies	B-Site cation deficiency	
502

(Sr0.95Na0.05)RuO3	OER	Na dopant	Elemental doping	
503

Gd(Fe1−xCux)O3	OER	Cu dopant	Elemental doping	
504

Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co2−xNix)O5+δ	Zn–air batteries	Ni dopant	Elemental doping	
505

Sr(Ti1−xIrx)O3	OER	Ir dopant	Elemental doping	
506

(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.1Ir0.1)O3−δ	OER	Ir dopant	Elemental doping	
507

(La0.3(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.7)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ	OER/ORR	La dopant	Elemental doping	
508

La(Co0.8V0.2)O3	OER	V dopant	Elemental doping	
509

La(NixM1−x)O3 (M = Co, Mn, Fe)	OER/ORR	Ni dopant	Elemental doping	
510

(SrScx)(NbyCo1−x−y)O3−δ	OER	Sc, Nb codopants	Elemental doping	
511

Ba(Bi0.05Co0.95−xNbx)O3−δ	OER/ORR	Nb dopant	Elemental doping	
512

LaFeO3−3xCl3x	OER	Cl dopant	Elemental doping	
513

(La0.5Ba0.25Sr0.25)CoO2.9−δF0.1	OER	F dopant	Elemental doping	
514

Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6−x−δFx	ORR	F dopant	Elemental doping	
515

5.84% S–LaMO3 (M = Co, Fe, Ni)	OER/ORR	S dopant	Elemental doping	
516

Phosphorus-doped LaFeO3−δ	OER/ORR	P dopant	Elemental doping	
517

Sr(Co0.9Ta0.1)O2.5+δ	OER	O vacancies	High-temperature treatment	
518

(La0.7Sr0.3)CoO3−δ	OER	Lattice strain and O vacancies	Laser treatment	
519

CaMnO3	OER/ORR	S dopant and O vacancies	Elemental doping	
520

(Pr0.5Ba0.5)(Fe1−xNix)O3−δ	OER	Fe, Ni dopants and O vacancies	Elemental doping	
521

CaMnO3−δ	OER/ORR	O vacancies	Heat treatment in H2/Ar	
303

(Sr0.95Nb0.1)(Co0.9−xNix)O3−δ	OER/ORR/HER	O vacancies	Heat treatment in H2/N2	
522

Ca2Mn2O5	OER	O vacancies	Heat treatment in H2/Ar	
523

(Sm0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ	OER/ORR	O vacancies	Heat treatment	
524

(La0.8Sr0.2)(CoxFe1−x)O3−δ	ORR	O vacancies	Elemental doping	
496

(La1−xSrx)FeO3−δ	OER	Sr dopant and O vacancies	Elemental doping	
525

Sr((Co0.8Fe0.2)0.95P0.05)O3−δ	Zn–air batteries	O vacancies	Elemental doping	
526

LaMnO3	OER/ORR	O vacancies	Salt-assisted treatment	
527

La(Mn0.75Co0.25)O3−δ	OER	O vacancies	Heat treatment in H2/Ar	
528

Sr2Co2O5.5	OER	O vacancies	Chemical treatment	
529

(La1−xSrx)CoO3−δ	OER	O vacancies	A-site substitution	
530

SrMnO3−δ	OER	O vacancies	Heat treatment	
531

Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co1.5Fe0.5)O3−δ	OER	O vacancies	Plasma treatment	
532

LaNiO3 film on SrTiO3	OER	Ruddlesden–Popper defects	Lattice strain	
533

La2NiMnO6	OER	Jahn–Teller distortion	Vibronic superexchange	
534


 	Fig. 20  Free energy diagrams of four-electron OER for (001) slabs: (a) (La0.75Sr0.25)MnO3 and (b) (La0.75Sr0.25)Mn0.92O3 surface (reproduced from ref. 502 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  ORR current densities: (a) LaMO3 and (b) La(Ni1−xMx)O3 (reproduced from ref. 539 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

(La0.7Sr0.3−xPdx)MnO3	Sr/Pd (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 2 h)	Al–air batteries	
541

(La2−xMx)NiO4 (M = Ca, Ba)	La/Ca, Ba (A-site)	Microwave assisted combustion heat treatment (900 °C for 2 h)	Chemical looping reforming	
542

(Sm0.92Bi0.08)FeO3	Sm/Bi (A-site)	Aqueous chemistry heat treatment (700 °C for 1 h)	Li-ion batteries	
543

(La1−xCex)MnO3	La/Ce (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (800 °C for 5 h)	Zn–air batteries	
544

(La0.8Sr0.2)0.95(Mn0.5Fe0.5)O3	La/Sr (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 4 h)	ORR, OER	
545

Mn/Fe (B-site)
(Pr0.5Ba0.5)CoO3−δ	Pr/Ba (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (950 °C for 3 h)	Zn–air batteries	
546

La(Mn0.8M0.2)O3 (M = Cu, Co)	Mn/Cu, Co (B-site)	Sol–gel combustion heat treatment (800 °C for 5 h)	Li–air batteries	
547

BaPr(Mn1.75Co0.25)O5+δ	Mn/Co (B-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (950 °C for 5 h)	Zn–air batteries	
95

Sr(Co1−xRux)O3−δ	Co/Ru (B-site)	Solid-state reaction heat treatment (1100 °C for 5 h)	OER	
548

(La0.8Sr0.2)(Mn1−xNix)O3	Ni/Mn (B-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 4 h)	Li–air batteries	
549

PrBa(Fe1.9Zn0.1)O5+δ	Zn/Fe (B-site)	Sol–gel combustion heat treatment (1100 °C for 2 h)	SOFCs	
550

Sr2CoMoO6−δ	Co/Mo (B-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (900 °C for 10 h)	Pseudocapacitors	
551

La2BMnO6 (B = Ni, Co, Cu)	B/Mn (B-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (800 °C for 4 h)	Pseudocapacitors	
552

Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co2−xNix)O5+δ	Co/Ni (B-site)	Pechini heat treatment (1000 °C for 4 h)	Zn–air batteries	
505

(PrBa0.5Sr0.5)0.95(Co1.5Fe0.5)O5+δ	Ba/Pr (A-site)	Electrospinning heat treatment (900 °C for 2 h)	ORR, OER, HER	
553

Sr/Pr (A′-site)
Fe/Co (B-site)
(La1.5Sr0.5)(Ni0.5Mn0.5)(Ni0.5Ru0.5)O6	Sr/La (A-site)	Solid-state reaction heat treatment (1200 °C for 12 h)	ORR, OER	
554

Ni/Mn (B-site)
Ni/Ru (B′-site)
(La0.8Sr0.2)(Co0.8Ni0.2)O3−δ	La/Sr (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (750 °C for 3 h)	Li–air batteries	
555

Ni/Co (B-site)
Pr(Ba1−xCax)CoCuO5+δ	Br/Ca (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (700 °C for 7 h)	SOFCs	
556

(Sr0.95Ag0.05)(Nb0.1Co0.9)O3−δ	Sr/Ag (A-site)	Solid-state reaction heat treatment (1200 °C for 10 h)	SOFCs	
557

Nb/Co (B-site)
(Ba0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.79Fe0.21)O2.67	Sr/Ba (A-site)	Sol–gel heat treatment (950 °C for 5 h)	Zn–air batteries	
558

Co/Fe (B-site)

 	Fig. 22  Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) data for (La1−xBax/2Srx/2)Co(O3−yFy) and (Pr1−xBax/2Srx/2)Co(O3−yFy): (a) LSV HER curves, (b) LSV OER curves, and (c) chronoamperometric tests of LBSCOF (LBSCOF: x = 0.5, y = 0.1; LBSCO: x = 0.5, y = 0; PBSCF: x = 0.5, y = 0.2; LBSCF: x = 0.5, y = 0.2; BSCF: x = 1.0, y = 0.2; LSCO: (La0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ) (reproduced from ref. 514 with permission from the Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Pseudotetragonal or pseudocubic a axis lattice constants of some perovskites and common single-crystal cubic substrates (reproduced from ref. 567 and 569 with permission from the Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute), (b) effect of compressive strain on the required overpotential of LaNiO3 thin films (reproduced from ref. 568 with permission from the American Chemical Society), and (c) LaCoO3 thin films with moderate tensile strain (reproduced from ref. 570 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 24  Distortion of coordination polyhedra and electron energy levels from Jahn–Teller distortion: (top) octahedral site elongated along the z axis and (bottom) octahedral site compressed along the z axis.571	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic illustration of Jahn–Teller distortion of MnO6 and NiO6 octahedra in the La2NiMnO6 double perovskite (reproduced from ref. 534 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 26  Typical effects of doping on the grain size and resultant effects on photocatalytic performance for a full-scale doping study (reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic of CB, VB, and band gap energy positions of some perovskites and redox potentials versus NHE (pH = 0) and vacuum relevant to renewable energy technologies.582–584	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic of photocatalytic water splitting by a semiconductor loaded with co-catalysts for H2 and O2 evolution (reproduced from ref. 586 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 29  Electronic band structures of Mn and O substitutional monodoping and codoping of SrTiO3, showing defect configurations, Eg, CB and VB band edges positions, and redox reaction potential for H2 and O2 generation (reproduced from ref. 594 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Crystal structure of SrTiO3 with an oxygen-deficient surface, (b) digital photography of reduced SrTiO3 at different temperatures, and (c) comparison of the photocatalytic H2 production rates of SrTiO3 reduced at different temperatures (reproduced from ref. 577 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 31  Photocatalytic Sr(Ti1−xCrx)O4−δ and (Sr1−xLax)(Ti1−xCrx)O4−δ: (a) crystal structure, (b) schematic band energies, (c) kinetics of photocatalytic H2 evolution from water splitting, and (d) comparison of photocatalytic H2 production rates (full range = UV + visible light) (reproduced from ref. 598 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) SEM image of undoped Bi4Ti3O12, (b) SEM image of Cr-doped Bi4Ti3O12 (Bi4Ti2.6Cr0.4O12), (c) photocatalytic H2 production rates of Bi4Ti3O12 as a function of Cr substitution, and (d) photocatalytic H2 production rates of Bi4Ti3O12 as a function of NiO cocatalyst addition (reproduced from ref. 602 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 33  Refined crystal structures of (a) La0.5Ca0.5TiO2.5N0.5 and (b) La0.3Ca0.7TiO2.7N0.3 (c) O2 production rates as a function of x in (La1−xCax)Ti(O2+xN1−x) (reproduced from ref. 608 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Refined crystal structures of SrTaO2N (top) and codoped (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N (bottom); kinetics of photocatalytic H2 evolution from water splitting as a function of (b) La and Zr codoping and (c) Pt cocatalyst loading of (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N. (d) Visible light absorbance and QE as a function of excitation wavelength (i.e., action spectrum) of (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N for H2 production (0.5 M Na2SO3 aqueous solution as a sacrificial agent, 0.5 wt% Pt as a cocatalyst), and (e) cyclic H2 production for (La0.6Sr0.4)(Zr0.6Ta0.4)O2N under visible light (reproduced from ref. 609 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) UV-visible absorption spectra of complete LaTaON2–SrTiO3 solid solutions and (b) tuning of the Eg and band edge modification through variation in the LaTaON2/SrTiO3 ratio (Sr25 = 75LaTaON2−25SrTiO3) (reproduced from ref. 606 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Refined crystal structure and (b) energy band diagram for undoped and Na-doped SrTaO2N (reproduced from ref. 610 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry), (c) energy band diagram with secondary VBs for N-doped Sr4Nb2O9 calcined at different temperatures, (d) photocatalytic O2 production under visible light of N-doped Sr4Nb2O9 (reproduced from ref. 605 with permission from John Wiley & Sons), (e) energy band diagram for undoped and doped SrTaO2N, i.e., Sr(Nb1−xMgx)O2+yN1−y (x = 0.2), and (f) visible light absorbance and QE as a function of excitation wavelength (i.e., action spectrum) of Mg-doped Sr(Nb1−xMgx)O2+yN1−y (x = 0.2) (reproduced from ref. 611 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematic representation of the band energy diagram for CO2 photoreduction in an aqueous medium (reproduced from ref. 614 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Refined crystal structure of NaTa(O3−xNx; unstated stoichiometry) (colour: purple = Na, cyan (inside grey octahedra) = Ta, blue = N, red = oxygen, white = oxygen vacancy), (b) SEM image of NaTa(O3−xNx) nanocubes, (c) band edge energy diagram for NaTaO3 and NaTa(O3−xNx), and (d) comparative CO and CH4 evolution rates for perovskites and heterojunctions (reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Eg values of various oxide (white) and oxynitride (coloured) perovskites having B-site occupation by Ti4+, Nb5+, or Ta5+ and (b) examples of colours displayed by a range of oxynitride perovskites (reproduced from ref. 203 and 641 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 40  (Bi4−xSmx)(Ti3−yVy)O12 (x = 0.75, y = 0.0375): (a) schematic of the energy band diagram, incorporating a calculated CB and measured Eg, and (b) NOx photodegradation (reproduced from ref. 644 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

Typical anode	Carbon-based materials, alloys, or perovskites	Carbon-based materials, alloys, or perovskites654	Li	Zn
Typical cathode	Li metal oxides or phosphates	Oxide, oxide perovskites	O2 + porous carbon and perovskite catalyst composite	O2 + porous carbon and perovskite catalyst composite
Typical electrolyte	Li salt dissolved in aprotic solvent	Alkaline aqueous solution	Nonaqueous (aprotic, similar to that of Li-ion batteries), aqueous, hybrid (nonaqueous/aqueous), or solid-state	Nonaqueous (aprotic), aqueous, hybrid (nonaqueous/aqueous), or solid-state
System configuration	Sealed	Sealed	Open, additional components, such as air dehydration membrane	Open, additional components such as air dehydration membrane
Theoretical gravimetric energy density (W h kg−1)	387	300	11140	1086655
Typical gravimetric energy density (W h kg−1)	150–200	75–150	900–1000	400–550
Operating voltage (V)	3.2–3.8656	3.7	3.0–3.2	1.65

 	Fig. 41  (a) Schematic of the crystal structure of stratified (La0.5Li0.5)TiO3 and (b) DFT simulation of the preferential Li+ diffusion path (yellow) in the x axis direction (reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 42  Plot of working potential against capacity (energy density) for electrode materials used in Na-ion batteries (reproduced from ref. 674 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 43  Schematic of the principle of an Li–air battery, with perovskite as the OER catalyst.	 

Nonaqueous (aprotic) electrolyte	Oxygen reduction reaction, discharge at cathode (ORR)	Li+ + e− + O2 → LiO2 (E0 = 3.0 V vs. Li/Li+)	Reaction (1)
2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2a (chemical reaction)	Reaction (2a)
LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2a (E0 = 2.96 V vs. Li/Li+)	Reaction (2b)
Oxygen evolution reaction, charge at cathode (OER)	Li2O2(s) → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2b (two-electron process)	Reaction (3)
Li2O2(s) → Li+ + e− + LiO2b (one-electron process)	Reaction (4)
Aqueous electrolyte	Oxygen reduction reaction, discharge at cathode (ORR)	4Li + O2 + 2H2O → 4LiOH (base electrolyte)	Reaction (5)
4Li + O2 + 4H+ → 4LiOH + 2H2O (acid electrolyte)	Reaction (6)
Oxygen evolution reaction, charge at cathode (OER)	4(LiOH + H2O) → 4Li + 6H2O + O2	Reaction (7)

 	Fig. 44  (a) Proposed mechanism of Fe2O3 surface reconstruction and polarisation curves of La0.85FeO3−δ electrodes at a current density of 100 mA g−1 with an energy density of 500 mA h g−1 (reproduced from ref. 694 with permission from American Chemical Society) and (b) charge/discharge resulting in decomposition/formation of Li2O2 for LaNi(O3−xNx) electrodes (reproduced from ref. 695 with permission from American Chemical Society).	 

Anode (Zn)	Zn + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e−
Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−
Cathode (perovskite + oxide)	O2 + 4e− + 2H2O → 4OH−
Full-cell reaction	2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO
Parasitic reaction	Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2

 	Fig. 45  Ce-Doped LaCoO3: (a) XRD data, (b) refined crystal structure, (c) EELS analysis for Co L-edge, (d) density of states (DOS) for undoped and Ce-doped LaCoO3, (e) orbital overlap of low-spin (LS) and intermediate-spin (IS) states of Co 3d with that of O 2p, and (f) EELS analysis for O K-edge (reproduced from ref. 702 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3	Li–air	Capacity = 6890 mA g−1	
704

Capacity retention = 98.9% after 30 cycles
Specific capacity limit = 1000 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1
(La0.6Sr0.4)MnO3−δ	Li–air	Capacity = 4895 mA g−1	
705

Capacity retention = ∼100% after 30 cycles
Specific capacity limit = 500 mA h g−1
Coulombic efficiency = ∼82%
(La0.5Sr0.5)CoO3−δ	Li–air	Capacity = 5799 mA h g−1	
706

Capacity retention = 50 cycles at 0.1 mA cm−1
Upper-limit capacity = 500 mA h g−1
(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.8Mn0.2)O3	Li–air	Capacity = ∼12742 mA h gcarbon−1	
707

Heterojunction with RuO2	Capacity = 500 mA h g−1 (voltage range 2.6–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li)
(La0.8Sr0.2)(Mn0.6Ni0.4)O3	Li–air	Capacity = 5364 mA h gcarbon−1 at 50 mA gcarbon−1	
549

Initial discharge–charge voltage gap = 1.39 V
LaNiO3	Li–air	Capacity = 3407 mA h gcarbon−1	
708

Capacity = 1000 mA h g−1 (voltage range 2.0–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li)
La(Ni0.85Mg0.15)O3	Li–air	Capacity = 620 mA h g−1	
709

Plateau discharge voltage = 2.7 V
(La0.56Li0.33)1.005(Ti0.99Al0.01)O3	Li–air	Discharge capacity = 796 mA h gC+CoO−1 at 25 °C	
710

Discharge capacity = 4035 mA h gC+CoO−1 at 100 °C
Limited capacity mode = 500 mA h gC+CoO−1 at 0.3 mA cm−1
(La0.75Sr0.25)MnO3	Li–air	Capacity = 1000 mA h g−1 after 124 cycles	
711

Coulombic efficiency = ∼100%
(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ	Zn–air	Power density = 127 mW cm−1	
712

Operating voltage = 1.25 V vs. Li+/Li
La(Co0.71Ni0.25)0.96O3−δ	Zn–air	Specific energy density = ∼846 mA h g−1 gZn−1	
713

Power density = 127 mW cm−1
Capacity retention = 100% after 114 cycles (10 h)
Operating voltage = 1.25 V vs. Li+/Li
5.6% Ce/LaCoO3	Zn–air	Capacity = 783 mA kg−1	
714

Pt/Sr(Co0.8Fe0.2)0.95P0.05O3−δ	Zn–air	Capacity = 790.4 mA gzn−1 at 5 mA cm−2	
715

La(Ti0.65Fe0.35)O3−δ	Zn–air	Capacity = 440 mA h g−1 for >12 h	
716

Plateau discharge voltage = 1.16 V
Na0.44MnO2	Na-ion/cathode	Capacity = 96 mA h g−1 at 10 °C	
717

Capacity retention = 97.8% after 100 cycles at 0.5C
Na4Fe3(PO4)–P2O7 + reduced graphene oxide	Na-ion/cathode	Capacity = 78 mA h g−1 at 20C and 30 °C	
718

Capacity retention = 83% after 300 cycles at 20C
Coulombic efficiency = 97.5%
FeTiO3	Na-ion/anode	Capacity = 358.8 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	
683

Capacity retention = 90% after 200 cycles at 100 mA g−1
Coulombic efficiency = ∼99%
(Bi0.5Na0.5)TiO3	Na-ion/anode	Capacity = ∼470 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1	
684

Capacity retention = 46% after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1
Coulombic efficiency = ∼98% (50 cycles)
Na4Ti5O12 + carbon nanotube	Na-ion/anode	Capacity retention = 44.2 mA h g−1 after 3000 cycles at 1 A g−1	
719

Coulombic efficiency = ∼100%
(La0.56Li0.34)TiO3	Solid-state electrolyte	Ionic conductivity = 2.0 × 10−5 S cm−1	
720

Capacity = 145 mA h g−1 (41 μm thickness)
Capacity retention = 86.2% after 50 cycles (41 μm thickness)
Al–Li7La3Zr2O12	Solid-state electrolyte	Ionic conductivity = 9.9 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 25 °C	
721

Ionic conductivity = 5.1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C
Li1.4(Ti1.6Al0.4)(PO4)3	Solid-state electrolyte	Ionic conductivity = 5.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C	
722

Coulombic efficiency = ∼94.4% (36 mA h g−1 for 50 cycles)

 	Fig. 46  (La0.56Li0.34)TiO3 tape-cast films of ∼29 μm thickness: (a) cross sectional SEM image before sintering, (b) cross-sectional SEM image after sintering at 1260 °C, (c) SEM image of the surface after sintering at 1050 °C, (d) cycling performance at 0.1C (inset: images of pasted cathode and anode), and (e) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the Li/PEO/(Li0.34La0.56)TiO3/LiFePO4 full cell battery at 65 °C (reproduced from ref. 733 with permission from John Wiley & Sons).	 

Electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLC)	Ultrahigh power densities	Low energy densities	Carbon-based materials
Pseudocapacitors	Higher energy densities	Low capacitance retention	Metal oxides
Lower power densities	Conductive polymers
Intercalation pseudocapacitors	High power densities	Limited to specific material structures	Perovskites
Highest energy densities	Nb, Ru, W oxides

 	Fig. 47  Effect of cycling on the gravimetric capacitance of SrCoO3−δ and (Sr0.5Ba0.5)(Co0.8Fe0.2)O3−δ (reproduced from ref. 739 with permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 48  Dependence of the peak current density on the scan rate for (a) CaMnO3−δ, (b) Ca2MnO4−δ (measured at potentials of −0.10 V (black lines) and −0.25 V (red lines)), (c) intercalation rates of oxygen for all four perovskite variants, and (d) deintercalation rates of oxygen for all four perovskite variants (diffusion rates measured using a bounded diffusion model) (reproduced from ref. 741 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 49  (a) NEXAFS spectra obtained at the Mn 2p adsorption edge, (b) refined crystal structure of (PrBa)Mn2O6−δ, showing oxygen intercalation during charging. DFT+U calculated density of states (DOS) for (c) cubic and (d) hexagonal PBM (reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 50  Refined crystal structures of BiFeO3−δ during charging (left) and discharging (right), showing electric fields around oxygen vacancies (δ) in red and the surrounding electric field for Li+ transport in green (reproduced from ref. 737 with permission from Elsevier).	 


(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ	(La0.75Sr0.25)0.9(Cr0.5Mn0.5)O3	A-Site vacancies	3% H2O + CH4	900	0.2	7	
761

(La0.85Sr0.15)MnO3/YSZ	(Sm0.2Ce0.8)O2−δ/Ni/YSZ	Sm substitutional	25% CH4 + 75% air	700	0.3	500	
771

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ/GCO	Ba–(Ni0.53Cu0.47)Ox/GCO	Ba dopant	Dry CH4	750	0.31	200	
772

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ	4 wt% Au–NiO/GCO	Au dopant	CH4:H2O (2:1)	850	0.41	200	
773

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.2Fe0.8)O3–SDC/YSZ	Sm0.2(TixCe1−x)0.8O1.9/Ni/YSZ	Ti substitutional	Dry H2	700	0.38	80	
774

(La0.85Sr0.15)0.9MnO3−δ–SDC/YSZ	(Sm0.2Ce0.8)O2−δ/Ni/YSZ	Sm substitutional	Dry H2	800	0.52	70	
775

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ	10 wt% CeO2–25 wt% Ni/YSZ	Ce dopant	Dry CH4	800	0.48	5	
776

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ	LiLaNi–Al2O3 + Cu–Ni/YSZ	Cu dopant	CH4:O2 (2:1)	850	1.08	300	
777

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/ScSZ	LiLaNi–Al2O3/Ni–ScSZ	Ni dopant	CH4:H2O (2:1)	850	0.53	10	
778

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/ScSZ	7 wt% Ni–Al2O3/Ni–ScSZ	Ni dopant	CH4:O2 (4:1)	850	0.38	25	
779

(Pr0.7Ca0.3)MnO3/ScSZ	Cu–CeO2/Ni/YSZ	Cu dopant	C2H5OH + H2O	800	0.56	80	
780

(La0.8Sr0.2)MnO3/YSZ	Cu–Ni/YSZ	Cu dopant	Dry CH4	800	0.44	25	
781

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ/GCO	NiCu/GCO	Gd dopant	Dry CH4	800	0.32	1300	
782

(La0.6Sr0.4)(Co0.2Fe0.8)O3/GCO	(Fe0.1Ni0.9)/GCO	Gd dopant	Dry CH4	650	0.34	50	
783

	(18)

 	Fig. 51  Proton conductivity of various oxides calculated from data for proton concentrations and mobility according to Norby and Larring.798	 

 	Fig. 52  Predictions of (a) defect and gas fluxes inside the tube, (b) defect concentration and electrostatic potential as a function of tube radius, and (c) defect and gas fluxes outside the tube (positive flux = radially outward; negative flux = radially inward; OH˙ concentrations for 1 and 2 × 101 mol% overlap) (reproduced from ref. 790 with permission from the Electrochemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 53  Predicted equilibrium defect concentrations, electrical conductivity, and transference numbers as a function of temperature, with (solid lines) and without (dashed lines) polaron trapping (gas phase = 80.0 mol% O2 and 20.0 mol% H2O) (reproduced from ref. 795 with permission from the Electrochemical Society).	 

Ba(Y0.15Zr0.85)O3−δ	High proton conductivity, even at intermediate temperatures (500–800 °C)	Separator in high-drain electrochemical applications, including fuel cells, electrochemical reactors, and/or sensors	
807

High thermodynamic stability upon exposure to CO2, SO3, or H2O
High resistance (low conductivity) across grain boundaries	High-temperature proton conductor (HTPC)
Challenges in fabrication of high-density materials
Ba(Y0.1Zr0.9)O2.95	High hole (h˙) and low proton  conductivities under oxidising conditions at high PO2 in range 1–21 kPa	Fuel cell electrolyte at 700 °C with ionic transport number ∼0.8	
808

Nearly 100% proton conductivity under reducing conditions	Suitable for hydrogen injection into inert gas streams under reducing condition
Pr(Ni0.5Co0.5)O3−δ	Triple ionic–electronic conductor (simultaneous transport of electrons and two ionic species)	High activity in water oxidation reaction (WOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)	
784

Large water insertion capability of 0.055% ± 0.003% (hydration for 15 h at 500 °C in wet air)	PCEC (used as oxygen electrode with self-sustainable and reversible properties, exhibiting high electrochemical performance at intermediate temperature range of 400–600 °C).
Dense Pr(Ni0.5Co0.5)O3−δ membrane with high H2 permeation flux of 1.5 × 10−7 and 0.4 × 10−7 mol cm−2 s−1 at 500 °C in dry and wet 3% H2, respectively	High current density of −1.7 A cm−2 at 600 °C
Open-circuit potential of 1.06 V at 600 °C
High durability and thermal cycling stability as PCEC
NiO + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)Co2O5+δ	Lab-scale synthesis of triple-layer membrane, including:	Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)Co2O5+δ as cathodic electrode in intermediate-temperature protonic ceramic membrane fuel cell (IT-PCMFC)	
809

(1) Anode: NiO (60 wt%) + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ (40 wt%)	Open-circuit potential of 1.005 V at 700 °C
(2) Electrolyte: Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ (∼20 μm thickness)	Maximal power density of 520 mW cm−2 at 700 °C
(3) Cathode: Pr(Ba0.5Sr0.5)Co2O5+δ (∼50 μm thickness)	Low electrode polarisation resistance of 0.12 Ω cm2 at 700 °C
Ba(Zr0.1Y0.2Ce0.7)O3−δ as mixed ionic and electronic conducting material
NiO + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1CeO0.7)O3−δ Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1CeO0.7)O3−δ Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ	Synthesis of triple-layer membrane, including:	Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ as cathodic electrode in intermediate-temperature protonic solid oxide fuel cell (IT-SOFC)	
810

(1) Anode: NiO (65 wt%) + Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1Ce00.7)O3−δ (35 wt%)	Long-term power density stability of 0.6 V at 750 °C for 500 h
(2) Electrolyte: Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1Ce00.7)O3−δ (∼15 μm thickness)	Power densities of 1710 and 690 mW cm−2 at 750 °C and 600 °C, respectively
(3) Cathode: Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ (∼14 μm thickness)	Ohmic and polarisation resistances of 0.063 Ω cm2 and 0.046 Ω cm2, respectively, at 750 °C
Nd(Ba0.5Sr0.5)(Fe0.5Co1.5)O5+δ as mixed ionic–electronic conducting material
Ba(Zr0.1Y0.1Co0.4Fe0.4)O3−δ	Triple conductor (simultaneous transport of oxygen, proton, and hole species)	Potential use as PCFC cathode in ORR	
811

Proton conductivity of 1.73 S cm−1 at 600 °C in dry air (0% H2O)
Proton conductivity of 1.69 S cm−1 at 600 °C in partially wet air (10% H2O)
Proton surface exchange coefficient (Kδ) of 3.85 × 10−6 at 500 °C

(Sr0.2La0.8)(Fe0.4Co0.6)O3−δ	Coprecipitation	O2 permeation flux of 1 × 10−7 mol cm−2 at 950 °C through 1.85 mm thickness in O2/N2 + He	Oxidative coupling of methane	
812

(Sr0.4La0.6)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ	Inverse sequential tape casting	O2 permeation flux of 13.3 mL min−1 cm−2 at 1000 °C through 30 μm thickness in O2/Ar	O2 permeation	
813

(Sr0.5La0.5)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ	Spray deposition of perovskite on porous α-Al2O3 tube	O2 permeation flux of 2.5 × 10−7 mol cm−2 s−1 at 850 °C through 2 mm thickness in He (1 Pa)	CH4 conversion	
814

Ba(Zr0.1Fe0.9)O3−δ	Complexing EDTA–CA method or solid-state synthesis	O2 permeation flux of 1.95 × 10−4 mol cm−2 s−1 at 800 °C through 1.1 mm thickness in 50 mol% H2O and 30 mol% H2 at inlets of feed and sweep sides, respectively, ethane conversion of 79%, ethylene yield of 74%, and ethylene selectivity of 93% at 850 °C in CH4/Ar	Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane into ethylene	
815

(Sr0.4La0.6)(Fe0.8Co0.2)O3−δ	Combined phase inversion/sintering	O2 permeation flux of 2.2 × 10−4 mol m−2 Pa−1 s−1 at 970 °C in air stream; C2 yield of 15.3% and C2 selectivity of 43.8% at 950 °C in CH4/Ar	Oxidative coupling of methane to C2	
816

(Sr0.5Ba0.5)(Fe0.2Co0.8)O3−δ	Complexing EDTA–CA method	With La–Sr/CaO catalyst: C2 yield of ∼13–15%, and C2 selectivity of 54–88% at 775–900 °C	Oxidative coupling of methane to C2	
817

Ba(CoxFeyZr1−x−y)O3−δ	Phase-inversion spinning + sintering	H2 production rate of 1.2 cm3 min−1 cm−2 at 800 °C, ethane conversion of 59%, ethylene selectivity of 89% at 800 °C, ethylene yield of ∼55%	Water splitting and ethane dehydrogenation into ethylene	
818

Ba(CoxFeyZr1−x−y)O3−δ	Hydrolysis in NH4OH + ball milling + coating with Au paste + sintering	Ethane conversion of 35%, ethylene selectivity of 41%, methane selectivity of 24% at 725 °C	Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane into ethylene	
819

Ba(Ce0.7Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1)0.95Ni0.05O3−δ	Complexing EDTA–CA method	H2 permeation flux of 0.42 mL min−1 cm−2 at 800 °C through 0.45 mm thickness in 10% H2 + N2/Ar	H2 permeation	
820

ACTEM	Aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy

E
a
	Activation energy
ASSLB	All-solid-state lithium battery
APXPS	Ambient pressure XPS
ABF	Annular bright field
AQE	Apparent quantum efficiency
AIE	A-site ionic electronegativity
AET	Atomic electron tomography
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
AES	Auger electron spectroscopy

E
g
	Band gap
BJH	Barrett–Joyner–Halenda
BSHs	Battery–supercapacitor hybrids

r
Bohr
	Bohr radius
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
CBM	Conduction band minimum
CB	Conduction band
DFT	Density functional theory
DOS	Density of states

k
	Dielectric constant
DSC	Differential scanning calorimetry
DRIFTS	Diffuse reflection infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy
EDLCs	Electrochemical double layer capacitors
ECSA	Electrochemically active surface area
PEO	Electrolyte polyethylene oxide
EELS	Electron energy loss spectroscopy
EPR	Electron paramagnetic resonance
ESR	Electron spin resonance
ECC	Electronic charge compensation
EDS	Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
FFT	Fast Fourier transform

E
f
	Fermi energy
FESEM	Field emission scanning electron microscopy
FIB	Focussed ion beam
FTIR	Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
FWHM	Full width at half maximum
GHSV	Gas hourly space velocity

t
	Goldschmidt tolerance factor
GQD	Graphene quantum dot
HMTA	Hexamethylenetetramine
HAADF	High-angle annular dark field
HEPO	High-entropy perovskite oxides
HRSEM	High-resolution scanning electron microscope
HRTEM	High-resolution transmission electron microscope
HER	Hydrogen evolution reaction
HOR	Hydrogen oxidation reaction
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma atomic absorption spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
ICP-OES	Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry
ISS	Interstitial solid solubility
IVCT	Intervalence charge transfer
ICC	Ionic charge compensation
KPFM	Kelvin probe force microscopy
LB	Langmuir–Blodgett
Raman	Laser Raman spectroscopy
LDH	Layered double hydroxide
LSV	Linear sweep voltammetry
LiPON	Lithium phosphorus oxynitride
LAB	Lithium–air battery
LIB	Lithium-ion battery
LD	Low-dimensional
LEED	Low-energy electron diffraction
LEIS	Low-energy ion scattering
MG	Malachite green
MOF	Metal organic framework
MB	Methylene blue
MIEC	Mixed ionic–electronic conducting
MVCT	Multivalence charge transfer
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Testing
NAPXPS	Near ambient pressure XPS
NEXAFS	Near-edge X-ray adsorption fine structure
NPP	Nernst–Planck–Poisson
NQD	Nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots
NCNT	Nitrogen-doped multiwalled carbon nanotube
nc-AFM	Noncontact atomic force microscopy
NHE	Normal hydrogen electrode
NSR	NOx storage-reduction
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
OCM	Oxidative coupling of methane
Oads	Oxygen adsorption
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
Olatt	Oxygen lattice

pO2	Oxygen partial pressure
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
O2-TPD	Oxygen temperature-programmed desorption
PDOS	Partial density of states
PMS	Peroxymonosulfate
PES	Photoemission spectroscopy
PL	Photoluminescence
PGM	Platinum group metals
PEO	Polyethylene oxide
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PALS	Positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy
PAS	Positron annihilation spectroscopy
PEM	Proton exchange membrane
PAOCV	Proton-assisted oxygen vacancy creation
PCECs	Protonic ceramic electrochemical cells
PCFC	Protonic ceramic fuel cell
PLD	Pulsed laser deposition
QE	Quantum efficiency
ROS	Reactive oxygen species
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
RhB	Rhodamine-B
RP	Ruddlesden–Popper
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SFM	Scanning force microscopy
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
STM	Scanning tunnelling microscopy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SAED	Selected area electron diffraction
SCR	Selective catalytic reduction
SNCR	Selective non-catalytic reduction
SP	Single perovskite
SIB	Sodium-ion battery
SOFCs	Solid oxide fuel cells
SV	Space velocity
SSS	Substitutional solid solubility
SPXRD	Synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction
NH3-TPD	Temperature-programmed desorption of ammonia
TPR	Temperature-programmed reduction
TBA+OH−	Tetra(n-butyl)ammonium hydroxide
TBA	Tetra(n-butyl)ammonium
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
DDP	Three-dimensional draped porous
TWC	Three-way catalysts
TRFS	Time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy
TMOH	Transition metal oxide hydroxide
TMP	Transition metal phosphide
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TOF	Turnover frequency
UV	Ultraviolet
UV-Vis	Ultraviolet-visible
VBM	Valence band maximum
VB	Valence band
ΔV	Valence difference
VLS	Vapour–liquid–solid
VOC	Volatile organic compound
WOR	Water oxidation reaction
EXAFS	X-Ray absorption fine structure
XANES	X-Ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-Ray absorption spectroscopy
XRD	X-Ray diffraction
XPS	X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy
YSZ	Yttria stabilised zirconia
ZAB	Zinc–air battery
Footnote
† Hamidreza Arandiyan and Sajjad S. Mofarah contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
