Nanocarbon based composite electrodes and their application in microbial fuel cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01511A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01511A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12673-12698Nanocarbon based composite electrodes and their application in microbial fuel cells

        
          
            Yizhen 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lifen 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Bart 
            Van der Bruggen
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Fenglin 
            Yang
          
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China. E-mail: lifenliu@dlut.edu.cn
bSchool of Food and Environment, Dalian University of Technology, Panjin, China
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, KU Leuven, Celestijinenlaan 200F, Leuven, Belgium
Received 
      18th February 2017
    , Accepted 2nd May 2017First published on 9th May 2017AbstractOther than their use as new energy sources, microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are promising for wastewater treatment as they allow for significant energy savings and a high treatment efficiency if they are integrated with a MBR (membrane bioreactor), where the electricity can be in situ used over the cathode membrane, in spite of the insignificant power generation, the small current and low voltage output. The performance and cost of MFCs are largely influenced by the electrode materials. Nanocarbon materials with superior physical and chemical properties that conventional materials cannot match are crucial for the development of MFCs. In this review, recent research progress and applications of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and their composites as MFC anode/cathodes are highlighted, for insights into the characteristics, the modification/preparation methods and the performance of such MFCs. Different composite catalytic cathode membranes in integrated MFC–MBR systems are also reviewed. Integrating a MBR with a catalytic cathode membrane in MFCs improves the effluent quality and overcomes the deficiencies of MFC, while using the recovered bio-energy to offset the energy consumption for aeration and filtration.Yizhen ZhangYizhen Zhang is currently a postgraduate for successive postgraduate and doctoral program in the School of Environmental Science and Technology, supervised by Professor Lifen Liu at the Dalian University of Technology (DUT, http://www.dlut.edu.cn/), China. She received her B.S. from Qingdao Agriculture University in 2015. Her research focused on photo(electro)catalytic electrode materials to degrade water contaminants.Lifen LiuLifen Liu is currently a full professor in the School of Environmental Science and Technology, DUT. She received her bachelor, master and Ph.D degrees in DUT. She was a visiting scholar and collaborator at Sydney University, Australia from 1997–1999, research associate at HKUST, HK, and a senior research fellow at the Georgia Institute of Technology, USA (2010.10–2011.05). Her current and main scientific interests include environmental nanotechnology and pollution control engineering, specifically functional membrane and fuel cell technologies for cost-effective processes. She has published more than 100 international peer-reviewed papers.Bart Van der BruggenBart Van der Bruggen is currently a full time research professor at KU Leuven, Belgium since 1 October 2009. He received his Ph.D degree in Applied Sciences and Chemical Engineering from KU Leuven in 2000. He was a postdoctoral fellow/visiting researcher at Universita della Calabria and ITM-CNR, Italy; at Lappeenranta University of Technology (LUT), Finland; and at the University of North Carolina (UNC-Chapel Hill), USA. His research interests include solvent separation, resource recovery, and water treatment. He has published more than 350 international peer-reviewed papers.Fenglin YangFenglin Yang was born in Jilin province, China, 1944. He is currently a professor and a group leader of laboratory of environmental pollution control, in the School of Environmental and Science and Technology, DUT. His current and main scientific interests include membrane separation technology, environmental electrochemical technology, advanced biological treatment, industrial ecology and environmental planning. He has published more than 400 international peer-reviewed papers.
1. Introduction
The fast-growing population and increasing living standards stimulate the global demand for energy, clean water and materials. The challenges in energy supply and conservation, and in abating environmental pollution efficiently, make the development of fuel cell technologies, which are capable of directly utilizing the energy of complex organic substances (e.g., biomass) without any additional processing1 or intensifying the use of natural resources, very important in global sustainable development.
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are bio-electrochemical systems that can spontaneously convert biomass/organics into electric power through the metabolic reactions of specific microbes called exo-electrogens2 under anaerobic conditions.3Exo-electrogens in a bio-anode disintegrate an organic substrate while producing electrons (e−) and protons (H+).4 Electrons produced in this way are transferred from the microbes to the anode and further migrate through the external circuit to the cathodes, while protons are transferred internally to the cathode chamber through proton exchange membranes. The electrons and protons react with oxygen and form water. Accordingly, the anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction promote the transfer of electrons in the anode and to the cathode, which completes the circuit.5–7 This is the basic working mechanism of MFCs, which generates electrical power and simultaneously removes organic waste pollutants.
Nevertheless, even with remarkable improvements in the generated power density, the still relatively insignificant power intensity and high costs of MFCs restrict large-scale application of MFCs. The electrode material is critical to the performance and costs of MFCs, and especially the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode,8,9 besides the electrochemical activities of exo-electrogenic bacteria at the anode,4,10,11 is critical. Making MFCs cost-effective and scalable by the design of high performance electrodes is still a great challenge.
Carbon materials are the most widely used electrode/support in MFCs such as carbon cloth,12 carbon paper,13 carbon rods,14 graphite granules15 and graphite felt,16 due to their chemical stability, high conductivity, high specific surface area and low cost.17–19 The characteristics of the support can be improved by surface treatment and by the addition of metals.20,21 Nanocarbon materials are increasingly used to manifest the broad range carbon materials with a tailored nanoscale dimension and functional properties that dramatically depend on their nanoscale features. The modification of electrodes by various nano-engineering techniques is thought to be promising.20 This field has attracted ever-increasing interest and efforts in electrode preparation and design. Recently, Yuan et al.21 summarized graphene-based materials for usage in MFCs, and provided insight into the modification of graphene materials for improving MFC electrodes. Graphene nanosheets based ORR catalysts were reviewed, influencing factors and strategies in catalyst modification were outlined and research efforts in the graphene based ORR were highlighted.8 Yazdi et al.22 reviewed the advances in MFCs using CNTs and CNT-based composites, their modification and their impact on power/current generation.
In this paper, research progress in carbon nanotubes/graphene, g-C3N4 and their composites, as anode/cathodes are reviewed, and applications of MFCs integrated in different processes are suggested. Membrane bioreactor (MBR) integrated MFCs are proposed as a promising technology in wastewater treatment and electricity production. In this coupled system, a MBR enhances the effluent quality to overcome the deficiencies of a typical MFC, while the MFC compensates the energy consumption for aeration and filtration in the MBR by generating power.23,24 Electro-catalysts in the cathode membrane have been studied to mitigate membrane fouling and to improve the cathodic catalytic activity, such as the oxygen reduction reaction. Thus, using a composite cathode membrane electrode is more opportune for an MFC–MBR system in view of simple operation and lower space requirements.25 Because a composite cathode membrane can be made functional as a catalyst for the ORR, it can conduct electrons and filtrate effluent simultaneously in an MFC–MBR system. This paper highlights the most significant recent advances in exploiting CNTs, graphene and g-C3N4 in MFCs, and reviews the characteristics, modifications and preparation methods of these nano-carbon modified electrodes. Applications of carbon nanotubes, graphene and g-C3N4 as anodes or cathodes in MFCs, and the use of composite catalytic cathode membrane electrodes in an MFC–MBR system will be discussed.
2. Nano carbon material – structural features and catalytic properties
2.1 Carbon nanotubes
Since the discovery of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), a cylindrical-shaped nanomaterial, in 1991 by Iijima and colleagues,26 they have attracted much attention due to their unique features, such as their nanometer size,27 good electronic conductivity,28,29 surface-area-to-volume ratio, superb mechanical and chemical stability,29,30 and manufacturing compatibility with batch mode microfabrication.31 CNTs are commonly classified as SWCNTs (single-walled) and MWCNTs (multi-walled). The 3-D nanotubes improve both the surface area and electrode reaction kinetics in comparison with 2-D carbon cloth electrodes.32,33 The excellent electrical properties of CNTs promote electron-transfer reactions, making CNTs extremely attractive as an electrode material.
CNTs with bilirubin oxidase improve electron transfer and yield a more than tenfold increase in electro-chemical reduction of oxygen compared to conventional carbon fibers. CNTs have been reported to improve the electrochemical performance of enzymes and microorganisms.34 The electrons from the anode electrodes can be accepted by the electron acceptors in the cathode, including O2, nitrate, and ferricyanide. Among them, O2 is the most preferred electron acceptor due to its high standard potential, low cost, and “earth-abundant” nature. Generally, there are two different ORR pathways9: (1) electrons and protons via an efficient 4-electron pathway (eqn (1)); (2) an inefficient 2-electron pathway involve hydrogen peroxide production (HO2−) as the intermediate product (eqn (2)), followed by the reduction of HO2− (eqn (3a)) or a disproportionation reaction between HO2−- and the solution (eqn (3b)).36 O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O, Eθ = 1.229 V vs. SHE(1) O2 + 4H+ + 2e− → HO2− + OH−, Eθ = −0.0076 V vs. SHE(2) HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−, Eθ = 0.878 V vs. SHE(3a) 2HO2− → 2OH− + O2(3b)
What's more, the electron transfer number of the ORR can be calculated through the slopes of Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots by the following equation: (4) id = 0.62nFAv−1/6CO2DO22/3ω1/2(5)where i is the measured current density, ik is the kinetic current density, id is the diffusion limiting current density, ω is the rotating speed of the disk electrode (rad s−1), n is the number of electrons transferred per oxygen molecule in the ORR process, F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1), A is the area of the disk electrode, ν is the kinetic viscosity of the electrolyte, CO2 is the bulk concentration of O2, and DO2 is the diffusion coefficient of O2.37,38
Electrocatalysts used in the cathode can accelerate the slow kinetics of the ORR in an MFC. CNTs supported Pt can increase the reaction activity and reduce the high cost of Pt.39 According to Ghasemi et al.,40 CNTs greatly enhance the heterogeneous electron transfer in the ORR. The mechanism is by (1) supplying more accessible active sites for oxygen chemical adsorption, due to the increase in the specific surface area, (2) weakening the O–O bonds and reducing the activation energy. Huang et al.35 depicted the pathway (Fig. 1) of oxygen reduction in a NiO/CNT composite with effective electro-catalytic activity. CNTs can promote NiO uniform distribution with more active sites for the oxygen reduction and transport of ORR relevant species, which further boosts the reduction of O2 with H+ and e−. Additionally, the synergetic effects of CNTs and NiO accelerate the ORR. Furthermore, the catalyst performance was highly dependent on the percentage of NiO in the CNT nanocomposites, two electrons to 3.5 electrons were transferred along with pathways of the ORR accompanied with the increasing concentration of NiO. A unique cathode catalyst Co/Fe/N/CNTs obtained a higher cathodic electrochemical activity, due to the highly active catalytic surface in the presence of the CNTs, which facilitates the electron transfer through the films and decreases the oxygen reduction overpotential.41
 Fig. 1  Schematic pathway of oxygen reduction of NiO/CNT composites.35 Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier. 
2.2 Graphene
The family members of graphene nanomaterials include single- and multilayer graphene, graphene oxide, reduce graphene oxide, graphene (oxide) quantum dots, and hybridized nanocomposites.42–44 Graphene is the world's thinnest and most rigid nanomaterial; its two-dimensional lattice is made of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, an extended honey comb network, and long-range p-conjugation yield electro-catalytic properties.45–47 Since the isolation of graphene in 2004,48 it has attracted research attention for its unique properties including intrinsically superior electrical conductivity,49 excellent mechanical robustness and flexibility, ultrahigh specific surface area,50 low production costs and good biocompatibility.51 These have induced a strong scientific and technological interest with great application prospects in various fields, such as nanoelectronics,52 energy storage materials, biosensing,53 and catalysts.54 It may provide new opportunities to MFCs as well.
Graphene can be synthesized by either top-down processes (e.g., electrochemical/mechanical/chemical exfoliation of graphite) or bottom-up methods (e.g., chemical vapor deposition and chemical synthesis).55–57 Graphene oxide (GO) is an important derivative of graphene that contains largely oxygenated GO sheets bearing epoxy and hydroxyl functional groups on their basal planes as well as carbonyl and carboxyl groups on the sheet edges.36 However, the electrical conductivity of GO sheets is reduced by the destructed conjugated sp2 hybridized network via its hydrophilic functional groups.58 Therefore, some efforts have been devoted on the utilization of reduced GO (rGO) to increase the electrical conductivity of GO by removing (part of) the oxygen functional groups.
Although rGO has a better electrical conductivity compared to GO, it often forms irreversible agglomerations during chemical reduction, which lowers its active surface and electrical conductivity compared to graphene. Hence, the complex formation of rGO with more conductive materials is essential for better electrical conductivity and less rGO aggregation.59 Yong et al.60 prepared a conductive, free-supporting and monolithic graphene foam, decorated with a conductive polymer, polyaniline (PANI), through in situ polymerization. The bacteria can densely adhere on the graphene surface and deep inside the 3D graphene/PANI, which accelerates electron transfer and provides highly conductive pathways.
2.3 g-C3N4
Carbon nitride (C3N4) is considered as one of the oldest artificial polymers in the scientific literature. C3N4 polymers and their precursors were first developed by Berzelius and named by Liebig in 1834.61 C3N4 generally has seven phases which are α-C3N4, β-C3N4, pseudocubic C3N4, cubic C3N4, g-o-triazine, g-h-triazine, and g-h-heptazine.64 Among all the phases, tri-s-triazine-based graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) was energetically favored relative to the other phases.65 It has a stacked 2D structure, accessible crystalline pore walls, and a large surface area, facilitating mass transfer. g-C3N4 has excellent chemical resistance and is almost insoluble in water, toluene, ethanol and diethyl ether, which may be attributed to van der Waals interactions between its stacked layers.66,67 In addition, g-C3N4 has a remarkably high catalytic activity for many chemical reactions, such as contaminant degradation and photocatalytic hydrogen production, due to its abundant nitrogen active sites.68–72 The preparation method of g-C3N4 is relatively simple, mainly through the pyrolysis of nitrogen-rich precursors via bulk reaction or poly-condensation.

Fig. 2 shows that triazine (C3N3) and tri-s-triazine/heptazine (C6N7) rings are the basic tectonic units to establish allotropes of g-C3N4.62,63 Tri-s-triazine based g-C3N4 was the most stable phase of C3N4 under ambient conditions up to 600 °C.69 This was in accord with the first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations verified by Kroke et al.73 Among nitrogen-doped carbons, g-C3N4 with a high N content is deemed to be the most stable allotrope of various CN structures. However, due to its semi-conductive properties (band gap: 2.7 eV),71 the electrocatalytic oxygen reduction activity of pure g-C3N4 is not satisfactory. Thus, it is rarely explored for application in fuel cells and other electrochemical processes. However, due to excellent electron collection and transport properties of graphene, electrons can be transferred from the graphene layer to the g-C3N4 layer in g-C3N4/graphene multilayer sheets, particularly accumulating on the N atoms in g-C3N4 acting as the catalytically active sites in the composite.74 Yang et al.75 synthesized graphene–based carbon nitride (G–CN) nanosheets with excellent electrocatalytic activity and selectivity for 4e− ORR path. Recently researchers have focused on the incorporation of conductive materials like mesoporous carbon and graphene sheets into g-C3N4 to improve the electron transfer efficiency in MFCs. For example, Feng et al.70 implanted nitrogen active sites on mesoporous g-C3N4 with sufficient nitrogen content, and used this modified nitrogen-doped graphene cathode to promote the ORR in a MFC.
 Fig. 2  (a) Triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine (heptazine) structures of g-C3N4.62,63 Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 63 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
3. Preparation methods of nano carbon material and their composite electrodes
3.1 CNT electrodes

3.1.1 Polymer modified CNT electrodes. 
Among many commercially and custom-made polymers, conductive polymers such as polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline (PANI), having excellent properties and easy synthesis with CNTs, are utilized as MFC electrode materials.
As an important conducting polymer, polyaniline (PANI) has been used for the preparation of MFC electrodes due to its facile processing ability, hydrophilicity, electrical conductivity, biocompatibility and environmental stability.76 A new strategy of electrophoretic adsorption of CNTs on PANI modified macroporous graphite felt (GF) was explored,76 in which PANI was modified on the graphite felt sheets by electro-polymerization an aniline monomer solution using cyclic voltammetry. CNTs were electrophoretically immobilized on the PANI/GF by applying an anode current. Roh et al.3 prepared PPy-coated CNTs via the in situ chemical polymerization of pyrrole on CNTs. A manganese–polypyrrole–carbon nanotube (Mn–PPy–CNTs) composite preparation includes two steps: in situ chemical polymerization of PPy, and in situ Mn deposition onto the PPy.77
The layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly technique is a versatile approach to fabricate nanostructured thin films. It was first introduced in the early 1990s by Decher, Moehwald and Lvov,78 based on non-covalent intermolecular interactions among charged or hydrogen-bonding moieties. This simple but effective method can not only avoid the poor solubility of CNTs in most solvents in some preparation processes, but also can control the nanostructure of the composite, including the molecular framework and thickness.79,80 More importantly, its non-selective characteristics to the electrode makes the LBL method more adaptable in modifying the MFC electrode. A LBL assembly method was employed to construct CNT/PANI multilayer films, and the CNTs inside the multilayer film could expand the electroactivity of PANI to neutral electrolytes.81 Sun et al.82,83 used the LBL self-assembly method to modify a carbon paper anode, alternately assembling positively charged polyethyleneimine and negatively charged multi-walled carbon nanotubes based on electrostatic interactions. Scanning electron micrographs of the carbon paper and MWCNT/PEI electrodes at different magnifications are shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3a and b, carbon fibers show a relatively smooth texture. However, the LBL-assembled MWCNT/PEI electrode is coarser and flakier (Fig. 3c). A networked rod nanostructure of the outer layer on a MWCNTs/PEI electrode without any aggregation is shown at higher magnification in Fig. 3d. It appears that the LBL self-assembly process enables the CNTs to interweave to form a 3D network-linked structure.
 Fig. 3  Scanning electron micrographs of carbon paper at low (a) and high (b) magnifications, and the PEI/MWCNT composite at low (c) and high (d) magnifications.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier. 
As mentioned above, CNTs can also be conjugated with a natural polymeric matrix. Chitosan (CHI), a natural, polycationic polymer, is used as the supporting material, due to its excellent adsorption properties and biocompatibility.77 Chitosan scaffolds with a pore size distribution between 10 and 120 μm doped with multi-walled carbon nanotubes were fabricated using three different cross-linking agents.84 The results showed that Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 will colonize the CHI–CNT composite material, and integrated scaffolds offer a robust macroporous electrode material. Liu et al.85 fabricated a nanostructured biocathode by a one-step electro-deposition of CNTs and CHI onto carbon paper for oxygen reduction. The results obtained in this study showed that a CHI–CNT electrode facilitates the electron transfer and therefore significantly decreases the electrochemical energy loss at the electrode/bacteria interface.


3.1.2 Metal/metal oxide modified CNT electrodes. 
The introduction of metals or metallic oxides such as Co,41 Pd,86 MnO2,87 and Fe3O4 into CNTs can dramatically enhance the performance of CNTs due to a higher energy density, and a more distinct redox potential.
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a commonly applied technique for manufacturing bulk amounts of high quality CNTs. In CVD, the gaseous hydrocarbon feedstock reacts between transition metal catalyst particles in the furnace, and finally precipitates as CNTs onto the catalyst bed. Sharma et al.88 have synthesized MWCNTs using a single stage furnace thermal CVD facility by catalytic decomposition of acetylene over Mischmetal (Mm), then Pt/MWNTs were synthesized by chemical reduction. Vertically aligned CNTs were synthesized by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) as well, and used as cathode materials in single chamber MFCs.89 Manganese dioxide was electrochemically deposited on the vertically aligned CNTs to improve the cell performance and lower the oxygen reduction reaction resistance.
A variety of Pt based binary or multimetallic alloys, such as Pt–Co, Pt–Ni, Pt–Pd, have been prepared to serve as the oxygen reduction catalyst due to their good activity and stability. As a transition metal similar to Pt, palladium (Pd) shows similar binding energies of O and OH and has a comparably high catalytic activity than Pt, but a much lower cost than Pt.90 Therefore, Quan et al.90 fabricated a CNT supported Pt–Pd electrode using a simple electro-deposition method in dissolving chloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6·6H2O) and disodium tetrachloropalladate (Na2PdCl4) in H2SO4. The electro-deposition method was easily optimized through controlling deposition cycles and selecting optimum supporting materials to optimize the amount of metal deposition.
As the anode material, some studies indicate that platinum can be used as an anode electrocatalyst to promote the bacterial metabolism.90–92 However, it has been found that molybdenum carbides (Mo2C) have a platinum-like electrocatalytic activity towards the bacterial metabolism.93,94 Mo2C modified CNTs as anode materials were synthesized by using the microwave-assisted method with Mo(CO)6 as a single source precursor. Park et al.20 synthesized Fe3O4/CNT composite modified anodes in MFCs. Firstly they coated mono-dispersed Fe3O4 nanoparticles on CNTs by using a solvothermal synthetic method. Then the Fe3O4/CNT nano-composite was introduced into an E. coli culture medium; the bacteria were immobilized on a Fe3O4/CNT nanocomposite by a culturing process, to form a network of E. coli and the Fe3O4/CNT nanocomposite.


3.1.3 3D structured CNT electrodes. 
Electrode materials and their spatial orientation have a significant effect on the performance of an MFC.95 Two-dimensional porous anodes have small pore sizes; consequently, microorganisms only clog on the surface and the interior of the electrode is inaccessible.60 This phenomenon seriously limits the performance of MFCs.96 Compared with 2D electrodes, 3D architectures enable internal colonization and efficient transport of substrates and increase bacterial cell attachment, showing promise for application in MFCs.97 Recently, a number of new porous materials with nano-components and three-dimensional structures, including CNTs,98 graphene-coated sponges99 and reduced graphene oxide covered nickel foam,100 have been developed to improve the performance of MFCs. Previously, Xie et al.101 reported on the fabrication and properties of a CNT–textile bio-electrode. A CNT-coated textile provides an open 3D space for internal colonization with efficient electrolyte transport and an affinitive CNT surface for extracellular electron transfer.
Xie et al.102 also decorated CNTs–textile with a platinum nanoparticle composite to catalyze oxygen reduction, using an electrochemical deposition method. The electrochemical deposition method guarantees an electronic pathway for all of the catalyst, while the open and macroporous structure of the CNTs–textile provides a high specific interfacial surface area of catalyst-electrolyte. This effective design of the cathode structure, the improved catalyst loading, and the catalytic activity of CNTs jointly yield a superior performance.
Unlike the CNTs–textile with a layered structure of limited thickness, the CNTs–sponge can be tailored into any shape through different synthesis processes to fit a range of device configurations, such as cylinders, cubes, or strips. The sponge can enable useful functionalities that are difficult to obtain with paper or textile and has a continuous 3D surface that is virtually free of interrupted junctions.98 Xie et al.98 prepared a CNTs–sponge composite by a simple and scalable dipping and drying process, which can provide a three-dimensional scaffold that was favorable for microbial colonization and catalytic decoration. Fig. 4a and b show that a strong affinity CNT ink is conformed on a 3D sponge surface with hydrophilic macroscale pores. As shown in Fig. 4c, the open 3D porous structure of the CNTs–sponge allows microorganism to colonize internally, without the biofilm clogging the pores. Microorganisms are attached on the CNTs–sponge surface in as shown in Fig. 4d, illustrating the strong interaction between the microbial nanowires and CNTs. Zhang et al.103 also utilized a dipping–drying method as explained above, to fabricate a homogeneous and stable CNTs–stainless steel mesh biocathode for MFCs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the CNTs–sponge, (b) SEM images of the CNTs–sponge before microbial colonization, (c) interior SEM images of the CNT–sponge after microbial colonization, and (d) a microorganism attached to the CNTs–sponge surface.98 Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3.2 Graphene electrodes

3.2.1 Graphene modified electrodes. 
A routine method of preparing graphene-modified electrodes typically comprises three steps: (1) chemical synthesis of GO using Hummers' method; (2) reduction of GO to graphene by using a chemical reductant; (3) painting the as-prepared graphene on the base electrode material like a stainless steel mesh (SSM) and carbon paper.104 Zhang et al.105 prepared a graphene/polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) modified stainless steel mesh anode, and obtained graphene by the chemical oxidation–reduction treatment of graphite.
Graphene can be synthesized by the chemical reduction of GO with hydrazine/hadrazine derivatives. However, unstable hydrazine/hadrazine derivatives are highly toxic and dangerous. Recently, Salas et al.106 and Wang et al.107 discovered that GO could be reduced to graphene by microbial respiration of Shewanella cells under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions. They have claimed that the resulting microbially reduced graphene (MRG) shows excellent electrochemical properties that are comparable to those prepared by chemical methods. This paper puts forward new insights into microbial mediated green method to synthesize high-performance graphene. Based on this work, Yuan et al.108 built graphene scaffolds in the anode biofilm via in situ conversion of GO to graphene by the extracellular respiration of bacterial cells by adding GO and acetate into an MFC. Electrochemical measurements reveal that the number of accessible active exoelectrogens increase due to the presence of graphene scaffolds, and the EET kinetics are accelerated. The microbial reduction method is also used in preparation of a graphene/biofilm composite cathode for MFCs. For example, Zhuang et al.109 fabricated a biocathode by which the MRG was implanted into a cathodic biofilm, forming graphene/biofilm composites with a 3D structure.
The ice segregation induced self-assembly technique (ISISA) is a universal freeze casting technique, aiming to produce a series of aligned macroporous or layered materials in a sophisticated structure.110–112 The preparation of graphene–polymer nano-composites with higher-order 3D layered architectures has been reported via ISISA, but this requires an additional stabilizer (polystyrenesulfonate) for the chemically reduced 2D graphene, while poly(vinyl alcohol) is to be used as a support material.111 To avoid that only the surface of the electrode is exposed to the bacterial suspension and to design a multileveled porous structure and high conductivity anode for MFC. He et al.113 utilized CHI as the support material to prepare a hierarchically porous architecture, consisting of chitosan and vacuum stripped graphene (CHI/VSG) as an efficient bioanode, using ISISA. To prepare CHI/VSG, graphene oxide was first heated at 250 °C for 5 min under vacuum to obtain VSG, followed by a uniform dispersion in an aqueous CHI solution without using a stabilizer. After that, this suspension was frozen by immersion in liquid nitrogen and subsequently freeze-dried, obtaining self-supported sponge-like 3D scaffolds (Fig. 5b). This CHI/VSG forms a thick multilayered biofilm network favoring mass transport and microorganism infiltration into the interior of the anode material (Fig. 5e and f). However, the scaffolds prepared with RGO form a single-layer biofilm, which can be observed in Fig. 5c and d, indicating a larger surface roughness, and more available surface area provided by the randomly assembled 3D VSG compared to the planar RGO.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of two kinds of structure formation process of (a) layered structure CHI/RGO and (b) branched structure CHI/VSG scaffolds and their contact with bacteria. SEM images of (c, d) CHI/RGO and (e, f) CHI/VSG scaffolds after incubation with bacteria at low (c, e) and high (d, f) magnification.113 Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Heteroatom/polymer doped graphene electrodes. 
Among various heteroatom-doped graphene (using N, P and B atoms, for instance), N-doped graphene (NG) has been proposed as a promising nanomaterial, not only for its catalytic and electrochemical performance, but also for its excellent biological properties, including haemocompatibility, nontoxicity and water-dispersity. A study of Maldonado and Stevenson114 showed that nitrogen-induced defects on the carbon structure can increase the edge plain exposure which contributes to the catalytic activity.115 In the literature, a number of approaches, such as chemical vapour deposition,116 arc discharge of graphite electrodes in a nitrogen atmosphere,116–120 thermal annealing and hydrothermal reduction of graphene oxide,119 have been proposed to synthesize NG. But these methods with low yield, high production cost, high energy consumption and high environmental concern still limit their wide application.120
The carbonization of N-containing polymers like melamine, poly(p-phenylene), polyacrylonitrile, polyaniline and polypyrrole, is an easy way to obtain various types of nitrogen-rich carbon materials retaining the morphology of the precursors. Wen et al.115 prepared porous nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets on graphene (PNCN) by carbonization of graphite oxide–polyaniline hybrid (GO–PANI) and chemical activation with KOH.
However, the reported methods for NG synthesis are usually complex, require high temperatures, produce low atomic ratios of nitrogen to carbon (N/C) in products, and do not deliver products in a reasonably large quantity. Feng et al.121 used a completely metal-free detonation technique to synthesize NG with an atomic ratio of N/C of 12.5%, at a lower synthesis temperature and with easier operation than previously reported methods. Under mild and safe conditions, some microorganisms such as Shewanella and Escherichia coli have been reported to rGO with fewer defects and better properties than chemically prepared grapheme. Fan et al.120 introduced nitrogen into graphene by microbial reduction of graphene oxide with mixed microorganisms from the anode chamber of MFCs. Using this method, the ratio of N/C can approach 8.14%.
Generally, polymer doped graphene can be synthesized with polymeric matrices via simple methods, such as polymerization and electro-deposition. To avoid the use of a binder like polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or Nafion, which may result in a low conductivity of the composite and a low loading of graphene, Lv et al.104 prepared PPy/GO composites by in situ electropolymerization of pyrrole in the presence of GO, which contains many functional groups such as –OH and –COOH acting as an anionic dopant of PPy. Electropolymerization of pyrrole was performed in GO solution as a weak electrolyte in a three-electrode electrochemical cell consisting of a working electrode (GF), a reference electrode (saturated calomel electrode, SCE) and a counter electrode (Pt mesh). The results showed that PPy was uniformly coated on the GF surface compared to a modified GF electrode with PPy alone or graphene alone.
Wang et al.122 adopted galvanostatic electropolymerization as well to fabricate a graphene/PEDOT(G/PEDOT) hybrid as an anode in MFCs. Fig. 6A shows the synthesis pathway to the G/PEDOT hybrid and its interaction with Escherichia coli cells. First, carbon paper/graphene (CP/G) was constructed by coating graphene on the surface of CP. After desiccation, the CP/G electrode was used as the working electrode using galvanostatic electropolymerization to fabricate a G/PEDOT hybrid. Then the negatively charged E. coli cells adhered to the G/PEDOT hybrid with electrostatic interaction, thereby contributing to biofilm formation.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of (A) the G/PEDOT hybrid electrode and its electrostatic interaction with E. coli cells,122 (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from John Wiley and Sons) and (B) the CP/GNR/PANI electrode and the electron transfer from bacteria to the electrode (reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).96 
Zhao et al.96 fabricated PANI networks onto graphene nanoribbon (GNR)-coated carbon paper (CP/GNR/PANI) by electro-deposition. As shown in Fig. 6B, a GNR suspension prepared by longitudinal unzipping of a MWCNT solution was first dropped onto the CP electrode to obtain the CP/GNRs, followed by a two-step electro-deposition of PANI networks in a conventional three electrode system. The first electro-deposition process was the nucleation of the PANI on the CP/GNR electrode, and the second step was growing PANI networks by cyclic voltammetry. Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 (S. oneidensis) transfers electrons to an anode through outer membrane cytochromes and mediators (ribofiavin molecules) excreted by itself. Hou et al.123 prepared a PANI/rGO nanocomposite modified anode by electrochemically reducing graphene oxide first and then coating polyaniline (PANI) nano-fibers on the surface of carbon cloth. The great improvement in this work is attributed to the fact that graphene not only serves as a highly conductive support material, but also provides a large surface for PANI.
To tackle the dispersion of metal nanoparticles, research efforts on anchoring Pt nanoparticles over PANI layered rGO (rGO/PANI/Pt), through simple in situ polymerization and reduction techniques, have been reported.59 GO as a platform provides a high surface area and more active nucleation sites for the effective adsorption of aniline over its surface. In addition, the interaction of GO with aniline occurs through electrostatic interactions between the electron withdrawing functional groups of GO and electron donating groups (–NH–) of aniline, π–π stacking forces between GO and the phenyl group and basal planes of aniline, as well as hydrogen bonding between hydroxyl groups of GO sheets and –N– of aniline (Fig. 7). The adsorbed aniline was polymerized with the aid of ammonium (APS) and the PANI layer was evenly surrounded on the edges of the GO sheets, followed by the addition of HCOOH with GO/PANI to reduce GO into rGO. Polymer/GO/rGO composites are a new type of composite materials that exhibit excellent properties compared to their individual counterparts. Based on this structure and the attention of the green chemistry sector, conductive polypyrrole (PPy)/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) composites were synthesized through in situ polymerization and bioreduction techniques with the aid of Ocimum tenuiflorum, which contains a variety of phytochemical compounds with strong reduction tendencies.62 FT-IR analysis demonstrated that the presence of amide bonds of proteins in Ocimum tenuiflorum extract is mainly responsible for the reduction of GO.
 Fig. 7  Proposed scheme for the preparation of the rGO/PANI/Pt nanocomposite.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


3.2.3 Metal/metal oxide modified graphene electrodes. 
It is known that the immobilization of metallic nanoparticles on graphene as the support has potential for application in fuel cells,124 electronics,125 and sensors.126 To reduce the amount of Pt, some researchers have focused on the cathode electrocatalysts of Pt-based bimetallic catalysts. For example, Quan et al.90 fabricated a Pt–Pd alloy catalyst on carbon paper via electro-deposition as an alternative catalyst for oxygen reduction in an air-cathode MFC. Pt–Co/G alloy nanoparticles were synthesized as cathode electrocatalysts, via an ethylene glycol reduction method.127
Nanostructured metal oxide semiconductors such as SnO2, TiO2, MnO2, and Co3O4 have been extensively used to modify the electrode in MFCs, due to their high surface area, non-toxicity, good biocompatibility and chemical stability.128 Su et al.129 and Song et al.130 used NH4OH as a reductant to prepare a nanocomposite of cobaltosic oxide and nitrogen-doped graphene. Su et al.129 have synthesized a nanocomposite by a general two-step method. The first step is stirring a supernatant GO aqueous solution, Co(Ac)2 aqueous solution and NH4OH at room temperature for 12 h, followed by a facile hydrothermal reaction step at 150 °C for 3 h to reduce GO to graphene. Morphology characterizations showed that the Co3O4 nanoparticles with a crystalline spinel structure are homogeneously dispersed on the nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets, and the graphene weight fraction in Co3O4/N–G hybrid is estimated to be 20%. However, Song et al.130 synthesized Co3O4 on nitrogen doped reduced graphene oxide in only one step stirring at room temperature for 20 h.
Compared with conventional chemical reduction methods, the microwave assisted synthesis can promote mass production in a short time with little energy cost and involves no toxic chemicals for the reduction of GO. Mehdinia et al.128 fabricated graphene–SnO2 nanohybrids using hydrothermal and microwave assisted synthesis. By this method, carbonaceous modified GO was prepared by in situ hydrothermal polymerization of glucose. Subsequently, a large amount of Sn2+ can be adsorbed on the surface of the carbonaceous modified GO with a large number of active groups, followed by the formation of SnO2 nanoparticles on the surface of rGO–C through microwave irradiation. Subsequently, it can be annealed to decompose the carbonaceous material (Fig. 8A). The obtained unique nanostructured graphene–SnO2 nanohybrids, with unique active sites and electron conductivity, enhances hosting of the bacteria for more biocompatibility.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure (A) RGO/SnO2,128 (reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier.) (B) TiO2/rGO hybrid (reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier).132 
Titanium dioxide (TiO2), an important semiconductor metal oxide with rich abundance, low cost, nontoxicity, chemical stability properties and good biocompatibility is attractive for using as electrode material.131 However, the intrinsically low electrical conductivity limits the application of TiO2, but it can be effectively overcome by integration of TiO2 with graphene.
A facile microwave-assisted solvothermal (MWST) process was used to synthesize a graphene/TiO2 hybrid. Amorphous TiO2 was in situ assembled on graphene. Firstly, tetrabutyl titanate and NH3·H2O are added to ethanol, followed by dropwise addition of the mixture to graphene under the MWST conditions. Then, GO can be easily reduced to graphene, while nanostructured TiO2 is in situ assembled on the graphene sheets due to the large number of functional groups on graphene acting as active sites for TiO2 growth.131
However, in this method, the catalytic utilization of TiO2 is relatively weak because of the loose deposition of amorphous TiO2 on the graphene surface and because of aggregation effects. Zou et al.132 synthesized a TiO2/rGO hybrid with uniform deposition of small sized TiO2 crystals (∼10 nm) on rGO nanosheets through a sol–gel process followed by solvothermal treatment. Tetrabutyl titana was mixed with pure ethanol and added dropwise to a GO ethanol/water solution with magnetic stirring to obtain a TiO2/GO colloid, followed by heat treatment at 180 °C for 12 h to allow for a reduction of GO into a Teflon-lined autoclave. After cooling to room temperature, the TiO2/rGO hybrid was dried in a freeze-drying setup (Fig. 8B). The strong synergistic effect of well-uniformed small sized TiO2 nanocrystals and superior conductivity of rGO in the TiO2/rGO hybrid greatly promotes a large amount of microorganisms grown on the highly biocompatible TiO2 nanocrystals surface, which leads to a fast and direct electrochemistry for significantly improved bioelectrocatalysis.
A manganese dioxide–graphene nanosheet (MnO2/GNS) hybrid was synthesized by a redox reaction between GNS and potassium permanganate under microwave irradiation as an alternative cathode catalyst.133 MnO2 nanoparticles grown on GNS to form the MnO2/GNS hybrid depended on the following direct redox reaction: 4MnO4− + 3C + H2O ⇌ 4MnO2 +CO32− + 2HCO3−.


3.2.4 Graphene hydrogel and aerogel electrodes. 
To facilitate EET processes, several approaches have been explored to improve the properties of anodes. For example, Xie et al.99 fabricated a graphene-coated sponge with stainless steel (SS) as the anode material by a simple dipping-and-drying process. Wang et al.100 fabricated three-dimensional (3D) reduced graphene oxide–nickel (rGO–Ni) foam, prepared by refluxing a nickel foam substrate in an aqueous GO solution at 120 °C for 5 h, followed by annealing in hydrogen atmosphere at 400 °C to increase their electrical conductivities. This large pore size of rGO–Ni allows bacteria colonization in the inner structure of the 3D electrode and efficient mass transfer of the nutrient. It can also be folded and bent into various shapes, which makes it fitting to different MFC configurations.
However, this electrode cannot provide a large active surface area for electrocatalytic reactions. Therefore, an electrode with a hierarchical macro- and meso-pore structure promoting cell growth inside pores for high loading of biocatalysts, while providing a large active surface area for high electrocatalytic process, is desired. Freeze drying, also known as lyophilization, has been widely applied to produce porous materials for tissue engineering and biological applications.134,135 Recently, novel types of porous materials such as aligned porous materials and hybrid porous materials have been successfully synthesized by freeze drying.136 Yang et al.137 fabricated 3D supermacroporous graphene-containing foam by freeze drying and pyrolysis of a GO–agarose gel. Agarose was used as a hardening agent to mechanically strengthen the GO–agarose foam structure. In a further study a aerogel/nickel (G/Ni) electrode with a hierarchical porous structure was developed by a freeze-drying assisted self-assembly process for MFC anodes without any binders or conducting additives. The obtained hierarchical porous graphene/nickel (G/Ni) composite with pore sizes of 20 nm to 50 mm could increase the biocatalyst loading.97
Due to the 3D network structure of hydrogels/aerogels, they have an excellent capability of embedding the material of choice, which substantially improves its physical properties. Chen et al.138 found that the nanosheets of GO could be easily assembled into a 3D hydrogel via a chemical reduction induced self-assembly. However, the microporous structure of the rGO hydrogel is difficult for microorganisms to penetrate. Therefore, to prepare a hierarchical microstructure, they adopted an ice template method, which can be utilized to tailor the pore structure of a graphene aerogel during the freeze-drying process of the graphene hydrogel, resulting in a flexible graphene sponge.139 In the freezing process, the size and shape of ice crystals depend on the rate of cooling. An ice template at different growing rates of ice crystals could induce different 3D porous graphene structures (Fig. 9). Liquid nitrogen freezing for a quick growth of ice crystals results in a higher temperature gradient and rapid ice nucleation and growth, and leads to plenty of small ice crystals and an isotropic structural ice template (graphene foam, GF). However, graphene sponge was produced at −10 °C in a refrigerator, because the growth of ice crystals prevailed over ice nucleation, and ice crystals grow along a temperature gradient, leading to a large and anisotropic ice template.139
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the formation process of 3D porous graphene structures under different conditions (a and d). Cross-sectional SEM images of graphene foam (b and c) and a graphene sponge (e) respectively. Surface of the graphene film of a graphene sponge aligned by graphene sheets (f).139 Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graphene aerogels have been also synthesized with hydrothermal methods. However, the obtained aerogels often have considerably hydrophobic surfaces, which are difficult for the electrolyte to access. Therefore, to tailor the pore size of the graphene aerogel and to generate a hydrophilic and biocompatible surface, Qiao et al.140 prepared a graphene aerogel with L-cysteine as the reductant, by a chemical reduction method at low temperature (80 °C) in an oil bath for 9 h. Compared with rGO obtained using the hydrothermal method by heating GO at 180 °C in the autoclave, this method has a low energy consumption. In this study, with the optimized ratio of L-cysteine in the precursor, the obtained graphene aerogel exhibits a highly hydrophilic surface for the redox reaction of flavins and bacterial attachment, and an appropriate pore structure to simultaneously facilitate the electro- and bio-catalytic processes.

3.3 g-C3N4
g-C3N4 is found to have been synthesized by thermal treatment of different nitrogen-rich precursors such as urea, thiourea, melamine, cyanamide, dicyandiamide, and so forth (Fig. 10).141–146 g-C3N4 and its allotropes can be synthesized by various methods, including direct heating of s-triazine-based compounds in an inert atmosphere, or pyrolysis of nitrogen-rich precursors to incorporate s-triazine rings at high pressures and high temperatures.147–149 For example, Li et al.150 synthesized a Fe–N–G catalyst by a facile thermal treatment of a mixture of Fe salt, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and chemically reduced graphene. The g-C3N4 precursor was prepared by thermal polymerization of dicyandiamide at 550 °C with a flow of argon in a tube furnace.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of g-C3N4 by thermal treatment of different nitrogen-rich precursors such as melamine,141 cyanamide,142 dicyanamide,143 urea,144,145 and thiourea.146 The black, white, blue, red, and yellow balls denote C, H,N, O, and S atoms, respectively.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Great effort has been devoted to the synthesis of g-C3N4 implanted porosity with a high surface area to promote the catalytic performance of g-C3N4.151 Meso-g-C3N4 materials have a high specific surface area (up to 830 m2 g−1) and a large porosity (up to 1.25 cm3 g−1), a high selectivity and large numbers of active sites on the surface, resulting in an enhanced performance when used as an electrode material in an MFC.69 Templating methods are the most common pathways for the preparation of meso-g-C3N4. The soft-templating method can be carried out by cooperative assembly of amphiphilic surfactant molecules and guest species to form an arrangement of mesopores under hydrothermal conditions (Fig. 11a). In contrast, hard-templating (nanocasting) methods employ primary nanopores in the silica template to form replica arrays of g-C3N4, followed by the removal of the template with a corrosive solution (Fig. 11b).69
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the soft-templating method (a) and hard-templating method (b) for the synthesis of meso-g-C3N4.69 Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In an MFC, a nitrogen-doped graphene electrode was synthesized by the implantation of nitrogen active sites with mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (meso-C3N4) in a two-step process. In the first step, nitrogen-doped graphene and meso-C3N4 were prepared by a one-pot solvothermal method and by self-condensation reactions, respectively. In the second step, using a sonochemical approach, meso-C3N4 with abundant nitrogen active sites is implanted into nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets.70
3.4 Nanocarbon nonconductive membrane electrodes
In the past decades, the membrane bioreactor (MBR) process has gained worldwide attention and popularity. A MBR combines the biological activated sludge process with membrane filtration, and provides a satisfactory wastewater treatment performance. The decline of flux caused by membrane fouling is a bottle-neck problem in wastewater treatment and reclamation, with approximately 60% of the operating cost directly related to membrane fouling.154,155 It has been proved that applying an electric field in MBR can efficiently control membrane fouling because the conductive layer on the membrane surface may greatly reduce fouling in an MBR when an electric field is applied.156,157 Liu et al.158 applied an electric field (0.2 V and 0.4 V) to a conductive membrane as the cathode and found that such a field was effective in cutting down the cake layer thickness and decreasing pore clogging by extra-cellular polymeric substances (EPS). When using conductive reduced graphene oxide/polyvinylidene fluoride (rGO/PVDF) membrane as cathodes, this modified membrane displayed a better antifouling performance under a 0.6 V cm−1 applied electric field.159 Therefore, using bio-generated electricity from an MFC to inhibit membrane fouling would reduce the energy cost. Especially, when an MBR was coupled with an MFC, through building an anaerobic anode chamber and sharing a membrane cathode in the aerobic chamber for this coupled system,23 the sustained electric field reduces fouling of cathode membranes and produces some electrical energy.
Nonconductive base materials such as nonwoven filter/cloth have been applied, simultaneously modified with conductive polymers (polyaniline, polypyrrole),158,160 and graphene doping further improved the conductivity.161 Li et al. prepared conductive membranes by coating graphene (G) and polyaniline (PANI) doped with phytic acid (PA) on polyester filter cloth with a higher conductivity. To improve the stability of the conductivity, graphene was deposited on the filter cloth followed by in situ polymerization. The results indicated that the short-term cumulative permeate volume from the G/PANI–PA modified membrane was increased by ∼58% when a 0.2 V cm−1 electric field was applied, while it was only ∼10% for a PANI–PA modified membrane.162
Conductive materials such as carbon fiber cloth or stainless-steel mesh have also been utilized in producing conductive membrane electrodes, by coating PVDF and conductive polymers onto it to improve the filtration. By the modification of a stainless steel mesh with PPy or cheap ARS (Alizarin Red's) or expensive AQS (9,10-anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid) doped PPy film, via constant-potential anodic electro-polymerization of PPy in a three-electrode electrochemical cell, a high ORR activity and higher power output was obtained in the integrated MFC–MBR system.163
The catalyst and the ORR in cathodes are important factors for MFC; moreover, introducing a cathode catalyst can effectively catalyze the ORR and improve energy recovery.15 In an MFC–MBR system, a cost-effective membrane cathode can be made functional as a catalyst for the ORR, while conducting electrons and filtration simultaneously for wastewater treatment as well as for electricity generation.15 Li et al.15 prepared an effective cathode membrane with carbon fiber cloth, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and a catalyst containing C, Mn, Fe and O elements, by heat treatment for catalyst loading followed by PVDF coating for membrane separation purposes. Based on this research, Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 was first tested as an ORR catalyst on carbon filter cloth in a coated PVDF layer as the cathode membrane, in the coupled MFC–MBR system.164 A Pd–RGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst was prepared through a one-pot microwave-assisted reduction, using ethylene glycol as the reducing agent, and assisted by microwave reduction. For the preparation of the casting solution, PVDF was first dissolved in DMF, followed by mechanical stirring for 3 h before addition of carbon nanofibers to improve the conductivity and the Pd–RGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst. Subsequently, the casting solution was mechanically stirred for 1 h and degassed in a vacuum oven for 4 h. After that, the solution was cast to form a membrane on the surface of carbon fiber cloth, and then immersed into distilled water as a coagulation bath at room temperature overnight (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  The process of preparing the cathode membrane.164 Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Elsevier. 
4. Applications of nanocarbon based electrodes in a MFC
4.1 Anode electrodes
The anode electrode material, which is associated with bacterial adhesion and electron transfer from microbes to the electrode by different mechanisms, is a crucial factor for the overall performance of MFCs.165 Anodes can enhance the MFC performance with increased EET, higher specific surface area and more active interaction in the microbe–electrode–electrolyte system. Since the anode material and its structure can directly affect the attachment of bacteria, the interfacial electron transfer efficiency and substrate oxidation, a high-performance anode composite/structure is essential to improve the power output of MFCs.34 Therefore, choosing optimal anode materials and modification of the anode surface, as well as analyzing the effect of surface characteristics of the anode material for microbial energy production are important for improving the power production of MFCs.82 Numerous studies have been dedicated to improving anode materials for MFCs.

4.1.1 Carbon nanotubes. 
MWCNTs with carboxyl groups was fabricated as an electrode material for single-chamber air-cathode MFCs, and the performance was compared against that using commercial carbon cloth.166 Park et al.20 modified anodes with Fe3O4/CNT composites and applied these in an MFC. In the modified anode, Fe3O4 helps attach the CNTs on the anode surface by its magnetic attraction, and forms a multi-layered network, where CNTs offer a better nanostructure environment for bacterial growth and help the electron transfer. This MFC was able to produce much higher power densities than obtained with an unmodified carbon anode; the 30 wt% Fe3O4/CNT modified anode was found to have a maximum power density of 830 mW m−2. Wu et al.82 constructed an MFC equipped with a CNT/Au/TiO2 nanocomposites modified carbon paper anode. The results demonstrated that the 3D CNT/Au/TiO2 nanostructure can remarkably increase the specific surface area of the microbial fuel cell anode, increase the electron transfer rate and promote electron exchange at the electrode surface.
The addition of CNTs to PANI can increase the specific surface area of the electrode and enhance the charge transfer capability, which improves the electrochemical activity of the anode reaction in an MFC. Therefore, Qiao et al.34 prepared a CNT/PANI composite as an anode material for MFC applications. The best discharge performance was observed for a composite containing 20 wt% CNTs; this delivers a cell voltage of 450 mV. Cui et al.76 synthesized CNTs and PANI on macroporous graphite felt as an anode in a mediator-free dual-chamber MFC, with a maximum power density of 257 mW m−2, which represents a 343% increase compared to the power density obtained with a pristine graphite felt anode.
Xie et al.101 described a biocompatible, highly conductive, macro- and microscale porous anode with a carbon nanotube–textile (CNT–textile) composite for high-performance MFCs. The macroscale porous structure of the intertwined CNTs–textile fibers creates an open 3D structure, resulting in a ten times larger anolyte–biofilm–anode interfacial area compared to the projective surface area of the CNT textile. The conformally coated CNT layer with microscale pores has a strong interaction with the microbial biofilm. An MFC equipped with a CNTs–textile anode achieves a considerably better performance, with a maximum power density 68% higher and an energy recovery 141% better than one equipped with a traditional carbon cloth anode. In a further study, a pristine CNTs–sponge and Pt decorated CNTs–sponge were used as anodes. The CNT–sponge composite provides a three-dimensional scaffold, which is favorable for microbial colonization and catalytic decoration, with lower internal resistance, greater stability, better tunability and a uniform macroporous structure (pores up to 1 mm in diameter). Using a batch-fed H-shaped MFC equipped with a CNTs–sponge as the anode, an area power density of 1.24 W m−2 was achieved when treating domestic wastewater, with a maximum volumetric power density of 182 W m−3 for a continuously fed plate-shaped MFC.98
A multifacet improvement was also observed in anode modification. For example, the highly active sites on the rough surface and the electrical conductivity as well as the positive charge of the anode greatly promote the direct EET between an active biofilm and the anode surface. A 3D mesoporous anode was constructed by coating single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) on a mesoporous polysulfone matrix (MPPS) in a Shewanella-inoculated MFC, with a power output of 1410 mW m−2.167 To further improve the properties of anodes for facilitating EET processes, Zhao et al.10 constructed a new architecture of a highly electroactive hybrid biofilm, which is composed of a graphene–carbon nanotube network with embedded bacteria (G–CNTs–biofilm) as an anode for MFCs (Fig. 13A). By mixing the GO–CNTs composite with S. oneidensis cells and culturing for two days, bacterial cells were found to be self-assembled on the surface of GO–CNTs. Simultaneously, GO was biologically reduced into graphene by the S. oneidensis cells, forming the G–CNTs–biofilm hybrid biomaterial. As shown in Fig. 13B(a) and (b), a multi-layered cross-linked biofilm network was tightly bound onto the fibres of the carbon felt surface, due to the large surface area of the G–CNT network and strong van der Waals forces between them. In this research, green-fluorescent-protein (GFP)-tagged S. oneidensis was used to test the viability of cells in the G–CNTs–biofilm. As shown in Fig. 13(c) and (d), S. oneidensis cells continuously display green fluorescence before and after MFC operation, indicating high bacterial viability in the G–CNT–biofilm. This novel architecture greatly enhances direct extracellular electron transfer between Shewanella oneidensis and the electrode, also due to the multifacet improvement related to the strong adhesion of the hybrid conducting biofilm onto the anode surface, the large surface area of graphene and the high conductivity of CNTs.
 Fig. 13  (A) Fabrication of G–CNTs–biofilm, and electron transfer process.10 (B) (a and b) SEM images of G–CNTs–biofilm firmly adhered onto the carbon felt electrode; (c and d) CLSM images of G–CNTs–biofilm before and after MFC operation. Red arrows indicate hybrid biofilm tightly attached onto the carbon fibres of the carbon felt electrode.10 Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
The performance of various CNT-based anode materials, including the methods of assembly and architecture are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the CNT-based anode performance




Anode
Cathode
Type
Max power density (mW m−2)
Voltage (mV)
Max current density (mA m−2)
Ref.


Coating/support
Method
Coating/support
Microorganism
Feed
Electron acceptor
Reactor type
Volume (cm3)




CNT/Ni-based alloy
Thermal CVD
None/carbon felt
Mixed
Dairy waste water
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
150 + 150
2310
820 (OCV)
Not given

152



CNTs–PANI/nickel foams

In situ chemical oxidation
Pt/none

E. coli K12
Glucose
Oxygen
Dual
Not given
42
450 (cell voltage)
100

34



CNTs–PANI/pristine GF
Electrophoretic deposition
None/carbon cloth

Shewanella putrefaciens

Inoculated medium
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
63 + 63
257
342 (cell voltage)
Not given

76



Fe3O4/CNT/carbon paper
Solvothermal
Pt/carbon cloth

E. coli

Glucose
Oxygen
Dual
10 + 10
830
578 (voltage output)
0.32

20



CNT/Au/TiO2/carbon paper
Sol–gel
None/carbon paper

E. coli

Glucose
Oxygen
Single
120
2.4
770 (OCV)
7.4

82



CNTs–textile
Dipping–drying
None/carbon cloth
Mixed
Artificial wastewater
Oxygen
Dual
200 + 200
873
300 (voltage output)
Not given

101



CNTs–sponge
Dipping–drying
CNTs–sponge–Pt
Mixed
Glucose
Oxygen
Dual
300
1240
Not given
1.44

98



CNTs–sponge
Dipping–drying
CNTs–sponge–Pt
Mixed
Domestic wastewater
Oxygen
Dual
300
730
Not given
0.25

98







4.1.2 Graphene. 
Graphene-based anodes can promote the MFC performance by an increased electron transfer efficiency, higher specific surface area and more active interaction in the microbe–electrode–electrolyte system.
The biofilm-based anode has been considered the heart of an MFC,19 due to the electroactive microbes in biofilms functioning as biocatalysts to oxidize complex organic compounds and converting this chemical energy into electrical current. Generally, EET from microbes to a solid electrode can occur via three mechanisms: (1) the redox active proteins on the bacterial outer membrane,168 (2) electrically conductive pili (also known as “nanowires”),169 and (3) indirect electron transfer mediated by shuttle molecules.170 To facilitate EET processes, several approaches have been explored to improve the properties of anodes. An ideal anode electrode is expected to facilitate the EET with microorganisms and electron shuttles. Interestingly, GO can be in situ reduced via the respiration of bacteria in the MFC. Yuan et al.108 constructed microbially reduced graphene scaffolds with a 32% enhanced maximum power. Not only did the graphene mediated long-distance EET from the intermediate or top layers of the biofilm to the electrode improve but the electron transfer was also facilitated. In addition, the EET process of the self-constructed bacteria/MRG network was investigated. The results showed that the long-distance electron transfer occurred via the wiring of these graphene scaffolds and the anode biofilm, which improved the kinetics of electron transfer to enhance the catalytic activity. To shorten the electron conduction length in the less conductive graphene sponge, Xie et al.99 constructed an MFC equipped with a graphene-coated sponge with a stainless steel current collector (G–S–SS) (Fig. 14b). Fig. 14c and d shows that a stainless steel current collector creating an electron transport “highway” would decrease the Ohmic resistance by shortening the electron conduction length in the less-conductive G–S. Using G–S–SS as the anode in an MFC a maximum power density of 1.57 W m−2 was achieved.
 Fig. 14  Schematic of the G–S composite electrode (a) vs. (b) the G–S–SS composite electrode, and the electron pathways in the G–S electrode with (d) and without (c) an SS current collector.99 Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
On the other hand, an anode with a high specific surface area can provide sufficient area for the attachment of biofilms, and consequently guarantee a high quantity of biocatalysts for the oxidation of organics.171 In general, a high specific surface area is obtained with a hierarchical and porous structure.113 A number of new porous materials with a nanocomposite 3D structure has been successfully synthesized by different methods. For example, a hierarchical porous graphene aerogel/nickel (G/Ni) anode not only allows bacterial growth on both the outside and inside surfaces of the pores, but also generates a biofilm to increase the electron transfer/transport, which simultaneously boosts the electro- and bio-catalytic processes.97 A macroporous 3D graphene sponge used as the anode of an MFC generated a maximum power density of 427.0 W m−3, which was higher than that of the MFC fabricated using carbon felt as the anode material, because the macroporous structure allowed an easier diffusion of the microbes, and subsequent propagation inside the materials.139 Due to the 3D network structure of hydrogels, they have an excellent capability of embedding the material of choice. Kumar et al.153 prepared a novel anode material, i.e., a graphene oxide/carbon nanotubes composite hydrogel, using a suspension polymerization method, and applied this in an MFC. The electrically conductive graphene oxide/carbon nanotubes filled with a Poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAM) hydrogel showed an effective performance, with the bulk conductivities of 285.71 S mm−1, the charge transfer resistance about 15 Ω, and a percolated network, which was attributed to the high surface area, the number of active sites, and the improved electron-transfer process. By combining the functionalities of GO and CNTs, the PNIPAM–GO–CNT composite has highly porous and open channels for molecular transportation, which promotes the MFC performance and results in power densities up to 434 mW m−2, with a durability of more than 300 h.
In most cases, the enhanced performance of an MFC is a synergistic effect of the electrode material. He et al.113 reported a hierarchically porous chitosan/vacuum stripped graphene scaffold with a specific surface area of 248 m2 g−1 as an efficient bioanode (CHI/VSG). The results showed that a mediator-less MFC delivers a remarkable maximum power density of 1530 mW m−2, 78 times higher than a carbon cloth anode. A biocompatible VSG stimulating P. aeruginosa to excrete more endogenous mediators, and an architecture of the scaffold to form a thick multilayered biofilm network providing an open space for colonization, both increase the mediated anode transfer rate.
PANI has been reported to easily form porous nanostructures. Yong et al.60 demonstrated the use of a 3D polyaniline hybridized three-dimensional (3D) graphene as an MFC anode. The maximum power density obtained from the 3D graphene/PANI MFC was 768 mW m−2, which is about four times higher than that from the carbon cloth MFC (158 mW m−2). This is partly because the large specific surface area of the 3D graphene/PANI can integrate with the bacterial biofilm, but because the large surface area can easily accept electrons from riboflavin molecules (electron shuttles released by S. oneidensis MR-1), which stimulates a direct electron transfer from OmcA cytochrome proteins on cell membranes, and shown in Fig. 15A. As observed in SEM images (Fig. 15B(a) and (b)), the bacteria formed a biofilm on the graphene/PANI surface. The SEM image focused on the interior of the electrode (Fig. 15B(c)) shows that bacteria deep inside the 3D electrode densely adhere on the surface. However, bacteria can densely adhere on carbon fibers on the surface of the carbon cloth (Fig. 15B(e)), without bacteria in the electrode interior (Fig. 15B(f)). As shown in Fig. 15C, the power density of these two types of MFC reached its plateau at 6 h. The power density of the MFC equipped with a carbon cloth anode produced a power density of ∼110 mW m−2. But the power density of the MFC equipped with a 3D graphene/PANI increased further to a plateau (∼190 mW m−2) at about 24 h. Because the maximally attainable power is obtained at the perfect match between the internal resistance and the load resistance, the polarization curve was tested in this paper as shown in Fig. 15D.
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the interface between the 3D graphene/PANI electrode and S. oneidensis MR-1 bacteria, (B) SEM images of graphene/PANI (a–c) and carbon cloth (d–f) electrodes after 60 h incubation in MFC with S. oneidensis MR-1 cell suspension, with a higher magnification, images of the electrode surface (b and e) the electrode interior (c and f). (C) Power generation and (D) polarization curves (inset I–V relation) of the MFCs equipped with a carbon cloth anode or a graphene/PANI foam anode.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The maximum power density obtained from the 3D graphene/PANI MFC is ∼768 mW m−2, which is about 4 times higher than that from the carbon cloth MFC (∼158 mW m−2).

Table 3 summarizes the performance of various graphene-based anode materials and the corresponding power output in MFC.
Table 2 Summary of the CNT-based cathode performance




Cathode
Anode
Type
Max power density (mW m−2)
Output voltage (mV)
Max current density (mA m−2)
Ref.


Coating/support
Method
Coating/support
Microorganism
Feed
Electron acceptor
Reactor type
Volume (cm3)




Mn–PPy–CNTs
Chemical polymerization + Mn deposition
None/carbon cloths
Activated sludge
Artificial wastewater
Oxygen
Single
28.3
213
700 (OCV)
Not given

77



Pt–Pd/CNTs
Electro-deposition
None/carbon cloth
Anaerobic sludge
Synthetic wastewater
Oxygen
Dual
70 + 70
1274
850 (OCV)
∼800

90



MnO2/CNTs/stainless steel mesh
Direct redox reaction
PPy/AQDS/carbon felt

Shewanella decolorationis S12
Wastewater
Oxygen
Single
25
2676
Not given
Not given

87



CNTs–textile–Pt
Dipping–drying + electrochemical deposition
CNTs–textile

E. coli

Domestic wastewater
Oxygen
Dual
Not given
837
Not given
5200

102



CNTs/SSM
Dipping–drying
Graphite felt
Anaerobic sludge
Acetate
Oxygen
Single
30
147
51
350

103



Co3O4–NCNTs/carbon cloth
Chemical reduction
None/carbon cloth
Anaerobic sludge
Glucose
Oxygen
Single
25
469
629 (OCV)
Not given

130





Table 3 Summary of the graphene-based anode performance




Anode
Cathode
Type
Max power density (mW m−2)
Cell voltage (mV)
Max current density (mA m−2)
Ref.


Coating/support
Method
Coating/support
Microorganism
Feed
Electron acceptor
Reactor type
Volume (cm3)




Graphene/SS-mesh
Pressure coating
None/Carbon papers

Escherichia coli

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
530 + 530
2668
Not given
Not given

105



Bacteria + graphene/glassy carbon
Microbially reduced
Pt/Carbon papers
Anaerobic sludge
Sodium acetate
Oxygen
Single
10
1905
478 (voltage output)
Not given

108



Chitosan + vacuum stripped graphene/none
ISISA
None/carbon cloth

P. aeruginosa

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
Not given
1530
910 (OCV)
2550

113



Graphene containing foam/none
Freeze-drying and pyrolysis
None/carbon paper

S. putrefaciens

Lactate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
Not given
786
0.58 (OCV)
0.657

137



rGO + Ni foam/none
Hydro-thermal
None/carbon cloth

Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
Trypticase soy broth (TSB)
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
25 + 25
Not given
0.62 (OCV)
0.5

100



Graphene sponge/none
Ice template
None/carbon paper
Anaerobic sludge
Acetate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
120 + 120
0.71
0.55 (voltage output)
Not given

139



Graphene + SS/sponge
Dipping–drying
Pt/carbon cloth
Mixed
Glucose
Not given
Dual
Not given
1570
Not given
10700

99



Graphene aerogel/none
Hydrothermal method
None/carbon paper

Shewanella putrefaciens

Lactate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
100 + 100
679.7
Not given
0.365

140



Hierarchical porous graphene/nickel
Freeze-drying
None/carbon paper

S. putrefaciens

Lysogeny broth
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
100 + 100
3903
Not given
Not given

97



rGO + PANI + Pt/carbon cloth

Situ polymerization + reduction
Pt/carbon paper

Escherichia coli

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
Not given
2059
400 (voltage output)
9559

59



GO/PPy/carbon cloth
Polymerization + bioreduction
Pt/carbon paper

Escherichia coli

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
Not given
1068
400 (OCV)
Not given

58



Graphene–CNTs–biofilm/carbon felt
Microbial reduction
None/carbon felt

Shewanella oneidensis

Lactate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
100 + 100
0.097
Not given
0.12

10



SnO2 + RGO/carbon cloth
Hydrothermal + microwave-assisted
Pt rod

Escherichia coli

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
75 + 75
1450
830 (OCV)
Not given

128



PPy/GO/carbon felt
Electro polymerization
None/carbon felt

Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
Lactate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
25
1326
330 (voltage output)
7530

104



Graphene–TiO2/nickel foams
Microwave-assisted solvothermal
None/carbon paper

S. oneidensis

Lactate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
30 + 30
409
∼700 (OCV)
Not given

131



TiO2/rGO/carbon cloth
Sol–gel + solvothermal reduction
None/carbon fiber brush

S. putrefaciens CN32
LBmedium
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
100 + 100
540
Not given
1490

132



TiO2–rGO/nickel foam
Sol–gel + solvothermal reduction
None/carbon fiber brush

S. putrefaciens CN32
LBmedium
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
100 + 100
3169
Not given
Not given

132



Graphene/PEDOT/carbon paper

In situ electro polymerization
None/carbon paper

E. coli

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
100 + 100
873
260 (voltage output)
Not given

122



PANI–graphene nanoribbons/carbon paper
Electro-deposition
None/carbon paper

S. oneidensis

Lactate
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
Not given
856
Not given
Not given

96



PNIPAM–GO–CNTs/none
Suspension polymerization
None/carbon cloth

E. coli

Glucose
Potassium ferricyanide
Dual
Not given
434
Not given
3606

153






4.2 Cathode electrodes
The cathode is the main limiting factor for the power output in MFCs, due to a high overpotential for the oxidoreduction reaction.40 Among various oxidants, oxygen is the most favorable cathodic electron acceptors. However, the slow kinetics of the ORR limit the power density of MFCs,133 and therefore, the development of effective electrocatalysts for the ORR is needed. The use of carbon nanomaterial modified electrodes is a way to improve the catalyst activity and/or facilitate catalyst support.

4.2.1 Carbon nanotubes. 
To reduce the amount of Pt used, Halakoo et al.86 synthesized a carbon nanotube–platinum (CNT/Pt) nanocomposite by using the in situ method as a novel cathode catalyst in an MFC; its performance was better compared than with platinum in an MFC system due to better interaction with oxygen in the cathode chamber and the high catalytic activity of CNTs/Pt for the ORR. In addition, Ghasemi et al.40 also used a CNT/Pt composite as a cathode catalyst in an MFC. The amount of Pt in the CNT/Pt electrode could be reduced by up to 25% of the amount necessary for a conventional Pt/carbon electrode, and the effect of the catalyst increases for a higher COD.
Lu et al.172 prepared three types of manganese dioxide, α-MnO2, β-MnO2, and γ-MnO2 as alternative cathode catalysts for the ORR in air-cathode MFCs. The cyclic voltammetry curve results show that β-MnO2 with its intrinsic structure and better interaction has the highest catalytic activity. With CNT supported β-MnO2 applied to air-cathode MFCs a higher maximum power density (97.8 mW m−2) was obtained, with a COD removal efficiency of 84.8% for domestic wastewater as the feed; this is comparable to that with a Pt-catalyst. The mechanism of the ORR comprises a reduction of MnO2 was to MnOOH by a proton insertion process, followed by an electron transfer from MnOOH to O2 whereby MnOOH is oxidized back to MnO2. A novel manganese–polypyrrole–carbon nanotube (Mn–PPy–CNT) composite was synthesized as an air-cathode in an MFC.77 The results of cyclic voltammetry showed that Mn–PPy–CNT can catalyze the ORR in neutral media with a good activity, indicated by the comparable peak current (500 μA) to Pt/C (430 μA), possibly due to the presence of manganese–nitrogen (Mn–N) active sites. The maximum power densities of Mn–PPy–CNT-based MFCs decrease by only 10% after four months of operation, which shows the good long-term stability.
CNTs can be uniformly distributed over the surface of the stainless steel mesh (SSM), thus forming a three-dimensional network structure as a bio-cathode for performance improvement in MFCs. The MFC with a CNT–SSM biocathode achieved a higher maximum power density (147 mW m−2), which is 49 times larger than that produced from the MFC with a bare SSM bio-cathode (3 mW m−2).103 Moreover, cyclic voltammetry indicated that the microorganisms on the CNT–SSM bio-cathode play a major role in the ORR, and the CNT–SSM bio-cathode has a better catalytic activity towards the ORR than the SSM bio-cathode. It is likely that micrometer-scale structures and three-dimensional nanostructures facilitate the attachment of microorganisms to the CNT–SSM biocathode, thus enhancing the biofilm associated-ORR. Xie et al.102 recently synthesized a highly conductive single walled carbon nanotube (CNT)–textile composite with only 19.3% Pt loading as the cathode catalyst in an MFC, which produced a 2.14 times higher maximum power density compared to a commercial Pt coated carbon cloth cathode (Fig. 16a). As shown in Fig. 16b, the CNT–textile–Pt cathode generates much larger reduction currents than those of the CC–Pt, indicating the superior oxygen reduction activity.
 Fig. 16  Polarization curves of MFCs with different cathodes (a) and LSV results showing the oxygen reaction activities of different cathodes (b), at a step-sweep rate of 10 mV per 10 seconds from 0.3 to 0.3 V vs. a double junction Ag|AgCl|KCl (3.5 M) RE.102 Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The performance of various CNT-based cathode materials, including the methods of assembly and architecture and performance of MFC is summarized in Table 2.


4.2.2 Graphene. 
In principle, oxygen is reduced either through a one-step four-electron pathway or a less efficient two-electron pathway. The four-electron pathway is favorable because of the higher reduction potential of the cathode. It has been determined that the four-electron transfer predominates in the ORR using nitrogen-doped graphene (NG) as a cathode material.173 The NG surface contains pyridinic N, pyrrolic N and graphitic N, all of which can efficiently create ORR active sites. It is believed that carbon atoms adjoined to nitrogen dopants yield a highly positive charge density to offset the strong electronic affinity of the nitrogen atom. The nitrogen-induced charge delocalization could alter the adsorption of oxygen on graphene, which effectively weakens the O–O bonding to facilitate the ORR process.150 Gram-scale nitrogen-doped graphene is a metal-free and less expensive cathode catalyst for MFCs (Fig. 17) with excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability for oxygen reduction via a combination of two-electron and four-electron pathways.174 The NG–MFCs generate a maximum power density of 1350 mW m−2, which is 5.19% lower than that of Pt/C–MFCs (1420 mW m−2). Thus, since NG has a high performance and is less expensive than Pt/C, it can be crucial for the large scale application of MFCs. Su et al.129 used cobalt oxide and nitrogen-doped graphene (Co3O4/N–G) with a crystalline spinel structure as a cathode catalyst in a MFC. The results demonstrated that the MFC performance is comparable to that of a commercial Pt/C catalyst, with a maximum power density of 1340 ± 10 mW m−2. However, the structure of the supporting material for the metal active sites significantly affects the kinetics of the ORR. Therefore, both Co3O4 and nanocarbon materials as the cathode catalyst have synergistic effects to improve the MFC performance.
 Fig. 17  Schematic of a membrane-free single-chamber air-cathode MFC showing the basic mechanism of current generation.174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
A manganese dioxide–graphene nanosheet (MnO2/GNS) hybrid was utilized as an alternative cathode catalyst in an air-cathode MFC.133 Due to the reaction between GNS and MnO2, the decreased particle size and the improved dispersion of MnO2 over the surface of the GNS, MnO2 nanoparticles closely anchored on the conductive graphene nanosheets, which improved the catalytic activity. The results showed that an MFC with MnO2/GNS as the air cathode catalyst generates a maximum power density of 2083 mW m−2, which is higher than that of an MFC with a pure manganese dioxide catalyst (1470 mW m−2). Qi et al.175 used Fe3O4–RGO nano-composites as a cathodic catalyst for a single-chamber MFC treating phenol sewage experiment, with a removal rate of 88.6% after 30 hours.

Table 4 summarizes different graphene-based cathode materials with their modifications, preparation methods and power output.
Table 4 Summary of graphene-based cathodes and the performances




Cathode
Anode
Type
Max power density (mW m−2)
Cell voltage (mV)
Max current density (mA m−2)
Ref.


Coating/support
Method
Coating/support
Microorganism
Feed
Electron acceptor
Reactor type
Volume (cm3)




Graphene + biofilm/carbon cloth
Microbially reduced
None/carbon cloth
Anaerobic activated sludge
Sodium acetate
Oxygen
Dual
9.8 + 9.8
323.2 ± 21
0.39 ± 0.02 (OCV)
Not given

109



Nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheet + graphene/SS
Carbonization + KOH activation
None/carbon brush
Anaerobic activated sludge
Acetate
Oxygen
Dual
226
1159.34
0.243 (OCV)
Not given

115



Co3O4–NG/glass carbon
Hydrothermal
None/carbon granules

Shewanella oneidensis MR-1
Lactate
Oxygen
Dual
250 + 250
1340
680 (OCV)
Not given

129



Co3O4–NGO/carbon cloth
Chemical reduction
None/carbon cloth
Anaerobic sludge
Glucose
Oxygen
Single
25
313
606 (OCV)
Not given

130



MnO2 graphene nanosheet/SS
Redox reaction
None/carbon felt
Anaerobic sludge
Acetate
Oxygen
Single
226
2083
0.771 (OCV)
Not given

133







4.2.3 g-C3N4. 
Iron and nitrogen-functionalized graphene (Fe–N–G) was synthesized using graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) and Fe salt, and used as a non-precious metal catalyst for enhanced ORR in an air-cathode MFC.150 A more positive onset potential and increased reduction current densities were observed, indicating an enhanced ORR activity of the Fe–N–G catalyst. This was attributed to the introduction of various nitrogen and iron components. More importantly, the Fe–N–G–MFC achieves the highest power density of 1149.8 mW m−2, which is ∼2.1 times of that generated with the Pt/C–MFC.
In the present study, nitrogen active sites were implanted into nitrogen-doped graphene (N–G) nanosheets, synthesizing an ideal electrocatalyst for the ORR in neutral electrolytes. Feng et al.70 prepared mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (meso-C3N4) implanted with nitrogen active sites on an N–G electrode (denoted as I–NG) in an MFC. Electrochemical characterization revealed that in neutral electrolyte this composite has a super electrocatalytic activity with a 100% four-electron ORR pathway. It was observed that based on the polarization data the maximum power density in I–NG–MFCs was also much better than the N–G and Pt/C ones (Fig. 18A). It can be seen from Fig. 18B that the I–NG–MFC had a much better stability for power output with only a 4.8 decrease of maximum power density after 80 days, compared with NG (9.1%) and Pt/C (16.0%) as the references.
 Fig. 18  (A) Power densities and cell voltages in I–NG–MFCs, NG–MFCs and Pt/C–MFCs. (B) Decrease of maximum power density with cycle number at an external resistance of 1000 V. 40 cycles represent about 80 days. Error bars represent standard deviations of duplicate tests.70 Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 

4.3 Conductive membrane cathode
To achieve a high efficiency, it is of interest to combine MFCs with a MBR. On the one hand, MFCs can extract electric energy from wastewater by bacteria and the generated power (still limited) can be used for membrane fouling reduction.176–179 On the other hand, a hybrid system integrating MFC with membrane separation was proposed to overcome poor effluent quality from an MFC to meet the discharge standards.163,179,180 It is necessary to construct a simple reactor structure with independent cathode membrane electrode. The integration of MFC with MBR utilizes a composite cathode membrane, which seems more ideal for simple operation and reduced space occupation.23,27
As mentioned, the cathode catalyst affects the performance of MFCs in power generation and oxygen reduction kinetics. The reaction rate without a catalyst is usually very low.181 Thus, developing an effective catalyst on the cathode membrane in an MFC–MBR system is critical.177 These cathode membranes can be made more effective for the ORR or electrochemical reactions, simultaneously conducting electrons, performing filtration and other added functions. Thus, developing an effective catalyst on the cathode membrane in an MFC–MBR system is critical. These cathode membranes can be made more effective for the ORR or electrochemical reactions, simultaneously conducting electrons, performing filtration and other added functions.
Nanocarbon materials can be used in preparing a conductive membrane due to the unique properties which can improve the conductivity of membrane electrodes, and enhance electron transfer as the electrode material in MFCs. Also nanocarbon materials are appropriate catalyst supports, ideal for cathodic ORR activity. Nanocarbon such as GO/rGO modified membranes can improve membrane antifouling performance and permeation flux, while maintaining high quality effluent.177
Li et al.164 coated a Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst and PVDF binder on carbon filter cloth, which functioned as the cathode membrane in a coupled MFC–MBR. This cathode membrane (Fig. 19A) had higher conductivity (15.2 × 10−2 S cm−1), higher flux (59.817 LMH bar−1), and helped obtain the maximum power density (683 mW m−3) (Fig. 19B). A catalytic cathode membrane with an effective catalyst can enhance the degradation of pollutants under an electric field by generating ROS (hydroxyl free radicals ˙OH or superoxide radical O2˙−), or increase the electricity output via improved ORR activities.
 Fig. 19  (A) SEM figures of (a) raw carbon fiber cloth; (b) a 300 μm cathode membrane without a catalyst; (c) a 700 μm cathode membrane with a Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst; (d) a 300 μm cathode membrane with Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst. (B) The performance of different ratios in a Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst of 700 μm cathode membrane in a two-chambered MFC system. The ratio of Pd:rGO in Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 was: (a), 1:1; (b), 1:2; (c), 2:1, and (d) stands for without catalyst.164 Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Elsevier. (C) Configuration of a photocatalysis-assisted MFC/MBR coupled system. (D) TH removal rate of photocatalysis-assisted MFC/MBR coupled system using CoFe2O4–PCM (a) and CoFe2O4 (–rGO)–PCM (b) within or without irradiation.182 Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One important progress had been achieved by using a nano carbon modified photocatalytic cathode membrane (PCM) in an assisted MFC. Photocatalytic functional CoFe2O4 (–rGO) cathode membrane assisted and increased oxygen reduction reaction activity (Fig. 19C) and increased tetracycline hydrochloride (TH) degradation (Fig. 19D).182 CoFe2O4–rGO–PCM can remove 98% TH under irradiation. This photo-electrocatalysis (PEC)-integrated MFC can operate photo-catalytically or photo-electro-catalytically. The solar light assisted PEC–MFC had increased power output and enhanced effluent quality. Membrane fouling was more effectively reduced with both germicidal and oxidative effect.
5. Conclusion
This paper reviews recent advances in CNTs, graphene, g-C3N4 electrodes and their characteristics, modifications/preparation methods, as well as the application and performance of these nanocarbon materials as anodes and cathodes in MFCs. For cathode materials, challenges still remain in developing novel nanocarbon composite materials with high cathodic reaction activity and clarified reduction mechanism, which is the origin of the limited power output. For anode materials, on the other hand, more attention should be paid to increasing the electron transfer efficiency, obtaining a higher specific surface area and more active interaction in a microbe–electrode–electrolyte.
Most studies aim to improve the power output by developing different electrode materials and configuration. However, it is desirable to combine MFCs with MBR to treat diverse wastewaters, to overcome the drawbacks of a standalone MFC treatment, due to the advantages of the coupled system, including the high quality of the effluent, energy saving, and membrane fouling reduction in operation. Thus, through the discussion in this article about different conductive membrane cathode, it is suggested to direct research efforts to the development of such MFC–MBR coupled systems in a lab environment and in actual applications. These should be cost effective and competitive, efficient and energy-saving, and intended for treating different kinds of wastewater and different sizes/scales of operations.
In spite of these efforts, however, MFCs are still not used for full-scale wastewater treatment.183 The next step in improvement of MFCs requires an interdisciplinary approach to substantially decrease the cost per electron produced.183 It can be expected that with research advances in composites of CNTs, graphene, and g-C3N4, there will be more nano-carbon based electrodes and catalysts available; the cost might drastically decrease when the scale of production increases, and increasing demands in fuel cell material markets are met.
Energy and water crises can be controlled by recovering resources in wastewater and intensifying in situ use of bio-energy by such fuel cell technologies, so that current energy intensive processes can be replaced by new low cost and energy-saving systems, producing safe effluents (no toxic trace species and residues), and improving environmental quality and protect ecosystems.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the financial support from the China National Nature Science Foundation (Project No. 21677025) and the support from Governmental funding of introducing talents to China (No. B13012).
References
X. B. Gong, S. J. You, X. H. Wang, Y. Gan, R. N. Zhang and N. Q. Ren, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Roh and H. G. Woo, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 484–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2009, 7, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. A. Rozendal, U. Schrorder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Bond and D. R. Lovley, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 1548–1555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Trends Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kannan and G. Gnana Kumar, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 1208–1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ben Liew, W. R. W. Daud, M. Ghasemi, J. X. Leong, S. Su Lim and M. Ismail, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 4870–4883 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Zhao, J. S. Wu, Y. Z. Ding, V. B. Wang, Y. D. Zhang, S. Kjelleberg, J. S. C. Loo, B. Cao and Q. C. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 654–658 CrossRef CAS .
S. Venkata Mohan, G. Velvizhi, J. Annie Modestra and S. Srikanth, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 40, 779–797 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, H. Liu and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 2426–2432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Min and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 5809–5814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Chaudhuri and D. R. Lovley, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 21, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Liu, F. Yang and N. Ren, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 484, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, H. S. Park, H. J. Kim, G. T. Kim, I. S. Chang, J. Lee and N. T. Phung, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2004, 63, 672–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, P. Liang and X. Huang, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 9335–9344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xiao, J. Damien, J. Y. Luo, H. D. Jang, J. X. Huang and Z. He, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, M. Chi, J. Luo, H. He and T. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4427–4435 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Park, M. Christy, P. Kim and K. S. Nahm, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 58, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Yuan and Z. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7022–7029 RSC .
A. A. Yazdi, L. D'Angelo, N. Omer, G. Windiasti, X. Lu and J. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 536–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Wang, G. P. Sheng, W. W. Li, Y. X. Huang, Y. Y. Yu, R. J. Zeng and H. Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9256–9261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Liu, Y. P. Wang, Y. X. Huang, X. F. Sun, G. P. Sheng, R. J. Zeng, F. Li, F. Dong, S. G. Wang, Z. H. Tong and H. Q. Yu, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2011, 108, 1260–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Wang, X.-W. Liu, W.-W. Li, F. Li, Y.-K. Wang, G.-P. Sheng, R. J. Zeng and H.-Q. Yu, Appl. Energy, 2012, 98, 230–235 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Thostenson, Z. Ren and T.-W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2001, 61, 1899–1912 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Bradford and A. E. Bogdanovich, J. Compos. Mater., 2008, 42, 1533–1545 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berber, Y.-K. Kwon and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4613–4616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4340–4363 RSC .
M. T. Nguyen, B. Mecheri, A. D'Epifanio, T. P. Sciarria, F. Adani and S. Licoccia, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 6462–6469 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. kumar, V. G. Sarathi and K. S. Nahm, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 461–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He and F. Mansfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 215–219 CAS .
Y. Qiao, C. M. Li, S. J. Bao and Q. L. Bao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Huang, N. W. Zhu, T. T. Yang, T. P. Zhang, P. X. Wu and Z. Dang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 72, 332–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, C. Wang and J. Ma, Materials, 2016, 9, 807 CrossRef .
Z.-J. Lu, S.-J. Bao, Y.-T. Gou, C.-J. Cai, C.-C. Ji, M.-W. Xu, J. Song and R. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3990 RSC .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Mikhaylova, E. K. Tusseeva, N. A. Mayorova, A. Y. Rychagov, Y. M. Volfkovich, A. V. Krestinin and O. A. Khazova, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3656–3665 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasemi, M. Ismail, S. K. Kamarudin, K. Saeedfar, W. R. W. Daud, S. H. A. Hassan, L. Y. Heng, J. Alam and S. E. Oh, Appl. Energy, 2013, 102, 1050–1056 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deng, M. Zhou, C. Liu, L. Liu, C. Y. Liu and S. J. Dong, Talanta, 2010, 81, 444–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Hong, S. Laurent, C. Wei, O. Akhavan, M. Imani, A. A. Ashkarran and M. Mahmoudi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3407–3424 CrossRef PubMed .
X. T. Zheng, A. Ananthanarayanan, K. Q. Luo and P. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan and G. Gao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. X. Guo, S. Lim, H. Song and C. M. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114, 275–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, F. Li, B. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lu, H. H. Yang, C. L. Zhu, X. Chen and G. N. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2009, 48, 4785–4787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, G. X. Ni, Y. Liu, B. Liu, A. H. C. Neto and K. P. Loh, Nature, 2014, 505, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chua and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 43, 291–312 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Kumar, C. J. Kirubaharan, S. Udhayakumar, K. Ramachandran, C. Karthikeyan, R. Renganathan and K. S. Nahrn, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2283–2290 CrossRef .
G. G. Kumar, C. J. Kirubaharan, S. Udhayakumar, C. Karthikeyan and K. S. Nahm, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 16883–16893 CrossRef .
Y. C. Yong, X. C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Yang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5160–5165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zambon, J. M. Mouesca, C. C. Gheorghiu, P. A. Bayle, J. Pecaut, M. Claeys-Bruno, S. Gambarelli and L. Dubois, Chem. Sci., 2015, 7, 945–950 RSC .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang and L. Qu, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 287 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S. T. Yong and S. P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 12868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, Y. Zhang, Q. Pan and J. Qiu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 20, 33–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yu, L. Liu, L. Li and F. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 122–129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717 CAS .
L. Feng, L. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Luo, M. Li, D. Wang and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3306 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. G. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
E. Kroke, M. Schwarz, E. Horath-Bordon, P. Kroll, B. Noll and A. D. Norman, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 508–512 RSC .
J.-M. Noël, A. Latus, C. Lagrost, E. Volanschi and P. Hapiot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2835–2841 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, X. Feng, X. Wang and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Cui, L. Du, P. B. Guo, B. Zhu and J. H. T. Luong, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 46–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, L. Guo, S. Kharkwal, H. N. Wu, H. Y. Ng and S. F. Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 381–386 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, F. Tang, M. Lim, T. Rufford, A. Mukherji, L. Wang and G. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 930–934 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 1737–1748 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Tian and W. Knoll, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5596–5599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Wu, X. L. Zhang, S. H. Li, X. Y. Lv, Y. Cheng and X. M. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 109, 328–332 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Sun, H.-Z. Zhao, Q.-Z. Yang, J. Song and A. Xue, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3041–3047 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Higgins, D. Foerster, A. Cheung, C. Lau, O. Bretschger, S. D. Minteer, K. Nealson, P. Atanassov and M. J. Cooney, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2011, 48, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-W. Liu, X.-F. Sun, Y.-X. Huang, G.-P. Sheng, S.-G. Wang and H.-Q. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1422 CAS .
E. Halakoo, A. Khademi, M. Ghasemi, N. M. Yusof, R. J. Gohari and A. F. Ismail, Procedia CIRP, 2015, 26, 473–476 CrossRef .
Y. F. Chen, Z. S. Lv, J. M. Xu, D. Q. Peng, Y. X. Liu, J. X. Chen, X. B. Sun, C. H. Feng and C. H. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sharma, A. L. M. Reddy, T. S. Chandra and S. Ramaprabhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6749–6754 CrossRef CAS .
R. Amade, M. Vila-Costa, S. Hussain, E. O. Casamayor and E. Bertran, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 1214–1220 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Quan, Y. Mei, H. D. Xu, B. Sun and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 165, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhou, W. S. Li, Z. Fu and X. D. Xiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 936–941 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fu, W. Li, W. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Zhou and X. Xiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8101–8105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenbaum, F. Zhao, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 6810–6813 CrossRef .
M. Rosenbaum, F. Zhao, M. Quaas, H. Wulff, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, S.-J. Bao and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 544 CAS .
C. Zhao, P. P. Gai, C. H. Liu, X. Wang, H. Xu, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12587–12594 CAS .
Y. Qiao, X. S. Wu, C. X. Ma, H. He and C. M. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21788–21793 RSC .
X. Xie, M. Ye, L. B. Hu, N. Liu, J. R. McDonough, W. Chen, H. N. Alshareef, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5265–5270 CAS .
X. Xie, G. H. Yu, N. Liu, Z. N. Bao, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6862–6866 CAS .
H. Y. Wang, G. M. Wang, Y. C. Ling, F. Qian, Y. Song, X. H. Lu, S. W. Chen, Y. X. Tong and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10283–10290 RSC .
X. Xie, L. B. Hu, M. Pasta, G. F. Wells, D. S. Kong, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 291–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, M. Pasta, L. B. Hu, Y. A. Yang, J. McDonough, J. Cha, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2011, 4, 1293–1297 CAS .
Y. P. Zhang, J. Sun, Y. Y. Hu, S. Z. Li and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Lv, Y. F. Chen, H. C. Wei, F. S. Li, Y. Hu, C. H. Wei and C. H. Feng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 366–373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, G. Q. Mo, X. W. Li, W. D. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang, J. S. Ye, X. D. Huang and C. Z. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5402–5407 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Salas, Z. Sun, A. Lüttge and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4852–4856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, F. Qian, C. W. Saltikov, Y. Jiao and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 563–570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, S. G. Zhou, B. Zhao, L. Zhuang and Y. Q. Wang, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 116, 453–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhuang, Y. Yuan, G. Q. Yang and S. G. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 21, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gutiérrez, Z. Y. García-Carvajal, M. J. Hortigüela, L. Yuste, F. Rojo, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2992–2995 RSC .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian and H. Zhang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2011, 86, 172–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. He, J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. M. Li and T. T. Y. Tan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maldonado and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4707–4716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wen, S. Y. Wang, J. Yan, L. J. Cong, Y. Chen and H. Y. Xi, Bioelectrochemistry, 2014, 95, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guan, L. Cui, K. Lin, Y. Y. Wang, X. T. Wang, F. M. Jin, F. He, X. P. Chen and S. Cui, Applied Physics A, 2011, 102, 289–294 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zheng, T.-W. Chen, F.-N. Xiao, W.-J. Bao and X.-H. Xia, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1809–1814 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Fan, C. L. Zhu, Z. Q. Feng, J. Z. Yang, L. Liu and D. P. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4882–4888 RSC .
L. Feng, Y. Chen and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9611–9618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. E. Zhao, D. Sun, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 823–829 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Hou, Z. L. Liu and P. Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Vinayan, R. I. Jafri, R. Nagar, N. Rajalakshmi, K. Sethupathi and S. Ramaprabhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 412–421 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vinoth, J. J. Wu, A. M. Asiri, T. Lana-Villarreal, P. Bonete and S. Anandan, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2016, 29, 205–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nayak, B. Anbarasan and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13202–13209 CAS .
Z. H. Yan, M. Wang, B. X. Huang, R. M. Liu and J. S. Zhao, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 149–158 CAS .
A. Mehdinia, E. Ziaei and A. Jabbari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10724–10730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Su, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. H. Shen, J. D. Lu, X. Y. Zhang, J. D. Chen and C. Z. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 6076–6082 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Song, D. B. Wang, H. Q. Wang, X. X. Li, Y. Y. Liang and J. J. Xie, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 3868–3874 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Zhao, W. J. Wang, D. Sun, X. Wang, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7091–7097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, Y. Qiao, X. S. Wu, C. X. Ma, X. Li and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wen, S. Y. Wang, J. Yan, L. J. Cong, Z. C. Pan, Y. M. Ren and Z. J. Fan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 187–191 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Badylak, D. O. Freytes and T. W. Gilbert, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Hutmacher, Biomaterials, 2000, 21, 2529–2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and A. I. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1529–1533 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Q. Wang, S. Q. Peng, H. M. Jiang, Y. M. Zhang, W. F. Deng, Y. M. Tan, M. Ma and Q. J. Xie, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10634–10638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
W. F. Chen, Y. X. Huang, D. B. Li, H. Q. Yu and L. F. Yan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21619–21624 RSC .
Y. Qiao, G. Y. Wen, X. S. Wu and L. Zou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 58921–58927 RSC .
S. C. Yan, Z. S. Li and Z. G. Zou, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 10397–10401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, X. Chen, K. Takanabe, K. Domen, Y. Hou, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1680–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, S. Yan, J. Wang, L. Wang, W. Jiang, S. Wu, C. Sun and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17521–17529 CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, S.-P. Chai and S.-T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
G. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8083–8091 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. Leinenweber, M. Bauer, L. A. J. Garvie, P. F. McMillan and G. H. Wolf, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7788–7796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. V. Lotsch and W. Schnick, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1891–1900 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Gillan, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3906–3912 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Li, Y. Y. Hu, Q. Xu, J. Sun, B. Hou and Y. P. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 265–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J.-O. Muller, R. Schlogl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
C. T. Wang, Y. M. Chen, Z. Q. Qi and Y. C. Yang, J. Nanomater., 2013, 12, 1–5 Search PubMed .
G. G. Kumar, S. Hashmi, C. Karthikeyan, A. GhavamiNejad, M. Vatankhah-Varnoosfaderani and F. J. Stadler, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1861–1865 CAS .
J. Song, L. Liu, F. Yang, N. Ren and J. Crittenden, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 147, 409–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Meng, S. Zhang, Y. Oh, Z. Zhou, H. S. Shin and S. R. Chae, Water Res., 2017, 114, 151–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Akamatsu, Y. Yoshida, T. Suzaki, Y. Sakai, H. Nagamoto and S.-i. Nakao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 88, 202–207 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bani-Melhem and M. Elektorowicz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 3298–3304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Liu, B. Gao and F. Yang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2012, 86, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Liu and F. Yang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 43597 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Liu, B. Gao, F. Yang and S. Chellam, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 394–395, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, F. Zhao, J. Liu and F. Yang, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 437, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, L. Liu and F. Yang, Desalination, 2014, 338, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Liu, J. Liu, F. Yang and N. Ren, Desalination, 2014, 349, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Liu and F. Yang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 505, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Wan and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3854–3878 RSC .
N. Thepsuparungsikul, N. Phonthamachai and H. Y. Ng, Water Sci. Technol., 2012, 65, 1208–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Nguyen, Y. Y. Yu, X. Wang, J. Y. Wang and H. Song, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10754–10756 RSC .
B. H. Kim, T. Ikeda, H. S. Park, H. J. Kim, M. S. Hyun, K. Kano, K. Takagi and H. Tatsumi, Biotechnol. Tech., 1999, 13, 475–478 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rabaey, N. Boon, M. Höfte and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 3401–3408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mehdinia, E. Ziaei and A. Jabbari, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10724–10730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, S. Kharkwal, H. Y. Ng and S. F. Y. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4728–4732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maldonado and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4707–4716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, Y. Chen and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9611–9618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Qi, X. Q. Li and J. Cao, Adv. Mater. Res.-Switz, 2014, 881–883, 310–314 CrossRef .
F. Meng, S. R. Chae, A. Drews, M. Kraume, H. S. Shin and F. Yang, Water Res., 2009, 43, 1489–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yu, L. Liu, Q. Yang, J. Song and F. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 48946–48953 RSC .
N. Li, L. Liu and F. Yang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 132, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Liu, B. Gao, F. Yang, J. Crittenden and N. Ren, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 17865–17872 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, C. Zhu, J. Ma and Z. Wu, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2013, 36, 2044–2050 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghasemi, W. R. W. Daud, M. Rahimnejad, M. Rezayi, A. Fatemi, Y. Jafari, M. R. Somalu and A. Manzour, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9533–9540 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Sun, L. Liu and F. Yang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 335–345 RSC .
Q. Zhang, J. Hu and D. J. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 217, 121–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Yizhen Zhang	Yizhen Zhang is currently a postgraduate for successive postgraduate and doctoral program in the School of Environmental Science and Technology, supervised by Professor Lifen Liu at the Dalian University of Technology (DUT, http://www.dlut.edu.cn/), China. She received her B.S. from Qingdao Agriculture University in 2015. Her research focused on photo(electro)catalytic electrode materials to degrade water contaminants.
Lifen Liu	Lifen Liu is currently a full professor in the School of Environmental Science and Technology, DUT. She received her bachelor, master and Ph.D degrees in DUT. She was a visiting scholar and collaborator at Sydney University, Australia from 1997–1999, research associate at HKUST, HK, and a senior research fellow at the Georgia Institute of Technology, USA (2010.10–2011.05). Her current and main scientific interests include environmental nanotechnology and pollution control engineering, specifically functional membrane and fuel cell technologies for cost-effective processes. She has published more than 100 international peer-reviewed papers.
Bart Van der Bruggen	Bart Van der Bruggen is currently a full time research professor at KU Leuven, Belgium since 1 October 2009. He received his Ph.D degree in Applied Sciences and Chemical Engineering from KU Leuven in 2000. He was a postdoctoral fellow/visiting researcher at Universita della Calabria and ITM-CNR, Italy; at Lappeenranta University of Technology (LUT), Finland; and at the University of North Carolina (UNC-Chapel Hill), USA. His research interests include solvent separation, resource recovery, and water treatment. He has published more than 350 international peer-reviewed papers.
Fenglin Yang	Fenglin Yang was born in Jilin province, China, 1944. He is currently a professor and a group leader of laboratory of environmental pollution control, in the School of Environmental and Science and Technology, DUT. His current and main scientific interests include membrane separation technology, environmental electrochemical technology, advanced biological treatment, industrial ecology and environmental planning. He has published more than 400 international peer-reviewed papers.
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O, Eθ = 1.229 V vs. SHE	(1)
O2 + 4H+ + 2e− → HO2− + OH−, Eθ = −0.0076 V vs. SHE	(2)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−, Eθ = 0.878 V vs. SHE	(3a)
2HO2− → 2OH− + O2	(3b)
	(4)
id = 0.62nFAv−1/6CO2DO22/3ω1/2	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic pathway of oxygen reduction of NiO/CNT composites.35 Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine (heptazine) structures of g-C3N4.62,63 Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and ref. 63 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scanning electron micrographs of carbon paper at low (a) and high (b) magnifications, and the PEI/MWCNT composite at low (c) and high (d) magnifications.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the CNTs–sponge, (b) SEM images of the CNTs–sponge before microbial colonization, (c) interior SEM images of the CNT–sponge after microbial colonization, and (d) a microorganism attached to the CNTs–sponge surface.98 Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of two kinds of structure formation process of (a) layered structure CHI/RGO and (b) branched structure CHI/VSG scaffolds and their contact with bacteria. SEM images of (c, d) CHI/RGO and (e, f) CHI/VSG scaffolds after incubation with bacteria at low (c, e) and high (d, f) magnification.113 Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of (A) the G/PEDOT hybrid electrode and its electrostatic interaction with E. coli cells,122 (reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from John Wiley and Sons) and (B) the CP/GNR/PANI electrode and the electron transfer from bacteria to the electrode (reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).96	 

 	Fig. 7  Proposed scheme for the preparation of the rGO/PANI/Pt nanocomposite.59 Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of synthesis procedure (A) RGO/SnO2,128 (reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from Elsevier.) (B) TiO2/rGO hybrid (reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier).132	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the formation process of 3D porous graphene structures under different conditions (a and d). Cross-sectional SEM images of graphene foam (b and c) and a graphene sponge (e) respectively. Surface of the graphene film of a graphene sponge aligned by graphene sheets (f).139 Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of g-C3N4 by thermal treatment of different nitrogen-rich precursors such as melamine,141 cyanamide,142 dicyanamide,143 urea,144,145 and thiourea.146 The black, white, blue, red, and yellow balls denote C, H,N, O, and S atoms, respectively.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of the soft-templating method (a) and hard-templating method (b) for the synthesis of meso-g-C3N4.69 Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  The process of preparing the cathode membrane.164 Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Fabrication of G–CNTs–biofilm, and electron transfer process.10 (B) (a and b) SEM images of G–CNTs–biofilm firmly adhered onto the carbon felt electrode; (c and d) CLSM images of G–CNTs–biofilm before and after MFC operation. Red arrows indicate hybrid biofilm tightly attached onto the carbon fibres of the carbon felt electrode.10 Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 


CNT/Ni-based alloy	Thermal CVD	None/carbon felt	Mixed	Dairy waste water	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	150 + 150	2310	820 (OCV)	Not given	
152

CNTs–PANI/nickel foams	
In situ chemical oxidation	Pt/none	
E. coli K12	Glucose	Oxygen	Dual	Not given	42	450 (cell voltage)	100	
34

CNTs–PANI/pristine GF	Electrophoretic deposition	None/carbon cloth	
Shewanella putrefaciens
	Inoculated medium	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	63 + 63	257	342 (cell voltage)	Not given	
76

Fe3O4/CNT/carbon paper	Solvothermal	Pt/carbon cloth	
E. coli
	Glucose	Oxygen	Dual	10 + 10	830	578 (voltage output)	0.32	
20

CNT/Au/TiO2/carbon paper	Sol–gel	None/carbon paper	
E. coli
	Glucose	Oxygen	Single	120	2.4	770 (OCV)	7.4	
82

CNTs–textile	Dipping–drying	None/carbon cloth	Mixed	Artificial wastewater	Oxygen	Dual	200 + 200	873	300 (voltage output)	Not given	
101

CNTs–sponge	Dipping–drying	CNTs–sponge–Pt	Mixed	Glucose	Oxygen	Dual	300	1240	Not given	1.44	
98

CNTs–sponge	Dipping–drying	CNTs–sponge–Pt	Mixed	Domestic wastewater	Oxygen	Dual	300	730	Not given	0.25	
98


 	Fig. 14  Schematic of the G–S composite electrode (a) vs. (b) the G–S–SS composite electrode, and the electron pathways in the G–S electrode with (d) and without (c) an SS current collector.99 Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic diagram of the interface between the 3D graphene/PANI electrode and S. oneidensis MR-1 bacteria, (B) SEM images of graphene/PANI (a–c) and carbon cloth (d–f) electrodes after 60 h incubation in MFC with S. oneidensis MR-1 cell suspension, with a higher magnification, images of the electrode surface (b and e) the electrode interior (c and f). (C) Power generation and (D) polarization curves (inset I–V relation) of the MFCs equipped with a carbon cloth anode or a graphene/PANI foam anode.60 Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 


Mn–PPy–CNTs	Chemical polymerization + Mn deposition	None/carbon cloths	Activated sludge	Artificial wastewater	Oxygen	Single	28.3	213	700 (OCV)	Not given	
77

Pt–Pd/CNTs	Electro-deposition	None/carbon cloth	Anaerobic sludge	Synthetic wastewater	Oxygen	Dual	70 + 70	1274	850 (OCV)	∼800	
90

MnO2/CNTs/stainless steel mesh	Direct redox reaction	PPy/AQDS/carbon felt	
Shewanella decolorationis S12	Wastewater	Oxygen	Single	25	2676	Not given	Not given	
87

CNTs–textile–Pt	Dipping–drying + electrochemical deposition	CNTs–textile	
E. coli
	Domestic wastewater	Oxygen	Dual	Not given	837	Not given	5200	
102

CNTs/SSM	Dipping–drying	Graphite felt	Anaerobic sludge	Acetate	Oxygen	Single	30	147	51	350	
103

Co3O4–NCNTs/carbon cloth	Chemical reduction	None/carbon cloth	Anaerobic sludge	Glucose	Oxygen	Single	25	469	629 (OCV)	Not given	
130



Graphene/SS-mesh	Pressure coating	None/Carbon papers	
Escherichia coli
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	530 + 530	2668	Not given	Not given	
105

Bacteria + graphene/glassy carbon	Microbially reduced	Pt/Carbon papers	Anaerobic sludge	Sodium acetate	Oxygen	Single	10	1905	478 (voltage output)	Not given	
108

Chitosan + vacuum stripped graphene/none	ISISA	None/carbon cloth	
P. aeruginosa
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	Not given	1530	910 (OCV)	2550	
113

Graphene containing foam/none	Freeze-drying and pyrolysis	None/carbon paper	
S. putrefaciens
	Lactate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	Not given	786	0.58 (OCV)	0.657	
137

rGO + Ni foam/none	Hydro-thermal	None/carbon cloth	
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1	Trypticase soy broth (TSB)	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	25 + 25	Not given	0.62 (OCV)	0.5	
100

Graphene sponge/none	Ice template	None/carbon paper	Anaerobic sludge	Acetate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	120 + 120	0.71	0.55 (voltage output)	Not given	
139

Graphene + SS/sponge	Dipping–drying	Pt/carbon cloth	Mixed	Glucose	Not given	Dual	Not given	1570	Not given	10700	
99

Graphene aerogel/none	Hydrothermal method	None/carbon paper	
Shewanella putrefaciens
	Lactate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	100 + 100	679.7	Not given	0.365	
140

Hierarchical porous graphene/nickel	Freeze-drying	None/carbon paper	
S. putrefaciens
	Lysogeny broth	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	100 + 100	3903	Not given	Not given	
97

rGO + PANI + Pt/carbon cloth	
Situ polymerization + reduction	Pt/carbon paper	
Escherichia coli
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	Not given	2059	400 (voltage output)	9559	
59

GO/PPy/carbon cloth	Polymerization + bioreduction	Pt/carbon paper	
Escherichia coli
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	Not given	1068	400 (OCV)	Not given	
58

Graphene–CNTs–biofilm/carbon felt	Microbial reduction	None/carbon felt	
Shewanella oneidensis
	Lactate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	100 + 100	0.097	Not given	0.12	
10

SnO2 + RGO/carbon cloth	Hydrothermal + microwave-assisted	Pt rod	
Escherichia coli
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	75 + 75	1450	830 (OCV)	Not given	
128

PPy/GO/carbon felt	Electro polymerization	None/carbon felt	
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1	Lactate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	25	1326	330 (voltage output)	7530	
104

Graphene–TiO2/nickel foams	Microwave-assisted solvothermal	None/carbon paper	
S. oneidensis
	Lactate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	30 + 30	409	∼700 (OCV)	Not given	
131

TiO2/rGO/carbon cloth	Sol–gel + solvothermal reduction	None/carbon fiber brush	
S. putrefaciens CN32	LBmedium	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	100 + 100	540	Not given	1490	
132

TiO2–rGO/nickel foam	Sol–gel + solvothermal reduction	None/carbon fiber brush	
S. putrefaciens CN32	LBmedium	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	100 + 100	3169	Not given	Not given	
132

Graphene/PEDOT/carbon paper	
In situ electro polymerization	None/carbon paper	
E. coli
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	100 + 100	873	260 (voltage output)	Not given	
122

PANI–graphene nanoribbons/carbon paper	Electro-deposition	None/carbon paper	
S. oneidensis
	Lactate	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	Not given	856	Not given	Not given	
96

PNIPAM–GO–CNTs/none	Suspension polymerization	None/carbon cloth	
E. coli
	Glucose	Potassium ferricyanide	Dual	Not given	434	Not given	3606	
153


 	Fig. 16  Polarization curves of MFCs with different cathodes (a) and LSV results showing the oxygen reaction activities of different cathodes (b), at a step-sweep rate of 10 mV per 10 seconds from 0.3 to 0.3 V vs. a double junction Ag|AgCl|KCl (3.5 M) RE.102 Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of a membrane-free single-chamber air-cathode MFC showing the basic mechanism of current generation.174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 


Graphene + biofilm/carbon cloth	Microbially reduced	None/carbon cloth	Anaerobic activated sludge	Sodium acetate	Oxygen	Dual	9.8 + 9.8	323.2 ± 21	0.39 ± 0.02 (OCV)	Not given	
109

Nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheet + graphene/SS	Carbonization + KOH activation	None/carbon brush	Anaerobic activated sludge	Acetate	Oxygen	Dual	226	1159.34	0.243 (OCV)	Not given	
115

Co3O4–NG/glass carbon	Hydrothermal	None/carbon granules	
Shewanella oneidensis MR-1	Lactate	Oxygen	Dual	250 + 250	1340	680 (OCV)	Not given	
129

Co3O4–NGO/carbon cloth	Chemical reduction	None/carbon cloth	Anaerobic sludge	Glucose	Oxygen	Single	25	313	606 (OCV)	Not given	
130

MnO2 graphene nanosheet/SS	Redox reaction	None/carbon felt	Anaerobic sludge	Acetate	Oxygen	Single	226	2083	0.771 (OCV)	Not given	
133


 	Fig. 18  (A) Power densities and cell voltages in I–NG–MFCs, NG–MFCs and Pt/C–MFCs. (B) Decrease of maximum power density with cycle number at an external resistance of 1000 V. 40 cycles represent about 80 days. Error bars represent standard deviations of duplicate tests.70 Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) SEM figures of (a) raw carbon fiber cloth; (b) a 300 μm cathode membrane without a catalyst; (c) a 700 μm cathode membrane with a Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst; (d) a 300 μm cathode membrane with Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst. (B) The performance of different ratios in a Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 catalyst of 700 μm cathode membrane in a two-chambered MFC system. The ratio of Pd:rGO in Pd–rGO–CoFe2O4 was: (a), 1:1; (b), 1:2; (c), 2:1, and (d) stands for without catalyst.164 Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Elsevier. (C) Configuration of a photocatalysis-assisted MFC/MBR coupled system. (D) TH removal rate of photocatalysis-assisted MFC/MBR coupled system using CoFe2O4–PCM (a) and CoFe2O4 (–rGO)–PCM (b) within or without irradiation.182 Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
