Light upconverting core–shell nanostructures: nanophotonic control for emerging applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00170B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00170B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1680-1713Light upconverting core–shell nanostructures: nanophotonic control for emerging applications

        
          
            Guanying 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Hans 
            Ågren
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tymish Y. 
            Ohulchanskyy
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Paras N. 
            Prasad
          
          
        
      *ad
aInstitute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics and Department of Chemistry, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA. E-mail: pnprasad@buffalo.edu
bSchool of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, People's Republic of China. E-mail: chenguanying@hit.edu.cn
cDepartment of Theoretical Chemistry & Biology, Royal Institute of Technology, S-10691 Stockholm, Sweden
dDepartment of Chemistry, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Korea
Received 
      16th May 2014
    First published on 22nd October 2014AbstractLight upconverting nanostructures employing lanthanide ions constitute an emerging research field recognized with wide ramifications and impact in many areas ranging from healthcare, to energy and, to security. The core–shell design of these nanostructures allows us to deliberately introduce a hierarchy of electronic energy states, thus providing unprecedented opportunities to manipulate the electronic excitation, energy transfer and upconverted emissions. The core–shell morphology also causes the suppression of quenching mechanisms to produce efficient upconversion emission for biophotonic and photonic applications. Using hierarchical architect, whereby each shell layer can be defined to have a specific feature, the electronic structure as well as the physiochemical structure of the upconverting nanomaterials can be tuned to couple other electronic states on the surface such as excitations of organic dye molecules or localized surface plasmons from metallic nanostructures, or to introduce a broad range of imaging or therapeutic modalities into a single conduct. In this review, we summarize the key aspects of nanophotonic control of the light upconverting nanoparticles through governed design and preparation of hierarchical shells in the core–shell nanostructures, and review their emerging applications in the biomedical field, solar energy conversion, as well as security encoding.
Guanying Chen
Guanying Chen received his BS and PhD degrees in optics in 2004, and 2009, respectively, from Harbin Institute of Technology, P. R. China. He is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, and a senior research scientist at the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. He was a postdoctoral fellow (2010–2011) at University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and Royal Institute of Technology. His interests include lanthanide-doped nanomaterials, nanostructured solar cells, and nanoparticles-based diagnostics and therapeutics.
Hans Ågren
Hans Ågren graduated with a PhD in 1979 in experimental atomic and molecular physics at the University of Uppsala, Sweden, under the supervision of Nobel laureate Kai Siegbahn. After a couple of Post Doc years in USA he became in 1981 an assistant professor in Quantum Chemistry at Lund University. He became the first holder of the chairs in Computational Physics at Linköping University in 1991 and in Theoretical Chemistry at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, in 1998. He heads the Department of Theoretical Chemistry and Biology at KTH which houses ca. 20 scientists and 40 PhD students, with research activities in theoretical modeling primarily in the areas of molecular/nano/biophotonics and electronics, in catalysis and in X-ray science. The research is a mix of method development and problem oriented applications in collaboration with experimentalists. Hans Ågren participates in several national and international networks in his research areas. He has received the Swedish Bjurzon and Roos' awards.
Tymish Y. Ohulchanskyy
Tymish Y. Ohulchanskyy holds his PhD degree in optics and laser physics from the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv (Kyiv, Ukraine). After finishing his PhD in 2001, he joined the Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics (ILPB) at the University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA. He is currently a Research Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry in the University of Buffalo and Deputy Director of Photomedicine at ILPB. His research interests lie in the area of photophysics and physical chemistry of organic materials and organic, inorganic and hybrid nanostructures, and their photonic and biomedical applications. Multimodal agents for medical imaging, cancer theranostics and targeted cancer phototherapy are of particular interest.
Paras N. Prasad
Paras N. Prasad is a SUNY Distinguished Professor of Chemistry, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Medicine; the Samuel P. Capen Chair of Chemistry; the Executive Director of Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York; the visiting Distinguished Professor at Korea University. He was named among top 50 science and technology leaders in the world by Scientific American in 2005. He has published over 700 scientific and technical papers, four monographs (Introduction to Nanomedicine and Nanobioengineering, Nanophotonics, Introduction to Biophotonics, Introduction to Nonlinear Optical Effects in Molecules and Polymers) and eight edited books. He has received many scientific awards and honors (Morley Medal; Schoellkopf Medal; Guggenheim Fellowship; Fellow of the APS, OSA, and SPIE, etc.). His interests include biophotonics, nanophotonics, nanomedicine, metamaterials, and solar cells.
1. Introduction
Photon upconversion (UC) refers to an anti-Stokes process in which two or more low energy photons are sequentially or step-wise absorbed via real intermediate long-lived electronic states, resulting in an excitation of a higher electronic state, emitting a higher energy photon.1,2 It is distinct from conventional multi-photon absorption induced fluorescence, whereby multiple photons are simultaneously absorbed using virtual intermediate electronic states to produce photons with higher energy,3 and from conventional nonlinear sum frequency generation (typically, second harmonic generation), where two incident photons (at different or the same frequencies) are parametrically annihilated in a non-centrosymmetric medium to produce a photon with summed energy.4–6 The advantage offered by sequential excitation is the possibility of generating UC with an excitation power density as low as ∼10−1 W cm−2, which is easily provided by low cost continuous-wave laser diodes or incoherent light sources such as bulb lamps and light emitting diodes. This low power excitation density is in marked contrast to the high power density excitation (>106 W cm−2) required in nonlinear multiphoton absorption in which an expensive ultrashort pulsed laser has to be employed.3 The idea of photon UC originated from Bloembergen in 1959, who proposed that infrared (IR) light could be detected by sequential absorption of an ion in a solid material.7 This concept was then realized and formulated independently by Auzel,8 Ovsyankin and Feofilov9,10 in the mid-1960s. For a long time, the investigation of photon UC remained centered on f-ion (lanthanide) or d-ion (transition metal) doped bulk crystalline materials or glasses for use in UC lasers, IR detection, optical storage, etc.1 It is only recently that photon UC in nanomaterials has captured worldwide attention, because of the advantage offered by nanochemistry to fabricate unique nanostructures with nanophotonic control of the excitation dynamics.11 Photon UC has been reported for many types of nanomaterials, such as lanthanide-doped nanostructures,12 transition metal-doped nanoparticles,13 defects-doped nanostructures,14 quantum nanostructures,15 as well as nanoparticles containing organic molecules as donor–acceptor pairs in triplet–triplet annihilation UC.15,16 Lanthanide-doped UC nanoparticles (UCNPs) are a major thrust area of current research on UC in nanoparticles. The discussion within this review will be limited to this type of UC, with a focus on the emerging hierarchical core–shell structured UCNPs.
Lanthanide-doped UCNPs can be considered as dilute guest–host systems, where trivalent lanthanide ions are dispersed as guests in an appropriate inorganic host lattice with dimensions of less than 100 nm.2 The inorganic host lattice can be either a dielectric material17 or a wide band gap semiconductor.18 UC is often more efficient in dielectric materials (e.g., sodium yttrium fluoride, NaYF4), as they are more favorable to incorporate trivalent lanthanide ions without the need for generating vacancies for charge compensation, and generally have lower phonon cutoff energy, which is important to minimize nonradiative energy losses.2,19 Light absorption and emission in the lanthanide dopants involves the 4f–4f orbital electronic transitions with concomitant wave-functions localized within a single lanthanide ion. The electronic energy gap of a lanthanide ion does not change with a change in the size or shape of UCNPs.11 As a result, lanthanide doped materials generally do not exhibit quantum confinement effects that are clearly manifested in semiconducting materials. Each lanthanide element has a unique electronic configuration, with a system of well-defined, fine structured energy levels. The fine ladder-like structure of long-lived energy levels covers a broad range of energy. Owing to the pioneering work by Dieke,20 Judd,21 Ofelt,22 Wybourne,23 and others in theoretical and experimental studies of the 4fN electronic structure, most of the energy levels of trivalent lanthanide ions (known as Dieke energy levels), which determine the optical properties of lanthanides, have already been established. Because of shielding of the 4f electrons by the outer complete 5s and 5p shells, trivalent lanthanide ions can display line-like sharp, stable emission under photoexcitation. By a judicious selection of one or more lanthanide dopants, UCNPs are able to generate upconverted photoluminescence (UCPL) at selective wavelengths, after being excited with light of longer wavelength. Thus, an energy upconversion takes place, when light is converted from the infrared (IR) region to the near infrared (NIR) one, NIR to shorter NIR, NIR to visible (VIS), or NIR to ultraviolet (UV), etc. This light upconversion feature opens up numerous opportunities for the applications of energy nanoconverters, such as in high-contrast deep tissue bioimaging,24,25 photodynamic therapy in deep tissue,26 remote photoactivation,27 security and display,28 biosensing,29 temperature sensing,30,31 drug release and gene delivery,32 as well as in solar cells.33,34 However, conventional lanthanide-doped UCNPs have a number of problems which still limit their practical applications. Some examples are low upconversion efficiency associated with nanosize-induced surface-related quenching effects, undesired interactions between lanthanide ions that seriously constrain the upconversion design, limited excitation light harvesting ability and the excitation wavelength tunability, as well as limited functionalities for imaging and therapy. Despite their promising applications in many areas, these limitations prevent rapid evolvement of UCNPs from laboratory bench to clinical, technological and industrial applications.
Hierarchical design of the core–shell UCNPs, whereby each shell layer can be defined within a regulated scale to introduce a specific feature, provides a range of unique nanophotonic solutions to address the challenges associated with conventional UCNPs and offers new imaging and therapeutic properties, while completely conserving all the merits of conventional UCNPs. With the ability of nanochemistry to produce a shell of stoichiometric composition and a shell thickness with monolayer precision, the electronic structure as well as the physiochemical structure of the upconverting system can be purposely aligned for nanophotonic control of upconversion or to introduce a broad range of imaging or therapeutic modalities into a single conduct. The advantages provided by the core–shell structure encompass:
(i) Higher upconversion efficiency due to suppression of the surface-related quenching effect produced by an epitaxial growth of a shell layer. The shell layer is able to provide an effective passivation of lattice defects located on the surface of a core nanoparticle, as well as to create a perfect spatial isolation of the core nanoparticle from the surrounding environment. This results in significant enhancement of the upconversion efficiency which is dependent on the shell type, the defects in the shell, and the thickness of the shell layer.
(ii) Nanoscopic control of ion–ion interactions through spatial confinement of different types of lanthanide dopants in separated shell layers or the core domain. The interaction between lanthanide ions of the same or different types can be precisely engineered by an appropriate arrangement of the electronic energy level hierarchy for lanthanides in different shell layers as well as by manipulating the shell thickness to control the interaction strength. This directed interaction provides powerful tools to manipulate the energy transfer processes which are the essence of photon upconversion. As such, the excitation wavelength, the emission color, the absorption of nanoparticles, as well as any quenching effect can be manipulated for a favorable photon upconversion effect.
(iii) Coupling with new excitation electronic states of dyes or localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) for enhanced or broad band upconversion. The nature of 4f–4f electronic transitions in lanthanide ions results in low extinction and a narrow absorption band, posing limitations for light harvesting as well as for upconversion efficiency of UCNPs. Coupling them with LSPR, using a core–shell structure, may result in plasmonically induced upconversion emission enhancement.35 Introducing an organic dye shell layer to the surface of UCNPs can cause interaction of the electronic states of dye molecules with that of 4f electrons for energy transfer to lead to upconversion, taking advantage of the high extinction coefficient and large spectral width of organic dyes for light harvesting. These types of core–shell architecture will alleviate the limitations posed by the nature of 4f electrons.
(iv) Generation of new functionalities and multifunctionalities for theranostic applications. The limited functionality of conventional UCNPs can be significantly extended by an epitaxial growth of functional layers that produce new imaging functionalities (for example, the growth of Gd3+-containing shell layer creates the capability for magnetic resonance imaging).36 Along with enriched optical properties, the group of lanthanide elements also has unique magnetic, X-ray absorption, and radiation enhancement properties.2 Appropriate doping of lanthanide ions into the multiple shell layers or the core domain can introduce multimodal imaging abilities in a hierarchical core–shell structure without interfering with each other, thus accelerating the uses of UCNPs as multimodal imaging probes. In addition, the UCNPs can be further coated with a non-epitaxial silica or polymer shell which is able to entrap, encapsulate, or complex drugs, providing therapeutic opportunities for drug/gene delivery and light-activated therapy (such as photodynamic therapy (PDT) or photothermal therapy (PTT)).26,37 A combination of imaging modalities, provided by the epitaxial core–shell structure, and the therapeutic modalities, created by the non-epitaxial shell, promises use of UCNPs-based nanostructures as new generation theranostic nanoplatforms.
Indeed, core–shell UCNPs produce numerous unprecedented abilities to manipulate the excitation dynamics (the emission properties, including color, efficiency, and lifetime, energy transfer, and cooperative optical transitions) to create UC emission of needs, and to provide new multifunctionalities for effective diagnostics and therapeutics as well as for other nanophotonic applications such as in solar energy conversion. In this work, we review nanophotonic control of upconversion in hierarchically designed core–shell nanostructures based on UCNPs, as well as their application in biomedical applications, solar cells, and security encoding.
2. Nanophotonic control of upconversion in core–shell nanoparticles
Photon upconversion employing lanthanides can be produced via six fundamental mechanisms, i.e., excited state absorption, energy transfer upconversion, cooperative sensitization upconversion, cooperative upconversion, cross relaxation, and photon avalanche.1,2 The essence of these mechanisms is sequential excitation through the excited states of a single lanthanide ion or ion–ion interactions in the excited states to allow energy transfer between two or more lanthanide ions.2,11 These features are regulated by the f–f transition nature of lanthanide ions, the local environment around them, as well as the lanthanide ion distributions within a single nanoparticle (or the ion–ion distance within a single nanoparticle). Typically, UCNPs contain lanthanide emitters with a ladder-like system of energy levels (e.g., Er3+, Tm3+, and Ho3+ ions), as well as of a sensitizer (e.g., Yb3+ ions) to harvest the excitation energy and then nonradiatively transfer to the emitters (energy transfer upconversion mechanism).2
Nanophotonics is an emerging frontier which deals with the interaction of light with matter on a nanometer size scale.19 A core–shell epitaxial structure can produce important manifestation in defining a local coordinating environment for surface lanthanides, which is distinct from that for the interior lanthanide ions (i.e., a bulk crystal field) due to the size-reduction induced structural distortion, surface defects, coordinated organic ligands, etc. Moreover, core–multishell epitaxial structures provide opportunities to engineer the distribution of lanthanide ions as well as to appropriately arrange their energy levels within a nanostructure. As a consequence, a core–shell structure provides nanophotonic means to tailor light excitation harvesting, upconversion efficiency, upconversion emission wavelengths, directed energy transfer, cross relaxation, as well as the dopant concentration quenching threshold.2 A core–shell hierarchical architecture also offers a structural flexibility for enhancing a specific upconversion or introducing multifunctionalities. In the following Sections of 2.1–2.7, we will summarize seven approaches that have been typically used for nanophotonic control of a core–shell nanostructure (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Seven directions for nanophotonic control of upconversion in a core–shell nanostructure. 
The core–shell nanostructures utilized in recent studies can be broadly classified into two categories: (1) a core–shell nanoparticle containing epitaxial layers with a matched or nearly matched crystalline lattice; and (2) a core–shell nanoparticle containing non-epitaxial layers. The core nanoparticle here can be either conventional UCNPs without any epitaxial shell or core–shell UCNPs with epitaxial shell layers. Fig. 2 gives the examples of six types of core–shell UCNPs from these two categories, which constitute most of the current core–shell design to produce selective UC emissions as well as to deliver multifunctionalities to reach comprehensive imaging and therapeutic modalities.
 Fig. 2  Different types of core–shell structures. The upper panel illustrates core–shell UCNPs with epitaxial layers: (a) core–shell UCNPs with an “inert” (i.e., without any absorbing/emitting lanthanide dopant) shell layer; the colored balls in the core area depict lanthanide dopants; the red circles at the interface represent surface quenching sites; the black arrows indicate random energy transfer pathways. (b) Core–shell UCNPs with an active shell layer (i.e., layers containing “active” lanthanide dopants); and (c) core–shell UCNPs with multiple shell layers. Core–multishell type (c) is exemplified using five layers, in which layer 1 and layer 3 (the gray striped ones) can be either inert layers to avoid undesirable interactions between the active layers (the colored ones), or active layers to enhance the interactions between different active domains. The bottom panel depicts core–shell UCNPs with non-epitaxial layers: (d) UCNPs@silica core–shell nanoparticles, (e) core–shell–shell UCNPs@silica@metal (or metal@silica@UCNPs) nanoparticles, and (f) UCNPs coated with organic dye molecules. 
2.1. Core–shell structure to control surface-related quenching
Suppression of surface-related quenching effects is a typical way of enhancing upconversion efficiency of UCNPs through control of the local environment of surface lanthanide ions. Although this approach has been frequently utilized, the involved specific mechanisms remain experimentally unverified albeit few attempts.38–40 Surface-related quenching effects for the core UCNPs stem from the high surface-to-volume ratio produced by the nanometer dimension, which exposes most of the lanthanide dopants to surface induced deactivation (surface defects, ligands, and solvents that possess high energy phonons). The partition of exposed lanthanide dopants strongly depends on the size of the synthesized core nanoparticles, but also is influenced by the nature of the surrounding environment.11,40 In principle, surface related quenching mechanisms can be divided into two types:
(i) Direct quenching. Dopants located on or close to surface are directly deactivated by neighboring quenching centres through nonradiative relaxation involving phonons from the surrounding environment. This deactivation pathway applies to a range of intermediate excited states involved in producing UC emission, resulting in more pronounced quenching than in the case of Stokes-shifted (downconversion) luminescence, which involves one exclusive emitting state. Direct quenching is a general surface-related quenching mechanism for all types of luminophores with nanoscale dimension.
(ii) Energy migration induced quenching. The electronic excitation energy of dopants located inside can randomly migrate inside UCNPs and travel to other dopant centres on/around the surface or directly to the surface quenching sites. This type of surface-related quenching mechanisms requires the existence of long-lived energy states favorable for excitation energy hopping. This is generally the case for conventional UCNPs, for example, NaYF4:Yb3+/Ln3+ (Ln = Er, Ho, Tm),41–43 which contain a high concentration of sensitizer (Yb3+ ≥ 18%) that has an exclusive long-lived state. However, the mechanism of energy migration induced quenching has not been experimentally substantiated until this point. On the other hand, the migration of excitation energy is also a necessary prerequisite for adequate activation of lanthanide emitters to produce efficient upconversion emission. An optimized lanthanide concentration for nanoparticles that are devoid of any shell originates from a delicate balance between quenching and emission produced by energy migration. A controlled suppression or elimination of an energy-migration-induced quenching mechanism (using core–shell structure) might result in determination of distinct optimized lanthanide concentration that will be a big step in development of the efficient UCNPs.
The two types of surface-related quenching mechanisms can be addressed through an epitaxial growth of one or multiple inert (i.e., not containing lanthanide dopants) outer shell layer on the core nanoparticle (Fig. 2a), which passivates the imperfections in the host lattice (often located at the core particle surface), and shields the core from the surrounding ligands (which are necessary for solvent dispersion) and solvents of high phonon energy. The distance between the UCNP core and the surrounding environment, created by the inert epitaxial shell, prevents quenching of the excited states of the surface lanthanide ions and curbs the migration of excitation energy into the surrounding environment.2,11 The epitaxial shell layer can be the same as the host lattice of the core nanoparticle or of different composition but having a low lattice mismatch with that of the core nanoparticle. The quality as well as the thickness of the shell is of paramount importance to minimize surface-related quenching mechanisms. The following describe some variations of this type of core–shell structures.

Homogenous active core–inert shell. A homogenous active (i.e., containing “active” lanthanide dopants) core–inert shell nanoparticle refers to the one where the core and the shell materials have an identical host lattice (Fig. 2a). This type of core–shell structure has been investigated for a myriad of host lattice materials for a broad range of core sizes and shell thicknesses. For example, upconversion enhancement up to tens of times has been observed in (NaYF4:Yb3+/Ln3+)/NaYF4 (Ln = Er or Tm),44–50 (KYF4:Yb3+/Er3+)@KYF4,51 (SrF2:Yb3+/Er3+)@SrF2,52 (NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@NaGdF4,40,53 (KGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@KGdF4,54 (YOF:Yb3+/Er3+)@YOF,55 (YF3:Yb3+/Ln3+)@YF3 (Ln = Er, Tm, or Er/Tm),56 (LaF3:Yb3+/Tm3+)/LaF3, (BaLaF5:Yb3+/Tm3+)/BaLaF5,57 and (NaLuF4:Gd3+/Yb3+/Er3+)@NaLuF4,58 when excited under NIR excitation at ∼980 nm. Absolute quantum yield measurements verified that 30 nm (NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+)@NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs were 3 times more efficient than the NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ core nanoparticles of the same size.59 This result provides a direct evidence on the effectiveness of an inert shell to suppress the surface-related quenching effect to increase the upconversion efficiency. It is important to note that the UC quantum yield (UCQY) or efficiency is dependent on the excitation power density due to the nonlinearity of the UC processes. As a result, the UCQY should be always considered in the accompaniment of the excitation power density. We have reported an absolute upconversion efficiency of ∼4% in NaYF4:Er3+@NaYF4 core–shell nanoparticles under 1523 nm excitation with a power density of 20 W cm−2.60 More recently, (LiLuF4:Yb3+/Er3+)@LiLuF4 nanoparticles manifested a quantum yield of 5.0%, while (LiLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@LiLuF4 nanoparticles reached as high as 7.6% under laser power density of 127 W cm−2 at ∼980 nm.61 These newly determined values of upconversion efficiency of core–shell nanoparticles are close to or higher than the previously reported ones for bulk materials,62 confirming the effectiveness of a shell to suppress surface-related quenching mechanisms. The relation between the intensity of UCPL and the thickness of the shell can be described either by a linear dependence (for a few monolayer thicknesses less than ∼2.4 nm)63 or by an exponential function, with the optimized shell thickness (i.e., thickness which effectively enhances the UCPL intensity without an excessive increase of the overall size of the UCNPs) determined to be around 6 nm.64 More insights are needed to shed light on this dependence of the UCPL intensity on the shell thickness and thereby to provide guidance for an optimization of a shell, which should be thin but adequate enough to prevent the quenching by the environment.

Heterogeneous active core–inert shell. Heterogeneous core–shell nanoparticles with the core and the shell host matrix of different compositions (Fig. 2a) have also been investigated for improvement of UCPL. For example, Yan et al. reported ∼300-fold enhancement of UC emission yield in the 10–13 nm cubic NaYF4:Ln3+@CaF2 heterogeneous core–shell nanoparticles in comparison to the parent NaYF4:Ln3+ nanoparticles.65 Such enhancement is extraordinary, as only several ten folds enhancements were reported for homogenous core–shell UCNPs (see above). This suggests the importance of the selection of shell types which are evidently different in the ability to passivate the imperfections on the core nanoparticle surface and to minimize the quenching effects from the environment. We demonstrated that a hetero-shell of CaF2 can enhance NIR-to-NIR UCPL from ∼20 nm NaYbF4:Tm3+ by about 35-fold, causing UCQY to be as high as 0.6% under a low excitation power density of 0.3 W cm−2.25 Han et al. reported that NIR-to-UV UC emission in a series of cubic NaYF4:(20–100%)Yb3+/Tm3+@CaF2 epitaxial core–shell nanoparticles can be enhanced by two orders of magnitude, when compared with the core nanoparticles.66 It was suggested that if compared to the typically used NaYF4 shell, the CaF2 coating is more effective in resisting quenching in aqueous medium to preserve the upconverted emission and also in suppression of any lanthanide chemical leakage.65 The core–shell NaYF4:Ln3+@NaGdF4 nanoparticles with fixed or tunable shell thicknesses have also been successfully prepared to yield much more efficient upconversion luminescence.67,68 Note that UCPL from the cubic form NaYF4 is known to be about one order of magnitude less efficient than that from the hexagonal form NaYF4.69 However, the reported UCPL of NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@CaF2 is higher or comparable to that of the corresponding hexagonal NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4 core–shell nanoparticles, revealing the great potential of developing new heterogeneous core–shell type structures to significantly increase the upconversion efficiency. Indeed, our recent work on ∼24 nm hexagonal (NaYbF4:Tm3+/Gd3+)@NaYF4 core–shell structure showed a ∼350 fold UCPL enhancement as compared to UCPL from the ∼22 nm core nanoparticles.70
2.2. Core–shell structure to enhance light harvesting
Generally, UCNPs have severely limited light absorbing ability due to their low extinction coefficient and narrow band absorption of lanthanide ions. This problem mainly arises from the dipole–dipole forbidden nature of 4f–4f transitions as well as from well-shielded localized electronic wave-function for lanthanide ions in UCNPs, which severely limit use of UCNPs in many applications. An engineering of the core–shell structure provides a new dimension to alleviate or resolve the absorption related issues by introducing absorption from new type of lanthanides or by coupling lanthanide ions with electronic states from organic dyes. Indeed, instead of utilizing an inert epitaxial shell material as discussed in the above section, a reasonable concentration of light absorbing dopants can also be introduced in the shell layer or multiple shell layers to enhance light harvesting (Fig. 2b and c). The introduced dopants can be the sensitizer lanthanide ions (e.g., Yb3+) to increase the absorption of the nanoparticles at a certain wavelength (e.g., ∼980 nm), or multiple types of lanthanide ions to broaden the light excitation/emission range. Moreover, the shell can also be organic in nature, containing a number of dye molecules to provide an intensive and broad absorption band for light harvesting, followed by nonradiative transfer of the harvested energy to lanthanide ions in the core. The shell layer now takes three roles: (i) suppression of surface-related deactivation; this role is the same as in the core–shell structure with an inert shell. (ii) Enhancement of UCPL produced by interaction of the lanthanide dopants in the shell with the lanthanide dopants located in the core nanoparticles (Fig. 2b). (iii) Harvesting of light over a broad spectral wavelength range by different types of lanthanide ions in different shells (Fig. 2c) or using an organic dye shell (Fig. 2f).

2.2.1. The shell containing absorbing lanthanide dopants. 
Capobianco et al. first reported on NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+ active core–active shell nanoparticles, displaying a significant increase in the intensity of NIR-to-visible upconversion, when compared to either the NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+ active-core@NaGdF4 inert-shell, and NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+ core only nanoparticles.71 The active core–active shell strategy has also been utilized in the NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,72–74 (CaF2:Yb3+/Tm3+/Ho3+)/NaYF4:Yb3+,75 LaPO4:Er3+@LaPO4:Yb3+ nanorods,76 (NaLuF4:Gd3+/Yb3+/Er3+)@NaLuF4:Yb3+,58 BaGdF5:Yb3+/Er3+@BaGdF5:Yb3+ nanoparticles,77 as well as in BaF2:Ln3+@SrF2:Ln3+ nanoparticles.77 We recently reported a significant enhancement of UCPL (∼240 times) in cubic (NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)/NaYbF4/NaYF4 active core–active shell–inert shell nanoparticles, using directed energy migration in the second shell layer.78 In addition to the suppression of core surface-related quenching, the active layer provided enhancement of upconversion through energy transfer from the Yb3+ ions-contained in the active-shell to the dopant ions in the core. However, caution has to be exercised when utilizing this strategy, as the introduction of Yb3+ into the shell layer at the same time elevates energy-migration induced surface-related quenching mechanism (see Section 2.1). An optimized Yb3+ concentration in the shell needs to be established. It was shown that the core–shell–shell design of the (NaGdF4:Er3+)@(NaGdF4:Ho3+)@NaGdF4 nanoparticles resulted in enhanced NIR light harvesting due to combined light harvesting capabilities of both Er3+ and Ho3+.79 The drawback however is that high doping concentrations of Er3+ and Ho3+ may cause adverse cross relaxations, inducing quenching beyond the interfaces, even though the dopants are in different layers. The concept of incorporating lanthanide dopants into distinct layers in the active core–multiple shell structure can provide unprecedented capabilities for nanophotonic control of uncoupled upconversion in each domain (Fig. 2c).


2.2.2. The shell containing organic dyes. 
Energy transfer from the electronic manifold of organic dye molecules to lanthanide ions in NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs has been established to dramatically enhance UC green emission intensity (by a factor of ∼3300 times) due to a significantly broadened absorption spectral range as well as a greatly increased absorption strength.80 The structure can be illustrated using Fig. 2f; the core is the NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs to which dye molecules are covalently attached. The organic dye shell will produce an “antenna effect” to sensitize the small sized UCNPs, exploiting three important features: (i) there exists a large amount of lanthanide ions located at or around the nanoparticle surface due to the unique high “surface-to-volume” ratio offered by the nanoscale dimension; (ii) typically, the NIR absorption of a dye molecule is three orders of magnitude more intense than the absorption of a lanthanide ion, and several times broader than its absorption band; (iii) energy transfer from the singlet state of an organic dye to the 4f–4f transition of lanthanide is quantum mechanically allowed via a Föster mechanism involving higher-order multipolar interactions (e.g., dipole–quadrupole), or a Dexter mechanism involving double electron exchange.81 This fact has long been established for lanthanide-coordinated metal complexes.81 Dye-sensitized upconversion provides a paradigm to broadly harvest NIR light and convert it into visible light. However, the net UCQYs obtained by Zou et al. remained relatively low (less than 0.1%),80 as the utilized nanoparticle has a quite poor UC efficiency, and the spectral overlapping between the emission of the organic dye (IR 806) and the absorption of Yb3+ ion is extremely limited. Increase of the UCQYs in dye-sensitized UCNPs is an appealing direction.

2.3. Core–shell structure to suppress cross relaxation
The cross relaxation process is the main problem for the well-known conventional “concentration quenching effect”, diminishing the luminescence of lanthanides. This loss mechanism is primarily considered for a Stokes-shifted downconversion luminescence, but its impact on the UC luminescent efficiency becomes significant with increase in concentration of the activators, such as Tm3+, Er3+, and Ho3+ ions. Moreover, with utilization of several types of lanthanide ion dopants in the same domain, cross relaxation between different types of ions turns into a serious concern. From a fundamental point of view, the cross relaxation process originates from Coulomb interactions between two lanthanide dopant ions which is strongly dependent on the ion–ion distance determined by the dopants concentration in the nanoparticle.1 Through optimization of the dopant concentration, the cross relaxation process can be minimized; however, the concentration of dopants has to be low, which limits the luminescence efficiency. One solution to this problem is to separate the appropriate lanthanide ions in the core and the shell to create a spatial confinement that can result in a highly efficient UC, reducing detrimental effects of the cross relaxation process (Fig. 2c). For example, the optimized concentration for Er3+ ions was determined to be ∼2% for NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ microsized particles;69 this parameter is then typically used in most studies with NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ nanoparticles. Recently, Kong and Zhang et al. demonstrated that this commonly accepted upper threshold for concentration quenching of Er3+ can be raised from 2 to 5% by spatial separation of the emitter doping area inside nanoparticles.82 This concept was later exploited by Zhao et al. to engineer the distribution of activators inside one single nanoparticle to enhance upconversion luminescence efficiency. In a comparison with conventional heterogeneous doping, which associates with fluctuations of dopant concentrations inside one nanoparticle, a layer-by-layer deposition of multilayer shells with a defined dopant concentration is able to homogenize the distribution of dopants within one single nanoparticle, thus yielding a two-fold increase in the absolute upconversion yield of NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4 UCNPs due to a reduction of cross relaxation-induced quenching effect.83
We exemplified here a recent success of using the concept of suppressing cross relaxation in a core–shell design to shift the typically used excitation wavelength at 980 nm to a more biocompatible wavelength at ∼800 nm. A motivation behind this is that a laser at ∼980 nm can produce heat to damage the biological tissue when long irradiation is involved, due to a noticeable water absorption at this wavelength. At the same time, water is much more transparent for NIR light at 800 nm (Fig. 3a). It was demonstrated that cascade sensitized Nd3+/Yb3+/Er3+(Tm3+) tri-doped (β-NaYF4:Ln3+)@β-NaYF4 colloidal UCNPs can shift the typically used excitation at ∼980 nm to a ∼800 nm.84 This system consists of a primary sensitizer (Nd3+), a bridging sensitizer (Yb3+) and a lanthanide emitter Er3+(Tm3+). The Nd3+ ions absorb photons at ∼800 nm, while the Yb3+ ions act as bridge, to receiving the energy from the Nd3+ ions and transfer it to the emitters Er3+(Tm3+). The hierarchy of involved energy levels, in conjunction with the interactions of these three lanthanide ions, allows energy to be transported in the way we described above. A serious problem, existing in this system, is that Nd3+ ions exhibit efficient cross relaxation with the emitter Er3+(Tm3+) ion. Overcoming this obstacle (suppressing cross relaxation process) requires the concentration of Nd3+ ion to be as low as ∼1%, limiting the light absorption ability and, correspondingly, the upconversion efficiency of this system. Yan et al. and Liu et al. demonstrated later that doping Nd3+ into a shell layer can minimize the cross relaxation process between the Nd3+ ions and the emitters (Er3+, Tm3+, Ho3+), while maintaining a high Nd3+ ion concentration of ∼10–15%.85,86 This is of particular importance for the brightness of the system, as a high concentration of Nd3+ not only can increase the absorption of the nanoparticle, but also can increase the cascaded energy transfer efficiency. Indeed, the total UCPL intensity of (β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+)@β-NaYF4:Nd3+ or (β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@β-NaYF4:Nd3+ UCNPs was several tens of times higher than that of (β-NaYF4:Nd3+/Yb3+/Er3+)@β-NaYF4 or (β-NaYF4:Nd3+/Yb3+/Tm3+)@β-NaYF4 nanoparticles, respectively (Fig. 3a and b).86 A core–shell design to minimize the cross relaxation process in Nd3+-sensitized systems has also been explored by others, by introduction of a transition layer between the Nd3+-containing layer and the Yb3+-containing layer (Fig. 3c) or growth of the anisotropic core–shell structure.87–90 These new core–shell designs resulted in the enhanced upconversion luminescence intensity, more tunable color output, as well as realization of dual modal upconversion and downconversion bioimaging. However, the absolute quantum yield of UCPL for the reported Nd3+-sensitized core–shell nanoparticles remains either unevaluated or rather low. The UCPL at ∼540 nm from the quenching-shielded sandwich structured UCNPs with Er3+ (Fig. 3c), that seems to outperform most of the current Nd3+-sensitized core–shell UCNPs, was characterized by UCQY of 0.11 ± 0.05% under excitation at 800 nm (20 W cm−2),89 which is much lower than the highest UCQY (5%) reported for Yb3+/Er3+-doped core–shell nanoparticles when excited at 980 nm (but with higher power density of 127 W cm−2).61
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorption spectrum of water in the range of 680–1000 nm and the core–shell design of NaYF4:Yb3+/A3+@NaYF4:Nd3+/Yb3+ (A = Tm, Er, Ho); (b) core–shell design for NaYF4:Nd3+/Yb3+/A3+@NaYF4:Nd3+; (c) illustration of the involved lanthanide energy levels of a core–shell design of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+@NaYF4:Nd3+ with a transition layer to create a larger distance between Nd3+ and Er3+ ions. All designs are based on the cascaded energy flow Nd3+ → Yb3+ → A3+ (A = Er or Tm) (excited at ∼800 nm). The deleterious cross relaxation between Nd3+ and A3+ (A = Er or Tm) in (a)–(c) is minimized by spatial isolation of the lanthanide dopants into the core domain as well as into the shell domain. In (b), a very limited concentration of Nd3+ (1 mol%) is employed to minimize the cross relaxation process, still enhancing energy transfer across the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, 86 and 89. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
2.4. Core–shell to nanoscopically control energy transfer
Nonradiative energy transfer from the excited states of lanthanide ions plays vital roles in all pertinent UC luminescence phenomena; the ability to precisely control its direction and rate has numerous manifestations in academic interests as well as in technological applications. The main source of nonradiative energy transfer arises from the fundamental multipolar and/or exchange interactions between two lanthanide ions. In general, the energy transfer probability for electric multipolar interactions is proportional to the inverse of the sth power of the ion–ion distance: for dipole–dipole (s = 6), dipole–quadrupole (s = 8), and quadrupole–quadrupole (s = 10) interactions.1,19 The exchange interaction is falling even on a shorter distance, exponentially with the separation distance of ions, as it requires the overlap between wave functions of two ions.81 This strong dependence of multipolar/exchange interactions on the ion-pair distance at the nanoscale provides an opportunity to use the control of nanostructure to optimize the ion-pair interaction. In particular, the demonstrated ability to control the shell layer thickness with the monolayer accuracy provides a method to manipulate the energy transfer at a nanoscale (see Section 3.2), in conjunction with a rational alignment of energy levels in different shell layers. This manipulation of energy transfer between different lanthanide dopants has been implemented in ∼10 nm LaF3 based core–shell nanostructures, where the core domain contains the Eu3+ dopant, the first layer is an inert LaF3, the active second layer contains the Tb3+ dopants, and the third layer is an inert LaF3.91 The core–shell structure is similar to Fig. 2c, with the difference that the 4th and the 5th layers do not exist. It is found that by varying the thickness of the undoped first layer between the Tb3+-doped layer (the second layer) and the Eu3+-doped layer (the core domain), the degree of energy transfer can be engineered to allow for zero, partial, or full energy transfer from a donor ion (Tb3+) to an acceptor ion (Eu3+). Chen et al. illustrated a general strategy to achieve the dual-mode luminescence of Eu3+ in (NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)/NaGdF4:Eu3+ core–shell nanoparticles that involves a controlled use of energy migration.53 Another example is provided by Liu et al. who prepared NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4@NaGdF4:Tb3+ core–shell–shell nanoparticles with varied NaGdF4 shell thickness to show that the excitation energy can travel through the Gd3+ sub-lattice for a substantial distance of over 5 nm, without energy losses.12
Wang et al. reported on light management through a directed energy transfer in NaYbF4@Na(Yb,Gd)F4@NaGdF4 core–shell–shell nanoparticles, where different types of lanthanide dopants were doped into different domains (Fig. 4).87 To manage the energy level for favorable energy flow, Nd3+ were doped into the core domain to harvest light excitation at ∼800 nm, Yb3+/X3+ (X = Er, Ho, Tm) were doped into the inner shell domain to produce colored upconversion emission, while the Z3+ (Z = Eu, Tb, Dy) were doped into the outmost shell domain to additionally tune the upconversion luminescence. Through the Yb3+ sub-lattice network, the harvested energy by Nd3+ ions can transfer to the emitter X3+ (X = Er, Ho, or Tm) in the inner shell domain. The Gd3+ ion has long been known as a good sensitizer for Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+ and Sm3+ when excited in the UV range,92,93 which can also be activated through Yb3+/X3+ (X = Tm, Er, or Ho) pairs through a five- or six-photon UC process when excited at ∼980 nm.94–96 However, UC emission in the UV range from the Yb3+/Tm3+, which is much more intense than UCPL from Yb3+/Er3+ or Yb3+/Ho3+ ion pairs, typically results in activation of Gd3+ ions with significantly higher efficiency. Because of the unique large energy gap of Gd3+ (∼32000 cm−1), the absorbed energy can be contained and migrate in the Gd3+ sub-lattice network, crossing the core/shell interface to reach the Z3+ (Y = Eu, Tb, or Dy) sites. As a result, if the Tm3+ ions are selectively doped, the energy in the high-lying excited state of Tm3+ can be transferred to the migrator ions (Gd3+), and then to the emitters Z3+ (Y = Eu, Tb, or Dy) and be released as luminescence. The color tunability is provided by the electronic structure of Eu3+, Tb3+, or Dy3+, which are excited through this energy migration process. The issue of the surface-related quenching mechanism in this system is addressed by growing an inert shell NaYF4.97 It can be concluded that the nanoscopic control of energy transfer in hierarchical core–multishell nanoparticles opens a new realm for controlling upconversion, by tailoring the absorption wavelength, the extinction coefficient, the UCPL wavelength, the lifetime and efficiency.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the principle of energy flow in a NaYbF4@Na(Yb,Gd)F4@NaGdF4 core–shell–shell structure. (b) The corresponding energy levels of Nd3+ doped in the core domain, Yb3+/X3+ (X = Er, Ho, Tm) in the inner shell, as well as the Z3+ (Y = Eu, Tb, or Dy) ions in the outmost shell. The involved upconversion mechanisms (absorption, energy migration and flow, as well as the luminescence) are shown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 
2.5. Core–shell structure to tune the color of upconversion emission

2.5.1. A combination of spatially isolated lanthanide ions. 
The use of a core–shell architecture with two or more lanthanide activators incorporated into the core and different shells is a typical strategy to tune the luminescence of UCNPs, while maintaining a high luminescence efficiency. This strategy also explores different combinations of lanthanide activators to produce multicolor emission and exercises a spatial isolation of these lanthanide activators using an appropriate core–shell structure. It eliminates deleterious cross relaxation between the lanthanide activators and suppresses surface-related quenching mechanism in the core nanoparticles, thus yielding a range of tunable emission with high efficiency.
Lanthanide emitters (activators) of Er3+, Tm3+, Ho3+, and Pr3+ ions have long-lived intermediate states, which typically can be sensitized by Yb3+ ions to produce efficient UC emission when excited at ∼980 nm. The use or combined use of these activators with precisely controlled concentration is able to produce three primary UC colors (blue, green, and red) and a range of UC outputs with other colors, even a white light output. Doping two or more of these activators into one single domain is a straight forward way to tune the UC output, but does often introduce the deleterious cross relaxation process resulting in a decrease in the UC intensity. Core–shell structured UCNPs can minimize this cross relaxation process (see Section 2.3 and Fig. 2c) while retaining the color tunability through spatial confinement of the emitters. Zhang et al. reported on hexagonal-phase NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ and NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ core–shell nanoparticles to produce multiple emission peaks.98 Emissions from both Tm3+ and Er3+ in these UCNPs were shown to be non-quenched, in contrast to the UCPL from Tm3+/Er3+-codoped NaYF4 nanoparticles. A range of sandwich-structured core–shell–shell nanoparticles of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYbF4:Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+, NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYbF4:Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+, and NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYbF4:Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ UCNPs have also been developed, exhibiting tunable UC emissions for multicolor cellular imaging.99 Ultrasmall UCNPs with hierarchical core–shell–shell architecture (NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4) have been prepared following a microwave-based thermolysis procedure, producing upconversion emission with the color output tuned by varying the position of the dopants inside the nanoparticles (Fig. 5).100
 Fig. 5  Tuning upconversion luminescence using ultrasmall core–shell–shell NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4 architectures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Lanthanide emitters like Eu3+, Tb3+, Dy3+ and Sm3+, which do not have long-lived intermediate energy states, can only be directly excited at NIR light through a simultaneous multi-photon absorption process or a cooperative sensitization upconversion (CSU) process via simultaneous extraction of the energy contained in an excited Yb3+ ion pair. These lanthanide ions can be utilized for tuning upconversion through nanoscopic control of energy migration in core–multishell structures (see Section 2.4).


2.5.2. Tuning upconversion through energy transfer. 
Energy transfer from a donor to an acceptor can involve two pathways: (1) nonradiative energy transfer via multipolar or exchange interactions; (2) radiative energy transfer, i.e., luminescence resonance energy transfer (LRET), where light emitted by the donor is absorbed by an acceptor molecule. When utilizing the UCNPs as an energy donor and dyes or quantum dots (QDs) as an energy acceptor, it offers a larger freedom for upconversion emission wavelengths than for the UCPL produced merely by the lanthanide ions. An expanded range of multicolor emission was obtained from the core–shell NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+(Tm3+)@silica nanostructures by encapsulating organic dyes or QDs into the silica shell to produce additional luminescence via nonradiative energy transfer or LRET processes (Fig. 6A).101 Alternatively, one or more bands of the UC emission from either NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ or NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ nanoparticles can be selectively quenched by organic luminescence quenchers or gold nanoparticles contained in the shell layer to produce a tunable color-coded output (Fig. 6B).102
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of tuning upconversion luminescence using non epitaxial UCNPs–silica core–shell structure, where (A) luminescent emitters and (B) luminescent quenchers are loaded in the silica shell. 

2.6. Core–shell UCNPs for coupling with localized surface plasmon
Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is a collective oscillation of free charge carriers at the interface of metallic or self-doped semiconductor nanomaterials and dielectric medium; LSPR is generated by incident light when the resonance occurs between frequency of light photons and the natural frequency of surface charge carriers. The plasmon resonant frequency for plasmonic nanostructures is revealed itself as a maximum in the optical absorption spectrum (typically in visible and close NIR ranges for Au and Ag metallic nanostructures).19,33 In an anisotropic nanostructures such as nanorods, LSPR along the longitudinal direction can be tuned over a wide range by changing the aspect ratio.103 The LSPR is able to greatly enhance the electromagnetic field near the particle's surface, which falls off rapidly with distance from the surface. This enhanced field produces an increase in the emission efficiency of an emitter located near the surface of the plasmonic nanostructure.104 However, coupling to structures with LSPR can also affect the emission in a different way. Close contact of the emitter with the metallic surface introduces large non-radiative decay, resulting in a drastic quenching of emission.105 That is why the distance between the emitter and the plasmonic nanostructure has to be optimized to obtain the plasmonic enhancement of emission. This optimization can be facilitated by using a core–shell type architecture (Fig. 2e). LSPR has been used to enhance the efficiency of the UCPL of UCNPs involving a large variety of configurations.106–112
Among the reported work, core–shell nanostructures of metallic@silica@UCNPs or UCNPs@silica@metallic (refer to Fig. 2e for schematic configuration) are of particular importance, as they provide a single platform to couple LSPR and UCPL at the nanoscale. The distance between the metallic nanoparticles and the UCNPs can be precisely controlled to achieve the optimum enhancement of UCPL by varying the thickness of the spacer silica shell. A number of previous reports have used a silica layer as a spacer,35,113–118 but some studies showed plasmonic-induced UCPL quenching.119–121 Time-resolved measurements did reveal that the emission process is influenced in both cases. The reported enhancements vary widely and the exact enhancement mechanisms are not clearly understood. The plasmonically induced enhancement is generally more pronounced for a multiphoton-induced UCPL band and at a low excitation power density, when saturation effects are not in play. Detailed measurements and analysis of the enhancement factors for different UCPL bands are necessary to establish the enhancement mechanism, along with theoretical guidance to produce optimized plasmonic structures of appropriate shape, size and situated at an optimum distance from the UCNPs. Lu et al. in their recent study “Plasmon Enhancement Mechanism for the Upconversion Processes in NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ Nanoparticles: Maxwell versus Förster” compared UCPL from NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs deposited on a silver nanograting and that from the ones on a flat silver film, and has shown that the intensity of the green and red UCPL (Er3+ emission) on the nanograting was up to 16 and 39 times higher.122 The UCPL intensity was found to depend quadratically on the excitation power in the weak excitation power limit and linearly in the strong excitation power limit. Importantly, the authors identified and separated two main mechanisms contributing to plasmon enhancement of luminescence upconversion: absorption of lanthanide ions and energy transfer between them. The absorption enhancement is described by the Maxwell's equations, while the energy transfer obeys the Förster's theory. It was further determined that the absorption enhancement played the dominant role, while the energy transfer enhancement was small and effective only in the weak excitation regime. The expressions for the overall enhancement factors for the upconverted luminescence intensity in the weak and strong excitation limits were derived. It can be assumed that the work of Lu et al. sheds light on how surface plasmon enhances the upconversion in lanthanide ions materials and may allow comparison among the widely varying reports in the literature, thus offering a foundation for more advanced engineering of plasmon enhanced upconversion materials.
2.7. Core–shell UCNPs for introducing new functionalities
This section provides an account of integration of various functionalities on a single UCNP platform using a core–shell architecture, which can be of great value for biomedical applications. Appropriate tailoring of this core–shell nanoplatform is able to produce multifunctionality, either by minimizing interference between incorporated functionalities or in contrast by bringing synergy of interaction between them. These functionalities can be utilized for biomedical imaging, sensing, various applications in diagnostics or therapeutics. An important new direction is to entail these core–shell structures for theranostic applications, whereby both diagnostic and therapeutic functions are combined.

2.7.1. New imaging modality. 
Biomedical imaging has become one of the most relied-upon tools in life sciences and healthcare. It embraces optical imaging, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and photoacoustic (PA) imaging.123 A nanoparticle platform for imaging contrast agents may allow for complementary use of the existing imaging techniques and for a development of novel imaging methods, that can lead to early detection, screening, diagnosis, and image-guided treatment of human diseases. The core–shell structure enables incorporation of appropriate imaging modalities into the core as well as in different shell layers (Fig. 2c), without interference between them (refer to the advantages of core–shell architecture discussed in 2.1–2.6).
An epitaxial core–shell structure with the shell containing magnetic elements (Gd3+, Dy3+, Mn2+, and Ho3+ ions) is able to produce a new MRI imaging modality without or with limited influence on UCPL from the core.124–129 For example, “smart” lanthanide-based theranostic NaDyF4:Yb3+/NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+ core–shell nanoprobes are able to circumvent the up-converting poisoning effect of Dy3+ ions to produce efficient up-conversion fluorescence, while offering not only excellent dark T2-weighted MR contrast, but also tunable bright and dark T1 MR contrast properties.129 Core–shell Fe3O4@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ nanocomplexes have been prepared for T2-weighted magnetic resonance and upconversion luminescence imaging.130 An epitaxial core–shell structure with high X-ray attenuation element (e.g., Lu3+ or Yb3+) in either in the core or in the shell offers a new modality for CT imaging,131,132 while positioning the radionuclide 153Sm in the outmost shell layer allows for SPECT imaging133 or the 18F radionuclide for PET imaging.134 Recent progress in the use of core–shell hierarchical design for multimodal imaging applications is discussed in Section 5.1.2.


2.7.2. Therapeutic functionality. 
In general, the UCNPs themselves lack the functionality to produce a therapeutic effect. A pertinent effect using lanthanide-doped nanoparticles (not UCNPs) is demonstrated by Strek et al. where high concentration Nd3+ containing NaYF4 is able to provide a local temperature increase when excited at ∼532 nm, potentially having applications in photothermal therapy (PTT).135 A silica coating of UCNPs (Fig. 2d) provides possibilities to incorporate various therapeutic functionalites into the UCNPs.136,137 The importance of silica coating resides in that it can be produced with controllable porosity, which provides promise for therapeutic loading and controlled release. The controlled release can take place in a sustained way via slow diffusion through voids or channels in the silica,138,139 or activated by UV upconversion light by the action of a NIR light penetrating deep through a biological medium.140 Silica also has a well-developed surface chemistry to introduce a variety of plasmonic nanomaterials (e.g., metallic nanoshells, metallic nanoparticles, self-doped plasmonic semiconductors) on to them, thus providing abilities to implement photothermal therapy (PTT) and/or photoacoustic imaging using silica coated UCNPs. Indeed, silica coating imparts a large variety of therapeutic functions to UCNPs, entailing them to be used as theranostic core–shell UCNPs. Use of polymeric coating instead of silica to incorporate various therapeutic functions is also being actively pursued.141 In addition, NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@TiO2, NaLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+/Gd3+@TiO2, NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@Bi2MoO6 core–shell nanoparticles have been prepared which show excellent NIR-driven photocatalytic activity as a result of using upconversion luminescence to activate the TiO2 photocatalyst positioned in the shell.142–144 The ability to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) or free radicals from a TiO2 shell layer shows promises for the use of these core–shell structures as attractive pro-drugs for NIR light-activated therapy. This potential has recently been verified in a study where the amount of ROS produced from NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@TiO2 nanoparticles was shown to be sufficient for killing cancer cells in vitro.145 The use of varied types of core–shell structure for therapeutic applications is discussed in Sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.4.

3. Preparation of hierarchical core–shell upconversion nanoparticles
Use of nanophotonic approaches to control the excitation dynamics of upconversion in a core–shell structure significantly relies on the ability of nanochemistry to produce shells in a precisely defined manner. This is of particular importance for epitaxial core–multishell upconversion nanoparticles, as each shell may play a specific distinct role. This means that the host lattice, thickness, crystal structure, as well as concentration and type of dopants might vary in different shell layers, yet the entire multishell coating has to be grown in a well-defined manner. This section provides an account of nanochemical approaches to prepare these epitaxial core–shell structures with single or multiple shell layers with monolayer deposition precision, as well as to synthesize non-epitaxial mesoporous silica coated UCNPs and plasmonic core–shell nanoparticles. The core only UCNPs have been typically prepared using solution-based colloidal nanochemistry via three main types of synthetic approaches: (i) thermal decomposition, (ii) Ostwald-ripening, and (iii) hydrothermal methods. By carefully adjusting experimental parameters, such as concentrations of precursors, type of solvents, reaction temperature and time, the core only UCNPs with a high crystallinity, narrow size distribution and exceptional optical properties can be prepared. As this nanochemistry has been thoroughly presented by us as well as by others in recent reviews,2,17,146,147 they are not discussed in this work.
3.1. General nanochemical approaches to prepare epitaxial core–shell UCNPs with a single shell layer
Three techniques have been typically used to produce a single shell layer on the core nanoparticle surface.

(i) Seed-mediated epitaxial growth. This is the most widely used chemistry to prepare high quality epitaxial core–shell structure nanoparticles with a uniform morphology and size. The essence in a preparation of the high quality inorganic nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution is to well separate the nucleation stage and the growth stage in time.148 As a result, “burst nucleation” is typically required in the growth solution to produce abundant nuclei that can then be utilized to direct the deposition of the monomer in the growth stage, but without generating new nuclei for new nanocrystals to form (in the case of synthesis of lanthanide-doped nanoparticles by the thermolysis method).42,93,149 In the case of UCNPs, the monomer can be defined as the minimal subunit of the host bulk crystal. For seed-mediated epitaxial growth, the core nanoparticles are utilized as “nuclei” for seeding the growth of the shell layer. As the core UCNPs have been prepared before the growth, the nucleation and the growth stages are therefore automatically separated ensuring high quality core–shell nanoparticle to be formed. Seed-mediated growth applies to both homogenous and heterogeneous core–shell UCNPs discussed in Section 2; the only difference is in the variance of shell precursors used in the growth solution. However, in order to create a homogenous interface between the core and the outer shell, the host lattice of the shell material is required to exhibit a low lattice mismatch with the core material. Moreover, the concentration of shell precursor is typically low in regard to the concentration of the core nanoparticles to avoid formation of new nuclei by shell precursors, which might then evolve into nanoparticles of shell host material alone rather than the core–shell UCNPs. The thickness of the shell can be controlled via adjusting the shell precursor concentration, which can be determined according to chemical stoichiometric calculation. In addition, the shell precursors can be either directly injected into the growing solution of the core nanoparticles to induce a further growth of the shell, or the core nanoparticles can be centrifuged out, and the shell layer is grown in a separate step. These two variants of loading shell precursors also provide two alternatives for layer-by-layer growth of core–multishell structure UCNPs as described in Section 3.2.

(ii) Seed-mediated Ostwald-ripening. Ostwald ripening refers to the process which favors larger particles with smaller surface to volume ratios over the energetically less stable smaller particles, resulting in the growth of larger particles at the expense of smaller ones. As a result, the Ostwald ripening process is able to dissolve energetically less stable small sacrificial nanoparticles into molecules of shell materials, which can then deposit on the larger stable core nanoparticles. Veggel and co-workers recently exploited this process to perform layer-by-layer shell growth onto larger core nanoparticles.47 Small sacrificial alpha-NaYF4 nanoparticles were firstly synthesized and used as the shell precursor. Subsequent injection of these sacrificial nanoparticles into a hot solution of NaYF4:Ln3+ core nanoparticles induces a rapid dissolution of the sacrificial nanoparticles and their deposition onto the larger core NPs (a self-focusing Ostwald-ripening process), which resulted in a formation of the core–shell structured nanoparticles with a well-defined shape, narrow size distribution, with control to provide a tunable shell growth. Thus, the shell thickness can be precisely controlled by manipulating the amount of the injected sacrificial nanoparticles. This method is flexible and holds promise to prepare other high-quality homogeneous and heterogeneous core–shell nanoparticles.

(iii) Cation exchange reaction. This strategy involves a reversible chemical reaction between an insoluble solid and a solution, during which cationic ions are interchanged. As a result, cationic ions from the surface of UCNPs are replaced by other cations present in solution, thus producing a unique heterogeneous core–shell structure. One of the earliest examples of use of this technique was the preparation of GdF3@LnF3 core–shell NPs by Veggel and Dong.150 They exposed the GdF3 core NPs to an aqueous solution containing excess Ln3+ ions and observed a partial replacement of Gd3+ ions in the GdF3 NPs by Ln3+ from the solution. The same group used the cation exchange approach to prepare multifunctional NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4 core–shell NPs with tunable shell thickness, enhanced UCPL and outstanding paramagnetic performance.127 More recently, Wang and Deng reported on in situ cation exchange of hexagonal phase NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ nanoparticles with Gd3+ ions during synthesis, which retained the small particle size of ∼12 nm, but increased the UCPL by about 29 times.151 However, extended use of the cation exchange method to prepare core–multishell UCNPs is problematic, as it is ineffective to precisely control the exchanging parts of UCNPs and yield a uniform shell. Notwithstanding, it still provides a versatile alternative to impart new imaging modality to UCNPs through the formation of a core–shell structure.
3.2. Layer-by-layer approach to prepare core–multishell UCNPs with monolayer thickness precision
The chemistry to produce core–multishell UCNPs relies on the deposition of shells in a layer-by-layer way. A straightforward approach is to use a multi-step approach to prepare each shell using seed-mediated epitaxial growth or seed-mediated Ostwald-ripening methods described above in Section 3.1. That is to say the core–1st shell UCNPs is utilized as the seeds for the core–1st shell–2nd shell UCNPs, which are in turn utilized as the seeds for the core–1st shell–2nd shell–3rd shell UCNPs, and then so forth. The stoichiometric nature of involved chemical reactions producing a shell causes its thickness to be precisely proportional to the shell precursor dosage, which can be calculated according to the increase in molar mass caused by deposition of the shell of a defined thickness. This essentiality provides an exciting opportunity to deposit each shell layer with a single monolayer precision. A multi-step method has been employed by many researchers to prepare core–multishell UCNPs, such as NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYbF4:Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+,99 NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4,100 NaYbF4@Na(Yb,Gd)F4@NaGdF4,87 NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4@NaGdF4:Tb3+,12 NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+@NaYF4:Nd3+ (Zhong, Adv. Mater., Nd),89 (NaGdF4:Er3+)@(NaGdF4:Ho3+)@NaGdF4,79 (NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)/NaYbF4/NaYF4,78 and NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4.88 It is worth noting that Zhao et al. was the first to show that the core–shell NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4 UCNPs can be prepared by employing monolayer-by-monolayer deposition,63 opening a new era for nanophotonic control of upconversion in the core–shell nanostructure with a sub-nanometer precision.
Although the multi-step approach is able to prepare a core–multishell structure with precision and flexibility, it utilizes prolonged heating, volatile solvent removal, centrifugation and washing for growth of each shell. Hence, the preparation process is time-consuming and laborious, especially when a few shell layers are needed. To overcome this, a protocol of one pot successive layer-by-layer (SLBL) deposition was introduced. It utilizes seed-mediated epitaxial growth, which is flexible to deposit uniform multishells on both hexagonal and cubic phase cores via successive introduction of the shell precursor solutions (Ln-OA and Na-TFA-OA dissolved in high boiling-point OA–ODE mixture) (Fig. 7).152 The shell thickness was shown to be well controlled in the range from 1 monolayer (0.36 nm) to more than 20 monolayers (8 nm) by simply adjusting the amounts of the shell precursors. The stoichiometric doping of lanthanides into the shell as well as into the core domain provides a large degree of freedom for engineering light upconversion in a core–shell structure. The principle of SLBL protocol has implications for the one pot growth of core–multishell nanostructures through the Ostwald-ripening strategy, when sacrificial nanoparticles are employed as the shell precursor.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of one pot successive layer-by-layer (SLBL) deposition to prepare epitaxial core–multishell UCNPs (upper panel), and HAADF STEM images of particles with varied shell thickness (lower panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
3.3. Mesoporous silica coating
Silica coating is a strategy for inorganic surface treatment to make nanoparticles water-dispersible and biocompatible as well as to introduce new therapeutic functionalities when using mesoporous silica to entrap a therapeutic agent and deliver it to the disease site. Silica is known to be highly stable, biocompatible, and optically transparent. When utilized as a coating material, surface silanization can flexibly offer abundant functional groups (e.g., –COOH, –NH2, –SH, etc.), allowing for conjugation with biomolecules. Generally, there are two types of conventional chemistry to coat nanoparticles with silica: (i) Stöber method, which applies to the hydrophilic UCNPs using well-established sol–gel chemistry that involves the hydrolysis and condensation of alkoxide-based precursors, such as tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS); (ii) reverse micelle microemulsion, which applies to UCNPs that has hydrophobic capping ligands. This method utilizes chemical reactions in nano-confined hydrophilic cavities generated by a homogeneous mixture of ammonia, cyclohexane, surfactant (e.g., Igepal CO-520), and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS). Since therapeutic upconversion nanoparticles typically exploit mesoporous silica coated core–shell UCNP structures, we focus here on chemistries to prepare them. Readers interested in UCNPs with non-mesoporous silica coating are recommended to refer to recent reviews on this topic.2,17,147
A mesoporous silica shell on UCNPs can be obtained by three methods, as illustrated in Fig. 8. (i) The calcination method (Fig. 8a), which typically takes three steps. The first step is to produce an amorphous silica shell on top of UCNPs, which is then coated with an organically modified silica shell using the Stöber method, where a combination of tetraethylorthosilicate and octadecyltrimethoxysilane with an appropriate ratio is used as a silica precursor. Finally, calcination at high temperature (∼500 °C) yields a mesoporous silica on top of UCNPs@amorphous silica core–shell nanostructure. Zhang et al. have utilized this method to prepare the core–shell NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@SiO2@mSiO2 nanoparticles to incorporate a photosensitizer or a genetic material into the mesoporous silica for upconversion photodynamic therapy (UC PDT) or controlled drug release in order to explore activation by deep penetrating NIR light excitation (Fig. 8b –d).26,27,153 (ii) The organic template method (Fig. 8e), which utilizes a surfactant [for example, cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) or hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (CTAC)] as a template. In this method, the first step is to produce a hydrophilic complex of CTAB or CTAC with UCNPs, which is then processed with the Stöber method to create a template-patterned silica shell. Subsequent extraction of the CTAB or CTAC using ion exchange (e.g., with sodium chloride) yields a patterned mesoporous silica shell. Cichos and Karbowiak developed a general and versatile procedure based on CTAB to produce a controlled thin mesoporous silica layer on the top of lanthanide-doped NaGdF4 nanoparticles and PbS quantum dots.154 Shi et al. utilized a CTAC template to prepare NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@mSiO2 core–shell UCNPs for light-regulated drug release by making use of the NIR-to-UV mediated trans–cis photoisomerization of azo molecules grafted in the mesopore network of a mesoporous silica layer.155 Lin et al. have utilized CTAB as a template to fabricate a set of multifunctional mesoporous core–shell structured nanocomposites such as Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+,156 Gd2O3:Er3+@SiO2@mSiO2,157 β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@β-NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@mSiO2 nanocomposites (Fig. 8f–h)158 and NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@SiO2@mSiO2,159 to be used as efficient nanoagents for drug delivery and optical imaging. A critical review by Lin and co-workers on this topic has appeared recently.138 (iii) Etching method (Fig. 8i). This method usually involves the growth of two dense silica shells twice, and the second shell growth usually employs a water-phase Stöber method. Subsequently, a surface-protected hot water etching process (using PVP as a surface protector) at ∼95 °C can etch away the first silica shell and produce mesoporous pores in the second silica shell, yielding a “yolk” nanostructure with a mesoporous silica shell. Shi et al. have utilized this method to produce a yolk nanostructure of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4@mSiO2 to be used for synergetic chemo-/radiotherapy as well as to deliver magnetic/luminescent dual-modal imaging modality.160 The same nanostructure has also been utilized for real-time in vivo quantitative monitoring of drug release determined by the varied signal intensities of both MRI and UCPL.161 The same group prepared NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@hmSiO2 using a similar approach for selective hypoxia imaging in vivo upon NIR excitation (Fig. 8j–l).162
 Fig. 8  Coating of UCNPs with a mesoporous silica shell. (a) Schematic of the calcination method; (b–d) corresponding TEM images of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+, NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica, and mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica nanoparticles obtained using the calcination method. (e) Schematic of the template method; (f) TEM image of β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@β-NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@mSiO2 nanocomposites, prepared using CTAB as a template, (g, h) TEM and dark-field STEM image of NaYF4:Tm3+/Yb3+@NaYF4@mSiO2 prepared using CTAC as a template. (i) Schematic of the etching method; (j) TEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4, (k) HAADF STEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@dSiO2@mSiO2, (l) HAADF STEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@hmSiO2 (d SiO2, dense layer silica; mSiO2 mesoporous layer silica, hmSiO2 obtained by etching the dense silica layer in hot water). Reproduced with permission from ref. 153, 158 and 162. Copyright 2009 and 2013, John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Coupling of UCNPs with plasmonics using core–shell architecture
Coupling of plasmonic properties with UCNPs can be of great importance for obtaining plasmonically enhanced UCPL (see Section 2.6). On the other hand, even if the plasmonic effect on UCPL is not revealed, the core–shell architectured hybrid of upconversion and plasmonic nanosystems might be of significance for a number of applications exploiting both plasmonic and UCPL features (e.g., optical and photoacoustic imaging, imaging guided photothermal therapy, etc.). Two variants for the fabrication of the plasmonic core–shell structures (Fig. 9) are described below.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration for preparing core–shell–shell structures of metallic@silica@UCNPs, along with (b–d) TEM images of the nanostructures obtained in each step. (e) Schematic illustration for synthesizing UCNPs@silica@metallic core–shell–shell structure, along with (f) and (g) TEM images of the corresponding samples. Reproduced with permissions from ref. 113 and 121. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society and 2013 Ivy Spring International Publisher. 

(i) Metallic@silica@UCNPs nanostructure.
Fig. 9a illustrates a typical procedure for creating metallic@silica@UCNPs core–shell–shell nanostructure, where a plasmonic metallic core of silver (Ag) nanospheres is utilized as an example.113 The first step is to coat silica onto metallic nanoparticles by using either the Stöber method or the reverse micelle microemulsion method (Fig. 9b). By controlling the coating process, the resulting metallic@SiO2 (e.g., Ag@SiO2) can have a uniform diameter and contain one metallic nanoparticle positioned at the centre. The thickness of the silica can also be precisely controlled via adjusting the amount of the utilized TEOS as well as by varying other parameters. In the second step, the metallic@SiO2 can then be coated with a layer of Y:Ln(OH)CO3·H2O through a homogeneous precipitation method from yttrium nitrate, lanthanide nitrate, and urea (e.g., at 90 °C for 2 h) (Fig. 9c). Finally, heat treatment at high temperature (e.g., 700 °C for 3 h) can convert the Y:Ln(OH)CO3·H2O layer into a crystallized lanthanide-doped Y2O3 upconverting layer (Fig. 9d). The thickness of this layer is determined by the thickness of the layer of Y:Ln(OH)CO3·H2O. This procedure was employed by Zhang et al. to prepare Ag@SiO2@Y2O3:Er3+ nanoparticles.113 An optimized LSPR UC enhancement of ∼40 times was reported, along with the use of this nanoplatform for bioimaging. Ge et al. reported on LSPR enhanced UCPL in Au@SiO2@Y2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ nanoparticles which are prepared by utilizing the chemistry described here.35 An optimization of the silica spacer's thickness resulted in a maximum ∼10 fold enhancement of the green UC emission of Er3+ ions, when excited at ∼980 nm. It is to be noted that the chemistry described in this section can be extended to prepare other multifunctional core–shell nanoparticle platforms, e.g., core–shell–shell Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ that integrate the magnetic properties and the UCPL properties for targeted chemotherapy.163 For this, the metallic nanoparticles are replaced by Fe3O4, and the Fe3O4@SiO2@Y2O3:Yb3+/Er3+ is further subject to ion-exchange in the presence of HF and NaF solution to form the Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ multifunctional nanoplatform.

(ii) UCNPs@silica@metallic nanostructure. The chemistry or the procedure to prepare UCNPs@silica@metallic nanoparticles is illustrated in Fig. 9e.120,121 The first step involves coating silica onto UCNPs by using either the Stöber method or the reverse micelle microemulsion method (Fig. 9g). An amino-functionalized silica can be produced by refluxing the NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica nanoparticles dispersed in ethanol with the addition of a hint amount of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) at an elevated temperature for a reasonable time range (e.g., at 80 °C for 1 hour). As the amino group has a strong affinity to the metallic element, the amino-functionalized silica can directly hold the synthesized metallic nanoparticles with a loosely coordinated ligand (e.g., poly-vinylpyrrolidone) (Fig. 9f).121 We have prepared NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica@Au nanostructures using this nanochemistry for biomodal optical imaging as well as for studies of LSPR interaction with UCPL.121 Li et al. reported on NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica@Au satellites for tunable green-to-red upconversion emissions using the absorption capability of gold.120 This chemistry has also been utilized to prepare PEGylated NaY/GdF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Tm3+@SiO2–Au@PEG5000 nanoparticles with a uniform size of less than 50 nm for CT, MR, as well as for upconversion luminescence bioimaging.164 It is important to note that when replacing the silica shell with ligands containing functional groups, the chemistry as well as the procedure outlined can be utilized to grow UCNPs/ligands/metallic nanostructures to deliver a combined and/or synergistic plasmonic and UCPL properties.110
4. Characterization of core–shell upconversion nanoparticles
A range of characterization tools can be utilized to indirectly suggest or directly verify the presence of a core–shell structure. These characterization tools encompass X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) based on tunable synchrotron radiation, high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), PL lifetime, PL intensity, etc. Typically, the formation of a core–shell structure can be indicated by the presence of five characteristic features (Fig. 10): (i) the increase of the average size, due to the introduction of a new layer onto the core only nanoparticles. The average size values can be directly obtained through averaging of the size of nanoparticles in TEM images, or calculated through the XRD pattern via Scherrer's equation. (ii) The variance of UCPL intensity. The formation of an epitaxial core–shell structure can significantly increase UCPL due to suppression of surface-related quenching mechanisms. Non-epitaxial core–shell structure, e.g., UCNPs@silica and UCNPs@metallic, also can affect the UCPL due to the interaction between the core and the non-epitaxial shell. (iii) The variance of UCPL lifetime. An epitaxial core–shell structure generally can result in a prolonged UCPL lifetime as compared to that of the core only nanoparticles. This is due to spatial isolation of the lanthanide ions from the surrounding surface quenchers as well as the passivation of surface defects of the core nanoparticles. (iv) The TEM contrast between the core domain and the shell domain in a single nanoparticle. (v) The variance of element content between the core domain and the shell domain in a single nanoparticle. The last two features are able to provide direct evidence of the formation of a core–shell structure, which will be discussed in the following two sections.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of five strategies to characterize formation of a core–shell structure. The imaging contrast and the elemental variance provide direct evidence to verify the formation, while the other three strategies yield indirect evidence to suggest the formation. 
4.1. Imaging of core–shell structures
The primary limitation for characterization techniques to demonstrate the formation of a core–shell structure is that it may be unable to clearly distinguish the structural and compositional variance between the shell layer and the core. TEM only discerns the core–shell structure when the core and the shell have significant difference in composition and crystallinity (and the corresponding difference in electron scattering) to create a good phase contrast between the core and the shell. Usually, non-epitaxial core–shell UCNP nanostructures can be visualized in such way; for example, the core–shell structure of the UCNPs@silica and Ag@silica@UCNPs can be easily discerned in regular TEM phase contrast imaging.113,121 However, TEM phase contrast imaging does not generally work for epitaxial core–shell UCNPs, since the core and the shell are compositionally similar or identical, and have similar crystallinity.
Although to date there is a lack of tools to discern the homogenous core–shell epitaxial structure, HAADF can be still utilized to discriminate the heterogeneous epitaxial core–shell structure, as the contrast of HAADF is approximately proportional to the square of the atomic number of the element contained, producing a z-contrast image.25 This technique was also used by Veggel et al., Zhao et al, and Chen et al. to demonstrate the formation of NaYF4@NaGdF4 (Fig. 11a) or NaGdF4@NaYF4 heterogeneous core–shell structure, in which the Y-rich domain appears to be darker than the Gd-rich domain.63,68,165 We have utilized HAADF to characterize the alpha-NaYbF4:Tm3+@CaF2 core–shell structure, the image of which shows a clear contrast between the core which appears bright (ytterbium Z = 70), and the shell which appears dark (calcium Z = 20) (Fig. 11b).25 Yan et al. and Chen et al. employed this technique to demonstrate the formation of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@CaF2 (Fig. 11c) and CaF2:Yb3+/Er3+@CaF2 core–shell structure, respectively.65,166 HAADF-STEM images of core–shell and core–multishell NaGdF4:Nd@NaYF4, NaGdF4:Nd@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Nd,Yb,Er, (Fig. 11d and e) and NaGdF4:Nd@NaYF4@NaGdF4:Nd,Yb,Er@NaYF4 (Fig. 11f) nanoparticles were also presented recently by Zhao et al.88 However, the utilization of this technique requires an adequate difference between the atomic number of the elements in the core and the shell.
 Fig. 11  HAADF STEM image of (a) NaYF4@NaGdF4, (b) (NaYbF4:0.5%Tm3+)@CaF2, (c) NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@CaF2, (d) NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4, (e) NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+ and (f) NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4 nanoparticles with resolved core–shell structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, 88 and 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
4.2. Element mapping in a single nanoparticle
The element difference between the core and the shell provides another way to discern the heterogeneous core–shell structure. Veggel et al. first reported direct evidence for such core–shell structure (NaYF4@NaGdF4 UCNPs) formation using XPS produced by tunable synchrotron radiation.67 The intensity ratio of the Y3+ 3d peak to the Gd3+ 4d peak increases with an elevation of the kinetic energy of the synchrotron radiation, indicating that the Gd3+ from the shell screens the Y3+ intensity from the core, and thus providing direct evidence for a core–shell structure. While this characterization technique does deliver a confirmation of a core–shell structure, it is an ensemble measurement and does not provide elemental details about a single core–shell UCNP. With respect to this, the line scan of EDX and EELS can provide the precise element distribution of single core–shell nanostructures.165 The characterization capabilities of EDX are due to that each element has a unique atomic structure, yielding a unique, well energy separated, set of peaks in its X-ray spectrum, as in the case of NaYF4/NaGdF4 core–shell structure (Fig. 12d and e).165 In our previous work, EDX line scan conducted with STEM imaging on a NaYbF4/CaF2 nanoparticle showed a higher Ca concentration in the peripheral region and a higher Yb concentration in the central region of the crystal, verifying the designed heterogenous core–shell structure.25 In EELS, a material is exposed to a beam of electrons with a known, narrow range of kinetic energies. Some of the electrons will undergo inelastic scattering, which means that they lose energy and have their paths slightly and randomly deflected. The amount of energy loss can be measured using an electron spectrometer and interpreted, in terms of what caused the energy loss. Zhao et al. demonstrated the use of cryo-TEM operating at 96 K to minimize the electron beam damage and provided evidence of a core–shell structure (Fig. 12a–c). A linear correlation between the NaGdF4 shell thickness and the optical properties of monodisperse hexagonal NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4 core–shell nanoparticles was demonstrated, revealing the importance of the shell thickness.63
 Fig. 12  (a) HAADF image of a single NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4 nanocrystal. EELS spectra of yttrium L2,3 (b) and gadolinium M4,5 (c) edges taken from the probe location on the inferred NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ core and NaGdF4 shell. (d) TEM image of one single NaYF4@NaGdF4 nanoparticle, as well as (e) the corresponding results of an EDS line scan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 and 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
5. Applications of core–shell UCNPs
5.1. Biomedical applications

5.1.1. Deep 3D bioimaging. 
Optical imaging is one of the most important techniques used in biomedical imaging as it is capable of providing cellular or molecular level information with almost single molecule sensitivity.167,168 Owing to their unique and versatile spectral properties and exceptional stability, UCNPs are found to be excellent optical probes for photoluminescence bioimaging, as they are devoid of many drawbacks attributed to other photoluminescent probes, namely broad emission and susceptibility to bleaching for organic luminophores, blinking and toxicity for semiconductor QDs, etc.2 The UCNPs, possessing spectrally narrow and tunable emission bands excitable by a single wavelength in NIR, can be readily employed as probes for multiplexed bioimaging.169 Numerous studies reported the use of UCNPs as targeted probes for cellular imaging in vitro,169,170 but full advantages of UCPL imaging with UCNPs are revealed in the in vivo imaging, since the anti-Stokes character of the emission excludes manifestation of the auto-fluorescence from the biological tissues, resulting in a decrease in the imaging background. In addition, the imaging background produced by the scattering of excitation light can be reduced by using short-pass filters with the imaging camera, since the emitted light is considerably shifted in wavelengths relative to excitation. Another benefit of UCPL imaging with UCNPs is that the excitation of the upconversion emission lies in the NIR spectral range, more importantly in the “optical transparency window” for the biological tissues (∼700–1000 nm). NIR light of this spectral range attenuates less and penetrates deeper in the tissue as a result of both lower absorption of the tissue constitutions and reduced scattering for NIR light.171,172 In a marked contrast to the multiphoton imaging employing NIR excitation from expensive ultrashort-pulsed lasers, a low-cost cw laser diode can be utilized as the NIR excitation source for UCPL imaging, with an excitation density of ∼10−1 W cm−2.2,12,173 We have pioneered a UCPL bioimaging approach in which both excitation (980 nm) and emission (800 nm) wavelengths are in the optical transmission window, utilizing the NIR-to-NIR upconversion in Tm3+/Yb3+-codoped NaYF4 UCNPs.24 In this work, a NIR-to-NIR UCPL imaging of a Balb-c mouse intravenously injected with UCNPs was reported, with the signal to background ratio (SBR) evaluated to be on the order of ∼10. It is important to emphasize that as the UC QY is strongly dependent on the excitation power density, UCNPs with a high UC quantum yield at low power excitation density is of critical importance for deep tissue imaging. This is because, according to the American National Standard Z136.1-2007 (American National Standard for Safe Use of Lasers), the employed excitation power density for a ∼980 nm cw laser has to be lower than the safety threshold of 0.73 W cm−2 when applied to human skin. Moreover, the strong scattering properties of a tissue will produce a significantly lower excitation density (than the excitation density at the tissue surface) at the location of UCNPs inside the tissue. As illustrated in Section 2.1, the core–shell design is an important strategy to reach a high UC QY.
Introduction of the core–shell architectured UCNPs with boosted UC QY allows us to further improve sensitivity of NIR-to-NIR UCPL in vivo imaging. The alpha-(NaYbF4:0.5%Tm3+)@CaF2 core–shell UCNPs manifest a UC QY as high as 0.6% under an excitation of 0.3 W cm−2.25 As a result, high contrast optical imaging (the SBR is ∼310) of live animals (mice) was achieved. We have also demonstrated that NIR-to-NIR UCPL imaging is possible through a ∼3.2 cm thick animal tissue (pork), which constitutes a leap forward for 3D optical imaging of deeper tissues using UCNPs.25 It is worth noting that the NIR UC QY of hexagonal NaLuF4:Gd3+/Yb3+/Tm3+, reported by Li et al., reaches about 0.47% under an excitation density of 17.5 W cm−2 at 980 nm, thus enabling an optical imaging depth of about 2 cm.174 An epitaxial growth of a shell layer onto this type of UCNPs and characterization of the UC QY under excitation power density below 0.7 W cm−2 convenient for imaging would be appealing, possibly leading to even further improved imaging depth and SBR. We note that the total UC QY, covering the UV, visible, and NIR PL spectral range of (LiLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@LiLuF4 core–shell UCNPs is reported to be 7.6% at a high excitation power density of 127 W cm−2.61 This suggests the possibility of achieving a high UC QY for the NIR UCPL of (LiLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@LiLuF4 core–shell UCNPs. It becomes very attractive to characterize their NIR UC QY at the excitation power density suitable for in vivo imaging, and apply these UCNPs for optical bioimaging. Andersson-Engels et al. recently showed that deep tissue optical imaging of core–shell (NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@NaYF4 upconverting nanoparticles can be enabled by exploiting higher intrinsic QY through the use of millisecond single pulse excitation with high peak power.175 This provides new possibilities for better deep tissue optical imaging (and also optical tomography) using reported core–shell UCNPs and a pulsed laser with optimized parameters.
Another promising direction for UCPL bioimaging is to utilize excitation other than ∼980 nm, since water absorbance at this wavelength can cause significant heating of a biological tissue under irradiation. S. He with co-authors explored the heating effect under 980 nm irradiation and proposed the use of the 915 nm laser, which produces less heating, to excite cubic NaYbF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ UCNPs in the UCPL bioimaging in vitro and in vivo.176 It should be however noted that that UCPL in this case still originates from the absorption of Yb3+ ions, which has a maximum at ∼980 nm and is much weaker at 915 nm. Since UCPL is proportional to the absorption of the exciting light by UCNPs, an efficient UCPL imaging with excitation at ∼980 nm could be achieved at a lower excitation power than for 915 nm excitation, without producing significant heating. A comparison of UCPL imaging at ∼980 nm and 915 nm (or another wavelength from the spectral range of Yb3+ absorption), along with evaluation of the thermal effect produced by both wavelengths, is needed to conclude how beneficial it would be to excite at 915 nm for the UCPL imaging employing UCNPs containing Yb3+ ions.
The heating effect caused by long time irradiation at 980 nm can be also significantly reduced when using other NIR excitation wavelengths, introduced through doping of other NIR absorbing lanthanide ions. In particular, to tune the NIR absorption of the nanoparticles, incorporation of Nd3+ ions can be proposed.84–86 Very recently, Zhong et al. reported the NaYF4:Yb3+20%, Er3+2%@NaYF4:Yb3+10%@NaNdF4:Yb3+10% core–shell–shell UCNPs (ErCSS), which are excitable at 800 nm owing to incorporation of Nd3+ ions into the outer shell.89 The absolute quantum yield for the UCPL peaked at ∼540 nm is 0.11% under excitation at 800 nm with a power density of 20 W cm−2. Fig. 13a illustrates contributions of the Nd3+ and Yb3+ ions into absorption of ErCSS. As a result of the difference in extinction, UCPL under 800 nm excitation was found to be ∼8 times brighter than under 980 nm excitation (Fig. 13b). It should be noted that the intensity of UCPL from ErCSS excited at 980 nm was similar to that from the conventional NaYF4:Yb3+20%, Er3+2%@NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs of similar size (Fig. 13b). The possibility of in vivo UCPL imaging with ErCSS and ErCS was evaluated and compared. After penetrating of the exciting light through ca. 1 cm of lean pork, a much higher SBR image was acquired from 800 nm-excited UCNPs than from the control sample with 980 nm excitation (Fig. 13c). Due to the difference in water absorption at 800 and 980 nm, after penetrating through 5 cm of water, the UCPL of the Nd3+-sensitized UCNPs was about 125 times stronger than that of the conventional Yb3+-sensitized UCNPs.89 The lower water absorption of the 800 nm laser source not only results in a deeper penetration depth, but can also help to minimize tissue overheating. As shown in Fig. 13d, a much higher temperature distribution can be observed for the 980 nm irradiated area, compared with the 800 nm irradiated one. While the temperature of 800 nm laser heated water was raised from initially 24 °C to 25.7 °C, water under 980 nm irradiation was heated to a temperature as high as 45.9 °C (same excitation power density and exposure time were used in both cases).
 Fig. 13  Comparison of UCPL under excitation at 800 nm and 980 nm for Nd3+-doped core–shell–shell UCNPs (ErCSS) and conventional Yb3+-sensitized core–shell UCNPs (ErCS). (a) Absorption spectra of ErCSS (20 mg mL−1 in hexane). (b) UCPL photographs of ErCSS and ErCS excited at 800 (top) and 980 nm (bottom) with 0.5 W cm−2 diode lasers. (c) UCPL from Nd3+-sensitized nanoparticles excited at 800 nm (left) and from Yb3+-sensitized nanoparticles excited at 980 nm (right). Excitation with a power density of 400 mW cm−2 was used. (d) Temperature-distribution image recorded after 7 min irradiation (Sp1: 980 nm; Sp2: 800 nm; 20 W cm−2). Inset: temperature increase with time under 800 and 980 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
Although UCNPs with Nd3+ sensitized UCPL do show a promising potential for deep tissue imaging, it should be however noted that, since the green UC emission of Er3+ at ∼540 nm is outside the optical transparency window and can be strongly attenuated by biological tissues, further studies are necessary to provide evidence for superior advantage of these UCNPs for deep tissue imaging, when compared with the use of well-established NIR-to-NIR Yb3+/Tm3+-doped core–shell UCNPs.25


5.1.2. Multimodal bioimaging. 
While UCPL is the key feature of UCNPs and provides a basis for their application in bioimaging, they can also open the door for other possibilities in the biomedical field. There is a growing interest in the development of nanoparticle probes that can function as multiple contrast agents for simultaneous use in different medicinal imaging modalities providing complementary diagnostic information (e.g., optical, MRI, PET, SPECT, CT). Correlation between these imaging techniques using a single multimodal nanoprobe will accelerate the diagnostic process, while reducing the stress on the patient related to multiple steps necessary for complete diagnostic using the current imaging technology.123 As discussed in Section 2.7.1, with the use of a hierarchical core–shell approach, a range of imaging modalities can be incorporated into UCNPs, thus supporting their use as multimodal nanoprobes. For example, epitaxial core–shell UCNPs of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4,177 NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4,127 and NaYbF4:Tm3+@NaGdF4,60 as well as non-epitaxial epitaxial core–shell UCNPs of NaYF4:Tm3+/Yb3+/Gd3+@mSiO2,178 and NaYF4:Ln3+@Si-DTTA-Gd3+,179 have been reported to exhibit both T1 MR relaxivity (provided by Gd3+ ions) and UCPL. Bioconjugation of the angiopep-2 peptide, using EDC chemistry, on the surface of PEGylated (NaYF4:Tm3+/Yb3+/Gd3+)@NaGdF4 core–shell nanoparticles enables them to cross the BBB barrier to biotarget glioblastoma, and then function as a simultaneous MRI/NIR-to-NIR UCPL bimodal imaging agent, which showed a much enhanced imaging performance in comparison with the clinically used single MRI contrast (Gd-DTPA) and fluorescent dye (5-ALA).180 Moreover, Liu et al. developed multifunctional nanoparticles, NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@Fe3O4@Au, which incorporated optical and T2 magnetic properties useful for dual-modal imaging, while utilizing the gold shell for photothermal therapy.37 Li et al. reported seed-mediated synthesis of NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@FexOy and Fe3O4@NaLuF4:Yb3+/Er3+/Tm3+ core–shell nanostructure as imaging agents for T2 MRI and UCPL bimodal imaging.132,181 Use of the same Fe3O4 core but a different (β-NaGdF4:Yb3+, Tm3+) shell and a polyelectrolyte coating allowed Anker with co-authors to obtain UCNPs which are stabilized against aggregation through PEGylation and capable of serving as bimodal (UCPL/MRI) imaging probes, providing both T1 and T2 MRI contrast due to availability of both a ferromagnetic core and a paramagnetic shell.182
In addition to MRI and UCPL biomodal imaging, trimodal CT/MRI/UCPL imaging as well as four modal SPECT/CT/MR/UCPL imaging have also been recently reported, exploiting the capability of a core–shell structure to incorporate multiple modalities. For example, core–shell nanostructures of Fe3O4@NaLuF4:Yb3+/Er3+/Tm3+ and NaLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@SiO2-GdDTPA have been reported as imaging probes for tri-modality CT/MRI/UCPL imaging.132,183 TaOx-decorated NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4 core–shell UCNPs were reported by Shi et al. for in vivo CT/MR/UCPL trimodal imaging.184 The same type of trimodal imaging was realized through the design and synthesis of the multi-shell structured NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaLuF4@NaYF4@NaGdF4 nanoparticles.185 While Gd3+ ions in the outermost shell provide T1-weighted MRI, the thick NaLuF4 shell epitaxially grown on the core not only constitutes a CT functional layer, but also offers an optically inert layer for remarkable enhancement of the UCPL. More importantly, the NaLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4 (153Sm) core–shell UCNPs have been reported for use in SPECT/CT/MR/UCPL four-modal bioimaging, providing an excellent paradigm for multimodal imaging using a core–shell architecture (Fig. 14).186 Furthermore, in this work, in vivo tumor angiogenesis analysis was performed by combining CT and SPECT imaging with confocal UCL imaging, showing the potential of using multimodal imaging for early detection of disease onset and real-time monitoring of a therapeutic approach.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of NaLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4(153Sm) core–shell UCNPs for SPECT/CT/MR/UCPL four-modal bioimaging. In this design, the Yb3+/Tm3+ ion pair provides the UCPL optical property; the Gd3+ ions in the epitaxial shell provide the ability for T1 MR imaging; the Lu3+ ions in the core host lattice lead to strong absorption of X-ray to enable for CT imaging, and the 153Sm in the shell (half-life, 46.3 hours) is a radioisotope which produces gamma rays for SPECT imaging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
In all the aforementioned multimodal designs, the provision of imaging modalities is as follows: (i) the Gd3+, Fe3O4, and TaOx are utilized to empower the MRI imaging. The Gd3+ ions at the shell surface are preferred, which can interact more efficiently with the proton. (ii) High Z elements, e.g., Lu3+ or Yb3+, are used to produce strong attenuation of X-rays to realize CT imaging. (iii) The Yb3+/Er3+(Tm3+) lanthanide ion pairs are doped, preferably in the core, to implement UCPL imaging. Positioning these dopants in the core also exploits the use of shell protection to suppress the surface-related quenching mechanism and produce efficient UCPL. (iv) The radionuclide (or radioisotope) of 153Sm and the 18F are utilized to entail for SPECT imaging and PET imaging, respectively. These radioisotopes are often introduced into the shell layer at a later stage during the sample preparation, to avoid adverse interaction with synthetic chemicals. In all, the strategy to construct multimodal imaging nanoprobes using the core–shell structure is to appropriately position each type of imaging contrast element without producing interference between different types.
Novel bioimaging techniques are being developed these days which can be combined with the conventional medical imaging modalities using core–shell structured UCNPs as a platform. For example, Niu et al. recently presented a combination of the UCPL and surface enhanced Raman scattering imaging (SERS) using core–multishell architecture.187 The silica coated UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb,Er@SiO2) served as a photoluminescent core. Ag nanoparticles in situ grown on a silica layer with different kinds of Raman reporters adsorbed on the surface formed an SERS-functional layer, while the last layer of denatured bovin serum albumin (dBSA) was coated on the tag UCPL/SERS tag to improve the colloidal stability and biocompatibility. The combined UCPL/SERS imaging modalities with the synthesized nanoprobes were demonstrated in vitro and in vivo.187 In another recent report, the UCPL signal provided by UCNPs in a core–shell nanostructure was shown to be partly converted to the high photoacoustic (PA) signal which can be utilized in the photoacoustic tomography (PAT).188 The core UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+) were coated with a shell of α-cyclodextrin (α-CD). The UCPL signal for UCNPs-α-CD core–shell nanoparticles dispersed in water was found to be noticeably quenched in comparison with that from the core alone UCNPs dispersed in cyclohexane. At the same time, the PA signal from the UCNPs-α-CD nanoparticles under 980 nm excitation was greatly enhanced, permitting use of these nanoparticles as efficient probes for PAT in vivo. It is suggested that UCPL quenching in UC-α-CD in aqueous solution, resulted from non-radiative relaxation of the excited states, leading to an increase in intrinsic heat generation under 980 nm excitation and subsequent PA signal enhancement.
With their multiple imaging capabilities, UCNPs are able to provide a powerful nanocarrier platform for imaging guided drug delivery. Using the hierarchical core–shell approach, the UCNPs-based multifunctional nanoparticles can be not only endowed with UCPL, MR and CT imaging abilities, but also loaded with a therapeutic agent, serving as nanocarriers for targeted, imaging guided drug delivery.189–191


5.1.3. NIR-light controlled photoactivation and drug release. 
This section focuses on the application of core–shell UCNPs as NIR-to-UV photon nanoconverters to initiate a UV-mediated photochemical process in situ. The UV-triggered photochemistry can be potentially applied to control chemical reactivity with a spatial and temporal precision for the widest application range. However, its practical usage is significantly limited by problems associated with the delivery of UV light to the reaction site. In the case of biological systems, that would be a severe phototoxicity and considerably limited penetration depth of UV light in biological media.2,66 The utilization of biocompatible, deep penetrating NIR light for in situ generation of UV light by the UCNPs is expected to provide powerful leverage in chemical biology, since such photon nanoconverters can spatiotemporally restrict photochemical reactions in the nanometer regime with minimal photo-damage, enable exceptional light penetration depth, and produce desired photochemical effects with a precise control.
The importance of NIR-to-UV UC for photochemistry was first illustrated by Branda et al. who showed photoswitching in dithienylethene using either the NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+ and the NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4 core–shell–shell UCNPs.192,193 They also demonstrated photo-release of caged compounds,194 photo-release of bio macromolecules from hydrogels,195 as well as dissociation of block copolymer micelles using epitaxial core–shell NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4 NIR-to-UV UCNPs.196 However, none of these reports involves the use of a biological model, which is needed to assess the potential use of these photon nanoconverters in biomedical field.
Recently, light-regulated release in vitro and in vivo has been shown by a number of groups, using nonepitaxial UCNPs@silica nanostructures which have strong NIR-to-UV upconversion, and provide an adequate space (mesopores and the surface) in the silica shell to hold pertinent molecules (genetic materials, chemotherapeutic drugs, etc.). Another important advantage of the core–shell structure is the nanoscale distance between the light-sensitive molecules in the silica shell and the core UCNPs that can allow for an efficient photoactivation process. The involved light-activatable molecules can be either a caged molecule, one moiety of which can be cleaved upon UV irradiation to release (or uncage), or a photoisomerizable molecule, the structure or spatial conformation of which can be changed upon UV irradiation. Zhang et al. reported on mesoporous silica coated NIR-to-UV NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4 nanostructures to release the photocaged nucleic acids in much deeper tissues compared to conventional systems (Fig. 15A and B).27 The use of photo-uncaging processes has also been reported by Xing et al., Li et al., as well as by us for light-controlled release using various core–shell nanostructures.66,197,198 Shi et al. reported on in vitro control of Dox drug release using NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaYF4 coated with an azo-modified mesoporous silica, which exploits the NIR-to-UV light-controlled trans–cis photoisomerization of azo molecules grafted in the mesopore network of a mesoporous silica layer (Fig. 15C and D).155 Real time monitoring of NIR-to-UV drug release in vitro and in vivo using simultaneous UCPL and MRI imaging has also been demonstrated by them using NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4 UCNPs coated with an azo-modified mesoporous silica.161 It is worth noting that epitaxial core–shell NIR-to-UV UCNPs are preferred for these light-regulated processes, as it can deliver more UV light for use than UCNPs that are devoid of an epitaxial shell, mainly due to the higher UC efficiency.
 Fig. 15  NIR light-controlled release of (A, B) genetic materials using photo-uncaging, and (C, D) the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (Dox), using a photomechanical path. (A) Plasmid DNA and siRNA are caged with DMNPE and then uncaged by NIR-to-UV light conversion by the core–shell UCNPs–silica nanostructure. The inset shows the penetration depth of UV and NIR light in the skin. (B) Loading of caged plasmid DNA–siRNA into the mesopores of the core–shell UCNPs–silica nanostructure. (C) Synthetic procedure for an epitaxial core–shell upconverting nanoparticle coated with a mesoporous silica outer layer. (D) NIR light-triggered Dox release by the NIR-to-UV conversion, which causes trans–cis photoisomerization of azo molecules grafted in the mesopore network of a mesoporous silica layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27 and 155. Copyright 2012 National Academy of Sciences, and 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 


5.1.4. Photodynamic therapy. 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an important noninvasive treatment modality of cancer and other diseases, which is conducted using light-sensitive compounds called photosensitizers (PS) or PDT drugs. PS are nontoxic in the “dark”, not the light-activated state, but become cytotoxic, generating reactive species (e.g., excited state of molecular oxygen, 1O2,), upon exposure to light of appropriate wavelengths matching PS optical absorption.123 PDT has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States as well as by equivalent agencies in other countries for treatment of certain types of cancer as well as for macular degeneration and some skin diseases.167 The photosensitizers used in conventional PDT are mostly activated by visible light, which has limited penetration through a biological tissue (consult Fig. 16a). Therefore, the application of these visible light photosensitizers is limited to treating surface tumors on or just below the skin or on the lining of internal organs or cavities, and is consequently less effective when treating deep and thick tumors. As NIR light in the range of ∼700–1100 nm has a much greater penetration depth in tissues than the visible light, the NIR-excitable UCNPs can efficiently convert the deep penetrating NIR light within this window to visible or UV wavelengths that can excite conventional photosensitizers to produce a cytotoxic agent promising their application in PDT of thick tumors.123
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the penetration depth of different wavelength in a tissue model; (b) upconversion nanoparticle as a frequency conversion nanotransducer to convert the NIR excitation to visible illumination for activation of photosensitizers, producing reactive singlet molecular oxygen for photochemical treatment of diseased sites. 
Though the potential of UC PDT for deep tissues was pointed out earlier,167 the inability to achieve efficient upconversion in water dispersible nanoparticles has been limiting its use in PDT until recently.199 Taking advantage of an efficient energy transfer (a mechanism of Luminescence Resonance Energy Transfer, LRET)200 from blue, green, and red emitting UCNPs to photosensitizers with appropriate absorption, a broad spectrum of UCNP-photosensitizer systems has been established for in vitro PDT201,202 A general non-epitaxial core–shell structure has been utilized, where UCNPs constitute the core and the photosensitizer contained in silica or a polymer as the shell. We illustrate these core–shell nanostructures in Fig. 16b, based on the typically used mesoporous silica coated UCNPs. A close proximity between the photosensitizer/s encased in the mesoporous silica shell and the UCNP core allows for energy transfer from the core to the photosensitizers, thereby activating the photosensitizers to generate cytotoxic species (1O2) from oxygen molecules, which exist in the environment in its ground electronic state (3O2).

In vivo UC PDT was first demonstrated by Liu et al. using PEGylated amphiphilic polymer-coated hexagonal NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs in association with the chlorine 6 photosensitizer.203 However, the tumor-selectivity of this UCNP-photosensitizer nanosystem is not shown in this work due to the lack of a tumor targeting ligand. Also, the employed NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs without an epitaxial shell have lower UC QY which results in reduced treatment efficacy. Mesoporous silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs with a tumor-targeting agent have been developed, which not only allow selective accumulation in tumor, but also permit a high loading of photosensitizers (consult Fig. 16b).26,153 Visible UC emission with two main peaks, green (∼540 nm) and red (∼660 nm), is well matched with the absorption of two photosensitizers, merocyanine 540 (MC540) and zinc(II) phthalocyanine (ZnPc), thus yielding greater PDT efficacy compared to approaches using a single photosensitizer.26In vivo studies have shown tumor growth inhibition in tumor-bearing mice using intratumoral injection of non-targeted UCNPs or intravenous injection of UCNPs conjugated with a tumor-targeting agent, followed by UC PDT.
As it is noted above, the use of UCNPs makes possible UCPL imaging at an unprecedented depth of more than 3 cm, utilizing an excitation of 980 nm and an upconversion emission at 800 nm (see Section 5.1.1).25 It is important to note that while during imaging, NIR light goes in (980 nm) and comes out (800 nm), PDT requires only one way for NIR light (i.e., 980 nm) to propagate and excite photosensitizers. This peculiarity has strong implications for the possibility to treat deep-seated tumors using UC PDT. However, the efficacy of upconversion PDT strongly depends on the efficiency (brightness) of the UCNPs. New designs of high-quality epitaxial core–shell UCNPs that outperform present forms with improved optical properties are required for PDT in deeper tissues, in particular, at an excitation density lower than ∼10−1 W cm−2, to compensate for attenuation of the excitation light and make possible PDT of deeper tissues.

5.2. Applications in solar energy harvesting
The loss of sub-band-gap photons is one of the major obstacles on the way of improving efficiency of solar cells, as only absorption of photons with energy higher than the band-gap can generate electron–hole pairs contributing to electric current.33 For example, the c-Si solar cells have a low semiconductor band gap, and thus a relatively small part of solar irradiation is unabsorbed and thus lost (transmission loss). However, even in such case, the energy loss still can be as high as ∼20%.204 Without altering the already existing designs and merits of a solar cell, UC technology provides a solution to circumvent this transmission loss by converting two or more sub-band-gap photons into one above-band-gap photon. Indeed, theoretical calculations indicate that the Shockley–Queisser efficiency limit for a c-silicon solar cell can be increased from ∼30% to 40.2%, when combined with ideal upconverters under non-concentrated air mass (AM) 1.5 solar irradiation.205 Moreover, even with a very narrow absorption bandwidth between 0.1–0.5 eV, upconverters can boost the Shockley–Queisser efficiency of a 1.7 eV band gap cell from 28.2% to 33.5–43.6%.206 Potential impacts of UC are now fueling the development of appropriate UC materials and their use in photovoltaics.
UCNPs are able to work efficiently in the NIR range of ∼800–1600 nm. Some of the examples are: (i) Nd3+/Yb3+/Ln3+(Ln = Er, Tm, Ho) are able to harvest photons at ∼800 nm and then produce visible upconversion at ∼480, 550, or 650 nm;84,86 (ii) Yb3+/Ln3+(Ln = Er, Tm, Ho) are capable of up-conversion from 980 nm to ∼480, 550 or ∼650 nm;207,208 (iii) Ho3+ can upconvert light at ∼1180 nm to ∼550 nm and ∼650 nm; (iv) Er3+ can upconvert light at ∼1500 nm to ∼550 nm and ∼650 nm.33,209 The upconversion in NaYF4:Er3+ powders was shown to significantly improve the response of a silicon solar cell at 1532 nm,210 while the use of LaF3:Yb3+/Er3+ and YF3:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs resulted in an impressive increase in the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) at ∼980 nm.211,212 We have also reported an improvement of the DSSC efficiency through infiltration of ∼20 nm colloidal NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs into the TiO2 pores in the DSSC device. This increase was ascribed to a combination of the overall increased light absorption of visible solar light by the dye in the DSSC (due to the light scattering by UCNPs), and the upconversion of NIR light absorbed by UCNPs.213 This bifunctional role (scattering/upconversion) was then explored later in a DSSC using non-epitaxial core–shell β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@SiO2 UCNPs (Fig. 17a–c) and core–shell–shell β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@SiO2@TiO2 sub-microprisms, both producing an impressive efficiency increase of 6–11%.214,215 It is worth noting that the performance of an inverted polymer bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell has also been improved by utilizing the bifunctional role of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs incorporated into a blend of PCDTBT:PCBM (Fig. 17d).216 The use of epitaxial core–shell hexagonal NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4 UCNPs with highly efficient UC was also reported, which can enhance the overall DSSC efficiency by ∼11.9% under AM 1.5 sun irradiation.217 Plasmonic core–shell nanostructures of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+/Gd3+ (18/2/30 mol%) nanorods coated with Au nanoparticles or an Au shell were prepared and applied to the front of a-Si:H solar cells, which resulted in a 16- to 72-fold improvement of the photocurrent under 980 nm light in comparison with the cell without an upconverter.218 In addition, a novel core–shell NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@TiO2 nanoparticle was utilized to prepare the photoelectrode (PE) of a DSSC which showed a 23.1% enhancement of the energy conversion efficiency when compared with the one with a pure TiO2 PE and 99.1% higher than the efficiency of the PE from a mixture of the TiO2 and the NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ UCNPs.219 More recently, a hetero-nanostructured photoanode with core–shell–shell NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4@TiO2 nanostructures embedded in porous photonic crystals has been prepared for use in CdSe quantum dots sensitized solar cell (Fig. 17e).220
 Fig. 17  (a) Principle of use of photon upconversion provided by core–shell β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@SiO2 UCNPs in the photoelectrode of a DSSC. Upconversion luminescence of a photoelectrode with (c) and without (b) core–shell UCNPs confirmed the existence of core–shell UCNPs in the photo electrode. (d) The structure of an inverted polymer solar cell device which incorporates UCNPs, along with the corresponding energy level structure. (e) Energy flow in hetero-nanostructures from NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs to visible light-absorbing CdSe nanoparticles to TiO2 photonic structures upon near-infrared photoexcitation. Energy diagram illustrating charge injection from excited CdSe into TiO2 and the transport of photoinjected electrons to the electrode surface for hydrogen generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214, 216 and 220. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 
Despite recent progress in the application of a range of novel and efficient core–shell UCNPs in different types of solar cells, up to now the reported improvement of the overall solar cell efficiency remains rather limited. This is mainly because of two limitations. First of them is that the UC efficiency of current core–shell UCNPs is still far from perfect, as most of the absorbed NIR light still cannot be efficiently converted into visible range. Particularly, the efficiency of most current UCNPs is extremely low under AM 1.5 solar irradiation due to a low spectral sun irradiance on the order of ∼1 W m−2 nm−1 or ∼0.01 W cm−2 nm−1. For laser irradiance close to sun irradiance, the reported highest UC QY is ∼0.6% in alpha-(NaYbF4:0.5%Tm3+)@CaF2 core–shell UCNPs for an excitation of 0.3 W cm−2.25 Design and fabrication of UCNPs which will be much more efficient UCNPs under low light irradiance is needed; this can be potentially achieved through nanophotonic control of utilizing a hierarchical core–shell structure. The second limitation arises from the narrow, discrete, and rather weak absorption of doped lanthanide ion owing to the nature of f–f transition. This severely restricts the harvesting capabilities of nanomaterials doped with lanthanide ions of the same type. The calculations by Briggs et al., however, revealed that the lanthanide-based upconverters can significantly increase cell efficiencies from 28% to over 34% with improved quantum yield, despite their narrow bandwidths. Should upconverter quantum yields be boosted beyond their current values, cell efficiency enhancement of several absolute percent is predicted for the efficiency of a solar cell. These calculations highlight the promise of upconversion for photovoltaics and stress the critical roles of upconverter absorption, bandwidth and quantum yield in the push towards technological viability.206 Thus, development of efficient UC materials that are broadly responsive to infrared light is in need. Fortunately, a number of wavelengths in the range of 800–1550 nm can be collectively upconverted by a set of lanthanide ions. A straightforward method to broaden the range of spectral sensitivity of UCNPs is to prepare a core–multiple shell nanostructure in which several types of lanthanide ions are separately doped into the core nanoparticles or in spatially isolated different shell layers (Fig. 2c). This design minimizes any possible cross relaxation between different types of lanthanide activators, and thus ensures a relatively high efficiency, while spectrally broadening the NIR light harvesting (see Section 2.2). In addition, dye-sensitized upconversion in lanthanides circumvents the drawback of low and narrow absorption of lanthanide ions, opening up the possibility of using an antenna effect to implement broad-band upconversion.80
5.3. Security encoding applications
The UV-excitable Stokes fluorescence from organic dyes (i.e., UV-to-VIS downconversion) has been used for protection against counterfeiting of bills, checks and other securities (e.g., as well as for fingerprint detection). However, the problem with the application of organic dye fluorescence in anti-counterfeiting is that it is easy to duplicate and fake. The fingerprint application of organic fluorophores suffers from background fluorescence and selectivity at the expense of generality. Since the naked eye is sensitive in the visible range, while having no response to the NIR light, this recognition offers an opportunity to address the security and the fingerprint detection applications by utilization of NIR-to-visible UCPL. Indeed, an encrypted 3D pattern that is invisible to a human eye under regular illumination, but flares up at a specific wavelength (i.e., a laser diode of a specific wavelength), provides a unique way to secure the object.
Using traditional photolithography, we fabricated a well-defined pattern with single or multiple layers (3-D) from NaYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ and NaYF4:Tm3+/Yb3+ UCNPs with the specifically modified surface. These security patterns became visible to the naked eye when irradiated by a laser diode at ∼975 nm, illustrating elegance suitability of UCNPs for security.28 More recently, Meruga et al. developed a specially tailored ink, which comprised oleic acid-capped NaYF4:Er3+/Yb3+ and NaYF4:Tm3+/Yb3+ UCNPs in toluene and methyl benzoate with poly(methyl methacrylate) as the binding agent. The ink was used to print quick response codes, which can be scanned by a smart phone.221 Jin et al. also demonstrated the utilization of high Tm3+ containing UCNPs for security printing use under an extremely high excitation density (on the order of ∼106 W cm−2) to produce an ultrabright visible upconverted emission for detection (Fig. 18a).222 Ressier et al. used atomic force microscopy (AFM) nanoxerography to fabricate micrometer sized quick response codes through 3D close-packed assemblies of core–shell (NaYF4:Gd3+/Yb3+/Er3+)/NaYF4 UCNPs.223 Importantly, Lee et al. reported a facile encoding strategy that combines spatial patterning with UCNPs using polymers, single-wavelength NIR excitation and portable charge coupled device (CCD)-based decoding to distinguish particles patterned by means of flow lithography (Fig. 18b).224 Yuan et al. showed that UCNPs functionalized with a lysozyme-binding aptamer can be used to detect fingerprints through recognizing lysozyme in the fingerprint ridges.225 This extends the security use of UCNPs to fingerprinting, which have long been utilized as one of the most useful types of physical evidence and also utilized in areas such as forensic investigations and access control.
 Fig. 18  (a) The printed image secured with high Tm3+ containing UCNPs, which becomes visible when high laser power density (∼106 W cm−2) is utilized. (b) Imaging of encoded UCNPs with portable (Apple iPhone 4S) decoder in challenging settings (from left to right, pharmaceutical blister packs, currency, and credit cards). Top: image acquisition using a portable decoder, middle and bottom: acquired image when exposed to 1 W 980 nm laser excitation (middle) and in the absence of NIR excitation (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 and 173. Copyright 2013 and 2014 Nature Publishing Group. 
Most of the reported security application studies have utilized lanthanide-doped core UCNPs without any epitaxial shell. It is known that an epitaxial core–shell structure is able to increase upconversion luminescence intensity by orders of magnitude (see Section 2). As a result, the use of epitaxial core–shell UCNPs in future studies will facilitate optical detection of secured patterns with considerably improved detection limit.
6. Concluding remarks
In this review, we have summarized nanophotonic approaches to control the excitation dynamics in core–shell upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs), and various synthetic nanochemistries to prepare epitaxial and non-epitaxial core–shell UCNPs. A range of advanced characterization tools to provide indirect or direct evidences for the formation of a core–shell structure is also described to generate guidelines for the UC field. We have also presented some exciting examples of the emerging utilization of core–shell UCNPs for photonic applications, such as high contrast deep optical bioimaging, multimodal bioimaging, light-regulated photoactivation and drug release, photodynamic therapy, solar energy conversion and security applications. Indeed, a core–shell structure provides numerous opportunities to manipulate excitation, energy transfer, and the emission, to tune desired UC properties for improving technology in a pertinent way. The ability to incorporate a broad range of imaging and therapeutic modalities into a single conduct, along with the capability of surface engineering for molecular targeting, promise their usage in the emerging field of theranostic applications for next generation personalized medicine. However, there still exist technical challenges for core–shell UCNPs, some of which are listed here:
(i) The reported UC QY for core–shell UCNPs remains rather limited for all in vivo uses (including optical imaging, PDT, as well as for light-regulated photoactivation or drug release) especially under low irradiance of ∼0.1 W cm−2. This value is close to the safety threshold (∼0.73 W cm−2 for the 980 nm cw laser diode when applied to the human skin, according to the American National Standard for Safe Use of Lasers). Moreover, a significant attenuation in the tissue will result in a significantly lower irradiance value than the threshold, when the excitation light reaches the UCNPs inside the tissue. To date, the reported highest UCQY for nanostructures is 7.6% for (LiLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+)@LiLuF4 core–shell UCNPs at an excitation density of 127 W cm−2.61 Due to the strong dependence on the excitation density, this UC QY will become significantly lower at ∼0.1 W cm−2. The alpha-(NaYbF4:0.5%Tm3+)@CaF2 core–shell UCNPs were reported to display a UC QY of 0.6% under an excitation of 0.3 W cm−2, but that is still not satisfactory. Nanophotonic approaches to control the excitation dynamics of core–shell UCNPs to produce adequate UCQY under irradiation of ∼0.1 W cm−2 will be appealing for all types of in vivo applications.
(ii) The core–shell UCNPs have limited light harvesting ability, reducing their brightness for various bioapplications, as well as their use in solar cells. The absorption band for each type of lanthanide ion is quite narrow and low because of the nature of the involved f–f transition, and it is specific for the lanthanide element, severely limiting the infrared light harvesting capability. It will be attractive to utilize a core–multiple shell structure (Fig. 2c) to incorporate a set of lanthanide ions into the core as well as the shells to collectively broaden the absorption of NIR light, without introducing cross relaxation processes. Moreover, the combined use of two or more NIR dyes to sensitize the f–f transition will also be attractive, harvesting a broad range of NIR light.
(iii) Concentration quenching of the emitters, typically produced by the cross relaxation processes, sets a serious limitation on the improvement of the brightness of UCNPs by simply increasing the concentration. Despite recent results having shown that the concentration quenching can be removed or reduced under high irradiance at ∼106 W cm−2 (mainly because high irradiance can activate the lanthanides at a rate higher than the quenching rate), the concentration quenching effect still dominates for the low excitation power density.222,226 The necessity of high irradiance might limit the UCNP use in a number of applications, restricting its appeal. A core–shell nanostructure is effective in eliminating the deleterious cross relaxations, as well as in suppression of surface-related quenching mechanisms. As a consequence, it will be advantageous to utilize a core–multiple shell structure to incorporate a high concentration of activators/emitters without concentration quenching, and also to produce an ultra-bright core–shell UCNPs under both low and high laser irradiance.
(iv) To reduce the possible heat-induced effects in an aqueous-based environment, the commonly used excitation wavelength of ∼980 nm (for Yb3+-containing UCNPs) is reported to be successfully shifted to ∼800 nm, using a core–shell structure incorporating the Nd3+ ions to sensitize Yb3+ ions (consult Section 2.3). This opens up new possibilities to explore the use of Nd3+/Yb3+ containing UCNPs for a range of applications. Since the UC efficiency in this system relies on the efficiency of energy transfer from the Nd3+ ions in the shell to the Yb3+ ions in the core, a careful engineering of the energy transfer process might result in much more efficient UCPL. Moreover, the absolute efficiency of most of the current systems remains unassessed, suggesting necessity of a spotlight research to allow comprehensive comparison of Nd3+/Yb3+ containing UCNPs with the typically used Yb3+-containing core or core–shell UCNPs.
(v) The integration of a broad spectrum of imaging modalities such as optical imaging, MRI, PET, SPECT and CT into a single nanoparticle platform, may provide complementary information to allow accurate comprehensive diagnostics in a reduced time frame. Moreover, the ability to incorporate therapeutic entities in a non-epitaxial shell produces opportunities for imaging-guided therapy as well as for real-time assessment of a therapeutic effect. With this hierarchical core–shell approach, introduction of biomolecules (which can help nanoparticles to cross various biological barriers and target an intended site through a molecular recognition mechanism) onto the surface of multimodal or multifunctional core–shell nanostructures will be more beneficial.
Abbreviations

UCUpconversion
IRInfrared
UCNPsUpconversion nanoparticles
NIRNear infrared
PLPhotoluminescence
PDTPhotodynamic therapy
PTTPhotothermal therapy
LSPRLocalized surface plasmon resonance
QYQuantum yield
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
CTComputed tomography
PETPositron emission tomography
SPECTSingle-photon emission computed tomography
PAPhotoacoustic
TEOSTetraethyl orthosilicate
APTES(3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
CTABCetyl trimethylammonium bromide
CTACHexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidone
XRDX-ray diffraction
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
HAADFHigh-angle annular dark-field
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
EELSElectron energy loss spectroscopy
EDXEnergy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
CCDCharge coupled device

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the grants from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (Grant No. 95500910361), the Swedish Energy Agency (project 32076-1), the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51102066), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Program for Basic Research Excellent Talents in Harbin Institute of Technology (BRETIII 2012018). We thank Mr Wei Shao for his assistance in drawing some of the figures.
References
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, H. Qiu, P. N. Prasad and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5161–5214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. He, L. S. Tan, Q. Zheng and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1245–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Shultz, C. Schnitzer, D. Simonelli and S. Baldelli, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 123–153 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pantazis, J. Maloney, D. Wu and S. E. Fraser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 14535–14540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kachynski, A. N. Kuzmin, M. Nyk, I. Roy and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10721–10724 CAS .
N. Bloembergen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1959, 2, 84 CrossRef CAS .
F. Auzel, C. R. Acad. Sci., 1966, 262, 1016–1019 Search PubMed .
V. V. Ovsyankin and P. P. Feofilov, Sov. Phys. JETP Lett., 1966, 3, 322–323 Search PubMed .
V. V. Ovsyankin and P. P. Feofilov, Sov. Phys. JETP Lett., 1966, 4, 317–318 Search PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, C. H. Yang and P. N. Prasad, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1474–1486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, R. R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. X. Wang, Y. Han, H. M. Zhu, X. Y. Chen and X. G. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Gamelin and H. U. Gudel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 235–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Stehr, S. L. Chen, N. K. Reddy, C. W. Tu, W. M. Chen and I. A. Buyanova, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3760–3764 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deutsch, L. Neeman and D. Oron, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 649–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Zhao, W. H. Wu, J. F. Sun and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5323–5351 RSC .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .
X. Wang, X. G. Kong, Y. Yu, Y. J. Sun and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15119–15124 CAS .

          P. N. Prasad, Nanophotonics, Wiley-Interscience, New Jersey,  2004 Search PubMed .
G. H. Dieke and H. M. Crosswhite, Appl. Opt., 1963, 2, 675–686 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Judd, Phys. Rev., 1962, 127, 750–761 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Ofelt, J. Chem. Phys., 1962, 511–520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Wybourne, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1965, 55, 928–934 CAS .
M. Nyk, R. Kumar, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3834–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, J. Shen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, N. J. Patel, A. Kutikov, Z. P. Li, J. Song, R. K. Pandey, H. Agren, P. N. Prasad and G. Han, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8280–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Idris, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, J. Zhang, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1580–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. G. Jayakumar, N. M. Idris and Y. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 8483–8488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Kim, M. Nyk and P. N. Prasad, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 185301 CrossRef PubMed .
S. W. Hao, G. Y. Chen and C. H. Yang, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 331–345 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Zamarron, A. J. de la Fuente, F. Sanz-Rodriguez, L. M. Maestro, E. M. Rodriguez, D. Jaque, J. G. Sole and J. A. Capobianco, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3254–3258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Fischer, G. S. Harms and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4546–4551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, L. Zhao and G. Han, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 744–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, J. Seo, C. H. Yang and P. N. Prasad, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8304–8338 RSC .
X. Y. Huang, S. Y. Han, W. Huang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173–201 RSC .
W. Ge, X. R. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. W. Lei, R. J. Knize and Y. Lu, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 282–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, W. C. Law, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2003–2008 RSC .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, Y. Li, J. Chen, C. Wang, M. Shao, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7385–7390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kar and A. Patra, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3608–3619 RSC .
N. J. J. Johnson and F. van Veggel, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 547–561 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, J. A. Wang and X. G. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7456–7460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. Kumar, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, F. Vetrone, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7444–7445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 847–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Yi and G. M. Chow, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 341–343 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13721–13729 CAS .
Y. Wang, L. P. Tu, J. W. Zhao, Y. J. Sun, X. G. Kong and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7164–7169 CAS .
N. J. J. Johnson, A. Korinek, C. H. Dong and F. van Veggel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11068–11071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, M. P. Manseau, J. I. Murray and F. van Veggel, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1157–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, K. Tao and K. Sun, Micro Nano Lett., 2013, 8, 731–734 CAS .
D. Li, Q. Shao, Y. Dong and J. Jiang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 617, 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schafer, P. Ptacek, O. Zerzouf and M. Haase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2913–2918 CrossRef .
Y. P. Du, X. Sun, Y. W. Zhang, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2013–2019 CAS .
Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li, W. Q. Luo and X. Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3266–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Wong, F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, H. L. W. Chan, J. H. Hao and J. A. Capobianco, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16589–16596 RSC .
G. S. Yi, Y. F. Peng and Z. Q. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2729–2734 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, H. L. Qiu, R. W. Fan, S. W. Hao, S. Tan, C. H. Yang and G. Han, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20190–20196 RSC .
J. Stecher, A. Rohlfing and M. Therien, Nanomaterials, 2014, 4, 69–86 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ouyang, D. Yin, X. Cao, C. Wang, K. Song, B. Liu, L. Zhang, Y. Han and M. Wu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 14001–14008 RSC .
J. C. Boyer and F. van Veggel, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1417–1419 RSC .
W. Shao, G. Y. Chen, J. Damasco, X. L. Wang, A. Kachynski, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, C. H. Yang, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 1386–1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, W. Zheng, S. Y. Zhou, D. T. Tu, Z. Chen, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li, E. Ma, M. D. Huang and X. Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Page, K. I. Schaffers, P. A. Waide, J. B. Tassano, S. A. Payne, W. F. Krupke and W. K. Bischel, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1998, 15, 996–1008 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, R. C. Che, X. M. Li, C. Yao, J. P. Yang, D. K. Shen, P. Hu, W. Li and D. Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2852–2858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Liu, F. Qin, H. Zhao, T. Q. Lv, Z. G. Zhang and W. W. Cao, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 2101–2103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Wang, L. D. Sun, J. W. Xiao, W. Feng, J. C. Zhou, J. Shen and C. H. Yan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5558–5564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, S. J. Kesseli, S. Buchholz, Z. P. Li, P. N. Prasad and G. Han, Small, 2013, 9, 3213–3217 CAS .
K. A. Abel, J. C. Boyer and F. van Veggel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14644–14645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen and P. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 11299–11304 RSC .
K. W. Kramer, D. Biner, G. Frei, H. U. Gudel, M. P. Hehlen and S. R. Luthi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1244–1251 CrossRef .
J. Damasco, G. Chen, W. Shao, H. Agren, H. Huang, W. Song, J. F. Lovell and P. N. Prasad, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13884–13893 CAS .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, V. Mahalingam, C. G. Morgan and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2924–2929 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Chen, Y. Ma and M. Y. Li, Mater. Lett., 2014, 114, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Zeng, B. Xue, Y. L. Zhang, D. Wang, X. M. Liu, L. P. Tu, H. F. Zhao, X. G. Kong and H. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4765–4772 RSC .
L. Lei, D. Q. Chen, W. Zhu, J. Xu and Y. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 2765–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, L. Tao, Y. H. Tsang and W. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4313–4318 RSC .
P. Ghosh, J. Oliva, E. De la Rosa, K. K. Haldar, D. Solis and A. Patra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9650–9658 CAS .
D. M. Yang, C. X. Li, G. G. Li, M. M. Shang, X. J. Kang and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5923–5927 RSC .
H. Qiu, C. H. Yan, W. Shao, J. Damasco, X. Wang, H. Agren, P. N. Prasad and G. Chen, Nanomaterials, 2014, 4, 55–68 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, L. Lei, A. P. Yang, Z. X. Wang and Y. S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5898–5900 RSC .
W. Q. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Ward, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2634–2642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Liu, X. G. Kong, Y. L. Zhang, L. P. Tu, Y. Wang, Q. H. Zeng, C. G. Li, Z. Shi and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11957–11959 RSC .
X. M. Li, R. Wang, F. Zhang and D. Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3634–3639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, G. Y. Chen, A. M. Vu, W. Fan, O. S. Bilsel, C. C. Chang and G. Han, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 644–650 CrossRef .
Y. F. Wang, G. Y. Liu, L. D. Sun, J. W. Xiao, J. C. Zhou and C. H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7200–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Xie, N. Y. Gao, R. R. Deng, Q. Sun, Q. H. Xu and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12608–12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Wen, H. Zhu, X. Chen, T. F. Hung, B. L. Wang, G. Y. Zhu, S. F. Yu and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13419–13423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Li, R. Wang, F. Zhang, L. Zhou, D. K. Shen, C. Yao and D. Y. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3536 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Zhong, G. Tian, Z. J. Gu, Y. J. Yang, L. Gu, Y. L. Zhao, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2831–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Liu, D. S. Wang, L. L. Li, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 3257–3259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. DiMaio, C. Sabatier, B. Kokuoz and J. Ballato, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 1809–1813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. P. Fan, M. Q. Wang and Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 025701 CrossRef .
J. C. Boyer, J. Gagnon, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3358–3360 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Qin, C. Y. Cao, L. L. Wang, J. S. Zhang, D. S. Zhang, K. Z. Zheng, Y. Wang, G. D. Wei, G. F. Wang, P. F. Zhu and R. Kim, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2167–2169 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, H. J. Liang, H. C. Liu, G. Somesfalean and Z. G. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 16366–16371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Wang, M. Lan, Z. Y. Liu, G. S. Qin, C. F. Wu, X. Wang, W. P. Qin, W. Huang and L. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2485–2490 RSC .
Q. Q. Su, S. Y. Han, X. J. Xie, H. M. Zhu, H. Y. Chen, C. K. Chen, R. S. Liu, X. Y. Chen, F. Wang and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20849–20857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Qian and Y. Zhang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12123–12125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Dou, N. M. Idris and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 1722–1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Quintanilla, F. Ren, D. Ma and F. Vetrone, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 662–669 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765–4769 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Gorris, R. Ali, S. M. Saleh and O. S. Wolfbeis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1652–1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, K. T. Yong, I. Roy, H. E. Pudavar, W. C. Law, E. J. Bergey and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12552–12557 CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Biochem., 2001, 298, 1–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dulkeith, A. C. Morteani, T. Niedereichholz, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, S. A. Levi, F. van Veggel, D. N. Reinhoudt, M. Moller and D. I. Gittins, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 203002 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Paudel, L.
L. Zhong, K. Bayat, M. F. Baroughi, S. Smith, C. K. Lin, C. Y. Jiang, M. T. Berry and P. S. May, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19028–19036 CAS .
M. Saboktakin, X. C. Ye, S. J. Oh, S. H. Hong, A. T. Fafarman, U. K. Chettiar, N. Engheta, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8758–8766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, S. Xu, Y. S. Zhu, T. Liu, X. Bai, B. A. Dong, L. Xu and H. W. Song, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6971–6973 RSC .
W. H. Zhang, F. Ding and S. Y. Chou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP236–OP241 CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. J. Li, I. A. Ivanov, Y. Q. Qu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2865–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schietinger, T. Aichele, H. Q. Wang, T. Nann and O. Benson, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 134–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. C. Sun, H. Mundoor, J. C. Ribot, V. Singh, I. I. Smalyukh and P. Nagpal, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 101–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, Y. F. Shi, Y. C. Zhang, X. H. Sun, N. O. Reich, D. Y. Zhao and G. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2850–2851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sudheendra, V. Ortalan, S. Dey, N. D. Browning and I. M. Kennedy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2987–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, B. T. Chen, W. Yu, Y. S. Zhu, T. Liu, S. Xu, X. L. Min, X. Bai and H. W. Song, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13525–13532 RSC .
A. Priyam, N. M. Idris and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 960–965 RSC .
W. Deng, L. Sudheendra, J. B. Zhao, J. X. Fu, D. Y. Jin, I. M. Kennedy and E. M. Goldys, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 325604 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. R. Zhang, H. Gao, S. Xu, C. Wei and Y. Zhao, J. Lumin., 2014, 147, 72–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Qian, L. H. Zhou, H. P. Too and G. M. Chow, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 499–510 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, L. M. Wang, Z. Y. Wang, X. H. Liu and Y. J. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3291–3296 CAS .
S. Liu, G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 275–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lu, S. K. Cho, S. Ahn, L. Brun, C. J. Summers and W. Park, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7780–7792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. N. Prasad, Introduction to Nanomedcine and Nanobioengineering, Wiley Interscience, New Jersey,  2012 Search PubMed .
R. Kumar, M. Nyk, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, C. A. Flask and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 853–859 CrossRef CAS .
M. Norek, E. Kampert, U. Zeitler and J. A. Peters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5335–5340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. D. Lin, V. Vijayaragavan, K. K. Bhakoo and T. T. Y. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10322–10324 RSC .
C. H. Dong, A. Korinek, B. Blasiak, B. Tomanek and F. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1297–1305 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Ni, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, X. P. Zhang, M. Li, H. Y. Xing, Q. F. Xiao, Y. Liu, Y. Q. Hua, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, K. L. Zhao and J. L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201401609 .
G. K. Das, N. J. J. Johnson, J. Cramen, B. Blasiak, P. Latta, B. Tomanek and F. C. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 524–529 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zeng, L. C. Xiang, W. Z. Ren, J. J. Zheng, T. H. Li, B. Chen, J. C. Zhang, C. W. Mao, A. G. Li and A. G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13915–13925 RSC .
Y. L. Liu, K. L. Ai, J. H. Liu, Q. H. Yuan, Y. Y. He and L. H. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, J. Zhou, M. Chen, M. Shi, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4618–4627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Sun, T. Y. Cao, J. J. Peng, Y. Liu, Y. Q. Wu, W. Feng, Y. J. Zhang and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 774–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Sun, C. G. Li, J. Zhou, C. Y. Li, T. S. Yang, X. Z. Zhang, T. Yi, D. M. Wu and F. Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3146–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bednarkiewicz, D. Wawrzynczyk, M. Nyk and W. Strek, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2011, 103, 847–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Yang, Q. Q. Xiao, C. X. Niu, N. Jin, J. Ouyang, X. Y. Xiao and D. C. He, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2757–2763 RSC .
G. B. Shan, R. Weissleder and S. A. Hilderbrand, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 267–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Yang, S. L. Gai and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3679–3698 RSC .
C. X. Li, Z. Y. Hou, Y. L. Dai, D. M. Yang, Z. Y. Cheng, P. A. Ma and J. Lin, Biomater. Sci., 2013, 1, 213–223 RSC .
Y. M. Yang, B. Velmurugan, X. G. Liu and B. G. Xing, Small, 2013, 9, 2937–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Viger, M. Grossman, N. Fomina and A. Almutairi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3733–3738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhang and Z. L. Hong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8930–8933 RSC .
W. Wang, M. Y. Ding, C. H. Lu, Y. R. Ni and Z. Z. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, K. Song, Y. Feng, D. Yin, J. Ouyang, B. Liu, X. Cao, L. Zhang, Y. Han and M. Wu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 39118–39125 RSC .
N. M. Idris, L. S. Sasidharan, Z. Q. Li, K. Huang and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7017–7026 RSC .
Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu and X. Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6924–6958 RSC .
J. Zhou, Z. Liu and F. Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1323–1349 RSC .
W. Feng, L.-D. Sun, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1038–1053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426–6436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Dong and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 123–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Deng and L. Y. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 782–793 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, D. K. Shen, J. P. Yang, C. Yao, R. C. Che, F. Zhang and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Qian, H. C. Guo, P. C. L. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Small, 2009, 5, 2285–2290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cichos and M. Karbowiak, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 556–568 RSC .
J. A. Liu, W. B. Bu, L. M. Pan and J. L. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4375–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Gai, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, W. X. Wang, Y. L. Dai, N. Niu and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1166–1172 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Xu, C. X. Li, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Hou, D. M. Yang, X. J. Kang and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 661–667 RSC .
C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, P. A. Ma, Y. Y. Chen, Y. Wu, Z. Y. Hou, Y. L. Dai, J. H. Zhao, C. P. Sui and J. Lin, Small, 2013, 9, 4150–4159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng, C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, M. M. Shang, P. A. Ma, G. G. Li, N. A. Liu and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15801–15811 CAS .
W. P. Fan, B. Shen, W. B. Bu, F. Chen, K. L. Zhao, S. J. Zhang, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, Q. F. Xiao, H. Y. Xing, J. N. Liu, D. L. Ni, Q. J. He and J. L. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6494–6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Liu, J. W. Bu, W. B. Bu, W. P. Pan, F. Chen, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, K. L. Zhao, J. L. Du and J. L. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4551–4555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Liu, Y. Liu, W. B. Bu, J. W. Bu, Y. Sun, J. L. Du and J. L. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9701–9709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, A. Pallaoro, Y. C. Zhang, Y. F. Shi, D. X. Cui, M. Moskovits, D. Y. Zhao and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 61–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Xing, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, X. P. Zheng, M. Li, F. Chen, Q. J. He, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, Y. Q. Hua and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 1079–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Abel, J. C. Boyer, C. M. Andrei and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, S. Y. Zhou, Z. Chen, P. Hu, Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li, M. D. Huang and X. Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6671–6676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. N. Prasad, Introduction to Biophotonics, Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2003 Search PubMed .
J. Michaelis, C. Hettich, J. Mlynek and V. Sandoghdar, Nature, 2000, 405, 325–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Cheng, K. Yang, S. A. Zhang, M. W. Shao, S. T. Lee and Z. A. Liu, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 722–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Jin, Y. J. Gu, C. W. Y. Man, J. P. Cheng, Z. H. Xu, Y. Zhang, H. S. Wang, V. H. Y. Lee, S. H. Cheng and W. T. Wong, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7838–7847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Frangioni, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2003, 7, 626–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bogdan, F. Vetrone, G. A. Ozin and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 835–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Sun, T. S. Yang, W. Feng, C. G. Li and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17122–17125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Liu, C. T. Xu, G. Dumlupinar, O. B. Jensen, P. E. Andersen and S. Andersson-Engels, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10034–10040 RSC .
Q. Q. Zhan, J. Qian, H. J. Liang, G. Somesfalean, D. Wang, S. L. He, Z. G. Zhang and S. Andersson-Engels, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3744–3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, Z. Q. Li, H. S. Qian, Y. Hu and I. N. Muhammad, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 125602 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Liu, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, F. Chen, H. Y. Xing, L. M. Pan, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2335–2341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang, B. Shuter and N. M. Idris, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12015–12018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Ni, J. W. Zhang, W. B. Bu, H. Y. Xing, F. Han, Q. F. Xiao, Z. W. Yao, F. Chen, Q. J. He, J. N. Liu, S. J. Zhang, W. P. Fan, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1231–1242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xia, Y. Gao, J. Zhou, C. Y. Li, T. S. Yang, D. M. Wu, L. M. Wu and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 7200–7208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chen, B. Qi, T. Moore, D. C. Colvin, T. Crawford, J. C. Gore, F. Alexis, O. T. Mefford and J. N. Anker, Small, 2014, 10, 160–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xia, M. Chen, Y. Gao, D. M. Wu, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 5394–5405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Xiao, W. B. Bu, Q. G. Ren, S. J. Zhang, H. Y. Xing, F. Chen, M. Li, X. P. Zheng, Y. Q. Hua, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, H. Y. Qu, Z. Wang, K. L. Zhao and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 7530–7539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Shen, C. X. Yang, L. X. Dong, H. R. Sun, K. Gao and X. P. Yan, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 12166–12172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. J. Zhu, J. J. Peng and F. Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11290–11300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Niu, H. Y. Chen, Y. Q. Wang, W. H. Wang, X. Y. Sun and L. X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5152–5160 CAS .
S. K. Maji, S. Sreejith, J. Joseph, M. Lin, T. He, Y. Tong, H. Sun, S. W.-K. Yu and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5633–5638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, Z. J. Gu, L. J. Zhou, W. Y. Yin, X. X. Liu, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. L. Ren, G. M. Xing, S. J. Li and Y. L. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1226–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. A. Cheng and Z. A. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1110–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, W. Y. Yin, J. J. Jin, X. Zhang, G. M. Xing, S. J. Li, Z. J. Gu and Y. L. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1379–1389 RSC .
C. J. Carling, J. C. Boyer and N. R. Branda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10838–10839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, C. J. Carling, B. D. Gates and N. R. Branda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15766–15772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Carling, F. Nourmohammadian, J. C. Boyer and N. R. Branda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3782–3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, J. C. Boyer, D. Habault, N. R. Branda and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16558–16561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, J. C. Boyer, N. R. Branda and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19714–19717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Zhao, J. J. Peng, Q. Huang, C. Y. Li, M. Chen, Y. Sun, Q. N. Lin, L. Y. Zhu and F. Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 363–371 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Yang, Q. Shao, R. R. Deng, C. Wang, X. Teng, K. Cheng, Z. Cheng, L. Huang, Z. Liu, X. G. Liu and B. G. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3125–3129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, W. Steelant, M. Kumar and M. Scholfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4526–4527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Selvin, T. M. Rana and J. E. Hearst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 6029–6030 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Shan, S. J. Budijono, G. H. Hu, N. Yao, Y. B. Kang, Y. G. Ju and R. K. Prud'homme, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2488–2495 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tian, W. L. Ren, L. Yan, S. Jian, Z. J. Gu, L. J. Zhou, S. Jin, W. Y. Yin, S. J. Li and Y. L. Zhao, Small, 2013, 9, 1929–1938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Q. Tao, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 6145–6154 CAS .
B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081–11095 RSC .
T. Trupke, A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, P. Wurfel and M. A. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3327–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Briggs, A. C. Atre and J. A. Dionne, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 124509 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. G. Zhang, G. Somesfalean, Z. G. Zhang, Q. Sun and F. P. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 133103 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, H. C. Liu, G. Somesfalean, H. J. Liang and Z. G. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 385704 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, A. Kachynski, H. Agren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4981–4986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shalav, B. S. Richards, T. Trupke, K. W. Kramer and H. U. Gudel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 013505 CrossRef PubMed .
G. B. Shan and G. P. Demopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4373–4377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Wu, J. L. Wang, J. M. Lin, Z. Lan, Q. W. Tang, M. L. Huang, Y. F. Huang, L. Q. Fan, Q. B. Li and Z. Y. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Yuan, G. Y. Chen, P. N. Prasad, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Z. J. Ning, H. N. Tian, L. C. Sun and H. Agren, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16709–16713 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhou, J. H. Wang, F. Nan, C. H. Bu, Z. H. Yu, W. Liu, S. S. Guo, H. Hu and X. Z. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2052–2055 RSC .
L. L. Liang, Y. M. Liu, C. H. Bu, K. M. Guo, W. W. Sun, N. Huang, T. Peng, B. Sebo, M. M. Pan, W. Liu, S. S. Guo and X. Z. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2174–2180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Z. Z. W. B. Guo, W. F. Xie, L. Sun, L. Shen, C. Y. Liu, Y. Y. He and Z. H. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 124, 126–132 CrossRef PubMed .
A. F. Khan, R. Yadav, P. K. Mukhopadhya, S. Singh, C. Dwivedi, V. Dutta and S. Chawla, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 6837–6846 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, X. D. Li, Q. Q. Liu, X. H. Chen, Z. Sun, C. Liu, X. J. Ye and S. M. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 025402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. O. Shen, W. Guo, S. H. Wang, C. T. Zhu, F. Xue, J. F. Hou, H. Q. Su and Z. B. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 47–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Su, S. K. Karuturi, J. S. Luo, L. J. Liu, X. F. Liu, J. Guo, T. C. Sum, R. R. Deng, H. J. Fan, X. G. Liu and A. I. Y. Tok, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Meruga, W. M. Cross, P. S. May, Q. Luu, G. A. Crawford and J. J. Kellar, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 395201 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Zhao, D. Y. Jin, E. P. Schartner, Y. Q. Lu, Y. J. Liu, A. V. Zvyagin, L. X. Zhang, J. M. Dawes, P. Xi, J. A. Piper, E. M. Goldys and T. M. Monro, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 729–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Sangeetha, P. Moutet, D. Lagarde, G. Sallen, B. Urbaszek, X. Marie, G. Viau and L. Ressier, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9587–9592 RSC .
J. Lee, P. W. Bisso, R. L. Srinivas, J. J. Kim, A. J. Swiston and P. S. Doyle, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 524–529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Wei, X. Y. Li, B. H. Zhang, J. X. Wang, C. Huang and Q. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1616–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Gargas, E. M. Chan, A. D. Ostrowski, S. Aloni, M. V. P. Altoe, E. S. Barnard, B. Sanii, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 300–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Guanying Chen
	Guanying Chen received his BS and PhD degrees in optics in 2004, and 2009, respectively, from Harbin Institute of Technology, P. R. China. He is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, and a senior research scientist at the Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York. He was a postdoctoral fellow (2010–2011) at University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and Royal Institute of Technology. His interests include lanthanide-doped nanomaterials, nanostructured solar cells, and nanoparticles-based diagnostics and therapeutics.

Hans Ågren
	Hans Ågren graduated with a PhD in 1979 in experimental atomic and molecular physics at the University of Uppsala, Sweden, under the supervision of Nobel laureate Kai Siegbahn. After a couple of Post Doc years in USA he became in 1981 an assistant professor in Quantum Chemistry at Lund University. He became the first holder of the chairs in Computational Physics at Linköping University in 1991 and in Theoretical Chemistry at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, in 1998. He heads the Department of Theoretical Chemistry and Biology at KTH which houses ca. 20 scientists and 40 PhD students, with research activities in theoretical modeling primarily in the areas of molecular/nano/biophotonics and electronics, in catalysis and in X-ray science. The research is a mix of method development and problem oriented applications in collaboration with experimentalists. Hans Ågren participates in several national and international networks in his research areas. He has received the Swedish Bjurzon and Roos' awards.

Tymish Y. Ohulchanskyy
	Tymish Y. Ohulchanskyy holds his PhD degree in optics and laser physics from the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv (Kyiv, Ukraine). After finishing his PhD in 2001, he joined the Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics (ILPB) at the University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA. He is currently a Research Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry in the University of Buffalo and Deputy Director of Photomedicine at ILPB. His research interests lie in the area of photophysics and physical chemistry of organic materials and organic, inorganic and hybrid nanostructures, and their photonic and biomedical applications. Multimodal agents for medical imaging, cancer theranostics and targeted cancer phototherapy are of particular interest.

Paras N. Prasad
	Paras N. Prasad is a SUNY Distinguished Professor of Chemistry, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Medicine; the Samuel P. Capen Chair of Chemistry; the Executive Director of Institute for Lasers, Photonics, and Biophotonics, University at Buffalo, State University of New York; the visiting Distinguished Professor at Korea University. He was named among top 50 science and technology leaders in the world by Scientific American in 2005. He has published over 700 scientific and technical papers, four monographs (Introduction to Nanomedicine and Nanobioengineering, Nanophotonics, Introduction to Biophotonics, Introduction to Nonlinear Optical Effects in Molecules and Polymers) and eight edited books. He has received many scientific awards and honors (Morley Medal; Schoellkopf Medal; Guggenheim Fellowship; Fellow of the APS, OSA, and SPIE, etc.). His interests include biophotonics, nanophotonics, nanomedicine, metamaterials, and solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  Seven directions for nanophotonic control of upconversion in a core–shell nanostructure.	 

 	Fig. 2  Different types of core–shell structures. The upper panel illustrates core–shell UCNPs with epitaxial layers: (a) core–shell UCNPs with an “inert” (i.e., without any absorbing/emitting lanthanide dopant) shell layer; the colored balls in the core area depict lanthanide dopants; the red circles at the interface represent surface quenching sites; the black arrows indicate random energy transfer pathways. (b) Core–shell UCNPs with an active shell layer (i.e., layers containing “active” lanthanide dopants); and (c) core–shell UCNPs with multiple shell layers. Core–multishell type (c) is exemplified using five layers, in which layer 1 and layer 3 (the gray striped ones) can be either inert layers to avoid undesirable interactions between the active layers (the colored ones), or active layers to enhance the interactions between different active domains. The bottom panel depicts core–shell UCNPs with non-epitaxial layers: (d) UCNPs@silica core–shell nanoparticles, (e) core–shell–shell UCNPs@silica@metal (or metal@silica@UCNPs) nanoparticles, and (f) UCNPs coated with organic dye molecules.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorption spectrum of water in the range of 680–1000 nm and the core–shell design of NaYF4:Yb3+/A3+@NaYF4:Nd3+/Yb3+ (A = Tm, Er, Ho); (b) core–shell design for NaYF4:Nd3+/Yb3+/A3+@NaYF4:Nd3+; (c) illustration of the involved lanthanide energy levels of a core–shell design of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+@NaYF4:Nd3+ with a transition layer to create a larger distance between Nd3+ and Er3+ ions. All designs are based on the cascaded energy flow Nd3+ → Yb3+ → A3+ (A = Er or Tm) (excited at ∼800 nm). The deleterious cross relaxation between Nd3+ and A3+ (A = Er or Tm) in (a)–(c) is minimized by spatial isolation of the lanthanide dopants into the core domain as well as into the shell domain. In (b), a very limited concentration of Nd3+ (1 mol%) is employed to minimize the cross relaxation process, still enhancing energy transfer across the interface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, 86 and 89. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the principle of energy flow in a NaYbF4@Na(Yb,Gd)F4@NaGdF4 core–shell–shell structure. (b) The corresponding energy levels of Nd3+ doped in the core domain, Yb3+/X3+ (X = Er, Ho, Tm) in the inner shell, as well as the Z3+ (Y = Eu, Tb, or Dy) ions in the outmost shell. The involved upconversion mechanisms (absorption, energy migration and flow, as well as the luminescence) are shown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  Tuning upconversion luminescence using ultrasmall core–shell–shell NaGdF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4 architectures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of tuning upconversion luminescence using non epitaxial UCNPs–silica core–shell structure, where (A) luminescent emitters and (B) luminescent quenchers are loaded in the silica shell.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of one pot successive layer-by-layer (SLBL) deposition to prepare epitaxial core–multishell UCNPs (upper panel), and HAADF STEM images of particles with varied shell thickness (lower panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Coating of UCNPs with a mesoporous silica shell. (a) Schematic of the calcination method; (b–d) corresponding TEM images of NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+, NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica, and mesoporous-silica-coated NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@silica nanoparticles obtained using the calcination method. (e) Schematic of the template method; (f) TEM image of β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@β-NaGdF4:Yb3+/Er3+@mSiO2 nanocomposites, prepared using CTAB as a template, (g, h) TEM and dark-field STEM image of NaYF4:Tm3+/Yb3+@NaYF4@mSiO2 prepared using CTAC as a template. (i) Schematic of the etching method; (j) TEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4, (k) HAADF STEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@dSiO2@mSiO2, (l) HAADF STEM image of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@hmSiO2 (d SiO2, dense layer silica; mSiO2 mesoporous layer silica, hmSiO2 obtained by etching the dense silica layer in hot water). Reproduced with permission from ref. 153, 158 and 162. Copyright 2009 and 2013, John Wiley and Sons. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration for preparing core–shell–shell structures of metallic@silica@UCNPs, along with (b–d) TEM images of the nanostructures obtained in each step. (e) Schematic illustration for synthesizing UCNPs@silica@metallic core–shell–shell structure, along with (f) and (g) TEM images of the corresponding samples. Reproduced with permissions from ref. 113 and 121. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society and 2013 Ivy Spring International Publisher.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of five strategies to characterize formation of a core–shell structure. The imaging contrast and the elemental variance provide direct evidence to verify the formation, while the other three strategies yield indirect evidence to suggest the formation.	 

 	Fig. 11  HAADF STEM image of (a) NaYF4@NaGdF4, (b) (NaYbF4:0.5%Tm3+)@CaF2, (c) NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@CaF2, (d) NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4, (e) NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+ and (f) NaGdF4:Nd3+/NaYF4/NaGdF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4 nanoparticles with resolved core–shell structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, 88 and 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) HAADF image of a single NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaGdF4 nanocrystal. EELS spectra of yttrium L2,3 (b) and gadolinium M4,5 (c) edges taken from the probe location on the inferred NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+ core and NaGdF4 shell. (d) TEM image of one single NaYF4@NaGdF4 nanoparticle, as well as (e) the corresponding results of an EDS line scan. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 and 165. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Comparison of UCPL under excitation at 800 nm and 980 nm for Nd3+-doped core–shell–shell UCNPs (ErCSS) and conventional Yb3+-sensitized core–shell UCNPs (ErCS). (a) Absorption spectra of ErCSS (20 mg mL−1 in hexane). (b) UCPL photographs of ErCSS and ErCS excited at 800 (top) and 980 nm (bottom) with 0.5 W cm−2 diode lasers. (c) UCPL from Nd3+-sensitized nanoparticles excited at 800 nm (left) and from Yb3+-sensitized nanoparticles excited at 980 nm (right). Excitation with a power density of 400 mW cm−2 was used. (d) Temperature-distribution image recorded after 7 min irradiation (Sp1: 980 nm; Sp2: 800 nm; 20 W cm−2). Inset: temperature increase with time under 800 and 980 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of NaLuF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@NaGdF4(153Sm) core–shell UCNPs for SPECT/CT/MR/UCPL four-modal bioimaging. In this design, the Yb3+/Tm3+ ion pair provides the UCPL optical property; the Gd3+ ions in the epitaxial shell provide the ability for T1 MR imaging; the Lu3+ ions in the core host lattice lead to strong absorption of X-ray to enable for CT imaging, and the 153Sm in the shell (half-life, 46.3 hours) is a radioisotope which produces gamma rays for SPECT imaging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  NIR light-controlled release of (A, B) genetic materials using photo-uncaging, and (C, D) the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin (Dox), using a photomechanical path. (A) Plasmid DNA and siRNA are caged with DMNPE and then uncaged by NIR-to-UV light conversion by the core–shell UCNPs–silica nanostructure. The inset shows the penetration depth of UV and NIR light in the skin. (B) Loading of caged plasmid DNA–siRNA into the mesopores of the core–shell UCNPs–silica nanostructure. (C) Synthetic procedure for an epitaxial core–shell upconverting nanoparticle coated with a mesoporous silica outer layer. (D) NIR light-triggered Dox release by the NIR-to-UV conversion, which causes trans–cis photoisomerization of azo molecules grafted in the mesopore network of a mesoporous silica layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27 and 155. Copyright 2012 National Academy of Sciences, and 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the penetration depth of different wavelength in a tissue model; (b) upconversion nanoparticle as a frequency conversion nanotransducer to convert the NIR excitation to visible illumination for activation of photosensitizers, producing reactive singlet molecular oxygen for photochemical treatment of diseased sites.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Principle of use of photon upconversion provided by core–shell β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@SiO2 UCNPs in the photoelectrode of a DSSC. Upconversion luminescence of a photoelectrode with (c) and without (b) core–shell UCNPs confirmed the existence of core–shell UCNPs in the photo electrode. (d) The structure of an inverted polymer solar cell device which incorporates UCNPs, along with the corresponding energy level structure. (e) Energy flow in hetero-nanostructures from NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+@NaYF4 core–shell UCNPs to visible light-absorbing CdSe nanoparticles to TiO2 photonic structures upon near-infrared photoexcitation. Energy diagram illustrating charge injection from excited CdSe into TiO2 and the transport of photoinjected electrons to the electrode surface for hydrogen generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214, 216 and 220. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The printed image secured with high Tm3+ containing UCNPs, which becomes visible when high laser power density (∼106 W cm−2) is utilized. (b) Imaging of encoded UCNPs with portable (Apple iPhone 4S) decoder in challenging settings (from left to right, pharmaceutical blister packs, currency, and credit cards). Top: image acquisition using a portable decoder, middle and bottom: acquired image when exposed to 1 W 980 nm laser excitation (middle) and in the absence of NIR excitation (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 171 and 173. Copyright 2013 and 2014 Nature Publishing Group.	 
UC	Upconversion
IR	Infrared
UCNPs	Upconversion nanoparticles
NIR	Near infrared
PL	Photoluminescence
PDT	Photodynamic therapy
PTT	Photothermal therapy
LSPR	Localized surface plasmon resonance
QY	Quantum yield
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
CT	Computed tomography
PET	Positron emission tomography
SPECT	Single-photon emission computed tomography
PA	Photoacoustic
TEOS	Tetraethyl orthosilicate
APTES	(3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
CTAB	Cetyl trimethylammonium bromide
CTAC	Hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidone
XRD	X-ray diffraction
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
HAADF	High-angle annular dark-field
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
EELS	Electron energy loss spectroscopy
EDX	Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
CCD	Charge coupled device

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
