Oxygen electrocatalysts for water electrolyzers and reversible fuel cells: status and perspective   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22554A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22554A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9331-9344Oxygen electrocatalysts for water electrolyzers and reversible fuel cells: status and perspective†

        
          
            Sehkyu 
            Park
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuyan 
            Shao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aPacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA. E-mail: jun.liu@pnnl.gov; yong.wang@pnnl.gov
bVoiland School of Chemical Engineering and Bioengineering, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99163, USA
Received 
      15th June 2012
    , Accepted 2nd August 2012First published on 29th August 2012AbstractHydrogen production by electrochemical water electrolysis has received great attention as an alternative technology for energy conversion and storage. The oxygen electrode has a substantial effect on the performance and durability of water electrolyzers and reversible (or regenerative) fuel cells because of its intrinsically slow kinetics for oxygen evolution/reduction and poor durability under harsh operating environments. To improve oxygen kinetics and durability of the electrode, extensive studies for highly active and stable oxygen electrocatalysts have been performed. However, due to the thermodynamic instability of transition metals in acidic media, noble metal compounds have been primarily utilized as electrocatalysts in water electrolyzers and reversible fuel cells. For water electrolyzer applications, single noble metal oxides such as ruthenium oxide and iridium oxide have been studied, and binary or ternary metal oxides have been developed to obtain synergistic effects of each component. On the other hand, a variety of bifunctional electrocatalysts with a combination of monofunctional electrocatalysts such as platinum for oxygen reduction and iridium oxide for oxygen evolution for reversible fuel cell applications have been mainly proposed. Practically, supported iridium oxide-on-platinum, its reverse type, and non-precious metal-supported platinum and iridium bifunctional electrocatalysts have been developed. Recent theoretical calculations and experimental studies in terms of water electrolysis and fuel cell technology suggest the effective ways to cope with current major challenges of cost and durability of oxygen electrocatalysts for technical applications.Sehkyu ParkDr Sehkyu Park received his PhD in Chemical Engineering at University of South Carolina in 2008. He is a postdoctoral research associate in Chemical & Material Sciences Division at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. His research interest includes energy materials and nanostructured electrodes for fuel cells and rechargeable batteries. He has authored more than 20 peer reviewed publications.Yuyan ShaoDr Yuyan Shao is a Senior Scientist at the Chemical & Materials Sciences Division of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. His research is focused on the fundamental study and high-performance functional materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including fuel cells, metal-air batteries, lithium/sodium batteries, redox flow batteries, supercapacitors, etc. He has published over 60 journal papers.Jun LiuDr Jun Liu is a Laboratory Fellow at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, and leader for the Transformational Materials Science Initiative. Dr Liu's main research interest includes synthesis of functional nanomaterials for energy storage, catalysis, environmental separation and health care. He has received an R&D 100 Award, two BES Awards for Significant Impact on DOE Missions, and was named 2007 Distinguished Inventor of Battelle. Dr Liu is an AAAS Fellow and MRS Fellow. He has over 270 publications.Yong WangDr Yong Wang is the Voiland Distinguished Professor in Chemical Engineering at Washington State University, and a Laboratory Fellow/Associated Director of Institute for Integrated Catalysis at PNNL. He is best known for his leadership in the development of novel catalytic materials and reaction engineering for the conversion of fossil and biomass feedstocks. He has received three R&D 100 awards, two PNNL Inventor of the Year awards, Asian American Engineer of the Year Award, and Presidential Green Chemistry Award. Dr Wang is an AAAS Fellow and ACS Fellow. He has authored more than 150 peer reviewed publications and holds 81 issued US patents.

Broader context
Hydrogen is an efficient energy carrier to store renewable energy through water electrolysis and generate electricity via fuel cell reactions. The oxygen electrode plays a crucial role in performance and lifetime of water electrolyzers (WEs) and reversible (or regenerative) fuel cells (RFCs) due to its slow electrochemical processes under rigorously oxidizing or reducing environments. Much effort has thus been dedicated to develop efficient and stable oxygen evolution electrocatalysts and bifunctional electrocatalysts at low pH and a wide range of potential, resulting in significant improvement of the oxygen electrode performance and durability. However, even though there have been outstanding achievements in the development of oxygen electrocatalysts, material cost and durability still remain as main challenges. This article reviews a variety of electrocatalysts for the oxygen electrode in acid electrolyte for WE and RFC applications and provides a perspective based on current state-of-the-art technology.

1. Introduction
Power generation using renewable energy has been considered as a solution to reduce reliance on fossil fuels that cause release of excess amounts of carbon dioxide, a main contributor to global warming.1–3 Typically, the power generated from natural sources, including solar and wind, is undulating and intermittent because of variable weather conditions, which essentially requires energy storage devices (e.g., secondary batteries) to counterbalance its variability.3,4 However, due to the limited energy storage capacity in secondary batteries,4–7 hydrogen production by water electrolysis in water electrolyzers (WEs) or reversible (or regenerative) fuel cells (RFCs) that have no constraints on energy storage capacity by electrode materials has been studied as an alternative technology for energy conversion and storage.8–14 The fundamental reactions of water electrolysis in acidic media are as follows: Anode: 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−; E0 = 1.229 V (SHE)(1) Cathode: 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2; E0 = 0.000 V (SHE)(2) Overall: 2H2O → O2 + 2H2; E0 = 1.229 V(3)
As illustrated in Fig. 1, water molecules are oxidized to produce oxygen molecules and release protons and electrons at the anode (oxygen evolution reaction, OER). Protons which travel through the electrolyte combine with electrons to form hydrogen at the cathode (hydrogen evolution reaction). In RFCs, reverse reaction of water electrolysis also takes place to generate electricity i.e., hydrogen molecules are oxidized to give protons and electrons at the anode (hydrogen oxidation reaction). Protons passing through the electrolyte react with adsorbed oxygen to produce water at the cathode (oxygen reduction reaction, ORR).8,15
 Fig. 1  Scheme that shows water electrolysis and fuel cell reactions. 
The electrochemical process of oxygen at the interface between the electrolyte and the electrode is more sluggish and complex, compared with that of hydrogen.16–19 Open circuit potential of the oxygen electrode is significantly lower than the equilibrium oxygen potential because of its strong chemical bond in both alkali and acid electrolytes.16 In alkaline media, non-precious metals can be utilized as electrocatalysts because of their lower equilibrium potentials on each electrode at high pH.20,21 However, the alkaline electrolyte has relatively low ion conductivity and is susceptible to the formation of carbonate as a contaminant by the reaction with carbon dioxide.22 In contrast, the electrochemical process that occurs in acid solution makes it possible to produce considerably higher operational current densities, although precious metals are required for the oxygen electrode. The possible reactions for oxygen reduction in acid solution are as follows:16,23 O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O; E0 = 1.229 V (SHE)(4) O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2; E0 = 0.695 V (SHE)(5) H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O; E0 = 1.770 V (SHE)(6) 2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2(7) S–H2O2 → H2O + S–O(8) S–O + 2H+ + 2e− → S + H2O(9)where S is the active site on the oxygen electrode. The molecular oxygen adsorbed on the electrode is directly reduced by a four-electron transfer process or reduced to water via the formation of hydrogen peroxide with the consumption of two electrons.23 On the other hand, the electrochemical process of oxygen in acidic media is greatly affected by the anions in the electrolyte e.g., the onset potential for oxygen reduction shifts positively in the order of HBr < HCl < H2SO4 < HClO4, in decreasing tendency for anion adsorption.16,24
Water electrolysis has been primarily employed to produce hydrogen rather than oxygen in technical applications. Typically, platinum-based hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts have been reported for several decades and recently, bio-inspired electrocatalysts and earth-abundant metal complex electrocatalysts, including molybdenum and cobalt (pentapyridine) complexes, and such metal complex-modified electrodes have been proposed.25–28 More details for hydrogen production by molecular electrocatalysis on metal complexes can be found in ref. 28. However, due to slower kinetics and higher overpotential for OER at the oxygen electrode than cathodic processes concerning hydrogen evolution reaction at the hydrogen electrode, more effort has been devoted to the development and understanding of an efficient electrocatalyst for OER.29–34 It has been reported that the platinum-based electrocatalyst is the most promising material for ORR over the entire range of pH,21,35–40 while it is ascribed as a poor OER electrocatalyst because the OER on the platinum surface needs a high overpotential (>300 mV).41,42 Alternatively, metal oxides (e.g., ruthenium oxide and iridium oxide) have been extensively studied because they are highly active and stable in acidic media and have a wide anodic potential range.43–45 For the bifunctional oxygen electrode in RFCs, the electrocatalysts with a combination of platinum for ORR and metal oxide for OER have been proposed.33,34,46 However, it has been pointed out that metal oxides are not thermodynamically stable under reducing conditions and conversely platinum is vulnerable to the oxidation by the oxidative species at high anodic potentials.45,47 It is thus necessary to shed light on the subject of novel materials at the oxygen electrode which could improve electrocatalytic activity and tolerate rigorously oxidizing and reducing conditions during long-term operations in WEs and RFCs. This article focuses on a variety of electrocatalysts in the development of oxygen electrodes in WEs and RFCs. First, oxygen evolution electrocatalysts that contain pure metals, single and multimetallic oxides used in WEs are reviewed. Next, bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts for RFC applications are presented. Finally, a perspective for advanced designs and materials for the oxygen electrocatalysts in future technological applications is provided, followed by a summary.
2. Oxygen evolution electrocatalysts in water electrolyzers
2.1. Single metal electrocatalysts
At the initial stage of water electrolyzer development, Bockris and co-workers41 measured anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes and catalytic activity for single metals and binary alloy electrodes in perchloric acid solution. Their results showed that oxygen evolution kinetics decreased in the order of Ir > Rh > Pt–Rh > Pt, while the tendency in activity toward oxygen reduction was nearly opposite to that for OER. Similarly, Miles and Thomason48 made a comprehensive survey of single metallic elements in terms of OER activity. To determine materials activity and stability in acidic media, they conducted cyclic voltammetry experiments in sulfuric acid solution at 80 °C and measured the potential at a fixed current density. The experimentally measured overpotential for oxygen evolution increased in the sequence: Ru ≈ Ir < Pd < Rh < Pt < Au < Nb, which is in qualitative agreement with the results of Bockris' group.41 At high anodic potentials, however, the electrocatalytic active metals typically continue to corrode, although pure metals form an oxide film on the surface during oxygen evolution.49,50 It has been reported51,52 that the requirement for an OER electrocatalyst is the formation of a relatively thick oxide film on the metal surface that shows high ion insertion charge capacity.
2.2. Single metal oxide electrocatalysts
Trasatti's group53–55 studied ruthenium oxide-coated titanium substrate as a dimensionally stable anode and found that the ruthenium oxide film was more stable in acidic media and over a wide range of potential than ruthenium oxide single crystals, while its catalytic activity for OER was restricted by reactions involving reactants and products adsorption. They examined how surface morphology of ruthenium oxide films prepared at various temperatures influences voltammetric charge and Tafel behavior on the surface and proposed the mechanism of oxygen evolution on ruthenium oxide as follows:55–57 S + H2O → S–OH + H+ + e(10) S–OH → S–O + H+ + e(11) S–OH + S–OH → S–O + S–H2O(12) S–O + S–O → O2 + 2S(13)
They proposed that S is an active site related to a topological defect on the film and correlated a strong S–OH bond with cracked ruthenium oxide film that allows more protons to penetrate into the bulk along the defects. It was thus believed that the OER primarily takes place viaeqn (10) and (11) as the rate-determining steps (RDS) on the dense ruthenium oxide film, while eqn (10) and (12) as the RDS are preferential OER pathways on porous films. They suggested that the surface concentration of intermediate species58 as well as surface morphology can be critical factors for oxygen electrodes to control the mechanism of oxygen evolution, thereby determining electrocatalytic activity on the ruthenium oxide surface.
Although the ruthenium oxide has attracted favorable attention as a promising OER electrocatalyst, its oxidation to ruthenium tetroxide in acidic media during the oxygen evolution (>1.4 V) is thermodynamically favored by the following reaction:59 RuO2 + H2O → RuO4 + 4H+ + 4e−(14)
Ruthenium tetroxide as the only corrosion product on the ruthenium (oxide) electrode dissolves into the electrolyte and exists in the solution phase.60,61 Furthermore, it is highly volatile due to its tetrahedral structure and aggressively oxidative to any hydrocarbon.62,63 Thus, this reaction greatly modifies ruthenium oxide properties, substantially losing its electrocatalytic activity and stability during an extended WE operation.60,64
On the other hand, it is generally accepted that the iridium oxide is a metallic conductor,65 has a variety of valencies of iridium cation,66 has a high affinity with adsorbed hydroxide as an intermediate67 and is anodically stable. Song et al.68 investigated both ruthenium and iridium metal (oxide) for OER activity using cyclic voltammetry. As illustrated in Fig. 2, iridium oxide still retained the highest voltammetric charge among the materials without significant change with increasing potential cycles. They claimed that ruthenium-based electrocatalysts readily formed ruthenium tetroxide which is non-conductive and soluble, while iridium oxide appears to be fairly stable, showing no significant peaks for iridium oxides in different oxidation states. Iridium oxide on the tantalum substrate was electrochemically characterized by Hackwood et al.,67 who found that a deposited iridium film prepared by sputtering was not dissolved into an acid electrolyte and showed high corrosion resistance even at 1.95 V (RHE) for >240 h and high electrocatalytic activity at low overpotentials. Likewise, Slavcheva69 observed high stability of iridium oxide film deposited on the titanium film supported by the carbon paper. They also found that a thin film of iridium oxide was activated with a small number of potential cycles and presented a relatively high electrocatalyst utilization as well as high durability as compared with thick iridium oxide films. Trasatti and co-workers70 examined the effect of calcination temperature on voltammetric features for iridium oxide. Their results showed that the temperature during heat-treatment affects both surface area and ion penetration into the oxide layer i.e., higher temperature leads to a smaller surface area and a lower ion insertion charge capacity.43 They also showed that when iridium chloride as a precursor was dissolved in isopropanol during the preparation, the voltammetric charge of iridium oxide was ca. 2.5 times larger, compared with the case treated with an aqueous solution. Kötz et al.71 studied anodic oxidation of iridium and oxygen evolution on iridium oxide through XPS analysis. They found that the oxide species become dominant at the sacrifice of hydroxide species which are abundant at low potentials near 0.0 V (SCE), still maintaining a constant amount of whole oxygen species with increasing potential. Such oxidation or reduction of the iridium oxide film leads to transfer of protons at the interface between electrode and electrolyte with reversibly changing color, called the electrochromic effect.72,73 They also suggested a mechanism for OER on iridium oxide. Initially, as depicted in Fig. 3, Ir(OH)3 converts to IrO(OH)2 with proton discharge to the electrolyte under anodic potentials, IrO3 in hexavalent state appears via two consecutive deprotonation steps from IrO(OH)2 and then oxygen comes out of it, drawing a water molecule to transform the oxide to the tetravalent state.71
 Fig. 2  Cyclic voltammograms of various electrocatalysts (a) Ru, (b) Ir, (c) RuO2, (d) IrO2, and (e) Ru0.5Ir0.5O2 during potential cycles between 0 and 1.2 V (SCE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. 
 Fig. 3  Model for charge storage and oxygen evolution on iridium electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. 
2.3. Binary and ternary metal oxide electrocatalysts
It has been reported74–78 that substoichiometric ruthenium oxide (i.e., RuOx, x < 2) initially has a higher electrocatalytic activity toward OER in an acid electrolyte because of its transition from a lower (III) to a higher (IV) valence state and RuOx is then transformed into stable and stoichiometric ruthenium(IV) oxide during oxygen evolution, resulting in a relatively low activity for oxygen evolution. On the other hand, the iridium oxide has a relatively high overpotential and Tafel slope for OER, while it is very stable in acidic media during the oxygen evolution process.68,79 Hence, extensive studies of ruthenium–iridium alloys and oxides have been carried out to further enhance the activity and thermodynamic stability of single metal oxides. Stucki and co-workers71,76,80 prepared ruthenium–iridium alloys and mixed oxides with different compositions by reactive sputtering. For the metal alloys RuxIr1−x, electrochemical behavior was controlled by the formation of surface oxide and shift of redox potential, depending on the composition of each element i.e., the higher the iridium content, the thinner the surface oxide (x < 0.5), but more cathodic the redox peak.80 Similarly, they observed that the oxidation to ruthenium tetroxide is significantly inhibited along with an enhanced stability during OER in the presence of iridium oxide in binary metal oxide electrodes. However, the effect of surface segregation relevant to surface oxide formation was negligibly small for the mixed metal oxides.80 Instead, the improvement in OER kinetics is attributed to the following two factors: (i) the alteration of electronic structure by alloying and (ii) the interplay with surface dipole and adsorbed species on single metallic sites. Specifically, alloying may form a common electronic d-band where electronic charge transfer occurs between ruthenium and iridium sites, thereby mitigating oxidation to ruthenium tetroxide at a low expense of electrocatalytic activity. Alternatively, the electrochemical property of the mixed oxide can be determined by the interaction between metallic sites and surface charges or adsorbates from the solution without modification of innate properties of ruthenium and iridium.76,81 To maintain mixed valencies (III–IV) of the ruthenium cations, Srinivasan and co-workers79 made an attempt to prepare ruthenium-based binary and ternary oxide compounds with iridium and tantalum. Binary and ternary oxides in their study were relatively stable in acidic media and a single Tafel slope over a wide current density was solely observed for RuIr0.5Ta0.5Ox, while other oxide compounds exhibited two different Tafel slopes. They proposed that ruthenium–iridium–tantalum ternary oxides could remain in mixed valencies of ruthenium under long-term oxygen evolution environments because tantalum presumably suppresses the oxidation of Ru3+ to Ru4+. In addition, the RuIr0.5Ta0.5Ox manifested a continuously increasing tendency for the overpotential during OER, while the Ru0.5Ir0.5TaOx had a lower overpotential which was being stabilized. Hutchings et al.82 synthesized mixed metal oxides using ruthenium, iridium, and tin oxides and measured oxygen electrode potential under an accelerated stress test. As shown in Fig. 4, a ternary mixed oxide Sn0.5Ru0.25Ir0.25O2 had vastly improved stability during oxygen evolution, although it initially exhibited higher overpotential and lower activity for OER. High stability of Sn0.5Ru0.25Ir0.25O2 was surmised to arise from nearly identical radii of ruthenium and iridium cations for those substitutions on the sublattice83 and modified electronic property due to the inhibited solid solubility of SnO2 as a wide-gap semiconductor, which leads to the formation of a metastable mixed oxide with the rutile structure.82,84 Boodts and Trasatti85 partially substituted titanium oxide in ruthenium–titanium oxide by tin oxide, thus yielding ternary oxides of Ru0.3Ti(0.7−x)SnxO2. Clearly, the addition of tin oxide to ruthenium–titanium oxide resulted in a similar electrocatalytic activity to pure ruthenium oxide, which was ascribed to the decrease in stabilizing action of titanium oxide possibly controlled by the degree of intermixing of ruthenium. It is inferred from the above results that the introduction of a third material that has similar ionic radii for lattice substitution and high corrosion-resistance in acidic media such as tantalum oxide and tin oxide into binary electrocatalysts further alters electronic and surface properties.82 This results in improved stability in long-term operation, not considerably exacerbating electrocatalytic activity originating mainly from ruthenium in a mixed valency state, although the amount of noble metal (oxides) is appreciably reduced.79 Recently, Strasser's group86 investigated platinum-containing binary and ternary electrocatalysts for OER using a combinatorial method87 and demonstrated an activity map presented in Fig. 5. Their combinatorial screening and RDE experiments showed that ruthenium-rich electrocatalysts, including Pt20Ru80, Pt20Ru60Ir10, and Pt20Ru70Pd10 are promising OER electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 4  The variation of the anode potential during an accelerated stress test of three metal oxide electrocatalysts. (1): IrO2, (2): (Sn0.5Ru0.25Ir0.25)O2, (3): (Ru0.5Ir0.5)O2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. 
 Fig. 5  Ternary composition-activity map of ternary systems of Ru–Pt–Pd and Ru–Pt–Ir. Ball size encodes OER noble meal-based activity at 1.48 V (RHE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. 
Chemical compounds based on titanium have been widely used for photochemical and electrochemical water splitting because of high stability of titanium at high anodic potentials.88–91 However, there are limited numbers of titanium alloys available for oxygen evolution because oxygen kinetics on titanium oxide is not so fast.45 Scherer et al.92 studied a polycrystalline titanium–copper alloy electrode prepared by an arc-melting procedure. A sufficiently high copper content (>33% Cu in Ti–Cu) was necessary to compensate for poor activity of titanium because excess copper leads to the formation of titanium–copper alloy without complete dissolution of copper. In terms of cost effectiveness, the loading of precious metals on the oxygen electrode should be reduced. This can be achieved by harnessing the high surface area supports that are able to increase electrocatalytic active sites on oxygen electrodes. Ma et al.93 harnessed titanium carbide-supported iridium oxide for the anode in a proton exchange membrane (PEM) WE and observed that titanium carbide increases the specific pore volume and electric charge passed through the electrocatalyst. Siracusano et al.94 prepared two iridium oxide catalysts supported on in-house and commercial titanium-suboxide (TinO2n−1). Their results demonstrated that titanium suboxide which has a high surface area and large micropores resulted in small agglomerates of iridium oxide on the support, thus providing high voltammetric charge and fast oxygen evolution kinetics. Fuentes et al.95 compared anatase and rutile titanium dioxide as stable supports for multimetallic nanoparticles. They clearly observed that iridium–ruthenium supported on anatase titanium dioxide was highly active toward OER, which was attributed to a better dispersion of nanoparticles on the support. Pak and co-workers96 developed a barium-doped titanium oxide hollow sphere (Ba/TiO2) electrocatalyst for water electrolysis. A titanium oxide hollow sphere was prepared by a template method,97,98 followed by mixing with barium chloride and additives to form a barium layer over the sphere. According to their X-ray diffraction (XRD) and cyclic voltammetry results, Ba/TiO2 contained a mixed phase of rutile TiO2 and perovskite BaTiO3 that is electrochemically active and stable in acidic media. As a result, titanium-based materials, including titanium carbide, titanium suboxide, and different types of titanium oxide have been developed to improve the dispersion of electrocatalyst nanoparticles and the electronic conductivity. In addition, one of the approaches to further enhance electronic conductivity of titanium oxide includes doping which minimizes lattice distortion.99,100 Niobium has received great attention as a suitable dopant for titanium oxide because it has nearly identical ionic radii to titanium.101 Park and Seol102 and Popov and his coworkers103 recently prepared niobium-doped titanium and showed its possibility for PEM fuel cell applications.
On the other hand, a variety of metal (oxide) compounds have been also utilized as OER electrocatalysts (or cocatalysts) to reduce overpotential for water oxidation at the photoanode in photoelectrolytic cells (which is out of the scope but worthy of a short note): (i) single metal oxides which contain iridium, ruthenium, rhodium, cobalt, and manganese oxide, (ii) binary metal oxides such as nickel–iron oxide, (iii) metal alloys (e.g., NiMoZn, CoB), and (iv) metal complexes such as divalent cobalt–phosphate complexes (Co–Pi).104 It is generally ascribed that large overpotential for OER at the photoanode readily leads to the recombination of electrons excited to the conduction band and hole in the valence band on the semiconductor rather than the charge transfer to the interface between the photoanode and electrolyte.104–106 Hence, OER electrocatalysts have been adopted to overcome sluggish oxygen kinetics at the photoanode. Iridium oxide deposition on the (oxy)nitride semiconductor, for instance, enhanced photoactivity for water oxidation and stability under photoirradiation, while facilitating charge separation in the semiconducor.107
3. Bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts in reversible fuel cells
3.1. Unsupported electrocatalysts
Bifunctional electrocatalysts for RFC applications have been developed using a combination of metallic platinum and OER electrocatalyst such as ruthenium (oxide) and iridium (oxide).33,34 Dhar108 first suggested a reversible fuel cell by fabricating a bifunctional oxygen electrode which consists of carbon backing, carbon-supported platinum, and iridium. Swette et al.30 prepared various bifunctional electrocatalysts and examined materials with single-layer and double-layer electrode architecture supported on a platinum-plated titanium mesh. The single-layer electrode was composed of a bifunctional electrocatalyst, while the double-layer electrode was composed of a platinum transition layer and a metal oxide or metal–metal oxide (i.e., Pt–MOx) layer for oxygen redox reaction. Most of the double-layer bifunctional oxygen electrodes showed better performance in both fuel cell and electrolysis modes, as compared with the single-layer ones. The activity of the bifunctional electrocatalyst on top of the platinum single-layer evaluated in electrolysis mode was in the order: Pt–IrOx > Pt–RuO2 > Pt–IrO2 > RuOx–IrOx > RhO2 > Pt–NaxPt3O4. It was inferred that performance difference results from selective electrocatalytic activity and different electrode structure in terms of water management. Mallouk and co-workers32 adopted a combinatorial approach which has been employed to select materials of interest by screening of all materials in a library.109 Specifically, catalyst arrays consisting of all combinations of five noble metals (Pt, Ru, Os, Ir, and Rh) were prepared and screened in a three-electrode cell containing indicator solution as an electrolyte with potential scan for ORR and OER activity. Several catalysts screened by the combinatorial method were then characterized physically and electrochemically. As presented in Fig. 6, they found that Pt4.5Ru4Ir0.5 is highly active for both ORR and OER activity, while the electrocatalytic activity of Pt and PtIr is high only for ORR and OER, respectively. They also observed a comparable ORR and OER activity of PtRu to that of Pt4.5Ru4Ir0.5. However, PtRu appeared to be unstable because metallic ruthenium was readily oxidized to ruthenium tetroxide in acidic media at high anodic potentials, modifying its surface morphology. Their XPS studies demonstrated that the Pt4.5Ru4Ir0.5 is in oxide form consisting of metallic platinum, iridium, and metal oxides of ruthenium and iridium. It is believed that metallic platinum mainly contributes to ORR and ruthenium oxide is responsible for OER, while a mixed oxidation state of iridium prevents the electrocatalyst from passivation during the OER, which is in agreement with the result of Kötz and Stucki76 mentioned earlier. Yim et al.46,110 tested various commercially available and in-house bifunctional electrocatalysts in the RFCs. The performance in fuel cell mode with different electrocatalysts appeared to increase in the sequence of Pt > Pt–Ir > Pt–RuOx > Pt–Ru ≈ Pt–Ru–Ir > Pt–IrOx, while Pt–Ir ≈ PtIrOx > Pt–Ru > Pt–Ru–Ir > Pt–RuOx ≈ Pt in water electrolysis mode. They also prepared platinum–iridium (Pt–Ir) electrocatalysts with different iridium contents between 0 and 50 at% and interestingly showed that the Pt–Ir electrocatalyst with 1 at% iridium considerably lowered the onset overpotential and polarization losses during water oxidation, while it made no fuel cell performance difference in comparison with that obtained for platinum black. For a mixed electrocatalyst of platinum and iridium black in RFC,42 likewise, a small amount of iridium led to high performance in fuel cell as well as electrolysis modes.
 Fig. 6  Polarization curves of oxygen electrodes in electrolysis (oxygen evolution) and fuel cell (oxygen reduction) modes for different bifunctional electrocatalysts in acid solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. 
3.2. Supported electrocatalysts
It is generally ascribed that the electrocatalyst support improves the dispersion of electrocatalyst particles, increases the electrocatalytic surface area and electronically interacts with electrocatalyst particles, leading to a substantial increase in electrocatalyst utilization.111–113 The requirements for a durable electrocatalyst support are typically to stabilize electrocatalyst particles on the support and to show corrosion resistance at anodic potentials (>1.4 V). The former is necessary to prevent electrocatalyst particles from agglomerating and dissolving into the electrolyte which results in losses in electrochemical surface area of the electrocatalyst under highly oxidizing conditions.114,115 The latter is relevant to durability and electronic conductivity of the electrode during oxygen evolution.112,116 These factors are also believed to be highly interrelated. Furthermore, support materials in bifunctional electrocatalysts should have a high surface area. Ioroi et al.31 synthesized iridium oxide powder from its colloidal precursor (i.e., iridium hydroxide hydrate, Ir(OH)3(H2O)3) by heat treatment at various temperatures. Their XRD and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) results demonstrated that iridium hydroxide hydrate is crystallized at 400 °C in air, resulting in the highest surface area in iridium oxide. With in-house prepared iridium oxide, they developed iridium oxide supported on platinum (IrO2/Pt) by deposition of the same colloidal precursor onto platinum black.117 As shown in Fig. 7a, polycrystalline iridium oxide is primarily anchored on platinum agglomerates, while discrete agglomerates of platinum and iridium oxide are found for a mixture of iridium oxide and platinum in Fig. 7b. They fabricated bifunctional oxygen electrodes using IrO2/Pt and measured polarization behavior in both fuel cell and electrolysis modes. Both IrO2/Pt and mixed electrocatalysts clearly showed much lower overpotential and higher electrocatalytic activity for water oxidation. However, the IrO2/Pt catalyst prepared using the colloidal precursor demonstrated higher OER and ORR activity per unit mass of iridium and platinum, respectively, resulting in improved round-trip energy conversion efficiency. The enhancement in RFC performance using IrO2/Pt was attributed to the fact that the IrO2/Pt has a similar pore size distribution to platinum black powder, simultaneously establishing an electronic pathway through the platinum nanoparticles interconnected with each other. They further achieved a higher round-trip efficiency in RFC by engineering oxygen electrode components (i.e., concentration of a hydrophilic/hydrophobic agent and ratio of iridium oxide and platinum) in terms of water management necessary for effective reactant and product transport to and from the electrocatalytic active sites in both electrolysis and fuel cell modes.118–120 Similarly, a platinum-supported ruthenium oxide and iridium oxide electrocatalyst (RuO2/IrO2/Pt) was also synthesized by the colloid deposition method with some modifications for RFC applications.121
 Fig. 7  TEM micrographs of (a) iridium oxide supported on platinum (IrO2/Pt) and (b) a mixture of iridium oxide and platinum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. 
In contrast to the electrocatalyst design of Ioroi and co-workers117 and Zhang et al.,121 Yao et al.122 prepared iridium oxide-supported platinum (Pt/IrO2) as a bifunctional electrocatalyst by a chemical reduction method with a surfactant. Their Pt/IrO2 electrocatalyst showed faster OER kinetics, but slower kinetics for ORR, as compared with a mixed electrocatalyst of platinum and iridium oxide. A relatively low ORR activity on Pt/IrO2 was probably due to stronger adsorption of surface oxides on the platinum surface which was verified by a positive shift of oxide adsorption–desorption peaks in a cyclic voltammogram.123 In other words, the interaction between platinum and iridium in Pt/IrO2 enhances the adsorption energy of surface hydroxide, thus blocking more active sites for oxygen reduction.124 Recently, iridium/iridium oxide nanocomposite (Ir/IrO2) as a platinum support was developed for RFC applications.125 As seen in Fig. 8, the iridium oxide surface was first modified by iridium nanoparticles to make an electronic pathway between platinum nanoparticles deposited later. Higher electrochemical surface area and stability under potential cycling between 1.2 and 1.6 V (NHE) were obtained for Pt/Ir/IrO2, as compared with Pt/IrO2. This can be explained by the fact that highly dispersed iridium nanoparticles on the surface of iridium oxide may create many metal–metal oxide junctions where most of platinum nanoparticles are stabilized, thus preventing platinum metals from agglomeration and detachment from the support.126
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of Pt/Ir/IrO2 preparation and structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. 
Non-precious metal-based supports such as titanium carbide127 and titanium dioxide91 have been examined in RFCs. Sui et al.127 prepared a platinum–iridium electrocatalyst supported on titanium carbide (Pt/Ir/TiC) with different reduction methods. Their plasma treatment128 effectively modified the valence state of platinum and iridium and produced smaller metal nanoparticles on the support, resulting in a higher electrocatalytic activity toward both ORR and OER, as compared with the Pt/Ir/TiC electrocatalyst prepared by a chemical reduction method. Popov and co-workers91 synthesized mesoporous titanium dioxide-supported platinum (Pt/TiO2) and iridium (Ir/TiO2), respectively and their physical mixture was utilized as a bifunctional electrocatalyst at the oxygen electrode. To decrease particle-to-particle electronic resistance,129 a high amount of noble metals (60 wt%) was loaded onto the support, as observed in Fig. 9. When platinum and iridium were deposited on titanium dioxide, each particle size was significantly reduced by 64% and 80% or higher, resulting in ca. a two-fold higher electrochemical surface area than platinum and iridium black electrocatalysts. Moreover, their oxygen electrode at a metal loading of 1.0 mg cm−2 exhibited an enhanced round-trip efficiency (ca. 12.4%) and durability, when compared with the unsupported electrocatalyst. On the other hand, Lee et al.130 treated the Nafion membrane with polypyrrole (PPy) where the metal precursor was able to be chemically reduced, resulting in a Pt/PPy/Nafion electrode for the bifunctional oxygen electrode. They clearly observed that polypyrrole makes platinum nanoparticles uniformly dispersed, thus increasing the electrochemical surface area and reducing platinum loading (<0.4 mg cm−2) on the oxygen electrode.
 Fig. 9  TEM micrographs of (a) TiO2, (b) Pt/TiO2, and (c) Ir/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. 
4. Perspective
It has been observed41,48 that during anodic polarization, pure metals exist as oxidized metals due to the immediate passivation. Such an oxygen layer on the metal surface is stabilized at high anodic potentials.47 Nørskov and co-workers45 theoretically studied water oxidation on rutile metal oxides in terms of thermochemistry of elementary reactions. According to their density functional theory calculation, electrocatalytic activity toward OER was explained by the binding energy of oxygen species such as O*, OH*, and OOH* on the surface of metals or metal oxides. Specifically, as depicted in Fig. 10, metal oxides (Fig. 10a) have much lower oxygen binding energy than pure metals (Fig. 10b) at the top of the activity volcano since pure metals interact with water molecules, resulting in the formation of adsorbed hydroxide and superoxy-type species (OOH) on the surface, while such interaction is relatively small for metal oxides. Notably, they pointed out that there is some space for a better material than ruthenium oxide for OER in Fig. 10a and the best electrocatalyst material would have a maximum activity for both OER and ORR at the same oxygen binding energy near the theoretical equilibrium potential (dashed line). It is thus believed that a better oxygen electrode material for technological applications may be explored and designed with such reaction descriptors for the volcano-type activity. On the other hand, it has been found that the surface local structure relevant to the stepped surface site greatly contributes to electrocatalytic activity.131,132 That is, the stepped surface site such as Pt (211) can accommodate more oxygen species (O and OH) because atomic oxygen on the (111) surface moves to the (211) surface to form superoxy-type species.132 Therefore, the utilization of more active sites by effectively modifying the surface structure as well as the binding energy of oxygen species are of great importance for the enhancement in oxygen kinetics.132
 Fig. 10  The theoretical activity of the four charge transferring steps of oxygen evolution on (a) the metal oxide surface and (b) the metal surface is depicted as a function of the oxygen binding energy. The y-axis is the activity defined as −ΔG of the different reaction steps, calculated from the linear relations: ΔG1 = ΔGHO − ΔGwater = ΔEHO + 0.35 eV, ΔG2 = ΔGO − ΔGHO = ΔEO + 0.05 eV − ΔEHO − 0.35 eV, ΔG3 = ΔGHOO − ΔGO = ΔEHOO + 0.40 eV − ΔEO − 0.05 eV, ΔG4 = ΔGO2 − ΔGHOO = 4.96 eV − ΔEHOO − 0.40 eV. The resulting volcano is indicated with dash-dotted lines and the hatched area. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. 
On the other hand, the properties of electrocatalysts prepared by a variety of methods are significantly affected by preparation conditions,43,44,133e.g., nonstoichiometry of metal oxides relevant to crystallographic defects77,79 which can be controlled by the metal precursor, calcination temperature, and solvent in the course of thermal decomposition. More specifically, ionic and electronic defects may occur due to residual impurities that remain in the lattice of metal oxides during the thermal decomposition, controlling charge transfer and distribution to and from the electrolyte.43,134–136 To decrease structural defects induced by the residue in precursor, alternatively, Mattos-Costa et al.133 prepared a metal oxide by the sol–gel method that could avoid chlorine contamination in its lattice. Hence, when a new electrocatalyst material based on theoretical calculation is proposed, a systematic and extensive approach in preparation of such a material is required to closely obtain properties predicted by the simulation.
Highly active metal oxides tend to form stable metal oxides that show vastly different chemical nature, resulting in slow oxygen evolution kinetics during anodic polarization.43 As a result, many ruthenium or iridium-based binary and ternary metal oxides have been developed to tailor the intrinsic nature of a single metal oxide. Recently, Strasser and co-workers137 synthesized bimetallic Ru–M (M = Pd, Ir, Cu, Co, Re, Cr, Ni) alloy electrocatalysts at various stoichiometries and found that the Ru60Co40 has the highest OER activity probably attributed to its hexagonal/cubic mixed phase and enhanced oxygen chemisorption by cobalt doping. For the platinum as an electrocatalyst, it is generally accepted that a transition alloying element modifies the platinum electronic structure, Pt–Pt bond distance, adsorption energy of oxidative species, and redox reaction kinetics on pure platinum.138,139 For instance, Pt3Cr (111)140 and Pt3Co (111)141 exhibited smaller lattice parameters and more d-band vacancies, resulting in higher onset potential for the formation of adsorbed hydroxide than Pt (111). Accelerated stress tests in PEM fuel cells proved that platinum alloyed with transition metal is more stable than pure platinum.112,142–144 Furthermore, electrochemical (or voltammetric) dealloying of a transition-metal-rich noble metal alloy resulted in higher electrochemical surface area and lattice contraction, thus substantially improved ORR kinetics and stability without severe surface roughening.145–147 It is expected that alloying a precious metal (e.g., ruthenium and iridium) with transition metals (which could be followed by the electrochemical dealloying process) may effectively alter chemical and structural properties of the single electrocatalyst, which improves electrocatalytic activity and durability, and considerably decreases noble metal loading on the oxygen electrode with low-cost production.
It is also suggested from the results of ternary rutile compounds that the addition of a third element, which is electrochemically stable in a wide potential range and has similar radii of the ions in the crystal lattice to ruthenium (and/or iridium) cations, into a binary transition metal–noble metal alloy may further decrease noble metal loading, possibly enhancing electrocatalytic stability in an extended WE operation.
In RFC operation, platinum in the bifunctional electrocatalyst that is primarily responsible for ORR at the oxygen electrode can be easily corroded due to high concentration of intermediate species on the surface during water electrolysis, which may lead to the platinum dissolution into the electrolyte.59,132,148 In order to mitigate platinum oxidation at high anodic potentials, platinum-based alloy electrocatalysts have been proposed with theoretical and experimental approaches.45,149–153 Adzic and co-workers149,150 have developed single metals or alloys covered by a platinum or palladium monolayer which is believed to be stabilized by underlying metals and in turn to inhibit base alloys oxidation.152 Particularly, their platinum-based electrocatalyst with a cluster of gold that has relatively low oxygen binding energy among pure metals showed negligible change in ORR activity and electrochemical surface area (ca. 4% loss) after 30000 potential cycles between 0.6 and 1.1 V (RHE) (see Fig. 11).45,151 Therefore, such skin-containing multimetallic compounds could be efficient electrocatalysts that provide high ORR activity and endure rigorously oxidizing conditions during RFC operation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Polarization curves and (b) voltammetry curves for the oxygen reduction reaction on the carbon-supported platinum with gold clusters (Au/Pt/C) on a rotating disk electrode, before and after 30000 potential cycles. (c) Polarization curves and (d) voltammetry curves for the carbon-supported platinum (Pt/C). The potential cycles were from 0.6 to 1.1 V in an oxygen-saturated acid solution. The shaded area in (d) indicates the lost Pt area after 30000 potential cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. 
Recent studies on binary and ternary electrocatalysts in RFCs34,46,110 have demonstrated that a pure ruthenium oxide at the oxygen electrode does not enhance the performance in RFCs. The reason may be related to different operating conditions between WE and RFC i.e., pure ruthenium oxide readily suffers from repeated operating mode conversions in RFCs, resulting in rapid losses of oxygen electrode property even with few potential swings, which is consistent with the results of Song et al.68 So, as mentioned before, the modifications of a pure ruthenium (oxide) electrocatalyst by alloying with transition metals or forming a core–shell structure that probably prevents underlying ruthenium (oxide) from oxidation and subsequent dissolution are worth noting in the future research.
Development of a novel electrocatalyst support is also important to overcome the cost issue in WE and RFC commercialization, because it can significantly reduce precious metal loading at the oxygen electrode while maintaining high performance. As reviewed in the oxygen evolution electrocatalysts section, several metal oxides based on titanium, tantalum, and tin were employed as excellent alloying materials with noble metals (oxides) due to substitutable cationic radii and strong corrosion resistance under harshly oxidizing conditions. Fuel cell scientists have studied a variety of electrocatalyst support materials154–167 to improve dispersion of platinum or platinum alloy nanoparticles and mitigate electrocatalyst degradation such as platinum coalescence, dissolution, and detachment from the support and demonstrated enhanced durability and even performance after long-term tests or accelerated stress tests. Several novel nanostructured support materials in PEM fuel cells can be roughly classified into the following four categories:116 (i) nanostructured and graphitized carbons such as mesoporous carbon, carbon nanotubes, and nanofibers, (ii) diamonds, (iii) metal oxides that contain tin oxides, titanium oxides, and tungsten oxides, and (iv) carbides, including titanium carbide and tungsten carbide. It is obviously believed that these materials are worthy subjects of new oxygen electrocatalysts development. Several results using above materials for WE and RFC applications have been reported.91,168,169 Duo et al.168 utilized boron-doped diamond (BDD), which has an appreciably wide potential window, very low background current, and high anodic stability,170 as an iridium oxide support for WE applications and showed that the BDD interacted with iridium oxide cluster and contributed to the formation of hydroxyl radicals,171 leading to high activity toward OER. The titanium dioxide91 or titanium carbide127 for RFC application could make electrochemically active materials highly dispersed and effectively offer a strong interaction with noble metals under both oxidizing and reducing conditions. It is thus expected that such diamonds, metal oxides or carbides as electrocatalyst supports are the leading candidates that could effectively increase electrocatalytic activity with relatively small amount of noble metals at the oxygen electrode for WE and RFC applications.
5. Summary
For several decades, the oxygen electrode has demonstrated great influence on the renewable energy cycle (i.e., renewable energy conversion to hydrogen by water electrolysis, followed by transforming hydrogen into electricity by fuel cell reactions),8,27,172–174 since the performance and durability of water electrolyzers (WEs) and reversible fuel cells (RFCs) are limited by sluggish electrochemical kinetics and severely oxidizing/reducing conditions at the oxygen electrode. With increasing interests in highly efficient and stable oxygen electrode for technological applications, numerous studies in the development and understanding of advanced electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in WEs and bifunctional electrocatalysts for both oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and OER in RFCs have been done. It is generally believed that few noble metal compounds are thermodynamically stable at low pH and high potential. Nevertheless, acid solution or proton exchange membrane has been considered as an electrolyte in WEs and RFCs because acidic media show relatively high ionic conductivity and are free from the formation of carbonate, as compared with alkaline electrolyte.
Noble metals as electrocatalysts for OER in acidic media were initially examined by the polarization technique. It was found that ruthenium or iridium showed high activity toward OER, but metallic elements were immediately passivated with short excursion to high anodic potential. On the other hand, metal oxides have received attention because the oxide layer anodically grown on the metal surface is less stable than that formed through other procedures. A thick film of ruthenium oxide on the substrate as a dimensionally stable anode in WEs was fabricated and exhibited high electrocatalytic activity, depending on adsorption of chemical species, concentration of intermediates, and morphology. However, it has been pointed out that the formation of ruthenium tetroxide by further oxidation of rutile ruthenium oxide during anodic processes significantly exacerbates kinetic losses at the oxygen electrode. In contrast, the iridium oxide film was very stable during potential cycling or potential hold near 2 V, even if it shows higher overpotential for OER than the ruthenium oxide film. High stability of iridium oxide was explained by the thermodynamic stability of iridium oxide which preferentially evolves oxygen molecules rather than being further oxidized. To obtain synergistic effects from different metal oxides, a variety of mixed metal oxides have been developed. Ruthenium–iridium oxide showed improved electronic property and suppressed the formation of ruthenium tetroxide. Alloying the above two metals with tantalum enhanced oxygen evolution kinetics and the addition of tin resulted in a metastable mixed oxide. Recently, ruthenium-rich platinum electrocatalysts and titanium (or titanium carbide)-supported electrocatalysts for OER were suggested.
Bifunctional electrocatalysts for both ORR and OER have been studied for RFC applications. The design of bifunctional electrocatalysts at the oxygen electrode is more complex because platinum as a prominent electrocatalyst for ORR is not preferred for OER due to its high overpotential necessary for water oxidation. A typical bifunctional electrocatalyst is thus composed of metallic platinum for ORR and noble metal oxide such as iridium oxide for OER. For unsupported bifunctional electrocatalysts, Pt–MOx (M = Ru, Ir, Na), bimetallic (e.g., Pt–Ir), and trimetallic (e.g., Pt4.5Ru4Ir0.5) materials have been developed and platinum with a small amount of iridium (oxide) recently appeared as a promising bifunctional electrocatalyst. On the other hand, to enhance the electrochemical surface area and electronic property of the oxygen electrode in RFCs, supported bifunctional electrocatalysts have been proposed. One of the efficient supported electrocatalysts was platinum-supported iridium oxide prepared by heat-treatment of a mixture of colloidal precursor (iridium hydroxide hydrate) and platinum black. Conversely, iridium oxide-supported platinum electrocatalysts have been prepared and demonstrated high electrocatalytic activity toward OER. However, it was observed that the surface of platinum supported on iridium oxide was sensitive to the adsorption of hydroxide during the anodic process, resulting in lower activity toward ORR than a mixed electrocatalyst of platinum and iridium oxide. Recently, the metallic iridium-decorated iridium oxide enhanced dispersion and stabilization of platinum nanoparticles on the support and non-noble metal oxide-supported bifunctional electrocatalysts (e.g., Pt/Ir/TiC, Pt/TiO2 + Ir/TiO2) demonstrated higher activity toward both ORR and OER than unsupported bifunctional electrocatalysts.
Significant advances in the development of novel electrocatalysts for the oxygen electrode have been made for WE and RFC applications. Considerable challenges still exist especially for material cost and durability. Based on the state-of-the-art technology in ORR and OER electrocatalysts, a perspective is given as follows:
(1) Thermodynamic study of electrochemical processes in terms of oxygen binding energy suggests possibilities to explore a new electrocatalyst material and structure for the oxygen electrode in WEs and RFCs.
(2) The alloying noble metal with transition metal could effectively alter material properties such as electronic structure, lattice parameter, surface chemistry, resulting in higher activity and stability with decreased material costs.
(3) The core–shell structure of platinum can be utilized for bifunctional electrocatalysts in RFCs because a skin could protect underlying multimetallic compound under harshly oxidizing conditions for an extended RFC operation.
(4) Nanostructured support materials employed in PEM fuel cells such as diamonds, metal oxides and carbides could serve as electrocatalyst supports because those materials can effectively stabilize noble metal (oxide) nanoparticles with high dispersion, which in turn increases electrocatalyst utilization and durability in WEs and RFCs.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE's) Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fuel Cell Technologies Program. PNNL is operated by Battelle for DOE under Contract DE-AC05-76L01830.
References
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. Ma and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ibrahim, A. Ilinca and J. Perron, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1221–1250 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barbir, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
K. Agbossou, R. Chahine, J. Hamelin, F. Laurencelle, A. Anouar, J. M. St-Arnaud and T. K. Bose, J. Power Sources, 2001, 96, 168–172 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Zoulias and N. Lymberopoulos, Renewable Energy, 2007, 32, 680–696 CrossRef .
M. Santarelli, M. Cali and S. Macagno, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 1571–1586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yilanci, I. Dincer and H. K. Ozturk, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2009, 35, 231–244 CrossRef CAS .
M. Santarelli and D. Pellegrino, Renewable Energy, 2005, 30, 493–510 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dunn, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 235–264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Smith, J. Power Sources, 2000, 86, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Vielstich, Fuel Cells: Modern Processes for the Electrochemical Production of Energy, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1970 Search PubMed .

          E. Gileadi, Electrode Kinetics for Chemists, Chemical Engineers, and Materials Scientists, VCH, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
A. Parthasarathy, S. Srinivasan, A. J. Appleby and C. R. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2530–2537 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .

          M. Cifrain and K. V. Kordesch, in Handbook of Fuel Cells: Fundamentals, Technology and Applications, ed. W. Vielstich, A. Lamm and H. Gasteiger, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  2003, vol. 1 Search PubMed .
F. Bidault, D. J. L. Brett, P. H. Middleton and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gulzow, J. Power Sources, 1996, 61, 99–104 CrossRef .
E. Yeager, J. Mol. Catal., 1986, 38, 5–25 CrossRef CAS .
L. Muller and L. N. Nekrasso, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1965, 9, 282–290 CrossRef .
I. K. Kapdan and F. Kargi, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2006, 38, 569–582 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724–761 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Chen and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6763–6778 CAS .
L. L. Swette and J. Giner, J. Power Sources, 1988, 22, 399–408 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Swette, A. B. Laconti and S. A. McCatty, J. Power Sources, 1994, 47, 343–351 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ioroi, N. Kitazawa, K. Yasuda, Y. Yamamoto and H. Takenaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2018–2022 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Chen, D. A. Delafuente, S. Sarangapani and T. E. Mallouk, Catal. Today, 2001, 67, 341–355 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jorissen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 23–32 CrossRef .
J. Pettersson, B. Ramsey and D. J. Harrison, Electron. Lett., 2006, 42, 1444–1446 CrossRef .
C. C. Liang and A. L. Juliard, Nature, 1965, 207, 629–630 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Markovic, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic and P. N. Ross, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 105–116 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, A. Wokaun, G. G. Scherer, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic, V. Radmilovic, N. M. Markovic and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 4181–4191 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, F. Harnisch, U. Schroerder, F. Scholz, P. Bogdanoff and I. Herrmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5193–5199 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Adzic, J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirovic, M. Shao, J. X. Wang, A. U. Nilekar, M. Mavrikakis, J. A. Valerio and F. Uribe, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 249–262 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2007, 315, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Damjanovic, A. Dey and J. O. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1966, 113, 739–746 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Jung, S. Park and B. N. Popov, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 357–361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 225–241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Yim, W. Y. Lee, Y. G. Yoon, Y. J. Sohn, G. G. Park, T. H. Yang and C. S. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 713–718 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys., 2005, 319, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Miles and M. A. Thomason, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1459–1461 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1995, 49, 331–452 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2377–2385 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gottesfeld and S. Srinivasan, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1978, 86, 89–104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mozota, M. Vukovic and B. E. Conway, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1980, 114, 153–157 CrossRef CAS .
D. Galizzio, F. Tantardi and S. Trasatti, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1974, 4, 57–67 CrossRef .
D. Galizzioli, F. Tantardini and S. Trasatti, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1975, 5, 203–214 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lodi, E. Sivieri, A. Debattisti and S. Trasatti, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1978, 8, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. M. Bockris, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 817–827 CrossRef CAS .
A. Damjanovic, A. Dey and J. O. M. Bockris, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 791–814 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Conway and M. Salomon, Electrochim. Acta, 1964, 9, 1599–1615 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Deltombe, N. de Zoubov and M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, NACE, Houston,  1974 Search PubMed .
R. Kötz, S. Stucki, D. Scherson and D. M. Kolb, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 172, 211–219 CrossRef .
N. Mamaca, E. Mayousse, S. Arrii-Clacens, T. W. Napporn, K. Servat, N. Guillet and K. B. Kokoh, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 376–380 CrossRef .
C. E. Dullmann, B. Eichler, R. Eichler, H. W. Gaggeler and A. Turler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6679–6684 CrossRef .
J. H. Han, S. W. Lee, S. K. Kim, S. Han, W. Lee and C. S. Hwang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1407–1414 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. H. Chan, C. C. Takoudis and M. J. Weaver, J. Catal., 1997, 172, 336–345 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Rogers, R. D. Shannon, A. W. Sleight and J. L. Gillson, Inorg. Chem., 1969, 8, 841–849 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Goldberg and L. G. Hepler, Chem. Rev., 1968, 68, 229–252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hackwood, L. M. Schiavone, W. C. Dautremontsmith and G. Beni, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 2569–2573 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, H. Zhang, X. Ma, Z. Shao, R. T. Baker and B. Yi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4955–4961 CrossRef CAS .
E. Slavcheva, I. Radev, S. Bliznakov, G. Topalov, P. Andreev and E. Budevski, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3889–3894 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardizzone, A. Carugati and S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1981, 126, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kötz, H. Neff and S. Stucki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 72–77 CrossRef .
J. D. E. McIntyre, W. F. Peck and S. Nakahara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 1264–1268 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Kreuer, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 610–641 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Iles and M. E. A. Casale, Platinum Met. Rev., 1967, 11, 126–129 CAS .
C. Angelinetta, S. Trasatti, L. D. Atanasoska and R. T. Atanasoski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 214, 535–546 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kötz and S. Stucki, Electrochim. Acta, 1986, 31, 1311–1316 CrossRef .
H. Over, Y. D. Kim, A. P. Seitsonen, S. Wendt, E. Lundgren, M. Schmid, P. Varga, A. Morgante and G. Ertl, Science, 2000, 287, 1474–1476 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Fan, J. Wang, K. Jacobi and G. Ertl, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 10058–10062 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Yeo, J. Orehotsky, W. Visscher and S. Srinivasan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1900–1904 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kötz and S. Stucki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 103–107 CrossRef .
R. Vigano, J. Taraszewska, A. Daghetti and S. Trasatti, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1985, 182, 203–209 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hutchings, K. Muller, F. Kötz and S. Stucki, J. Mater. Sci., 1984, 19, 3987–3994 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon and C. T. Prewitt, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1969, 25, 925–946 CrossRef CAS .
E. N. Balko and C. R. Davidson, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1980, 42, 1778–1781 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. C. Boodts and S. Trasatti, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 3784–3789 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Neyerlin, G. Bugosh, R. Forgie, Z. Liu and P. Strasser, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B363–B369 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jandeleit, D. J. Schaefer, T. S. Powers, H. W. Turner and W. H. Weinberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 2495–2532 CrossRef .
M. S. Wrighton, D. S. Ginley, P. T. Wolczanski, A. B. Ellis, D. L. Morse and A. Linz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1975, 72, 1518–1522 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2356–2364 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ye, J. Li, X. Wang, T. Wang, S. Li, H. Wei, Q. Li and E. Christensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8049–8055 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Huang, P. Ganesan, H.-Y. Jung and B. N. Popov, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 23–29 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Scherer, P. Bruesch, H. Devantay, K. Muller and S. Stucki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1336–1342 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. Sui and Y. Zhai, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 470–477 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siracusano, V. Baglio, C. D'Urso, V. Antonucci and A. S. Arico, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 6292–6299 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Fuentes, J. Farell and J. W. Weidner, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, E5–E7 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Son, J. Chattopadhyay and D. Pak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 420–427 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Li and Z. K. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2004, 58, 2768–2771 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chattopadhyay, H. R. Kim, S. B. Moon and D. Pak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 3270–3280 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mardare and P. Hones, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1999, 68, 42–47 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, Thin Solid Films, 1999, 346, 73–81 CrossRef CAS .
J. Arbiol, J. Cerda, G. Dezanneau, A. Cirera, F. Peiro, A. Cornet and J. R. Morante, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 853–861 CrossRef CAS .
K.-W. Park and K.-S. Seol, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2256–2260 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Huang, P. Ganesan and B. N. Popov, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 96, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shen and S. S. Mao, J. Nanophotonics, 2012, 1, 31–50 Search PubMed .
P. D. Tran, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 727–747 CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11828–11829 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Dhar, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1993, 23, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Senkan, Nature, 1998, 394, 350–353 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Yim, G. G. Park, Y. J. Sohn, W. Y. Lee, Y. G. Yoon, T. H. Yang, S. Um, S. P. Yu and C. S. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 1345–1350 CrossRef CAS .
P. Costamagna and S. Srinivasan, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 242–252 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D. Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T. Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyatake, M. Hori, K. Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda, K.-i. Kimijima and N. Iwashita, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3904–3951 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 558–566 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Ferreira, G. J. la O', Y. Shao-Horn, D. Morgan, R. Makharia, S. Kocha and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2256–A2271 CrossRef .
Y. Shao-Horn, W. C. Sheng, S. Chen, P. J. Ferreira, E. F. Holby and D. Morgan, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 285–305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 46–59 RSC .
T. Ioroi, N. Kitazawa, K. Yasuda, Y. Yamamoto and H. Takenaka, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 1179–1183 CrossRef CAS .
P. Costamagna and S. Srinivasan, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 253–269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and B. N. Popov, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3473–3479 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J.-W. Lee and B. N. Popov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 5850–5865 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Wang, N. Wan and Z. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 400–404 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao, J. Yang, J. Wang and Y. Nuli, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Nørskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 10240–10246 CrossRef CAS .
F.-D. Kong, S. Zhang, G.-P. Yin, Z.-B. Wang, C.-Y. Du, G.-Y. Chen and N. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Mei, Z. Nie, D. Wang, C. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, S. Park, I. A. Aksay, Y. Lin, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sui, L. Ma and Y. Zhai, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5416–5422 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zou, Y.-p. Zhang and C.-J. Liu, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 11388–11394 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hayden, D. V. Malevich and D. Pletcher, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 395–399 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Lee, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Park, Y. G. Joe and T. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 131, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Fang and Z.-P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9765–9772 CAS .
Y. Fang and Z. Liu, Sci. China: Chem., 2010, 53, 543–552 CrossRef CAS .
F. I. Mattos-Costa, P. de Lima-Neto, S. S. Machado and L. A. Avaca, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 1515–1523 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 142–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bojinov, G. Fabricius, T. Laitinen, K. Makela, T. Saario and G. Sundholm, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2029–2048 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yokokawa, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 581–610 CrossRef CAS .
R. Forgie, G. Bugosh, K. C. Neyerlin, Z. Liu and P. Strasser, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, B36–D39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukerjee, S. Srinivasan, M. P. Soriaga and J. McBreen, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 4577–4589 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukerjee, S. Srinivasan, M. P. Soriaga and J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1409–1422 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roques and A. B. Anderson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, E340–E347 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roques, A. B. Anderson, V. S. Murthi and S. Mukerjee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, E193–E199 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Colon-Mercado, H. Kim and B. N. Popov, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 795–799 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Colon-Mercado and B. N. Popov, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 253–263 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, J. R. C. Salgado and E. R. Gonzalez, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 957–968 CrossRef CAS .
R. Srivastava, P. Mani, N. Hahn and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8988–8991 CrossRef .
P. Mani, R. Srivastava and P. Strasser, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2770–2778 CAS .
P. Mani, R. Srivastava and P. Strasser, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 666–673 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Lee, Corrosion, 1981, 37, 467–481 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, F. H. B. Lima, M. H. Shao, K. Sasaki, J. X. Wang, J. Hanson and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22701–22704 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirovic, Y. Xu, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2132–2135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, E. Sutter and R. R. Adzic, Science, 2007, 315, 220–222 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4932–4939 CAS .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Gao, T. Arunagiri, J. J. Chen, P. Goodwill, O. Chyan, J. Perez and D. Golden, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3495–3500 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, S. J. Choi, I. Oh, J. Kwak, Z. Liu, O. Terasaki and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2001, 412, 169–172 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Bessel, K. Laubernds, N. M. Rodriguez and R. T. K. Baker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 1115–1118 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Li, C. H. Liang, W. J. Zhou, J. S. Qiu, Z. H. Zhou, G. Q. Sun and Q. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6292–6299 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. Waje, X. Wang, J. M. Tang, R. C. Haddon and Y. S. Yan, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 345–348 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ganesan and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6557–6560 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chhina, S. Campbell and O. Kesler, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 893–900 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhong, H. M. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. M. Liang, J. W. Hu and B. L. Yi, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 707–712 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Saha, R. Li, M. Cai and X. Sun, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, B130–B133 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Tada, Y. Yamamoto, K. Matsutani, K. Hayakawa and T. Namai, in Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells 8, Pts 1 and 2, ed. T. Fuller, K. Shinohara, V. Ramani, P. Shirvanian, H. Uchida, S. Cleghorn, M. Inaba, S. Mitsushima, P. Strasser, H. Nakagawa, H. A. Gasteiger, T. Zawodzinski and C. Lamy,  2008, vol. 16, pp. 215–224 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, J. Sui, G. Yin and Y. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 79, 89–99 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, D. Li, C. Dai, D. Wang and N. Li, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 3566–3575 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Huang, P. Ganesan, S. Park and B. N. Popov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13898–13899 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, S.-Y. Huang and B. N. Popov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1163–B1172 CrossRef CAS .
I. Duo, P. A. Michaud, W. Haenni, A. Perret and C. Comninellis, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 325–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and G. M. Swain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E24–E32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Panizza and G. Cerisola, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 191–199 CrossRef CAS .
G. Foti, D. Gandini, C. Comninellis, A. Perret and W. Haenni, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 228–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1995, 20, 835–844 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granovskii, I. Dincer and M. A. Rosen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Deshmukh and R. F. Boehm, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 2301–2330 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article was submitted as part of a special collection on Catalysis for Clean Energy.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Sehkyu Park	Dr Sehkyu Park received his PhD in Chemical Engineering at University of South Carolina in 2008. He is a postdoctoral research associate in Chemical & Material Sciences Division at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. His research interest includes energy materials and nanostructured electrodes for fuel cells and rechargeable batteries. He has authored more than 20 peer reviewed publications.
Yuyan Shao	Dr Yuyan Shao is a Senior Scientist at the Chemical & Materials Sciences Division of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. His research is focused on the fundamental study and high-performance functional materials for electrochemical energy conversion and storage, including fuel cells, metal-air batteries, lithium/sodium batteries, redox flow batteries, supercapacitors, etc. He has published over 60 journal papers.
Jun Liu	Dr Jun Liu is a Laboratory Fellow at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, and leader for the Transformational Materials Science Initiative. Dr Liu's main research interest includes synthesis of functional nanomaterials for energy storage, catalysis, environmental separation and health care. He has received an R&D 100 Award, two BES Awards for Significant Impact on DOE Missions, and was named 2007 Distinguished Inventor of Battelle. Dr Liu is an AAAS Fellow and MRS Fellow. He has over 270 publications.
Yong Wang	Dr Yong Wang is the Voiland Distinguished Professor in Chemical Engineering at Washington State University, and a Laboratory Fellow/Associated Director of Institute for Integrated Catalysis at PNNL. He is best known for his leadership in the development of novel catalytic materials and reaction engineering for the conversion of fossil and biomass feedstocks. He has received three R&D 100 awards, two PNNL Inventor of the Year awards, Asian American Engineer of the Year Award, and Presidential Green Chemistry Award. Dr Wang is an AAAS Fellow and ACS Fellow. He has authored more than 150 peer reviewed publications and holds 81 issued US patents.

Broader context
Hydrogen is an efficient energy carrier to store renewable energy through water electrolysis and generate electricity via fuel cell reactions. The oxygen electrode plays a crucial role in performance and lifetime of water electrolyzers (WEs) and reversible (or regenerative) fuel cells (RFCs) due to its slow electrochemical processes under rigorously oxidizing or reducing environments. Much effort has thus been dedicated to develop efficient and stable oxygen evolution electrocatalysts and bifunctional electrocatalysts at low pH and a wide range of potential, resulting in significant improvement of the oxygen electrode performance and durability. However, even though there have been outstanding achievements in the development of oxygen electrocatalysts, material cost and durability still remain as main challenges. This article reviews a variety of electrocatalysts for the oxygen electrode in acid electrolyte for WE and RFC applications and provides a perspective based on current state-of-the-art technology.

Anode: 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−; E0 = 1.229 V (SHE)	(1)
Cathode: 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2; E0 = 0.000 V (SHE)	(2)
Overall: 2H2O → O2 + 2H2; E0 = 1.229 V	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Scheme that shows water electrolysis and fuel cell reactions.	 
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O; E0 = 1.229 V (SHE)	(4)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2; E0 = 0.695 V (SHE)	(5)
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O; E0 = 1.770 V (SHE)	(6)
2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2	(7)
S–H2O2 → H2O + S–O	(8)
S–O + 2H+ + 2e− → S + H2O	(9)
S + H2O → S–OH + H+ + e	(10)
S–OH → S–O + H+ + e	(11)
S–OH + S–OH → S–O + S–H2O	(12)
S–O + S–O → O2 + 2S	(13)
RuO2 + H2O → RuO4 + 4H+ + 4e−	(14)

 	Fig. 2  Cyclic voltammograms of various electrocatalysts (a) Ru, (b) Ir, (c) RuO2, (d) IrO2, and (e) Ru0.5Ir0.5O2 during potential cycles between 0 and 1.2 V (SCE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 3  Model for charge storage and oxygen evolution on iridium electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 4  The variation of the anode potential during an accelerated stress test of three metal oxide electrocatalysts. (1): IrO2, (2): (Sn0.5Ru0.25Ir0.25)O2, (3): (Ru0.5Ir0.5)O2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82.	 

 	Fig. 5  Ternary composition-activity map of ternary systems of Ru–Pt–Pd and Ru–Pt–Ir. Ball size encodes OER noble meal-based activity at 1.48 V (RHE). Reproduced with permission from ref. 86.	 

 	Fig. 6  Polarization curves of oxygen electrodes in electrolysis (oxygen evolution) and fuel cell (oxygen reduction) modes for different bifunctional electrocatalysts in acid solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM micrographs of (a) iridium oxide supported on platinum (IrO2/Pt) and (b) a mixture of iridium oxide and platinum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of Pt/Ir/IrO2 preparation and structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM micrographs of (a) TiO2, (b) Pt/TiO2, and (c) Ir/TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 10  The theoretical activity of the four charge transferring steps of oxygen evolution on (a) the metal oxide surface and (b) the metal surface is depicted as a function of the oxygen binding energy. The y-axis is the activity defined as −ΔG of the different reaction steps, calculated from the linear relations: ΔG1 = ΔGHO − ΔGwater = ΔEHO + 0.35 eV, ΔG2 = ΔGO − ΔGHO = ΔEO + 0.05 eV − ΔEHO − 0.35 eV, ΔG3 = ΔGHOO − ΔGO = ΔEHOO + 0.40 eV − ΔEO − 0.05 eV, ΔG4 = ΔGO2 − ΔGHOO = 4.96 eV − ΔEHOO − 0.40 eV. The resulting volcano is indicated with dash-dotted lines and the hatched area. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Polarization curves and (b) voltammetry curves for the oxygen reduction reaction on the carbon-supported platinum with gold clusters (Au/Pt/C) on a rotating disk electrode, before and after 30000 potential cycles. (c) Polarization curves and (d) voltammetry curves for the carbon-supported platinum (Pt/C). The potential cycles were from 0.6 to 1.1 V in an oxygen-saturated acid solution. The shaded area in (d) indicates the lost Pt area after 30000 potential cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151.	 
Footnote
† This article was submitted as part of a special collection on Catalysis for Clean Energy.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
