Emerging new-generation hybrids based on covalent organic frameworks for industrial applications  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NJ00609F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NJ00609F
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 7014-7046Emerging new-generation hybrids based on covalent organic frameworks for industrial applications

        
          
            Shadpour 
            Mallakpour
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Elham 
            Azadi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chaudhery Mustansar 
            Hussain
          
          
        
      b
aOrganic Polymer Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, 84156-83111, Islamic Republic of Iran. E-mail: mallak@iut.ac.ir; mallak777@yahoo.com;  Fax: +98-31-3391-2350;   Tel: +98-31-3391-3267
bDepartment of Chemistry and Environmental Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
Received 
      5th February 2021
    , Accepted 16th March 2021First published on 17th March 2021AbstractCovalent organic frameworks (COFs) are innovative and remarkable crystalline/porous macrocyclic materials that are composed of purely organic building blocks with strong covalent linkages between light atoms. These newly developed crystals with tailor-made constructions have attracted widespread attention due to low density, promising stabilities, great surface area, ordered and regular porous networks, unique functionalities, as well as proper crystallinity. Impressively, in comparison with other giant molecules, these materials are synthetically manageable and fully organizationally pre-designable. The unique features have permitted COFs to be advanced in combination with other materials such as polymeric, metallic, and carbonaceous materials for designing and discovering novel promising systems in numerous utilizations. Herein, this review highlights the advancement of COF hybrid-based materials for diverse industrial applications. First, a summary of the latest achievements of COFs in various fields is presented, and then hybrids of these materials and their unique applications are considered.
Shadpour Mallakpour
Professor Shadpour Mallakpour, an organic polymer chemist, graduated from the Chemistry Department, University of Florida (UF), Gainesville, Florida, USA, in 1984. He spent two years as a post-doctoral fellow at UF. He joined the Department of Chemistry, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Iran, in 1986. He held several positions, such as the Chairman of the Department of Chemistry and Deputy of Research in the Department of Chemistry at IUT. From 1994-1995 he worked as a visiting professor at the University of Mainz, Germany, and from 2003-2004 as a visiting professor at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. He has published more than 850 journal papers and more than 400 conference papers and has received more than 30 awards. The most important award to him was being selected as the first laureate of fundamental research at the 21st Khwarizmi International Awards in 2008. He is listed in the Top 1% of Scientists in Chemistry in ISI Essential Science Indicators since 2003. He has also been listed in the Top 2% of Scientists in polymers in 2020. He was selected as an academic guest at the 59th Meeting of Nobel Prize Winners in Chemistry, 2009, at Lindau, Germany. He has presented many lectures as an invited or keynote speaker in different national and international conferences or universities. He has been a member of organizing and scientific committees for many national and international conferences. He has also been the chairperson of many national and international meetings. In recent years, he has focused on the preparation and characterization of polymer-based nanocomposites to be used as bioactive materials, as well as adsorbents and photocatalysts for remediation technology.
Elham Azadi
Elham Azadi received her BSc in Chemistry in 2011. She also received her MSc in Organic Polymer Chemistry in 2014 from Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran. Currently, she is a PhD student in organic polymer chemistry at IUT. Her research interests include biomaterials, high-performance polymer–inorganic nanocomposites, and metal oxide NPs and the removal of hazardous pollutants.
Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain
Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain, PhD is an Adjunct Professor, Academic Advisor, and Director of Chemistry and EVSc Labs in the Department of Chemistry and Environmental Sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark, New Jersey, USA. His research is focused on the applications of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Environmental Management, Analytical Chemistry in various industries. Dr Hussain is the author of numerous papers in peer-reviewed journals. He is also a prolific author and editor of several scientific monographs and handbooks in his research areas published with ELSEVIER, Royal Society of Chemistry, John Wiley & sons, CRC, Springer, etc.
Introduction
Covalent bonds, which can be formed as a result of different types of interactions, are very diverse and strong. These bonds bind atoms together to form molecules, and with more connections and links among molecules, they form giant covalent structures. The high strength of covalent bonds results in the stability of covalently networked solids. The chemistry of connecting building blocks through strong covalent bonds for the creation of extended crystalline constructions with reticular chemistry generated a novel class of porous materials, namely, covalent organic frameworks (COFs). In the chemistry of COFs, through condensation reactions, small molecular byproducts such as H2O or HCl are produced. COF materials were first manufactured through the self-condensation reaction of boronic acids for the production of boroxine anhydride-based linkages in the form of B3O3 rings. Due to advances in the synthetic methods of these molecules with high architecture and uniformity and controlled chemistry, it is now possible to achieve precise large molecules with two- as well as three-dimensional (2D, 3D) construction along with desirable features.1–9 Building blocks can create 2D and 3D COFs. For the preparation of 2D COFs, which are a major family of COFs, planar building units are required, where diverse topologies (isotropic and anisotropic topologies) have been developed. For designing 3D COFs, at least one of the building units has Td or orthogonal geometry.10–17 As fascinating materials with crystalline/porous construction, COFs, have attracted lot of consideration owing to their excellent characteristics including low density (being lightweight due to light H, B, C, N, as well as O elements), designable and controllable constructions, strong linkages, diverse active sites, large surface area, chemical stability, being thermally stable (250–450 °C, owing to covalent links, crystallinity, and strong aromatic organizations,) and porosity. Over the past decade, an amazing revolution has taken place in the field of COFs; with the passage of time and the advancement of science, their applications have expanded and can be observed in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Number of publications on the Scopus website with the keywords “covalent organic framework” in 2020. 
The framework's geometry in the lattice of the prepared COF is pre-determined via the connectivity as well as the geometry of the linkers.3,18,19 Linkage chemistry is a key factor and the morphology and organization of COFs are mainly related to the types of building monomers employed. The fabrication method is another important factor that affects the morphology. To date, numerous approaches have been employed to fabricate COFs such as solvothermal, sonochemical, mechanochemical, microwave, interfacial, ionothermal, and production in ambient conditions, among which the solvothermal approaches have been applied for most of COFs. In these processes, monomers with diverse geometries (tetragonal, hexagonal, trigonal, and kagome) have been used for designing and manufacturing COFs.10,12
Since the advent of this material, COF's chemistry is constantly evolving, and it has progressed rapidly over time. The development of these new macrocyclic networks is encouraging and has increased interest in various areas. Numerous applications of these materials have been reported and several reviews have been written in this regard4,6,10–12 This section describes many of the latest achievements and uses of COFs that have been reported since 2020 (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The latest applications of COF materials in 2020. 
Since COFs are very promising candidates in the preparation of diverse membranes for water treatment, in a study by Wang et al., with the addition of hydrophilic nano-sheets of COFs containing amino groups to polysulfonamide, a nanofiltration membrane with a positive charge was fabricated for acid wastewater comprised of dangerous metal ions.20 Water molecules passed through the suitable pore size successfully and rapidly, and excellent rejection (>90%) of metal salts such as MgCl2 and CaCl2 was observed. Controlling the release of drugs into the body is an important issue for controlling side effects. Alanagh et al. prepared a COF membrane for constantly releasing peptides. The biocompatibility of the prepared membranes was confirmed, and good behavior was observed. This membrane also showed good stability in aqueous environments.21 In another study, Guo et al. fabricated polyethylene glycol-COFs photoresponsive membrane with outstanding mechanical features and great energy conversion productivity for use as smart materials.22 Also, Di et al. designed COF-based proton permselective membranes for redox flow batteries. This research team demonstrated the feasibility of COFs for the construction of membranes in acid supporting redox flow batteries.23
In a study by Wang et al., single-atom catalysts with stability, multi-functionality, and recyclability were prepared by embedding transition-metal atoms (from Sc to Zn) into COFs via functional groups for effective oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions.24 The synergism among atoms and COFs (p–d hybridization) controlled the catalytic performances and promising electrocatalytic activity was observed. In a similar study, COFs were modified with a single atom for the preparation of electrocatalysts for the O2 reduction reaction.25 In this work, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, as well as Cu as single atoms were doped with COFs. Based on good results from research, COFs are good supports for single-atom catalysts.
Kumar et al. prepared a flexible 3D imine-based COF with high robustness and a ninefold interpenetrated diamondoid network as a switchable adsorbent for CO2 uptake.26 This product with a porous construction showed the potential for long-term use so that after several cycles of CO2 uptake, a minimal decrease in uptake-release was observed. Due to intramolecular channels and high surface area, COFs are good materials for adsorption. In this regard, Chen et al. manufactured imine-based COFs through a microwave-supported solvothermal method, with the building units comprising –F groups in skeletons (for the promotion of the stability as well as hydrophobicity of the resultant COFs) for application in oil/water separation.27 The superhydrophobicity of COF is due to the F-comprising groups with low surface energy. The resultant COF was tested to adsorb various oils, which showed outstanding adsorption capacity. After assembling COF powder in a handleable device, high efficiency (99.5%) and separation speed were observed for water-in-oil emulsions.
Like MOFs, COFs are used in drug delivery and have a high drug loading capacity. Compared to MOFs, although some properties such as biodegradability and magnetism are insufficient, they have unique advantages in biological utilization. Studies show that silver has limited biocompatibility due to its metallic nature, but copper is a light element and has no limitations in this regard. Also, compared to silver, it forms stronger bonds and also has better stability in physiological environments. Therefore, COFs are a good option for drug delivery. In this regard, Jia et al. functionalized a COF using 8-hydroxyquinoline with good features such as pH sensitivity, structure stability, outstanding dispersibility in physiological media, and appropriate pore size and used it as a nano-carrier for the delivery of the drug 5-fluorouracil.28 There was a significant loading capacity due to the incorporation of quinoline groups. With the variation of pH, the modified COF displayed controlled release because of the pH sensitivity. Since chiral drugs are important for our health, Ma et al. fabricated a homochiral COF catalyst in a simplistic, green strategy for the asymmetric production of intermediates such as the drug (S)-Clopidogrel. This process was successful, and good outcomes were achieved.29
In an investigation by Sun and co-workers, nanosized COFs with robust stability were fabricated for cancer phototherapy. In this study, by employing BSA protein (bovine serum albumin) with photothermal and photodynamic performance under laser irradiation, a homogeneous and photostable porphyrin-based COF was developed. In vitro and in vivo experiments showed outstanding biocompatibility as well as the phototherapy influence of the product. Overall, the developed protein-assisted COF showed good potential for biomedical utilization.30 In another study, COF was prepared and functionalized with pSC4/Au and horseradish peroxidase. A New COFs-based nanoprobe was designed for the detection of exosomes derived from colorectal cancer. The high porosity of the developed COFs caused excellent sensitivity and a high signal.31
With the advancement of science and the industrialization of societies, pollutants in the environment are increasing, which poses serious risks to the health of living organisms. As such, researchers around the world are looking for ways to reduce and eliminate these environmental pollutants. So far, various materials have been used in this regard, such as polymeric hybrids,32,33 MOFs,34 metal oxides,35,36 layered double hydroxides,37 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),38,39 and so on.40 Currently, COFs have gained much consideration in the remediation industry for the removal of heavy metals or organic pollutants and environmental protection. These materials have photocatalytic features owing to extensive light-harvesting capability, porosity, and robust π–π interactions in the structure; they are also suitable supports for semiconducting materials. In a work by Khaing, a COF was manufactured with MoS2 in a hydrothermal process and the photocatalytic performance was checked in the degradation of a dye (rhodamine B) and drug (tetracycline).41 The outcomes showed remarkably improved photocatalytic efficacy. Zhong et al. fabricated magnetic COF for the removal of heavy metal ions Cr(VI) and bisphenol A from wastewater. This adsorbent displayed admirable sorption capacity for Cr(VI) ions and bisphenol A through π–π interactions and hydrogen-bonding.42 In another study, benzimidazole-based COFs were synthesized for the removal of toxic dye (methylene blue) from wastewater. The fabricated COF showed high surface area and thermally stability. The maximum adsorption capacity for the elimination of dye was 63.29 mg g−1 (contact time: 40 min and pH: 6).43
Materials based on aggregation-induced emission luminogens (AIEgens) have extensive uses and have attracted widespread attention. Ding et al. prepared an AIEgen-based 3D COF with high microporosity and surface area 1084 m2 g−1. It was covered on a light-emitting diode (LED) and white LEDs with great stability were obtained.44 In another study, a very effective recipient for Li–S batteries was prepared by COF comprising building units with long π-conjugates.45 COF provided a nano-platform for conversion Li–S and a great channel for the acceleration of electron transmission through a conjugated construction.
COF materials-based films are promising candidates for electronic applications so Sun et al. designed and fabricated memory devices based on the preparation of crystalline polyimide COF with surface roughness on the glass substrate through the solvothermal process.46 The prepared device showed resistive switching and memory behavior at certain voltages, which were related to intramolecular charge transfers in a well-ordered donor/acceptor organization. 3D printing materials can also be prepared via COF materials. For example, Zhang et al. prepared 3D-printed COF monoliths using imine incorporation as well as β-ketoenamine.47
Due to the properties and applications of these materials, COFs can be used along with various compounds such as polymers like polysaccharides, metals/metal oxides nanoparticles, as well as carbon materials, and with the help of the synergistic effect of COFs and other components, excellent materials with properties and applications can be produced. So far, different hybrids of this material have been widely expanded and used in diverse areas. For example, in 2020,48 a nanocomposite based on chitosan/COF/Fe3O4 was successfully prepared and used as a recoverable catalyst for the preparation of biologically active materials through the Hantzsch reaction. Zheng et al. prepared Fe3O4/MOF and encapsulated it in a triazine-based COF matrix for the photodegradation of Malachite Green and Congo Red dyes.49 Gao et al. fabricated a metal-incorporated COF for effective oxygen evolution reactions.50 In another study, a nanocomposite based on COF and CNTs was fabricated and applied as a membrane for molecule separation.51 Li et al. successfully extracted and determined organophosphorus pesticides in vegetables by employing an Fe3O4/COF nanocomposite.52 Hence, based on this information and studies on COF materials, in this review, COF hybrids have been made in different categories. This review is a good resource for those interested in information on COFs.
Polymeric combinations of COFs
Synthetic polymers
In recent years, the preparation of polymeric hybrid membranes for molecular separation has attracted the attention of researchers. So far, various porous materials have been used as fillers in the preparation of these membranes, such as MOFs, zeolites, CNTs, and so on. Although significant advances have been made in the use of MOFs in the preparation of these polymeric membranes, they are often associated with polymer compatibility problems and cause defects in composite membranes. Therefore, researchers are looking to use completely organic, crystalline, porous materials with high chemical stability to introduce the polymer membranes as fillers. Due to their fully organic nature, COF compounds are better compatible with polymer matrices for preparing membranes. These compounds contain strong linkages, crystallinity, good porosity, and lightweight elements. Membranes based on COFs can be used for molecular separation. In this regard, a research team used these materials as an active filler to prepare polymeric membranes and investigated their use to separate gases such as CO2/N2 and CO2/CH4.53 In this study, polybenzimidazoles were applied as the polymeric matrix due to their outstanding thermochemical stability as well as great mechanical features at high temperatures. 2D COFs were prepared and inserted into the matrix. For the preparation of COFs and polymeric composites, at first, 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp) and aromatic diamines [p-phenylenediamine (Pa-1) for TpPa-1 and benzidine for TpBD] (Fig. 3a) along with mesitylene, dioxane, and acetic acid were placed in a Pyrex tube. After sonication to obtain a homogeneous dispersion, the tube was degassed and placed at 120 °C for 72 h, then the attained product was washed and dried (80% yield). In the next step, hybrid membranes of polybenzimidazoles and COFs were organized through the solution casting technique (Fig. 3b). Based on the outcomes, the manufactured membranes were reproducible, extremely flexible (Fig. 3c), and showed thermal as well as chemical stability, and good permeability of gases. Generally, the findings determined a versatile method of organizing chemically stable hybrid membranes based on COFs in gas/liquid separation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representations of the synthesis of COFs and their packing models indicating the pore apertures and stacking distances. (b) Overview of the solution-casting method for COF@PBI-BuI hybrid membrane fabrication. (c) Digital photographs showing the flexibility of TpPa-1 and TpBD(50)@PBI-BuI hybrid membranes.53 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
As mentioned above, for improving the separation behavior of membranes, the compatibility of the filler and polymer is a critical factor for COFs with a satisfactory affinity for the polymeric matrix, and to develop the compatibility of the filler/polymer interface. Cao et al. inserted highly compatible COFs into a poly(vinylamine) matrix for the enhancement of the performance of the membrane.54 At first, using the nucleophilic reaction of 1,3,5-triformylbenzene and 1,4-diaminobenzene, an imine-based COF was attained, and then added (in 10 wt%) to poly(vinylamine) solution (3.0 wt%) and stirred at 25 °C. Through casting this solution on polysulfone membrane, the mixed membrane was prepared and used to separate CO2/H2. The diffusivity and adsorption of CO2 remarkably enhanced the gas separation behavior of poly(vinylamine)/COF. The membrane containing 10 wt% COF showed a CO2/H2 selectivity of 15 and CO2 permeance of 396 GPU at 0.15 MPa. In a study by Duong et al., a 2D carboxyl-functionalized COF was prepared via the microwave method and various concentrations (0–0.8 wt%) were used as nano-fillers in a polyacrylonitrile matrix to manufacture an ultrafiltration membrane.55 The effects of COF content on several factors including morphology, mechanical features, and separation performance were investigated. Considering the outcomes, polyacrylonitrile/COF membranes with 0.8 wt% COF showed good mechanical and thermal features, high water flux, and fouling resistance. In comparison with a pure polyacrylonitrile membrane that had poor protein rejection (65% and 3.5% for γ-globulin and bovine serum albumin), the polyacrylonitrile/COF membranes including 0.8 wt% COF showed 99.4% and 81.9% rejection for γ-globulin and bovine serum albumin, respectively.
In another study, for further improving the permeability and selectivity of polyimide membranes toward N2 and O2, COFs were blended with them.56 In this work, through directly heating (in a tubular oven at 335 °C) a mixture of melamine, as a cheap tri-amine, and biphenyltetracarboxylic dianhydride, imide-linked COFs with a yield of 68 wt% and surface area 3.28 m2 g−1 were successfully manufactured in 100 minutes. After blending the COFs with polyimide, membranes were obtained. The influence of the amount of COF on selectivity and permeability was examined. The COF acted as gas channels for the permeation of N2 and O2 and provided an inverse perm-selective feature with upper N2 permeability.
The membrane performance is estimated mainly through the selectivity and permeability of gases, where permeability is determined by the mobility of polymeric chains as well as interchain spacing, and selectivity is determined via chain rigidity. The high rigidity of polyimide chains confirms respectable selectivity; nevertheless, the small chain spacing and mobility limit the permeation of gases. The non-uniform dispersion of fillers and the fillers/polymer interfacial gap have an important role in membrane performance. For polyimide membranes, Schiff base network-type COFs are a good choice due to amino groups and micropores as well as the compatibility of the COF/polyimide. In an investigation by Liu,57 by the solvothermal technique and employing melamine/terephthalaldehyde monomers and DMSO, COF nanoparticles were obtained at 180 °C for 10 h in the oven. By incorporating the as-prepared COFs into polyimide, the composite membranes were gained for CO2/CH4 separation. The outcomes specified the good distribution of COF and the great thermal stability of the composite. Within 5 wt% loadings of COF, the selectivity of CO2/CH4 was developed (48.7%) and CO2 permeability was enhanced (106.4%) owing to the high porosity of Schiff base network-type COFs, proper compatibility with polyimide, and particular adsorption to CO2. Cheng et al. prepared 3D COF fillers, using tetra-(4-anilyl)methane and terephthaldehyde monomers and a solvothermal method, with a yield of 78% to improve the separation performance of the membrane and develop the capturing of CO2.58 Organic COFs showed high affinity and compatibility with polymer matrices. The prepared COFs improved the fractional free volume of the membrane and developed the permeability of gases. Besides, the separation of the fillers was enhanced via the functionalization of COFs with polyethylenimine. The obtained COF-based membranes exhibited respectable anti-pressure and anti-moisture behavior, and long-term stability due to the chemical stability of COFs and polymeric matrices.
Lead in water is a serious risk to the health of living organisms and causes irreversible damage to the brain, liver, and kidneys. These materials with high porosity are good adsorbents for water purification and heavy metals can be separated from water by preparing polymer membranes. In a study by Xu et al., a COF containing high nitrogen and employing 1,3,5-triformylbenzene (Tb) and benzidine (Bd) monomers was manufactured through an in situ polycondensation reaction in a poly(vinylidene fluoride)/N,N-dimethyl acetamide solution, to prepare ultrafiltration membranes for the removal of Pb(II) ions.59 In a simple process, the poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane was modified with TbBd COF, and the antifouling feature, hydrophilicity, anti-scaling behavior, and ability to remove Pb(II) ions were tested. The filtration investigation revealed outstanding antifouling features as well as great water flux for membranes. Also, the removal proficiency for Pb(II) ions was 92.4% (64% for the unmodified membrane), and in the fourth treatment cycle, it was 87.5%. The modified membrane showed a higher water flux (123 L m−2 h−1) as compared to the unmodified poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane (75 L m−2 h−1).
In a study by Yang et al., hybrid membranes based on COFs and their incorporation in sodium alginate were produced for ethanol dehydration.60 In the first step, a highly crosslinked COF was manufactured by a polycondensation reaction using terephthalaldehyde and melamine monomers in the solvothermal method (180 °C for 72 h in N2 atmosphere). The surface area of the COF was 858 m2 g−1 and the micropore volume was calculated as 0.27 cm3 g−1, which specified a high degree of crosslinking of terephthalaldehyde and melamine. For the fabrication of the membranes, the prepared COF nanoparticles were dispersed in water using ultrasonication, alginate was added and then this solution was coated on polyacrylonitrile substrates. Finally, after drying, it was crosslinked with CaCl2. COF enhanced the mechanical and thermal behaviors, operation stability, and anti-swelling features. The permeation flux and separation factor for the hybrid membrane were 2397 and 1293 g m−2 h−1, respectively. In an investigation by Wu and coworkers, ultrathin hybrid membranes with improved nano-filtration behavior were achieved using a polydopamine/COF interlayer.61 This polydopamine/COF composite with excellent porosity and hydrophilicity was engineered on polyacrylonitrile substrates. The fabricated nano-filtration membrane displayed a suitable rejection of dye (94.5% for Orange GII) and a desalination ratio of 93.4% for Na2SO4, and also exceptional water permeation flux (207.07 L m−2 h−1 MPa−1), which was better as compared to the commercial ones.
Since COFs are greatly favorable platforms for manufacturing diverse membranes for separating molecules, Wang et al. prepared an imine-based COF/polyethersulfone composite membrane for desalination.62 In this study, by a secondary growth approach, COFs were grown on the macroporous polymeric support. At first, the surface of polyethersulfone was modified with poly(ethylene imine) for amination modification to help the nucleation, growth, and form a uniform COF on the substrate. Via the Schiff-base reaction of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Tp) and hydrazine (Hz) monomers, TpHz COFs were produced. Based on Fig. 4a, at first, by a dip-coating process, polyethersulfone support was modified with an aquatic solution of poly(ethylene imine) and a layer of poly(ethylene imine) was adsorbed on a substrate via H-bonding connections. With the formation of the active groups of NH2 on the support, the COF layer could be uniformly formed with good adhesion to the polyethersulfone. Using water/n-hexane as an immiscible solution pair and a high molar ratio of monomers allowed the unidirectional diffusion of hydrazine via substrate macropores for the production of a selective layer of COF on polyethersulfone. Based on Fig. 4b, this dense membrane with defect-free selective layers was applied to separate inorganic salts from water. Based on the outcomes, the resulting membrane exhibited considerable rejection of diverse salts, and high water permeance (Fig. 4e).
 Fig. 4  (a) Flowsheet of the secondary growth synthesis of the TpHz/PES membrane on the PEI-modified PES substrate. Inset is the synthetic scheme of TpHz synthesized by the Schiff base condensation reaction between Tp (blue) and Hz (red). (b) Schematic illustration of the diffusion cell for TpHz growth on the substrate by unidirectional diffusion synthesis. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of the TpHz selective layer on the substrate top side via the unidirectional diffusion of Hz and PTSA (catalyst) molecules through the pores of the substrate to react with Tp molecules (for interpretation of the references to color in this Fig. legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.). (d) The structural model of the TpHz/PES membrane with a continuous TpHz selective layer after secondary growth. (e) Schematic representation of the ion sieving mechanism of the TpHz selective layer.62 (PES: polyethersulfone, PTSA: p-toluene sulfonic acid, TpHz: imine-based COF). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Han et al. reported a superhydrophobic COF-DhaTab fluoride with a water contact angle >150° through a simple and effective technique and optimized the fabrication conditions of COF (assembly for 12 h in the air).63 When surfaces are coated with these COF materials, excellent properties such as stability (in boiling water, acidic, as well as basic media) and superhydrophobicity can be obtained. The prepared COF as a coating was combined with diverse substrates like melamine foam and cotton through a bottom-up method. Morphological photographs of the pure foam and COF/foam can be observed in Fig. 5a–f, in which the foam microstructures were unchanged, however, small changes are obvious on the surface. Before coating the COF, the surface of the foam was smooth and after coating, the COF was uniformly covered (Fig. 5). After the foams came in contact with the water, pure foam penetrated to the bottom of the water but the COF-coated foam was placed on the surface of the water, and this foam showed a Cassie–Baxter non-wetting behavior, as can be seen in Fig. 5g. Also, when water (dyed blue) and oil (red) droplets were placed on the surfaces of the pure foam and COF-covered foam, the oil and water droplets immediately penetrated the pure foam; however, for the modified foam, only the oil droplets penetrated and water droplets remained on it in a spherical form (Fig. 5i). The outcomes showed the superhydrophobicity and superoleophilicity of COF/foam. Similarly, the covered foam was tested as an absorber for the separation of underwater oil, and great outcomes were achieved (Fig. 5j). As a result, the prepared products showed excellent hydrophobic properties and had excellent self-cleaning and self-healing abilities. This offers a new way to control the wetting of materials.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of (a–c) pristine melamine foam and (d–f) COF–DTF@foam. (g) Images of COF-DTF@foam (brown) and melamine foam (white) filled with water. (h) Image of COF-DTF@foam soaked in water by external forces. (i) Photograph of oil (red) and water (blue) droplets on the surface of the COF-DTF@foam and pristine melamine foam. (j) COF-DTF@foam can separate underwater oil such as chloroform from water.63 (DTF: DhaTab fluoride, COF: covalent organic frameworks). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
The latest studies have revealed the potential of COFs as a drug delivery system with good drug loading capacity and effective release performance. Zhang et al. prepared a nanocomposite comprised of poly(ethylene glycol), curcumin derivative, and amino-modified COFs and studied it as a smart carrier with significant anti-cancer therapeutic proficiency for doxorubicin drug in vitro and in vivo (Fig. 6a).64 Fluorescence tracking was used to investigate the specified effective accumulation of the COF nanocomposite in cancer cells after injection (Fig. 6b). The outcomes showed the effective tracking of the COF-based nanocomposite upon cellular uptake as well as the release of doxorubicin drug. In vitro and in vivo examinations determined the successful performance of this system for doxorubicin delivery with great features comprising biodegradability, great capacity for doxorubicin loading, prolonged circulation time, good stability, developed doxorubicin accumulation in cancer cells, and strong fluorescence in solution and the solid-state.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representations. (a and b) The synthesis of DOX-loaded PEG-CCM@APTES-COF-1 with cellular uptake at weak acidic tumor tissue/cells.64 (DOX: doxorubicin, PEG: polyethylene-glycol, CCM: curcumin, APTES-COF-1: amine-functionalized COFs). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 64. An open-access paper, copyright 2019. 
Mu et al. prepared COFs nanosheets by employing 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol and p-phenylenediamine blocks and then inserted them in a poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) matrix for the preparation of PVA/COF nanocomposite films.65 The mechanical, thermal, and hydrophobic properties of PVA/COF films were considered. Owing to exceptional crystalline construction as well as H-bonding effects, even with the incorporation of 9.6 wt% COF into PVA, the tensile strength increased by 3.5% and T5 wt% of PVA was enhanced by 13 °C. Indeed, without any modification, the COF demonstrated dispersibility in PVA and compatibility, and also enhanced flame retardant, thermal, and mechanical behaviors.
In a study by Peng et al., supercapacitors based on porous polyaniline/COF/kenaf stem-derived carbon were fabricated. In this process, via the chemical oxidation polymerization process, polyaniline grew on COF/kenaf stem-derived carbon.66 The chemical construction and the manufacturing processes of the COF and composite can be observed in Fig. 7g and h. Microscopic descriptions displayed the uniform distribution of spherical COF (1 μm diameter) on the inner fence of the kenaf stem-derived carbon, and polymer prepared on the COF/kenaf stem-derived carbon (Fig. 7a–f). Based on the outcomes by galvanostatic charge–discharge examination, the prepared composite displayed 583.0 mF cm−2 specific capacitance. This electrode had exceptional mechanical strength, cycle stability, and electrical conductivity.
 Fig. 7  (a and d) SEM images of 3D-KSC, (b and e) 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1 and (c and f) 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1/PANI. (g) Chemical structure of COF-LZU1. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1, 3D-KSC/PANI and 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1/PANI.66 (KSC: Kenaf stem-derived carbon, PANI: polyaniline, COF-LZU1: covalent-organic framework). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
García-Arroyo et al. synthesized a COF and functionalized it with dopamine by click chemistry for the preparation of 2D nanoparticles with antioxidant performance, then integrated it into plasticized poly(lactic acid) for food packaging application.67 The physical, mechanical, and thermal features of the bio-nanocomposites were examined. With loading low quantities of the modified COF, (0.5 wt% and 1 wt%), the resulting composite was transparent and disclosed antioxidant activity, good interfacial adhesion, improved mechanical, thermal, and crystallinity features.
Zhang et al. reported the fabrication of a nanofibrous composite membrane by employing COF and polyacrylonitrile in an electrospinning technique for oil/water emulsion separation.68 The fabrication process of the membrane and oil/water separation can be observed in Fig. 8a. The prepared membrane demonstrated superoleophobicity and superhydrophobicity under water and oil, respectively. The water-contact angle and oil-contact angles were 153.7° and 152.3°, respectively. The photos of the pure polyacrylonitrile membrane and COF/polyacrylonitrile nano-fibrous membrane with a difference in colors are illustrated in Fig. 8b and d. Pure polyacrylonitrile and COF/polyacrylonitrile membranes had white and light orange colors. Microscopic pictures illustrated the smooth surface of the pure membrane, while the COF/polyacrylonitrile membrane showed a spindle-knotted construction (Fig. 8c and e). Schematic diagrams of the separation of oil-in-water and water-in-oil emulsions are shown in Fig. 8f and g shows photographs before and after the filtration of emulsions (water-in-toluene, toluene-in-water) by the prepared composite, with the water and oil successfully separated.
 Fig. 8  (a) Preparation of the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane and the selective separation process of oil/water emulsions and mixtures. Photographs of (b) the pristine membrane and (d) the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane. SEM images showing the surface structures of (c) the pristine membrane and (e) the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane. Selective separation mechanisms for oil/water emulsions and mixtures (f). Photographs of toluene-in-water and water-in-toluene surfactant-stabilized emulsions before and after filtration by the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane (g).68 (COF-DhaTab/PAN: covalent organic frameworks-DhaTab/polyacrylonitrile). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Green polymers
So far, many polysaccharides like chitosan, alginate and others as green materials have been selected to prepare COF hybrids for applications in diverse fields. For example, Li et al. described the fabrication of aerogel monoliths by using COF and chitosan by a powerful/simplistic freeze-drying method.69 The prepared 3D composite aerogels containing COFs with functionality and crystallinity were robust, lightweight, porous, highly hydrophilic, and processable, in which they were easily molded into diverse forms. At first, COFs were prepared via the solvothermal method (120 °C, 72 h) employing 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol for reaction with many monomers including 1,4-phenylenediamine, 2-nitro-1,4-phenylenediamine, hydrazine, and terephthalohydrazide. The fabricated COFs with 50 wt% were uniformly dispersed in 3D constructions of aerogel. The COF powder was mixed with acidic chitosan solution and a crosslinker was added (Fig. 9b). The gained aerogels were lightweight (0.056–0.069 g cm−3 density−1) and robust with great mechanical stability (Fig. 9d). Remarkably, the COF/chitosan composites were processable for the preparation of useful shapes using changes in the mold (Fig. 9e). Through the incorporation of Pd nanoparticles, the produced Pd/COF/chitosan aerogel could be employed for building a highly effective micro-reactor for the dechlorination of chlorobenzene in aquatic media.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of TpPa-1, TpPa-NO2, NUS-2 and TpTe-1. Their sample photographs and SEM images are given in the insets. (b) The fabrication of COF–chitosan hybrid aerogel monoliths. (c) COF–chitosan aerogels (COF, 50 wt%) based on TpPa-1, TpPa-NO2, NUS-2 and TpTe-1. (d) Vertical- (TpTe-1@chitosan) and side-direction (TpPa-NO2@chitosan and TpTe-1@chitosan) pressing tests conducted with a 250 g balance weight, and the exhibition of the TpTe-1@chitosan aerogel propped on the grassy leaves of a spider plant. (e) Photographs of the four obtained COF–chitosan aerogels with various shapes based on different moulds.69 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
COFs can adsorb and catalytically convert the CO2 and are used in composites for these purposes. In this regard, the COF/chitosan hybrid aerogel was designed and manufactured for the selective adsorption of CO2 and CO2 transformation.70 To this end, imidazolium ionic liquid-decorated COF was prepared under solvothermal condition (120 °C for 3 days), and then crosslinked with thiol-functionalized chitosan by photo-induced thiol–ene interactions. After the fabrication of the COF/chitosan, the crystallinity, and selectivity of COF for the adsorption and conversion of CO2 were maintained. The prepared covalent hybrid containing up to 80 wt% COF was processable, robust, and uniform.
Pharmaceutical antibiotics such as tetracycline and cefotaxime are a group of water contaminants and it is necessary to remove them from the water. In this regard, COF materials are very important. Magnetic COF materials are widely applied in the removal of contaminants. A facile synthetic method was explored by Li et al. for the construction of core/shell nanocomposite film based on NiFe2O4 nanoparticles, COFs, and chitosan.71 At first, the NiFe2O4/COF nanocomposite was prepared, however, for developing this nanocomposite, chitosan was selected as a backbone to form a good film for the ultrafast separation of a nanocomposite by a magnet, and preventing mass-loss. For improving the resistance of nanocomposite film in acid, terephthalaldehyde was selected as a crosslinker. The prepared adsorbent with 7.5 ± 0.5 μm exhibited exceptional sorption capacity of antibiotics owing to the plentiful OH and NH2 groups. Also, it was entirely separated in 2 s and mass-loss was not observed. The adsorption kinetics and isotherms of these antibiotics were fixed to pseudo-second-order and Freundlich models, respectively. The maximum elimination of tetracycline was 388.52 mg g−1 (at pH 8.0) and cefotaxime obtained 309.26 mg g−1 (at pH 4.0). The respectable reusability of over 6 times demonstrated that the prepared composite is suitable for long-term utilization. Based on the outcomes, the main mechanisms for antibiotics adsorption was mainly via electrostatic attraction, π–π interaction, ion exchange, and H-bonding.
In 2020, composite membranes using COF/nanofibrillated cellulose and Pd nanoparticles were prepared to dechlorinate dichlorobenzene via a catalytic reduction reaction.72 In this study, Pd was selected as a catalytic substance for transferring the reactive [H] to degrade the chlorinated materials. At first, amino-functionalized nanofibrillated cellulose was prepared, and then, through in situ self-assembly growth, COF/modified nanofibrillated cellulose was obtained. After that, by the in situ reduction method, Pd nanoparticles were decorated on it. The resulting composite membrane showed good surface area (357 m2 g−1) with 250 nm thickness, and uniformly in pore size (2–20 nm). This membrane with good recyclability exhibited excellent catalytic performance (reaction rate: 0.0235 min−1) in catalyzing dechlorination.
Currently, nuclear sources provide a lot of energy worldwide. However, the disposal of fuels used in this process is a challenge because radioactive substances such as iodine have destructive effects on human health and can cause diseases such as hypothyroidism and cancer. Therefore, timely and effective iodine treatment is an essential challenge. In this regard, Li et al. reported the production of a radioiodine adsorbent by employing 2D COFs-modified cotton fiber. This research team considered two essential issues (quick uptake kinetics, as well as a conveniently-used form) for the achievement of the high-performance material.73 In this work, 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene and terephthaldehyde were applied for the fabrication of COF. The obtained COF with 2D construction was attached to the fibers containing aldehyde groups. The COFs/cotton composite absorbent, with good features like porosity, respectable thermal stability, large surface area (124 m2 g−1), was applied to proficiently capture iodine (vapor and solution). Due to the imine functional groups and mesoporous holes in the structure, a high affinity, and great adsorption rate of iodine uptake were observed (capacity up to 533.9 mg g−1). There were also other advantages such as good reusability and reproducibility. By washing with ethanol, the adsorbed iodine could be entirely removed from COFs/cotton. With this process, functional textiles can be prepared to capture radioiodine from nuclear waste and the air. Also, the same research team with COF/cotton hybrid monolith successfully removed radioiodine. Firstly, (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane was applied in the surface functionalization of cotton fibers through the silylation reaction.74 COFs (12.28 wt%) were then grafted on fibers and with this process, the surface area reached 166 m2 g−1 (the surface area of cotton fibers was 1.9 m2 g−1). The prepared monolith presented an outstanding ability to capture iodine. Also, it showed thermal stability (decompose above 300 °C), good reusability, and chemical stability (for use in harsh conditions). In comparison with the COF/cotton hybrid with 124 m2 g−1 surface area and 533 mg g−1 capture capacity, the as-prepared monolith indicated an enhancement in surface area (166 m2 g−1) and outstanding adsorption (824 mg g−1 sorption capacity) of radioiodine. These increases were due to the introduction of (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane on the cotton surface.
Periyasamy and Viswanathan prepared melamine-based COF/alginate beads via a hydrothermal method to remove iron from wastewater.75 The COF was manufactured via a hydrothermal procedure employing an autoclave (180 °C for 24 h), melamine and terephthalaldehyde. After the preparation of the COF, it was sonicated and added to alginate solution (2%) and stirred for 24 h. The solution was then added drop by drop to 2% CaCl2 solution for crosslinking and the creation of composite beads, and after 48 h in CaCl2, they were washed and dried. The digital and microscopic images of the beads can be observed in Fig. 10a–c. The mechanism for the removal of Fe(II) ions using the prepared composite is illustrated in Fig. 10d. Melamine-based COF with imine groups and lone pair electrons coordinated with iron ion through complexation of the surface. Also, via ion-exchange Fe(II) ions, and electrostatic interactions, the iron ions were removed and the adsorption capacity was 53.89 mg g−1.
 Fig. 10  (a) Digital image of wet MCOP–Alg composite beads. SEM images of (b) the MCOP–Alg composite beads, (c) MCOP. (d) The synthesis and iron adsorption mechanism of the MCOP–Alg composite bead.75 (MCOP–Alg: melamine-rich covalent organic polymer/alginate). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Cr(VI) ions are highly water-soluble and simply react with living organs and cause carcinogenic diseases, so their removal is essential for providing harmless water. Cr(VI) ions have been successfully removed using microporous triazine-based COF/alginate bio-composite beads with 292 m2 g−1 surface area as promising adsorbents.76 COF was prepared by reacting triazine with terephthaldehyde in a hydrothermal process (180 °C for 36 h). Kinetic and equilibrium data were fixed with pseudo-second-order, intra-particle diffusion models, as well as Langmuir isotherm. The possible mechanism for the elimination of Cr(VI) ions followed electrostatic connection and reduction. In a study by Yang et al., alginate with a suitable membrane formation feature as well as appropriate separation behavior was used to create a membrane.77 COF was prepared via Schiff-base condensation of 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol and benzidine in a simple and fast method, and it was used as a filler for introduction into alginate. Since surface functionalization is an efficient technique for the optimization of the polymer/filler interface in composite membranes, in this study, alginate was modified with dopamine. After the functionalization of alginate, abundant catechol groups (42%) were introduced into it. Robust H-bond interactions between the COFs and modified alginate meaningfully increased the compatibility and membrane separation selectivity. The as-organized composite membrane was applied to dehydrate the ethanol-water mixture and respectable outcomes were achieved.
In addition to what has been said about the polymer composites of COFs, more research has recently been reported. For example, in 2020, insulin delivery carriers were prepared using COF/polymer composites by Zhang et al.78 In another study, polymer monoliths were modified with a β-cyclodextrin COF and used as a stationary phase for small molecule separation.79 Fan et al. inserted phosphotungstic acid/triazole-modified COF into poly(ether ether ketone) to enhance the proton conductivity.80 Ali Khan et al. prepared nano-COF sheets and used them as reactive fillers for the fabrication of free-standing polyamide-based membranes for effective distillation.81 In a study by Zhang,82 a COF/polymer composite was reported for transport in the blood–brain barrier as well as inhibiting brain metastasis from the renal tumor. An approach was developed for the preparation of magnetic COF/molecularly imprinted polymers and used as an adsorbent for cyanidin-3-O-glucoside separation in actual samples.83 Li et al. modified poly (styrene-divinyl benzene-glycidylmethacrylate) with COF and fabricated composites to quickly extract the anti-inflammatory drugs from water.84 Wang et al.85 prepared COFs on a polymeric substrate for dye separation. In another work, a sensor based on poly(o-aminothiophenol), COF, and Au nanoparticles was reported for the determination of aflatoxin B1 carcinogens.86
Metal/metal oxide combinations of COFs
Silver/COFs hybrids
In 2020, a research team prepared a functionalized nanomaterial, with a greatly porous surface area, based on a COF and Ag nanoparticles for use as a recyclable nanocatalyst for the sustainable fabrication of 2-oxazolidinones as well as carbamates through atmospheric cyclization CO2 capture.87 At first, the COFs structures were prepared by the Schiff-base reaction of 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)-trianiline and 1,3,5-triformyl phloroglucinol. For the production of Ag-architectured COFs, an Ag solution was prepared by the dropwise addition of NaBH4 into AgNO3 solution with stirring. The fabricated COFs particles were dispersed in the Ag nanoparticles solution, the reaction was performed and the product was achieved (Fig. 11). The N-enriched COF was used as a responsive host for the immobilization of the Ag particles and the catalytic production of industrial materials. The prepared Ag nanoparticles-architectured COFs showed outstanding performance in synthesizing cyclic carbamates and 2-oxazolidinone by CO2 capture. COFs with N-rich centers interacted very strongly with Ag nanoparticles at the surfaces. The fabricated nanocatalysts were simply reused and after five cycles, their performance did not show any significant alteration.
 Fig. 11  Schematic route for the generation of Ag@TpTta nanocatalysts.87 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
In another study, Lan et al. fabricated triazine COF nanosheets and inserted Ag nanoparticles in a simple method. By the interaction of the N sites of the triazine COF with Ag particles, the Ag in the interlayers of COFs with abundant micro and mesopores was stabilized.88 The Ag/COF composite possessed a high N content, abundant active sites, and low density, so, it was suitable and was capable of adsorption and activation of CO2 in the CO2 conversion and catalysis. Significantly, this heterogeneous catalyst (Ag/COF) displayed great catalytic performance for alkyne carboxylation with CO2. Also, the prepared catalyst presented outstanding stability without a major decrease in catalytic performance after 6 cycles. In a study by Wang et al., through solution infiltration, a composite catalyst comprising Ag nanoparticles and COF was successfully manufactured for the degradation of ecological contaminants.89 Since porous COFs and Ag nanoparticles have high efficiency for the remediation industry, their combination is a good choice for environmental remediation. Crystallite COF containing abundant N and O sites was designed as the support and substrate to minimize the accumulation of Ag nanoparticles in the catalytic progression and Ag was anchored by these active sites. In solvothermal conditions, by employing 2,4,6-tris-(4-formylphenoxy)-1,3,5-triazine and hydrazine hydrate construction units, COF was prepared. The outcomes disclosed the uniform distribution of Ag (5 ± 3 nm) in the interlayer gaps as well as on the COF's surface. The successful catalytic reduction of nitro-aromatic compounds and organic dyes like 4-nitrophenol and Rhodamine B was observed. The prepared composite had many good features like great selectivity, well-ordered porosity construction, high stability (in acidic, basic, and organic media), and catalytic behavior to reduce the diverse dyes and nitro-aromatics, extensive lifetime, respectable reusability, and great recovery.
Paraquat is an efficient herbicide that is dangerous for the environment and human health. Water-soluble pillar[n]arenes (WP6)-based composite materials can be employed for the detection of Paraquat. Pillar[n]arene-modified metallic nanoparticles show outstanding host/guest recognition ability for Paraquat. WP6 and 2D COFs can attach to each other via π interactions and H-bonding. In a study by Tan et al., using a solvothermal method and employing triformylphloroglucinol and paraphenylenediamine, 2D COF was prepared.90 On the other hand, Ag nanoparticles were modified with WP6 (via reducing Ag salt in the presence of WP6). Finally, WP6-functionalized Ag particles were assembled on the COF's surfaces. The microscopic images and schematic preparation are shown in Fig. 12. In this composite, the roles of Ag, WP6, and COF were as an electrocatalyst for sensing paraquat, a host to recognize the paraquat guest (by hydrophobic as well as electrostatic interactions), and a 2D material for the creation of a good platform for electrochemical sensing, respectively. The prepared electrode, in 0.01–50 μM of herbicide and at −0.95 to −0.4 V working potential performed well and had a 0.014 μM detection limit.
 Fig. 12  TEM image of WP6@Ag (a); HRTEM image of WP6@Ag (b); TEM image of WP6@Ag@COF (c). High-resolution image of WP6@Ag@COF (d).90 (WP6@Ag: Pillar[6]arene (WP6)-modified Ag nanoparticles, HRTEM: high-resolution transmission electron microscope). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
In another work, Ag nanoparticles were functionalized with glutathione and then with the dispersion of modified Ag on the COF substrate, COF/Ag-glutathione was prepared through a facile two-step post-synthetic treatment.91 With a good selection of the substrate, great attraction between glutathione and the N-linked glycopeptides, the existence of binding sites, and unoccupied Ag surfaces, the fabricated hybrid with good porosity displayed a suitable performance in the enrichment of N-linked glycopeptides. The advantages of this study were excellent binding capability (160 mg g−1), good sensitivity (1 fmol) and reusability (at least 5 times), ultrafast capture ability, and selectivity (1:1500, human immunoglobulin G: bovine serum albumin). Lan et al. prepared triazine-COFs and carbonized them to obtain carbon nitride frameworks as the substrate and support for the immobilization and stabilization of Ag nanoparticles for the catalytic conversion of CO2.92 The best surface area along with micro-/mesoporous construction for carbon nitride frameworks was achieved at 700 °C. Carbon nitride frameworks-supported Ag particles were organized in a facile chemical process. Ag particles were embedded in the pores and this catalyst displayed admirable catalytic performance, stability, and selectivity. Rich N atoms and various porosities caused the good distribution of the Ag and prevented its accumulation, which resulted in the exceptional catalytic action of the catalyst.
Iron oxide/COFs hybrids
The removal of bisphenols from water is essential because these harmful chemicals can enter the human body, as well as other living organisms, via water and gradually accumulate and cause many problems such as hypertension, obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. The methods for absorbing these substances should be simple and easy and without harmful by-products. Magnetic COFs with great surface area and efficacious sorption capacity are promising adsorbents that are a good choice for the removal of bisphenols; they can also be quickly separated using a magnet. In this regard, Chen et al. developed a facile and effective method for the fabrication of a core/shell structure based on COF and Fe3O4 at room-temperature.93 The magnetic nanosized Fe3O4 particles were prepared using a hydrothermal route. They were then covered with the COF shell via the precipitation polymerization of 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl)benzene and terephthaldicarboxaldehyde units. This magnetic nanocomposite with good core/shell morphology was successfully employed as an absorbent to detect, adsorb, and extract five trace bisphenols from a human serum sample. The advantages of this nanocomposite were high adsorption capability, large external surface (181.36 m2 g−1), uniform size (about 3.6 nm), great saturation magnetization (42.7 emu g−1), outstanding chemical stability, and good mechanical performance. The influences of pH, time, and adsorbent dosage were studied. The reproducibility (93.0–107.8%), linearity (r > 0.9982), enrichment factor (56–95 fold), and detection limits (1.0–78.1 ng L−1) were acceptable and appropriate values were obtained. In a similar study,94 bisphenol A and bisphenol AF were successfully removed from water using a COF/Fe3O4 adsorbent that was prepared by the solvothermal technique. This composite provided diverse active sites that enhanced the adsorption capability. The specific surface area and saturation magnetization for the absorbent were 335.2 m2 g−1 and 49.6 emu g−1, respectively. The maximum adsorption capacity for bisphenol A and bisphenol AF reached 140 and 290.4 mg g−1. The pseudo-second-order model and Freundlich isotherm were suitable for this process. Besides, the magnetic COF presented a satisfactory reusability performance (over 81% bisphenol elimination was maintained after 5 cycles). Also, the process of adsorption was spontaneous and exothermic. The microscopic images and the adsorption mechanism for the removal of bisphenols are shown in Fig. 13. The COF shell provided active sites and the pore construction and great surface area improved the sorption performance. After the adsorbent made contact with the aqueous solution containing the bisphenols molecules, the contaminants entered the pores and the adsorption capacity increased. These bisphenols were also absorbed by the π–π conjugate system and amino groups in the COF/Fe3O4. Hydrogen interactions occurred between the bisphenols and the functional groups in the COF shell.
 Fig. 13  (a and b) TEM images of Fe3O4 nanoparticles and Fe3O4@COF. (c) Adsorption mechanism of BPA and BPAF on Fe3O4@COF. (d) The adsorption process of bisphenols on Fe3O4@COF.94 (BPA: Bisphenol A, BPAF: Bisphenol AF). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Sun and co-workers manufactured a COF from magnetic nanospheres (Fe3O4/COF) for application as a mass spectrometry probe for screening hazardous compounds like bisphenols.95 The monodisperse Fe3O4 was the core, whereas benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde (BTA), 3,3′-dihydroxybenzidine (DHBD), and tetrahydrofuran formed the COF shell on the Fe3O4 core. This process was cheap, sensitive, and rapid and displayed several superior characteristics such as a surface area of 82.96 m2 g−1, pore size distribution of 2.82 nm, and great magnetization values (42.5 emu g−1). The core/shell nanospheres were prepared in two steps, namely, the preparation of carboxyl-modified nano-Fe3O4 for coating by the COFs, and the fabrication of COF on the core via a Schiff-base condensation reaction using DHBD and BTA as two building blocks. The prepared nanospheres were used as mass spectrometry probes for analyzing bisphenols. For many kinds of bisphenols (bisphenol A, F, B, and C), low detection limits, as well as good reproducibility (80.6–115%), were obtained. Li et al. fabricated an Fe3O4/COF adsorbent with core/shell construction through a condensation reaction of TAPB and TPA in the presence of DMSO for the effective and rapid removal of triclosan and triclocarban from aquatic solution.96 The advantages of this work include simple preparation and operation, high efficiency, reusability, cheap cost, fast process, fast sorption performance, and a great capacity for adsorption. Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption isotherm models were fitted in the low and high concentration regions, respectively. These isotherm models exposed multi-layer sorption via the connections of space embedding influence, benzene ring π–π stacking, van der Waals forces, and monolayer sorption via π–π stacking between the bactericide interface and the Fe3O4/COF nanocomposite. The removal proficiencies, recoveries, and reusability were 82.3–95.4%, 92.9–109.5%, and 10, respectively. Overall, the Fe3O4/COF presented great stability as well as outstanding removal performance.
In 2020, Yao et al. prepared a nano-scale core/shell with magnetic properties, involving an Fe3O4 core and a porphyrin–COF shell using the in situ growth approach; the fabrication process for these microspheres are shown in Fig. 14a.97 The Fe3O4 nanoparticles, which were pre-decorated with poly(vinylpyrrolidone) and poly(ethyleneimine), were covered with the COF shell. After preparation of the Fe3O4@COF, it was treated with lipase solution and finally, lipase-loaded microspheres were obtained and studied as interfacial catalysts for the promotion of enzymatic esterification through photothermal conversion. According to the microscopic images, Fe3O4 nanoparticles with 270 nm size were covered by the COF shell and after inserting the shell, the particle size increased (440 nm). After lipase loading, the shell tissue became uneven but the particle size did not increase, which indicated the encapsulation of lipase in the COF shell. Through the as-fabricated core/shell, incompatible bi-phasic systems (water/oil) could be converted to emulsions (Fig. 14b). On bringing a magnet toward the fast emulsion, the emulsion was broken, and 2 phases were formed (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  (a) The Fabrication of Fe3O4@DhaTph-Lipase and its interfacial catalytic synthesis of hexyl hexanoate perfume via visible-light-induced photothermal conversion. (b) Model diagram of the water-in-hexane Pickering emulsion system stabilized by the Fe3O4@DhaTph-lipase microspheres; (c) the corresponding reversible magnetically regulated demulsification behavior.97 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
Shi et al. reported the facile preparation of Fe3O4@COF with great porosity, uniform morphology, super magnetism, and surface area (180.20 m2 g−1), and its employment as an extraction adsorbent to determine the trace aromatic compounds in grilled meats as well as edible oils.98 The COF shell was fabricated on a magnetic surface by using 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol as well as 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone in a condensation reaction (Fig. 15a). These Fe3O4@COF materials showed outstanding extraction behavior toward aromatic compounds due to π–π and hydrophobic interactions. In optimal conditions, the sorption equilibrium was reached in 10 min. The detection limit was low and good linearity was observed. The outcomes displayed good accuracy with recoveries in the 85.5–104.2% range. In a similar work by a facile strategy, the Fe3O4@COF core/shell was manufactured and polycyclic aromatics in coffee, smoked bacon, grilled fish, water, and smoked pork were determined and adsorbed with the help of the core/shell (Fig. 15b).99 Excellent adsorption capability for aromatic compounds was gained and the enrichment proficiency reached 99.95%. The attained Fe3O4@COF had quick adsorption kinetics and the equilibrium was reached in 12 min. Excellent applicability and superior enrichment of aromatic compounds capacity were observed.
 Fig. 15  (a) Synthetic procedure for Fe3O4@COF(TpDA) materials and the application of Fe3O4@COF(TpDA) as a sorbent for MSPE. (b) Schematic fabrication process for Fe3O4@COF(TpBD) and application in magnetic solid-phase extraction. (c and d) TEM images of Fe3O4@COF nanocrystals.98,99 (MSPE: magnetic solid-phase extraction; PHA: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry copyright 2018, and ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
In many other studies, researchers prepared core/shell constructions of Fe3O4@COF (Fig. 16) for benzimidazole determination and their selective absorption in agricultural foods.100 In another work, the fabricated Fe3O4@COF was applied as a sorbent for endocrine-disrupting phenols.101 Fluoroquinolones were also adsorbed with Fe3O4@COF core/shells.102 Microscopic images of the structures of these materials are shown in Fig. 16; due to their unique properties and suitable structures, acceptable results have been reported.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of (a) Fe3O4, (b) Fe3O4@COFs.102 (c and d) Representative TEM images of Fe3O4 and the as-prepared Fe3O4@COF.100 (e and f) TEM images of Fe3O4 microspheres at 25000× magnification, and Fe3O4@COFs microspheres at 25000× magnification101 (TEM: transmission electron microscopy). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer, copyright 2019, ref. 100 with permission from Springer, copyright 2020, and 101 with permission from Springer, copyright 2019. 
In the medical field, imine-linked COFs are developing nanoscale candidates due to desirable characteristics such as pore geometry, great surface, area, and crystallinity. So far, composites including COFs and magnetic nanomaterials have been applied in thermo-chemotherapy treatment and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In this regard, Benyettou et al. loaded an imine-linked COF with doxorubicin drug and covered by magnetic γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. This system was then stabilized with a poly(L-lysine) shell through a facile impregnation process for utilization in MRI imaging chemotherapy (Fig. 17).103 The prepared core/shell with size 300 nm showed proficient cell-uptake ability. The drug-loaded core/shell could release doxorubicin in acidic media (pH 5.0, endosomes, and lysosomes of cancer cells), while in physiological media with pH 7.4, they showed limited release. The papered core/shell effectively generated 48 °C (high heat) in the magnetic field (owing to the porosity of COF for heat conduction, which made the core/shell a great heat mediator in aquatic media).
 Fig. 17  HRTEM images of (a) SD, (b) γ-SD, and (c) γ-SD/PLL. (d) Schematic representation of γ-SD/PLL synthesis: (1) loading of doxorubicin (Dox) into the TAB-DFP-nCOF pores. (2) Coating with 10 nm iron oxide nanoparticles (γ-Fe2O3 NPs), followed by (3) stabilization with a shell of poly(L-lysine) cationic polymer (PLL) via a simple impregnation procedure. (e) The subsequent magnetically induced heat- and acid-triggered Dox release from γ-SD/PLL in conditions that mimic cancer cell physiology.103 (PLL: poly(L-lysine)). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
Drug contamination poses serious risks to humans as well as aquatic organisms, and it is essential to remove these substances from the environment. COF-Containing composites combined with magnetic nanoparticles are used to prepare adsorbents. For instance, in a study, the elimination of diclofenac sodium from water by Fe3O4@COF was examined. To this end, many initial ingredients (1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol, p-phenylenediamine, as well as amine-modified Fe3O4@SiO2 particles) were used to prepare magnetic COFs with great features such as thermal and chemical stability, great surface area and crystallinity, easy separation from media, and good saturation magnetization.104 This adsorbent revealed amazing adsorption for diclofenac drug from water. Moreover, by employing a magnet, the magnetic COF was isolated simply from the water. In another study, by a microwave-aided procedure, an Fe3O4-decorated melamine-based COF was simply prepared for the very selective elimination of Hg(II) ions from wastewater.105 The outcomes displayed the good performance of magnetic COF for separation (MS = 0.75–3.59 emu g−1), and a surface area of 344–600 m2 g−1. Other features included a 97.65 mg g−1 adsorption capacity and great selectivity for Hg(II) ion removal due to the high density of N groups.
Food safety is important for human health and well-being. Food additives, contaminants, and biological toxins are harmful to health. Therefore, monitoring food safety is essential. Sample pre-treatment is a significant stage of non-targeted analysis. Li et al. prepared magnetic nanospheres and nano-fiber films based on a heteroporous COF and studied their utility in the pre-treatment of vegetable samples. At first, COFs with dual pores, good stability and good surface area were obtained.106 The core/shell structure was then prepared by growing the COF shell on an NH2-modified Fe3O4 core, and the polyacrylonitrile/COF film was obtained via a co-electrospinning technique. These were utilized to remove phytochromes and for effective pesticide recoveries from vegetable extracts. They showed excellent potential in pre-treatment for the non-targeted examination of dangers in foods. The fabricated magnetic core/shells and films were reused 10 times.
Titanium dioxide/COFs hybrids
TiO2, as a semiconducting material with great physical and chemical features such as biocompatibility and low cost, has been utilized in catalysis and photocatalysis, antibacterial applications, sensors, etc.107,108 With the incorporation of nano-TiO2 particles into COFs with porous and crystalline construction, an efficient and robust core/shell nanohybrid with developed features such as durability, good photocatalytic performance, selectivity, and reactivity can be obtained. For improving the migration of photo-created electrons/holes, the interface between TiO2 and the π-conjugated COF is vital. In this regard, Lu et al. planned and manufactured a covalently connected TiO2/COF core/shell nanocomposite with diverse thicknesses of the shell (COF) through the seed growth technique for the benzyl alcohol photo-oxidation process.109 In the fabrication process, TiO2 nanobelts were functionalized and amino-modified TiO2 was obtained. A small amount of COF monomers was utilized for the production of seed particles on the TiO2 surface. Subsequently, additional monomers connected the seed and created crosslinked and hyperbranched poly(azomethine) constructions via Schiff-base reactions, and finally, a uniform shell of COF was produced on the TiO2 surface. The alcohol oxidation in vis-light (>420 nm) disclosed that the core/shell including 15 nm thickness of COF shell had the best conversion and a superior rate constant (92.5%, and 6.73 × 10−2 h−1, respectively), which were 10 and 12 times those of TiO2 and COF, respectively. The improved photocatalytic performance of TiO2/COF was mostly due to the developed photon sorption capability as well as the charge transfer from shell to core. Besides, the prepared core/shell displayed good stability without a decrease in photoactivity (after 5 cycles). Overall, this nanohybrid was an effective visible-light photocatalyst with a well-matched band-gap and lower recombination rate of electron/hole pairs. Thus, COFs with appropriate structure blocks and organic active groups show high visible-light sorption capability.
So far, various photocatalysts have been developed for CO2 photoreduction. Porous crystalline materials such as MOFs and COFs have proven to be promising candidates for this purpose, due to the large internal surface area as well as dense catalytically active sites.110,111 Crystalline COFs with tunable construction and great surface areas are a good choice for providing an ideal scaffold to adsorb and reduce CO2. Zhang et al. presented a useful technique for the manufacture of a covalently connected stable Z-scheme heterojunction system using COFs and many semiconductors such as TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 for artificial photosynthesis employing H2O (as the electron donor).112 With this strategy, the photosensitizer, sacrificial agents and co-catalysts were not used. In this study, polyarylether–COFs were prepared by the aromatic nucleophilic substitution of different extended o-di-fluorobenzene and catechol units, named COF-316 and COF-318 (Fig. 18). The Z-scheme heterojunction comprised of COF-318-TiO2 particles with covalent bonds displayed the maximum CO fabrication rate of 69.67 μmol g−1 h−1 (6 times better than the pristine TiO2 and COF-318). The covalent bonds among COFs and TiO2 proficiently make photo-created electronic transfers and so the electrons/holes pairs in COF/TiO2 are effectively applied in CO2 reduction as well as H2O oxidation reactions. Overall, the fabricated organic–inorganic hybrid acted as a good photocatalyst for the reduction of CO2.
 Fig. 18  Schematic representation of the preparation of COF-318-SCs via the condensation of COF-318 and a semiconductor.112 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020. 
Steel materials have many applications in various industries; however, they sometimes corrode and cause pollution, energy loss, and reduced engineering safety and therefore, the preparation of anti-corrosion steels is very important. A cost-effective anti-corrosion technology is the photo-electrochemical (PEC) cathodic protection technique. This method is based on the creation of electrons under visible light radiation. These photoelectrons are transferred to the metal and the potential of the metal changes negatively, creating thermodynamic stability. On the other hand, COFs with good photocatalytic features as semiconductors can be applied in PEC cathodic protection. In a study by Wang et al. COF was developed (in situ) on the nano-TiO2 and the application of the prepared composite was studied for PEC cathodic protection.113 In the solvothermal method, COF was grown using 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol. The resultant COF/TiO2 composite exposed considerably improved PEC cathodic protection for steel materials. Through the formation of a Z-scheme heterojunction between COF and TiO2, effective charge carrier separation was attained. In another study, highly stable COF/TiO2 heterojunction photocatalysts with core/shell constructions were developed for the oxidation of alcohols.114 In this work, a photocatalyst with a tetrahydroquinoline-linked COF core and TiO2 shell (COF@TiO2) was effectively manufactured. Another photocatalyst with a TiO2 core and tetrahydroquinoline-linked COF shell (TiO2@COF) was also fabricated and the performance of both was tested. The outcomes showed that the spatial location of COF and TiO2 are important in photocatalytic activity and COF@TiO2 had better performance in the oxidation of alcohols as compared to the others owing to the simplistic transfer of the electrons from the TiO2 shell to O2. Yang and coworkers115 fabricated a series of COF–TiO2 nano-sheet hybrids via a hydrothermal process and examined their photocatalytic performance for hydrogen production. The experimental outcomes demonstrated that the COF with a porous construction provided additional specific surface area and active sites for reaction and also developed the harvesting of light under visible light radiation. The interface of the TiO2/COF hybrid provided channels for electron transfer from the CB of COF to TiO2, as well as hole transfer from the VB of TiO2 to COF. This hybrid formation inhibited the electron/hole combinations in the system. The production rate of H2 for the TiO2/COF hybrid was better (1.63 times) as compared to the pristine TiO2.
Through covalent bonds, organic COF and inorganic TiO2 were combined for the construction of heterostructure hybrids via an in situ reaction by Li et al. to photocatalytically produce H2. Fig. 19a shows the fabrication process of TiO2/COF.116 At first, in the solvothermal method, TiO2 nanosheets were fabricated and then functionalized with –CHO through a two-step process. At first, 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane was placed on the nano-sheets surface. After functionalization, they reacted with 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol for the production of the –CHO–modified TiO2via a Schiff base reaction. Finally, covalently bonded COF–TiO2 hybrids were prepared. These hybrids greatly enhanced the photocatalytic performance; the created covalent bonds in COF–TiO2 acted as a bridge for improving the electron/hole separation and transfer of electrons (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the TiO2-TpPa-1-COF hybrid material. (b) Schematic of the mechanism of the TiO2-TpPa-1-COF hybrid material. (c) SEM images of the TiO2-TpPa-1-COF.116 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Copper and copper oxide/COFs hybrids
Copper oxide (CuO), as an inexpensive and valuable semiconductor metal oxide, has wonderful physiochemical characteristics like non-toxicity, antibacterial and antioxidant properties, and so on, which have led to its diverse applications.117 Das et al. reported a novel CuO immobilized COF through grafting the nano-CuO particles at the surface of an N-rich COF.118 In this study, COFs were produced via the solvothermal method and then, with the addition of CuCl2 solution and stirring at room temperature, the COF/CuO was obtained with a surface area of 583 m2 g−1. The prepared product was applied as an effective catalyst for the C–C homocoupling reaction. In another study,119 Cu/Cu2O nanoparticles (2–3 nm) were grown on COF and heterogeneous catalysts were obtained for the manufacture of diynes through the Glaser-Hay heterocoupling.
Carbonaceous compound combinations of COFs
With the development of economics and politics, currently, the most important goal and the main priority is to conserve energy and reduce emissions. The rechargeable lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery has attracted significant attention due to many advantages like non-toxicity, high theoretical capacity, low cost, and natural abundance; however, there are still challenges such as poor cycling stability and fast capacity fading. In this regard, Wang et al. designed and prepared a functionalized separator for trapping the dissolved polysulfide through the simple approach of a functional covered separator using a COF/CNT nanocomposite.120 This separator acted as an ion sieve in Li–S batteries and selectively sieved Li+ and confined the polysulfide in the region of the cathode. After the combination of COF and CNT and using this as the separator-coating in Li–S batteries, due to their synergism, outstanding cycle features were displayed. After the first 500 cycles, the battery displayed great reversible capacity (1068 mA h g−1 and 621 mA h g−1), respectively (80% sulfur content). It was also appropriate for an extensive range of temperatures (10–50 °C).
The COF backbone, with redox-activity, high surface area, and porosity construction, assists in the preparation of electrochemical energy storage devices. The insulating behavior and insufficient electrical conductivity of COFs limit their use in self-charging power-pack devices. For the enhancement of the electrical conductivity of the COF, Mohammed and coworkers demonstrated an effective approach via the solid-state insertion of the carbon nano-fibers (CNF) in COFs and the preparation of a hybrid via intermolecular connections (π–π) in the middle of CNF (sp2 graphene layers) and COFs (Fig. 20a).121 Owing to intermolecular interactions, this composite helps with effective electron transfer. The prepared composites showed crystallinity, porosity and enhanced electrical conductivity, as well as energy storage (0.25 × 10−3 S cm−1 and 167 mF cm−2, respectively). The COF/CNF composite demonstrated a smooth surface and good porosity. Also, interlayer (π⋯π) interactions among the components can improve the electron transfer efficiency in the COF matrix (Fig. 20c). In the photovoltaic charged device, the supercapacitor based on COF/CNF was integrated with an effective perovskite solar cell with 16.7% conversion efficiency. Under sunlight, the solar cell is charged by converting photon energy into supercapacitor electrical energy. After photo charging for 300 s, the outstanding performance was demonstrated with a capacitance of 42 mF cm−2.
 Fig. 20  (a) Eclipsed models of DqTp and DqDaTp COFs; PXRD patterns of DqTp-CNF and DqDaTp-CNF hybrids; a schematic representation of the synthesis of the crystalline, yet flexible, DqTp-CNF and DqDaTp-CNF COFs. (b) Photographs of a freestanding and flexible DqDaTp-CNF hybrid thin sheet. (c) Diagrammatic representation of the COF–CNF hybrid model. (d) Diagrammatic representation of PSC. (e) Photograph of PSC as a wearable device and the diagrammatic representation of the supercapacitor; the X-ray tomography 3D image displays the interphases of the device.121 (CNF: carbon nanofibers, PXRD: Powder X-Ray Diffraction). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Zhang et al. fabricated a COF/CNT nanocomposite for utility in Li–S batteries. By employing 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol and p-phenylenediamine, the porous COF in a facile solvothermal method was grown on the CNTs matrix.122 The prepared COF/CNTs nanocomposite, with exceptional core/shell construction and great properties like well-ordered micro-porous channels, high surface area, very good initial discharge capacity, capacity retaining capability, long cycle life, and brilliant cycling stability, was applied as a host for the S cathode in Li–S batteries. In this work, conductive CNTs accelerated the electron transportation and the nanocomposite with abundant micropores alleviated the sulfur volume expansion on lithiation and absorbed polysulfide. The cathode based on S/COF/CNTs delivered a 1242.2 mA h g−1 initial discharge capacity in batteries. Furthermore, an ultralow capacity fading rate of 0.099% per cycle (for 450 cycles) and a coulombic efficacy of 99% were gained.
In another study, by the encapsulation of CNTs with COFs (including 4,4′-biphenyldiboronic acid and 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene precursor molecules) and the thermal decomposition, a unique boron/oxygen co-doped carbon (BOC)@CNT structure was prepared.123 BOC plays the role of a host for S in the battery due to an increase in conductivity as well as a polysulfide anchor. A BOC network containing active sites was fabricated on the outside surface of the CNT, and the porous BOC@CNT with cavities and heteroatoms was useful for loading sulfur and the preparation of the BOC@CNT/S electrode. The resultant BOC@CNT/S containing 68.5% S indicated great absorptivity for lithium polysulfides and showed exceptional cycling stability (794 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 1 °C), and a large reversible capacity (1077 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.2 °C), indicating its good electrochemical behavior as a cathode.
In a study by Sun et al., a simple one-pot approach to mobilizing a COF on an NH2-modified CNT support was designed and the COF@NH2-CNT hybrid with features like good conductivity and surface area of 147.3 m2 g−1 was deposited on the glassy carbon electrode.124 1,3,5-Tris-(4-aminophenyl)benzene and terephthaldicarboxaldehyde monomers were selected for the COF fabrication. The resultant sensor (COF@NH2-CNT/GCE) presented outstanding analytical behavior to sensitively detect nitrofuran compounds (furazolidone) in food and aquatic solutions. The advantages of this sensor included a wide detection range (0.2–100 μM) and a low detection limit (7.75 × 10−8 M). The method was effective for the hybridization of COFs and CNTs as non-conductive and conductive materials to overcome the limitation of COFs in the fabrication of sensors. The COF, with amazing sorption features, could efficiently adsorb furazolidone and played its role as an important material with fast response and great sensitivity as a sensor, indicating that COFs are useful in the development of electrochemical sensors.
In 2020, Wang et al. prepared a 2D crystalline COF nano-sheet (0.75 nm thickness) by applying 1,3,5-tris(p-formylphenyl)benzene and thionine materials via a condensation reaction.125 By combining the prepared COF with amino-modified CNTs, a composite containing COF and CNTs as an electrochemical sensor for the determination of ascorbic acid and pH was fabricated. Both of these compounds (CNTs and COF) played an effective role. The COF could improve the stability, dispersibility, and catalytic performance of CNTs on the surface of the electrode. CNT linkages prevented the accumulation of COF. The prepared sensor for ascorbic acid showed wide linear ranges (53.04 μm–4.00 mM and 4.00–8.00 mM), 17.68 μM detection limit, along with reproducibility, acceptable selectivity and stability. Also, the pH sensor showed a 1–12 linear range and sensitivity of 54 mV pH−1.
Yang et al. prepared a highly sensitive sensor with the formation of COF thin films on 3D porous carbon for preparation of the electrode. COF enhanced the functional sites as well as the specific surface area.126 After the deposition of Cu and Pt nanoparticles on the electrode, the electrocatalytic oxidation and reduction of glucose and H2O2 were examined via many analytical methods. Based on the outcomes, the linear range and detection limit for glucose by the prepared electrodes were found to be 4.69 μM–1.57 mM and 1.54 μM, respectively. For H2O2 detection, the linear range and detection limits were 18.5 nM–5.4 μM and 6.0 nM. These sensors were also highly selective, with good repeatability and good stability.
Graphene with good characteristics has been applied in areas such as photodetection and optoelectronics. It is not selective to wavelength due to the wide light absorption, so its performance in photodetectors is limited. Cao et al. covered monolayer graphene with COFs for the preparation of a photodetector and the performance was examined.127 Compared to photodetectors based on unmodified graphene, the prepared graphene/COF photodetector exhibited improved responsivity. This research team verified that the improvement in the performance of the device was related to the orderliness of the COF surface, which affected the interfacial charge transfer through tuning the π–π stacking of the graphene and COF surface.
In the 2D construction of COFs, periodically eclipsed π-stacking columns act as direct channels for electronic transportation. However, inserting them into electrical appliances is a challenge. In this regard, a research group128 prepared a crystalline imine-based COF film with the help of a solvothermal method and two building blocks of 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-formylphenyl)pyrene with high carrier mobility and p-phenylenediamine on the graphene layer. An electronic device (vertical field-effect transistor, VFET) was developed by the incorporation of COF/single-layer graphene into the VFET. COF (semiconducting layer) and the single-layer graphene acted as a transport channel and the source electrode, respectively. The prepared system showed outstanding ambipolar charge transport performance. In another study, by employing hexachlorocyclotriphosphazene and dicyanamide blocks, a porous N,P-comprising COF with great electrocatalytic behavior and active sites covered the CNT surface for the preparation of metal-free nanocomposites for a Zn–air battery cathode.129 Firstly, the N,P-comprising COF was polymerized thermally (at 350 °C) on the surface of the CNT, then high-temperature (800 °C) co-carbonization was performed. The fabrication of the N,P-C is illustrated in Fig. 21a. In Fig. 21b, the Zn–air battery adopted the Zn plate as the anode, the carbon paper-covered electrocatalyst 800-N, P-CNT as the cathode, and potassium hydroxide as the electrolyte. As displayed in Fig. 21c, the Zn–air battery with 800-N, P-CNT on the cathode at 1.53 V had high open-circuit potential.
 Fig. 21  (a) Illustration of the preparation of the N,P-C. (b) Schematic of the basic configuration of a primary Zn–air battery. (c) Photograph of the ZABs and the corresponding open-circle potential (OCP).129 (ZABs: Zn–air batteries). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Since 2D materials such as COFs with ordered construction and pre-designed π-electronic frameworks display great features for utilization in electronic and optoelectronic devices, Xiong et al. prepared COF material on the graphene surface and new heterostructures were successfully obtained.130 With the help of the COF/graphene heterostructure, an ultrasensitive photodetector was designed and developed. In Fig. 22a the preparation process of the photodetector can be observed, where single-layer graphene was held by a copper substrate immersed in a combination of COF monomers. In solvothermal conditions, these monomers reacted and grew on the surface of graphene for the formation of the heterostructure. The heterostructure prepared through the wet-transfer process was located on a gold electrode on a Si–SiO2 layer (Fig. 22b). An SEM image of the fabricated photodetector is displayed in Fig. 22c. Based on the outcomes, this device showed excellent photo-responsivity (3.2 × 107 A W−1 at 473 nm and 1.14 ms).
 Fig. 22  COFETBC–TAPT-graphene photodetectors. (a) COFETBC–TAPT was grown on Cu-supported CVD graphene in a sealed glass tube with COF powder precipitated in the bottom of the reaction vessel. Photodetectors were fabricated by assembling a COFETBC–TAPT-graphene heterostructure with Au electrodes on a Si/SiO2 substrate. The area in dashed lines represents the chemical structures of COFETBC–TAPT and its monomers. (b) Side view of a constructed COFETBC–TAPT-graphene photodetector and its measurement setup. (c) The SEM image of the fabricated device. The scale bar is 20 μm. Inset: The enlarged SEM image of the COFETBC–TAPT-graphene area. The scale bar is 1 μm.130 (CVD: chemical vapor deposition, SEM: scanning electron microscope). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020. 
Mohammed et al. reported a synthetic technique for the creation of self-supported hierarchically porous COF foams including well-organized micro-pores (2–2.2 nm), disordered meso-/macropores (50 nm to 200 μm), and well-ordered macro-pores (1.5 mm to 2 cm) via applying the 3D printing technology.131 In this study, graphene oxide was employed to create disorderly macro/mesopores in preparation for diverse geometrical shapes of COF/graphene oxide foams. The COF was prepared and then graphene oxide suspension (foaming mediator) was applied for the creation of macro-pores in the COF (Fig. 23). By using a 3D printer, diverse shapes were obtained. The resultant 3D-printed COF/graphene oxide foam was applied as an outstanding adsorbent for the fast elimination of organic and inorganic contaminants like methylene blue and congo red dyes, and KMnO4 with efficiencies of 95% and 98%, respectively. This foam also removed bisphenol A from the water with 80% efficiency.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis and 3D printing of COF-GO foams. The mixture of COF precursors, water, and graphene oxide forms a hydrogel, which is used for the 3D-printing. (b) Schematic representation of the partial frameworks of COFs. At this stage, we expect the formation of partial framework structures or oligomers in the 3D-printing ink. (c) (i and ii) The SEM image of a 3D-printed millimeter-sized COFGO foam grid with print resolution of 0.7 mm and pore size of 1.5 mm. (c) (iii and iv) The digital photographs of a 3D-printed centimeter-sized COF-GO foam grid. (d) The precursors for COF-GO foam synthesis. (e) The space-filled model of TpBD COF. (f) and (i) X-ray microtomography of the 3D printed TpBD foam. It shows the presence of macropores in the COF-GO foam; (ii) SEM image of the TpBD foam monolith, which displays the macropores in the matrix; (iii) graphical representation of the macroporous foam. (g) and (i) The digital image of a 3D-printed self-supported nine-pore COF-GO foam grid with the size of 2.3 × 2.3 cm; (ii) graphical representation of the nine-pore COF-GO foam grid.131 (COF-GO: covalent organic framework-graphene oxide). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
Other hybrids of COFs
MOF/COF hybrid materials
Each MOF and COF compound has unique benefits and limitations. For example, in the removal of colored contaminants from water, because MOF has insufficient chemical stability in organic, acidic, and alkaline environments, these limitations can be compensated for by hybridization with COF and new properties can be obtained. COFs can be suitable for the removal of pollutants due to their low density, good chemical and thermal stability, as well as through the formation of electrostatic and H-bonding, π–π stacking, and Lewis acid–base interactions. In this regard, Firoozi et al. prepared a hybrid of MOF/COF as an efficient sorbent for the simultaneous elimination of two dyes (rhodamine B and auramine O).132 In this study, MOF and COF were based on zinc and melamine/terephthaldehyde, respectively. The resultant adsorbent at pH 9.5 exhibited 16.18 and 17.95 mg g−1 capacity for rhodamine B and auramine O, respectively. The toughness adsorption efficacy was due to amide bond formation in MOF/COF that enhanced the adsorbent stability. In a study by Zhou et al., a label-free aptasensor was fabricated using MOF/COF nanohybrids for the detection of oxytetracycline in water;133 a melamine/cyanuric acid-based COF was added to Ce-based MOF in different dosages. The nanohybrids containing 500 mg COF revealed many good features such as wider linearity, the lowest detection limit (17.4 fg mL−1), high stability and selectivity, and reproducibility for detection. Liu et al. fabricated a nanoarchitecture as an aptasensor based on a Co-based MOF and terephthalonitrile-based COF to detect ampicillin antibiotics.134 The fabricated sensor had a high surface area, regenerability, good selectivity and stability, and also applicability in milk, water, and human serum. In another work, a MOF/COF core/shell catalyst was developed through the utilization of π–π stacking to catalyze the deacetalization–Knoevenagel condensation reaction by Gao et al.135 This core/shell had Lewis acid and Brønsted base sites due to Co(II) sites, as well as the Zr(IV) clusters in the MOF and imine groups in COF, which improved the thermal and chemical stability.
Due to the relatively low catalytic performance of MOFs, their therapeutic and catalytic efficacies are unsatisfactory. For enhancement of the therapeutic proficiency of MOF-based nanozymes, a nanozyme based on MOF–COF was designed as a peroxidase mimic with high efficiency.136 In this nanozyme, active centers were organized by the MOF's metallic nodes and with growing COFs, hierarchical nanocavities for preparing the pore microenvironment were created for the enrichment and activation of substrate molecules through noncovalent attraction. Using COF, this nanozyme effectively inhibited the bacteria. In vitro as well as in vivo examination outcomes revealed the suitable catalytic microbicidal efficiency and aided the rapid healing of the wound.
In another work, by the covalent linking method, the microporous MOF core was covered by the mesoporous COF shell for the preparation of the crystalline and hierarchical pore hybrid as an electrochemical aptasensor with great electrochemical detection activity for chloramphenicol and adenosine triphosphate.137 This sensor showed the greatest reproducibility, exceptional selectivity, outstanding stability and sensitivity for biological monitoring. Chen et al. prepared magnetic nanospheres employing an MOF/COF hybrid to modify Fe3O4 nanospheres to extract and adsorb sulfonamides in environmental samples (chicken, water, shrimp, and pork).138 Due to the outstanding sorption capability of the MOF/COF with good porosity and great efficiency of separation, the manufactured adsorbent demonstrated good results in the sample pretreatment. Other advantages were reproducibility, low detection limit, and good linearity.
In a study by Fu et al., composite membranes were produced by growing MOF on COF (MOF/COF) for molecular separation.139 The fabricated membranes revealed the developed separation selectivity of H2/CO2 as compared to the pure components (COF and MOF, individually). This outstanding behavior was due to the creation of chemical links among the supports, MOF, and COF. In another work,140 MOF nanoparticles were dispersed on COF sheets in a new approach to manufacturing stable hierarchical MOF/COFs as catalysts for solar energy conversion. To this end, a triazine-based COF was modified with benzoic acid and then bonded with MOF through amide connections and the resulting hybrid exhibited great photocatalytic performance and high stability for H2 evolution in visible-light radiation. Photo-electrochemical studies showed that the formed amide connections among the COF-MOF served as a charge transfer mediator and helped considerably to separate electron/holes. Rahmati et al. produced a recoverable catalyst based on a Co-based MOF and melamine/terephthaldehyde COF with π–π stacking interactions and used it for the preparation of benzylidenemalononitrile from aryl aldehydes under green conditions at room temperature in a short time.141 The investigation of the catalytic behavior of the resultant Co-MOF/COF displayed exceptional performance in the Knoevenagel condensation reaction. The prepared hybrid included Lewis acidic and basic sites due to Co2+ and the imine groups of MOF and COF. The durability and reusability of Co-MOF/COF were also investigated. Good catalytic performance was observed for 15 mg of Co-MOF/COF at room temperature for 5–60 min. Garzln-Tovar et al. reported a two-stage procedure (spray-drying and amorphous-crystalline conversion) for the fabrication of porous MOF/COF beads.142 At first, with spray-drying, the MOF was encapsulated in amorphous polymer beads and after that, these beads were subjected to covalent chemistry conditions and transformed into crystals. With this conversion, at the interface of the MOF–COF hybrid, micropores and mesopores with superior porosity were produced. The surface area of the MOF–COF hybrid was better as compared to that of each component.
In addition to these studies on MOF/COF, in other works,143 MOF@COF hybrids were designed, fabricated, and employed for many other applications; for example, Peng et al. used an MOF/COF core/shell for the photocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B. Wang et al. used MOF@COFs for ratiometric fluorescence sensing.144 In a study by Zhu et al., Pd nanoclusters were blended into an MOF/COF hybrid as nano-reactors for catalytic hydrogenation.145 In another study by Yola et al., an immunosensor was prepared using Ti-MOF@COFs core/shell composites and gold nanoparticles.146
MOP/COF hybrid materials
Like MOFs and COFs, metal–organic polyhedra (MOP), as a porous material, is a good choice for water treatment. Mollick et al. fabricated an anion exchangeable composite with an embedded MOP structure (Fig. 24a) inside the COF matrix with particular binding sites for the selective sequestration and removal of toxic oxoanions (the main source of contamination such as CrO42−, SeO42−, ReO4−) from water. The capture of oxoanions from water is of paramount importance for environmental preservation as well as human health.147 A schematic illustration for the sequestration of oxoanions by the prepared hybrid can be observed in Fig. 24b. The cationic composite (MOP/COF) was manufactured through a two-step procedure; at first, 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol was used for the functionalization of MOP, and then, the modified MOP reacted with 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol and p-phenylenediamine for the manufacture of the MOP/COF hybrid (Fig. 24c). Based on this, the prepared composite showed a flowerlike morphology that was different from the MOP and COF components. Exchangeable Cl− ions (exchange with oxoanions), Cp3Zr3O-(OH)3 SBU (replacement of OH groups with oxoanions and trapping in the Zr(IV) SBU sites), as well as –NH2 (H-bonding with oxoanions) groups played a role in the removal of oxoanions. In a similar study, Karmakar et al. explored a smart hybrid based on MOP/COF to capture toxic oxoanions from water. In this work, the MOP and COF were covalently linked for the generation of an anion exchangeable composite to remove metallic oxoanions (Fig. 24d).148 MOP was based on the exchangeable performances of cationic (Zr cluster) and anionic (Cl ions) sites. Cationic MOP was attached to the COF, where the COF acted as an inflexible porous anchor and facilitated the exposure of MOP and oxoanions. Due to this cationic MOP/COF composite, anion-exchange was performed for oxoanions. This hybrid displayed an amazing feat and selectively removed oxoanions in the presence of other anions. The prepared hybrid showed fast kinetics (100% efficiency in seconds), and great selectivity for water purification.
 Fig. 24  (a) Structure of the MOP molecule. (b) Schematic representation of the selective capture of toxic oxoanions by a nanotrap-grafted anion exchangeable hybrid material. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the anion exchangeable hybrid material.147 (d) Schematic illustration of the anion exchangeable MOP/COF hybrid material acting as a nanotrap for oxyanions.148 (MOP/COF: metal–organic polyhedral/covalent organic framework). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 147, with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020, and ref. 148, with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
COF/MXene hybrid materials
MXenes are compounds that contain nitrides/carbides/carbonitrides with good active sites, which have favorable features like metallic conductivity and charge mobility anisotropy. In a study by Wang et al., heterostructures of MXenes/COF were prepared for photocatalytic H2 generation.149 Pristine COF photocatalysts show relatively low proficiency due to quick charge recombination; therefore, the hybridization of COFs can improve the photocatalytic performance by the separation of the charge/carrier in the photo-redox process. For the preparation of hybrids, β-ketoenamine-linked COFs were produced, which showed good photocatalytic action. Particularly, after growing (in situ) β-ketoenamine-linked COFs on MXene through covalent linking, the fabricated hybrid showed an obvious enhancement in the photocatalytic performance due to effective charge transfer, robust covalent coupling, as well as good electrical conductivity.
Conclusions and outlook
COFs currently have countless applications in various fields and researchers around the world are interested in using these valuable substances in diverse utilizations. COFs as crystalline materials with orderly porous constructions have great features like high specific surface area, chemical, and thermal stability, low density, etc. Because of these benefits, COFs have been employed in diverse fields such as water purification and remediation, medicine, catalysts, photocatalysts, and so on. COF-based hybrids and a variety of materials, including polymers, carbon compounds, and metal oxides, have great potential for a variety of applications. Through the combination of these versatile and valuable materials with other components, new hybrids with improved properties have been obtained and have the potential to be used in many fields. Numerous membranes or catalysts have been prepared with polymeric hybrids of COFs, which are used for molecular separation, water purification, and catalysis. COF/metal oxide hybrids have been used as nanocatalysts for CO2 conversion, environmental remediation, and so on. COF hybrids based on carbon materials have been applied in batteries, supercapacitors, and electrodes. Diverse sensor adsorbents and photocatalysts have been developed using MOF/COF hybrids. While attractive and successful advances have been made based on COF hybrids, several issues need to be considered for future development, e.g., investigation of the synergistic effects of compounds on the resulting composites. Investigations of the synthetic parameters of these hybrids, as well as their recycling and stability, are some of the issues that can be considered in the future.
Abbreviations

COFsCovalent organic frameworks
MOFMetal−organic frameworks
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
LEDLight-emitting diode
PVAPoly(vinyl alcohol)
BTABenzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde
DHBD3,3′-Dihydroxybenzidine
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
PECPhoto-electrochemical
MOPMetal–organic polyhedra

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We are immensely grateful for financial support from the Research Affairs Division of Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan. I. R. Iran, and Iran Nanotechnology Initiative Council (INIC) Tehran, I. R. Iran. We would also like to show our gratitude to the National Elite Foundation (NEF), Tehran, I. R. Iran, and Center of Excellence in Sensors and Green Chemistry IUT. We are thankful to Miss. F. Sirous for the nice comments.
References
B. Gui, G. Lin, H. Ding, C. Gao, A. Mal and C. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Li, B. Gui, G. Lin, Q. Fu, S. Yin, X. Liu, J. Sun and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2123–2129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Nguyen, C. Gropp, Y. Ma, C. Zhu and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20335–20339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Chen, T. Xiong, C. Zhou, X. Li, D. Huang, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4135–4165 RSC .
E. Ploetz, H. Engelke, U. Lächelt and S. Wuttke, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909062 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao and D. Jiang, CCS Chem., 2021, 3, 2003–2024 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kandambeth, K. Dey and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1807–1822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Waller, F. Gándara and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3053–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yildirim and B. Derkus, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 3034–3044 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lohse and T. Bein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705553 CrossRef .
Z. Li, T. He, Y. Gong and D. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1672–1685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, G. Li, D. Wu, B. Zhang, N. Hu, H. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Wu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 145, 111699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, B. Li, R. Zhu and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 602–623 CrossRef CAS .
M. Martínez-Abadía and A. Mateo-Alonso, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, J. Qiao, S. W. Chee, H. Sen Xu, X. Zhao, H. S. Choi, W. Yu, S. Y. Quek, U. Mirsaidov and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4932–4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Segura, S. Royuela and M. Mar Ramos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3903–3945 RSC .
H. M. El-Kaderi, J. R. Hunt, J. L. Mendoza-Cortés, A. P. Côté, R. E. Taylor, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2007, 13, 268–273 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355, aal1585 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Wang, H. Jiang, A. Sheng, Z. Wei, Y. Li, C. Wu and H. Li, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 9329–9339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rezvani Alanagh, I. Rostami, M. Taleb, X. Gao, Y. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, X. He, L. Li and Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 7899–7903 RSC .
X. Guo, T. Mao, Z. Wang, P. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. Ma and Z. Zhang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 787–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Di, L. Hu, L. Gao, X. Yan, W. Zheng, Y. Dai, X. Jiang, X. Wu and G. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125833 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Wang, S. Qi and M. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 17675–17683 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, M. Miyayama and K. Kamiya, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1644–1652 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kumar, M. Singh, R. Goswami and S. Neogi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 48642–48653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Du, W. Zhou, H. Shen, L. Tan, C. Zhou and L. Dong, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 3421–3427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, B. He, Y. Lin, M. Li and J. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 117, 111243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Ma, G. J. Chen, F. Huang and Y. Bin Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12574–12578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, R. Xia, J. Zhou, X. Zheng, S. Liu and Z. Xie, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2346–2356 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Pan, S. Wu, Z. Sun, L. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Yin and G. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 169, 112638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and F. Tabesh, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 166, 722–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and F. Tabesh, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 133, 754–766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Xu, Z. H. An, K. Xu, Q. Liu, R. Das and H. L. Zhao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 15, 213554 CrossRef .
S. Mallakpour and M. Naghdi, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 6510–6523 RSC .
S. Mallakpour and F. Motirasoul, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 224, 592–602 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mallakpour and V. Behranvand, Layered double hydroxide polymer nanocomposites for water purification, in “Layered Double Hydroxide Polymer Nanocomposites”, ed. S. Thomas and S. Daniel, Elsevier, Woodhead Publishing, Sawston, Cambridge, United Kingdom,  2020, pp. 781–803 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Xia, J. Gu, W. Wang, Q. Liu, L. Yan and T. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Mallakpour and E. Khadem, Carbon Nanotubes for Heavy Metals Removal, In “Composite Nanoadsorbents”, ed. G. Kyzas and A. C. Mitrpoulos,  2019, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands, pp. 181–210 Search PubMed .

          C. M. Hussain, Handbook of functionalized nanomaterials for industrial applications, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2020 Search PubMed .
K. K. Khaing, D. Yin, Y. Ouyang, S. Xiao, B. Liu, L. Deng, L. Li, X. Guo, J. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 6942–6952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, Z. Lu, W. Liang and B. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 393, 122353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Rahmanian, M. Falsafin and M. Dinari, Polym. Int., 2020, 69, 712–718 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J. Li, G. Xie, G. Lin, R. Chen, Z. Peng, C. Yang, B. Wang, J. Sun and C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lu, Z. Wang, F. Cui, J. Li, X. Han, Q. Qi, G. Jiang, X. Zeng and X. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34990–34998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, X. Li, T. Feng, S. Cai, T. Chen, C. Zhu, J. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51837–51845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Lin, M. Tang, Y. Wu and C. Ke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5154–5158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zare and Z. Rafie, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2020, 7, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Zheng, C. Yao and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 319–326 CrossRef .
Z. Gao, L. Le Gong, X. Q. He, X. M. Su, L. H. Xiao and F. Luo, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 4995–5003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Manoranjan, F. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Dong, W. Fang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu and J. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 53096–53103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, A. Wen, J. Liu, D. Wu and Y. Wu, Food Chem. J., 2021, 337, 127974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Biswal, H. D. Chaudhari, R. Banerjee and U. K. Kharul, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4695–4699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Qiao, Z. Wang, S. Zhao, P. Li, J. Wang and S. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 9167–9174 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. H. Duong, V. A. Kuehl, B. Mastorovich, J. O. Hoberg, B. A. Parkinson and K. D. Li-Oakey, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 574, 338–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, Y. Wang, G. Deng, X. Zong, C. Zhang and S. Xue, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2019, 30, 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Liu and J. Lu, High Perform. Polym., 2019, 31, 671–678 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, L. Zhai, Y. Ying, Y. Wang, G. Liu, J. Dong, D. Z. L. Ng, S. A. Khan and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4549–4560 RSC .
W. Xu, X. Sun, M. Huang, X. Pan, X. Huang and H. Zhuang, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 269, 110758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, H. Wu, F. Pan, Z. Li, H. Ding, G. Liu, Z. Jiang, P. Zhang, X. Cao and B. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 520, 583–595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, J. Yuan, H. Wu, Y. Su, H. Yang, X. You, R. Zhang, X. He, N. A. Khan, R. Kasher and Z. Jiang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 576, 131–141 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. Wei and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 604, 118090 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, Z. Zhang, H. Gao, Y. Qian, L. Tan, C. Yang, H. Zhang, Z. Cui, W. Li and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2926–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, X. Li, Q. Liao, Y. Liu, K. Xi, W. Huang and X. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Mu, W. Cai, Y. Xiao, L. He, X. Zhou, H. J. Wang, W. Guo, W. Xing and L. Song, Composites, Part B, 2020, 198, 108218 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, H. Yang, S. Chen and L. Wang, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 32, 101786 CrossRef .
P. García-Arroyo, M. P. Arrieta, D. Garcia-Garcia, R. Cuervo-Rodríguez, V. Fombuena, M. J. Mancheño and J. L. Segura, Polymer, 2020, 196, 122466 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, N. Han, L. Tan, Y. Qian, H. Zhang, M. Wang, W. Li, Z. Cui and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 16545–16554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, L. G. Ding, B. J. Yao, N. Huang, J. T. Li, Q. J. Fu and Y. Bin Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11140–11146 RSC .
L. G. Ding, B. J. Yao, F. Li, S. C. Shi, N. Huang, H. B. Yin, Q. Guan and Y. Bin Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4689–4698 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Liu, S. Zou, C. Lu, H. Bai, H. Mu and J. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 123008 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, X. Wang, G. Chen, C. Guo and B. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 246, 122574 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Li, Q. Zhao, L. Li, R. Chen and C. He, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 1517–1529 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, R. Chen, Y. Li, T. Xiong and Y. Li, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 5879–5892 CrossRef CAS .
S. Periyasamy and N. Viswanathan, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 64, 2280–2291 CrossRef CAS .
S. Periyasamy, M. Naushad and N. Viswanathan, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2020, 6, 851–863 RSC .
H. Yang, H. Wu, F. Pan, M. Wang, Z. Jiang, Q. Cheng and C. Huang, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2020, 28, 90–97 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Y. Ji, X. Li, X. Wang, M. Song, H. Gou, S. Gao and X. Jia, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Ma, Y. Du, L. Zhang, J. Gan and J. Yang, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Fan, H. Wu, Y. Li, B. Shi, X. He, M. Qiu, X. Mao and Z. Jiang, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 349, 115316 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Khan, N. A. Khan, N. A. Khan, J. Yuan, J. Yuan, H. Wu, H. Wu, H. Wu, T. Huang, T. Huang, X. You, X. You, A. U. Rahman, C. S. Azad, M. A. Olson, M. A. Olson, Z. Jiang and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27777–27785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, B. Jiang, C. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. He, X. Huang, W. Chen, K. Xi, H. Guo, X. Zhao and X. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 4475–4488 RSC .
Q. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Liu, Z. Chen, B. Li, X. Liao, J. Mac Regenstein, J. Wang and X. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8751–8760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, L. Huang, D. Guo, Y. Zhao and Y. Zhu, J. Chromatogr. A, 2018, 1571, 76–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, X. Shi, Z. Zhang, A. Xiao, S. P. Sun, Z. Cui and Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 586, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, Y. Wang, X. Wu, M. Pan, N. Hu, J. Wang and S. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 291, 293–297 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, T. S. Khan, A. Ghosh, A. H. Chowdhury, M. A. Haider, A. Khan and S. M. Islam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5495–5513 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lan, C. Du, L. Cao, T. She and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, D. Li, L. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou, J. Mu and Z. Su, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 1051–1059 RSC .
X. Tan, Z. Zhang, T. Cao, W. Zeng, T. Huang and G. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem., 2019, 7, 20051–20059 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yu-Fang Ma, L.-J. Wang, Y.-L. Zhou and X.-X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5526–5534 RSC .
Y. Li, C. Du, T. She, Q. Li and G. Bai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 8560–8569 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. He, Z. Lei, C. Gao, Q. Xie, P. Tong and Z. Lin, Talanta, 2018, 181, 296–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. You, K. Xu, G. Ding, X. Shi, J. Li, S. Wang and J. Wang, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 320, 114456 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, C. Gao, W. Ma, Y. He, J. Wu, K. Luo, D. Ouyang, Z. Lin and Z. Cai, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187, 370–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Huang, Z. Lin and Z. Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22492–22500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Yao, X. M. Zhang, F. Li, C. Li and Y. Bin Dong, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 10360–10368 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, N. Li, D. Wu, N. Hu, J. Sun, X. Zhou, Y. Suo, G. Li and Y. Wu, Anal. Methods, 2018, 10, 5014–5024 RSC .
N. Li, D. Wu, N. Hu, G. Fan, X. Li, J. Sun, X. Chen, Y. Suo, G. Li and Y. Wu, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 3572–3580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Q. Liang, S. Ali, H. Ahmed and J. Zhang, Food Anal. Methods, 2020, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Z. Deng, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Gao, L. Dong, M. Wang and R. Zhao, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 2, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, M. Gao, K. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Wang, Q. Fu, Z. Xia and D. Gao, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Benyettou, G. Das, A. R. Nair, T. Prakasam, D. B. Shinde, S. K. Sharma, J. Whelan, Y. Lalatonne, H. Traboulsi, R. Pasricha, O. Abdullah, R. Jagannathan, Z. Lai, L. Motte, F. Gándara, K. C. Sadler and A. Trabolsi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18782–18794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, N. Mao, Q. Yan, D. Zhang and Q. Shuai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, J. Xiao, L. Liu, L. Qiu and X. Jiang, J. Porous Mater., 2016, 23, 791–800 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, H. X. Jiang, Y. Geng, X. H. Wang, R. Z. Gao, A. N. Tang and D. M. Kong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20922–20932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Mallakpour and E. Azadi, Sonochemical protocol for the organo-synthesis of TiO2 and its hybrids: properties and applications, in Green Sustainable Process for Chemical and Environmental Engineering and Science, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands,  2020, pp. 287–323 Search PubMed .
S. Mallakpour and V. Ramezanzade, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 162, 512–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, X. Huang, Z. Wu, Y. Li, L. Xing, H. Gao, W. Dong and G. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 493, 551–560 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002091 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Han, Y.-M. Fu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Meng, Z.-Y. Zhou and Z.-M. Su, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 3186–3192 RSC .
M. Zhang, M. Lu, Z. L. Lang, J. Liu, M. Liu, J. N. Chang, L. Y. Li, L. J. Shang, M. Wang, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6500–6506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, W. Gao, N. Liu, Y. Xin, X. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Tian, X. Chen and B. Hou, Corros. Sci., 2020, 176, 108920 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, H. Liu, C. Li, J. Liu, J. Liu and Q. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18745–18754 RSC .
Q. Yang, P. Peng and Z. Xiang, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 162, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Li, M. Y. Gao, X. J. Sun, H. L. Tang, H. Dong and F. M. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 266, 118586 CrossRef .
S. Mallakpour, E. Azadi and C. M. Hussain, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 419, 213378 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, B. Krishna Chandra, R. A. Molla, M. Sengupta, S. M. Islam, A. Majee and A. Bhaumik, Mol. Catal., 2020, 480, 110650 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chakraborty, S. Nandi, D. Mullangi, S. Haldar, C. P. Vinod and R. Vaidhyanathan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15670–15679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Qin, X. Zhu and Y. Teng, Energy, 2020, 199, 117372 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Mohammed, V. Vijayakumar, A. Halder, M. Ghosh, M. Addicoat, U. Bansode, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30828–30837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Yao, Y. Mai, J. Liu, X. Hua and H. Wei, Mater. Lett., 2018, 213, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Xu, F. H. Du and Y. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1–12 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Xu, X. Qiao and Z. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 321, 128501 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Yang, H. Liang, L. Wang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1412–1419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Shen, L. Wang, Y. Song and L. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 855, 113590 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, B. Guo, Y. Yu, X. Zhou, J. R. Gong and S. Lei, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 18780–18786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, C. H. Zhu, Y. Liu, C. Wang, L. J. Wan and D. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4367–4374 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Zhao, C. Yin, L. Wei, W. Wu, Z. Hu and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44519–44528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Q. Liao, Z. Huang, X. Huang, C. Ke, H. Zhu, C. Dong, H. Wang, K. Xi, P. Zhan, F. Xu and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–8 Search PubMed .
A. K. Mohammed, S. Usgaonkar, F. Kanheerampockil, S. Karak, A. Halder, M. Tharkar, M. Addicoat, T. G. Ajithkumar and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8252–8261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Firoozi, Z. Rafiee and K. Dashtian, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 9420–9428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhou, Y. Ma, B. Hu, L. He, S. Wang, Z. Zhang and S. Lu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 127, 92–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, M. Hu, M. Wang, Y. Song, N. Zhou, L. He and Z. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 123, 59–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Gao, M. H. Qi, L. Liu and Z. B. Han, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6377–6380 RSC .
J. Ren, L. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. Deng, Y. Sang, K. Dong and X. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3469–3474 CrossRef PubMed .
H. W. Zhang, Q. Q. Zhu, R. Yuan and H. He, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 129144 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. He, X. Luo, F. Wu, S. Tang and J. Zhang, Food Anal. Methods, 2020, 13, 1346–1356 CrossRef .
J. Fu, S. Das, G. Xing, T. Ben, V. Valtchev and S. Qiu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7673–7680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, D. Wang, Q. J. Xing, G. Zhou, S. S. Liu, Y. Li, L. L. Zheng, P. Ye and J. P. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 621–628 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rahmati and Z. Rafiee, J. Porous Mater., 2020, 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. Garzón-Tovar, J. Pérez-Carvajal, A. Yazdi, J. Hernández-Muñoz, P. Tarazona, I. Imaz, F. Zamora and D. Maspoch, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 9612–9616 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, M. Zhao, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, F. Dai, Z. Lai, X. Cui, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–5 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Wang, H. Q. Yin and X. B. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20973–20981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. D. Wang, X. Sun, M. Fan, X. Hu and Z. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7285–7294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Yola and N. Atar, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19824–19832 RSC .
S. Mollick, S. Fajal, S. Saurabh, D. Mahato and S. K. Ghosh, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1534–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Karmakar and J. Li, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1476–1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Qian, J. Liu, Y. Zeng, D. Wang, W. Zhou, L. Gu, H. Wu, G. Liu and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 4862–4871 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
Table Content:

Shadpour Mallakpour
	Professor Shadpour Mallakpour, an organic polymer chemist, graduated from the Chemistry Department, University of Florida (UF), Gainesville, Florida, USA, in 1984. He spent two years as a post-doctoral fellow at UF. He joined the Department of Chemistry, Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Iran, in 1986. He held several positions, such as the Chairman of the Department of Chemistry and Deputy of Research in the Department of Chemistry at IUT. From 1994-1995 he worked as a visiting professor at the University of Mainz, Germany, and from 2003-2004 as a visiting professor at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA. He has published more than 850 journal papers and more than 400 conference papers and has received more than 30 awards. The most important award to him was being selected as the first laureate of fundamental research at the 21st Khwarizmi International Awards in 2008. He is listed in the Top 1% of Scientists in Chemistry in ISI Essential Science Indicators since 2003. He has also been listed in the Top 2% of Scientists in polymers in 2020. He was selected as an academic guest at the 59th Meeting of Nobel Prize Winners in Chemistry, 2009, at Lindau, Germany. He has presented many lectures as an invited or keynote speaker in different national and international conferences or universities. He has been a member of organizing and scientific committees for many national and international conferences. He has also been the chairperson of many national and international meetings. In recent years, he has focused on the preparation and characterization of polymer-based nanocomposites to be used as bioactive materials, as well as adsorbents and photocatalysts for remediation technology.

Elham Azadi
	Elham Azadi received her BSc in Chemistry in 2011. She also received her MSc in Organic Polymer Chemistry in 2014 from Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran. Currently, she is a PhD student in organic polymer chemistry at IUT. Her research interests include biomaterials, high-performance polymer–inorganic nanocomposites, and metal oxide NPs and the removal of hazardous pollutants.

Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain
	Chaudhery Mustansar Hussain, PhD is an Adjunct Professor, Academic Advisor, and Director of Chemistry and EVSc Labs in the Department of Chemistry and Environmental Sciences at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark, New Jersey, USA. His research is focused on the applications of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Environmental Management, Analytical Chemistry in various industries. Dr Hussain is the author of numerous papers in peer-reviewed journals. He is also a prolific author and editor of several scientific monographs and handbooks in his research areas published with ELSEVIER, Royal Society of Chemistry, John Wiley & sons, CRC, Springer, etc.

 	Fig. 1  Number of publications on the Scopus website with the keywords “covalent organic framework” in 2020.	 

 	Fig. 2  The latest applications of COF materials in 2020.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representations of the synthesis of COFs and their packing models indicating the pore apertures and stacking distances. (b) Overview of the solution-casting method for COF@PBI-BuI hybrid membrane fabrication. (c) Digital photographs showing the flexibility of TpPa-1 and TpBD(50)@PBI-BuI hybrid membranes.53 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Flowsheet of the secondary growth synthesis of the TpHz/PES membrane on the PEI-modified PES substrate. Inset is the synthetic scheme of TpHz synthesized by the Schiff base condensation reaction between Tp (blue) and Hz (red). (b) Schematic illustration of the diffusion cell for TpHz growth on the substrate by unidirectional diffusion synthesis. (c) Schematic illustration of the formation of the TpHz selective layer on the substrate top side via the unidirectional diffusion of Hz and PTSA (catalyst) molecules through the pores of the substrate to react with Tp molecules (for interpretation of the references to color in this Fig. legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.). (d) The structural model of the TpHz/PES membrane with a continuous TpHz selective layer after secondary growth. (e) Schematic representation of the ion sieving mechanism of the TpHz selective layer.62 (PES: polyethersulfone, PTSA: p-toluene sulfonic acid, TpHz: imine-based COF). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of (a–c) pristine melamine foam and (d–f) COF–DTF@foam. (g) Images of COF-DTF@foam (brown) and melamine foam (white) filled with water. (h) Image of COF-DTF@foam soaked in water by external forces. (i) Photograph of oil (red) and water (blue) droplets on the surface of the COF-DTF@foam and pristine melamine foam. (j) COF-DTF@foam can separate underwater oil such as chloroform from water.63 (DTF: DhaTab fluoride, COF: covalent organic frameworks). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representations. (a and b) The synthesis of DOX-loaded PEG-CCM@APTES-COF-1 with cellular uptake at weak acidic tumor tissue/cells.64 (DOX: doxorubicin, PEG: polyethylene-glycol, CCM: curcumin, APTES-COF-1: amine-functionalized COFs). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 64. An open-access paper, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and d) SEM images of 3D-KSC, (b and e) 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1 and (c and f) 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1/PANI. (g) Chemical structure of COF-LZU1. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1, 3D-KSC/PANI and 3D-KSC/COF-LZU1/PANI.66 (KSC: Kenaf stem-derived carbon, PANI: polyaniline, COF-LZU1: covalent-organic framework). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Preparation of the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane and the selective separation process of oil/water emulsions and mixtures. Photographs of (b) the pristine membrane and (d) the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane. SEM images showing the surface structures of (c) the pristine membrane and (e) the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane. Selective separation mechanisms for oil/water emulsions and mixtures (f). Photographs of toluene-in-water and water-in-toluene surfactant-stabilized emulsions before and after filtration by the COF-DhaTab/PAN composite membrane (g).68 (COF-DhaTab/PAN: covalent organic frameworks-DhaTab/polyacrylonitrile). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of TpPa-1, TpPa-NO2, NUS-2 and TpTe-1. Their sample photographs and SEM images are given in the insets. (b) The fabrication of COF–chitosan hybrid aerogel monoliths. (c) COF–chitosan aerogels (COF, 50 wt%) based on TpPa-1, TpPa-NO2, NUS-2 and TpTe-1. (d) Vertical- (TpTe-1@chitosan) and side-direction (TpPa-NO2@chitosan and TpTe-1@chitosan) pressing tests conducted with a 250 g balance weight, and the exhibition of the TpTe-1@chitosan aerogel propped on the grassy leaves of a spider plant. (e) Photographs of the four obtained COF–chitosan aerogels with various shapes based on different moulds.69 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Digital image of wet MCOP–Alg composite beads. SEM images of (b) the MCOP–Alg composite beads, (c) MCOP. (d) The synthesis and iron adsorption mechanism of the MCOP–Alg composite bead.75 (MCOP–Alg: melamine-rich covalent organic polymer/alginate). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic route for the generation of Ag@TpTta nanocatalysts.87 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM image of WP6@Ag (a); HRTEM image of WP6@Ag (b); TEM image of WP6@Ag@COF (c). High-resolution image of WP6@Ag@COF (d).90 (WP6@Ag: Pillar[6]arene (WP6)-modified Ag nanoparticles, HRTEM: high-resolution transmission electron microscope). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) TEM images of Fe3O4 nanoparticles and Fe3O4@COF. (c) Adsorption mechanism of BPA and BPAF on Fe3O4@COF. (d) The adsorption process of bisphenols on Fe3O4@COF.94 (BPA: Bisphenol A, BPAF: Bisphenol AF). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 94 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The Fabrication of Fe3O4@DhaTph-Lipase and its interfacial catalytic synthesis of hexyl hexanoate perfume via visible-light-induced photothermal conversion. (b) Model diagram of the water-in-hexane Pickering emulsion system stabilized by the Fe3O4@DhaTph-lipase microspheres; (c) the corresponding reversible magnetically regulated demulsification behavior.97 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Synthetic procedure for Fe3O4@COF(TpDA) materials and the application of Fe3O4@COF(TpDA) as a sorbent for MSPE. (b) Schematic fabrication process for Fe3O4@COF(TpBD) and application in magnetic solid-phase extraction. (c and d) TEM images of Fe3O4@COF nanocrystals.98,99 (MSPE: magnetic solid-phase extraction; PHA: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry copyright 2018, and ref. 99 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of (a) Fe3O4, (b) Fe3O4@COFs.102 (c and d) Representative TEM images of Fe3O4 and the as-prepared Fe3O4@COF.100 (e and f) TEM images of Fe3O4 microspheres at 25000× magnification, and Fe3O4@COFs microspheres at 25000× magnification101 (TEM: transmission electron microscopy). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from Springer, copyright 2019, ref. 100 with permission from Springer, copyright 2020, and 101 with permission from Springer, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 17  HRTEM images of (a) SD, (b) γ-SD, and (c) γ-SD/PLL. (d) Schematic representation of γ-SD/PLL synthesis: (1) loading of doxorubicin (Dox) into the TAB-DFP-nCOF pores. (2) Coating with 10 nm iron oxide nanoparticles (γ-Fe2O3 NPs), followed by (3) stabilization with a shell of poly(L-lysine) cationic polymer (PLL) via a simple impregnation procedure. (e) The subsequent magnetically induced heat- and acid-triggered Dox release from γ-SD/PLL in conditions that mimic cancer cell physiology.103 (PLL: poly(L-lysine)). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic representation of the preparation of COF-318-SCs via the condensation of COF-318 and a semiconductor.112 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the TiO2-TpPa-1-COF hybrid material. (b) Schematic of the mechanism of the TiO2-TpPa-1-COF hybrid material. (c) SEM images of the TiO2-TpPa-1-COF.116 This figure has been reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Eclipsed models of DqTp and DqDaTp COFs; PXRD patterns of DqTp-CNF and DqDaTp-CNF hybrids; a schematic representation of the synthesis of the crystalline, yet flexible, DqTp-CNF and DqDaTp-CNF COFs. (b) Photographs of a freestanding and flexible DqDaTp-CNF hybrid thin sheet. (c) Diagrammatic representation of the COF–CNF hybrid model. (d) Diagrammatic representation of PSC. (e) Photograph of PSC as a wearable device and the diagrammatic representation of the supercapacitor; the X-ray tomography 3D image displays the interphases of the device.121 (CNF: carbon nanofibers, PXRD: Powder X-Ray Diffraction). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Illustration of the preparation of the N,P-C. (b) Schematic of the basic configuration of a primary Zn–air battery. (c) Photograph of the ZABs and the corresponding open-circle potential (OCP).129 (ZABs: Zn–air batteries). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 22  COFETBC–TAPT-graphene photodetectors. (a) COFETBC–TAPT was grown on Cu-supported CVD graphene in a sealed glass tube with COF powder precipitated in the bottom of the reaction vessel. Photodetectors were fabricated by assembling a COFETBC–TAPT-graphene heterostructure with Au electrodes on a Si/SiO2 substrate. The area in dashed lines represents the chemical structures of COFETBC–TAPT and its monomers. (b) Side view of a constructed COFETBC–TAPT-graphene photodetector and its measurement setup. (c) The SEM image of the fabricated device. The scale bar is 20 μm. Inset: The enlarged SEM image of the COFETBC–TAPT-graphene area. The scale bar is 1 μm.130 (CVD: chemical vapor deposition, SEM: scanning electron microscope). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis and 3D printing of COF-GO foams. The mixture of COF precursors, water, and graphene oxide forms a hydrogel, which is used for the 3D-printing. (b) Schematic representation of the partial frameworks of COFs. At this stage, we expect the formation of partial framework structures or oligomers in the 3D-printing ink. (c) (i and ii) The SEM image of a 3D-printed millimeter-sized COFGO foam grid with print resolution of 0.7 mm and pore size of 1.5 mm. (c) (iii and iv) The digital photographs of a 3D-printed centimeter-sized COF-GO foam grid. (d) The precursors for COF-GO foam synthesis. (e) The space-filled model of TpBD COF. (f) and (i) X-ray microtomography of the 3D printed TpBD foam. It shows the presence of macropores in the COF-GO foam; (ii) SEM image of the TpBD foam monolith, which displays the macropores in the matrix; (iii) graphical representation of the macroporous foam. (g) and (i) The digital image of a 3D-printed self-supported nine-pore COF-GO foam grid with the size of 2.3 × 2.3 cm; (ii) graphical representation of the nine-pore COF-GO foam grid.131 (COF-GO: covalent organic framework-graphene oxide). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Structure of the MOP molecule. (b) Schematic representation of the selective capture of toxic oxoanions by a nanotrap-grafted anion exchangeable hybrid material. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the anion exchangeable hybrid material.147 (d) Schematic illustration of the anion exchangeable MOP/COF hybrid material acting as a nanotrap for oxyanions.148 (MOP/COF: metal–organic polyhedral/covalent organic framework). This figure has been reproduced from ref. 147, with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020, and ref. 148, with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 
COFs	Covalent organic frameworks
MOF	Metal−organic frameworks
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
LED	Light-emitting diode
PVA	Poly(vinyl alcohol)
BTA	Benzene-1,3,5-tricarbaldehyde
DHBD	3,3′-Dihydroxybenzidine
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
PEC	Photo-electrochemical
MOP	Metal–organic polyhedra

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2021
