Ultrafast exciton dynamics in InAs/ZnSe nanocrystal quantum dots    - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42125A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42125A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15166-15172Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUltrafast exciton dynamics in InAs/ZnSe nanocrystal quantum dots†‡

        
          
            Musa 
            Cadirci
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Stuart K. 
            Stubbs
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Samantha J. O. 
            Hardman
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ombretta 
            Masala
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guy 
            Allan
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christophe 
            Delerue
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Nigel 
            Pickett
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            David J. 
            Binks
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Physics and Astronomy & Photon Science Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK. E-mail: david.binks@manchester.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)161 275 1001;   Tel: +44 (0)161 2754234
bNanoco Group plc, 46 Grafton Street, Manchester, M13 9NT, UK. E-mail: npickett@nanocotechnologies.com;  Fax: +44 (0)161 603 7901;   Tel: +44 (0)161 603 7901
cDépartement ISEN, Institut d’Electronique de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnologie (UMR CNRS 8520), 41 Boulevard Vauban, F-59046 Lille Cedex, France. E-mail: Christophe.Delerue@isen.fr;   Tel: +33-3-20-30-40-53
Received 
      25th June 2012
    , Accepted 22nd August 2012First published on 30th August 2012AbstractColloidal nanocrystal quantum dots with a band gap in the near infra-red have potential application as the emitters for telecommunications or in vivo imaging, or as the photo-absorbing species in next generation solar cells or photodetectors. However, electro- and photoluminescence yields and the efficiency with which photo-generated charges can be extracted from quantum dots depend on the total rate of recombination, which can be dominated by surface-mediated processes. In this study, we use ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy to characterise the recombination dynamics of photo-generated charges in InAs/ZnSe nanocrystal quantum dots. We find that recombination is dominated by rapid, sub-nanosecond transfer of conduction band electrons to surface states. For the size of dots studied, we also find no evidence of significant multiple exciton generation for photon energies up to 3.2 times the band gap, in agreement with our theoretical modelling.
1. Introduction
Colloidal nanocrystal quantum dots (NQDs) emitting and absorbing in the near infra-red (NIR) have been the subject of significant interest in recent years because of the inexpensive, solvent-based routes by which they may be synthesised and processed, and the numerous potential applications enabled by their size-tunable properties.1 In particular, their emission may be size-tuned to commonly-used telecommunications wavelengths (typically 1200–1600 nm)1,2 or to the 650–900 nm region where optical penetration in tissue is the greatest and hence is most suitable for in vivo imaging.3 Similarly, their size-tunable band gap (Eg) makes them well-suited as the photo-absorbing species in NIR photodetectors or in next generation photovoltaics. This is particularly important for solar cells, the efficiency of which is maximised for a band gap in the NIR. For single-junction devices in which no more than one electron–hole pair is produced per absorbed photon, the optimum Eg ∼ 1.3 eV4 but for devices benefiting from multiple exciton generation (MEG), i.e. more than one electron–hole pair produced per absorbed photon, the optimum position of the band edge is even further into the NIR.5
The effectiveness of NQDs in these roles depends on the quantum efficiency (QE) of the desired process: electro- and photoluminescence quantum yield in the case of telecommunications and imaging applications, and the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency for detectors and photovoltaic cells. For NQDs, these efficiencies can be determined by the rate of non-radiative, surface-mediated trapping and recombination which occurs on sub-nanosecond timescales6,7 and competes with the desired process. An example of the importance of surface-mediated recombination is the significant improvement in photoluminescence quantum yield obtained when NQDs are over-coated with a shell of high Eg material which acts as a potential barrier that keeps photo-generated charges away from the surface. For instance, the addition of a ZnSe shell to InAs NQDs has been shown to increase the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) from 2.5% to 50%.8 However, this approach is not applicable to processes involving charge injection into NQDs, such as electroluminescence, or charge extraction from them, such as in photo-detectors or solar cells, which necessarily brings carriers into contact with the surface. It is thus important to be able to study and characterise the ultrafast exciton dynamics of NIR NQDs in order to be able to determine the influence of surface-mediated recombination.
Much of the work to date on ultrafast exciton dynamics in NIR NQDs has been on samples made from PbX (X = Se, S and Te); the interest in this type of NQD is driven by the low Eg of the bulk material (at room temperature Ebulk = 0.26, 0.37 and 0.25 eV for X = Se, S and Te, respectively9) which allows size-tuning of the absorption edge and photoluminescence across the NIR. For this reason, they have also been the subject of most of the studies of MEG reported so far.5,10–18 These MEG studies are a further illustration of the importance of understanding the role of the surface in exciton dynamics: much of the early controversy in this field19–23 arose from the fact that surface-mediated trion formation can result in an exaggerated apparent MEG QE.15,24,25 Exciton dynamics in InAs NQDs (Ebulk = 0.36 eV at room temperature9) have also been studied but to a lesser degree.26 Efficient MEG in InAs NQDs has also been reported, initially by one group27 and shortly afterwards by a second group.21 This interest was stimulated because InAs NQDs have properties that make then particularly well-suited to the application of MEG to solar power. In particular, they have a band gap that can be size-tuned to the optimum value for maximum solar cell efficiency and, as will be discussed in more detail below, they have a photon energy threshold for MEG that is close to the minimum possible.5 However, this second group later retracted their findings22,28 and it was only subsequent to these reports that the key role played by surface trapping and trions was fully realised.15,24,25 A later theoretical study calculated the lifetimes of both biexcitons and trions in InAs NQDs and found that they were indeed similar, but potentially distinguishable.29 Clearly, further experimental work on the role of the surface in determining the dynamics of excitons in InAs NQDs would help to clarify the results previously reported.
In this paper, we will describe an investigation into the sub-nanosecond exciton dynamics of InAs/ZnSe NQDs. An ultrafast transient absorption spectrometer was used to probe the time-dependent occupation of the conduction band minimum under various pump wavelengths and fluences. Samples were stirred or held static to assess the effects of surface-mediated trion formation on exciton dynamics. Our results will also be compared to previously reported theoretical studies of exciton dynamics and new calculations of the efficiency of MEG in InAs NQDs.
2. Methodology
2.1 Synthesis
InAs NQDs were synthesised by using an inorganic cluster of the type (Me4N)4[E4M10(SPh)16] (E = S, Se; M = Zn, Cd) as a seeding template with indium myristate and (Me3Si)3As as indium and arsenic precursor feed stock respectively that are added periodically to facilitate NQD growth. Contrary to the hot-injection technique, a high temperature nucleation step is not necessary to initiate NQD growth because suitable nucleation sites are already provided in the system by the molecular clusters. Feed stock solutions were injected periodically at successively higher temperatures (190 °C, 215 °C and 220 °C), with the smallest NQD size resulting from just the first injection, the mid-sized NQDs from the first two and the largest NQD from all three. During this time the emission peak shifted gradually from 700 nm to as far as 950 nm. After the last injection the reaction was kept at 220 °C for 20 min. InAs cores were isolated by addition of acetone to the reaction mixture and a black solid was obtained by centrifugation and dried under vacuum.
For the shelling reaction, a toluene solution of InAs cores was injected into the flask and toluene was removed by gentle heating under vacuum. The flask was refilled with N2 and therminol, undecylenic acid and Zn(ac)2 were added, then the solution was degassed for 1 h at 100 °C. 1-Octane selenol was used as a source of selenium and injected at 160 °C. The temperature was increased to 230 °C and held for 1 h. Four successive injections of octane selenol were made at 160 °C and the temperature was increased each time at 230 °C and kept for 1 h. The total amount of octane selenol used was calculated in order to produce a 2 ML (i.e. 0.5 nm) thick shell in each case. The reaction solution was cooled to 50 °C and a solution of hexadecylamine in toluene was injected. The solution was gently warmed, sonicated and then centrifuged. The residue solid was discarded and a brown powder was isolated from the supernatant after injection of acetone and centrifugation. All manipulations were carried out under an inert atmosphere.
2.2 Experimental studies
Steady-state absorption spectra were measured using a Camspec M550 Double Beam scanning UV/Vis spectrophotometer. The InAs/ZnSe NQD samples were prepared in hexane, and kept in 10 mm path-length cuvettes. For all samples, the concentration was adjusted so that the absorbance, A, was ∼0.2 at the band edge. The crystal phase of InAs cores produced by the method described above was confirmed to be zinc blende with a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer using Cu Kα incident X-ray radiation – see ESI.‡
The dynamics of excitons were observed using a home-built ultrafast transient absorption spectrometer which has been described previously.30 In brief, however, 5% of the output from a Spectra Physics Spitfire Pro Ti:Sapphire ultrafast regenerative amplifier (1 kHz pulse repetition rate at a wavelength of 800 nm, pulses of ∼100 fs duration and 0.8–2 μJ in energy) was focussed onto a 2 mm thick sapphire window to produce a white light continuum which was used as probe beam and divided into reference and sample arms. The reference beam bypassed the sample, whereas the sample beam was focussed into the cuvette containing the NQD solution with a spot size of ∼1 mm. In the absence of the pump-beam, the reference and sample beams were balanced using a variable neutral density filter and then passed through a SpectraPro 2500i spectrometer before detection by two silicon photodiodes. The samples were vigorously stirred at 1000 rpm throughout the experiment using a magnetic stirrer (Thermo Scientific, Variomag Mini), unless otherwise is stated. The remaining 95% of the output of the Ti:Sapphire regenerative amplifier was used, via an optical parametric amplifier (Light Conversion, TOPAS-C) and subsequent harmonic generation, to generate a pump beam with a tuneable wavelength ranging from the ultraviolet to visible region of the spectrum. To improve the signal-to-noise ratio, the pump beam was modulated with a mechanical chopper synchronised to half of the laser repetition rate and phase locked with a digital lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR830). To control the time-delay between pump and probe beam, a 200 mm long mechanized delay stage (Newport ILS) was employed.
2.3 Theoretical calculations
The relaxation of hot carriers to the ground state is modelled numerically as a competition between two processes, i.e., impact ionization and the sequential emission of phonons. The relative rates of these processes determine the number of generated electron–hole pairs per absorbed photon. Initially, the electronic structure of the NQDs is found by tight-binding calculations. Then impact ionization rates are computed for each initial state of the electron or the hole using Fermi's golden rule. The rates are determined by the two-particle matrix elements of the screened electron–electron interaction calculated in the random-phase approximation, taking into account the frequency-dependence of the screening. Concerning the relaxation via sequential emission of phonons, each carrier is considered to decay to lower energy by emission of a phonon of energy 30 meV with a rate 1/τph. The lifetime, τph, is taken to be an energy-independent parameter with a value of 0.5 ps. Further details on this methodology are given in our previous studies of MEG.31–33
3. Results and discussion
The steady-state absorbance spectra for the InAs/ZnSe NQD samples are shown in Fig. 1. There are clear shoulders visible at about 760, 850 and 950 nm in the three spectra corresponding to the 1S (i.e. band edge) absorption feature in each, and the position of this feature was used to calculate the diameter of the NQD cores as 2.6 nm, 3.5 nm, and 4.4 nm, respectively – see ESI.‡ Example band-edge transmittance transients are shown in Fig. 2 for the sample with 4.4 nm diameter core; similar transients for the other samples can be found in the ESI.‡ In each case, the pump wavelength was 450 nm and the transients resulting from pump powers between 0.5 mW and 2.5 mW are shown. The decrease of each transient from its peak value could be well described by a bi-exponential decay to a plateau in each case (see Fig. 2 and Fig. S3, ESI‡). The decay constants extracted from global fits to the transients for each NQD (which were thus the same for all pump powers) are plotted against EC−3/2 in Fig. 3, where EC = E1S − Ebulk is the confinement energy and E1S is the energy of the band edge (and which is taken to be the effective band gap of the NQD). The decay constants and the relative contributions to the transients of the associated components are tabulated in the ESI.‡ Previous studies21,22,26–28 have also reported similar bi-exponential decays of the pump-induced transmittance changes for InAs NQDs. The reported values of the associated time constants vary considerably, depending on the structure and size of the NQD. For InAs NQDs without an outer shell of large band gap material, values of a few hundred ps are described for the longer of the two time constants, τ2,27,34 similar to the values observed in this study (∼480–750 ps). For InAs NQDs with a shell or shells of either CdSe or CdSe/ZnSe, the reported values range from a few ns21 to in excess of 200 ns.27 The reported values of the shorter time constant, τ1, vary approximately linearly with EC−3/2 (which is proportional to NQD volume) over a range from a few ps to a few tens of ps for NQD with EC ∼ 1 or less.26,27 However, this relationship seems to breakdown for NQDs with larger EC (i.e. smaller NQD diameters),27 such as the ones investigated in this study; nevertheless, the lifetimes we observe (22 to 64 ps) lie within the range of values reported previously. Previous investigations have also identified the longer and shorter of the time constants as being single, τx, and biexciton lifetimes, τxx, respectively,21,27,34 consistent with a linear relationship with EC−3/2. However, subsequent work has identified alternative explanations for similar decays in other NQD types,6,7,15,24,25 and so we will now consider which of these possibilities is consistent with our observations.
 Fig. 1  Absorbance spectra for InAs/ZnSe NQDs of different diameters. 
 Fig. 2  Fractional transmittance change, ΔT/T, transients for the 4.4 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQDs with bi-exponential fits to the decay. Transients are shown for pump powers of 0.5 mW, 1 mW and 2.5 mW. 
 Fig. 3  The time constants, τ1 and τ2, yielded by a bi-exponential fit to the decay transients for InAs/ZnSe NQDs of different core diameters plotted against EC−3/2, where EC is the confinement energy. 
The probability, P(n), of a NQD absorbing n photons during a pump pulse and thus forming n excitons is governed by Poisson statistics35i.e.: P(n) = 〈n〉n exp(−〈n〉)/n!(1)where 〈n〉 is the average number of photons absorbed per NQD per pump pulse and can be estimated35 from the maximum value of the fractional transmittance change, ΔTmax/T: 〈n〉 = (2/A) × ΔTmax/T.(2)
The value of ΔTmax/T does not exceed 0.01 in our experiments and so 〈n〉 is always less than 0.1 and thus the probability of forming a biexciton is less than 5% of the probability of a single exciton being produced, i.e. P(2)/P(1) < 0.05. This is inconsistent with the approximately equal contribution both decay components make to the transient, which does not change significantly with increased excitation or between samples (the fractional contribution of each decay component is tabulated for each sample in the ESI‡). We thus conclude that the recombination of multiexcitons produced by the absorption of more than one photon per pump pulse per NQD does not significantly contribute to the sub-nanosecond transients observed here for InAs/ZnSe NQDs.
The process of MEG can increase the number of biexcitons generated relative to the number of single excitons; it can result in a significant yield of biexcitons even at low pump fluences, i.e. low 〈n〉 values, since it requires the absorption of only a single photon per pump pulse. However, MEG only occurs for pump photon energies at or above a threshold value, hνth. It was proposed in ref. 10 that hνth, depends on the band gap and the effective masses of the electron, , and hole, . as: (3)For InAs  and so the expected threshold for MEG is hνth = 2.05 × E1S, which is close to the minimum of 2.0 × E1S allowed by conservation of energy.9 The pump wavelength of 450 nm used to obtain the transients corresponds to a photon energy (2.76 eV) which is above the threshold for MEG for only one of the InAs/ZnSe NQD samples, and even in that case it is only 3% above the threshold. We thus conclude that MEG cannot explain the form of the transients observed. Since, as discussed above, InAs NQDs are potentially very well-suited to the application of MEG to improving the efficiency of solar cells5 and also have been the subject of conflicting reports in the literature, the possible effect of MEG on the observed transmittance transients was further investigated. Fig. 4 compares the transmittance transients obtained for the 4.4 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQD sample, for which E1S = 1.31 eV, when it was pumped by photons of energies 1.6 × E1S, 2.1 × E1S and 3.2 × E1S. Using an approach similar to the one developed by Ruhman and co-workers,28 the pump power was adjusted to give the same peak value of ΔT/T in each case, compensating for the change of sample absorbance with pump wavelength. Moreover, the peak value of ΔT/T was kept low to ensure the probability of a NQD absorbing more than one photon per pulse was negligible; P(2)/P(1) was calculated to be less than 0.5%. Under these conditions, there is no observable difference between the transients corresponding to the different pump wavelengths (i.e. decay constants and fractional contributions unchanged) and we therefore conclude that MEG is not significant in this case.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of transmittance transients for the 4.4 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQD pumped at different wavelengths. 
This conclusion is further supported by the results of our theoretical calculations. Fig. 5 shows the MEG quantum yield, QY, (i.e. excitons generated per absorbed photon) as a function of band gap normalised photon energy, hν/E1S, for four differently-sized InAs NQDs, corresponding to values of E1S ranging from 1.2 eV to 3.0 eV. For the values of E1S encompassing the range studied here experimentally (1.2–1.7 eV), QY is approximately unity until at least hν/E1S ∼ 3. This indicates that, although energetically possible according to eqn (3), MEG is not significant for InAs NQD of this size for photon energies between twice and three times Eg, in agreement with experiment. However, Fig. 7 also shows that the onset of significant MEG occurs at progressively lower values of hν/E1S for increasing E1Si.e. for decreasing NQD size, eventually reaching the energetic minimum by E1S ∼ 3.0 eV. The value of hν/E1S which corresponds to the onset of significant MEG has a crucial impact on the potential benefit that this phenomena may have on solar cell performance.5 These results indicate that significant MEG only occurs in InAs NQD at a threshold close to the energetic minimum of 2.0 × E1S when the band gap is much larger than the optimum for harvesting the solar spectrum. InAs NQD are therefore less well-suited to the exploitation of MEG for enhancing solar cell efficiency then they appear when just considering eqn (3) and the range of E1S achievable for them.
 Fig. 5  Theoretical calculation of quantum yield as a function of hν/E1S for four sizes of InAs NQD with different band gaps, E1S. 
In recent years it has been demonstrated that processes associated with the surface-trapping of photo-generated charges can also produce sub-nanosecond transmittance decays. These processes are of two types: the direct de-population of the conduction band minimum by rapid electron transfer to a surface state i.e. direct surface-trapping; and the decay of trions formed due to the long-lived surface trapping of charges. Fig. 6 shows two cartoons that illustrate these processes. The first mechanism has been primarily studied in CdSe NQDs by Kambhampati et al.;6,7 by inducing trap states in some of their samples they demonstrated that the transfer to the surface trap can occur on a time-scale of a few 10 s of ps. They also observed that in samples where surface-trapping was prevalent the amplitudes of the decay components were no longer consistent with the Poissonian distribution expected between single and multi-exciton states created by the absorption of one or more photons per pump pulse. Moreover, the decay transient was no longer well-described by a single sub-nanosecond time constant combined with a longer multi-nanosecond decay.7 Thus, these results for CdSe NQD are very similar to ones we report in this work for InAs NQDs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Long-lived surface-trapping – here trapping to a surface state (SS) results in the presence of a pre-existing charge in the NQD core when the absorption of a photon creates another exciton (red arrow). This hot exciton first cools to the band edge (blue arrows) and then rapidly recombines (green arrow) via an Auger interaction with the pre-existing charge. (b) Direct surface trapping – photon absorption initially creates a hot exciton (red arrow) which cools to the band edge (blue arrows); the electron then transfers to a surface-state and thus depopulates the CBM (CBM = conduction band minimum; VBM = valance band minimum). In this scenario, the electron is assumed to recombine from the surface state after some time greater than 10 ps but less than the time in between pump pulses. 
The second process was identified as a result of efforts to understand some of the seemingly contradictory findings of different early studies into MEG. Some of the early work reported very high QE for MEG, as large as 700%.36 However, other groups reported much lower QE for ostensibly similar NQDs19,20,28,37 but, after a period of some controversy, it was realised that these seemingly conflicting reports could be reconciled if the effects of long-lived, surface-traps were taken into account. A series of careful studies15,24,25 on PbSe NQDs showed that the apparent QE of MEG was significantly higher if the sample of NQDs was static compared to when it was vigorously stirred or flowed. These observations can be explained by the trapping of either an electron or hole on the surface for a period greater than the time in between excitation pulses. Its geminate partner is thus still present in the volume of the NQD when a second photon is absorbed during a subsequent excitation pulse and thus a trion forms. As for MEG-produced biexcitons, trions can decay by an efficient Auger process, and consequently have a similar lifetime, and are formed from the absorption of one pump photon per pulse; the decay component associated with trions can thus be easily mistaken for the signature of MEG. This effect has been studied experimentally and it has been shown for PbSe NQDs that it becomes significant in static samples where the long-lived, surface-trapped charges can accumulate. It was also shown that the formation of trions in this way can be suppressed by sufficient stirring or flowing of the sample, which sweeps NQDs containing long-lived, surface-trapped charges out of the excitation volume in between pump pulses and prevents their accumulation.15 A theoretical study29 which compared biexciton and trion lifetimes in InAs NQDs (both with and without a CdSe shell) calculated that their lifetimes were indeed similar (though distinguishable) and in the tens to hundreds of ps range found experimentally. Moreover, it was found that positive and negative trions (i.e. two holes and one electron in the NQD volume, or vice versa, respectively) could have significantly different lifetimes for NQDs with similar values of EC to ones investigated in this study. In particular, the negative trion was calculated to have a lifetime of ∼30 ps whilst the positive trion had a lifetime approaching 200 ps. This suggests the possibility that the bi-exponential form of the observed decay on a sub-nanosecond time-scale arises from positive and negative trion recombination in complementary fractions of the NQD population.
To investigate which of these two processes associated with surface-trapping is responsible for the transients we observe for InAs/ZnSe NQDs, the transient obtained when a sample was stirred vigorously was compared to one in which it was allowed to remain static during the experiment. As shown in Fig. 7, there was no visible difference between the transients. Furthermore, Fig. 8 shows the first and last of a series of 10 transients obtained consecutively for a static sample, and compares them to the average of the series; again there is no appreciable difference between the transients indicating that there is no significant change in the samples during the experiment. These results suggest that the accumulation of photo-generated charges in long-lived surface traps is not a significant effect for InAs/ZnSe NQDs, in contrast to the case for PbSe NQDs.15 We thus conclude that the observed transmittance transients are instead consistent with the direct surface-trapping of photo-generated charges on a sub-nanosecond timescale. Moreover, the relative amplitude of the plateau observed in the transients (see ESI‡), which is attributed to those photo-generated charges not subject to surface-trapping and thus available for subsequent radiative recombination, is broadly similar to the PLQY obtained for InAs NQD on the addition of a ZnSe shell.8 Both these results suggest that a ZnSe shell is only partly effective in preventing surface-mediated non-radiative recombination.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of transmission transients obtained for the 2.6 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQDs when the sample is stirred and static. 
 Fig. 8  Comparison of the first and last of a series of 10 consecutively obtained transmission transients with the average of the series for a static sample of the 2.6 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQDs. It took a period of an hour to complete the 10 transients. 
4. Conclusions
The ultrafast dynamics of excitons in InAs/ZnSe NQDs have been studied using ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy. In both cases, the decays of the pump-induced transmittance changes were found to bi-exponential on a sub-nanosecond time-scale. The relative magnitudes of the decay components were inconsistent with the Poissonian distribution expected if they were associated with excitons or multiexcitons formed by the absorption of one or more photons per pump pulse per NQD. For the InAs/ZnSe NQDs, pumping at a photon energy greater than the threshold for MEG produced no discernible change in the decay transient, suggesting that it is not a significant effect in these samples under the experimental conditions used. This finding was supported by theoretical calculations which indicate that the onset of significant MEG does not occur in InAs NQD of this size until the energy of the exciting photons reaches at least 3 times the band gap. Further, the calculations also show that the onset of significant MEG only approaches the energetic minimum for InAs NQD with band gaps much larger than the optimum required for exploitation of the solar spectrum. It was instead concluded that the sub-nanosecond decay transients observed were associated with surface-trapping. Furthermore, comparison of transients obtained from stirred and static samples suggest that the mechanism involved is not the formation of trions produced by surface-trapped charge surviving between pump pulses, as it is for PbSe NQDs,15,24,25 but rather the direct and ultrafast de-population of the conduction band by transfer of charge to surface trap state, as observed previously for CdSe NQDs.6,7 The fractional contribution of this surface-mediated decay channel is consistent with the PLQY reported for InAs/ZnSe NQD8 suggesting it is an important non-radiative recombination process.
These findings have implications for the assessment of MEG in NQDs, as similarly noted by Kambhampati et al. in their study of CdSe NQDs.7 Whereas it seems that sample stirring or flowing is sufficient to suppress surface-trap related sub-nanosecond decay channels in some types of NQD, such as PbSe,15,24,25 our results show that, as for CdSe NQDs,6,7 this is not the case for InAs/ZnSe NQDs and hence it cannot be assumed to be true for other NQD types. These insights suggest the following procedure for correctly identifying the occurrence and efficiency of MEG from ultrafast transient spectroscopic data. Firstly, below the threshold for MEG given by eqn (3), a mono-exponential sub-nanosecond decay transient should appear onto a background plateau as the pump power is increased. The amplitude of this sub-nanosecond decay relative to the plateau should be consistent with the probability of a single NQD absorbing one or more photons per pump pulse, as described by Poissonian statistics. Further, the time constant associated with the decay should scale linearly with EC−3/2 or NQD volume. Secondly, for pump photon energies above the MEG threshold, this sub-nanosecond mono-exponential decay should persist at pump fluences for which the probability of absorbing more than photon per pump pulse is negligible. Finally, the transients obtained for a static sample must be compared to those for a sample that is stirred or flowed. If there is a difference, then the flow or stirring rate above which no further change of the transient is observed must be determined, and the efficiency of MEG calculated only from data obtained for rates greater than this.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of both the UK’s Engineering and Physical Science Research Council under grant EP/E036287/1 for S.H. and the Ministry of National Education of the Republic of Turkey for M.C. We also thank Prof. W. Flavell for access to the laser system funded by the Northwest Science Fund (NWDA).
Notes and references
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmüller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hetsch, X. Xu, H. Wang, S. V. Kershaw and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1879–1887 CrossRef CAS .
R. Weissleder, Nat. Biotechnol., 2001, 19, 316–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Binks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12693–12704 RSC .
P. Kambhampati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22089–22109 CAS .
P. Tyagi and P. Kambhampati, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Aharoni, T. Mokari, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 128, 257–264 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. I. Berger, in Handbook of Physics and Chemistry, ed. D. R. Lide, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2009, p. 90 Search PubMed .
M. C. Beard and R. J. Ellingson, Laser Photonics Rev., 2008, 2, 377–399 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. C. Hanna, J. M. Luther, B. K. Hughes and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, A. G. Midgett, M. Law, O. E. Semonin, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 836–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, M. C. Beard, Q. Song, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1779–1784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Midgett, H. W. Hillhouse, B. K. Hughes, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17486–17500 CAS .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, S. K. Stubbs, B. F. Spencer, E. A. Seddon, H.-T. Fung, S. Gardino, F. Sirotti, M. Silly, J. Akhtar, P. O'Brien, D. J. Binks and W. R. Flavell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20275–20283 RSC .
G. Nair and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 081304 CrossRef .
G. Nair, S. M. Geyer, L. Y. Chang and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 125325 CrossRef .
J. J. H. Pijpers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4146–4152 CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, E. Hendry, M. T. W. Milder, R. Fanciulli, J. Savolainen, J. L. Herek, D. Vanmaekelbergh, S. Ruhman, D. Mocatta, D. Oron, A. Aharoni, U. Banin and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4783–4784 CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, K. J. Tielrooij, A. Osherov, Y. Golan, C. Delerue, G. Allan and M. Bonn, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 811–814 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. McGuire, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1810–1819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. McGuire, M. Sykora, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2049–2057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. H. Pijpers, M. T. W. Milder, C. Delerue and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6318–6324 CAS .
R. D. Schaller, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3469–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ben-Lulu, D. Mocatta, M. Bonn, U. Banin and S. Ruhman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Califano, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2706–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Stubbs, S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, B. F. Spencer, W. R. Flavell, P. Glarvey, O. Masala, N. L. Pickett and D. J. Binks, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 081303 CrossRef .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205423 CrossRef .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125340 CrossRef .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7318–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, R. Rapaport, D. T. Fuchs, L. Lucas, A. J. Lovinger, S. Vilan, A. Aharoni and U. Banin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 251108–251103 CrossRef .

Semiconductor and Metal Nanocrystals, ed. V. I. Klimov, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 424–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Trinh, A. J. Houtepen, J. M. Schins, T. Hanrath, J. Piris, W. Knulst, A. Goossens and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Dedicated to Professor David Cole-Hamilton on the occasion of his retirement and for his outstanding contribution to transition metal catalysis.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42125aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Absorbance spectra for InAs/ZnSe NQDs of different diameters.	 

 	Fig. 2  Fractional transmittance change, ΔT/T, transients for the 4.4 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQDs with bi-exponential fits to the decay. Transients are shown for pump powers of 0.5 mW, 1 mW and 2.5 mW.	 

 	Fig. 3  The time constants, τ1 and τ2, yielded by a bi-exponential fit to the decay transients for InAs/ZnSe NQDs of different core diameters plotted against EC−3/2, where EC is the confinement energy.	 
P(n) = 〈n〉n exp(−〈n〉)/n!	(1)
〈n〉 = (2/A) × ΔTmax/T.	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of transmittance transients for the 4.4 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQD pumped at different wavelengths.	 

 	Fig. 5  Theoretical calculation of quantum yield as a function of hν/E1S for four sizes of InAs NQD with different band gaps, E1S.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Long-lived surface-trapping – here trapping to a surface state (SS) results in the presence of a pre-existing charge in the NQD core when the absorption of a photon creates another exciton (red arrow). This hot exciton first cools to the band edge (blue arrows) and then rapidly recombines (green arrow) via an Auger interaction with the pre-existing charge. (b) Direct surface trapping – photon absorption initially creates a hot exciton (red arrow) which cools to the band edge (blue arrows); the electron then transfers to a surface-state and thus depopulates the CBM (CBM = conduction band minimum; VBM = valance band minimum). In this scenario, the electron is assumed to recombine from the surface state after some time greater than 10 ps but less than the time in between pump pulses.	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of transmission transients obtained for the 2.6 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQDs when the sample is stirred and static.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of the first and last of a series of 10 consecutively obtained transmission transients with the average of the series for a static sample of the 2.6 nm core diameter InAs/ZnSe NQDs. It took a period of an hour to complete the 10 transients.	 
Footnotes
† Dedicated to Professor David Cole-Hamilton on the occasion of his retirement and for his outstanding contribution to transition metal catalysis.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42125a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
