Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy for surfaces and interfaces  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00206H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00206H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4020-4041Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy for surfaces and interfaces

        
          
            Xiang 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sheng-Chao 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Teng-Xiang 
            Huang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hai-Sheng 
            Su
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jin-Hui 
            Zhong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhi-Cong 
            Zeng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mao-Hua 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Ren
          
        
      *
      Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, and The MOE Key Laboratory of Spectrochemical Analysis and Instrumentation, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: bren@xmu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st March 2017
    First published on 7th June 2017AbstractSurface and interfaces play key roles in heterogeneous catalysis, electrochemistry and photo(electro)chemistry. Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) combines plasmon-enhanced Raman spectroscopy with scanning probe microscopy to simultaneously provide a chemical fingerprint and morphological information for the sample at the nanometer spatial resolution. It is an ideal tool for achieving an in-depth understanding of the surface and interfacial processes, so that the relationship between structure and chemical performance can be established. We begin with the background of surfaces and interfaces and TERS, followed by a detailed discussion on some issues in experimental TERS, including tip preparation and TERS instrument configuration. We then focus on the progress of TERS for studying the surfaces and interfaces under different conditions, from ambient, to UHV, solid–liquid and electrochemical environments, followed by a brief introduction to the current understanding of the unprecedented high spatial resolution and surface selection rules. We conclude by discussing the future challenges for TERS practical applications in surfaces and interfaces.
1. Introduction
Solid–gas and solid–liquid interfaces play the most important roles in the heterogeneous catalysis, electrochemistry and photo(electro)chemistry. On one hand, due to the unsaturated coordination of the surface atoms, they usually have a higher energy and unique chemical activity, compared with that of the bulk atoms. On the other hand, the presence of gas or liquid either as reactants, products, solvents or electrolytes in the region close to the surface forms a complex interfacial region. Various processes, including molecular diffusion, adsorption and desorption, electron transfer and reaction, surface reconstruction and relaxation, may occur in this region, which are highly dynamic in time and space. The catalytic and chemical performance of surfaces inherently depends on the surface structures (including geometric structure and electronic structure), the interaction between the surface and molecules, and between surface molecules.1–4 For a complete understanding of the surface and interfacial processes, it is highly important to provide information for both the surface and the molecule on the molecular level with the molecular fingerprint and on the nanometer spatial resolution, so that the relationship between structure and chemical performance can be established.5–7 The development of surface sciences has provided abundant information towards the understanding of surfaces and interfaces and the related processes by various microscopic and spectroscopic methods.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) can provide fine structures down to atomic spatial resolution for the surface and catalysts. In situ electron microscopic methods have been booming recently for the understanding of the structural evolution of solid materials during the reaction.8–10 In parallel, scanning probe microscopies (SPM), including atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) from their very early stages, boast of being able to conveniently provide surface morphology and electronic structure at the atomic resolution.11–13 However, it is still very challenging for SPM to provide the molecular information. Recently, X-ray microscopies, ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and X-ray absorption near-edge structure have shown promising applications in revealing the surface structure, chemical composition, and the electronic structure of the solid surfaces as well as the surface species.14–16 However, the in situ study usually requires a synchrotron-based light source.
A convenient way to obtain the in situ molecular fingerprint information of the surface species is to employ vibrational spectroscopy using light both as the probe and signal. The commonly used vibrational spectroscopic methods include infrared spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy and sum frequency generation. Among these, Raman spectroscopy is particularly powerful because it can use visible light as the excitation source and can easily work in the presence of gases, solvents, and electrolytes. Raman scattering is an inelastic two-photon process, in which the electron cloud is distorted after the absorption of the excitation photon. The distorted electrons may experience an energy exchange with nuclear motions via vibration–electronic coupling, leading to the relaxation of the molecule to emit secondary photons with energies different from that of excitation energy. Such a process is called the Raman process and the energy difference is termed the Raman shift, determined by both the bond strength and atoms forming the bond.17,18 Each molecule may give a group of Raman peaks with different Raman shifts and intensities that can be used to determine molecular structure and its interaction with the environment; therefore, Raman spectroscopy has been increasingly used for quantitative and qualitative analysis. However, it is a great challenge for using Raman spectroscopy for surface analysis because Raman scattering is inherently a very weak and inelastic process, in which only one in every 106–108 incident photons is Raman scattered.19 This weakness becomes more severe when Raman spectroscopy is used to study the surface process. In this case, there are usually only monolayer species, the number of which is less than that in a 1 mM solution. The latter is barely detectable by the most advanced confocal Raman microscopy; therefore, the surface species are invisible by the normal Raman technique (see Scheme 1a).
 Scheme 1  Schematic of (a) Raman spectroscopy, (b) SERS, and (c) TERS. 
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) occurring on nanostructured noble metal surfaces significantly enhances the detection sensitivity of Raman spectroscopy. The first SERS signal was reported in 1974 from pyridine adsorbed on a roughened silver electrode, which was unfortunately attributed to the increased surface area of the roughened surface.20 Three years later, the anomalously strong Raman scattering was confirmed to be surface-enhanced Raman phenomenon. One of the enhancements comes from the static electric field induced by the applied potential on the electrode.21 Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) was then proposed to be responsible for the signal enhancement in SERS.22,23 LSPR is a result of the collective oscillation of free electrons of metal nanostructures under the excitation of light of suitable wavelength, leading to the enhancement of the local electric field on the surface. As a result, the Raman signal of the molecules located on or in the close vicinity of metal structures can be strongly enhanced with an enhancement factor of around 106.24 It has therefore become routine for SERS to detect monolayer species or even single-molecules on the surface, even with conventional Raman instruments (see Scheme 1b). After over 40 years of development, especially benefiting from the development of instruments, optical techniques and nanomaterial science, SERS has been developed into a powerful analytical tool and is widely used in surface sciences, material sciences, biology, medicine and so on.25–29 However, SERS is based on the conventional optical microscope and the spatial resolution is limited by the diffraction of light and does not meet the nanometer spatial resolution required to study the structure and function correlation for surfaces and interfaces.
There are already some efforts to address this issue by using aperture-based scanning near-field Raman microscopy.30–32 However, even with the assistance of the SERS effect, it is still quite challenging to observe good quality signals through the tiny aperture. On the other hand, if a nanometer-sized Au or Ag tip was controlled by SPM to approach a sample, which was then illuminated by a laser of proper wavelength and polarization, the signal of the sample could be enhanced by the tip (Scheme 1c). This technique is called tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) and is an apertureless nanospectroscopy technique.33–35 By raster scanning of either the sample or tip, the hyperspectral (fingerprint) information of the sample can be obtained. Due to the tight confinement of the electromagnetic field in the vicinity of the plasmonic tip apex because of LSPR and lightning-rod effects, it offers an enhancement up to 107,36 and detection sensitivity down to the single-molecule level.37,38 Furthermore, due to the highly confined local electric field, TERS can provide a spatial resolution at several nanometers or even on a sub-nanometer scale.38 TERS is finding increasingly important applications in surface science, material, biology, energy and so on.36,39–43 Recently, the counterpart of TERS in infrared spectroscopy, a nano-IR technique combining SPM and IR spectroscopy, has been rapidly developed and is now able to achieve a spatial resolution of about 20 nm.44–47 Practical application of nano-IR for surface and interface analysis, especially for in situ characterization in the aqueous environment is still challenging. One of the difficulties comes from the great challenge in obtaining the low frequency peaks reflecting the bonding between molecules and the surface with laboratory light sources. The other difficulty comes from the strong IR absorption of water. In contrast, TERS has unique advantages and a great potential for in situ characterization on the nanoscale and molecular level for both solid–gas and solid–liquid surfaces.
In recent years, there have been some TERS reviews introducing the general advances in the field of TERS.36,39–43 There are also reviews concentrating on ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) TERS,48 the application of TERS in catalysis,49,50 and single-molecule (electro-)chemistry.51,52 In this review, we limit ourselves to TERS applications for studying molecular species on surfaces and interfaces. In Sections 2 and 3, we will discuss some issues in experimental TERS, including tip preparation and TERS instrument configuration, which critically influence the performance and spatial resolution of TERS. In Section 4, we give a critical overview of the current progress in TERS for studying the surfaces and interfaces under different conditions, from ambient, to UHV, solid–liquid and electrochemical environments. The systems to be addressed range from monolayer species on rough surfaces and pure and bimetallic single crystal surfaces, to single-molecules on single crystal surfaces. Emphasis will be placed on the most recent progress on ultrahigh spatial resolution. We will further introduce the current understanding of the unprecedented high spatial resolution and surface selection rules. In the final section, we will propose the future trend and the issues to be addressed for TERS application in surfaces and interfaces.
2. Tip-related issues
2.1 General understanding of TERS enhancement for improved sensitivity and spatial resolution
The TERS enhancement is predominantly contributed by LSPR and the lightning-rod effect, which result in a strongly localized electromagnetic field at the tip apex and substantially enhanced Raman signal. The reported average TERS enhancement can be about 104 for the AFM-based TERS and 105–106 for the STM-based TERS.36 The enhancement can be affected by various factors, including the laser wavelength, the resonance strength, the surrounding environment, the tip material, shape and size, and the substrate material.53
There are increasing reports on the application of TERS in liquid and electrochemistry, and it is necessary to understand the consequence of liquid environment on the TERS enhancement, compared with that of air. Due to the increase of the dielectric constant when the medium is changed from air to liquid, we should be aware of a sizable red shift of the LSPR peaks.54,55 For the Au TERS tip, a notable red shift (100–200 nm) of the LSPR position of the tip was predicted when transferred from air to water.54,55 Although there is no report about the LSPR of Ag TERS tip in water, we can obtain a rough range considering the 30 nm and 170 nm red shift of the LSPR peak when Ag nanoparticles and Ag nanorods are immersed in water, respectively.56,57 It is generally understood that the change in the resonance strength should be negligible.54,58 Various factors, such as size, shape, and the incident angle of lasers, will affect the LSPR of TERS tips in water. It requires a more delicate calculation and rigorous experiment to obtain a relatively accurate shift in the LSPR peak position of TERS tips in different dielectric environments.
In practical TERS measurements, a substrate has to be used to support the sample and is placed close to the tip apex. The substrate material will more or less influence the field enhancement at the tip apex.59–62 Depending on the substrate material, we can classify TERS measurement modes into the conventional TERS and gap-mode TERS. In the conventional TERS, a dielectric material substrate (e.g. SiO2, Al2O3) is used and there is no effective electromagnetic (plasmonic) coupling between the tip and substrate.59,61 In this case, the TERS enhancement is mainly contributed by the tip and a very weak enhancement can be achieved. The presence of the substrate will not lead to an obvious shift of the LSPR peak of the tip.54 In the gap-mode TERS, a noble metal substrate (Au, Ag and Cu) with very good plasmonic properties is used. This substrate can have a strong plasmonic coupling with the tip, resulting in a huge TERS enhancement (two orders of magnitude higher than the uncoupled type) and a notable red shift (by tens of nanometers) of the LSPR wavelength of the tip.54,59,61 Compared with noble metals, when a transition metal substrate (e.g. Pt, Pd, Ni) is used, it can still couple with the tip, giving a slightly weaker enhancement and a smaller red shift (by a few nanometers) due to the decrease in the density of the surface conduction electron.59,61,63 However, the enhancement from transition metal substrates is still about one to two orders of magnitude higher than the conventional uncoupled type.
In addition to the substrate, the tip is the core of TERS. For a given material, the tip radius determines the field enhancement and spatial resolution of TERS. Surprisingly, the field enhancement and spatial resolution follow different trends for the dielectric and metallic substrates. When a dielectric substrate (e.g. glass or silicon) is used, the field enhancement is dominantly determined by the tip as the coupling between tip and substrate can be neglected. Both the field enhancement and the spatial resolution are improved with the decrease of the tip radius (Fig. 1a).64 Moreover, the spatial resolution is usually better than the dimension of the tip radius. When a coinage metal substrate (e.g., Ag or Au) is used, it will strongly couple with the tip plasmon, thus significantly influencing the position and strength of the LSPR peak. In this case, the field enhancement and spatial resolution follow a different trend. For a Au wire tip over a Au substrate, the field enhancement increases slowly when the tip radius increases from 15 to 50 nm. Further increase of the tip radius does not provide additional enhancement (see Fig. 1b).61 A similar trend is observed when a Au coated Si tip approaches a Au substrate (Fig. 1c and d).65 The field enhancement increases sharply with the increase of the thickness of the Au coating from 5 nm to 80 nm, as a result of the increased size of the tip, accompanied by a shift of the LSPR peak from 528 nm to 613 nm. Further increase in the thickness of the Au coating leads to the decrease of the enhancement. These theoretical predictions were well confirmed by the experimental results, in which the maximum TERS enhancement factor was achieved at a Au thickness of 55–75 nm, as shown in Fig. 1e. For both types of tips, the spatial resolution is higher at a smaller tip radius and can still reach 7 nm (Fig. 1f) when a large tip (i.e. Rtip = 65 nm) is used. Therefore, it is important to find the delicate balance between the sensitivity and spatial resolution for different types of samples.
 Fig. 1  (a and b) The effect of tip radius on the field enhancement and spatial resolution between the full metal tip and different substrate materials: (a) Ag tips coupled with glass substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, copyright 2005 American Institute of Physics. (b) Au tips coupled with Au substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61, copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (c–f) The effect of tip radius on the field enhancement and spatial resolution between the metal-coated tip and Au substrate. (c) The dependence of the electric field enhancement on the thickness of the Au coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2015 Optical Society of America. (d) The dependence of the spatial resolution (SR) (using 632.8 nm as the excitation wavelength) on the thickness. (e) Experimental results of the dependence of the TERS enhancement on the thickness. The peak of MGITC at 1176 cm−1 was used. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (f) TERS mapping of thin layer polyaniline by using a Au-coated AFM tip with a radius of 65 nm. The spatial resolution is 7.3 nm. 
For a given sample, it is crucial to have a good match of the excitation wavelength with the LSPR wavelength in the tip–sample system. It can be realized by changing either the laser wavelength or the LSPR position. To date, it is still not a common practice to use tunable wavelength lasers in TERS, due to the difficulty in experiment to precisely align the laser of different wavelengths to the tip apex. Instead, most TERS instruments have only a limited number of laser wavelengths, for example, 488 nm, 532 nm and 632.8 nm. Therefore, a more convenient way is to produce the tips with the LSPR wavelength close to the available lasers to achieve a high TERS enhancement and improve the detection sensitivity. In 2006 and 2007, the Zenobi group demonstrated both experimentally and theoretically that the LSPR wavelength of the Ag-coated dielectric AFM tip can be blue-shifted with the decrease of the refractive index of the dielectric tip by changing the materials from Si (n = 3.48) to TiO2 (n = 2.75), SiO2 (n = 1.50), to AlF3 (n = 1.40).66–68 Coating a layer of other material over the commercial AFM tip may increase tip radius, sacrificing the spatial resolution In 2009, the Kawata group followed a similar idea to reduce the refractive index of the tip by thermal oxidization of the Si AFM tip to form a compact SiO2 layer over Si before the Ag coating.69 The refractive index of the AFM tip decreased with the increase in the SiO2 layer thickness. In this way, they are able to tune the LSPR wavelength of the Ag coated SiO2 tip, but still keep the sharpness of the tip. Another way to tune the LSPR wavelength is to increase the tip length to shift the wavelength to the red region, while maintaining a high field enhancement. FIB milling is the most convenient, but expensive way to fabricate metal-coated AFM tips with different lengths.70,71
2.2 Fabrication of TERS tips with high activity
The sensitivity and spatial resolution of TERS is largely determined by the optical properties of the tip, which is influenced by the tip size and shape. Therefore, it is vitally important to develop a sophisticated fabrication method to control the tip radius and the surface roughness and thereafter control the LSPR wavelength. To date, considerable efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of TERS tips with an improved enhancement and reproducibility.
Full metal tips are commonly used in STM – and scanning force microscopy (SFM) – based TERS. A common way to prepare STM TERS tips is using the electrochemical etching, which is to anodically dissolve a metal wire in an etching electrolyte. Au and Ag tips (see Fig. 2a and b) can be routinely produced through the “drop off” mechanism.72–81 There are already commercially available Au and Ag tips made by this method. Unfortunately, it is still an art to precisely tune the tip radius and shape only by the electrochemical etching. Numerous factors, such as the composition of the etchant, the etching voltage and the method to cut off the circuit, were found to affect the quality of the tip.53 In addition, the etching temperature and the concentration of the original chemicals were also found to play key roles in the reproducibility. Therefore, it is still too complicated to discuss the detailed etching mechanism in the reacting three-phase region. The shape of the tip not only affects the optical properties, but also influences the stability of TERS. A full metal tip with a high aspect ratio is mechanically unstable and it is important to select the tip with an appropriate aspect ratio. Considerable efforts (for example tip dentation) have been developed to modify the structure of the tip apex in situ to improve the imaging quality.
 Fig. 2  SEM image of the TERS tips. (a) Electrochemically etched Au tip. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2004 American Institute of Physics. (b) Electrochemically etched Ag tip. (c) Ag-coated tip produced by vacuum evaporation; Redrawn with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2009 The Optical Society. (d) Au-Coated tip produced by pulsed electrodeposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (e) Photonic crystal cavity on a Si3N4 cantilever with attached tapered waveguide. Redrawn with permission from ref. 105, copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (f) Overview of the Au cone scanning probe. (Redrawn with permission from ref. 89, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (g) Campanile tip consisting of a tapered metal–insulator–metal waveguide with a nanogap at the apex. Redrawn with permission from ref. 108, copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (h) FIB milled Au tip etched by the electrochemical method superimposed with the optical image of grating illumination and apex emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Unlike the STM case, AFM TERS tips are fabricated by the deposition of Ag or Au onto a commercially available silicon or silicon carbide AFM cantilever. It is worth noting that an AFM tip with a low resonant frequency can be easily interfered with by the surrounding vibrations. It is necessary to choose the AFM tips with high resonant frequency for TERS experiments. The prevalent method to fabricate the metal-coated AFM TERS tip is the vacuum evaporation method (Fig. 2c). As the quality of the as-deposited film can be affected by main factors including evaporation rate, temperature, vapor pressure, and the placement of the heater, source and substrate, it is also an art to control the deposition of the metal film in the same manner in different vacuum chambers of different research groups.53,82–86 Consequently, tips with quite different morphologies have been reported.68,69,87,88 Most importantly, the random deposition of the metal nanoparticles of different sizes onto the tip apex makes it hard to precisely control the tip radius. Recently, our group developed a pulsed electrodeposition method to coat a metal layer onto AFM tips with a high reproducibility.89 The obtained AFM-TERS tips show a well-defined tip apex (Fig. 2d). The LSPR wavelength of the TERS tips can be tuned by controlling the thickness of the coating layer, which can be realized by controlling the deposition potential and time. In addition to the vacuum deposition and electrodeposition, there are also some efforts to coat metal over AFM tips by electrodeless deposition, such as mirror reaction and galvanic reaction.90–93
In addition to the full metal tips and the metal-coated tips, other types of tips have also been developed. Some groups prepared TERS tips by attaching a metal nanoparticle to the tip apex.94–101 However, it is time consuming to finish the attachment processes. Microfabrication, such as focused ion beam (FIB) milling, appears to be a promising way to fabricate TERS tips with high enhancement and reproducibility because it offers precise control of the size and shape of the tip apex.70,83,102–107 The Di Fabrizio group sculpted a photonic crystal cavity and tapered waveguide on the cantilever of an AFM tip (Fig. 2e).105 In this way, the surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) excited by the incident laser come from the photonic crystal cavity and are confined at the apex of the tapered waveguide to produce strong field enhancement. Moreover, it drastically lowers the background at the sample plane. The Fleischer group combined the thin-film metallization, electron beam induced deposition of etching masks, and Ar ion milling to fabricate single, individually engineered Au cones at the apex of AFM tips (Fig. 2f).104 The Au cone has a sharp tip radius of 10 nm for high spatial resolution and larger body for efficient excitation. The plasmon resonance frequency can be tuned by changing the size of the cone. The Schuck group proposed a very interesting type of a campanile tip (Fig. 2g);108 it was made of an optically transparent silica of campanile shape. Au was coated on two of the facing facets of the campanile, resulting in a gap of a few tens of nanometers. The tip demonstrated tip-enhanced photoluminescence with a spatial resolution breaking the diffraction limit. It would be a very promising type of tip for TERS if the gap of the tip could be further narrowed down. The Raschke group developed a method to fabricate gratings on the tip shaft by FIB milling (Fig. 2h) to remotely excite the SPPs, which can be subsequently propagated to the tip apex to excite TERS.109 Indeed, the FIB method shows great advantages for fabricating customized tips, but it is still too expensive and time consuming to be affordable by ordinary labs to fabricate daily used TERS tips.
2.3 Lifetime and protection protocols of TERS tips
A clean tip guarantees the reproducibility and reliability of TERS measurements. It is unavoidable that some organic contaminants may be adsorbed on the tip surface when the tip is exposed to air, which may interfere with the TERS measurement and shorten the lifetime of the tip. Compared with Au, Ag is oxidized much easier and is tarnished in air. Both issues may lead to the decrease of the TERS enhancement. As a result, it was reported that the lifetimes of Ag tips are only about several hours to several days.110,111 Considerable efforts have been devoted to improving the chemical stability of the TERS tips, including chemical or electrochemical removal of the contaminants and oxides,112–114 improving the storage environment,115 and coating of a protective layer.111,116
The Zenobi group proposed a method to coat a self-assembly monolayer (SAM) of ethanethiolate on the Au tip surface to remove the contaminants and inhibit the adsorption of analyte molecules from the aqueous solution.112 It is inevitable that the distance between the tip and the substrate will increase in the presence of the SAM layer, resulting in a slight decrease in the TERS enhancement. Our group developed a method to dip the Au tip in concentrated sulfuric acid, followed by rinsing with ultrapure water to effectively revive the contaminated Au tips.113 In this way, the used or stored Au tip can be regenerated and the TERS enhancement can be recovered; however, this method cannot be used for cleaning the Au-coated AFM TERS tips, because the concentrated sulfuric acid will lead to the peeling off of the Au coating layer. In this case, the O2 plasma cleaning might be the viable option, but for Ag or Ag-coated tips, both the sulfuric acid and O2 plasma cleaning methods cannot be used for revival, due to the oxidation of the Ag. The Zenobi group developed a simple electrochemical restoration method to revive the Ag tips and the field enhancement of the recovered Ag tips is comparable to that of the freshly prepared tip.114 An alternative way is to modify the Ag tips with halide ion (e.g., iodide ion) to remove the contaminants adsorbed on the Ag surface.
Another strategy to improve the lifetime of the Ag tip is to prevent the oxidation of the Ag. Kumar et al. studied the influence of the storage environments (for example, ambient, vacuum, and nitrogen) on the lifetime of Ag tips.115 Under ambient conditions, the lifetime of the Ag tips is only about 8 h. It extends to a few days when the tip is stored in a vacuum desiccator. It is very encouraging that the lifetime can be extended to 5 months when a nitrogen glovebox is used for storage.
Coating the tip with a protective layer is another way to prevent the oxidation and extend the lifetime of the Ag tips. Recently, Zenobi and Li groups borrowed the concept of “shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy” (SHINERS) to coat an ultrathin (few nanometers) and pinhole-free SiO2 shell on the apex of the Ag tips (Fig. 3a).111 The shell-isolated tips showed comparable enhancement, but much longer lifetime than that of the uncoated tips (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images from a region close to the apex of a silica-protected Au tip (left panel) and a silica-protected Ag tip (right panel). (b) Direct comparison of TERS intensity of the adsorbed thiophenol after different storage times with unprotected (squares) and silica-protected (triangles) Ag tips. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to chemical stability, mechanical stability is also very important to the lifetime of TERS tips, especially for AFM TERS tips. The coating may be worn during AFM experiments, especially in the contact mode.117,118 Two methods have been proposed to improve the mechanical stability of the coating layer: one way is to add a buffer layer, such as SiOx, between the tip and the coating layer to improve the adhesion and avoid the peel-off of coating layer.112 Another way is to deposit an ultrathin and protecting layer, such as Al2O3 or SiOx, on the Ag-coated AFM tip layer to protect the metal coating (Fig. 4).117 These hard oxide layers can improve the wear resistance, prevent chemical attack and inhibit degradation, which may extend the lifetime of the tip. However, the presence of a protective layer will increase the distance of the sample to the strongest enhanced region, so a delicate balance between an effective protection and a sufficient enhancement must be considered.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) SEM images of two unprotected Ag-coated tips, (c and d) SEM image of two protected Ag-coated tips after six scans on a standard silicon grid. In all cases, the apex is circled. The scale bar are all for 1 μm. Redrawn with permission from ref. 117, copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
3. Optical design in TERS instruments
TERS is a combination of plasmon-enhanced Raman spectroscopy with SPM and requires a complete integration of a SPM and a Raman system. The SPM controls the plasmonic tip in close proximity to the sample so that it can make use of the LSPR effect of the tip to locally enhance the Raman scattering of the sample. An optical system is required to accurately align the laser spot on the tip apex to efficiently excite the LSPR of the tip and collect the enhanced Raman scattering signal of the sample. The excitation and collection efficiency relies on the optical design of the TERS system, which determines the detection sensitivity of the TERS instrument. The optical design is more important for UHV- and solution-based systems because the interference of the optics with UHV SPM and the effect of the liquid layer on the optical path should be taken into consideration.
3.1 Optical design for ambient TERS
According to the geometries of the illumination, four types of optical configurations (Fig. 5) have been employed in TERS instruments.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of different optical geometries for tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. (a) Bottom illumination geometry; (b) side illumination geometry; (c) top illumination geometry; (d) parabolic mirror illumination geometry. 
In bottom illumination geometry, the laser beam is introduced from the bottom side (see Fig. 5a). It can be conveniently constructed by simply integrating an inverted microscope with a SPM system. In this configuration, the laser is focused through the substrate to the gap of the sample and tip apex, and the back scattering signal is collected by the same objective. Since the Raman optical components are on the opposite side of the SPM tip and tip holder, an oil- or water-immersion objective with a short working distance and a high numerical aperture (NA) up to 1.4 can be used in this configuration without considering the space constraint. This is beneficial for focusing the spot tightly and collecting the scattered light with a large solid angle to guarantee both high excitation and collection efficiencies. However, the bottom illumination mode can only be applicable to transparent samples and substrates. To avoid the blocking of the light by the opaque sample, the Deckert group incorporated a dichroic mirror in a bottom illumination TERS setup;119 thereby, the laser can pass through the transparent part outside the opaque sample, which is then reflected to the tip apex by the dichroic mirror above the tip holder. The TERS signal is also reflected by the dichroic mirror and collected by the inverted objective. This modified configuration overcomes the limitation of the bottom illumination mode and can be applied to opaque samples.
Side illumination geometry is more flexible and can be used for both transparent and opaque samples (see Fig. 5b). In this configuration, a microscope objective with a long working distance is used to focus the laser beam and collect the TERS signal at a defined and tilted angle. To guarantee a large component of polarized light parallel to the tip axis, the tilted angle is normally in the range of 45–70 degrees, relative to the tip axis. Limited by the open space of the SPM head, the NA of the objective is usually less than 0.55, which leads to a small effective solid angle and low collection efficiency. On the other hand, resulting from the asymmetric illumination geometry, the laser spot is focused in an asymmetric way, leading to a large illumination spot and a high background. Additionally, the microscopic image quality is also deteriorated as a result of the asymmetric configuration, which leads to inconvenience for the observation of samples. However, the side illumination mode can be applied to study bulk noble metal substrates in the gap mode. Therefore, the excitation and low collection efficiency can be compensated by the huge enhancement due to the strong coupling between the plasmonic tip and substrate.
The low collection efficiency and microscopic imaging quality can be overcome by using the top illumination configuration. In this configuration, the laser is introduced from the top side and illuminates the sample and tip apex perpendicularly (see Fig. 5c). This symmetric illumination improves the quality of the laser focus and microscopic imaging quality. Additionally, the NA of the objective used in this configuration can be as high as 0.7, which is higher than that used in the side illumination setup. A fraction of light is masked by the tip located in the space between the objective and sample, leading to a decrease in the excitation and collection efficiency. However, the excitation and collection efficiency is still higher than that of the side illumination. This mode can also be applied to all types of samples.
A parabolic mirror has been used in the TERS instrument to form special type of top illumination configuration. The parabolic mirror, with a high NA up to 1.0, can be used to focus the laser onto the sample surface and collect the Raman scattering light (see Fig. 5d). At the center of the parabolic mirror, a hole is drilled to accommodate the tip to approach the sample surface. Benefitting from the high NA of the parabolic mirror, a tight focus and high collection efficiency can be achieved. To avoid the aberration as a result of the position mismatch between the optical axis and the mirror axis, a piezo tube can be equipped to move the parabolic mirror for an accurate alignment.120,121 On the other hand, when studying the opaque samples, a sample with a small size will be helpful for improving the effective NA in the experiment.
After over about 17 years of development, the ambient TERS setup gradually matured and commercial instruments are now available. The requirement to investigate the surface and interface under a more controlled environment has led to the development of TERS working under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV),38,48,121–123 solution55,112,124–127 and electrochemical conditions.55,128,129
3.2 Optical design for UHV TERS
To realize the UHV-TERS, it is highly important to integrate Raman optics with a UHV SPM setup without interfering with each other. There are two ways to incorporate the Raman optics with the UHV TERS. One is to place optical components inside the UHV chamber. In 2007, the Pettinger group constructed the first UHV TERS setup by placing a parabolic mirror inside the chamber.121 In addition, they mounted most of the Raman optics on an optical platform, which was then assembled in the UHV chamber. On the other hand, the Dong group constructed a UHV TERS setup based on the side illumination by mounting the aspheric lens inside the chamber; other core optics were placed outside the UHV chamber.38 In this way, a lens or objective with a high NA can be used for laser focusing and signal collection and is free of the constraint by the size of the viewport or the distance from SPM to the viewport. Special attention should be paid to avoiding the interference with the UHV-SPM during the laser alignment. Alternatively, the Van Duyne group developed a UHV-TERS setup by mounting all the optics outside the chamber.123 In this setup, the laser was focused through a viewport by a long working distance lens outside the chamber and the TERS signal was also collected through a viewport by another lens via a different viewport. In this configuration, the UHV SPM and Raman optics are completely isolated, which is beneficial to avoid the interference of the Raman optics to the SPM. Due to the long working distance and limited size of the viewport, the effective NA of the TERS setup is low, leading to a relatively low detection sensitivity.
3.3 Optical design for solid–liquid interfaces
There is growing interest in the study of samples in situ in liquid and solid–liquid interfaces, which require TERS instruments capable of operating in liquid. The main challenge to extending TERS from air to solution lies in the distortion of the optical path when light passes through air and the electrolyte as a result of the refractive index mismatch. The optical distortion should be minimized to improve the excitation and detection sensitivity. We show in Fig. 6a–c the scheme of the optical paths in solution for some commonly used optical geometries under ambient conditions. Among these geometries, the bottom illumination geometry is the most convenient. The laser is focused from the bottom side into the gap of the tip and sample without passing through the thick water layer and the optical distortion can be avoided. Based on this configuration, the Zenobi group demonstrated the first liquid phase TERS experiments (Fig. 6d) on a transparent substrate.112
 Fig. 6  Schematic overview of the optical design for the extension of TERS to solution. (a) Bottom illumination geometry; (b) side illumination geometry; (c) top illumination geometry. (d) AFM-TERS setup performing in solution based on the bottom illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112, copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (e) STM-TERS setup performing in solution on the basis of the side illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f) AFM-TERS setup performing in solution on the basis of the top illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
In the side and top illumination geometries, the light has to pass through the air and the electrolyte, and the optical path is severely distorted. Furthermore, the capillary force of the tip will elevate the solution to form a meniscus liquid layer, which further distorts the optical path. As a result, the focusing quality and the collection efficiency are severely deteriorated. It will not only sacrifice the imaging quality of the optical microscope to guide the alignment, but also decrease the detection sensitivity of the TERS instrument. The distortion becomes severe with the increase of the thickness of the water layer. Our group developed a modified side illumination configuration to decrease the optical distortion by introducing the laser horizontally through a quartz window to achieve a defined thin solution layer. Based on this configuration, our group developed the first electrochemical TERS (EC-TERS) for opaque samples.55 More recently, the Domke group developed a solid/liquid TERS setup based on a side-illumination configuration (Fig. 6e).127 They tried to reduce the optical distortion in the side illumination mode by carefully controlling the water layer thickness to within several millimeters. Similarly, to reduce the optical distortion in the top illumination configuration, which renders higher excitation and collection efficiency, the Ozaki group placed a droplet of 5–10 μL of solution on the sample surfaces to control the thickness of the solution (see Fig. 6f).124
3.4 Optical design for electrochemical TERS (EC-TERS)
Ever since the discovery of EC-STM, it is known that the electrochemical interface can be controlled in a well-defined state as that in the UHV system. Furthermore, electrochemistry offers a better tuning of the surface electronic properties and the interaction of molecules with the substrates. Therefore, it would be highly important if TERS could be extended and applied in electrochemical systems, which has been a dream of the TERS and SERS communities. Several challenges need to be overcome to extend TERS to electrochemistry. In addition to the abovementioned optical distortion as in the solid–liquid system, EC-TERS requires a proper potential control of the working electrode in an electrochemical system, which makes the setup more complex. Moreover, EC-TERS requires molecular systems with large Raman cross sections, high affinity to the surface and well-behaved electrochemistry, which is different from that of normal TERS.51 It was not until the middle of 2015 that EC-TERS was successfully demonstrated.55,128Fig. 7a shows the first EC-TERS setup developed by our group. In the setup, the laser beam was introduced horizontally via an objective to the electrochemical cell and focused onto the tip apex. To avoid the block of light by the electrode, the single crystal electrode was tilted to 10°. Benefitting from this modified side illumination, the water layer thickness in the optical path can be decreased to about 1 mm to minimize the optical distortion. Additionally, the influence of water evaporation and curved liquid surface caused by the capillary force in the focused optical path can be avoided. Therefore, the laser can be well focused at the tip apex and the Raman signal can be collected with a high efficiency. In the STM-based EC-TERS, a bipotentiostat was used to control the potentials of the tip (WE1) and the substrate (WE2). Since the Faradaic current on the tip will interfere with the tunneling current and the distance control between the tip and substrate, it is necessary to insulate the tip to minimize the Faradaic current and to ensure that the tip can properly approach the surface. With the insulated Au tip and the home-designed EC-TERS setup, we obtained the potential dependent TERS spectrum of non-resonant monolayer molecules adsorbed on Au(111).55 In the same period, the Van Duyne group reported the AFM-based EC-TERS, built on a bottom illumination configuration for the transparent ITO electrode (see Fig. 7b).128 In the AFM-based EC-TERS, the electrode potential is only applied on the substrate and the tip does not have a potential control, which can avoid the electrical inference between the tip and substrate. Though the inverted illumination configuration is limited to transparent electrodes, it allows the use of the oil-immersion objective with a high NA to achieve a high excitation and collection efficiency. This enabled the authors to probe the nanoscale redox behavior of a few Nile Blue (NB) molecules on a ITO electrode.
 Fig. 7  Illustration of the EC-TERS setup. (a) STM-based EC-TERS setup using a modified side illumination geometry for both transparent and opaque samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) AFM-based EC-TERS setup working in transmission illumination geometry for transparent samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
4. TERS for surfaces and interfaces
From a microscopic point of view, the systems that are of interest in surfaces and interfaces include the surface structure, the bonding between molecules and surfaces, and the behavior of molecular overlayers. Unlike the atoms in the bulk, the surface atoms have unsaturated coordination number and hence a higher energy, compared with that in the bulk. The surface atom will reconstruct or relax to be stabilized. Depending on the surface packing of the surface atoms, there are various coordination sites, such as one-fold, two-fold, three-fold, and four-fold sites. Different sites may have different surface electronic properties and show different bonding interactions with the adsorbed species, leading to highly different chemical and catalytic performances.2 The capability to chemically and spatially resolve the chemical heterogeneity of the surface makes TERS a highly promising technique to obtain the information from such a complex interfacial region regarding the solid surface, the molecular layer and their interaction.
4.1 Experimental issues
TERS can provide not only the surface morphology via SPM, but also the surface chemical information through Raman scattering, which is able to identify the surface species, the interactions between molecules and surfaces, and the interactions between molecules. Therefore, it is crucial to guarantee that the Raman signals really come from the molecules adsorbed on the surface rather than that from the tip, in order to obtain the true behavior of surface species. When the tip approaches the substrate in the tunneling distance or atomic force distance, the tip may pick up some species from the substrate, which may contaminate the tip. The most prevalent method used in the literature is to obtain the spectrum by focusing the laser on the tip apex after the sample retraction. However, this approach is less satisfactory in the tip–substrate coupled system. The lack of the SPR coupling makes the field enhancement at the tip apex too small to detect the contaminated molecules on the tip. It has become a routine in most TERS labs to perform TERS measurement on a clean substrate using the same tip following the TERS measurement of surface species. If the signal of the molecule can still be observed, even if it is weaker, it still indicates that the tip may have been contaminated. Ren et al. found a shift in Raman frequency for thiophenol molecules adsorbed on Pt(110) and Au(110) surfaces with the same Au tip.63 To verify that the frequency shift is not an artifact of tip contamination, they performed sequential TERS measurements on Pt(110) first, followed by Au(110) and finally back to Pt(110), as shown in Fig. 8a. Both spectra obtained on the Pt surface show the same features, which are clearly different from those from Au surfaces. This work suggested a convincing way to check whether the TERS signal is really from the intact sample or the species attached to the Au tip. If the species is on the Au tip, the peak position will not change when the substrate material changes.
 Fig. 8  (a) TERS spectra of thiophenol measured at first on Pt(110), then on Au(110), and finally on a Pt(110). Reprinted with the permission of ref. 63, copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (b) Double logarithmic plot of Raman band intensities (left) and the integral background (right) for varying distances z of the STM tip to the surface. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 130, copyright 2007 American Physical Society. 
Another critical parameter in TERS experiments is the tip–sample distance. TERS investigations of co-adsorbed guanine and ClO4− at different tip and sample distances were performed.130 With the increasing distance between the Au tip and Au(111) substrate, a remarkable blue shift of the background maximum (over a range of more than 10 nm) and decay of TERS signal intensity (for z less than 8 nm) were observed (Fig. 8b), which agreed well with the theoretical prediction. Therefore, it is important to keep the measurement parameters in mind, especially if the spectral features are to be used to interpret the interaction of the molecule with the surface.
Drift effect is another issue that should be taken into consideration. Both the environment temperature and creep effect of the piezoceramics cause the drift in the TERS systems, which will lead to a fluctuation of signals. A precise displacement sensor and drift compensation are helpful to decrease the influence of the creep effect. The drift in TERS systems also comes from the stress relaxation of the tip after installation, especially in STM. To reduce this effect, the tip can be mounted into the tip holder in advance to release the stress.
In addition to the drift effect, the blinking effect is also another source of the fluctuation of TERS signals. Several factors including the diffusion of the molecules on surface, photo bleaching or photo damaging of the molecules, and adsorption of contaminants during experiment may give rise to the spectral blinking. Operations under ultrahigh vacuum and low-temperature are good choices to avoid the contamination and molecular diffusion. Acquiring the time series spectra under different laser power is a good way to check if the molecules have been damaged or bleached in the hot spot. This is also a means to optimize the laser power to achieve a high signal to noise ratio and high sensitivity, which is highly important in the TERS experiment.
4.2 TERS for solid–gas interfaces
Shortly after the discovery of TERS, it was used to probe the adsorbed species on the metal surface under ambient conditions, in addition to the widely used carbon materials with very strong Raman signals. It was convincingly demonstrated that TERS has sufficient sensitivity to observe the signal from monolayer species on the surface. In the 2003, Pettinger group successfully obtained the TERS signal of CN− ions adsorbed on rough Au and Ag surfaces and they observed a clear increase in the Raman signal when the tip approached the surface.131 The complicated micro environments of rough surfaces result in TERS peaks with a broad spectral feature, making it difficult to analyze the spectral features and understand the adsorption mode in a clear way. To address this issue, Ren et al. chose the atomically smooth Au single crystal surface as the substrate, and successfully obtained the first TERS signal from single crystal surfaces.132 They used electrochemically etched Au wire as the TERS tip, and successfully obtained the TERS signal from CN− adsorbed on Au(111) and malachite green isothiocyanate (MGITC) adsorbed on Au(111) and Pt(110), using either Au or Ir tips. Enhancement factors of ∼105 for CN− and ∼106 were observed for the resonant MGITC molecule. They estimated that the lateral spatial resolution of TERS corresponded roughly to the radius of the tip, which is much smaller than 100 nm. By comparing the signal obtained from Au and Pt, they concluded that the use of noble metals is advantageous to achieving a higher TERS enhancement. Surfaces with different electronic properties render different bonding interactions with molecules. They successfully detected the TERS signal for thiophenol and 4-mercaptopyridine adsorbed on Au and Pt single-crystal surfaces.63 This work clearly showed that it is no longer difficult to detect adsorbed species on smooth single crystal surfaces, even for the adsorbates with moderate or weak Raman cross-sections. In particular, both frequency shift and relative intensity of Raman peaks are different when thiophenol molecules are adsorbed on Au and Pt surfaces (Fig. 8a), which suggests that TERS is sensitive enough to identify molecular orientation and molecule–surface interactions on different metal surfaces. TERS will become an important technique that can bridge the material gap of real catalysts and the model single crystal surface. It may also be possible for TERS to reveal the role of surface sites such as steps and terraces in adsorption processes and chemical reactions. Subsequently, we obtained the high quality TER signals and molecular resolution STM image of ordered monolayer of nonresonant 4,4′-biypridine molecules on Au(111) surface simultaneously for the first time (Fig. 9a).133
 Fig. 9  (a) TERS spectra for the 4,4′-bipyridine SAM layer on the Au(111) surface (middle spectrum), the bottom spectrum for the tip-retracted case, and the top spectrum for the SERS spectrum. The inset shows the high resolution STM image obtained with a Pt–Ir tip. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 133, copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics. (b) Schematic illustration showing the phase transition during assembly from low coverage to high coverage. The blue rectangle represents the aromatic part of the molecule. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 134, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
After demonstrating the ultrahigh sensitivity of TERS for surface analysis, we proceeded to investigate how the molecular interaction between aromatic molecules on the Au(111) surface may impact the bonding between the molecules and the surface.134 The Raman peak belonging to the vibration of aromatic rings first experiences a red shift and then a blue shift, with increased adsorption time (Fig. 9b). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopic measurement revealed the increase in electron transfer resistance, followed by a decrease with the further increase of the assembly time. The interplay of electrostatic forces between molecules and the stress of the molecule–surface bond results in the dynamic relaxation process of the full monolayer of the adsorbed species. In addition to the monolayer consisting of a single composition, the TERS technique can also be used to observe SAMs with mixed components. TERS mapping was performed on binary thiol monolayers formed by methyl- and azobenzene-terminated thiols on polycrystalline Au substrates. It was found that the grain boundaries can enhance the movement of the surface molecules; thus, the replacement of the two types of molecules can be enhanced.135
In an STM-based TERS system, it is convenient to measure the electric properties of the molecule while performing TERS measurements. By applying a high bias between the tip and metal substrate, Toccafondi et al. found that the TERS intensity of azobenzenethiol on a Au surface decreased faster than expected after considering the increased distance as a result of the higher bias.136 They proposed that the increasingly higher local field close to the tip apex would induce the molecular bending, resulting in an additional modification of the TERS intensity.
TERS has also been used to study hydrogen bonding is of great importance in the formation of Watson–Crick base pairs, which contain the genetic information in biological organisms. Zhang et al. used TERS to study the hydrogen bonding between adenine and thymine.137 The TERS spectra indicated that the adenine–thymine base pairs were adsorbed onto the Au(111) surface with the adenine part closer to the substrate surface, while the thymine part was away from the surface. They further found that the adenine to thymine ratio and the pH environment would influence the hydrogen bonding between adenine and thymine. Although there are increasing number of TERS papers in the biological realm, the full understanding of TERS spectra is yet to be established. The complexity of biological sample leads to the difficulty in ascribing the TER spectral peak or getting reproducibly convincing results.

4.2.1 TERS study of reacting system. 
We have described the TERS investigations on the surface species under static conditions. It is more interesting to see whether TERS can be used to monitor the reacting system. The surface atoms with high activities can bond to molecules, as well as activate the surface species and initiate a chemical process. The heterogeneity of the surface leads to different catalytic activities from site to site. How to monitor and observe catalytic reactions in situ and figure out the structure–function relationship on surfaces have been essential tasks in catalysis. The nanoscale understanding of heterogeneous catalysis requires the identification of the intrinsic properties of active sites and the improvement of the rational design of catalysts.
At present, there are two categories of work based on the processes being studied. The first category is to monitor the surface chemical processes at the nanoscale by identifying the surface species with TERS. The first TERS study of the catalytic processes was reported in 2012 (Fig. 10).138 A Ag-coated AFM tip was utilized, and by focusing a 532 nm laser into the gap of a Ag coated AFM tip and a Au nanoplate, the LSPR of the system induced the reaction of the adsorbed para-nitrothiophenol (pNTP) with p,p′-dimercaptoazobisbenzene (DMAB) on the Au nanoplate in air. The processes were probed by another laser of 633 nm (Fig. 10a). As seen in Fig. 10b, the characteristic peak (νNN, βC–H) of the product DMAB only appears after illumination by 532 nm, indicating the occurrence of the reaction (Fig. 10c). This work demonstrates that TERS is able to monitor nanoscale catalytic reactions with molecular fingerprints. Similarly, under the UHV conditions, the Xu group adsorbed the pNTP molecules to the Au tip as well as the Ag film substrate. Upon illumination by 633 nm laser, the photocatalytic reactions of pNTP with DMAB were driven by the excited gap plasmon, and were monitored by TERS.139
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic overview of using inverted TERS to monitor photocatalytic reactions. (b) Time-dependent TERS spectra at 633 nm excitation shown before (top) and after (below white band) 532 nm illumination. (c) Representative spectra before (i) and after (ii) the initiation of the catalytic reaction. Spectrum (ii) indicates the formation of the NN bond. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 138, copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The second category is to use TERS to monitor the catalytic activities of different surface sites, taking advantage of the high spatial resolution of the TERS technique, which aims to find the relationship between structures and their catalytic performance at the nanoscale, and thereby to guide the optimization of industrial catalysis. In 2015, the Roy group performed TERS mapping of the catalytic activity of a Ag film for the plasmon-induced reactions of para-aminothiophenol (pATP) with DMAB.140 An alumina-coated tip was employed to enhance the Raman signal while avoiding direct photocatalytic reactions at the tip apex. It showed that the photocatalytic reactions occurred only at a few locations of the Ag substrate, as evidenced by the distribution of the Raman peaks of DMAB. The catalytically active and inactive sites were identified by TERS imaging, which showed a spatial resolution of 20 nm, as shown in Fig. 11. Technically, this is the first report of using TERS to characterize the active site in a real catalytic reaction. However, as we have mentioned, the complicated surface structures make it challenging to establish a clear understanding of the surface processes.
 Fig. 11  (a) AFM image of a Ag substrate with Ag nanoparticles on a glass substrate. (b) TERS map of the dashed rectangle marked in (a), showing the varied intensity of the 1142 cm−1 peak of DMAB. (c) Near-field spectra from the positions marked in (b). (d) Intensity profile along the dotted line marked in (b), showing the spatial resolution of the TERS map. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 140, copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. 
Recently, our group fabricated a bimetallic structure by the electrochemical underpotential deposition of an atomically well-defined Pd sub-monolayer on a Au(111) single crystal surface (Fig. 12a).141 The phenyl isocyanide (PIC) molecule was used as a probe molecule because it can interact with the surface, directly with the NC triple bond, and is sensitive to the electronic properties of surfaces, which allows us to distinguish different local structures. A TERS line profile with 3 nm spatial resolution in real space showed a weakened vibration of the NC triple bond (a lower band frequency) of PIC molecules adsorbed at the Pd step edge, compared to that at the Pd terrace, as shown in Fig. 12b and c. This result suggests an enhanced reactivity of PIC molecules at the step edge, due to the higher d-band electronic profile for the low-coordinated Pd step edge atoms. Our work demonstrates the power of the TERS technique to both spatially and chemically probe the molecular features at different surface sites, which may enable a more detailed understanding of surface chemical processes. When using TERS to study heterogeneous catalysts, EC-TERS will be a very good starting point for in situ observation of real catalytic reactions.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of an STM-based TERS configuration using Au tips and Pd/Au(111) substrates with phenyl isocyanide (PIC) on the surface (top panel). (b) Plots of intensities of the three main TERS peaks with the tip positions and topographic height profile of the surface. (c) Line-scan TERS spectra across a Pd terrace–Pd step edge–Au terrace region. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 141, copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The above studies demonstrated that TERS has the potential to investigate monolayer species. However, the study of the systems with fast dynamic processes or with weak Raman cross sections requires further improvement of the TERS enhancement. Recently, stimulated emission in TERS was demonstrated, in which the obtained stimulated gain was estimated to be 109.142 The billion-fold increase in the Raman signal over conventional TERS enabled a much faster imaging of the surface, which made it possible to investigate dynamic processes on the surfaces.


4.2.2 TERS for single-molecules. 
Single molecule detection is the ultimate goal of an analytical method. Furthermore, one may be able to extract more physical and chemical information from single-molecule observation, which may be averaged in ensemble systems. In 2006, the Pettinger group first demonstrated the single-molecule sensitivity of TERS.143 They analyzed both the concentration of dye MGITC and the corresponding STM topography and pointed out that there were only ∼5 molecules in the enhanced region. Intriguingly, they did not observe the variation in band position or relative intensity; it requires a higher resolution STM image to unambiguously prove the presence of single-molecule(s). Right in the same year, the Raschke group reported the observation of a single MGITC signal with TERS in the ambient environment, featured by the spectral diffusion and the discretization of Raman peak intensities.144 Thereafter, the Zenobi group reported the single-molecule TER spectra for the adsorbed brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) on a planar metal surface in air.145
These single-molecule works demonstrate the capability of TERS as a single-molecule method. It would be more helpful for surface science if a deeper understanding of the system could be derived by the observed single-molecule signal. Our group developed a fishing-mode TERS (FM-TERS) technique to monitor the bonding between molecules and the surface during the electron transport process.146 FM-TERS allowed the simultaneous recording of single-molecule conductance and Raman signals at room temperature. The TERS signals show increased intensities and band widths, and some shifting of peak position during the period with a high probability of the conduction state (Fig. 13a and b). When the conductance switches between the single-molecule junction (ON) state and the disconnected (OFF) state (with and without current jumps, Fig. 13c), the TERS signal fluctuates (Fig. 13d), indicating that the change in the TERS signal originates from single-molecule events. The DFT calculation revealed that the structural deformation led to the most significant spectral change at a high voltage and a stronger molecular interaction with the drain electrode may result in the nonlinear dependence of conductance on the bias voltage.
 Fig. 13  Simultaneous conductance and TERS measurement of 4,4′-bipyridine by FM-TERS. (a) Time sequence of conductance for the Au tip–molecule–Au(111) system. Left inset: Expanded view of (a); right inset: conductance histogram for the Au tip–molecule–Au(111) system. (b) Time sequence of 4,4′-bipyridine TERS spectra obtained simultaneously with the conductance data in (a). (c) Selected conductance curves for a 1 s time period. (d) TERS spectra that correspond to the conductance curves in (c). Reprinted with the permission of ref. 146, copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Spectroscopic fluctuations and discrete signal distribution are the reflection of statistical and macroscopic behaviors of single-molecules. The most convincing evidence would be the straight-forward topographic image of a single-molecule; then, the corresponding TER spectra would definitely come from a single-molecule. Nevertheless, it is still necessary to overcome the mechanical drift of the SPM system, the thermal-induced molecular diffusion, and the contaminants in ambient environment. Such problem can inherently be solved by using UHV and low-temperature TERS, which will be discussed in the next sections.

4.3 TERS under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV)
Although ambient TERS has shown high promise in the nanoscale investigation of surfaces and interfaces, it still suffers from interference of contaminants in air. Furthermore, the presence of a water layer on the surface at a moderate humidity and the oxygen in air may lead to the degradation of some fragile samples.147 These problems not only reduce the sensitivity and spatial resolution of TERS, but also affect the reliability of TERS experiments. Compared to the ambient air conditions, the UHV chamber provides an ultraclean and well controlled environment, so that very delicate experiments can be carried out without bothering too much about unexpected contamination or reactions. Therefore, it is advantageous to develop TERS setups capable of working under the UHV conditions.
In 2008, the Pettinger group developed the first UHV-TERS, which allowed them to obtain the TERS spectra of an isolated BCB molecule and realize the TERS mapping of single-molecules at a spatial resolution of ∼15 nm (see Fig. 14a–c).37 In comparison with the ambient condition, they observed a slower photo bleaching of the dye molecule under the UHV conditions, which is beneficial to the long-time TERS measurements. In 2012, the Van Duyne group reported a UHV-TERS study of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) adlayers on a Ag(111) surface.123 The sample was prepared in the UHV chamber to avoid contamination. Under such a clean environment, they were able to simultaneously obtain STM images at the sub-nanometer resolution (Fig. 14d inset) and observe several vibrational modes of CuPc by TERS (Fig. 14d). They further demonstrated the TERS imaging (Fig. 14e) of a dynamic molecular phase boundary in UHV at room temperature and were able to unravel the molecular orientation in the dynamic two-phase system.148 More recently, they successfully distinguished the conformational differences between neighboring molecules on Cu(111) at room temperature.149 These works showed the prominent ability of UHV-TERS for the nanoscale chemical analysis of sub-monolayer molecules or even a single-molecule. There are attempts to incorporate pulsed lasers into TERS systems as the excitation source, so that the interfacial process can be monitored on an ultrafast time scale with a high spatial resolution. However, the ultrashort laser pulse may lead to an intense transient electric field at the tip–sample gap, which may lead to the damage, diffusion and desorption of the molecules; all these processes will result in an irreversible signal degradation.150 In this regard, the UHV environment can already help to reduce the photoinduced dissociation and slow down the signal decay under the excitation of ultrashort laser pulses, as demonstrated by the Van Duyne group.151
 Fig. 14  (a) STM image of a single BCB molecule adsorbed on Au(111). (b) TERS mapping of the single BCB molecule. (c) TERS intensity profile across the molecular center. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2008 American Physical Society. (d) UHV-TERS spectra of a CuPc adlayer on Ag(111), the inset is the STM image with the tip illuminated by the laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) STM topographic image and TERS mapping of the phase boundary. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The ultimate spatial resolution in TERS imaging relies not only on the confinement of the electric field, but also on the mobility of the molecules on the surface and the thermal drift of the instrument. The latter two effects can be eliminated by lowering the temperature of the sample and using cryogenic temperature SPM. At such a temperature, the molecule will not move on the surface, which allows a long time imaging, as long as the SPM is stable. Such a low temperature can only be possible in the UHV chamber where the water condensation can be negligible. Indeed, it was found that the peak width of the TERS spectra became narrow under the UHV and cryogenic temperature conditions as a result of less molecular motion and averaging (see Fig. 15).152,153 Therefore, it is possible to characterize the additional adsorption properties of molecules on surfaces and the intramolecular coupling and molecular rotation.
 Fig. 15  (a) UHV-TERS spectra of R6G at 19 K and 300 K, and compared with the UHV-SERS spectra of rhodamine 6G at 19 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Temperature-dependent TERS spectra of malachite green; the graph on the right is the Lorentzian line fit analysis of the N–C stretching mode at 1610 cm−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Furthermore, the lower thermal drift of the SPM system at such a low temperature is beneficial to push the spatial resolution of TERS towards its limit. In 2013, the Dong group reported a milestone work, which convincingly demonstrated that TERS was capable of imaging a single porphyrin molecule on the Ag(111) surface (Fig. 16) at a temperature of 80 K and UHV conditions.38 They achieved an unprecedented spatial resolution of 0.5 nm (Fig. 16c), allowing them to spatially distinguish two adjacent molecules within van der Waals interactions (Fig. 16d) and visualize the spatial distribution of local defects and strain along a bent carbon nanotube.154,155 The sub-nanometer spatial resolution demonstrated in these works is really impressive, which cannot be achieved by other spectroscopic techniques, even up to the present time.
 Fig. 16  (a) Representative TERS spectra on the lobe (red) and center (blue) of a flat-lying H2TBPP molecule on Ag(111). (b) Height profile of a line trace, the inset is the STM image of the single-molecule. (c) TERS intensity profile of a line trace, the inset is sub-nanometer resolution TERS mapping of the single-molecule. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) STM image of six molecules alternately arranged adjacent to each other at the step edge of Ag(111). (e) TERS spectra acquired at the positions marked in (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 154, copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The UHV and cryogenic temperature environments provide extremely clean and stable conditions for the fundamental study of adsorbates and their interactions with the surface at the single-molecule level. Such a single-molecule condition is highly different from the practical catalytic or electrochemical system, where the surface molecule coexists with other molecules on the surface. Therefore, it is of great importance to develop TERS to be performed in the practical environment, including liquid environments.
4.4 TERS for solid–liquid interfaces
Solid–liquid interfaces can be widely found in our daily life and play the dominant role in cell–material interactions, molecular assembling, catalysis, electrochemistry, etc. There is an increasing interest in developing TERS as a form of nanospectroscopy for studying the solid–liquid interface. In 2009, the Zenobi group performed a proof-of-principle study and demonstrated the feasibility of TERS for the in situ study of wet samples and solid–liquid interfaces.112 In 2015, we found that the presence of the solution was in turn beneficial for the TERS experiment.55 The solution could be a good buffer to prevent exposure of the tip–substrate gap to air and impurities. Furthermore, the high heat capacity of water can effectively prevent the abrupt increase in the local temperature. As a result of these two effects, we can obtain much more stable TERS signal in solution, compared to that in air (Fig. 17), clearly showing the advantages of performing TERS in solution.
 Fig. 17  (a) Time series TERS spectra obtained in air. (b) Time series TERS spectra obtained in the aqueous solution containing 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH = 3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, the TERS study in liquid has been booming. The Domke group demonstrated the TERS study of monolayer adsorbates of resonant MGITC dye and nonresonant thiophenol on Au(111) single crystals in water.127 They found that the SPM parameters could influence the TERS intensity in solution as both the bias and tunneling current could affect the tip–sample distance. The Maisonhaute group further demonstrated the TERS imaging of mononlayer thioazobenzene derivative on a Au surface in an organic liquid environment.125 Recently, the Ozaki group modified a TERS tip with pH sensitive molecules (i.e., p-mercaptobenzoic acid and PATP), which was then used to map the pH profile at a solution/solid interface at a 400 nm spatial resolution (Fig. 18).124 Although the demonstrated spatial resolution was still low compared with other TERS mapping results, it pointed to the feasibility of using the functionalized TERS tip to detect the local chemical property of solid–liquid interfaces.
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of using a chemically modified TERS tip to map the local pH distribution in a solution/solid interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
We believe these preliminary efforts of liquid phase TERS will inspire a surge of TERS applications for studying the processes occurring in solution and at solid liquid interfaces, including electrochemical systems.
4.5 TERS for electrochemical interfaces
The electrochemical interface is the place where the electron transfer, energy conversion and storage, and mass transfer occur; it determines the function and performance of an electrochemical system. It is desirable to have a highly sensitive in situ technique that can provide fingerprint molecular information at the nanometer resolution. This is important for understanding the local electrochemical processes in the interface, which is highly significant to solar cells, electrocatalytic systems, energy storage devices, electrosynthesis, etc. In this regard, TERS, which integrates the advantages of nanometer spatial resolution, single-molecule sensitivity, and rich vibrational information, is apparently a promising tool for the molecular level and nanoscale analysis of the electrochemical interfaces.
In 2015, we obtained the potential-dependent EC-TERS spectra of 4′-(pyridin-4-yl)biphenyl-4-yl)methanethiol (4-PBT) molecules assembled on a Au(111) single crystal electrode surface.55 A substantial change in the molecular configuration with potential was observed from the EC-TERS spectra. As shown in Fig. 19a, the doublet peaks at 1592 and 1605 cm−1 that were assigned to the vibration of the pyridine ring and benzene ring, respectively, were observed at 0.3 V. At −0.7 V, the peak at the low frequency contributed by the pyridine ring shifted to overlap with the 1605 cm−1 peak and appeared as a single peak after the pyridine ring was protonated. However, this potential-dependent spectral change, as a result of the protonation and deprotonation, was not clearly observed in EC-SERS (see Fig. 19d), because of the interference of the double-end bounded molecules trapped between the gap of nanoparticles, as shown in the TERS and SERS detection schemes in Fig. 19b, c, e and f. This result demonstrated that EC-TERS could more sensitively reflect the structural change at the electrochemical interface, due to the well-defined configuration.
 Fig. 19  (a) Potential-dependent EC-TERS of 4-PBT adsorbed on the Au(111) surface in 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH = 10). (b and c) Models of the TERS system at positive (b) and negative potentials (c). (d) Potential-dependent SERS of a 4-PBT-modified Au nanoparticle surface in 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH = 10). (e and f) Models of the SERS system at positive (e) and negative potentials (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In the same period, the Van Duyne group developed AFM-based EC-TERS to monitor the electrochemical redox behavior of Nile Blue (NB) molecules.128,129 The high sensitivity of the inverted TERS setup with an oil-immersion objective enabled the study of the electrochemical behavior of few molecules during the cyclic voltammetry (CV). At a low coverage, they observed a step-like feature in TERS voltammograms, corresponding to the reduction and oxidation of single or few molecules (Fig. 20a–d). With the increasing coverage, the percentage of two-step TERS CVs corresponding to the behavior of two molecules increased. More interestingly, the formal potential E0′ extracted from the step-like TERS voltammogram obtained at different surface sites shows a broad distribution (Fig. 20e), as a result of the heterogeneity of polycrystalline ITO. In addition, the difference between the cathodic and anodic E0′ in histograms was found to be larger than the ΔEpeak in the ensemble CV, indicating a hysteresis in the tip–sample junction and that the tip may influence the molecular electrochemical behavior.
 Fig. 20  (a) EC-TER spectra of NB acquired during cyclic voltammetry (CV). (b) Background subtracted CV of NB on ITO. (c) Potential dependence of the integrated TERS intensity of the 591 cm−1 peak. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Potential dependence of the integrated TERS intensity and fitting to the Laviron model. (e) Histograms of single-molecule formal potentials extracted from fitting TERS CVs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
These works demonstrate that EC-TERS can be successfully used to monitor electrochemical processes at the nanoscale. Though EC-TERS is still in its early stage, it shows impressive potential in addressing more interesting and challenging issues in the electrochemical interface, including electro(photo)catalysis, corrosion, plasmon-driven electron transfer, and energy storage. With the extremely high spatial resolution down to several nanometers, it is possible to achieve a nanoscale spectral imaging of an electrochemical interface and reveal the structure–function correlation at the electrochemical interfaces by correlating the sub-nanometer resolution SPM image with the simultaneous nanometer resolution TERS image.
4.6 Recent understanding of TERS
The electromagnetic field enhancement indicates that only the vibrational modes aligned along the direction of the surface electric field can be effectively enhanced, which is termed the surface selection rule in SERS as well as TERS.24 Therefore, the relative intensity of TERS spectra is sensitive to the molecular orientation and adsorption configuration. For example, the Dong group demonstrated that the out-of-plane modes of flat-lying ZnTPP molecules on the Ag single crystal are weakened, while the in-plane modes are strengthened upon the standing up of the molecule on the surface.141,154 This behavior can be understood because the component along the axial plasmonic field of the out-of-plane mode decreases and that of the in-plane mode increases when the molecule switches from the flat to tilted orientation. However, the above surface selection rule only discusses the relative direction of the electric field with known molecular vibrational modes, and one should be very cautious when applying the selection rule for analyzing the TERS spectra. When a molecule is adsorbed on the surface, in addition to the generation of the surface bonding modes, the symmetry of the molecule may be lowered and some Raman silent modes may become Raman active.156–158 Furthermore, due to the strong field gradient in TERS, especially in the gap-mode TERS, the electric field may vary over the length of a vibrational mode, the field gradient may alter the potential energy of the induced dipole in an asymmetric way, leading to a markedly different selection rule from the conventional understanding.159,160 For instance, 2-butane lying on a Ag film showed several out-of-plane modes, but not in-plane modes in SERS.161 IR-active modes and higher-order Raman, such as overtone modes or combinational modes, which are not observable in far-field spectra, were observed in TERS spectra.162 Indeed, the observation of more vibrational peaks provide the chance to understand chemical information on surfaces in a more explicit way. To date, there are still some experimental observations that cannot be fully explained by the current understanding of TERS selection rules. The Zenobi group showed that the amide I mode of amino acid in proteins that can be observed in normal Raman spectra, disappeared in SER and TER spectra. They tentatively attributed the absence of the mode to the low signal-to-noise ratio or possible shielding of the protein/peptide backbone by the amino acid side chain.163 Yet, a comprehensive understanding of this phenomenon requires an explicit understanding of the enhancement processes and selection rules.
Most SERS and TERS phenomena can be understood in terms of classical electromagnetic theory. However, it is still very challenging to understand the sub-nanometer spatial resolution as demonstrated by the Dong group, which allows them to identify two adjacent molecules and image the sub-molecular vibrational information of a single-molecule.38,154 This extremely high spatial resolution requires the ultrahigh confinement of electric field enhancement, which cannot be fully understood with the classic EM theory. They described the TERS process as an analogue to the broadband femtosecond stimulated Raman process, in which the laser acts as the Raman pump and the broadband surface plasmon acts as the Raman probe, as shown in Fig. 21a. The fitting curve shown in Fig. 21b suggests a combination of the linear spontaneous Raman scattering and a third-order stimulated Raman process. Therefore, this nonlinear process can tightly confine the electric field to achieve an ultrahigh spatial resolution.38,164
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the broadband femtosecond stimulated Raman scattering, where the laser acts as the Raman pump and the broadband surface plasmon acts as the Raman probe. (b) The dependence of the TERS signals (I) on the incident laser power (I0) for one of the dominant Raman peaks at 1210 cm−1 (red circles). Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Time-dependent density functional theory calculations for metal nanoparticles with atomic features at the surfaces show that the EM fields can be confined down to the atomic dimension, which is different from the general understanding of localization of plasmonic fields.165 The electric fields of atomic-scale features are superimposed with the overall field enhancement given by the plasmon resonance (Fig. 22), which leads to very intense and localized atomic-scale hot spots (Fig. 22b and d).166 These hot spots may account for the sub-nanometer spatial resolution observed in the TERS experiment.
 Fig. 22  Local induced-field enhancement of a Na metallic dimer for the case of tip-to-facet configuration with a separation of 2 nm (a) and 0.6 nm (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Near-field map of the pico-cavity showing sub-nanometer localization of the optical field. (d) Near-field intensity across the gap. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166, copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The sub-nanometer resolution also inspired some theoreticians to include the role of molecules in their understanding of the TERS and SERS enhancement. A canonical model of cavity optomechanics was proposed by assuming a dynamic interaction between the molecular vibration and the localized plasmon as two parametrically coupled and non-resonant harmonic oscillators (Fig. 23a).167 It was predicted that an excitation laser, blue-detuned from the plasmon resonance, is capable of parametrically amplifying the molecular vibration, resulting in a nonlinear enhancement of Raman emission. The pronounced optomechanical back-action when the laser power is close to the instability threshold leads to a significant increase in the spatial resolution, as shown in Fig. 23b.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic mapping of a plasmonic hot spot hosting a molecule with a Raman-active internal vibrational mode. (b) Computed Stokes scattering intensity as a function of lateral position assuming a point-sources caterer located at the origin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Multiple elastic scattering of light by the molecules adsorbed in the nanogap was also proposed to induce a strong near-field self-interaction of molecules with the plasmonic structures, as shown in Fig. 24a.168 As a result, the self-interaction effect is able to significantly tune the Raman excitation and radiation both in the signal intensity and spatial sensitivity, then a “super-hot spot” can be formed to realize a sub-nanometer lateral spatial resolution of Raman mapping (Fig. 24b).
 Fig. 24  (a) Excitation process of spontaneous Raman enhancement when considering the molecule self-interaction with the Ag tip–substrate gap through multiple elastic scattering (white arrows, abbreviated by E.S.) for the incident light. Em,s is the modified excitation field due to the E.S. mechanism, and p is the induced dipole moment describing the molecule response to the excitation light. (b) Calculated intensity profile of the local field confined within the gap involving the molecule in self-interaction via multiple elastic scattering with the Ag tip–substrate gap. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The common description of SERS/TERS processes involves two steps. At first, the localized surface plasmon (LSP) excited by the incoming light drives the Raman process of molecules. Instantaneously, the Raman radiation interacts with LSP and scatters to far field through LSP. Various ways have been proposed to describe the SERS/TERS process beyond the classic description. In most of the descriptions, including the abovementioned work, SERS is implicitly separated into two distinct parts and is described as a standard Raman process, enhanced externally by LSP. Quantum mechanics was used to describe the quantum effects and the coupling between molecules and plasmon.169–172 It is interesting to note a more recent description of SERS by high-order Raman processes:173 they argue that excitation of LSP is inherently involved in the Raman process and SERS can be treated as one quantum-mechanical process (Fig. 25a). As a result, the SERS process should be described with four-order perturbation theory rather than separating it into two distinct processes. It predicts a stronger enhancement, up to three orders of magnitude, than that of the conventional theory, as shown in Fig. 25b. Note that the difference between high-order and two-order processes is pronounced in vacuum and decreases with the increasing dielectric constant of the environment (Fig. 25c). This understanding is in contrast with the conventional understanding by treating SERS as ordinary Raman scattering corresponding to second-order perturbation theory.
 Fig. 25  (a) Feynman diagram of Raman process corresponding to fourth-order perturbation theory. g, j, and f are vibronic ground, intermediate and final states of a molecule respectively. (b) Maximum enhancement as a function of sphere diameter. Solid lines correspond to the enhancement from calculations based on Mie theory, and dashed lines correspond to the quasistatic approximation. Diamonds mark the enhancement obtained by EM-DR. (c) Maximum enhancement for a 30 nm gold nanosphere as a function of the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2016 American Physical Society. 
In brief, with the development of nanoscience and experimental techniques, new intriguing results continue to emerge, which cannot be fully understood by the classical theory. The new experimental findings will thus stimulate a surge of work finding alternative ways to understand the SERS/TERS mechanisms. The proposed mechanisms are yet to be strictly verified by experimental work performed under well-defined conditions, as a lot of experimental parameters may influence the conclusion. The existing challenges in the field also indicate that there is still potential and space to further improve the enhancement to push the faster development of SERS and TERS, which requires the synergetic collaboration between experimentalists and theoreticians.
5. Conclusion and outlook
TERS is a powerful tool for surface and interface analysis because it can simultaneously provide a chemical fingerprint and morphological information of the sample at the nanometer spatial resolution. In particular, when the sample is supported on a plasmonic substrate, TERS can achieve very high sensitivity, down to the single-molecule level and the spatial resolution down to the sub-nanometer scale. Theoretical efforts have been able to guide TERS experimentalists to choose the optimized conditions to achieve the best performance. After over 17 years of continuous efforts, great progress has been achieved in both tip preparation and TERS instruments. Both vacuum and electrochemistry-based methods have been developed so that TERS tips can now be routinely produced in most TERS labs, and commercial TERS tips are now available. The development of TERS instruments has reached its mature stage, and commercial instruments for both ambient and UHV environments are now available. Benefitting from these achievements, TERS has found wide applications in various fields of natural sciences. In the field of surface and interface analysis, it has become routine to obtain TERS signals for some strongly adsorbed aromatic species both from metal films or single crystal surfaces. TERS has been able to monitor the dynamic interactions of the molecules on the surface, and identify surface sites of different chemical and electronic properties, with spatial resolution of about 3 nm. The development of UHV-TERS and electrochemical TERS offers a well-defined environment and better control of the surface reaction and molecular interaction, which is especially important to surface and interfacial studies. The inherent plasmonic excitation in TERS can lead to local plasmon-induced chemical reaction, which can be probed in situ by TERS. All these developments synergistically boost TERS into powerful nanospectroscopy, and its wide applications as an in situ and even operando technique require the following challenges to be properly addressed:
(1) although it has been demonstrated that TERS is able to obtain signals of adsorbed species and the reaction products on the metal surfaces, great efforts have yet to be devoted to developing it into an operando technique so that the dynamic changes of the surface structures of the active sites and the quantification of the products at those sites can be monitored at the nanometer spatial resolution and on the molecular level. Only in this way can the goal to establish the correlation of structure and function in interfacial chemistry, especially during the catalytic reaction processes, be accomplished. For this purpose, it will be highly important to develop TERS systems that can work under high pressure and high temperature, which may offer opportunities for the observation of chemical processes on solid–gas interfaces under real conditions. Further efforts should be devoted to improving the enhancement, stability and lifetime of TERS probes, to achieve in situ observation.49,50 Although EC-TERS has enabled in situ characterization of electrochemical processes at the solid–liquid interfaces, it still calls for TERS systems under water and in air free conditions, such as in a glovebox, so that it can be used for studying some more practical systems such as lithium batteries and photoelectrochemical systems. All these important and potential applications require TERS with a significantly improved sensitivity and imaging rate.
(2) Tip are the core components of TERS, because they should not only be sharp enough to provide the high resolution image of the sample surface, but also possess appropriate plasmonic properties to enhance the Raman signal of the sample to be adequate for imaging. Among various physical and chemical methods that have been reported to fabricate tips with high TERS activity, electrochemical etching has become quite promising for fabricating STM-TERS tips from metal wires. The recently developed pulse electrochemical deposition method for preparing the AFM-TERS tips is now able to control the size of the tip apex by simply varying the deposition time to achieve the optimized TERS enhancement for the specific laser wavelength and substrate. However, it is still a great challenge to make tips with precisely controlled tip radii, except after the post treatment with the high-cost FIB. It is also important to develop an efficient technique that can conveniently screen the optical response of the tip in the presence or absence of the sample, so that it can guide the selection of the appropriate experimental conditions and significantly improve the experimental efficiency, which is important for wider application of TERS.
(3) Sensitivity renders the extraordinary power of TERS as nanospectroscopy. TERS imaging at the sub-nanometer resolution has stimulated a surge in the theoretical understanding of TERS enhancement, including non-linear Raman processes and cavity resonance. Although it is still not conclusive, these theoretical understandings indicate the possibility to achieve unprecedented sensitivity and spatial resolution of TERS that is totally outside of the expectations of the experimentalist. It is still necessary to establish a solid protocol to guide the selection of the tip and optical configurations, and excitation wavelengths to achieve the optimized sensitivity and spatial resolution. The directional TERS detection scheme is another important approach that may help to reduce the background and improve collection efficiency, but requires a rational design of the tip and sample configuration.174 Combination of TERS with stimulated emission has already achieved a billion-fold enhancement, which may open a new avenue for TERS.
(4) TERS signals are inherently weaker than SERS signals because in SERS there are huge amounts of hot spots contributing to the final signal. The chemometric methods have been widely used in normal Raman and SERS studies, whereas they are seldom used in TERS. It would be advantageous if chemometric methods could be integrated into TERS software to improve the signal quality and the TERS imaging speed.
(5) TERS and SERS signals are mainly enhanced by the LSPR-induced electromagnetic field enhancement. Therefore, the relative intensity of the spectra will be shaped by the LSPR response, due to the different resonant conditions at different wavelengths. The use of such LSPR-shaped spectra for the analysis of molecule–surface interactions may be risky. We recently developed a method to use the photoluminescence (PL, also the background of the TERS spectra, BG) of the tip or tip–substrate plasmonic structures and the PL of the corresponding bulk metal to correct the LSPR shaping effect. The correction was realized by subtracting BG from the TERS spectra, dividing by the BG and multiplying by the bulk PL.175 We can then recover the original surface Raman signal that may provide the real structural information for molecules from TERS spectra for the analysis of the molecular configuration on the surface.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation of China (21633005 and 21621091) and National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0200601 and 2013CB933703), and Ministry of Education of China (IRT13036).
References

          H.-J. Butt, K. Graf and M. Kappl, Physics and Chemistry of Interfaces, Wiley-VCH GmbH & Co. KGaA, Wenheim,  2003 Search PubMed .

          K. W. Kolasinski, Surface Science: Foundation of Catalysis and Nanoscience, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, West Sussex, 2nd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .

          E. Gerhard, Reactions at solid Surfaces, John Wiley & Sons. Ltd, Hoboken,  2010 Search PubMed .

          G. A. Somorjai and Y. Li, Introduction to Surface Chemistry and Catalysis, John Wiley & Sons. Ltd, Hoboken, 2nd edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9212–9228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Somorjai and Y. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 917–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ertl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 52–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Liao, L. Cui, S. Whitelam and H. Zheng, Science, 2012, 336, 1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Liao, D. Zherebetskyy, H. Xin, C. Czarnik, P. Ercius, H. Elmlund, M. Pan, L.-W. Wang and H. Zheng, Science, 2014, 345, 916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, Y. Zhu and S. Y. Meng, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 12–18 CrossRef .
S. Yoshimoto and K. Itaya, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2013, 6, 213–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Itaya, Electrochemistry, 2015, 83, 670–679 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Xiao, L. Yu, Q. Liu, Y. Ning, Z. Zhou, H. Chen, W. Huang, P. Liu and X. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dell'Angela, T. Anniyev, M. Beye, R. Coffee, A. Föhlisch, J. Gladh, T. Katayama, S. Kaya, O. Krupin, J. LaRue, A. Møgelhøj, D. Nordlund, J. K. Nørskov, H. Öberg, H. Ogasawara, H. Öström, L. G. M. Pettersson, W. F. Schlotter, J. A. Sellberg, F. Sorgenfrei, J. J. Turner, M. Wolf, W. Wurth and A. Nilsson, Science, 2013, 339, 1302 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Yang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7710–7729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Current Trends of Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. J. Y. Park, Springer, New York,  2014 Search PubMed .

          E. Smith and G. Dent, Modern Raman Spectroscopy – A Practical Approach, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, West Sussex,  2005 Search PubMed .

          G. Z. Wu, Raman Spectroscopy: An Intensity Approach, Science Press, Beijing,  2016 Search PubMed .

Raman Spectroscopy: Development and Applications, ed. G. Turrell and J. Corset, Academic Press Limited, London,  1996 Search PubMed .
M. Fleischmann, P. J. Hendra and A. J. McQuillan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 26, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Jeanmaire and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 84, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Albrecht and J. A. Creighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5215–5217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 69, 4159–4161 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, C. Zong, M. Xu, X. Wang and B. Ren, Small, 2015, 11, 3395–3406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Special issue: Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 465–747 CrossRef .
Special issue: Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 132, 1–340 RSC .
Themed collection: Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 873–1076 RSC .
Themed collection: New Frontiers in Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 7333–7512 RSC .

          E. C. Le Ru and P. G. Etchegoin, Principles of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Related Plasmonic Effects, Elsevier,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Futamata and A. Bruckbauer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 341, 425–430 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, A. Wang, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12054–12061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Fang and X. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5095–5109 CAS .
M. S. Anderson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3130–3132 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hayazawa, Y. Inouye, Z. Sekkat and S. Kawata, Opt. Commun., 2000, 183, 333–336 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Stockle, Y. D. Suh, V. Deckert and R. Zenobi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 318, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pettinger, P. Schambach, C. J. Villagómez and N. Scott, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 379–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Steidtner and B. Pettinger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 236101 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. C. Dong, S. Jiang, C. Zhang, L. G. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liao, J. Aizpurua, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, Nature, 2013, 498, 82–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bailo and V. Deckert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 921–930 RSC .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1856–1870 RSC .
N. Jiang, D. Kurouski, E. A. Pozzi, N. Chiang, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 659, 16–24 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Pozzi, G. Goubert, N. Chiang, N. Jiang, C. T. Chapman, M. O. McAnally, A.-I. Henry, T. Seideman, G. C. Schatz, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 4961–4982 CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Sheng, R. Wang and M. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 9328–9346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Amenabar, S. Poly, W. Nuansing, E. H. Hubrich, A. A. Govyadinov, F. Huth, R. Krutokhvostov, L. Zhang, M. Knez, J. Heberle, A. M. Bittner and R. Hillenbrand, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2890 Search PubMed .
B. Pollard, E. A. Muller, K. Hinrichs and M. B. Raschke, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3587 Search PubMed .
T. Neuman, P. Alonso-González, A. Garcia-Etxarri, M. Schnell, R. Hillenbrand and J. Aizpurua, Laser Photonics Rev., 2015, 9, 637–649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dazzi and C. B. Prater, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5146–5173 CAS .
E. A. Pozzi, G. Goubert, N. Chiang, N. Jiang, C. T. Chapman, M. O. McAnally, A.-I. Henry, T. Seideman, G. C. Schatz, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 4961–4982 CAS .
C. E. Harvey and B. M. Weckhuysen, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 40–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hartman, C. S. Wondergem, N. Kumar, A. van den Berg and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1570–1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zaleski, A. J. Wilson, M. Mattei, X. Chen, G. Goubert, M. F. Cardinal, K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2023–2030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Zrimsek, N. Chiang, M. Mattei, S. Zaleski, M. O. McAnally, C. T. Chapman, A.-I. Henry, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Chem. Rev., 2016 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00552 .
T. X. Huang, S. C. Huang, M. H. Li, Z. C. Zeng, X. Wang and B. Ren, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2015, 407, 8177–8195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Downes, D. Salter and A. Elfick, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6692–6698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Zeng, S. C. Huang, D. Y. Wu, L. Y. Meng, M. H. Li, T. X. Huang, J. H. Zhong, X. Wang, Z. L. Yang and B. Ren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11928–11931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Notingher and A. Elfick, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15699–15706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Yang, J. Hu, X. Li, H. Zhou and Z. Q. Tian, Chin. J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 17, 253–258 CAS .
A. Downes, D. Salter and A. Elfick, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 5216–5222 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Stadler, B. Oswald, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uetsuki, P. Verma, P. Nordlander and S. Kawata, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5931–5935 RSC .
Z. L. Yang, J. Aizpurua and H. X. Xu, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1343–1348 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Sun, Y. R. Fang, Z. L. Yang and H. X. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9412–9419 RSC .
B. Ren, G. Picardi, B. Pettinger, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 139–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Demming, F. Festy and D. Richards, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 184716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Meng, T. X. Huang, X. Wang, S. Chen, Z. L. Yang and B. Ren, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 13804–13813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Cui, W. H. Zhang, B. S. Yeo, R. Zenobi, C. Hafner and D. Erni, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 8309–8316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Yeo, T. Schmid, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 387, 2655–2662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Yeo, W. H. Zhang, C. Vannier and R. Zenobi, Appl. Spectrosc., 2006, 60, 1142–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Taguchi, N. Hayazawa, Y. Saito, H. Ishitobi, A. Tarun and S. Kawata, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 6509–6518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, P. Steinvurzel, T. Yang and K. B. Crozier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 171107 CrossRef .
I. Maouli, A. Taguchi, Y. Saito, S. Kawata and P. Verma, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 032401 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ren, G. Picardi and B. Pettinger, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 837–841 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Cui and B. Ren, Chem. J. Chin. Univ.-Chin., 2007, 28, 522–525 CAS .
M. G. Boyle, L. Feng and P. Dawson, Ultramicroscopy, 2008, 108, 558–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dickmann, F. Demming and J. Jersch, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1996, 67, 845 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iwami, Y. Uehara and S. Ushioda, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1998, 69, 4010–4011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4514–4520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lloyd, A. Williams, R. H. Rickman, A. McCowen and P. R. Dunstan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 143108 CrossRef .
P. A. Hodgson, Y. Wang, A. A. Mohammad and P. Kruse, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2013, 84, 026109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Bryant, H. S. Kim, Y. C. Zheng and R. Yang, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1987, 58, 1115 CrossRef .
A. J. Melmed, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 1991, 9, 601 CAS .
J. A. DeRose, T. Thundat, L. A. Nagahara and S. M. Lindsay, Surf. Sci., 1991, 256, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartschuh, E. J. Sanchez, X. S. Xie and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 095503 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lüssem, S. Karthäuser, H. Haselier and R. Waser, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 249, 197–202 CrossRef .
V. L. Schlegel and T. M. Cotton, Anal. Chem., 1991, 63, 241–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, E. Matveeva, I. Gryczynski, Z. Leonenko and J. R. Lakowicz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7969–7975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asghari-Khiavi, B. R. Wood, P. Hojati-Talemi, A. Downes, D. McNaughton and A. Mechler, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
V. Deckert, T. Deckert-Gaudig, M. Diegel, I. Gotz, L. Langeluddecke, H. Schneidewind, G. Sharma, P. Singh, P. Singh, S. Trautmann, M. Zeisberger and Z. Zhang, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 177, 9–20 RSC .
L. K. Yang, T. X. Huang, Z. C. Zeng, M. H. Li, X. Wang, F. Z. Yang and B. Ren, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18225–18231 RSC .
P. R. Brejna and P. R. Griffiths, Appl. Spectrosc., 2010, 64, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Saito, T. Murakami, Y. Inouye and S. Kawata, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 920–921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, J. J. Wang, D. N. Batchelder and D. A. Smith, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 6857–6861 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang, Y. Saito, D. N. Batchelder, J. Kirkham, C. Robinson and D. A. Smith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 263111 CrossRef .
K. Yi, X. He, Y. Zhou, W. Xiong and Y. Lu, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79, 073706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. You, N. A. Purnawirman, H. L. Hu, J. Kasim, H. P. Yang, C. L. Du, T. Yu and Z. X. Shen, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2010, 41, 1156–1162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fujita, R. Chiba, G. Lu, N. N. Horimoto, S. Kajimoto, H. Fukumura and H. Uji-i, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9839–9841 RSC .
T. Umakoshi, T. A. Yano, Y. Saito and P. Verma, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 052001 CrossRef .
H. T. Wang, T. Tian, Y. Zhang, Z. Q. Pan, Y. Wang and Z. D. Xiao, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8918–8922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. U. Vakarelski and K. Higashitani, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2931–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Okamoto and I. Yamaguchi, J. Microsc., 2001, 202, 100–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sqalli, M. P. Bernal, P. Hoffmann and F. Marquis-Weible, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2134–2136 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Comstock, J. W. Elam, M. J. Pellin and M. C. Hersam, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83, 113704 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Weber-Bargioni, A. Schwartzberg, M. Cornaglia, A. Ismach, J. J. Urban, Y. J. Pang, R. Gordon, J. Bokor, M. B. Salmeron, D. F. Ogletree, P. Ashby, S. Cabrini and P. J. Schuck, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1201–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fleischer, A. Weber-Bargioni, M. V. P. Altoe, A. M. Schwartzberg, P. J. Schuck, S. Cabrini and D. P. Kern, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2570–2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. De Angelis, G. Das, P. Candeloro, M. Patrini, M. Galli, A. Bek, M. Lazzarino, I. Maksymov, C. Liberale, L. C. Andreani and E. Di Fabrizio, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 67–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Christiansen, M. Becker, S. Fahlbusch, J. Michler, V. Sivakov, G. Andra and R. Geiger, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 035503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Farahani, D. W. Pohl, H. J. Eisler and B. Hecht, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 017402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, M. Melli, N. Caselli, F. Riboli, D. S. Wiersma, M. Staffaroni, H. Choo, D. F. Ogletree, S. Aloni, J. Bokor, S. Cabrini, F. Intonti, M. B. Salmeron, E. Yablonovitch, P. J. Schuck and A. Weber-Bargioni, Science, 2012, 338, 1317–1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Berweger, J. M. Atkin, R. L. Olmon and M. B. Raschke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3427–3432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid, L. Opilik, P. Kuhn, P. S. Dittrich and R. Zenobi, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 509–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Opilik, Ü. Dogan, C. Y. Li, B. Stephanidis, J. F. Li and R. Zenobi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20828–20832 CAS .
T. Schmid, B. S. Yeo, G. Leong, J. Stadler and R. Zenobi, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1392–1399 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, K. Dai, S. Jin, Z. C. Zeng, M. D. Zhuang, Z. L. Yang, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1400–1406 CrossRef CAS .
L. Opilik, U. Dogan, J. Szczerbinski and R. Zenobi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 091109 CrossRef .
N. Kumar, S. J. Spencer, D. Imbraguglio, A. M. Rossi, A. J. Wain, B. M. Weckhuysen and D. Roy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13710–13716 RSC .
C. A. Barrios, A. V. Malkovskiy, R. D. Hartschuh, A. M. Kisliuk, A. P. Sokolov and M. D. Foster, Proc. SPIE, 2008, 6954, 69540C CrossRef .
R. L. Agapov, A. P. Sokolov and M. D. Foster, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44, 710–716 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Barrios, A. V. Malkovskiy, A. M. Kisliuk, A. P. Sokolov and M. D. Foster, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8158–8161 CAS .
T. Deckert-Gaudig, M. Richter, D. Knebel, T. Jähnke, T. Jankowski, E. Stock and V. Deckert, Appl. Spectrosc., 2014, 68, 916–919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lieb and A. Meixner, Opt. Express, 2001, 8, 458–474 CAS .
J. Steidtner and B. Pettinger, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Peica, S. Röhrig, A. Rüdiger, K. Brose, C. Thomsen and J. Maultzsch, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2708–2712 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jiang, E. T. Foley, J. M. Klingsporn, M. D. Sonntag, N. A. Valley, J. A. Dieringer, T. Seideman, G. C. Schatz, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5061–5067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pienpinijtham, S. Vantasin, Y. Kitahama, S. Ekgasit and Y. Ozaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 14663–14668 CAS .
T. Touzalin, A. L. Dauphin, S. Joiret, I. T. Lucas and E. Maisonhaute, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15510–15513 RSC .
A. Nakata, T. Nomoto, T. Toyota and M. Fujinami, Anal. Sci., 2013, 29, 865–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Martin Sabanes, L. M. Driessen and K. F. Domke, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7108–7114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kurouski, M. Mattei and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7956–7962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mattei, G. Kang, G. Goubert, D. V. Chulhai, G. C. Schatz, L. Jensen and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 590–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pettinger, K. F. Domke, D. Zhang, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 76, 113409 CrossRef .
B. Pettinger, G. Picardi, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 554–555, 293–299 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pettinger, B. Ren, G. Picardi, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 096101 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Liu, M. D. Zhuang, H. M. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. X. Xie, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 101105 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. H. Zhong, M. Zhang, Z. Liu, D. Y. Wu and B. Ren, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 915–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Picardi, A. Krolikowska, R. Yasukuni, M. Chaigneau, M. Escude, V. Mourier, C. Licitra and R. Ossikovski, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 276–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Toccafondi, G. Picardi and R. Ossikovski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 18209–18219 CAS .
D. Zhang, K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1662–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. van Schrojenstein Lantman, T. Deckert-Gaudig, A. J. G. Mank, V. Deckert and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 583–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, Z. Zhang, H. Zheng and H. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 647 Search PubMed .
N. Kumar, B. Stephanidis, R. Zenobi, A. J. Wain and D. Roy, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7133–7137 RSC .
J. H. Zhong, X. Jin, L. Meng, X. Wang, H. S. Su, Z. L. Yang, C. T. Williams and B. Ren, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 132–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Wickramasinghe, M. Chaigneau, R. Yasukuni, G. Picardi and R. Ossikovski, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3421–3426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Domke, D. Zhang and B. Pettinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14721–14727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Neacsu, J. Dreyer, N. Behr and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 193406 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, B. S. Yeo, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1733–1738 CAS .
Z. Liu, S. Y. Ding, Z. B. Chen, X. Wang, J. H. Tian, J. R. Anema, X. S. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. W. Mao, X. Xu, B. Ren and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 305 CrossRef PubMed .
B. L. Weeks, M. W. Vaughn and J. J. DeYoreo, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8096–8098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, N. Chiang, L. R. Madison, E. A. Pozzi, M. R. Wasielewski, T. Seideman, M. A. Ratner, M. C. Hersam, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3898–3904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chiang, X. Chen, G. Goubert, D. V. Chulhai, X. Chen, E. A. Pozzi, N. Jiang, M. C. Hersam, T. Seideman, L. Jensen and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7774–7778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Klingsporn, M. D. Sonntag, T. Seideman and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 106–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Pozzi, M. D. Sonntag, N. Jiang, N. Chiang, T. Seideman, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2657–2661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Klingsporn, N. Jiang, E. A. Pozzi, M. D. Sonntag, D. Chulhai, T. Seideman, L. Jensen, M. C. Hersam and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3881–3887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-D. Park, E. A. Muller, V. Kravtsov, P. M. Sass, J. Dreyer, J. M. Atkin and M. B. Raschke, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 479–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, Y. Zhang, R. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Liao, Y. Luo, J. Yang, Z. Dong and J. G. Hou, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 865–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liao, S. Jiang, C. Hu, R. Zhang, Y. Kuang, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Z. Dong, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4040–4046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Campion and D. R. Mullins, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1983, 94, 576–579 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Lippitsch, Phys. Rev. B, 1984, 29, 3101–3110 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Patterson and M. J. Weaver, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1331–1334 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Sass, H. Neff, M. Moskovits and S. Holloway, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 621–623 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Ayars, H. D. Hallen and C. L. Jahncke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 4180–4183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. DiLella and M. Moskovits, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 2042–2046 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Z. Zhang, L. Chen and M. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 783–794 RSC .
C. Blum, T. Schmid, L. Opilik, N. Metanis, S. Weidmann and R. Zenobi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23061–23066 CAS .
S. Duan, G. Tian and Y. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1041–1045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barbry, P. Koval, F. Marchesin, R. Esteban, A. G. Borisov, J. Aizpurua and D. Sánchez-Portal, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3410–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Benz, M. K. Schmidt, A. Dreismann, R. Chikkaraddy, Y. Zhang, A. Demetriadou, C. Carnegie, H. Ohadi, B. de Nijs, R. Esteban, J. Aizpurua and J. J. Baumberg, Science, 2016, 354, 726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roelli, C. Galland, N. Piro and T. J. Kippenberg, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, B.-Q. Chen and Z.-Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11858–11871 CAS .
A. M. Kelley, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 224702 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Masiello and G. C. Schatz, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 064102 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Payton, S. M. Morton, J. E. Moore and L. Jensen, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 214103 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Payton, S. M. Morton, J. E. Moore and L. Jensen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 88–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Mueller, S. Heeg and S. Reich, Phys. Rev. A, 2016, 94, 023813 CrossRef .
H. Shen, G. Lu, Z. Cao, Y. He, Y. Cheng, J. Li, Z.-Y. Li and Q. Gong, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2016, 47, 1194–1199 CrossRef CAS .
K. Q. Lin, J. Yi, J. H. Zhong, S. Hu, B. J. Liu, J. Y. Liu, C. Zong, Z. C. Lei, X. Wang, J. Aizpurua, R. Esteban and B. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of (a) Raman spectroscopy, (b) SERS, and (c) TERS.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) The effect of tip radius on the field enhancement and spatial resolution between the full metal tip and different substrate materials: (a) Ag tips coupled with glass substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64, copyright 2005 American Institute of Physics. (b) Au tips coupled with Au substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61, copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (c–f) The effect of tip radius on the field enhancement and spatial resolution between the metal-coated tip and Au substrate. (c) The dependence of the electric field enhancement on the thickness of the Au coating. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2015 Optical Society of America. (d) The dependence of the spatial resolution (SR) (using 632.8 nm as the excitation wavelength) on the thickness. (e) Experimental results of the dependence of the TERS enhancement on the thickness. The peak of MGITC at 1176 cm−1 was used. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (f) TERS mapping of thin layer polyaniline by using a Au-coated AFM tip with a radius of 65 nm. The spatial resolution is 7.3 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM image of the TERS tips. (a) Electrochemically etched Au tip. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2004 American Institute of Physics. (b) Electrochemically etched Ag tip. (c) Ag-coated tip produced by vacuum evaporation; Redrawn with permission from ref. 69, copyright 2009 The Optical Society. (d) Au-Coated tip produced by pulsed electrodeposition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (e) Photonic crystal cavity on a Si3N4 cantilever with attached tapered waveguide. Redrawn with permission from ref. 105, copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (f) Overview of the Au cone scanning probe. (Redrawn with permission from ref. 89, copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (g) Campanile tip consisting of a tapered metal–insulator–metal waveguide with a nanogap at the apex. Redrawn with permission from ref. 108, copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (h) FIB milled Au tip etched by the electrochemical method superimposed with the optical image of grating illumination and apex emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images from a region close to the apex of a silica-protected Au tip (left panel) and a silica-protected Ag tip (right panel). (b) Direct comparison of TERS intensity of the adsorbed thiophenol after different storage times with unprotected (squares) and silica-protected (triangles) Ag tips. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) SEM images of two unprotected Ag-coated tips, (c and d) SEM image of two protected Ag-coated tips after six scans on a standard silicon grid. In all cases, the apex is circled. The scale bar are all for 1 μm. Redrawn with permission from ref. 117, copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of different optical geometries for tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. (a) Bottom illumination geometry; (b) side illumination geometry; (c) top illumination geometry; (d) parabolic mirror illumination geometry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic overview of the optical design for the extension of TERS to solution. (a) Bottom illumination geometry; (b) side illumination geometry; (c) top illumination geometry. (d) AFM-TERS setup performing in solution based on the bottom illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112, copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (e) STM-TERS setup performing in solution on the basis of the side illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (f) AFM-TERS setup performing in solution on the basis of the top illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Illustration of the EC-TERS setup. (a) STM-based EC-TERS setup using a modified side illumination geometry for both transparent and opaque samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) AFM-based EC-TERS setup working in transmission illumination geometry for transparent samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TERS spectra of thiophenol measured at first on Pt(110), then on Au(110), and finally on a Pt(110). Reprinted with the permission of ref. 63, copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. (b) Double logarithmic plot of Raman band intensities (left) and the integral background (right) for varying distances z of the STM tip to the surface. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 130, copyright 2007 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TERS spectra for the 4,4′-bipyridine SAM layer on the Au(111) surface (middle spectrum), the bottom spectrum for the tip-retracted case, and the top spectrum for the SERS spectrum. The inset shows the high resolution STM image obtained with a Pt–Ir tip. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 133, copyright 2007 American Institute of Physics. (b) Schematic illustration showing the phase transition during assembly from low coverage to high coverage. The blue rectangle represents the aromatic part of the molecule. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 134, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic overview of using inverted TERS to monitor photocatalytic reactions. (b) Time-dependent TERS spectra at 633 nm excitation shown before (top) and after (below white band) 532 nm illumination. (c) Representative spectra before (i) and after (ii) the initiation of the catalytic reaction. Spectrum (ii) indicates the formation of the NN bond. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 138, copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) AFM image of a Ag substrate with Ag nanoparticles on a glass substrate. (b) TERS map of the dashed rectangle marked in (a), showing the varied intensity of the 1142 cm−1 peak of DMAB. (c) Near-field spectra from the positions marked in (b). (d) Intensity profile along the dotted line marked in (b), showing the spatial resolution of the TERS map. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 140, copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of an STM-based TERS configuration using Au tips and Pd/Au(111) substrates with phenyl isocyanide (PIC) on the surface (top panel). (b) Plots of intensities of the three main TERS peaks with the tip positions and topographic height profile of the surface. (c) Line-scan TERS spectra across a Pd terrace–Pd step edge–Au terrace region. Reprinted with the permission of ref. 141, copyright 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 13  Simultaneous conductance and TERS measurement of 4,4′-bipyridine by FM-TERS. (a) Time sequence of conductance for the Au tip–molecule–Au(111) system. Left inset: Expanded view of (a); right inset: conductance histogram for the Au tip–molecule–Au(111) system. (b) Time sequence of 4,4′-bipyridine TERS spectra obtained simultaneously with the conductance data in (a). (c) Selected conductance curves for a 1 s time period. (d) TERS spectra that correspond to the conductance curves in (c). Reprinted with the permission of ref. 146, copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) STM image of a single BCB molecule adsorbed on Au(111). (b) TERS mapping of the single BCB molecule. (c) TERS intensity profile across the molecular center. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2008 American Physical Society. (d) UHV-TERS spectra of a CuPc adlayer on Ag(111), the inset is the STM image with the tip illuminated by the laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e) STM topographic image and TERS mapping of the phase boundary. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) UHV-TERS spectra of R6G at 19 K and 300 K, and compared with the UHV-SERS spectra of rhodamine 6G at 19 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Temperature-dependent TERS spectra of malachite green; the graph on the right is the Lorentzian line fit analysis of the N–C stretching mode at 1610 cm−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153 copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Representative TERS spectra on the lobe (red) and center (blue) of a flat-lying H2TBPP molecule on Ag(111). (b) Height profile of a line trace, the inset is the STM image of the single-molecule. (c) TERS intensity profile of a line trace, the inset is sub-nanometer resolution TERS mapping of the single-molecule. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) STM image of six molecules alternately arranged adjacent to each other at the step edge of Ag(111). (e) TERS spectra acquired at the positions marked in (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 154, copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Time series TERS spectra obtained in air. (b) Time series TERS spectra obtained in the aqueous solution containing 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH = 3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of using a chemically modified TERS tip to map the local pH distribution in a solution/solid interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124, copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Potential-dependent EC-TERS of 4-PBT adsorbed on the Au(111) surface in 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH = 10). (b and c) Models of the TERS system at positive (b) and negative potentials (c). (d) Potential-dependent SERS of a 4-PBT-modified Au nanoparticle surface in 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH = 10). (e and f) Models of the SERS system at positive (e) and negative potentials (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 55, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) EC-TER spectra of NB acquired during cyclic voltammetry (CV). (b) Background subtracted CV of NB on ITO. (c) Potential dependence of the integrated TERS intensity of the 591 cm−1 peak. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Potential dependence of the integrated TERS intensity and fitting to the Laviron model. (e) Histograms of single-molecule formal potentials extracted from fitting TERS CVs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129, copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the broadband femtosecond stimulated Raman scattering, where the laser acts as the Raman pump and the broadband surface plasmon acts as the Raman probe. (b) The dependence of the TERS signals (I) on the incident laser power (I0) for one of the dominant Raman peaks at 1210 cm−1 (red circles). Reprinted with permission from ref. 38, copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 22  Local induced-field enhancement of a Na metallic dimer for the case of tip-to-facet configuration with a separation of 2 nm (a) and 0.6 nm (b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 165, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Near-field map of the pico-cavity showing sub-nanometer localization of the optical field. (d) Near-field intensity across the gap. Reprinted with permission from ref. 166, copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic mapping of a plasmonic hot spot hosting a molecule with a Raman-active internal vibrational mode. (b) Computed Stokes scattering intensity as a function of lateral position assuming a point-sources caterer located at the origin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Excitation process of spontaneous Raman enhancement when considering the molecule self-interaction with the Ag tip–substrate gap through multiple elastic scattering (white arrows, abbreviated by E.S.) for the incident light. Em,s is the modified excitation field due to the E.S. mechanism, and p is the induced dipole moment describing the molecule response to the excitation light. (b) Calculated intensity profile of the local field confined within the gap involving the molecule in self-interaction via multiple elastic scattering with the Ag tip–substrate gap. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Feynman diagram of Raman process corresponding to fourth-order perturbation theory. g, j, and f are vibronic ground, intermediate and final states of a molecule respectively. (b) Maximum enhancement as a function of sphere diameter. Solid lines correspond to the enhancement from calculations based on Mie theory, and dashed lines correspond to the quasistatic approximation. Diamonds mark the enhancement obtained by EM-DR. (c) Maximum enhancement for a 30 nm gold nanosphere as a function of the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2016 American Physical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
