Non-fused molecular photovoltaic acceptor with a planar core structure enabled by bulky and embracing-type side chains   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC05550J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05550J
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 2945-2949Non-fused molecular photovoltaic acceptor with a planar core structure enabled by bulky and embracing-type side chains†

        
          
            Zhong-Xin 
            Xue
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Fang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zi-Wen 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li-Na 
            Liu
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Yao
          
        
      *cd, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Qi 
            Ma
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wei-Shi 
            Li
          
        
      *ad
aKey Laboratory of Synthetic and Self-assembly Chemistry for Organic Functional Molecules, Center for Excellence in Molecular Synthesis, Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 345 Lingling Road, Shanghai 200032, P. R. China. E-mail: liws@mail.sioc.ac.cn
bI-Lab & Printable Electronics Research Centre, Suzhou Institute of Nano-tech and nano-bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 398 Ruoshui Road, SEID, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province 215123, P. R. China. E-mail: jfang2020@sinano.ac.cn
cCAS Key Laboratory of Energy Regulation Materials, Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 345 Lingling Road, Shanghai 200032, China. E-mail: yaojh@mail.sioc.ac.cn
dEngineering Research Center of Zhengzhou for High Performance Organic Functional Materials, Zhengzhou Institute of Technology, 6 Yingcai Street, Huiji District, Zhengzhou, Henan 450044, P. R. China
Received 
      17th November 2021
    , Accepted 28th January 2022First published on 31st January 2022AbstractA strategy involving bulky and “embracing”-type side chains for keeping the planarity of non-fused units was proposed and applied to the design of a non-fullerene acceptor (NFA) molecule. The NFA molecule iPrBT-NFA bearing a 2,2′-bithiophene core with two bulky and embracing-type 2,4,6-triisopropylphenyl substituents at its 3,3′ positions was demonstrated to display a planar core structure, red-shifted light absorption, finely regulated aggregation and much better photovoltaic performance than that shown by a reference molecule (DeBT-NFA) having the same backbone but with long alkyl side chains.
Numerous and structurally diverse non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have been developed in the last few years, and at the same time considerable progress has been made in the development of organic solar cells (OSCs).1–3 NFAs with an acceptor-donor–acceptor (A–D–A) structure benefiting from adjustable energy levels, strong light absorptions, and reduced energy losses have increased the power conversion efficiency (PCE) record of OSCs to over 18%.4
The highly efficient A–D–A NFAs reported so far share the structural characteristic of each using a large multiple-ring-fused π-conjugated segment as the donor moiety in the core of the structure.3,5 This feature endows the molecules with a completely planar central backbone and ensures a smooth flow from one end to the other for both π-electrons and charge carriers. Due to this feature together with the occurrence of strong intermolecular π–π stacking between the terminal A moieties, the molecules in the solid state can easily establish an effective three-dimensional charge-carrier transport network and thus generally display excellent charge mobility.6 Moreover, the large fused D moiety often induces an efficient intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) to terminal A units, and thus enables an intense ICT band in the near-infrared (NIR) region and expands the wavelength range of the light absorption of the molecule to allow it to harvest more solar light.7
Undoubtedly, these fused-ring electron acceptors (FREAs) have achieved great success and have led the field into a new era with PCEs higher than 15%. However, the multiple-ring-fused core is relatively challenging to synthesize, and lacks much structural flexibility.8 Therefore, besides FREAs, non-fused-ring acceptors (NFRAs) have also gained considerable attention and many such molecules have been designed and studied.9–11 In order to improve the backbone planarity, elements that can produce intramolecular noncovalent interactions, such as O⋯S, O⋯H, and F⋯S, were designed into NFRA structures and have been demonstrated to be effective in producing a conformational lock and ultimately in enhancing the performance of the resulting devices.12–14 However, such noncovalent interactions are generally weak and do not form to much of an extent in solution. Thus, in stark contrast to FREA molecules, NFRA molecules adopt twisted conformations in solution. During film formation procedures, NFRA molecules gradually stack together and planarize their backbones. But kinetic issues often prevent them from reaching the final fully planar stage, and instead keep them in various intermediate conformational stages.
In order to tackle this problem, we proposed here the use of bulky and “embracing”-type side chains to force two non-fused aromatic rings into planar conformations in both solution and film states. Non-fused bithiophene (BT) was shown—according to density functional theoretical (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/6-31G level—to have essentially no energy barrier to twisting (Fig. 1b). In Fig. 1c, it also displayed an intense peak at a wavelength of about 306 nm in solution but a plateau in absorption for wavelengths up to 360 nm in the film state. This difference was attributed to the planarization of its conjugated backbone and intermolecular π–π stacking upon formation of the film. In comparison, the molecule DeBT having two decyl side chains at the 3,3′-positions showed an absorption peak at 255 nm in solution, blue shifted by 51 nm relative to that of BT in solution. Moreover, formation of the film state of DeBT coincided with a further blue shift of its main absorption peak. Note that DeBT in the film state also showed a newly present weak shoulder at about 275 nm (red shifted relative to the main peak). These observations suggested that the long alkyl chain substituents at the 3,3′-positions twisted the BT backbone in both the solution and film states, yielding a complicated description of twisting angles and multiple conformational stages. The results of DFT calculations were consistent with this picture, and showed the lowest energy state of DeBT involving S–C–C–S dihedral angles of about 90 or 270°. In contrast, when 2,4,6-triisopropylphenyl was used as the substituent at the 3,3′-positions, the resulting molecule, i.e., iPrBT, displayed a light absorption peak at about 316 nm with very similar spectral shapes resulting from the solution and film states. This result indicated that the iPrBT molecule formed the same backbone configuration in solution and the film state. DFT calculations revealed the lowest energy state of the molecule resulting from a S–C–C–S dihedral angle of 180°, i.e., an arrangement involving the two thiophene units in antiparallel coplanar positions. These observations can be reasonably explained as resulting from the isopropyl substituents at the 4,6-phenyl positions resembling two arms closely embracing the central thiophene units and forcing them to always stay in the antiparallel coplanar arrangement.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures, (b) twisting energy profiles, and (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra in solution and film states of BT, DeBT and iPrBT. 
Inspired by the above thoughts and observations, we were encouraged to use iPrBT as a key building block in the place of multiple-ring-fused units for NFA design. Fig. 2 shows the subject of our first work, i.e., iPrBT-NFA, which was used in combination with a benzothiadiazole bridge and 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (IC) acceptor cap. The reference molecule DeBT-NFA, bearing the same chemical structure except the use of DeBT in place of iPrBT, was also designed and synthesized. Comparison studies found the embracing-type side chains in iPrBT-NFA as expected having great impacts on many optoelectronic properties as well as the film structure, and finally leading to a much-improved photovoltaic performance with an optimal PCE of 8.12% for iPrBT-NFA devices in contrast to the low PCE of only 0.29% for DeBT-NFA devices. Note that similar NFRAs bearing the same iPrBT core and achieving a PCE of 15.2% have been published during the time of this manuscript preparation.15,16 In contrast to the reported molecules, iPrBT-NFA studied here was designed to use a benzothiadiazole bridge unit between IC and the iPrBT core to ensure an extension of its absorption band into the deep NIR region.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures, computed molecular geometry labelled with several important dihedral angles, and HOMO and LUMO orbitals of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA. 
In order to check the rationale of the molecular design, DFT computations were first carried out at the B3LYP/6-31G level. As shown in Fig. 2, iPrBT-NFA was calculated to have an almost planar backbone with dihedral angles from the center to the terminus all near zero, specifically 0.4, 1.4, and 9.5°. Undoubtedly, this planar scaffold would facilitate π-electron communication throughout the entire backbone and lead to long-range delocalization of HOMO and LUMO orbitals. Meanwhile, the phenyl rings in the side chains were calculated to be perpendicular to the backbone with a dihedral angle of about 90°, a conformation preventing any significant conjugation of the phenyl units with the backbone and resulting in the phenyl units making no contribution to the formation of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). This conformation was nevertheless found to be important due to its ensuring the isopropyl chains at its 4,6-positions behaving like two arms to tightly hold the backbone thiophene units and stop them from twisting. In comparison, DeBT-NFA was calculated to have a twisted backbone between the central thiophene units with a dihedral angle of about 57.9°—with the twisting causing HOMO electron density to mainly reside on the central segments, and LUMO electron density to be located on the terminal acceptor moieties.
Following this theoretical study, iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA were synthesized following the schemes shown in Scheme S1. They both formed dark blue solids. Their chemical structures were unambiguously characterized by carrying out 1H- and 13C-NMR spectroscopic analyses, elemental analysis, and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectroscopy. DeBT-NFA displayed moderate solubility in common organic solvents such as chloroform and chlorobenzene, while iPrBT-NFA showed much better solubility.

Fig. 3a displays UV-Vis absorption spectra of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA in chloroform solutions and as thin films. In dilute chloroform solutions, iPrBT-NFA exhibited an absorption band in the wavelength range 500–800 nm with the strongest signal at 691 nm—while in comparison, DeBT-NFA showed a blue-shifted absorption band in the range 400–700 nm with the strongest signal at 576 nm. Considering the identical backbone structure for both molecules, this difference between their UV-Vis absorption spectra must have resulted from their different side chains at the central bithiophene unit. Unlike long alkyl side chains, that in general tend to twist backbones, the bulky and embracing-type side chains apparently helped the backbone stay in a coplanar structure and endowed the molecule with the ability to absorb more infrared light. In the film state, both molecules showed broadened and red-shifted absorption, attributed to the occurrence of intermolecular π–π stacking. Surprisingly, even with a much blue-shifted absorption band in solution, DeBT-NFA was found to extend its absorption edge in the film state more so than did iPrBT-NFA. Consequently, the iPrBT-NFA film showed a light-absorption onset point at 870 nm, while DeBT-NFA film exhibited it at about 910 nm. This result indicated a narrower bandgap for the DeBT-NFA film than for the iPrBT-NFA film (1.36 vs. 1.42 eV). At the same time, we noticed much broader absorption bands for the DeBT-NFA film than for the iPrBT-NFA film. These observations suggested that backbone planarization took place during the formation of the DeBT-NFA film. However, this process proceeded neither comprehensively nor completely, resulting in multiple conformational stages for DeBT-NFA molecules. We considered it reasonable to deduce that some DeBT-NFA molecules fully planarized their backbones and closely π–π stacked together, giving rise to light absorption at the red edge. But most DeBT-NFA molecules apparently still kept their backbones twisted and were poor in π–π stacking, features favorable neither for charge transport nor for photovoltaic performance.
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra in a chloroform solution and film state and (b) CV profiles of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA. 
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to determine energy levels of the HOMO and LUMO orbitals of the molecules. As shown in Fig. 3b, both iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA films displayed irreversible reduction and oxidation peaks in the negative and positive voltage scannings, respectively. From the oxidation onset (Eonset, ox) and reduction onset (Eonset, red) potentials of these peaks, the HOMO and LUMO energy levels of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA were calculated to be −5.50/−4.10 and −5.39/−4.01 eV. DeBT-NFA clearly exhibited shallower-lying HOMO and LUMO energy levels than did iPrBT-NFA, implying some impact of backbone planarity.
Using PM6 (Fig. S15, ESI†) as a donor component, the photovoltaic performances of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA as acceptor components were investigated with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PFN-Br/Al device configuration. In optimization experiments, both devices achieved their optimal performances when prepared by spin-coating pre-mixed PM6:NFA chloroform solutions with a PM6 concentration of 7 mg mL−1, a D/A ratio of 1/1.6, and 0.75% 1,8-diiodooctance (DIO) as additive at 3700 rpm, and subsequently carrying out thermal annealing at 100 °C for 5 minutes (Tables S1–S6, ESI†). As shown in Fig. 4a, the optimal iPrBT-NFA device performance involved a Voc of 0.74 V, Jsc of 17.72 mA cm−2 and FF of 61.8%, giving the best PCE of 8.13%. But DeBT-NFA devices showed extremely poor performance, with an optimized PCE of only 0.29% (Voc = 0.77 V, Jsc = 1.23 mA cm−2, FF = 30.9%). An external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectroscopy investigation found that iPrBT-NFA devices normally worked in the wavelength range 300–900 nm with a maximum of 61.7% at 610 nm (Fig. 4b), while DeBT-NFA devices showed poor photo-responsiveness in both visible and infrared regions.
 Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves and (b) EQE spectra of the optimal iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA devices. (c and d) J1/2–V plots of hole-only and electron-only devices based on (c) PM6/iPrBT-NFA and (d) PM6/DeBT-NFA. 
In order to understand the origin of this large difference in performance, hole and electron mobility (μh and μe) levels of the active layers were measured using the space charge-limited current (SCLC) method with hole-only ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/Au and electron-only ITO/ZnO/active layer/Ca/Al devices (Fig. 4c and d). The μh and μe of the PM6/iPrBT-NFA active layer were measured to be 4.34 × 10−4 and 1.13 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, both two orders of magnitude greater than those of the PM6/DeBT-NFA active layer (1.66 × 10−6 and 2.25 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). Moreover, an atomic force microscopy (AFM) investigation revealed the PM6/iPrBT-NFA film having shown a homogeneous microphase separation morphology and a smooth surface with a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 3.85 nm (Fig. 5a and b). In sharp contrast, clear fibrous objects with widths of hundreds of nanometers were observed in the PM6/DeBT-NFA film. These features made the film non-uniform and very rough, with an RMS roughness of 39.21 nm. Obviously, such a morphology is in general not favorable for photovoltaic performance.
 Fig. 5  (a) AFM height and (b) AFM phase images of of PM6/iPrBT-NFA and PM6/DeBT-NFA films. (c) 2D GIWAXS patterns and (d) scattering profiles in out-of-plane and in-plane directions of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA neat films and PM6:iPrBT-NFA and PM6:DeBT-NFA blend films. 
Furthermore, two-dimensional grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (2D-GIWAXS) experiments on the molecules were conducted to study their respective packings and orientations (Fig. 5c and d). The neat DeBT-NFA film yielded (100) and (200) diffraction peaks at 0.31 and 0.64 Å−1, respectively, in both out-of-plane (OOP) and in-plane (IP) directions, suggesting a lamellar structure with a distance between layers of 20.5 Å. A weak (010) diffraction peak was identified at 1.76 Å−1, corresponding to a π–π stacking distance of 3.57 Å. Similarly, the neat iPrBT-NFA film exhibited a set of (100), (200) and (010) diffraction peaks from a lamellar structure with a distance between layers of 17.0 Å and π–π stacking distance of 3.55 Å. While these peaks were observed to be weaker than those of DeBT-NFA, they were still clear observations, and their shorter d-spacings demonstrated that the bulky and embracing-type side chains in iPrBT-NFA did not prevent intermolecular π–π stacking from occurring. Considering the great steric hindrance involved here, such π–π stacking must have occurred between terminal benzothiadiazole and IC moieties of neighboring molecules. This conclusion was consistent with those of most reported NFAs having A–D–A structures. For PM6:iPrBT-NFA and PM6:DeBT-NFA blend films, a (100) diffraction peak appeared only in the OOP direction, at positions similar to those for the neat films, indicating an edge-on-dominated molecular orientation in both blend films. Notably, PM6:iPrBT-NFA blend films displayed additional diffraction peaks at 0.49 and 0.77 Å−1 in the OOP direction, probably originating from the PM6 crystallization. Further, in the IP direction, the π–π-stacking peak still appeared at 1.77 Å−1. But none of these peaks were not observed for the PM6:DeBT-NFA blend film. These results as well as the AFM results showed a much better molecular packing structure and morphology for the PM6:iPrBT-NFA blend film than for the PM6:DeBT-NFA blend film.
The dependences of Voc and Jsc on light intensity (Plight) were investigated to gain insight into the charge recombination mechanism in the iPrBT-NFA devices. As shown in Fig. 6a, Voc was found to linearly increase with Plight, with a slope of 1.10 kT q−1, suggesting the occurrence of Shockley-Read-Hall recombination to some degree.17 In general, Jsc depends on Plight according to the relationship Jsc ∝ Plightα, where the power law index α reflects the extent of bimolecular recombination; an α value near 1 is indicative of the device exhibiting effective exciton transport and reduced energy loss caused by bimolecular recombination. In this work, we obtained an α value of 0.97, suggesting the effective suppression of bimolecular recombination in iPrBT-NFA devices. Furthermore, analysis of the dependence of photocurrent density (Jph) on effective voltage (Veff), shown in Fig. 6b, indicated a saturated photocurrent density (Jsat) of 18.53 mA cm−2 for the devices. Based on these measurements, the ratio of photocurrent against this saturated value under the short-circuit condition was calculated to be 94.1%, reflecting a good charge separation efficiency. However, the photocurrent ratio dropped to 76.8% under the maximum power output condition, suggesting a poor charge collection efficiency for the devices.
 Fig. 6  (a) Plots of VOC and JSCversus light intensity and (b) a JPh–Veff curve of PM6/iPrBT-NFA devices. 
In summary, we demonstrated here the use of bulky and “embracing”-type side chains in photovoltaic material design. In contrast to DeBT-NFA carrying conventional long alkyl side chains, iPrBT-NFA functionalized with two arm-like 2,4,6-tripropylphenyl side chains showed a planar backbone structure even in solution, and thus leading to a red-shift absorption band in solution. The bulky side chains in iPrBT-NFA, although changing the molecular packing structure, did not hamper π–π stacking of terminal acceptor moieties. Regarding the blending of iPrBT-NFA with PM6 for OSC fabrication, the so-formed active layers were observed to display a good morphology with appropriate microphase separation and large charge mobility, thus affording a PCE of 8.13% for the optimized device. Therefore, exemplified by iPrBT-NFA, the work has paved the way to a new method for achieving a coplanar backbone structure, in addition to previous methods involving ring fusion and intramolecular non-covalent configuration locks. Although the photovoltaic performance resulting from the use of iPrBT-NFA still lags behind the-state-of-the-art level, the strategy developed merits further investigation and application.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of competing interest.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21674125, 21672251, 21975279 and 51761145043), Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDB20020000), Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry (No. sioczz202123), and Zhengzhou Institute of Technology.
Notes and references
Y. Tong, Z. Xiao, X. Du, C. Zuo, Y. Li, M. Lv, Y. Yuan, C. Yi, F. Hao, Y. Hua, T. Lei, Q. Lin, K. Sun, D. Zhao, C. Duan, X. Shao, W. Li, H.-L. Yip, Z. Xiao, B. Zhang, Q. Bian, Y. Cheng, S. Liu, M. Cheng, Z. Jin, S. Yang and L. Ding, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 758–765 CrossRef CAS .
A. Armin, W. Li, O. J. Sandberg, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, J. Nelson, D. Neher, K. Vandewal, S. Shoaee, T. Wang, H. Ade, T. Heumüller, C. Brabec and P. Meredith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003570 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dey, Small, 2019, 15, 1900134 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, X. Zhang, D. Liu and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15607–15619 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Cao, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, R. Geng, L. Yang and W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4313–4333 RSC .
X. Li, F. Pan, C. Sun, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Du, J. Wang, M. Xiao, L. Xue, Z.-G. Zhang, C. Zhang, F. Liu and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-P. Yu, Z.-X. Liu, F.-X. Chen, R. Qin, T.-K. Lau, J.-L. Yin, X. Kong, X. Lu, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2152 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, L. Zhan, F. Liu, J. Ren, M. Shi, C.-Z. Li, T. P. Russell and H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705208 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, Q. Guo, S. Feng, C. E. Zhang, Z. Bi, W. Xue, J. Yang, J. Song, C. Li, X. Xu, Z. Tang, W. Ma and Z. Bo, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3083 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Chen, M. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Yang, Y. Liu, F. Liu, Z. Tang, Q. Bao and Z. Bo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22714–22720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-S. Lu, Y. Zhang, T.-Y. Hu, Y.-F. Ma, Y.-N. Zhu, D.-W. Liu, Z.-Q. Zhang, E. Wang, W. Ma and H.-L. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2021, 93, 106132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Y. Li, S. Li, X. Xia, X. Lu, M. Shi and H. Chen, Solar Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 225, 111046 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. Zhang, J. Zhu, J. Wang, J. Ren, J. Zhang and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bi, S. Zhang, J. Ren, Z. Chen, Z. Zheng, Y. Cui, J. Wang, S. Wang, T. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Xu, J. Qin, C. An, W. Ma, X. Hao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater. DOI:10.1002/ADMA.202108090 .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245207 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05550jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures, (b) twisting energy profiles, and (c) UV-Vis absorption spectra in solution and film states of BT, DeBT and iPrBT.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures, computed molecular geometry labelled with several important dihedral angles, and HOMO and LUMO orbitals of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra in a chloroform solution and film state and (b) CV profiles of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) J–V curves and (b) EQE spectra of the optimal iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA devices. (c and d) J1/2–V plots of hole-only and electron-only devices based on (c) PM6/iPrBT-NFA and (d) PM6/DeBT-NFA.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) AFM height and (b) AFM phase images of of PM6/iPrBT-NFA and PM6/DeBT-NFA films. (c) 2D GIWAXS patterns and (d) scattering profiles in out-of-plane and in-plane directions of iPrBT-NFA and DeBT-NFA neat films and PM6:iPrBT-NFA and PM6:DeBT-NFA blend films.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Plots of VOC and JSCversus light intensity and (b) a JPh–Veff curve of PM6/iPrBT-NFA devices.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc05550j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
