Recent advances in chemical methods for activating carbon and metal oxide based electrodes for supercapacitors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05003H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05003H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17151-17173Recent advances in chemical methods for activating carbon and metal oxide based electrodes for supercapacitors

        
          
            Tianyi 
            Kou
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Yao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tianyu 
            Liu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yat 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, 1156 High Street, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. E-mail: yatli@ucsc.edu
Received 
      8th June 2017
    , Accepted 19th July 2017First published on 19th July 2017AbstractCarbon and metal oxides are considered as the two most important categories of electrode materials for supercapacitors. To date, significant progress has been made in the synthesis of different carbon and metal oxide based electrodes. However, the limited ion accessible area of many carbon materials, poor electrical conductivity of most metal oxides, and sluggish ion diffusion in the bulk carbon or metal oxide materials are major barriers for these electrodes to achieve high energy density and power density simultaneously. In the past decade, numerous activation methods have been demonstrated to overcome these limitations. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in chemical methods for activating carbon and metal oxide electrodes for supercapacitors, including heteroatom doping, increasing porosity, introducing oxygen vacancies, and chemical exfoliation. The fundamentals of these methods are discussed and exemplified. We also discuss the challenges and opportunities of different activation methods.Tianyi KouTianyi Kou received his B.S. degree in composite materials and engineering from the University of Jinan and M.S. degree in materials science and engineering from Shandong University, China. He is now a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, under the supervision of Prof. Yat Li. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials with potential applications in energy storage and conversion, such as supercapacitors and electrochemical water splitting.Bin YaoBin Yao received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in materials science from the Wuhan University of Technology (WUT), China. He is currently a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, under the supervision of Prof. Yat Li. His research interest includes flexible energy storage and conversion devices based on metal oxides and nitrides.Tianyu LiuTianyu Liu received his B.S degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of Beijing, China. He is currently a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, under the supervision of Prof. Yat Li. His research focuses on carbon-based materials for supercapacitors applications.Yat LiYat Li received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of Hong Kong. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard University from 2003 to 2007 under the supervision of Prof. Charles M. Lieber. He is now an associate professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of advanced nanostructured materials for energy storage and conversion, such as supercapacitors, photoelectrochemical/electrochemical water splitting and microbial fuel cells.
1. Introduction
Renewable and eco-friendly energy sources, such as solar, wind and geothermal energy, represent promising and sustainable solutions to the increasing global energy needs and fossil fuel depletion.1 However, due to the intermittent nature of most renewable energy sources, the development of efficient electrical energy storage devices is critical yet challenging.1 The soaring demand of portable electronics and hybrid electric vehicles calls for power sources with high power density and outstanding energy density as well as excellent durability.2 Among various rechargeable energy storage devices, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have attracted much attention due to its outstanding energy density.3 Enormous amounts of lithium ions can be stored in bulk electrode materials via ion intercalation (faradaic reactions), which contributes to an excellent energy density of more than 100 W h kg−1 (Fig. 1).1,4 Yet, sluggish lithium ion diffusion in bulk materials restricts its power density (typically <1 kW kg−1) and makes it difficult to satisfy the need of electronics such as memory back-up systems that require a pulse-power supply.1,2
 Fig. 1  Ragone plot showing the specific energy and power of different electrical storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2008, the Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Electrochemical capacitors, also called supercapacitors (SCs), have gained a lot of attention for their high-power uptake and supply applications owing to their fast charging/discharging (usually in a few seconds) characteristics.1,5–7 As shown in the Ragone plot (Fig. 1), electrochemical capacitors can deliver a high specific power density of more than 10 kW kg−1, about one order of magnitude larger than that of LIBs. Based on the different charge storage mechanisms, SCs can be categorized into electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors. The charge storage of EDLCs relies on the interfacial electrostatic charge adsorption between the electrode (e.g., carbon-based materials) and electrolyte (Helmholtz double-layer, Fig. 2a), whereas the pseudocapacitors primarily depend on the fast and reversible surface (or near surface) faradaic reactions of electrodes (e.g., transition metal oxides, Fig. 2b).1,8 The energy (E), the maximum power (Pmax) and average power (P) of a supercapacitor are calculated according to the following equations:2,5 (1) (2) (3)where V is the device voltage, C is the overall capacitance of the device, R is the equivalent series resistance (ESR), Δt is the discharging time.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration showing (a) double-layer charge storage at the electrode surface. (b) Faradaic reactions close to the electrode surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Carbon is an earth abundant element that has outstanding physical and chemical properties favorable for supercapacitor electrodes, such as excellent electrical conductivity, nontoxicity, superior electrochemical stability, etc.2,9–11 Therefore, carbons have been the most commonly used electrode materials for EDLCs. For EDLCs, charges are stored via surface charge accumulation and the electric double-layer capacitance is calculated by the following equation:12 (4)where A is the surface area of the electrode, ε is the electrolyte dielectric constant and d represents the thickness of the charge double-layer. According to the equation, it is clear that electric double-layer capacitance is directly proportional to the specific surface area.9 In this regard, the overall charge storage capability of carbon materials is determined and limited by their ion accessible surface area. For example, the theoretical specific electric double-layer capacitance of graphene is only around 550 F g−1, which is difficult to satisfy the increasing demand on the energy density of charge storage devices.13
Transition metal oxides are another important category of supercapacitor electrode materials. They can store charges through faradaic reactions, so most of them have remarkable theoretical specific capacitances that are substantially higher than the capacitances of carbon materials.14–16 However, most transition metal oxides have poor electrical conductivities, which is detrimental to their rate capabilities and limits their capacitances during fast charging and discharging.17 For example, TiO2 has a fairly low electrical conductivity of about 10−7 S cm−1, which results in more than 80% capacitance decay when the scan rate increased from 10 to 1000 mV s−1.18,19 Another example is MoO3 that has a low conductivity of about 0.06 S cm−1, causing almost 70% capacitance loss when the current density increased from 0.5 A g−1 to 10 A g−1.20 Besides, sluggish ion diffusion also poses a barrier to power density (capability of fast charging and discharging) of both carbon and transition metal oxide based supercapacitors.17
To improve the capacitive performance of carbon and metal oxide based materials, a variety of chemical methods have been implemented to activate these SC electrodes. For example, methods of introducing heteroatom doping and increasing porosity have been used to boost the pseudocapacitance and rate capability of carbon-based electrode materials.21–56 Controlled introduction of oxygen vacancies and elemental doping have been developed to improve the electrical conductivity of transition metal oxides.19,20,57–70 Exfoliation methods have been explored to increase the number of active sites and facilitate the ion diffusion for both layered carbon structures and metal oxide materials.71–78 A number of excellent articles have reviewed the recent advances in the development of SC electrode materials and structures.1,2,9,12,17,79 This recent review article also presented an excellent summary of different porous carbon electrodes with corresponding synthesis techniques with particular emphasis on the creation of macro-pores and their function in facilitating ion diffusion.80 Although increasing the porosity of carbon electrodes is one of the activation strategies we are highlighting in this review article, we also present other important chemical activation techniques such as chemical exfoliation and elemental doping for improving capacitive performances of carbon materials as well as metal oxides. The challenges and opportunities in this field are also discussed.
2. Carbon-based materials
Activated carbon has been employed as the electrode material for commercial EDLCs. However, its relatively low specific capacitance (about 100 F g−1) may not be able to satisfy the increasing energy demand for SCs.13 Carbon-based materials with a high surface area such as graphene (2630 m2 g−1) have been investigated as electrodes for EDLCs. Unfortunately, the ease of restacking between carbon layers severely restricts their ion accessible area, and limits most of these carbon materials with a specific capacitance between 100 and 300 F g−1.9,13,21–25,37,40,52,53,71,81 Here we review some important chemical methods that have been demonstrated to be effective in activating these carbon-based materials for better specific capacitance and rate capability.
2.1 Doping
Introduction of dopants is an important way to activate carbon materials for charge storage. For instance, heteroatom (e.g. boron, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorous, etc.) doping has been adopted to tailor surface chemistry and electronic structure of carbon-based materials for charge storage.21–36,48–52,54,55 Some of these dopants can introduce functional groups onto the carbon surface that enable faradaic reactions and provide additional pseudocapacitance.21,23–29,32–36,51 Other dopants such as nitrogen can modify the electronic structure of carbon materials and consequently improve their electrical conductivities and charge transport capability.22,30,31,48–50 In this section, we will highlight a number of important heteroatom dopants.

2.1.1 Boron doping. 
Boron substitutionally doped carbon materials have been studied for decades. According to the theoretical and experimental study conducted by Radovic et al., boron has dual roles in altering the tendency of oxidation of carbon materials, depending on its doping concentration.26 At high boron doping concentrations, it is favorable to form a B2O3 layer that prevents the carbon materials from oxidation.27 Yet, at a low doping level (such as 2.5 wt% doping in Saran char), a B2O3 protection layer cannot be formed and a catalytic effect in facilitating carbon oxidation was indeed observed through weakening C–C bonds and strengthening C–O bonds.27 The incorporation of oxygen into the carbon materials through the low doping level of boron in this case can introduce additional pseudocapacitance. Wang et al. further demonstrated that boron substitutional doping (0.065 wt% to 0.16 wt%) can be introduced into mesoporous carbon through co-impregnation and calcination methods.28 The boron doped mesoporous carbon yielded an increased interfacial capacitance (composed of Helmholtz double layer capacitance and quantum capacitance) of 0.21 F m−2, which is 1.5 times higher than the value obtained from undoped mesoporous carbon.28,82 The enhanced specific capacitance was attributed to the pseudocapacitance contribution induced by oxygen incorporation.28 Likewise, boron-doped graphene also showed enhanced capacitance through surface functionalization with oxygen containing groups.21 An excellent specific capacitance of 281 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 in 2 M H2SO4 electrolyte was obtained for boron-doped porous graphene.21 The pseudocapacitance was estimated to be 37% of the total capacitance.
Moreover, it has been reported that the uneven charge distribution induced by boron doping can facilitate the charge transfer among carbon atoms.29 As quantum capacitance is dependent on density of states, boron dopant in graphene has been found to be effective in increasing the density of states, and thus, the quantum capacitance.29,83 Recently, Li et al. synthesized high performance boron doped (1.4 at%) reduced graphene oxide (B-rGO) through a dielectric barrier discharge plasma method.29 B-rGO achieved a specific capacitance of 446.24 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, which is much higher than that of rGO (Fig. 3a). Moreover, B-rGO has a great rate capability with an excellent capacitance of 237 F g−1 still retained when the current density increased to 20 A g−1 (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) CV curve comparison of rGO and B-rGO collected at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 6.0 M KOH. (b) Plot of specific capacitance of rGO and B-rGO as a function of current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.2 Nitrogen doping. 
A nitrogen-doped carbon structure typically has four bonding configurations: pyridinic N oxide, quaternary N, pyrrolic N and pyridinic N, as shown in Fig. 4.48 N dopants in different configurations play different roles in charge storage of carbon-based materials. The negatively charged pyridinic N and pyrrolic N typically function as the faradaic reaction sites and contribute to the pseudocapacitance, whereas the positively charged quaternary N and pyridinic N oxide often can facilitate electron transport in the carbon lattices.30
 Fig. 4  Four possible bonding configurations of nitrogen in graphene lattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009, Springer. 
Nitrogen doping has been commonly employed to boost the capacitive performances of carbon electrodes.22,30,31,48–50 Incorporating nitrogen into the carbon lattice can be realized by either direct pyrolysis of nitrogen containing precursors or through post-growth ammonia treatments at elevated temperatures. For example, Chen et al. selected pyrrole as the N-enriched precursor and coated it onto carbon nanofibers followed by calcination treatment to obtain nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers (Fig. 5).22 Both the nitrogen doping concentration and the surface area of the carbon structure can be controlled through the tuning of carbonization temperatures. Temperature-dependent experiments revealed that carbon nanofibers carbonized at 900 °C achieved a maximum surface area of 562.51 m2 g−1. The incorporated pyridinic and quaternary N act as the faradaic reactions sites and help reduce electrons transport resistance in the carbon lattice. The N-doped carbon nanofibers delivered a specific capacitance of 202.0 F g−1 at the current density of 1.0 A g−1, and retained a capacitance of 164.5 F g−1 when the current density increased to 30.0 A g−1, demonstrating a great rate capability (Fig. 5b). Besides, the electrode exhibited a good stability with only 3% capacitance decay after 3000 cycles (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers (CNFs). (b) A plot of specific capacitance of samples prepared under different treatment conditions as a function of current densities. (c) A plot of specific capacitance of the nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers as a function of charge/discharge cycle number. Reproduced with permission ref. 22. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Lin et al. reported a nitrogen-doped mesoporous few-layer carbon EDLC electrode with an excellent conductivity of 360 S cm−1 and a large surface area of 1900 m2 g−1.31 The electrode was synthesized through a silica based template method coupled with a sol–gel strategy (Fig. 6a). Nitrogen was implanted into the carbon lattice via a post-growth NH3 treatment. Pyrrolic (N-5) and pyridine nitrogen (N-6) were incorporated with protons through favorable N–H redox reactions, which boosts the specific capacitance of carbon electrodes in an acidic electrolyte (Fig. 6b). This ordered mesoporous few-layer carbon tubes (TEM images in Fig. 6c and d) showed a pore diameter of about 1 to 2 nm and carbon layers (less than 6 layers) were confirmed by high-resolution TEM (Fig. 6e). It achieved remarkable gravimetric capacitances of 855 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and 615 F g−1 at 40 A g−1 (Fig. 6f and g).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the ordered mesoporous few-layer carbon (OMFLC). (b) Possible doping position of nitrogen in OMFLC. (c and d) The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC). (e) The high-resolution TEM image showing the layered structure of OMFLC. (f) Galvanostatic charging/discharging curves and (g) specific capacitance obtained at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


2.1.3 Phosphorus doping. 
Unlike nitrogen doping that has been extensively and intensively studied for carbon based SC electrodes, there are only a few reports on the phosphorus doping in carbon-based materials. The first phosphorus-doped carbon for SCs was reported in 2009.23 Thermal phosphoric acid activation on different carbon precursors was employed to synthesize the phosphorus enriched carbon materials. The gravimetric capacitance of the carbon electrode increased considerably from 140 F g−1 (1 A g−1) to 220 F g−1 after phosphorus doping. In a follow-up study, Wen et al. synthesized phosphorus doped graphene using the same phosphoric acid thermal activation method.24 Phosphorus atoms were primarily found to exist in pyrophosphate and metaphosphate configurations, which bond to graphene through bridging oxygen in these functional groups. Importantly, they found that the mechanism of capacitance enhancement is due to the additional pseudocapacitance derived from surface functional groups. The redox peaks in the cyclic voltammetry curves of the P-doped graphene were attributed to the functional groups of CO in quinone and PO in pyrophosphate and metaphosphate. A specific capacitance of 115 F g−1 at 0.05 A g−1 was obtained for the P-doped graphene, which is much higher than the value obtained for the undoped sample (29 F g−1) at the same current density. Even though the phosphorus doping can improve the capacitance of carbon materials, the reported specific capacitances in these P-doped carbon materials are relatively low compared to their counterparts with nitrogen doping. This could be due to the fact that redox reactions on N–H sites are more favorable than that on PO sites. In addition, the presence of quaternary N and pyridinic N in the carbon rings has been found to be effective in facilitating charge transport, while there is no evidence that phosphorus doping has the similar function.30


2.1.4 Sulfur doping. 
Similar to phosphorus doping, the introduction of sulfur doping in carbon materials can also result in the increasing of pseudocapacitance via the redox reactions of the SO groups in sulfones and/or sulfoxides.32,51 Hasegawa et al. used a sulfonated poly(divinylbenzene) network as the sulfur and carbon precursor to synthesize sulfur doped activated carbon materials.25 The S-doped carbon material exhibited a very high surface area of 2400 m2 g−1. It delivered a specific capacitance of 206 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in 2 M H2SO4 electrolyte and retained 81% of capacitance when the current density was increased to 10 A g−1. Seredych et al. further studied the relationship between gravimetric capacitance and sulfur concentration.33 A linear growth of the capacitance with the sulfur content ranging from 3 to 4.4 at% was recorded, indicating the important role of sulfur in increasing pseudocapacitance in carbon materials.33 By virtue of the analysis of natural bond orbital, Liang et al. found that after S-doping, the 3s electrons of sulfur lost due to the mismatch between the orbitals of sulfur and carbon (sp2 hybridization).84 This change results in the positively charged sulfur atoms which act as the new active sites and attract OH− ions in the electrode/electrolyte interface; thus a boosted electric double-layer charge storage was realized.33,34


2.1.5 Dual doping. 
Compared to the single heteroatom doping, dual doping opens up new opportunities to improve the capacitive performance of carbon-based materials. For example, low-level boron doping in carbon can facilitate the oxidation of carbon, and thus, increase oxygen containing groups for redox reactions.27 Nitrogen doping in quaternary N and pyridinic N configurations can promote the electron transport.30 The dual doping of nitrogen and boron can possibly boost the pseudocapacitance and electron transport of the carbon electrodes simultaneously.
Using nitrogen plasma and high temperature boron doping methods, Fujisawa et al. prepared boron and nitrogen dually doped graphene materials for SCs.35 Pyridinic N and quaternary N were found in the doped graphene, which can increase the electrical conductivity of the graphene. In addition, both BNO moieties and C–O functionalities found in the dually doped graphene were believed to be effective in introducing additional pseudocapacitance. As a result, the dually doped sample exhibited 4–10 times enhancement in specific capacitance compared to the undoped graphene.35 Albeit the efforts of realizing heteroatoms doping in graphene, it is a challenge to ensure uniform doping in graphene due to the serious layer stacking. To address this concern, Wu et al. developed a bottom-up strategy in which a negatively charged graphene oxide layer and positively charged poly-L-lysine (PLL, nitrogen precursor) were deposited alternatively through electrostatic attraction (Fig. 7).36 The obtained PLL/GO film was immersed in H3PO4 for intercalation and the subsequent high-temperature (800 °C) thermal treatment successfully realized the boron and nitrogen dually doped graphene electrode (Fig. 7). The film based micro-supercapacitor achieved an outstanding volumetric capacitance of 488 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1, which is much higher than the capacitance obtained from an undoped graphene film based micro-supercapacitor (245 F cm−3) at the same scan rate. The enhanced performance was believed to be due to the increased amount of electrochemically active functional groups such as CO, C–N, B–C, and C–B–N, which introduced additional pseudocapacitance and elevated the charge storage capacity. In addition, the wettability of the doped graphene electrode was improved due to the presence of surface hydrophilic functional groups and thus an increased electrolyte accessible electrode area was guaranteed.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of boron and nitrogen dually doped graphene film (BNG film) through a layer-by-layer assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014, Wiley VCH. 
Other dually doped carbon structures have also been reported. For example, oxygen and nitrogen dual doping are expected to increase both the pseudocapacitance and electron transport ability of carbon electrodes.54,55 Li et al. and coworkers adopted a one-step pyrolysis of kelps in NH3 to obtain a nitrogen (pyridinic N, pyrrolic N and pyridinic N oxide) and oxygen (carbonyl, noncarbonyl and carboxylic O) dually doped porous carbon.55 The nitrogen and oxygen enriched carbon provided sufficient sites for faradaic reactions as well as facilitated electron transport, with high specific capacitances of 440 F g−1 and 180 F g−1 achieved at 0.5 A g−1 and 150 A g−1, respectively. Li et al. reported nitrogen and sulfur dually doped porous carbon nanosheets through a one-step pyrolysis and activation method.52 The presence of C–S–C and C–SOx–C bonding in the doped carbon nanosheets contributed additional pseudocapacitances, while the presence of quaternary N increased the charge transport in the carbon structure. The dually doped graphene film achieved an excellent gravimetric capacitance of 298 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 (Fig. 8a). More importantly, the film retained a capacitance of 233 F g−1 at 50 A g−1 (Fig. 8a). The specific capacitance of dually doped graphene outperformed both undoped graphene film and nitrogen-doped graphene at all current densities. Besides, the nitrogen and sulfur dually doped sample exhibited only 2% loss in capacitance after 10000 cycles, indicating its excellent electrochemical stability (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Plots of specific capacitance of different samples (CAC: conventional activated carbon, PCNs: porous carbon nanosheets, N,S-PCNs: N and S dually doped porous carbon nanosheets) as a function of current density. (b) Plots of specific capacitance (collected at a current density of 5 A g−1) of samples prepared under different treatment conditions as a function of cycle number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 

2.2 Increasing porosity
It is highly desirable to increase the ion accessible surface area for enhancing EDL capacitance.2 Meanwhile, it is equally important to decrease the dead volume of SC electrodes and ensure the rapid ion diffusion in bulk carbon materials for achieving a good rate capability and high capacitance or energy density during fast charging and discharging.37 Controlled creation of pores in the carbon electrode has been proven to be a promising strategy for addressing these limitations simultaneously by increasing the surface area for charge adsorption and providing electrolyte reservoirs to shorten the ion diffusion length.2
Multiple scale pores, including the micropores (smaller than 2 nm), mesopores (between 2 and 50 nm) and macropores (larger than 50 nm), can be created in carbon materials using different methods.1 Microporous structures have been found to be effective in increasing the specific surface area and promoting the capacitance.85 However, the desolvation of ions in such sub-nanometer pores restricts the fast diffusion in a rapid charging/discharging process, and therefore limits the rate capability as well as power density of these electrodes.1,86 Meso- and macropores can facilitate the ion diffusion in the bulk carbon structure.37 Based on the theoretical calculation and the most recent experimental results, a rational combination of different size pores can improve specific capacitance as well as rate capability,37–39 which is central to the success of a porous structure for charge storage. In this section, we highlight some effective strategies in creating multiple scale pores in carbon-based materials for enhancing charge storage performance.

2.2.1 Template method. 
The template method is one of the most commonly used strategies to create porous structures. Typically, the carbon precursors are first synthesized or deposited on a porous template, such as porous silica foam/film,37,39,41–43 nickel foam,44–46,87 or nanostructured metal oxides.40,47 Porous carbon structures can be obtained by carbonization followed by eliminating the template.37,39–47,87 The template method provides a simple way to prepare porous carbons, and its feature of precisely tuning pore size through tailoring the template structure makes this strategy a popular way of increasing porosity.2
You et al. prepared hollow carbon nanospheres with a bimodal mesoporous structure (3.1 and 6.4 nm in pore size) through a silica nanosphere (∼360 nm in diameter) template method.43 A carbon based polymer was self-assembled on the silica spheres, and with subsequent carbonization the mesoporous carbon spheres were obtained. The mesoporous carbon materials showed a good specific capacitance of 251 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1 in H2SO4 and only 23% of the capacitance was lost when increasing the scan rate to 500 mV s−1. The enhanced capacitance and rate capability were believed to be due to the existence of mesopores that facilitates the ion diffusion.
Zhai et al. prepared a three-dimensional (3D) graphene scaffold by depositing graphene sheets on nickel foam through hydrothermal reaction.44 Eliminating the nickel template leads to the formation of a unique 3D graphene hollow structure (3DGH) (Fig. 9a and b).44 It has an ultrasmall mass density of 0.82 mg cm−2 and a good specific surface area of 219 m2 g−1. 3DGH provides a lightweight and highly conductive scaffold for deposition of pseudocapacitive materials such as V3S4 and MnO2. Significantly, an asymmetric SC device using 3DGH as current collector achieved an excellent active material ratio of 24% (Fig. 9c), and delivered a remarkable energy density of 7.4 W h kg−1 (normalized by the total weight of the entire device) at the average power density of 3000 W kg−1 (Fig. 9d). This was the highest gravimetric energy density reported for carbon based electrochemical capacitors at such a high power density.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of a 3DGH structure. (b) Magnified SEM image of 3DGH highlighted in the dashed box in (a). (c) A schematic illustration of the V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH device. (d) Ragone plot showing the specific energy and power density of the V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH device (marked as ‘+’). The shadow area marks the specific power density against energy density for capacitors, electrochemical capacitors, and Li ion batteries reported by Simon et al. in 2008.1 Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to silica nanosphere and nickel foam, metal oxides such as ZnO have also been utilized as templates.40 ZnO is an attractive material for the template because it can be easily dissolved in acidic or basic solutions. Using ethylene glycol (EG) as the carbon source and Zn(CH3COO)2 as the zinc source, Zhao and coworkers synthesized mesoporous carbon nanofibers through carbonization on the ZnO nanotubes with subsequent etching of the oxide template (Fig. 10a).40 The as-synthesized carbon nanofibers have both small (∼4 nm) and large (10–20 nm) size of mesopores, yielding an excellent specific surface area of 1725 m2 g−1. Importantly, the small and large mesopores are interconnected in the structure, which offers not only high ion accessible area, but also minimized ion diffusion resistance. The mesoporous carbon nanofibers showed a higher current density than activated carbon. When increasing the current density from 0.5 A g−1 to 5 A g−1, about 72% of the specific capacitance (280 F g−1) was retained, demonstrating a good rate capability (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of the mesoporous carbon nanofibers (CNFs). (b) Galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of the mesoporous CNFs with current densities from 0.5 A g−1 to 5 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2011, Wiley VCH. 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) which include metal ions and organic ligand with naturally distributed pores have recently been developed as special templates and carbon precursors for synthesizing porous carbon electrodes for supercapacitors.88–90 For example, Yamauchi et al. reported a nanoporous carbon derived from carbonization of ZIF-8 in nitrogen with subsequent acidification to remove metal (Zn) from the MOF precursor.88 The obtained carbon structure contains large amount of micropores with an average pore size of about 1 nm, which substantially increased the electrode surface area (1523 m2 g−1). Owing to the porous structure and high surface area, the nanoporous carbon exhibited a specific capacitance of 251 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and about 50% of the initial capacitance was retained at 1000 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4. Compared to the other template methods, MOF templates represent a facile process in deriving the porous structure without the need of template removal.91 Its capability of tuning the carbon porosity also makes MOFs a promising method for making high performance porous carbon electrodes.91


2.2.2 Chemical etching. 
Template methods have proven to be effective in controlled creation of meso-/macropores. Yet, these pores are not able to increase the ion accessible surface area significantly. To increase the specific capacitance of porous carbon materials, it is important to create additional micropores. Chemical etching is one of the most promising strategies for introducing micropores into carbon materials. For example, K2CO3 and KOH can react with carbon at elevated temperatures to produce pores through the following reactions:37,92 K2CO3 ⇌ K2O + CO2(5) K2O + 2C ⇌ 2K + CO(6) K2CO3 + 2C ⇌ 2K + 3CO(7)
The reaction between KOH and carbon is described as follows:92 6KOH + 2C ⇌ 2K + 3H2 + 2K2CO3(8)
And the as-produced K2CO3 can continue the etching reaction through reactions in (5)–(7).
Zhang et al. reported a 3D hierarchically porous carbon foam (PCF) obtained from an one-step carbonization of K2CO3-embedded chitosan (Fig. 11a).37 The chemical etching effect of K2CO3 leads to the formation of large amount of micropores with an average size of 0.66 nm, and a high surface area of 1030 m2 g−1. Significantly, the PCF showed a high specific capacitance of 246.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and 67.5% of the capacitance can be retained when increasing the current density to 100 A g−1, demonstrating the excellent rate capability (Fig. 11b and c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of porous carbon foam (PCF). (b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of PCF at different current densities. (c) The specific capacitance (gravimetric/volumetric capacitance) of the PCF versus current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Springer. 
Compared to K2CO3, KOH is believed to have a high efficiency in etching carbon materials primarily because both KOH (eqn (8)) and its reaction product (K2CO3, eqn (8)) can all directly react with carbon.39,41,53,93,94 For example, Zheng et al. synthesized highly porous carbon nanosheets through a one-step KOH activation of glucose-based spheres.53 The carbon nanosheets have multi-scale pores with size distributed in three regions ranging from micropores to macropores: 0.6 to 0.8 nm, 1.1 to 1.4 nm and 10 to 100 nm. This hierarchical porous structure exhibits an ultrahigh specific surface area of 2633 m2 g−1 and an excellent specific capacitance of 257 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. It also retained 72% of capacitance when the current density was increased to 100 A g−1.
Controlled creation of multi-scale porous structures in carbon electrodes is believed to be beneficial for enhancing their specific capacitance and rate capability. For example, Kim et al. synthesized high surface area (∼1957 m2 g−1) hollow carbon spheres with a multi-scale porous structure (pores size ranging from micropores to macropores).41 Silica spheres template in this work were featured with a large diameter (around 2 μm), and mesoporous surface. After the deposition of carbon, the subsequent KOH treatment at the high temperature (900 °C in Ar flow) reacted with both silica sphere and carbon shell, realizing multi-scale pores in the final carbon spheres. The increased surface area and porous structure contributed to the good EDL capacitance, with 157 F g−1 at 0.5 mA cm−2.
In contrast to the particulate carbon materials, a self-supporting 3D carbon aerogel avoids the use of conducting binders, which is favorable to improving the electrode's gravimetric capacitance.56,87,95–99 The monolithic 3D structure can also reduce the contact resistance that has been a major drawback for powder electrodes. Introducing the hierarchical porous structure in monolithic 3D carbon aerogel is therefore a promising approach to boost the charge storage performance. Xu et al. developed a 3D holey graphene electrode through a H2O2 etching method in hydrothermal reaction.56 Abundant micropores with pore sizes spanning from sub-micrometers to micrometers were created on the entire graphene sheets, and the reduced graphene sheets were able to self-assemble into a 3D structure. The 3D continuous self-supporting holey graphene based supercapacitor showed great capacitive performances, with 310 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 76% (237 F g−1) of the capacitance retained at 100 A g−1. Recently, Zhang et al. synthesized a self-standing carbon foam electrode with a network of multi-scale pores with pore size from sub-nanometer to several tens of microns.39 The several tens micron size cavities were created during the freeze-drying process. The macropores (200 nm) were obtained by using a silica sphere template, while micro- (<2 nm) and mesopores (<20 nm) were introduced through KOH etching. It was found that the existence of micro- and mesopores in the carbon foams increased the specific surface area to about 2900 m2 g−1. The carbon foam electrode achieved an outstanding specific capacitance of about 347 F g−1 at the current density of 1 A g−1. A remarkable 60% capacitance retention at the current density of 500 A g−1 demonstrated the excellent rate capability of this carbon foam, which was attributed to the presence of macropores and mesopores that act as electrolyte reservoirs and provide channels for fast ion diffusion.
In addition, KOH chemical etching strategy can also combine with elemental doping method to realize a porous carbon structure incorporated with functionalized moieties for improving electrochemical performances of carbon materials.100–102 For example, a nitrogen-doped porous graphene/carbon (NPGC) framework was prepared by Ning et al. who used graphene oxide and a polypyrrole composite as the precursor and KOH etching to create a porous structure.100 The nitrogen (pyrrolic N, pyridinic N and quaternary N) doped NPGC exhibits a large surface area of 1882.3 m2 g−1, with pore size ranging from micropores to mesopores, and an excellent capacitance of 405 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and 202 F g−1 at 20 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4. Gao and coworkers synthesized porous carbon with an enriched nitrogen dopant for through annealing of the hydrochars in melamine followed by KOH etching.101 The remarkable specific capacitances of 570 F g−1 and 313 F g−1 were obtained from the nitrogen doped porous carbon structure at the current densities of 0.05 A g−1 and 3.0 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4, respectively. The enhanced capacitance was attributed to the increased porosity and nitrogen functionalities that favorable for ion diffusion and redox reactions. Furthermore, dual doping combined with KOH etching has also been reported to boost the specific capacitance through increasing the surface area and faradaic reaction sites of carbon. For instance, Chen et al. developed a boron and nitrogen co-doped hierarchical porous carbon electrode through successive chemical activation strategies, which include KOH etching of bamboo-derived carbon followed by heteroatom doping through a hydrothermal method involving boric acid and ammonia solution as the dopant precursors.102 In comparison to the pristine sample, the co-doped sample showed greatly enhanced specific capacitance of 281 F g−1 in KOH and 318 F g−1 in H2SO4 at 0.2 A g−1, respectively.

2.3 Chemical exfoliation
Graphite family members such as graphene hold great potentials as electrode materials for EDLCs. However, these layered structures usually have limited ion-accessible surface area due to the strong π–π stacking (van der Waals attraction).74 The sluggish ion diffusion in the interspace of carbon layers poses a barrier to the rapid charging and discharging process. Exfoliation, a method that reduces and breaks the interlayer attraction to expose rich active sites for ion diffusion, has proven to be effective in activating materials of the graphite family.103 To date, different exfoliation strategies have been reported, including mechanical exfoliation,104–107 chemical oxidation,71–73,78 electrochemical intercalation, etc.74,75 Mechanical exfoliation has been reviewed in a recent article.107 This review article will focus on chemical oxidation and electrochemical intercalation. In most cases, these two strategies can retain the structure of a carbon monolith, demonstrating the great potential to be used in boosting the capacitive performances of binder free and self-supporting electrodes.

2.3.1 Chemical oxidation. 
In 2011, Wang et al. reported the synthesis of partially exfoliated multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs).71 By using a solution mixture of concentrated H2SO4 and KMnO4 as an oxidizing agent, the authors were able to break the interlayer stacking of MWCNTs and increase the ions-accessible surface area for charge storage. As shown in Fig. 12, the surface of the MWCNTs is partially exfoliated after oxidation treatment. The oxidized MWCNTs showed considerably improved water solubility and can be homogeneously dispersed in aqueous solution. The presence of oxygen-containing groups on the CNT surface also contributed to the pseudocapacitance (Fig. 12c). Exfoliated CNT showed a gravimetric capacitance of 154.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is much higher than 11.8 F g−1 of the untreated CNT obtained at the same current density (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  TEM images of (a) multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and (b) exfoliated carbon nanotubes (Ex-CNTs). Insets show the schematic illustration of MWCNTs and Ex-CNTs and the digital image of the carbon nanotubes dispersed in aqueous solution. (c) CV curves comparison of Ex-CNTs and MWCNTs at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (d) Plots of the specific capacitance of MWCNTs and Ex-CNTs against current density. The columbic efficiency of Ex-CNTs is plotted as a function of current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
In a follow up study, a modified chemical oxidation strategy was applied to activate inexpensive carbon cloth using a mixture of concentrated H2SO4 and HNO3, and an oxidizing agent of KMnO4.72Fig. 13 shows the morphology characteristics of the partially exfoliated carbon cloth (CC). It is clear that the outer layers of the carbon fibers were exfoliated (Fig. 13b and c). The activated CC electrode showed an enhancement of more than two orders of magnitude in charge-storage capability, compared to the untreated sample, due to the substantially increased surface area and increased amount of oxygen-containing groups. Moreover, the seamless connection between the exfoliated layers and carbon fiber ensured the efficient charge transfer. The symmetric supercapacitor devices fabricated using two identical activated CC electrodes showed a capacitance retention of 50% when the scan rate increased from 10 to 10000 mV s−1, which was one of the best capabilities reported for carbon-based solid-state SCs.
 Fig. 13  SEM images showing the morphology of (a) an untreated and (b) an oxidized CC substrate. (c) TEM image of the fiber in oxidized CC. (d) High-resolution TEM image revealing the morphology of the edge of the oxidized CC fiber showed in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2014, Wiley VCH. 
Besides chemical oxidation methods, Wang et al. demonstrated a one-step electrochemical oxidation strategy to activate commercial CC under relatively mild conditions.73 CC can be partially exfoliated by applying a constant voltage of 3 V on CC in a mixed acid (H2SO4 and HNO3) solution for 10 min. The partially exfoliated CC fibers achieved an areal capacitance of 756 mF cm−2 at 6 mA cm−2, which is three orders of magnitude higher than that of the untreated CC. In comparison to the chemical oxidation method, the electrochemical oxidation method enables better control on the degree of exfoliation and the introduction of surface oxygen containing groups through adjustment on the applied voltage, reaction medium and time. In most cases, the electrochemical exfoliation also takes shorter time than chemical method.


2.3.2 Electrochemical intercalation. 
To expand the interlayer through ion intercalation is another promising method to improve capacitive performance of layer structures. It is known that ions in electrolyte can be intercalated into the interlayer of graphite materials under external bias.74 The expanded layer spacing reduces the strong attraction due to the van der Walls force, with the possibility to increase ion accessible area for charge storage.
Liu et al. developed a facile electrochemical strategy to exfoliate graphite materials through altering intercalation of lithium and perchlorate ions (Fig. 14a and b).103 The interlayer distance was expanded from 0.337 nm to 0.883 nm as confirmed by the blue shifted 2D bands and splitting of the G band. It is noteworthy that the lithium–perchlorate ion intercalations not only largely enhanced the capacitance of the graphite paper by 1000 times (Fig. 14c) but also showed a good rate performance with 84% capacitance retained when increasing the current density by 10 times (Fig. 14d). In this regard, electrochemical intercalation can be advantageous over chemical oxidation exfoliation methods, which usually impair the rate capability of graphite based electrodes due to the decreased electrical conductivity of oxidized carbons.
 Fig. 14  SEM images of (a) graphite (G) paper and (b) G–N–Ox (G paper containing decomposed intercalation compounds). (c) CV curves comparison between pristine G paper and G–N–Ox at the scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (d) The relationship between areal capacitance/volumetric capacitance of G–N–Ox and current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH. 
The electrochemical intercalation method can also couple with other exfoliation strategies. For instance, Song et al. developed a novel two-step gas evolution assisted electrochemical ion intercalation method to exfoliate and activate graphite foil.81 By applying a sweeping potential between 0.5 V and 1.8 V (vs. SCE) on a graphite foil through cyclic voltammetry, gas bubbles evolved due to water oxidation exfoliated the graphite electrode surface (Fig. 15). In a following step, multiple ions including NO3−, K+ and Cl− were able to intercalate into the graphite. This two-step process leads to the formation of a tri-layer exfoliated structure with a top graphite layer, a middle graphite intercalation layer and a bottom graphite layer. At a high mass loading of 8.5 mg cm−2, the partially exfoliated electrode exhibited an excellent gravimetric capacitance of 96.5 F g−1 (820 mF cm−2) at a current density of 0.6 A g−1, which is 400 times higher than the untreated graphite foil. The tri-layer graphite electrode also had a great capacitance retention rate of 75% from 5 to 100 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of preparing the tri-layered graphite foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

3. Transition metal oxides
Transition metal oxides is an important class of pseudocapacitive materials as many of them have remarkable theoretical capacitances due to the presence of multiple stable oxidation states. Nonetheless, the poor electrical conductivity and sluggish ion diffusion in the bulk metal oxides have severely limited their application for SC devices.15 In this section, we summarize the recent advances of the chemical activation techniques for boosting the electrical conductivity of transition metal oxides and enhancing ion diffusion rate in the materials.
3.1 Introducing oxygen vacancies
Controlled creation of oxygen vacancies in metal oxide materials has been proven to be a general and effective strategy to increase their carrier densities, and thus, electrical conductivities. Here we highlight some commonly used techniques for creating oxygen vacancies in transition metal oxides, including thermal annealing in a hydrogen or oxygen deficient environment,19,20,57–59,65 chemical reduction and electrochemical reduction.60,61,66,67

3.1.1 Hydrogen treatment. 
TiO2 has been considered as a promising electrode material for SCs due to its pseudocapacitance and superior chemical stability.19,58,60,108–111 However, the poor electrical conductivity of TiO2 represents a major barrier for its applications. In 2012, Lu et al. demonstrated that hydrogen treatment can substantially increase the donor density, and thus, the specific capacitances of TiO2 nanotubes (Fig. 16a).19 XPS results indicated that the Ti4+ was partially reduced to Ti3+ in hydrogen treated TiO2 (H-TiO2) accompanied by an increased number of oxygen vacancies. The carrier density of TiO2 was increased by three orders of magnitude after hydrogen treatment. The H-TiO2 surface was also modified with hydroxyl groups that enhance the electrode pseudocapacitance. The H-TiO2 yielded the largest specific capacitance of 3.24 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, which is 40 times higher than the capacitance obtained from pristine TiO2 under the same conditions (Fig. 16b and c).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of hydrogen treated TiO2 nanotubes (H-TiO2 NTAs). (b) CV curves comparison of the pristine, air treated, and hydrogen treated TiO2 nanotubes (scan rate of 100 mV s−1). (c) Areal capacitance of TiO2 samples measured as a function of the scan rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
MnO2 is another promising and widely studied pseudocapacitive material, due to its high theoretical specific capacitance (∼1400 F g−1), high abundance and nontoxicity.57,112–115 Poor electrical conductivity (10−5 to 10−6 S cm−1) again is the major limitation for the material.57 To address the concern, Zhai et al. recently synthesized MnO2 nanorods material through a low temperature hydrogenation method.57 The oxygen vacancies were successfully introduced into MnO2 nanorods, resulting in a mix-valence of manganese (Mn2+, Mn3+ and Mn4+). Low valence states of manganese have been reported to be electrochemically active for pseudocapacitive charge storage.116 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) confirmed that hydrogen treated MnO2 has enhanced electrical conductivity compared to the pristine MnO2. Hydrogenation created not only oxygen vacancies and mix-valence of manganese, but also a porous structure (pores size in 3–5 nm) that was believed to be playing an important role in facilitating ion diffusion for better rate capability.
Orthorhombic MoO3 (α-MoO3) possesses a unique layered structure connected through van der Waals forces, and thus has been proven to be a good cation intercalation electrode material for SCs.117–123 For example, it was found that up to a ratio of 1.5 for Li/Mo can be achieved when inserting lithium ions into this oxide.117 Nonetheless, albeit the appealing layer structure for cation intercalation, as an n-type semiconductor, the inferior electrical conductivity of α-MoO3 largely impairs its charge storage performance. Zhou and coworkers used the same hydrogenation strategy to produce oxygen deficient α-MoO3−x.20 Theoretical calculation indicated that there is an overlapping between impurity band and conduction band of the α-MoO3−x, which considerably increased its electrical conductivity. The electrical resistivity of α-MoO3 dropped considerably from 1.6–1.8 × 10−1 Ω m to 2.4–4.8 × 10−3 Ω m after hydrogenation. The α-MoO3−x electrode showed a specific capacitance of 337 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and a good capacitance retention of 63% when the current density was increased from 0.5 A g−1 to 10 A g−1.
In addition to being directly used as active materials, hydrogenated nanostructured metal oxides were also able to act as the electrical conducting scaffolds for SC electrodes. Yang et al. found that the hydrogen treatment can highly boost the carrier density from 7.04 × 1017 cm−3 of the pristine ZnO nanowires to 2.65 × 1020 cm−3 of the hydrogenated ZnO nanowires.65 The improved electrical conductivity makes hydrogen treated ZnO nanowires a great conducting core for supporting MnO2 active material. Owing to the electrochemically favorable structure, the composite materials (MnO2 grown on hydrogenated ZnO) showed a much higher areal capacitance of 138.7 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, almost three times the areal capacitance (49.3 mF cm−2) of MnO2 on pristine ZnO.


3.1.2 Thermal annealing in an oxygen deficient environment. 
Oxygen vacancies can also be generated by annealing metal oxides in an oxygen deficient environment, such as nitrogen or argon.58,59 Salari et al. successfully incorporated oxygen vacancies into rutile TiO2 by thermal treating anatase TiO2 in an inert gas atmosphere at a temperature near 600 °C.58 The low oxygen partial pressure in the environment contributed to the formation of oxygen vacancies (presence of Ti3+). The areal capacitance of TiO2 treated in argon (521 μF cm−2) was much higher than the air annealed sample (30 μF cm−2) at the same scan rate of 1 mV s−1.
Fe2O3 represents one of the most promising negative electrode candidates for SCs due to its high theoretical specific capacitance, high-abundance, nontoxicity and desirable working windows.59,68,124–126 Hydrogen treatment may not be the most suitable method for creating oxygen vacancies in Fe2O3 as it can be easily reduced to metal in a reducing environment. Alternatively, Lu et al. demonstrated the synthesis of sub-stoichiometric iron oxide (Fe2O3−x) through annealing of FeOOH in nitrogen ambience.59 The nitrogen treated Fe2O3 showed a donor density of 8.1 × 1019 cm−3, significantly higher than that of its air treated counterpart (5.5 × 1018 cm−3). A high mass loading nitrogen treated Fe2O3 electrode exhibited a negligible IR drop of 0.009 V, again confirming its good electrical conductivity.


3.1.3 Chemical and electrochemical methods. 
Instead of annealing metal oxide in a reducing environment, the materials can be chemically and/or electrochemically reduced.60,61,66,67 For example, Zhou et al. employed a cathodic polarization method to create oxygen vacancies in TiO2.60 The electrochemical treated TiO2 exhibited five orders of magnitude enhancement in carrier density compared to the untreated sample. It leads to an order of magnitude enhancement in areal capacitance at 5 mV s−1. Wang and coworkers developed a chemical reduction method to create oxygen vacancies in Co3O4 nanowires using a strong reducing agent NaBH4.61 The crystal structure of Co3O4 was preserved after chemical reduction, while oxygen vacancies were created accompanied by partial reduction of Co3+ to Co2+. The treated Co3O4 exhibited an outstanding gravimetric capacitance of 977 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 and still retained a capacitance of 484 F g−1 at 10 A g−1, showing a good rate capability.61
Although both thermal annealing (in reducing or oxygen deficient environments) and chemical/electrochemical reduction methods can create oxygen vacancies, these methods have different advantages in activating metal oxide electrodes. For example, hydrogenation at high temperature is effective in creating oxygen vacancies, but the strong reducing power can possibly convert many metal oxides (such as Co3O4) into metal, impairing their capacitive performances. In contrast, chemical and electrochemical methods offer a relatively mild way to realize partial reduction under ambient conditions. The adjustment of applied potential and time in the electrochemical reduction strategy allows even better control on the degree of reduction, and preservation of the electrode material morphology.

3.2 Doping
The electrical conductivity of metal oxides can also be improved by introduction of extrinsic impurities into the materials. In comparison to creating intrinsic defects such as oxygen vacancies, doping not only introduces electron donors for higher electrical conductivity, for some dopants it also helps to improve ion diffusion in the metal oxides.62–64 Moreover, dopants can introduce new valence states of metal ions for enhancing pseudocapacitance. Here we highlight some commonly used non-metal and metal dopants for metal oxides and their functions in activating their capacitive performances.

3.2.1 Non-metal doping. 
Vanadium oxides are attractive anode materials for SCs due to the mixed valence of vanadium (V2+, V3+, V4+, and V5+), which allow multiple redox reactions in a negative potential widow.62,127–129 It has been reported that the redox pair of V4+/V3+ exhibits a more negative potential window than that of V5+/V4+.130 Vanadium oxide based electrodes with a mixed valence of vanadium are therefore promising in expanding the potential window. Zhai et al. adopted a post-growth sulfur vapor treatment method to create a sulfur doped V6O13−x (VOS) electrode.62 The mixed valence of vanadium including V3+, V4+, and V5+ was observed on the surface of VOS. The VOS electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 1353 F g−1 at 1.9 A g−1 in LiCl electrolyte, which outperformed the vanadium oxide control sample (VO) treated in the absence of sulfur. The increased capacitance was believed to be due to the presence of V4+/V3+ which expands the potential window. Besides, the sulfur doping also reduced the charge transfer and Warburg resistance of vanadium oxide considerably, suggesting that the conductivity and ions diffusion rate were also improved.
Xu et al. reported the synthesis of sulfur doped Co3O4 nanowires through a two-step hydrothermal reaction.63 The sulfur doped Co3O4 nanowires acted as a double-layer charge storage electrode in a negative potential window. Similar to sulfur doped vanadium oxide, sulfur doping in Co3O4 was also found to be useful in improving the lithium ion diffusion rate. The increased electrical conductivity of sulfur doped Co3O4 was supported by the small IR drop 0.012 V that is much smaller than the value (0.163 V) obtained for the control sample.
Boron has also been explored as the heteroatom dopant for manganese dioxide by Chi et al.64 The boron doped MnO2 showed a 30% enhancement of gravimetric capacitance (269 F g−1 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1) compared to the undoped sample. Improved electrical conductivity was believed to be part of the reason for the enhancement. The boron doping also resulted in the formation of a porous structure and increased growth rate of active materials. Therefore, the enhanced capacitance was also partly due to the increased surface area.


3.2.2 Metal doping. 
Metal dopants have also been explored to improve the capacitive performance of metal oxides.68–70 For example, Chen and coworkers used a sputtering method to dope Au in the MnO2 (Fig. 17a).69 The DFT simulation indicated that the doping of Au can create a new donor state in MnO2 and improve its electrical conductivity. A gravimetric capacitance of 626 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 was obtained on the Au doped (9.9 at%) MnO2 film with a thickness of 1.35 μm, while only 380 F g−1 was obtained for pristine MnO2 at the same scan rate (Fig. 17b). The decreased electrical resistance resulted from the electron donor (Au) contributed to the fast charge transfer as well as the high specific capacitance.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of Au doped MnO2. (b) The specific capacitance of Au (9.9 at%) doped MnO2 and MnO2 film as a function of scan rate. Note: (■) and (▲) correspond to the Au doped MnO2 film with a film thickness of 0.7 μm and 1.35 μm, respectively. (□) and (△) represent the undoped MnO2 film with a thickness of 0.7 μm and 1.35 μm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2013, Wiley VCH. 
Zeng and coworkers reported the hydrothermal synthesis of Ti doped Fe2O3 nanorods using butyl-titanate as the Ti precursor.68 Ti4+ is expected to act as an electron donor for Fe2O3 through substitutional doping. XPS results and Raman spectra proved the successful introduction of Ti and creation of Fe2+ sites. Varying the concentration of Ti resulted in different areal capacitances and the optimal charge storage capacity (163.6 mF cm−2 at 100 mV s−1) was achieved when there was 21.3 at% of Ti doped in Fe2O3 nanorods. EIS results confirmed the decreased resistance of the Ti doped Fe2O3 and it was believed to be responsible for the enhanced performance.
Both non-metal and metal doping have been found to be effective in increasing the electrical conductivity of transition metal oxides through band gap narrowing, creation of oxygen vacancies and boosting the carrier density.62,63,131 Compared to metal doping, some non-metal dopants such as sulfur and nitrogen can also facilitate ion (such as Li+) diffusion and introduce mixed valence for broadening potential windows.62,63 Dopants should be selected based on the chemical nature of host metal oxides and which limitations that need to be addressed. For example, to increase the electrical conductivity of semiconductor metal oxides, n-type and p-type dopants should be employed respectively to increase the carrier density of n-type and p-type metal oxides. Besides, the ionic radii of the dopants should be considered for introducing interstitial vs. substitutional doping.68,70 For example, the dopants having similar radii as the ions in the host metal oxides are more favorable for forming substitutional doping and could minimize the degree of lattice distortion for better charging/discharging stability.

3.3 Chemical exfoliation
Electrical conductivity and ion diffusion are equally important factors for SC electrodes, as they are designed for rapid charging and discharging. Even though the introduction of defects and element doping can substantially enhance the electrical conductivity of transition metal oxides, they have minor effects on ion diffusion rate in the bulk electrode. Unique 2D metal oxide structures show great promise for alleviating the ion diffusion problem. For example, 2D Co3O4 thin sheets showed great performances in charge storage by virtue of the morphological feature in facilitating ion and electron transport.132,133 The multi-layer graphene-like Co3O4 nanosheets (CQU-Chen-Co-O-1) electrode prepared through a facile hydrothermal method achieved outstanding specific capacitances of 1752 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and 651 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH.132 For layered metal oxides in the bulk state, chemical exfoliation is another effective strategy to facilitate the ion diffusion by expanding the layer structure. Meanwhile, the newly exposed active sites/surface area can simultaneously enhance their specific capacitance.76,77,134
Ji et al. reported an alternative method to address the slow ion diffusion issue of bulk α-MoO3.76 They designed and fabricated a dodecylamine (DDA)-intercalated layered α-MoO3 and then carbonized this intercalated structure in nitrogen at 600 °C. The high temperature annealing resulted in the formation of a graphene layer with a high degree of graphitization (Fig. 18a). The interlayer distance of MoO3 was increased from 0.69 nm to 3.13 nm after DDA intercalation.76 The expanded layered structure of MoO3 and the presence of conductive graphene boosted the capacitive performance of MoO3 significantly. The DDA-intercalated MoO3 calcinated at 600 °C showed an optimal capacitance of 331 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and retained 71% of the capacitance when the current density was increased to 10 A g−1 (Fig. 18b). The enhanced capacitance and rate capability were attributed to the improved ion diffusion. The increased Warburg slope of the expanded MoO3 also supported the facilitated ion diffusion in the electrode.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of MoO3/C. (b) Galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of DDA-intercalated MoO3 calcinated at 600 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015, Wiley VCH. 
Likewise, Zhang and coworkers also demonstrated that polyaniline can be intercalated into MnO2 through the exchange reactions between polyaniline and n-octadecyltrimethylammonium-intercalated MnO2 for SC electrodes.77 The polyaniline intercalated MnO2 showed an expanded basal spacing of about 1.47 nm, and the expanded structure with polyaniline intercalant contributed to a specific capacitance of 330 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, which is higher than the capacitances obtained from polyaniline or MnO2 alone at the same current density.
4. Challenges and opportunities
We have reviewed the recent advances of using chemical methods to activate the carbon and transition metal oxide electrode materials for SCs (Tables 1 and 2). Although significant progress has been made in the past decade, there are still many challenges to be addressed in order to push their capacitive performances. Previous studies have been primarily focused on demonstration of various dopants for activation of either carbon-based materials or transition metal oxides. In most cases, there is a lack of fundamental understanding of the function of dopants, especially for the interaction between dopants in dually doped materials. For instance, the improved capacitive performance of boron and nitrogen dually doped graphene was believed to be due to some synergistic effects between the two dopants, but the nature of the synergistic effect still needs further investigation. Even for the same dopant, the chemical nature can be different depending on the doping position and concentration in the crystal lattice. To have a good understanding on the doping configurations, their local electronic structures and the effects on the electrochemical charge storage behavior is important and challenging. Theoretical simulation is a powerful tool to offer scientific insights into elucidating the role of doping and how to establish the optimal doping structure. Furthermore, theoretical simulation can also provide important guidelines for designing a porous structure with an optimal pore shape, pore size, amount and distribution of multi-scale pores for ensuring rapid diffusion of electrolyte ions in the electrode.
Table 1 Summary of activation methods, mechanism and capacitive performances of carbon based electrodes




Dimension
Activation methods
Mechanism
Electrode
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Cycling performance
Ref.




0D
Si template method
Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion
Mesoporous carbon nanospheres
2 M H2SO4
251 F g−1 (50 mV s−1)
—

43



Si template method and KOH etching
Micro-, meso- and macroporous carbon spheres
1 M (C2H5)4N(BF4)
157 F g−1 (0.5 mA cm−2)
99% after 2000 cycles (1 mA cm−2)

41



1D
B doping
Increased pseudocapacitance
Mesoporous carbon
1 M H2SO4
0.21 F m−2 (10 mV s−1)
—

28



N doping
Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance
Carbon nanofibers
6 M KOH
202.0 F g−1 (1.0 A g−1)
97% after 3000 cycles (1.0 A g−1)

22



ZnO template method
Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion
Mesoporous carbon nanofibers
6 M KOH
280 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
—

40



H2SO4 and KMnO4 oxidation
Increased ion-accessible area and increased pseudocapacitance
Exfoliated carbon nanotubes
3 M NaOH
154.4 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
89% after 2000 cycles (1 A g−1)

71



2D
B doping
Increased pseudocapacitance
Reduced graphene oxide
6 M KOH
446.24 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
∼89% after 1000 cycles (10 A g−1)

29



P doping
Graphene
1 M H2SO4
115 F g−1 (0.05 A g−1)
—

24



N doping
Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance
Mesoporous few-layer carbon
0.5 M H2SO4
855 F g−1 (1.0 A g−1)
∼80% after 50000 cycles

31



B and N doping
Graphene
1 M HSO4
29.7 F g−1 (0.1 A g−1)
—

35



N and S doping
Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance
Porous carbon nanosheets
6 M KOH
298 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
98% after 10000 cycles (5 A g−1)

52



KOH etching
Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion
Micro-, meso- and macroporous carbon nanosheets
6 M KOH
257 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
—

53



Gas evolution assisted electrochemical intercalation
Increased ion-accessible area
Tri-layered graphite foil
3 M KCl
820 mF cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)
94% after 10000 cycles (40 mA cm−2)

81



3D
N and O doping
Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance
Porous carbon
6 M KOH
440 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
95.4% after 15000 cycles (50 mV s−1)

55



S doping
Increased pseudocapacitance
Carbon
2 M H2SO4
206 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
—

25



B doping
Graphene
2 M H2SO4
281 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)
∼110% after 4000 cycles (10 A g−1)

21



MOF template method
Nanoporous carbon
1 M H2SO4
251 F g−1 (5 mV s−1)
—

88



K2CO3 etching
Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion
Micro- and mesoporous carbon foam
3 M KOH
246.5 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
98% after 10000 cycles (200 mV s−1)

37



Si template method and KOH etching
Micro-, meso- and macroporous carbon foams
3 M KOH
347 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
98% after 20000 cycles (200 mV s−1)

39



N doping and KOH etching
Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance. Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion
Micro- and mesoporous graphene/carbon framework
1 M H2SO4
405 F g−1 (0.2 A g−1)
96% after 1000 cycles (10 A g−1)

100



N doping and KOH etching
Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance. Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion
Porous carbon
1 M H2SO4
570 F g−1 (0.05 A g−1)
∼97% after 1000 cycles (1 A g−1)

101



B and N doping KOH etching
Porous carbon
1 M H2SO4
318 F g−1 (0.2 A g−1)
82% after 2000 cycles (4 A g−1)

102



H2SO4, HNO3 and KMnO4 oxidation, followed by two-step reduction
Increased ion-accessible area and increased pseudocapacitance
Partially exfoliated carbon cloth
1 M H2SO4
88 mF cm−2 (10 mV s−1)
97% after 20000 cycles (1 V s−1)

72



Electrochemical oxidation
Partially exfoliated carbon cloth
5 M LiCl
756 mF cm−2 (6 mA cm−2)
∼100% after 30000 cycles (100 mV s−1)

73



Electrochemical intercalation
Partially exfoliated graphite
3 M KOH
108.88 mF cm−2 (0.5 mA cm−2)
—

103



P doping
Increased pseudocapacitance
Carbon
1 M H2SO4
220 F g−1 (1.0 A g−1)
∼85% after 5000 cycles (5 A g−1)

23





Table 2 Summary of activation methods, mechanism and capacitive performances of metal oxide based electrodes




Dimension
Activation methods
Mechanism
Electrode
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Cycling performance
Ref.




1D
Hydrogen treatment
Increased electrical conductivity
TiO2 nanotubes
0.5 M Na2SO4
3.8 mF cm−2 (10 mV s−1)
96.9% after 10000 cycles (100 mV s−1)

19



Hydrogen treatment
MnO2 nanorods
0.5 M Na2SO4
306 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)
99% after 10000 cycles (100 mV s−1)

57



Hydrogen treatment
α-MoO3−x nanobelts (35 wt% CNT)
5 M LiCl
337 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
—

20



Annealing in argon atmosphere
TiO2 nanotubes
1 M KCl
911 μF cm−2 (1 mV s−1)
98% after 500 cycles (10 μA cm−2)

58



Annealing in nitrogen atmosphere
Fe2O3 nanorods
5 M LiCl
382.7 mF cm−2 (0.5 mA cm−2)
95.2% after 10000 cycles (200 mV s−1)

59



Electrochemical reduction
TiO2 nanotubes
0.5 M Na2SO4
1.84 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)
93.1% after 2000 cycles (100 mV s−1)

60



NaBH4 reduction
Co3O4 nanowires
1 M KOH
977 F g−1 (2 A g−1)
Above 90% after 2000 cycles (2 A g−1)

61



S doping
Mixed valence states are created, increased electrical conductivity and ion diffusion rate
V6O13−x nanowires
5 M LiCl
1353 F g−1 (1.9 A g−1)
47.7% after 200 cycles (100 mV s−1)

62



S doping
Increased electrical conductivity and ion diffusion rate
Co3O4 nanowires
5 M LiCl
0.55 F cm−2 (10 mV s−1)
92% after 10000 cycles (200 mV s−1)

63



Ti doping
Increased electrical conductivity
Fe2O3 nanorods
5 M LiCl
0.81 F cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
80.7% after 30000 cycles (100 mV s−1)

68



2D
B doping
Increased electrical conductivity and porosity
MnO2 film
0.5 M Na2SO4
∼420 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)
—

64



Au doping
Increased electrical conductivity
MnO2 film
2 M Li2SO4
626 F g−1 (5 mV s−1)
107% after 15000 cycles (50 mV s−1)

69



Dodecylamine intercalation and carbonization
Increased ion-accessible area, improved ion diffusion and increased electrical conductivity
Sandwich MoO3/C hybrid nanostructures
1 M H2SO4
331 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
Above 87.9% after 10000 cycles (10 A g−1)

76



Polyaniline intercalation
Polyaniline intercalated MnO2 nanocomposite
0.1 M Na2SO4
330 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
94% after 1000 cycles (1 A g−1)

77





Besides, previous efforts have been mainly focused on demonstrating the activation methods and concepts. Most of the studies have been performed on electrode materials with fairly low mass loading (typically less than 1 mg cm−2), and it is critical to demonstrate that these activation methods are also feasible for high mass loading electrodes (∼10 mg cm−2 for commercial devices),135 which could have very different morphology and requirements for charge and ion transport. For example, thick electrodes with a high mass loading require very efficient ions diffusion for appealing capacitive performances. It is challenging to increase porosity in thick metal oxide materials as template or chemical etching methods used in carbon materials are not feasible for metal oxides which are vulnerable to acid or alkaline etchants. In addition, when the electrode thickness increases, it could be detrimental to the capacitive performance of most metal oxides as they are not very electrically conductive. Effective and new strategies for creating hierarchical porous structures are particularly important for high mass loading transition metal oxide to ensure efficient ion diffusion to support rapid charging and discharging processes. A feasible strategy is to design and prepare carbon electrodes with ultrahigh specific surface areas, so that the high mass loading metal oxide can be deposited on carbon structures with reduced film thickness and shorten the ion diffusion length. The recent development of 3D printing techniques also provides new opportunities to enhance the performance of high mass loading electrodes. 3D printing techniques provide the unique capability of engineering the size, shape, distribution and periodicity of pores, which could alleviate the long range ion diffusion and charge transfer problem for high mass loading electrodes.
Acknowledgements
Yat Li acknowledges support by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) grant no. NNX15AQ01. Tianyu Liu acknowledges the financial support from the Chancellor's Dissertation-year Fellowship granted by the University of California, Santa Cruz.
References
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y.-S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11619–11635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Kou, Y. Song, T. Liu and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700107 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P. L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16070 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-L. Wu and A.-W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4852–4864 CAS .
D. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, Y. Ding, J. Niu, Z. Xia, A. Roy, H. Chen, J. Qu, Z. L. Wang and L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1400198 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
J. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 739–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cheng, W. Yang, C. Dong, T. Kou, Q. Bai, H. Wang and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17469–17478 CAS .
C. Dong, Y. Wang, J. Xu, G. Cheng, W. Yang, T. Kou, Z. Zhang and Y. Ding, J. Mater. Chem A, 2014, 2, 18229–18235 CAS .
G. Cheng, T. Kou, J. Zhang, C. Si, H. Gao and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Z. Wang, Y. Han, Y. Tong, X. Lu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4634–4658 CAS .
A. Abate, T. Leijtens, S. Pathak, J. Teuscher, R. Avolio, M. E. Errico, J. Kirkpatrik, J. M. Ball, P. Docampo, I. McPherson and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2572–2579 RSC .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, J. Gan, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1690–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, Z. Peng, C. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Beidaghi, Z. Yang, N. Wu, Y. Huang, L. Miao, Y. Gogotsi and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zuo, Z. Jiang and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13476–13483 CAS .
L.-F. Chen, X.-D. Zhang, H.-W. Liang, M. Kong, Q.-F. Guan, P. Chen, Z.-Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7092–7102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, A. M. Puziy, O. I. Poddubnaya, F. Suárez-García, J. M. D. Tascón and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5026–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, B. Wang, C. Huang, L. Wang and D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 80–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hasegawa, M. Aoki, K. Kanamori, K. Nakanishi, T. Hanada and K. Tadanaga, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2060–2063 RSC .
L. R. Radovic, M. Karra, K. Skokova and P. A. Thrower, Carbon, 1998, 36, 1841–1854 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lee, Y. Uchiyama and L. R. Radovic, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2233–2244 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, Z.-G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7195–7200 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. Wang, H. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Ren, M. Zheng, L. Dong and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10988–10991 RSC .
M. Seredych, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, G. Q. Lu and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1475–1488 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lin, I. W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, Q. Zhang, C.-M. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Reiche, A. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Schlögl and D. Sheng Su, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 624–630 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seredych and T. J. Bandosz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11717–11727 CAS .
M. Seredych, J.-C. Idrobo and T. J. Bandosz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7059–7067 CAS .
K. Fujisawa, R. Cruz-Silva, K.-S. Yang, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, M. Endo, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9532–9540 CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, K. Parvez, A. Winter, H. Vieker, X. Liu, S. Han, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4552–4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, T. Liu, G. Hou, T. Kou, L. Yue, R. Guan and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2875–2888 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Black and H. A. Andreas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12030–12038 CAS .
F. Zhang, T. Liu, M. Li, M. Yu, Y. Luo, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3097–3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Dou, Z. Wu, H. Liu, X. Qian, D. Gu, Y. Xia, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Kim, K.-B. Kim, S.-M. Park and K. C. Roh, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Leyva-Garcia, D. Lozano-Castello, E. Morallon and D. Cazorla-Amoros, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4570–4579 CAS .
B. You, J. Yang, Y. Sun and Q. Su, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12364–12366 RSC .
T. Zhai, X. Lu, H. Wang, G. Wang, T. Mathis, T. Liu, C. Li, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3189–3194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ping, Y. Gong, Q. Fu and C. Pan, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2017, 27, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bello, O. O. Fashedemi, J. N. Lekitima, M. Fabiane, D. Dodoo-Arhin, K. I. Ozoemena, Y. Gogotsi, A. T. C. Johnson and N. Manyala, AIP Adv., 2013, 3, 082118 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, Y. Liu, J. Yan, G. Ning, Q. Wang, T. Wei, L. Zhi and F. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Biddinger, D. von Deak and U. S. Ozkan, Top. Catal., 2009, 52, 1566–1574 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhan, Y. Zhang, P. T. Cummings and D.-E. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4668–4674 RSC .
Y. Cheng, L. Huang, X. Xiao, B. Yao, L. Yuan, T. Li, Z. Hu, B. Wang, J. Wan and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 66–74 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gu, M. Sevilla, A. Magasinski, A. B. Fuertes and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2465–2476 CAS .
Y. Li, G. Wang, T. Wei, Z. Fan and P. Yan, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, W. Lv, Y. Tao, J. Shao, C. Zhang, D. Liu, J. Luo, D.-W. Wang and Q.-H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6896–6903 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Lou, X. Yuan, W. Dong, C. Dong, H. Bi and F. Huang, Carbon, 2017, 118, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Liu, X. Gao, B. Yao, K. Huo, Y. Cheng, X. Cheng, D. Chen, B. Wang, W. Sun, D. Ding, M. Liu and L. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24622–24628 CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, X. Huang, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4554 CAS .
T. Zhai, S. Xie, M. Yu, P. Fang, C. Liang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salari, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5128–5133 RSC .
X. Lu, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M.-S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3148–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5626–5636 CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Zhou, K. Jiang, P. Da, Z. Peng, J. Tang, B. Kong, W.-B. Cai, Z. Yang and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400696 CrossRef .
T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Liu, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5869–5875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Chen, M. Yu, Y. Zeng, Y. Long, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10779–10785 CAS .
H. Z. Chi, Y. Li, Y. Xin and H. Qin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13349–13352 RSC .
P. Yang, X. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Ding, P. Qiang, X. Tan, W. Mai, Z. Lin, W. Wu, T. Li, H. Jin, P. Liu, J. Zhou, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2617–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Ding, W. Kang, C. Li, D. Lin, X. Wang, Z. Chen, M. Wu and D. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 40–47 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, M. Beidaghi, X. Xiao, L. Huang, Z. Hu, W. Sun, X. Chen, Y. Gogotsi and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 100–107 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Y. Han, Y. Zhao, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, Y. Liu, H. Tang, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402176 CrossRef .
J. Kang, A. Hirata, L. Kang, X. Zhang, Y. Hou, L. Chen, C. Li, T. Fujita, K. Akagi and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1664–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, X. Xiao, C. Chen, T. Li, L. Huang, C. Zhang, J. Su, L. Miao, J. Jiang, Y. Zhang and J. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 226–234 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, F. Qian, X. Yang, X.-X. Liu and Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5209–5214 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Zeng, Y. Han, M. Yu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3572–3578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cai, D. Thorpe, D. H. Adamson and H. C. Schniepp, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24992–25002 RSC .
H. Ji, X. Liu, Z. Liu, B. Yan, L. Chen, Y. Xie, C. Liu, W. Hou and G. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1886–1894 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Ji, S. Zhang and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 1017–1023 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, X. Zhao, H. Liu, L. Guo and J. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9496–9502 CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Su, W. Huang and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 43–59 CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Yu, G. Lou, Y. Shen, H. Chen, Z. Shen, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, S. Chai and Q. Zou, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 11201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, T.-Y. Liu, G.-L. Xu, D.-Y. Feng, B. Yao, T.-Y. Kou, X.-X. Liu and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7683–7688 CAS .
M. D. Stoller, C. W. Magnuson, Y. Zhu, S. Murali, J. W. Suk, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4685–4689 CAS .
H. Ji, X. Zhao, Z. Qiao, J. Jung, Y. Zhu, Y. Lu, L. L. Zhang, A. H. MacDonald and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3317 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
J. Chen, K. Sheng, P. Luo, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4569–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Kamachi, N. L. Torad, S. M. Hwang, Z. Sun, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19848–19854 CAS .
X. Yan, X. Li, Z. Yan and S. Komarneni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 308, 306–310 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Gao and H. Guo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3599–3606 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shen, X. Chen, J. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5887–5903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23710–23725 RSC .
S. Wu, G. Chen, N. Y. Kim, K. Ni, W. Zeng, Y. Zhao, Z. Tao, H. Ji, Z. Lee and Y. Zhu, Small, 2016, 12, 2376–2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, T. Liu, F. Qian, T. Y.-J. Han, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, C.-Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, C. Lee, X. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Huang, M. I. Shakir and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4605–4610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ning, W. Zhong, S. Li, Y. Wang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8859–8867 CAS .
F. Gao, G. Shao, J. Qu, S. Lv, Y. Li and M. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 201–208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, D. Liu, Z. Shen, B. Bao, S. Zhao and L. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 241–251 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, C. Zhu, T. Kou, M. A. Worsley, F. Qian, C. Condes, E. B. Duoss, C. M. Spadaccini and Y. Li, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 635–641 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Paton, E. Varrla, C. Backes, R. J. Smith, U. Khan, A. O'Neill, C. Boland, M. Lotya, O. M. Istrate, P. King, T. Higgins, S. Barwich, P. May, P. Puczkarski, I. Ahmed, M. Moebius, H. Pettersson, E. Long, J. Coelho, S. E. O'Brien, E. K. McGuire, B. M. Sanchez, G. S. Duesberg, N. McEvoy, T. J. Pennycook, C. Downing, A. Crossley, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Han, J. I. Jang, H. Kim, J. Y. Hwang, H. K. Yoo, J. S. Woo, S. Choi, H. Y. Kim, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, K.-J. Baeg, K. Cho and G.-W. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5133 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yi and Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11700–11715 CAS .
H. Kim, M.-Y. Cho, M.-H. Kim, K.-Y. Park, H. Gwon, Y. Lee, K. C. Roh and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1500–1506 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, M. Xie, G. Wang, H. Sun, A. S. Cavanagh, J. J. Travis, S. M. George and J. Lian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A364–A369 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. H. Wen and J. H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2141–2146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, D. Li, X. Zhu, C. Yang, D. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Song and L. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 129–136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duay, S. A. Sherrill, Z. Gui, E. Gillette and S. B. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1200–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toupin, T. Brousse and D. Bélanger, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3184–3190 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, Y. Ding, Z. Lin, Z. Chen, Y. Li, P. Qiang, M. Ebrahimi, W. Mai, C. P. Wong and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 731–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, C. Cheng, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Gong and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2076–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Song, S. Cheng, H. Chen, W. Qin, K.-W. Nam, S. Xu, X.-Q. Yang, A. Bongiorno, J. Lee, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson, J. Cho and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3483–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tsumura and M. Inagaki, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 104, 183–189 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, L. Liu, S. Tian, L. Li, Y. Yue, Y. Wu and K. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10058–10060 RSC .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Chang, Z. Wen and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13582–13587 CAS .
K. Zhou, W. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Sang, S. Ji, W. Li, J. Lu, L. Li, W. Niu, H. Liu and S. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 510–520 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, L. Huang, J. Zhang, X. Gao, J. Wu, Y. Cheng, X. Xiao, B. Wang, Y. Li and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6353–6358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. Johnston and P. S. Grant, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8755–8760 RSC .
D. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Wang and T. Wang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2095–2102 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, R. Jia, T. Zhai and H. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27518–27525 CAS .
M. Yu, Y. Zeng, Y. Han, X. Cheng, W. Zhao, C. Liang, Y. Tong, H. Tang and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3534–3540 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Bai, T.-Y. Liu, F. Luan, Y. Li and X.-X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10882–10888 CAS .
A. Choudhury, J. S. Bonso, M. Wunch, K. S. Yang, J. P. Ferraris and D. J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 287, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
N. Venkatathri, M. P. Vinod, K. Vijayamohanan and S. Sivasanker, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 473–478 RSC .
M. Yu, X. Cheng, Y. Zeng, Z. Wang, Y. Tong, X. Lu and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6762–6766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xuan, L. Chen, Q. Yang, W. Chen, X. Hou, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17525–17533 CAS .
Y. Jiang, L. Chen, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Zhu and D. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 292, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, M. Hughes, A. O'Neill, P. King, N. McEvoy, G. S. Duesberg, B. Mendoza Sanchez, H. Pettersson, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1751–1763 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Owusu, L. Qu, J. Li, Z. Wang, K. Zhao, C. Yang, K. M. Hercule, C. Lin, C. Shi, Q. Wei, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14264 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Tianyi Kou	Tianyi Kou received his B.S. degree in composite materials and engineering from the University of Jinan and M.S. degree in materials science and engineering from Shandong University, China. He is now a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, under the supervision of Prof. Yat Li. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials with potential applications in energy storage and conversion, such as supercapacitors and electrochemical water splitting.
Bin Yao	Bin Yao received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in materials science from the Wuhan University of Technology (WUT), China. He is currently a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, under the supervision of Prof. Yat Li. His research interest includes flexible energy storage and conversion devices based on metal oxides and nitrides.
Tianyu Liu	Tianyu Liu received his B.S degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of Beijing, China. He is currently a PhD student in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, under the supervision of Prof. Yat Li. His research focuses on carbon-based materials for supercapacitors applications.
Yat Li	Yat Li received his B.S. degree and Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of Hong Kong. He was a postdoctoral research fellow at Harvard University from 2003 to 2007 under the supervision of Prof. Charles M. Lieber. He is now an associate professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz. His research focuses on the design and synthesis of advanced nanostructured materials for energy storage and conversion, such as supercapacitors, photoelectrochemical/electrochemical water splitting and microbial fuel cells.

 	Fig. 1  Ragone plot showing the specific energy and power of different electrical storage devices. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1. Copyright 2008, the Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration showing (a) double-layer charge storage at the electrode surface. (b) Faradaic reactions close to the electrode surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (a) CV curve comparison of rGO and B-rGO collected at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in 6.0 M KOH. (b) Plot of specific capacitance of rGO and B-rGO as a function of current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Four possible bonding configurations of nitrogen in graphene lattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2009, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers (CNFs). (b) A plot of specific capacitance of samples prepared under different treatment conditions as a function of current densities. (c) A plot of specific capacitance of the nitrogen-doped carbon nanofibers as a function of charge/discharge cycle number. Reproduced with permission ref. 22. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the ordered mesoporous few-layer carbon (OMFLC). (b) Possible doping position of nitrogen in OMFLC. (c and d) The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC). (e) The high-resolution TEM image showing the layered structure of OMFLC. (f) Galvanostatic charging/discharging curves and (g) specific capacitance obtained at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of boron and nitrogen dually doped graphene film (BNG film) through a layer-by-layer assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Plots of specific capacitance of different samples (CAC: conventional activated carbon, PCNs: porous carbon nanosheets, N,S-PCNs: N and S dually doped porous carbon nanosheets) as a function of current density. (b) Plots of specific capacitance (collected at a current density of 5 A g−1) of samples prepared under different treatment conditions as a function of cycle number. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of a 3DGH structure. (b) Magnified SEM image of 3DGH highlighted in the dashed box in (a). (c) A schematic illustration of the V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH device. (d) Ragone plot showing the specific energy and power density of the V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH device (marked as ‘+’). The shadow area marks the specific power density against energy density for capacitors, electrochemical capacitors, and Li ion batteries reported by Simon et al. in 2008.1 Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of the mesoporous carbon nanofibers (CNFs). (b) Galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of the mesoporous CNFs with current densities from 0.5 A g−1 to 5 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2011, Wiley VCH.	 
K2CO3 ⇌ K2O + CO2	(5)
K2O + 2C ⇌ 2K + CO	(6)
K2CO3 + 2C ⇌ 2K + 3CO	(7)
6KOH + 2C ⇌ 2K + 3H2 + 2K2CO3	(8)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of porous carbon foam (PCF). (b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of PCF at different current densities. (c) The specific capacitance (gravimetric/volumetric capacitance) of the PCF versus current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 12  TEM images of (a) multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and (b) exfoliated carbon nanotubes (Ex-CNTs). Insets show the schematic illustration of MWCNTs and Ex-CNTs and the digital image of the carbon nanotubes dispersed in aqueous solution. (c) CV curves comparison of Ex-CNTs and MWCNTs at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (d) Plots of the specific capacitance of MWCNTs and Ex-CNTs against current density. The columbic efficiency of Ex-CNTs is plotted as a function of current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images showing the morphology of (a) an untreated and (b) an oxidized CC substrate. (c) TEM image of the fiber in oxidized CC. (d) High-resolution TEM image revealing the morphology of the edge of the oxidized CC fiber showed in (c). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2014, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  SEM images of (a) graphite (G) paper and (b) G–N–Ox (G paper containing decomposed intercalation compounds). (c) CV curves comparison between pristine G paper and G–N–Ox at the scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (d) The relationship between areal capacitance/volumetric capacitance of G–N–Ox and current density. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of preparing the tri-layered graphite foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of hydrogen treated TiO2 nanotubes (H-TiO2 NTAs). (b) CV curves comparison of the pristine, air treated, and hydrogen treated TiO2 nanotubes (scan rate of 100 mV s−1). (c) Areal capacitance of TiO2 samples measured as a function of the scan rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of Au doped MnO2. (b) The specific capacitance of Au (9.9 at%) doped MnO2 and MnO2 film as a function of scan rate. Note: (■) and (▲) correspond to the Au doped MnO2 film with a film thickness of 0.7 μm and 1.35 μm, respectively. (□) and (△) represent the undoped MnO2 film with a thickness of 0.7 μm and 1.35 μm, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2013, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of MoO3/C. (b) Galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of DDA-intercalated MoO3 calcinated at 600 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2015, Wiley VCH.	 

0D	Si template method	Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion	Mesoporous carbon nanospheres	2 M H2SO4	251 F g−1 (50 mV s−1)	—	
43

Si template method and KOH etching	Micro-, meso- and macroporous carbon spheres	1 M (C2H5)4N(BF4)	157 F g−1 (0.5 mA cm−2)	99% after 2000 cycles (1 mA cm−2)	
41

1D	B doping	Increased pseudocapacitance	Mesoporous carbon	1 M H2SO4	0.21 F m−2 (10 mV s−1)	—	
28

N doping	Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance	Carbon nanofibers	6 M KOH	202.0 F g−1 (1.0 A g−1)	97% after 3000 cycles (1.0 A g−1)	
22

ZnO template method	Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion	Mesoporous carbon nanofibers	6 M KOH	280 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	—	
40

H2SO4 and KMnO4 oxidation	Increased ion-accessible area and increased pseudocapacitance	Exfoliated carbon nanotubes	3 M NaOH	154.4 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	89% after 2000 cycles (1 A g−1)	
71

2D	B doping	Increased pseudocapacitance	Reduced graphene oxide	6 M KOH	446.24 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	∼89% after 1000 cycles (10 A g−1)	
29

P doping	Graphene	1 M H2SO4	115 F g−1 (0.05 A g−1)	—	
24

N doping	Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance	Mesoporous few-layer carbon	0.5 M H2SO4	855 F g−1 (1.0 A g−1)	∼80% after 50000 cycles	
31

B and N doping	Graphene	1 M HSO4	29.7 F g−1 (0.1 A g−1)	—	
35

N and S doping	Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance	Porous carbon nanosheets	6 M KOH	298 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	98% after 10000 cycles (5 A g−1)	
52

KOH etching	Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion	Micro-, meso- and macroporous carbon nanosheets	6 M KOH	257 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	—	
53

Gas evolution assisted electrochemical intercalation	Increased ion-accessible area	Tri-layered graphite foil	3 M KCl	820 mF cm−2 (5 mA cm−2)	94% after 10000 cycles (40 mA cm−2)	
81

3D	N and O doping	Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance	Porous carbon	6 M KOH	440 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	95.4% after 15000 cycles (50 mV s−1)	
55

S doping	Increased pseudocapacitance	Carbon	2 M H2SO4	206 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	—	
25

B doping	Graphene	2 M H2SO4	281 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)	∼110% after 4000 cycles (10 A g−1)	
21

MOF template method	Nanoporous carbon	1 M H2SO4	251 F g−1 (5 mV s−1)	—	
88

K2CO3 etching	Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion	Micro- and mesoporous carbon foam	3 M KOH	246.5 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	98% after 10000 cycles (200 mV s−1)	
37

Si template method and KOH etching	Micro-, meso- and macroporous carbon foams	3 M KOH	347 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	98% after 20000 cycles (200 mV s−1)	
39

N doping and KOH etching	Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance. Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion	Micro- and mesoporous graphene/carbon framework	1 M H2SO4	405 F g−1 (0.2 A g−1)	96% after 1000 cycles (10 A g−1)	
100

N doping and KOH etching	Increased pseudocapacitance and reduced electron transport resistance. Increased ion-accessible area and improved ion diffusion	Porous carbon	1 M H2SO4	570 F g−1 (0.05 A g−1)	∼97% after 1000 cycles (1 A g−1)	
101

B and N doping KOH etching	Porous carbon	1 M H2SO4	318 F g−1 (0.2 A g−1)	82% after 2000 cycles (4 A g−1)	
102

H2SO4, HNO3 and KMnO4 oxidation, followed by two-step reduction	Increased ion-accessible area and increased pseudocapacitance	Partially exfoliated carbon cloth	1 M H2SO4	88 mF cm−2 (10 mV s−1)	97% after 20000 cycles (1 V s−1)	
72

Electrochemical oxidation	Partially exfoliated carbon cloth	5 M LiCl	756 mF cm−2 (6 mA cm−2)	∼100% after 30000 cycles (100 mV s−1)	
73

Electrochemical intercalation	Partially exfoliated graphite	3 M KOH	108.88 mF cm−2 (0.5 mA cm−2)	—	
103

P doping	Increased pseudocapacitance	Carbon	1 M H2SO4	220 F g−1 (1.0 A g−1)	∼85% after 5000 cycles (5 A g−1)	
23


1D	Hydrogen treatment	Increased electrical conductivity	TiO2 nanotubes	0.5 M Na2SO4	3.8 mF cm−2 (10 mV s−1)	96.9% after 10000 cycles (100 mV s−1)	
19

Hydrogen treatment	MnO2 nanorods	0.5 M Na2SO4	306 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)	99% after 10000 cycles (100 mV s−1)	
57

Hydrogen treatment	α-MoO3−x nanobelts (35 wt% CNT)	5 M LiCl	337 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	—	
20

Annealing in argon atmosphere	TiO2 nanotubes	1 M KCl	911 μF cm−2 (1 mV s−1)	98% after 500 cycles (10 μA cm−2)	
58

Annealing in nitrogen atmosphere	Fe2O3 nanorods	5 M LiCl	382.7 mF cm−2 (0.5 mA cm−2)	95.2% after 10000 cycles (200 mV s−1)	
59

Electrochemical reduction	TiO2 nanotubes	0.5 M Na2SO4	1.84 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)	93.1% after 2000 cycles (100 mV s−1)	
60

NaBH4 reduction	Co3O4 nanowires	1 M KOH	977 F g−1 (2 A g−1)	Above 90% after 2000 cycles (2 A g−1)	
61

S doping	Mixed valence states are created, increased electrical conductivity and ion diffusion rate	V6O13−x nanowires	5 M LiCl	1353 F g−1 (1.9 A g−1)	47.7% after 200 cycles (100 mV s−1)	
62

S doping	Increased electrical conductivity and ion diffusion rate	Co3O4 nanowires	5 M LiCl	0.55 F cm−2 (10 mV s−1)	92% after 10000 cycles (200 mV s−1)	
63

Ti doping	Increased electrical conductivity	Fe2O3 nanorods	5 M LiCl	0.81 F cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	80.7% after 30000 cycles (100 mV s−1)	
68

2D	B doping	Increased electrical conductivity and porosity	MnO2 film	0.5 M Na2SO4	∼420 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)	—	
64

Au doping	Increased electrical conductivity	MnO2 film	2 M Li2SO4	626 F g−1 (5 mV s−1)	107% after 15000 cycles (50 mV s−1)	
69

Dodecylamine intercalation and carbonization	Increased ion-accessible area, improved ion diffusion and increased electrical conductivity	Sandwich MoO3/C hybrid nanostructures	1 M H2SO4	331 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	Above 87.9% after 10000 cycles (10 A g−1)	
76

Polyaniline intercalation	Polyaniline intercalated MnO2 nanocomposite	0.1 M Na2SO4	330 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	94% after 1000 cycles (1 A g−1)	
77


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
