A review on inkjet printing of nanoparticle inks for flexible electronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC01630A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC01630A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8771-8795A review on inkjet printing of nanoparticle inks for flexible electronics

        
          
            Laxmidhar 
            Nayak
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Smita 
            Mohanty
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sanjay Kumar 
            Nayak
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ananthakumar 
            Ramadoss
          
          
        
      
School of Advanced Research in Polymers, Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials, Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, Bhubaneswar-751024, India. E-mail: laxmidhar.phy@gmail.com
Received 
      26th March 2019
    , Accepted 17th June 2019First published on 19th June 2019AbstractInkjet printing is recognised as an efficient method for direct deposition of functional materials on flexible substrates in predesigned patterns owing to simple processing, low cost and higher adaptability for large scale fabrication of electronic devices, sensors, light emitting diodes, etc. Inks used in inkjet printing mostly consist of organic polymers, metal nanoparticles and carbon materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes. For effectiveness of the printing process, the fluid dynamic parameters such as viscosity and surface tension, as well as dimensionless quantities such as the Weber number, Reynolds number, and Ohnesorge number, must be within a suitable limit. More frequently, this process suffers due to the formation of a coffee ring during the post printing process, which affects the morphology as well as electrical conductivity of the printed pattern. In this review, we have summarized the various aspects of inks such as fluid dynamical parameters of inks, mechanism of the coffee ring formation, different types of ink preparation strategies and their applications in sensors, thin film transistors, and energy storage devices.
Laxmidhar Nayak
Laxmidhar Nayak obtained his MSc degree from Ravenshaw University and Master of Philosophy (MPhil) from Utkal University in physics. He is currently a PhD scholar at the Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM), an R&D wing of the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET). His research interest includes synthesis of nanoparticle inks for inkjet printing in flexible electronic applications.
Smita Mohanty
Dr Smita Mohanty is a Principal Scientist, Director, School of Advanced Research in Polymers (SARP), LARPM, CIPET, Bhubaneswar. She received her PhD and DSc degrees from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar. She has more than 13 years of research and teaching experience. Her research areas include E-waste recycling, biopolymers from natural resources, polymer electrolytes, etc. She has published more than 150 papers in major international journals and 5 Indian patents. She has supervised more than 15 PhD scholars and successfully completed about 15 research projects.
Sanjay Kumar Nayak
Prof S. K. Nayak is the Director General of the Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET). He is a dual PhD holder in the fields of polymers and advanced materials. He also has a DSc in the field of bio-based composites. His main research interest includes polymer blends, composites, biopolymers, recycling technology, coatings and adhesives. He has published more than 400 research papers in major international journals, 16 books/book chapters and 15 patents. He has supervised more than 55 PhD scholars and 80 M. Tech students.
Ananthakumar Ramadoss
Ananthakumar Ramadoss is a Scientist (Jr) at the Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM), SARP, CIPET, Bhubaneswar, India. He received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from Jeju National University, South Korea. He was a Alexander Von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Konstanz, Germany, and a Postdoctoral fellow at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea, as well as a research fellow at the CSIR-CECRI, India. His research interests mainly focus on the development of nanostructured materials and their applications in supercapacitors, nanogenerators, self-powered systems, corrosion protection and bio-implant applications.
Introduction
In recent years low cost, large-area, light weight, optically transparent, flexible and easy to fabricate electronic devices have been considered as an attractive and interdisciplinary area of research in science and engineering. Unlike conventional electronic manufacturing processes, which require a complex fabrication method like lithography1 on hard and rigid semiconducting wafers, the new technology offers designing of the electronic circuits on flexible plastic, paper or rubber substrates in a cost effective and simple way of manufacturing. The inkjet printing technique2 offers such a device manufacturing method, in which the digital control on the printing process improves the quality, printing speed, and accurate deposition of material at predesigned positions on the substrate and multiple layers can be printed for better functional outcome of the device. Different transparent3 and bendable devices4 including sensors,5,6 electronic displays,7,8 solar cells,9 thin film transistors,10 and supercapacitors11 have been fabricated using the printing method.
The conducting patterns can be designed on various flexible substrates, such as paper12 or polymeric substrates.13 Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), polyimide (PI), and polycarbonate (PC) are a few examples of polymeric substrates used in flexible electronics. Sometimes substrate surfaces are hydrophobic in nature, so to increase the adhesive property of the substrate, it needs some surface modifications.14 Also plastic substrates are not suitable in high temperature applications due to their low glass transition temperatures (78 °C for PET and 120 °C for PEN) as well as low coefficient of thermal expansion. But many modified substrates have been developed that can have a balance of the necessary properties of substrates for flexible electronics applications.15
In the inkjet printing process, the liquid phase of a material or materials dissolved in solvents are deposited on substrates with high resolution without any extra wastage of materials. Therefore, it is very essential to prepare a printable ink as well as to understand its fluid dynamic properties. It is also important to understand the different aspects of droplet formation,16,17 impact as well as spreading of the ink on the substrate after injection.18 It has been shown that three dimensionless parameters such as the Reynolds number, Weber number and Ohnesorge number, which are derived from the rheological parameters (viscosity, surface tension, and density) of fluids, influence the behaviour of liquid drop formation.19 Also viscosity, surface tension, velocity and surface properties of the substrate describe the interaction of the ink drop on the substrate after impact. A detailed fluid dynamical study of inks suitable for inkjet printing will help in selecting suitable solvents as well as functional materials and surfactants for ink preparations. After printing on the substrate, the interaction of the ink with the substrate and the morphological change of the printed pattern post printing influence the device performance. Such type of morphological change appearing on a printing pattern is known as a coffee ring effect.20 In this effect the suspended particles flow towards the contact line during the time of evaporation forming a ring like structure. Therefore to avoid such type of outcome during evaporation, it is required to understand the mechanism of coffee ring formations21 as well as how to overcome them during device fabrication.
Many types of conducting inks have been developed by researchers with different types of active materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes,22 metal nanoparticles,23 conducting polymers,24 and organic–metal hybrids25 for different applications. However, all active materials have their own limitations for application in flexible electronics. For example, polymeric organic materials are suitable for flexible electronics and these are well compatible with polymer substrates, but many times their electrical properties are not ideal for device fabrication. To overcome this difficulty, currently researchers are interested in fabricating inorganic material based flexible electronics. However, the small fracture strain of inorganic materials is a challenge to fabricate stretchable and bendable devices.26 Silver nanoparticles have many important properties for application in printing electronics. Silver nanoparticles possess high electrical conductivity among various metals and silver has relatively low cost with respect to gold. Although copper is of relatively lower cost than silver and also possesses high electrical conductivity, it easily forms oxide. On other hand Ag nanoparticles are stable without forming any oxide. The antibacterial27 properties of silver nanoparticles make them a suitable candidate in medical applications.
Carbon based materials such as graphene,28 carbon nanotubes,29 graphene oxide, and reduced graphene oxide have wide applications in printed electronics due to their versatile properties. Graphene is a two dimensional allotrope of carbon having many interesting properties such as high electrical conductivity,30 high mechanical strength, optical transparency,31 and simple preparation methods like liquid phase exfoliation32 with mass production making it a preferable material for ink preparation for many applications such as in sensors, transparent conductors, thin film transistors, supercapacitors, and batteries. Another allotrope of carbon is a carbon nanotube. This one dimensional material shows very unique properties in printing electronics due to its advantageous physical properties such as high mechanical strength, good thermal conductivity as well as both metallic and semiconducting properties.33 The preparation of carbon nanotubes using the plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition method34 or catalytically on pre-patterned growth templates35 is complex. Although the preparation of a CNT dispersion is difficult, various studies have shown that dispersing carbon nanotubes on different solvents36 makes them a suitable material in ink preparation.
In the following sections, we have attempted to describe briefly the different aspects of printed electronics such as droplet formation and fluid dynamic properties of inks and ink–substrate interactions.37 The formation of coffee ring on printed patterns after the printing treatment is also discussed. We have also studied the preparations of silver nanoparticle ink as well ink formulation of carbon based materials like graphene and carbon nanotubes. We also make a brief study of the applications of printing electronics in the fields of sensors, thin film transistors, and energy storage devices. Finally, we conclude with a brief summary and future prospects of this new technology (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of inkjet printing, process and applications. 
Physical properties of the ink
Inkjet printing is recognised as an advanced and economical way of device manufacturing process in the field of electronics applications. This technology requires small adjustable drops of fluid on a substrate for achieving higher quality and device reproducibility. Therefore, the ink can be prepared after checking whether the fluid fulfils the requirements of some fluid dynamical properties and parameters, and then we can control the drop formation for inkjet printing. There are two different mechanisms by which an inkjet printer generates droplet for printing:38 drop on demand (DOD) and continuous inkjet (CIJ). DOD printing is mostly used in graphics and text printing with a relatively smaller diameter of drops of about 20–50 μm as compared to a drop diameter of approximately 100 μm in CIJ. The demerit of CIJ printing is that some unwanted ink is used during the time of printing, which causes wastage of materials. But in the DOD process this difficulty can be avoided. In the DOD process the individual drops generated by the printer fulfil the printing requirements, so it is more economical than CIJ with respect to ink delivery on the substrate. The drops are injected from the nozzle, if the pulse of pressure propagating within the fluid exceeds some threshold limit. If the pressure is absent the liquid remains static at the nozzle due to surface tension. The pulse of pressure that generates drops in the nozzle can be achieved by the following different ways. One is using a thermal process and the other is using a piezoelectric transducer. In the thermal DOD printer an electric current is passed through a small thin film heater that heats the liquid above its boiling point to form small bubbles. After removal of current the bubbles disappear due to the heat transfer. The rapid expansion and collapse of bubbles generate a pulse of pressure. In the piezoelectric method the pressure is generated by application of mechanical force on a piezoelectric transducer. Another method for the inkjet process is the electrostatic technique. In this process a potential difference is applied between the liquid and a nearby plate. As a result, a conical surface is formed called a Taylor cone and from the tip of the cone drops are generated. Initially the drop moves from the nozzle with higher speed and then slows down by forming a ligament. At some points the ligament breaks down and the surface tension drives the newly formed drop into a spherical shape. If the ligament breaks into more numbers of droplets, then satellite drops will be formed.
Three dimensionless numbers such as the Reynolds number (NRe), Weber number (NWe) and the inverse of Ohnesorge number (Oh), which is designated by Z, help to characterize a liquid drop39 and these numbers are related to the viscosity, surface tension, and density and are given by the following equations: (1) (2) (3)where ρ, η and γ are the density, dynamic viscosity and surface tension respectively. v is the velocity of the fluid and a is the dimension of length.
For stable drop formation in DOD printing the value of Z was given by Reis and Derby40 to be within the limit 10 > Z > 1. For low values of Z, the viscous nature of fluid does not allow drop ejection from the nozzle, whereas a higher value of Z helps in the formation of a large number of satellite droplets. Stable drop formation in the case of DOD printable inks is determined by the value of Z. But different experimental results give different values of Z for printable inks. Some have also successfully achieved printing by DOD with Z ≥ 10.
Jang et al.41 have studied the printability of different mixtures of fluids such as ethylene glycol, water and ethanol. The values of fluid parameters for different solvent mixtures are shown in Table 1. From their experimental result they found that for fluids with Z values within the range 2–4, the tail was recoiled back to the drop head within the time range 160–200 μs to minimize the surface area. For fluids with Z values within 6–13, the recoiling filament was detached from the falling drop and finally merged to form a single drop within the time span of 140–180 μs. But for a fluid with an Z value of 17.32, the satellite was unable to merge with the main drop. So they summarized the results that the printability range of Z is within the limit 4 ≤ Z ≤ 14 and for fluids with Z ≤ 4, the droplet filament is long and also the time for droplet generation is long. Similarly for a fluid for which the value of Z > 14, there is no formation of single droplets.
Table 1 Summary of physical properties and dimensionless numbers for different fluids.a Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from the American Chemical Society




Solvent type (volume fraction)
Density (kg m−3)
Viscosity (mPa s)
Surface tension (mN m−1)
Reynolds number (NRe)
Weber number (NWe)
Inverse (Z) of Ohnesorge number (Oh)





a Droplet diameter and its travel velocity are assumed to be 50 μm and 3 m s−1, respectively.





Ethylene glycol (0.15) + water (0.85)
1059
3.11
54.8
51.08
8.69
17.32


Ethylene glycol (0.25) + water (0.75)
1068
3.69
47.8
43.42
10.07
13.68


Ethyl alcohol (0.75) + ethylene glycol (0.25)
866
4.83
28.9
26.89
13.47
7.32


Ethylene glycol (0.5) + water (0.5)
1094
7.61
45.8
21.56
10.76
6.57


Ethylene glycol (0.75) + water (0.25)
1106
12.3
45.6
13.49
10.91
4.08


Glycerol (0.66) + water (0.33)
1172
16.05
56.2
10.95
9.37
3.57


Diethylene glycol (0.5) + water (0.5)
1111
22.0
41.4
7.58
12.08
2.17


Diethylene glycol
1118
35.1
44.8
4.78
11.23
1.43





Table 1 represents the constants for various types of solvents.
Liu et al.42 have studied the limiting value of Weber number and the value of Z for DOD printing inks. They found that the limiting value of Weber number is 2 < NWe < 25, whereas for practical ink design they mentioned the limit of Z to be 2 < Z < 20. The lower limit of Weber number (NWe = 2) signifies the limit of the capillary force that should be overcome for drop formation and the higher limit 25 is the instability of tail formation during drop injection. They represent the drop formation limit in a NWe–Z coordinate space diagrammatically as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Phase diagram for printability in a parameter space of Z and the jet Weber number, Wej*. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the AIP Publishing. *Here in this image Wej refers to the Weber number. In the rest of the paper we designate Weber number as NWe. 
From this diagram it is found that, for single drop formation, the Weber number NWe of drop injection increases with decreasing Z value and for large values of Z, the maximum limit of NWe for drop injection decreases. Bing et al.43 have described the droplet formation in piezoelectric inkjet printing numerically by a lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) based binary fluid model. They have studied the droplet injection by controlling the intensity and duration of positive and negative force. They also studied the breakup time and velocity of droplets with respect to a change in the contact angle of the inner wall of the nozzle as well as by changing the surface tension of the ink. Upon decreasing the contact angle from 150° to 30° the breakup time was decreased from 61.73 μs to 37.14 μs and by increasing the surface tension from 20 to 85 mN m−1 the droplet velocity increased by 56%. From their result it is concluded that ink printability can be achieved by hydrophilic modification of the nozzle's inner wall as well as by increasing the surface tension of the ink.
Although the printability of a fluid can be evaluated by its Ohnesorge number, there are other factors that influence the drop formation such as the fluid/air surface tension barrier near the nozzle. For the ejection of the drop it should have a minimum velocity to overcome the barrier. The minimum velocity is given by44 (4)Here dn is the nozzle diameter and γ is the surface tension.
For Weber number the limiting value for drop formation is NWe ≥ 4; below this limit, the fluid cannot overcome the surface tension. Stow et al.45 have studied the details of the impact of printed droplets on substrates. Experimentally, they described the splashing of drops in terms of velocity and surface roughness. After a series of experiments with a given radius of drop, they found that there is a threshold velocity limit for drops below which no splashing is possible. Again they described splashing of drops on the basis of the roughness of the surface in terms of dimensionless parameters such as Weber number (NWe) and Reynolds number (NRe). The exact equation that relates the surface roughness to the dimensionless numbers is (NWe)1/2(NRe)1/4 = f(r)(5)Here f(r) is a function of surface roughness.
Interaction of drops with the substrate
After printing the ink on the substrate, the solidification of drops happens. Different mechanisms by which the change of phase from liquid to solid occurs are evaporation of solvent, cooling through the transition temperature, and chemical reactions. A well printed pattern and morphology of the printed line on the substrate are very important factors for electronic applications. For flexible applications a solid line which is stable under application of mechanical stretch and bending is essential. After ejection of the drop from the nozzle, isolated drops should spread over the surface. The behaviour of spreading drops on a substrate depends on the fluid property as well as on substrate characteristics. When the drop is injected from the nozzle to the substrate, various physical parameters such as kinetic behaviour at the time of impact, spreading, recoil, oscillation and final equilibrium structure controlled by velocity, surface tension, and capillary force as a function of time have been studied. After the ink droplet contacts the substrate, the deformation of the droplet starts due to the impact of kinetic energy and after a few microseconds spreading of the drop starts towards equilibrium. Some of its kinetic energy is absorbed by viscous dissipation. On other hand, if at the time of impact splashing is not found then the drop may recoil followed by expansion and oscillate for dissipating energy. After the drop reaches the equilibrium point, the drop shapes into a spherical structure because the higher surface tension value dominates over the smaller value of bond number46 of the fluid. Rioboo et al.47 have studied the time evolution of the impact of a liquid drop on a solid surface. The impact behaviour is determined at different timescales using time as a dimensionless parameter by modifying it to be t* = t(v/d). Here v is the impact velocity and d is the initial drop diameter. They distributed the total interaction in four phases with different timescales. The first phase is the kinetic phase in which the dimensionless time t* < 0.1. In this phase the total impact process depends on the impact velocity and initial diameter. Following the kinetic phase, the other phases are the spreading phase, relaxation phase and finally equilibrium phase. In the spreading phase most of spreading happens and viscous force plays a dominant role over surface tension. Surface tension has very little influence until t* = 0.5 and is reduced by a factor of 3 within 0.5 < t* < 2. In the relaxation phase, the free surface of the drop is minimised by surface tension. The contact line shows no motion and the top part of the drop oscillates. The final phase is a purely wetting phase and proceeds by increasing the spreading diameter proportional48 to t1/10. The final equilibrium contact diameter is given by the equation47 (6)In practical situations, several metastates are observed in sessile drops, hence the final contact diameter is confined between the receding and advancing contact diameters. So the receding (dr) or advancing (da) contact diameter will be obtained by replacing the equilibrium contact angle by the receding contact angle (θrec) or advancing contact angle (θadv) in eqn (6). Pasandideh-Fard et al.49 have studied the kinetic energy of an injected drop and the increase in surface energy of a spreading drop. They established a relation between the injected drop diameter and the maximum diameter of the spreading drop with an equation given by (7)Here θeq is the equilibrium contact angle and dmax is the maximum spreading diameter. When the second term in the denominator  of eqn (7) is large, then the contact angle has little influence on β. The consequence of this condition is that, the capillary effect can be neglected during droplet impact, if .
Satellite drop
Satellite drop formation (Fig. 3) during the time of printing is a constraint to the morphology of the printed line that needs to be overcome for achieving a printed pattern of high resolution and accuracy. After the drop appears outside of the nozzle during the time of printing, the speed of the drop head is relatively high, and it slows down with time due to the formation of a long tail behind the drop. The length of the tail will be long when the drop speed is more than the speed of the tail. This is the case when the viscosity of the ink is high. The higher speed of the drop head with respect to the tail causes the breakdown of the tail into small fractions and it forms satellite droplets. Viscosity is a parameter that controls the shape of the tail that is formed during printing. A highly viscous ink shows a long symmetric tail shape, and the length and symmetry of the tail decrease with the decrease of viscosity.50
 Fig. 3  Satellite drop formation during printing. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the IOP Publishing. 
Coffee ring effect
When a drop of ink after printing on a substrate is allowed to dry, most of the particles will assemble at the periphery of the drop forming a ring like structure called the coffee ring effect (CRE). During the evaporation of solvent of the ink, the drop edge is pinned to the substrate and the solvent flows towards the edge from the centre of the drop that causes the solute particles to accumulate at the periphery. This happens due to the capillary flow within the droplet during evaporation.51,52 When a given volume of the liquid droplet contacts the solid surface, the base radius (rb) of the liquid–solid interface depends on the contact angle. If the contact angle is high, then the radius (rb) is small and the drop thickness is high. Birid et al.53 have shown that the rate of evaporation is proportional to the radius rb by eqn (8) rate of evaporation = a1 + a2(rb)(8)Here a1 and a2 are constants. So from the above equation for a higher value of rb the evaporation rate is high. Therefore, the contact angle and hence the shape of the droplet influence the rate of evaporation. At the liquid–air interface, the rate of evaporation is equal to the rate of diffusion.54 During the drying process the air adjacent to the liquid drop is saturated with the vapour. But the air far from the liquid drop is unsaturated; as a result, the vapour diffuses outwards and maintains a steady state diffusion condition near the liquid drop. To maintain the constant evaporation flux near the liquid drop, a constant current of liquid flows towards the boundary of the drop and as a result the velocity of liquid within the drop towards the edge increases with the increase of evaporation time (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the evaporation process, depicting the capillary flow induced by pinned edges. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature. 
The width of the ring also depends on the initial concentration of the solute particles. Higher concentration of solute particles in the liquid forms a wider ring. When the particles are transported towards the edge, the deposition of particles on the ring depends on the size of the particle. Smaller particles are found at the outer edge of the ring with respect to the larger particles.55 The size of the drop also controls the coffee ring effect. Shen et al.56 experimentally found that there is a threshold limit of drop size for the formation of the coffee ring effect. If the size of the drop is larger than the threshold limit then the CRE occurs. The threshold diameter for the formation of the coffee ring effect depends on the particle concentration, particle size and relative humidity of the environment of evaporation. At a constant particle concentration, the threshold diameter decreases with higher relative humidity. Also, the higher the particle concentration the lower the threshold diameter.
The coffee ring effect can be controlled by controlling the shape of the solute particles. It is easy to form the coffee ring effect in isotropically shaped particles. If the particle shape is anisotropic in nature, during evaporation, the deformed interfaces produce a strong interparticle capillary interaction.57–60 As a result, particles are dispersed on the substrate uniformly after evaporation of the solvent. Loudet et al.61 have studied the influence of particle shape on the contact line using interferometry and optical trapping. They observed that the ellipsoid aspect ratio α (ratio of major/minor) of the particle affects its microscopic surface properties. From the experimental result they found that the value of contact angle θc depends on α (ratio of major/minor) and the contact angle decreases with an increase in the α value. Therefore, ellipsoid shaped particles form a uniform deposit and can overcome the coffee ring effect, as shown in Fig. 5. The coffee ring effect is such a phenomenon that can be observed for any kind of non-volatile solute ranging from large collides, nanoparticles to individual molecules.62 For most of the practical applications like printed electronics, the CRE is an unwanted phenomenon that we have to overcome. The morphology of the conducting track on the substrate after drying of ink is not good for electrical conduction due to the CRE. The accumulation of particles at the edge and lower concentration of particles at the centre of the track decrease the conductivity of the printed line.
 Fig. 5  Final distribution images of (a) ellipsoids (α = 3.5) and (b) spheres (α = 1.0) after evaporation. ‘α’ refers to the aspect ratios of the major and minor axes of the drop. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature. 
Overcoming such ubiquitous nature of matter is very essential for printing technology. As the evaporation of drops is non-linear and complex in nature, it is difficult to control the capillary flow of the solute particles. To manipulate the capillary flow, many works have been carried out. One of the ways to avoid the coffee ring effect is Marangoni flow,63 which can be achieved by controlling the surface tension of the solvents within the ink. Due to this effect, particles flow from a region of lower surface tension to a region of higher surface tension within the drop.64 The surface tension depends on the temperature65 and chemical composition of the liquid or surfactant66 present in the solvent. The non-uniform distribution of temperature of the drop during evaporation develops a temperature gradient on the drop. Due to the temperature gradient at different parts of the drop a surface tension gradient is developed across the drop, resulting in the appearance of the Marangoni effect or Marangoni convection.
Metal nanoparticle ink
Nanoparticles possess many remarkable properties which are different from the bulk material. The thermodynamic size effect67 reduces the melting point of nanoparticles compared to the bulk material. This novel property of nanoparticles is very useful for flexible electronics. To obtain highly conducting printed tracks, metal nanoparticles, such as silver, gold,68 and copper,69 are used. In particular, due to their lower resistivity, lower oxidation rate and lower cost compared to gold, silver nanoparticles have become a suitable material for ink formulation. Due to the low cost and high conductivity of copper, it attracts the attention of researchers for preparing inks for printing electronics. But the high rate of oxide formation of copper NPs needs extra protection with an anti-oxidation shell of noble metals.70
Synthesis of silver nanoparticle ink
Various types of synthesis methods are developed for the preparation of silver nanoparticles.71–73 The smaller size and uniform dispersion of silver nanoparticles in inks make them suitable for printing. The most important advantage of silver nanoparticles is the improvement of conductivity to the bulk level for which silver nanoparticles are used in different areas of research such as sensors,74 OLEDs,75 and solar cells.76 Moreover, the plasma resonance of silver nanoparticles depends on the particle size, morphology and density,77 which helps in absorbing and scattering the visible spectrum of light. Due to this property of silver nanoparticles they are used in the manufacturing of optical devices. Also due to the anti-bacterial property of silver nanoparticles they are used in medical applications.
The synthesis of silver nanoparticles by a chemical reduction method is relatively easy. But after the formation of nanoparticles, they agglomerate into larger particles. Particles with larger size are not suitable for ink formation as they clog the nozzle during printing. To prevent the agglomeration, stabilizing agents78 are used. The difficulty in adding a stabilizing agent is that, it affects the conductivity of the printing track. So there is a need for a post-printing treatment of the printed track to remove the stabilizing agent.
Wang et al.79 have described the mechanism for PVP as a stabilizing agent for silver nanoparticle reduction. The N atom of PVP stabilizes the smaller sized nanoparticle (particle size below 50 nm). For larger nanoparticles the stabilization is followed by the interaction of the silver ion with N and O of PVP. Zhang et al.80 synthesized highly concentrated monodisperse silver nanoparticles by taking AgNO3 as a precursor, adipoylhydrazide and dextrose as reducing reagents, and PVP as a stabilizing agent. An ink was prepared with the synthesized monodisperse nanoparticles in a mixture of ethylene glycol, ethanol and water with mass ratio 7:2:1. The ink contains 10–15 wt% of silver nanoparticles. From the UV-visible spectra, Fig. 6a, a wide distribution of nanoparticles reduced by adipicdihydrazide is found compared to a symmetrical distribution of particles reduced by dextrose and a mixture of both adipicdihydrazide and dextrose. It was also noticed that silver nanoparticles reduced by dextrose are larger than those reduced by the mixture of both reducing agents from the red shift of the absorption peak, because the larger particles absorbed longer wavelength of light compared to the smaller particles. The experimental evidence for the size dependence of nanoparticles on the mass ratio between PVP and AgNO3 is given in Fig. 6(b). A higher mass ratio of PVP/AgNO3 reduces the size of the nanoparticles.
 Fig. 6  UV spectra of the synthesized silver nanoparticles: (a) reduced by adipicdihydrazide (456 nm, curve I), dextrose (428 nm, curve II) and the mixed reductants (408 nm, curve III) respectively; (b) the PVP/AgNO3 mass ratios were 3:1 (410 nm, curve IV), 2:1 (412 nm, curve V) and 1:1 (413 nm, curve VI) with the same mixed reductants. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the IOP Publishing. 
The FTIR spectra (Fig. 7) of PVP coated silver nanoparticles when compared to those of original PVP concluded that the stretching vibration peak of CO at 1661 cm−1 has changed in size without any change in position, but the stretching peaks of C–N at 1026 cm−1 and at 1047 cm−1 in pure PVP are red shifted to 1046 and 1088 cm−1 in PVP coated Ag nanoparticles indicating that the coordination between the N atom and silver is stronger than that between O and silver. Hence the N atom of PVP is responsible for avoiding agglomeration.
 Fig. 7  Infrared spectra of pure PVP and silver nanoparticles coated with PVP. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the IOP Publishing. 
In the printed silver nanoparticle ink after sintering at 160 °C for 30 min, the resistivity is found to decrease from 9.18 × 10−8 to 8.76 × 10−8 Ω m. In the ink formulation, due to the higher boiling point and lower surface tension of ethylene glycol over water the Marangoni effect is established, which prevents the formation of the coffee ring effect during the evaporation of the solvent. Dang et al.81 prepared silver nanoparticles by reducing AgNO3 using ethylene glycol and PVP as capping agents82 with a mean diameter of 10 nm (distributed from 4 nm to 16 nm). With the combinations of solvent and co-solvent, a stable ink was formulated. The prepared ink contains 20 wt% of the as-synthesized silver nanoparticles with a viscosity of 12.1 cP and surface tension of 29.5 mN m−1. The second type of ink was produced with a viscosity of 9.8 cP and surface tension of 36 mN m−1. After one month of observation it was found that the ink was stable and the viscosity was changed from 9.5 cP to 10 cP from the date of preparation.
Vaseem et al.83 have synthesized silver nanoparticles of 12 nm using silver nitrate as a precursor, ethylene glycol as a reducing agent and PVP as a capping agent at different temperatures. From the UV-visible spectra, it was found that at 70 °C, Ag nanoparticles show two peaks at 400 nm and 520 nm. This is due to the formation of different populations of Ag nanoparticles at 70 °C. But in between 80–100 °C a single peak found at 403–420 nm exhibited the high degree of monodispersivity as shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  UV-visible spectra of Ag nanoparticles at different temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The dispersion of nanoparticles was due to the amphiphilic nature of PVP absorbed by the Ag nanoparticles. It was confirmed by the 4% weight loss at 150 °C of the synthesized particle due to decomposition of PVP from TGA analysis (Fig. 9a). FTIR spectra (Fig. 9b) of PVP and PVP capped Ag nanoparticles show that the symmetric stretching vibration for C–N shifts from 1071 to 1081 cm−1 and the –CO stretching vibration shifts from 1666 to 1645 cm−1 which indicates that either N or O atoms of PVP molecules interact with silver nanoparticles.
 Fig. 9  (a) TGA spectrum of Ag nanoparticles capped with PVP. The inset is the structure of PVP. (b) FTIR spectra of PVP and Ag nanoparticles capped with PVP. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The synthesized nanoparticles were well dispersed in a water and ethylene glycol mixture and printed on a polymer substrate. The preparation of Ag ink is followed by taking weight percentage of Ag nanoparticle:water:ethylene glycol in the ratio of 10:55:35 and then filtering by 0.2 μm polypropylene Whatman paper. The viscosity of the as-synthesized ink was 5.47 cP and the surface tension was 40.799 mN m−1. The contact angle of the prepared ink on different substrates such as Si/SiO2, glass, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyimide substrate was measured and found to be 28.57°, 29.28°, 47° and 48° respectively. The line pattern after annealing at different temperatures was studied. The resistivity was measured with temperature and found that the resistivity decreases to a minimum at 200 °C and after that, it was found to be constant with temperature. The measured resistivity at 200 °C was 1 × 10−5 Ω cm as shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  FE-SEM images of Ag nanoparticle films with different annealing temperatures: (a) as-printed and annealed at (b) 100, (c) 150, and (d) 200 °C. (e) Resistivity variation of the Ag conductive lines with different annealing temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Shen et al.84 synthesized stable silver nanoparticles that can be stored at room temperature for a long time of about 3 months. Here silver nitrate is used as the precursor, monoethanolamine (MEA) as the reducing reagent, PAA as the capping molecule and deionised water as the medium. In this method, PAA coated silver nanoparticles were formed with particle size 20–230 nm. The XRD image (Fig. 11) of the nanoparticle shows diffraction peaks at 38.2°, 44.4° and 64.5° which indicates the (111), (200) and (220) diffraction plane of the face centred structure.
 Fig. 11  XRD pattern of silver nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The thermal analysis of PAA coated silver nanoparticles (Fig. 12) shows a continuous weight loss of about 0.7% for temperatures up to 300 °C. The strong peak at 245 °C indicates the decomposition of PAA. The strong endothermic peak at 950 °C (melting point of bulk silver) and a cumulative weight loss of 0.1% from 955 °C to 1000 °C indicate that there is 99.2 wt% of silver.
 Fig. 12  TG/DTA of silver nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The ink was prepared by taking various amounts of silver nanoparticles, deionised water and ethylene glycol. After 20 min of sonication, 5–25 wt% of silver concentrated ink was prepared. The viscosity and surface tension of the ink with respect to the different silver nanoparticle contents were investigated and are shown in Table 2. The viscosity of the ink increased from 2.51 to 4.03 mPa by increasing the particle content from 5% to 25%. The change of viscosity and surface tension with respect to the particle concentration was almost linear and the value of number (Z) decreased from 9.94 to 7.00 indicating that the ink was well printable with the silver content varying from 5 to 25 wt%.
Table 2 Inks with different silver contents and their physical parameters. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry




Ag NP ink (wt%)
Surface tension γ (mN m−1)
Density ρ (×103 kg m−3)
Viscosity η (mPa s)

Z (1/Oh)




5
42.16
1.056
2.51
9.94


10
43.37
1.074
2.86
8.93


15
45.29
1.123
3.32
8.04


20
45.69
1.158
3.62
7.52


25
46.65
1.218
4.03
7.00




The prepared ink was printed on photopaper by printing the nanoparticle ink 10 times which created a line width ranging from 0 pt to 1.5 pt and then heating it to 50 °C for 15 min. It was found that the resistivity of the printed line decreased either by printing several times or heating at higher temperature, as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Electrical resistivity of printed silver patterns as a function of printing time and temperature. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It is observed that the resistivity decreases from 139.4 μΩ cm to 10.8 μΩ cm when the heating temperature increases to 180 °C for two printing cycles. By increasing the number of printing cycles to about 14 and sintering at room temperature a pattern similar to that at 50 °C was obtained. Approximately 20% of bulk conductivity of about 3.7 μΩ cm was achieved when the sintering temperature was increased to 180 °C. Kim et al.85 developed a silver nanoparticle ink with synthesized silver nanoparticles of size 20 nm by taking a mixture of solvents ethylene glycol, ethanol, n-propanol and deionised water and studied the properties by taking different ratios of water and EG and without EG. With a fixed amount of ethanol and about 10 wt% of n-propanol and by changing the percentage of EG from 0 to 16 and 32 wt% and deionised water percentage accordingly from 80 to 64 and to 48 wt%, the viscosity of the ink varied from 2.5 to 5.6 mPa s at a shear rate of 50 s−1 and the surface tension of the ink varied from 39 to 40 mN m−1. Upon printing on a polyimide substrate the angle of contact was found to change from 33° to 34°. After dropping a single drop of the ink without EG on the polyimide substrate it was found that the drop exhibited the coffee ring effect (CRE), that is silver nanoparticles were found at the boundary of the drop and the central region was almost empty. But the ink containing EG did not exhibit the CRE, hence the nanoparticles were found at the centre, as shown in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  Three-dimensional microscopic images of ink-jet printed single dots obtained from conductive inks with different solvent compositions: (a) 0, (b) 16, and (c) 32 wt% EG. (d) Represents the two-dimensional profiles of corresponding compositions. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from the AIP Publishing. 
If the ink contains EG with a higher boiling point of about 197 °C compared with other solvents such as water (100 °C), ethanol (78.4 °C) and n-propanol (97.1 °C), then this gives rise to different evaporation rates and a surface tension gradient between the solvents. The advantage of adding solvent with different boiling points in the ink is that the solvent composition at the contact line will shift towards a higher fraction of the higher boiling point solvent with the increase in the evaporation rate at the boundary of the drop. So the presence of EG having a higher boiling point resulted in different evaporation rates and hence enhanced the concentration gradient between the centre and edge of the droplet causing a surface tension gradient. The difference in evaporation rate of materials within the solvent leads to a Marangoni-type of flow from the region of lower surface tension to the region of higher surface tension. In this work, the ink containing EG has a Marangoni number of about 2 × 105, which is sufficient to overcome the coffee ring effect. On the other hand, the ink without EG showed an outward flow of solvent from the centre and displayed an increased coffee ring effect due to the presence of the fast evaporating solvent like ethanol and n-propanol. A comparison of the conductivity of the printed line of the ink with EG and without EG was made with the temperature ranging from 100 °C to 300 °C for 30 min at a constant heating rate of 5 °C min−1. The resistance of a 10 mm long printed line with 32 wt% of EG ink is lower compared to the ink without EG with values of about 46 Ω and 431 Ω at 300 °C respectively.
Magdassi et al.86 reported the sintering of metal nanoparticles at room temperature with high conductivity by a spontaneous three-dimensional coalescence process. Silver nanoparticles coated with poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) are treated with a cationic polymer poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDAC). This cationic charged polymer aggregates the PAA stabilised silver nanoparticles. The zeta potential and average particle sizes of aggregated nanoparticles were measured with different concentrations of PDAC solution. The zeta potential of primary nanoparticles (average diameter 11.1 nm, 0.013 wt% metal content) was −47 ± 3 mV, and its negative value was found to decrease with the increase in PDAC concentration and its value was zero at a PDAC/Ag ratio of 0.12. The aggregate size of a nanoparticle was found to be 700 nm. Room temperature sintering of the ink is very useful in printing it on temperature sensible plastics and papers.
Synthesis of graphene inks
Graphene contains a single layer of carbon with a two dimensional lattice structure, and is a very beneficial material for inkjet printing for flexible electronics87–91 due to its properties such as direct writing ability, scalability for large area application and low cost.92 The unique properties such as mechanical, electronic, and optical transparency of graphene make it promising for flexible electronics.93,94 Other electronic properties such as massless Dirac fermion charge carriers,95 room temperature quantum Hall effect,96 and ambipolar field effect mobility97 have been observed in graphene and this single layer carbon is also used as a transparent electrode.98 Now a days graphene is used in the manufacturing of thin film transistors,99 sensors, transparent conductors, and supercapacitors100 as active materials. Therefore, development of well dispersed and defect free graphene for ink preparation is very important. In this regard many methods have been developed to synthesize graphene and graphene based composites and are categorized as bottom-up and top-down approaches.101 For easy and large scale production, chemical reduction of GO is the most useful. The chemical reduction takes place in two steps. First graphite gets oxidized to graphene oxide by the Hummers102 or modified Hummers103 method and then GO is reduced by using various reducing agents such as hydrazine, sodium borohydride and lithium aluminium hydride. Although these reducing agents facilitate high yield production of graphene sheets, they are very toxic. For inkjet printing application it is necessary to prepare an ink which is suitable for different substrates, and also for different printer nozzles. In this regard a liquid phase dispersion method is a promising technique for graphene production104,105 for practical applications. But it is a challenge to maintain the fluidic properties of an ink that satisfies the parameter requirements, particularly surface tension and viscosity for inkjet printing. Solvents like dimethylformamide (DMF) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) are ideal for graphene dispersion. But there are a few demerits to using these solvents, such as low viscosity, toxicity and low concentration of graphene dispersion.
Exfoliation of graphene occurs when the surface energy of graphene matches the surface energy of the solvent. Hernandez et al.104 used the liquid phase exfoliation method to prepare defect and oxide free graphene of concentration 0.01 mg ml−1 by exfoliating graphite powder in NMP using bath sonication. The yield of monolayer graphene was about 1 wt%, which then improved to 7–12% by the method of recycling of sediment. In this method they collected the centrifuged sediment of graphene and made a fresh dispersion in NMP using sonication.
Secor et al.106 have developed graphene ink by using ethyl cellulose as a stabilizing agent. The ink was prepared by the exfoliation of graphite in ethanol and ethyl cellulose at room temperature. In this process a few layers of graphene sheets with thickness 2 nm were produced with a graphene concentration of >0.1 mg ml−1. After exfoliation, the large graphite flakes were separated by centrifugation and the dispersion content was 1:1000 graphene/EC. To remove excess EC, NaCl solution was added at room temperature. On addition of NaCl(aq.), a solid containing graphene and EC was flocculated and then collected by centrifugation. A black coloured solid with 15% graphene was obtained after being washed with water followed by drying. The procedure is shown in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of different ink preparation methods. (a) Exfoliation of graphite powder in ethanol/EC using probe sonication and isolation of graphene/EC powder. (b) Removal of residual large graphite flakes by sedimentation and (c) salt-induced flocculation of graphene/EC. (d) An ink prepared by dispersion of the graphene/EC powder in 85:15 cyclohexanone/terpineol. (e) Prepared graphene ink. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
An ink was synthesized with 2.4 wt% of graphene/EC powder dispersed in a mixture of solvents containing cyclohexanone and terpineol in the ratio 85:15. The surface tension and viscosity (shear rate 100–1000 s−1) of the ink were measured to be 33 mN m−1 and 10–12 mPa s at 30 °C. The printed lines using this ink exhibited lower resistivity after annealing to 250 °C for 20 min. Excellent morphology and low resistivity were obtained only after three printing layers. Upon further increasing the temperature from 250 °C to 300 °C, enhancement of the electrical conductivity of printed lines occurred due to the decomposition of EC, which created an efficient charge transport through the graphene network as EC thermally decomposed into aromatic species.
Torrisi et al.107 described a graphene based ink by liquid phase exfoliation of graphite in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone. Sonication of graphite flakes was done for 9 hours followed by extraction of flakes. Then the flakes which were not exfoliated properly were allowed to settle down for ten minutes. After that the dispersion was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for an hour and the larger particles were removed by filtration. The prepared ink after observation was found to consist of single layer, bi-layer and few layer graphene with a lateral size of 300–1000 nm and about 33% of SLG with 0.11 g L−1 carbon. Wei et al.108 reported the synthesis of graphene inks stabilised by different functional groups such as polyaniline, polyelectrolyte(poly[2,5-bis(3-sulfonatopropoxy)-1,4-ethynylphenylene-alt-1,4-ethynylphenylene]sodium salt) and poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS). All types of graphene ink were prepared by chemical reduction of graphene oxide. The different functionalized graphene shows different surface adhesive properties due to attachment of different functional groups with different polarities. Among different functionalized graphene inks, the graphene modified by PSS shows better wettability. All the functionalized groups were attached to reduced graphene oxide sheets by van der Waals interactions except for the ionic liquid 1-(3-aminopropyl)-3-methylimidazolium bromide, which was attached to reduced graphene oxide sheets covalently.
Li et al.109 have realized the synthesis of graphene ink by a solvent exchange procedure which yielded high concentration of graphene dispersion. The liquid phase exfoliation of graphite flakes in DMF produces low yield of graphene and the ink viscosity is very low (<2 cP) which is not suitable for printing. Again DMF is a toxic solvent, so ink with such a solvent is not useful. Here the ink is prepared by exfoliation of graphite flakes in DMF; after that the solvent is exchanged from DMF to terpineol by a distillation process. The difference in the boiling point between the solvents (DMF and terpeneol) helps in the exchange of solvents. High concentration of graphene was achieved by taking a much lower volume of terpineol relative to DMF during the time of distillation. To avoid the agglomeration of graphene in the solution, the stabilizing agent ethyl cellulose was used. The stabilizing agent reduces the conductivity of the printing line, so ethyl cellulose was removed from the printing track by heating at about 300–400 °C. In the above synthesized ink, it has been found that the graphene/terpineol concentration is 1 mg ml−1 and the ink is stable for several weeks. It was also noticed that the ink added with ethanol shows improvement in surface tension and viscosity. After printing on a glass substrate followed by heating, it was observed that the printed pattern retained its uniformity that indicates the absence of any undesired coffee ring effect.
Pan et al.110 have demonstrated the preparation of an environmentally friendly graphene ink using dihydrolevoglucosenone (cyrene), which is a non-toxic and low cost solvent for use in the liquid phase exfoliation method. Bio-based cyrene is a suitable material for graphene dispersion, because the material possesses appropriate surface tension and polarity.111–113 The prepared ink was stable and also contains high concentration (10 mg ml−1) of graphene. The authors have done a comparative study between NMP dispersed graphene and the graphene dispersed using cyrene. It was noticed that cyrene was a better solvent than NMP in terms of exfoliation efficiency, time reduction, and cost effectiveness and also due to its non-toxic nature. The electrical conductivity of the as-prepared dried graphene pattern was measured to be 7.13 × 104 S m−1.
Secor et al.114 have developed a graphene ink stabilised by nitrocellulose polymer. First the graphene/nitrocellulose composite was prepared by taking graphite flakes in nitrocellulose followed by shear mixing for 4 hours at 10230 rpm in an ice bath. Then the solution was centrifuged to remove large graphite flakes. The sedimented graphene/nitrocellulose was obtained by adding aqueous NaCl followed by centrifugation. The graphene/nitrocellulose powder was collected by washing the sediment with deionised water followed by vacuum filtration. The ink was prepared by liquid phase exfoliation of the graphene/nitrocellulose composite with 2.3% w/v directly in a mixture of ethyl lactate, octyl acetate and ethylene glycol diacetate with ratio 75:15:10. The viscosity of the ink was 10 mPa s, and the concentration of graphene within the ink was 10 mg ml−1.
Arapov et al.115 have developed two types of graphene ink for inkjet printing. One of these inks was prepared by taking expanded graphite with a surface active polymer and the other by functionalized graphene. The first type of ink was prepared by sonicating expanded graphite with N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone and vinyl acetate copolymer in an isopropanol (IPA) and n-butanol (n-BuOH) solution mixture. The second type of ink was prepared by dispersing functionalized graphene without addition of any surfactant. For this, they synthesized a nonoxidative potassium graphite intercalation compound by taking graphitic carbon nanofiber as the starting material. Then a functionalized graphitic carbon nanofiber intercalation compound by using p-nitrobenzylbromide was developed. The ink was prepared by dispersing the functionalized compound in alcohols, ethers, and chlorinated solvents. Michel et al.116 have demonstrated a surfactant free and environmentally friendly ink for ink-jet printing. The ink was prepared by dispersing graphite rods in different ratios of a terpineol and cyclohexanone solution mixture at a concentration of 10 mg ml−1 using bath sonication. The ink was printed on both SiO2/Si and on flexible polyimide substrates. Secor et al.117 demonstrated an inkjet printable graphene ink. The ink was prepared by dispersing graphene/ethyl cellulose powder in a mixed solvent of cyclohexanone/terpineol with ratio 85:15 using bath sonication. The prepared ink contained 50 wt% of graphene with respect to 4% w/v of graphene/EC solid within the ink.
Graphene metal hybrid ink
Xu et al.118 have demonstrated a graphene–Ag composite ink. The ink was prepared by preparing PVP coated Ag nanoparticles by a chemical reduction method using NaBH4 as the reducing agent. The graphene–Ag nanocomposite was prepared by adding the as-prepared Ag nanoparticles to a mixture of graphene (30 mg), sodium dodecyl sulphate (10 ml) and DMF (40 ml) followed by sonication, filtration and washing in ethanol and water. The ink was prepared by dispersing the graphene–Ag composite in an ethanol, ethylene glycol and glycerine mixture with volume percentage 50:45:5% respectively. Li et al.119 have prepared Ag nanoparticle–GO and Ag nanotriangle platelet (NTP)–GO composite inks by the liquid phase exfoliation method. The Ag nanoparticle–GO ink is a purely water based ink. This ink was prepared by sonication of GO in deionised water followed by filtration to remove the larger particles. Then Ag nanoparticles were doped on the GO surface by adding Ag nanoparticles to dispersed GO by sonication. Then the ink was prepared by sonicating the Ag–GO composite in deionised water at a volume concentration of 2.4 wt%. The Ag nanotriangle platelet (NTP)–GO ink was prepared in the same way as described above. The viscosity and surface tension of the Ag–GO ink were 13.9 mPa s and 49.4 mN m−1 and for the Ag (NTP)–GO ink the values were 13.7 mPa s and 50.2 mN m−1 respectively.
Graphene polymer hybrid ink
Seekaew et al.120 have prepared a graphene based ink which contained PEDOT:PSS. The ink was prepared by dissolving PEDOT:PSS solution in a DMSO and ethylene glycol mixture followed by the addition of graphene powder dispersed in DMSO. Then the final graphene PEDOT:PSS dispersion was obtained by sonicating for 30 min and stirring for one hr for better dispersion. The above ink was demonstrated to be a high sensing ammonia gas sensor with sensing efficiency measured for ammonia concentrations from 25 ppm to 1000 ppm at room temperature. Chi et al.121 have prepared a graphene–PANI nanocomposite ink for inkjet printing to fabricate supercapacitors. The composite ink was prepared by the following procedure. First a graphene hydrogel (GH) was prepared by thermal treatment of GO. Then the prepared GH was immersed overnight in 40 ml of 0.5 M H2SO4 solution containing 0.32 M of aniline monomer. Then a mixture was prepared by adding 40 ml of 0.5 M H2SO4 (aq) containing 750 mg of ammonium peroxydisulfate to the solution and the reaction was allowed to continue for 2 hours at 60 °C. After completion of the reaction the material was washed with H2SO4, ethanol, ammonia and distilled water subsequently to obtain a GH–PANI nanocomposite. Then the ink was prepared by dispersing the nanocomposite in a water and ethanol solution having volume ratio 1:1.
Synthesis of carbon nanotube (CNT) ink
Carbon nanotubes are a promising material that have attracted the attention of researchers in the field of flexible electronics. Many types of devices such as integrated circuits,122,123 supercapacitors,124,125 sensors,126 touch panels,127etc., can be fabricated using SWCNT. The metallic and semiconducting properties of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) make them a suitable material for electronic application. Metallic SWCNT can be operated at a higher current density, hence the conductivity is very high,128 and due to the ambipolar129,130 nature of semiconducting SWCNT they exhibit equal electron and hole mobility. When a graphene sheet is allowed to roll up along a vector Ch = na1 + ma2 a cylindrical structure of SWCNT is formed; here a1 and a2 are the basis vectors. The indices (n,m) define the electrical properties of the nanotube. If n–m is multiplied by 3 then the CNT shows metallic properties, otherwise it behaves as a semiconductor. SWCNTs are used as an active material for fabricating thin film transistors. But the presence of metallic CNT affects the transistor properties. Higher interconnection of metallic nanotubes helps in obtaining a high off current which leads to short the transistor. A thin film of SWCNT on a substrate is very flexible and stretchable without any significant loss in conductivity.131 A network of SWCNT is suitable for flexible electronics because it tolerates large strains of elongation and deformation application.132
A dispersion of carbon nanotubes in liquid is very difficult due to the van der Waals interactions between the tubes which make them agglomerated. Therefore, to avoid agglomeration functionalization of the nanotube is necessary. Carboxylation133 is a method to overcome the agglomeration of nanotubes. In this method a carboxyl group is attached to the wall of the nanotube. This prevents the van der Waals interaction between the nanotubes. Organic solvents134 are also used for the dispersion of carbon nanotubes. Preparation of a carbon nanotube ink has been reported by Beecher et al.135 through dispersion of CNT in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, by taking 1 μm length and 1 nm radius CNT of concentration 0.1–0.2 mg ml−1 and sonicating for 1 hour followed by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 30000 rpm. Then the upper half of the dispersed mixture was collected and filtered with 0.7 μm whatman paper obtaining a CNT concentration of 0.003 mg ml−1. The synthesized ink is printed on a piezoelectric printer with a nozzle diameter of 50 μm for a pulse duration of 37 μs. It is also reported that the dispersion of this CNT ink was stable over a long period of time without using any surfactant. The SEM images of the printed film and the printed electrode are given in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of (a) the CNT film and (b) the printed electrode structure. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the AIP Publishing. 
Okimato et al.136 prepared a SWCNT ink by sonicating CNT in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), taking a ratio of 0.04 μg ml−1 of SWCNT/DMF and sonicating for 90 minutes followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 12000 rpm. After filtering the collected dispersion the obtained ink concentration was noticed to be about 0.001 μg ml−1. On printing this ink, metallic and transistor properties were obtained by controlling the CNT concentration on the film. A high concentration of CNT shows metallic properties, whereas a low concentration gives transistor properties as shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Electrical properties at different CNT concentrations: (a) metallic, (b) transistor. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley. 
The transistor properties has been studied by printing the active semiconducting layers with different numbers (40, 20, 10, or 2) of CNT droplets. By using high-capacitance ionic liquid as gate dielectric material, a reduction in operating voltage and hysteresis were noticed. Kordas et al.137 prepared a functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) ink. MWCNT were treated with nitric acid followed by application of potassium permanganate to achieve more carboxyl groups on the surface of the nanotubes. Then the functionalized nanotubes were sonicated in water for 0.5 hour. Finally a stable dispersion of MWCNT–(COOH)n of concentration 0.26 mg ml−1 was achieved by centrifugation. The conductivity of the above functionalized ink was increased by increasing the printing frequency. The morphology of the printed film was found to be randomly oriented as curved nanotubes and this controls the inductive properties of the printed line on paper. With an increase in printing frequency, the total impedance of the printed line was found to decrease due to the dominance of capacitive coupling between CNT over parallel inductance. The measurement of the resistance value of the printed line was found to depend on the air quality attached to the printed track. This is an advantage in sensor application of the functionalized CNT.
Han et al.138 have synthesized a water based carbon nanotube ink. The ink was prepared by dispersing SWCNT and sodium dodecylbenezenesulfonate (SDBS) in deionised water using sonication. Here SDBS was used as a surfactant and the ink was stable for more than 30 days. They demonstrated the ink by writing it by a fountain pen nib which is an advantage for using on a flat substrate. They also demonstrated the use of the ink on paper circuit board with significantly reduced resistance compared to that of the printed line on filter paper. Kim et al.139 have demonstrated a well dispersed multiwalled carbon nanotube ink coated with PVP stabilizing agent. They developed this ink for meniscus guided 3D printing propose. They initially prepared an acid treated CNT which showed a viscosity of 12.5 mPa s and shear thinning properties. To achieve 3D printing properties, they added PVP to the treated CNT. Here PVP is used for avoiding the agglomeration as well as to achieve rheological properties for 3D printing. Using this ink in 3D printing, they demonstrated different electronic components such as radio frequency inductors and sensing transducers.
Shin et al.140 have developed a conductive bioactive water based carbon nanotube ink which is stable in water as well as in biological fluids. The dispersion of CNT in water is improved by using DNA, HA (hyaluronic acid) and gelatine which is modified chemically. With this ink they demonstrated foldable and stretchable electronic circuits by using a commercial printer. The change in electrical properties was studied in bending application by comparing the resistance of the printed pattern with respect to those folded at different angles. After folding, a small change in resistance of the printed pattern is observed. Using the ink, they demonstrated 3D circuits embedded within a hydrogel. Small et al.141 have synthesized a single walled carbon nanotube ink which is stabilised by using poly(2-methoxyaniline-5-sulfonic acid) (PMAS). The prepared ink was printed on transparent sheets using an inkjet printer. The printed PMAS–SWCNT shows a transparency of about 85% for light of wavelength λ > 500 nm. Also the PMAS–SWCNT printed film shows sensing of volatile organic compounds upon contact with their vapours under static or flowing conditions. Liu et al.142 have prepared a stable CNT ink using organic hydrazine treatment. They found that the dispersion of CNT treated with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine is more stable compared to other CNT dispersions treated with other organic compounds such as hydrazine, phenyl hydrazine and 2-nitrophynyl hydrazine.
Bucella et al.143 developed an inkjet printable single walled carbon nanotube based ink for designing a unipolar transistor applications. For ink preparation semiconducting nanotubes were selected from a mixture produced by high pressure carbon monoxide conversion with poly(3-dodecylthiophene-2,5-diyl) as a warping polymer and were dispersed in toluene by sonication. Then the polymer warped SWCNT were redispersed in ortho-dichlorobenzene (oDCB) for making them printable. The concentration of the most efficient ink was 0.2 g L−1.
Application
Printing electronics on flexible substrates provides a wide range of devices for different applications such as sensors, printed circuits, thin film transistors, displays, supercapacitors, etc.
Application in sensors
Song et al.144 have developed a CNT based strain sensor for detecting high strain from 1% to 300%, which showed excellent sensing properties even after one thousand cycles. The sensor was designed to detect human motion in real time. The application of the device on the chest of humans can detect the breathing frequencies and amplitudes and the device can give data about their respiratory functions. Wongwiriyapan et al.145 have fabricated a gas sensor using SWCNT to detect NO2 and Cl2 at room temperature. The sensitivity of the sensor was improved by using an electrical break down technique in which the resistance of the SWCNT was increased with an increase in the breakdown voltage, thus enhancing the gas sensing properties. Ghosh et al.146 have reported a SWCNT based sensor that can detect liquid flow. The velocity of the fluid can be measured from the ionic conductivity and the polar nature of the liquid. The free charge carrier of carbon nanotubes interacts with the fluctuating coulombic field of the liquid which is responsible for the sensing properties. Le et al.147 have reported a low cost, stable, environment-friendly water based inkjet printed graphene oxide (GO) sensing device for detecting ammonia gas yielding 6% resistance change for 500 ppm of ammonia in 15 minutes. Again by using a rGO thin film the yield was improved to 30% within a time duration of 5 minutes without the application of high temperature or UV light. The rGO film is also used for sensing of other gases including CO.
Labroo et al.148 have developed a biosensor using a graphene ink for the multiplex detection of various metabolites on a microfluidic paper by ink-jet printing as shown in Fig. 18. The sensor arrays are used to detect metabolites like glucose, lactate, xanthine and cholesterol rapidly and simultaneously.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram (left) and digital photograph (right) of graphene based biosensor arrays on a microfluidic paper. (b) Mechanism of biosensor detection. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Elsevier. 
Andersson et al.149 have demonstrated a low cost silver nanoparticle inkjet printed humidity sensor on paper. The humidity is measured by measuring the resistance of the sensor. When the humidity reaches a threshold limit, the resistance decreases to a constant value. Here paper has been used as the substrate material, as it is very sensitive to humidity.
Application in electronic devices
Wind et al.150 have developed a SWCNT based field effect transistor in a conventional MOSFET structure. CNT is used as the top gate electrode separated by thin dielectrics from the conduction channel. The transistor showed excellent electrical characteristics including a steep subthreshold slope and high transconductance at a gate voltage of nearly 1 volt. Takenobu et al.151 have reported a SWCNT thin film transistor on a flexible plastic substrate by inkjet printing. They used a water-based ink without any additional processing to remove metallic CNT and obtained an ON/OFF ratio on the order of 104. The mobility of the device was low (10−3–10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). The low mobility was improved by improving the electrical contact by applying a heat treatment, so mobility was improved to 0.34 cm2 (V s)−1 by heat treatment at 50–70 °C.
Li et al.152 have demonstrated inkjet printed thin film transistors by using pristine SWCNT as the channel, designed on oxidized silicon wafer and plastic substrates. One thousand TFTs were printed on silicon substrates. The transistor characteristics were studied considering different printed channel lengths L. They noticed that the ION/IOFF ratio increases with increasing channel length, which is due to the widening of the OSP (only semiconducting percolation) window. The electrical properties of multiple-strip SWCNT TFTs were also studied.
The ION/IOFF ratio for the single strip channel is different for different channel lengths, L (Fig. 19). In multiple strips (Fig. 20) the variation of ION/IOFF depends on the density of the CNT present. The ION/IOFF ratio in the multistrip channel is higher than the single strip channel; hence the former is better for transistor operation. Cho et al.153 have developed an inkjet printed OTFT using crystalline organic semiconductor, 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl)pentacene (TIPS pentacene) and amorphous polycarbonate (APC). The structure of the APC molecule creates a good phase separation during blend formation with TIPS pentacene crystals. The different orientations of TIPS crystals on the printed film as well as shape and morphology have been studied. The designed TFT performance depends on the TIPS pentacene/polymer phase segregation and orientation of TIPS pentacene crystals. To optimize the ratio of composition for which the optimal phase separation between TIPS pentacene and the polymer is achieved the TFT was studied in the framework of Flory–Huggins phase separation theory. The TIPS pentacene/APC composition shows a strong lateral phase separation when the ratio between them is 1:4, and this composition gives maximum mobility. The effect of different solvent mixtures used in ink preparation on mobility was investigated in this work as shown in Fig. 21. The composition of different solvent mixtures regulates the balance between Marangoni flow and solvent convection, which results in a high performance printed TFT.
 Fig. 19  (a) Transfer characteristics of single-strip SWCNT TFTs with various strip lengths. (b) ON/OFF current ratio and ON current with different channel lengths and (c) ON current as a function of channel length. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from the AIP Publishing. 
 Fig. 20  Transfer characteristics of (a) five- and (b) ten-strip SWCNT TFTs. Both (a) and (b) comprise ten independent devices. (c) Output characteristics of a ten-strip SWCNT TFT. (d) Dependence of the ON/OFF current ratio on ON current for SWCNT TFTs with different strip configurations. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from the AIP Publishing. 
 Fig. 21  Representation of average mobility of the TIPS pentacene/APC TFTs and the TIPS pentacene/APC ratios and the Gibbs free energy of mixing. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Application in energy storage devices
Ervin et al.154 have developed an inkjet printed supercapacitor for flexible electronic application. The ink has been prepared by dispersing graphene oxide in water. The printed graphene oxide reduces the oxide group thermally by heating it to 200 °C for 10 hours. The reduced graphene oxide printed supercapacitor is fabricated on a Kapton substrate, which shows a specific capacitance up to 192 F g−1. Kapton is used due to its advantageous properties. Kapton is a thermally stable material up to 400 °C and possesses good dielectric properties. The high temperature tolerance of Kapton is an advantage to print metallic components of the supercapacitor such as the conductive current collector by sintering above 200 °C. Again fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) coated Kapton is used in a heat sealing device due to its thermal decomposition properties. The drawback of the Kapton substrate is its permeability to water and oxygen, which could degrade the electrolytes. Metal foil such as aluminium foil coated with Kapton can overcome this demerit. Xu et al.155 also fabricated a supercapacitor by the inkjet printing method using a graphene/PANI ink at room temperature. Two electrode supercapacitors were fabricated using graphene/PANI electrodes on carbon fabric in the middle of a separator with 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. The printed electrode used as the active material and the carbon fabric as the current collector as shown in Fig. 22.
 Fig. 22  (A) Schematic representation of the supercapacitor device structure. CV profiles of (B) NGP and (C) NGP/PANI electrodes at different scan rates in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (D) Specific capacitance vs. scan rate in the two electrode system. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Elsevier. 
The fabricated device exhibited a maximum specific capacitance of 82 F g−1, power density of 124 kW kg−1 and energy density of 2.4 W h kg−1 at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The supercapacitor shows capacitance properties for low as well as for high frequencies. It shows Warburg type impedance behaviour due to the diffusion of ions within the porous region of the electrode.
Delekta et al.156 have fabricated a highly transparent and flexible microsupercapacitor using graphene. The supercapacitor is almost 90% transparent for 5 layers of printing, and the capacitance is measured to be 16 μF cm−2. The transmittance decreases to 71% after 20 layers of printed line whereas the capacitance increases to 99 μF cm−2. In this work a graphene pattern without any coffee ring formation was achieved by using dry etching. In the dry etching process, the graphene film was first printed on a glass substrate, and then an integrated hard mask of silver ink was printed on the inner region of the graphene film. After treating the whole structure with O2, the graphene film pattern was formed without coffee ring formation. After that, the graphene film was uncovered by removing the silver mask by treating with nitric acid solution. Eggenhuisen et al.157 have also demonstrated organic photovoltaic solar cells by printing different layers through the inkjet printing method under ambient conditions while the back and front of the cell are printed by conducting PEDOT:PSS and Ag respectively. The multilayer printing of functional materials enhanced the efficiency to 4.1% as compared to spin-coated devices. Eggenhuisen et al.158 have developed an organic solar cell by the inkjet printing method taking ZnO as the electron and PEDOT as the hole transport layer. The photoactive layer is printed from P3HT:PCBM, and PEDOT:PSS is used as an electrode layer. The layers are processed by non-halogenated solvents which are advantageous for the device performance compared to those prepared using chlorobenzene. The inkjet printing process helps in printing multiple layers that leads to significant performance of the device.
Mathies et al.159 have demonstrated an inkjet printed perovskite solar cell. The solar cell was designed by inkjet printing of triple cation perovskite layers with 10% cesium in a mixed formamidinium/methylammonium lead iodide/bromide composite. The triple cation perovskite was prepared by taking lead iodide, formamidinium iodide, lead bromide and methylammonium iodide in DMF and DMSO solution in 4:1 ratio. The final ink was prepared by adding cesium iodide/DMSO solution to the above prepared solution followed by stirring for one hour at 65 °C. The efficiency of the solar cell was measured to be 12.9%. The achievements in this work suggest the possibility of designing high efficiency perovskite solar cells by inkjet printing. Cai et al.160 have designed an inkjet printed stretchable and transparent energy storage device which provides a power density of 0.83 mW cm−2 and energy density of 0.61 μW h cm−2 by stretching it only by about 50%. They have designed the device by printing a single layer of WO3 nanoparticles on a transparent elastomeric conductor. WO3 with electrochromic properties along with the polyaniline/carbon nanotube composite forms the hybrid electrode for preparing a stretchable energy storage device.
Lawes et al.161 have demonstrated a lithium-ion battery in which the anode is designed by silicon nanoparticles by inkjet printing. They prepared a silicon ink for designing the printed anode of the battery by using different binders such as CMC and Na-alginate, PVP, and PEDOT:PSS. The inkjet printed Si nanoparticle anode with different binders was studied. They found that among the above different binders, the anode that contained PEDOT:PSS was the most stable and showed better electrical conductivity. The advantage of the PEDOT:PSS binder was the formation of a continuous conductive network for which the battery exhibited high initial capacities and a stable performance with respect to other binders. Fig. 23 shows the connectivity of binders with nanoparticles for battery performance.
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism explaining the electrochemical performance of anodes prepared with different binders. When using the PEDOT:PSS binder the SiNPs remain electrically connected throughout charging/discharging and are therefore able to maintain a stable cycling capacity. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Elsevier. 
Li et al.162 have developed an inkjet printed graphene based supercapacitor on various substrates such as glass, Kapton and silicon wafer. The highly concentrated printable graphene ink was prepared by solvent exchange from DMF to terpineol and cyclohexanone. The other ink used as the solid state electrolyte is PSSH which without encapsulation retains its functional properties. The printed microsupercapacitor has an areal capacitance of 0.7 mF cm−2. This simple way of printing helps design a device which consists of 100 microsupercapacitors on both Kapton and silicon wafer. Milroy et al.163 have reported an inkjet printed battery where lithium–sulphur (Li–S) is used as the cathode. The integrated current collector is designed by using single walled carbon nanotubes which are infused with conductive straight chain sulphur. The printed electrode shows an initial discharge capacity of 800 mA h g−1 which decreases to 700 mA h g−1 after 100 charge/discharge cycles. This finding opened a new dimension for research on Li–S batteries, especially on sulphur as an active material for energy technology.
Choi et al.164 have demonstrated an inkjet printed supercapacitor using a commercial printer on a A4 conventional paper substrate. The paper substrate is coated with cellulose nanofibril (CNF) mediated nanoporous mats using inkjet printing as a primer layer. The nanoporous structure of the CNF coated layer helps the formation of a printed pattern with high resolution as well as in reducing the electrical resistance as compared to the paper or PET substrate. The electrode was designed by printing single walled nanotubes and activated carbon (SWNT/AC) ink on the CNF coated substrate, followed by an Ag nanowire ink by inkjet printing. The printed Ag NW forms a highly interwelded network upon sintering with UV radiation. The inkjet printed supercapacitor shows reliable electrochemical performance after 2000 cycles of operation. Diao et al.165 have described an ink-jet printed supercapacitor using a graphene oxide and PANI composite. PANI is a suitable material for supercapacitor application due to its high capacitance properties. By preparing a composite ink of PANI with GO, a well printable and stable ink for better performance in supercapacitors was achieved. In this work GO was prepared by Hummers’ method and PANI was synthesized by mixing aniline in a dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid and deionised water solution at room temperature. The PANI/GO composite was prepared by adding GO on 1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC), and N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (NHS) to activate the carboxyl group under ice bath conditions followed by addition of PANI. The rGO/PANI composite electrode was achieved by reducing the printed electrode of the GO/PANI composite by hypophosphorous acid. The designed supercapacitor shows a volumetric capacitance of 258.5 F cm−3 for a sandwiched structure and 554 F cm−3 for an integrated structure.
Substrates for flexible electronics
Flexibility is a vital property of flexible electronic devices. Here we have to transform the devices from conventional to flexible ones by using the printing method and changing the substrate from a glass like rigid material to a plastic like flexible substrate that can be used for large area application by the inkjet printing or roll to roll (R2R) processing method. Some basic properties of plastic substrates required for flexible electronics are transparency, thermal stability, resistance to solvents and low coefficient of thermal expansion. Mostly when we require a conductive layer surface a composite multilayer substrate can fulfil these requirements, because plastic substrates are almost insulators.
Many types of substrates such as polymers,166 paper,167 and textiles168 are used in printing applications for flexible electronic devices. Different polymer substrates are used such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), polycarbonate(PC) and heat stabilised polyimide (PI). PET and PEN are semicrystalline and biaxially oriented thermoplastic15 materials, as well as transparent films having glass transition temperatures (Tg) of 78 °C and 120 °C respectively. So these materials are not useful in high temperature applications. On the other hand polyimide is a thermally stable polymer having glass transition temperature above 350 °C but the transparency of the material is low. The biaxially orientated structure of PET and PEN shows birefringence properties,169 an optical property of a material in which the refractive index depends on the polarization and propagation direction of light. The substrate should be resistant to moisture and solvents for device fabrication. Otherwise the degradation of the device will be accelerated. Though PET, PEN and PI are light weight and flexible, they absorb moisture.
During the time of device fabrication, when we applied heat to the substrate above its glass transition temperature (Tg) the film shrank or expanded due to the residual strain within the oriented parts of the film structure. Hence the thermal strain reduced the performance of the device. To tackle these difficulties, a process called thermal relaxation is applied to the film, by which the relaxation of molecular orientation in the material occurs. The molecular orientations of the film relaxed mainly along the non-crystalline regions.170 The other problem arises from the change in dimension of the film, with cyclic application of heat called the coefficient of thermal expansion. So heat stabilised films are designed which possess a low coefficient of thermal expansion. The different properties of PET and PEN films (heat-stabilized PET (Melinex® ST504/506) and PEN (Teonex®Q65)) for application in flexible electronics are shown in Fig. 24.
 Fig. 24  Summary of PET and PEN properties relevant to flexible electronics. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Wiley. 
Zardetto et al.171 have studied PET and PEN substrates coated with indium tin oxide (ITO). They compared different properties of both coated films (PET/ITO and PEN/ITO). The experimental results revealed that PEN/ITO is electrically more stable than PET/ITO after application of heat. PEN/ITO is electrically stable up to 235 °C but for PET/ITO, its resistance increases after 150 °C. The thermal deformation of sheets was also studied and was found that at 180 °C the PET/ITO film was totally rolled up whereas PEN/ITO rolled up at a temperature of 220 °C. The conductivity was measured after bending. The result showed that the conductivity of both PET/ITO and PEN/ITO degraded after 150 cycles of bending.
Perspectives and future studies
In this review we have discussed about the inkjet printing method for fabrication of electronic devices. As inkjet printing is an efficient and cost effective way of device fabrication, it is necessary to prepare inks that are suitable for printing applications. Though remarkable scientific studies have already been conducted in this regard, further studies are required to select suitable solvents, surfactants and functional materials to prepare stable as well as printable inks. The coffee ring effect, which affects the morphology of the printed pattern, has many negative impacts on printing electronics. But it may be utilised in electronic applications. So further studies are required to overcome the coffee ring effect as well as to develop functional design of printing patterns so that we can utilise the coffee ring pattern for device fabrication.
We have discussed the preparation of silver nanoparticle inks. Silver possesses high conductivity to design conductive lines, and is also used in optical devices. The difficulties in metal nanoparticle synthesis are the low amount of particles prepared and the requirement of surfactants for their stability. The high melting point of these surfactants creates difficulties at the time of sintering. So further studies are required to prepare surfactant free nanoparticles with higher yield for ink preparation. Also more research is necessary to develop other metal nanoparticles with low cost and high conductive materials like copper for ink preparation.
Carbon materials such as graphene are wonderful materials which possess many properties that can be suitable for printing electronics. Therefore, it is required to develop an efficient way to prepare defect free graphene in high yield for ink preparation. Though the liquid phase exfoliation method is an efficient method for dispersing graphene in solvents such as NMP and DMF, these solvents are toxic in nature. Therefore, further studies are required to synthesize environment-friendly graphene inks with suitable functionalization as well as by selecting different mixtures of solvents for achieving a concentrated and stable dispersion of graphene. Composite inks of graphene with metal nanoparticles as well as with conducting polymer have special importance in ink preparation. Graphene decorated with metal nanoparticles will improve the conductivity. Therefore, more research is required to develop such types of ink. Carbon nanotubes represent another carbon based material, which is very useful in electronic applications. Both metallic and semiconducting properties of CNT make them suitable for transistor, sensor, and supercapacitor applications. But it is difficult to achieve well dispersed CNTs. So they require surface functionalization with organic compounds for dispersion. Here also more research is required to prepare well dispersed and concentrated environment-friendly CNT inks.
Noticeably much research is still required to develop stable and printable inks of different functional materials such as metals, conducting polymers, carbon based materials as well as composite materials for achieving high resolution printing patterns to design flexible sensors, transistors, batteries and supercapacitors for flexible applications. Without any doubt, the huge potential in the field of printing electronics will provide opportunities for future research in materials, methods and related topics in materials science as well as in engineering disciplines.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Govt. of India for its support for this work (Ref. No: 15012/1/2013-PC-1 dt. 26.3.13).
References
J. Chopra, Analysis of lithography based approaches in development of semiconductors, Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol., 2014, 6, 61–72 Search PubMed .

          S. M. F. Cruz, L. A. Rocha and J. C. Viana, Printing Technologies on Flexible Substrates for Printed Electronics, Flexible Electronics, IntechOpen,  2018 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, 
            et al., Fabrication of transparent multilayer circuits by inkjet printing, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(7), 1420–1426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, 
            et al., Inkjet printing bendable circuits based on an oil–water interface reaction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 445, 391–397 CrossRef CAS .
N. Komuro, 
            et al., Inkjet printed (bio) chemical sensing devices, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2013, 405(17), 5785–5805 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kukkola, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed gas sensors: metal decorated WO3 nanoparticles and their gas sensing properties, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(34), 17878–17886 RSC .
M. Mizukami, 
            et al., Flexible organic light-emitting diode displays driven by inkjet-printed high-mobility organic thin-film transistors, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 39(1), 39–42 CAS .
F. Templier, B. Aventurier, P. Demars, J.-L. Botrel and P. Martin, Fabrication of high performance low temperature poly-silicon backplanes on metal foil for flexible active-matrix organic light emission diode displays, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515(19), 7428–7432,  DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2006.11.197 .
X. Peng, 
            et al., Perovskite and organic solar cells fabricated by inkjet printing: progress and prospects, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(41), 1703704 CrossRef .
S. Chung, K. Cho and T. Lee, Recent Progress in Inkjet-Printed Thin-Film Transistors, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801445 CrossRef .
J. Sun, 
            et al., Printable nanomaterials for the fabrication of high-performance supercapacitors, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(7), 528 CrossRef .
Y.-L. Tai and Z.-G. Yang, Fabrication of paper-based conductive patterns for flexible electronics by direct-writing, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(16), 5938–5943 RSC .
S. Jeong, 
            et al., Stable aqueous based Cu nanoparticle ink for printing well-defined highly conductive features on a plastic substrate, Langmuir, 2011, 27(6), 3144–3149 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Fang and M. M. Tentzeris, Surface Modification of Polyimide Films for Inkjet-Printing of Flexible Electronic Devices, Flexible Electronics, IntechOpen,  2018 Search PubMed .
W. A. MacDonald, 
            et al., Latest advances in substrates for flexible electronics, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2007, 15(12), 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Tai, et al., Control of droplet formation in inkjet printing using Ohnesorge number category: materials and processes. 2008 10th Electronics Packaging Technology Conference. IEEE, 2008.
J. R. Castrejón-Pita, 
            et al., A simple large-scale droplet generator for studies of inkjet printing, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79(7), 075108 CrossRef .
T. Lim, 
            et al., Experimental study on spreading and evaporation of inkjet printed pico-liter droplet on a heated substrate, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2009, 52(1–2), 431–441 CrossRef CAS .
B. Derby and N. Reis, Inkjet printing of highly loaded particulate suspensions, MRS Bull., 2003, 28(11), 815–818 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Enhanced Coffee-Ring Effect via Substrate Roughness in Evaporation of Colloidal Droplets, Adv. Condens. Matter Phys., 2018, 2018, 9795654 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, 
            et al., Recent advances in controlling the depositing morphologies of inkjet droplets, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(51), 28086–28099 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tortorich and J.-W. Choi, Inkjet printing of carbon nanotubes, Nanomaterials, 2013, 3(3), 453–468 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Tan, 
            et al., Metallic Nanoparticle Inks for 3D Printing of Electronics, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1800831 CrossRef .

          E. Hrehorova, et al., The properties of conducting polymers and substrates for printed electronics. NIP & Digital Fabrication Conference. Vol. 2005. No. 3. Society for Imaging Science and Technology, 2005.
A. Kamyshny, J. Steinke and S. Magdassi, Metal-based inkjet inks for printed electronics, Open Appl. Phys. J., 2011, 4(1), 19–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, 
            et al., Fracture and failure of nanoparticle monolayers and multilayers, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(2), 826–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Salomoni, 
            et al., Antibacterial effect of silver nanoparticles in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Nanotechnol., Sci. Appl., 2017, 10, 115 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang and C. Wang, Graphene and the related conductive inks for flexible electronics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(30), 7193–7207 RSC .
K. Bradley, P. G. Jean-Christophe and G. Grüner, Flexible nanotube electronics, Nano Lett., 2003, 3(10), 1353–1355 CrossRef CAS .
B. Marinho, 
            et al., Electrical conductivity of compacts of graphene, multi-wall carbon nanotubes, carbon black, and graphite powder, Powder Technol., 2012, 221, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Falkovsky, Optical properties of graphene, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2008, 129(1), 012004 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, 
            et al., Liquid-Phase exfoliation of graphene: An overview on exfoliation media, techniques, and challenges, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(11), 942 CrossRef .
D. Rossouw, 
            et al., Metallic and semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes: Differentiating individual SWCNTs by their carbon 1s spectra, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(12), 10965–10972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. S. Chang, Synthesis of free-standing carbon nanotube electrodes using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition, 2016 IEEE International Conference on Plasma Science (ICOPS), IEEE, 2016.
P. X. Hou, 
            et al., Carbon nanotubes prepared by anodic aluminum oxide template method, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57(2–3), 187–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Ausman, 
            et al., Organic solvent dispersions of single-walled carbon nanotubes: toward solutions of pristine nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104(38), 8911–8915 CrossRef CAS .
B. Derby, Inkjet printing of functional and structural materials: fluid property requirements, feature stability, and resolution, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 395–414 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Martin, S. D. Hoath and I. M. Hutchings, Inkjet printing-the physics of manipulating liquid jets and drops, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2008, 105(1), 012001 CrossRef .
J. E. Fromm, Numerical calculation of the fluid dynamics of drop-on-demand jets, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1984, 28(3), 322–333 Search PubMed .
N. Reis and B. Derby, Ink jet deposition of ceramic suspensions: Modeling and experiments of droplet formation, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2000, 625 Search PubMed .
D. Jang, D. Kim and J. Moon, Influence of fluid physical properties on ink-jet printability, Langmuir, 2009, 25(5), 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and B. Derby, Experimental study of the parameters for stable drop-on-demand inkjet performance, Phys. Fluids, 2019, 31(3), 032004 CrossRef .
B. He, 
            et al., The roles of wettability and surface tension in droplet formation during inkjet printing, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 11841 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. C. Duineveld, et al., Ink-jet printing of polymer light-emitting devices, Organic Light-Emitting Materials and Devices V, International Society for Optics and Photonics,  2002, vol. 4464 Search PubMed .
C. D. Stow and M. G. Hadfield, An experimental investigation of fluid flow resulting from the impact of a water drop with an unyielding dry surface, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1981, 373, 419–441 CrossRef .
Z.-Q. Zhu, 
            et al., Influence of bond number on behaviors of liquid drops deposited onto solid substrates, Microgravity Sci. Technol., 2012, 24(3), 181–188 CrossRef .
R. Rioboo, M. Marengo and C. Tropea, Time evolution of liquid drop impact onto solid, dry surfaces, Exp. Fluids, 2002, 33(1), 112–124 CrossRef .
L. H. Tanner, The spreading of silicone oil drops on horizontal surfaces, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1979, 12(9), 1473 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pasandideh-Fard, 
            et al., Capillary effects during droplet impact on a solid surface, Phys. Fluids, 1996, 8(3), 650–659 CrossRef CAS .
J. Eggers, Nonlinear dynamics and breakup of free-surface flows, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1997, 69(3), 865 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Deegan, 
            et al., Capillary flow as the cause of ring stains from dried liquid drops, Nature, 1997, 389(6653), 827 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hisatake, S. Tanaka and Y. Aizawa, Evaporation rate of water in a vessel, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 73(11), 7395–7401 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Birdi, D. T. Vu and A. Winter, A study of the evaporation rates of small water drops placed on a solid surface, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93(9), 3702–3703 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Peiss, Evaporation of small water drops maintained at constant volume, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 65(12), 5235–5237 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Wong, 
            et al., Nanochromatography driven by the coffee ring effect, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83(6), 1871–1873 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, C.-M. Ho and T.-S. Wong, Minimal size of coffee ring structure, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114(16), 5269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Danov, 
            et al., Interactions between particles with an undulated contact line at a fluid interface: Capillary multipoles of arbitrary order, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 287(1), 121–134 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Loudet, 
            et al., Capillary interactions between anisotropic colloidal particles, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94(1), 018301 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bowden, 
            et al., Self-assembly of microscale objects at a liquid/liquid interface through lateral capillary forces, Langmuir, 2001, 17(5), 1757–1765 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Yunker, 
            et al., Suppression of the coffee-ring effect by shape-dependent capillary interactions, Nature, 2011, 476(7360), 308–311 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Loudet, G. Y. Arjun and B. Pouligny, Wetting and contact lines of micrometer-sized ellipsoids, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97(1), 018304 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kaya, V. A. Belyi and M. Muthukumar, Pattern formation in drying droplets of polyelectrolyte and salt, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133(11), 114905 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu and R. G. Larson, Marangoni effect reverses coffee-ring depositions, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(14), 7090–7094 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gugliotti, M. S. Baptista and M. J. Politi, Surface tension gradients induced by temperature: The thermal Marangoni effect, J. Chem. Educ., 2004, 81(6), 824 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Mayer, Dependence of surface tension on temperature, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38(8), 1803–1808 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miller, P. Joos and V. B. Fainerman, Dynamic surface and interfacial tensions of surfactant and polymer solutions, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 1994, 49, 249–302 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, W. Hu and S. Xiao, Size effect on the thermodynamic properties of silver nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(7), 2359–2369 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cui, 
            et al., Gold nanoparticle ink suitable for electric-conductive pattern fabrication using in ink-jet printing technology, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 358(1–3), 35–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kang, 
            et al., Inkjet printed electronics using copper nanoparticle ink, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2010, 21(11), 1213–1220 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, 
            et al., Corrosion protection of electrically conductive surfaces, Metals, 2012, 2(4), 450–477 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Pourmortazavi, 
            et al., Procedure optimization for green synthesis of silver nanoparticles by aqueous extract of Eucalyptus oleosa, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 136, 1249–1254 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mulfinger, 
            et al., Synthesis and study of silver nanoparticles, J. Chem. Educ., 2007, 84(2), 322 CrossRef .
M. Zaarour, 
            et al., Photochemical preparation of silver nanoparticles supported on zeolite crystals, Langmuir, 2014, 30(21), 6250–6256 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Tung, 
            et al., Sensing technique of silver nanoparticles as labels for immunoassay using liquid electrode plasma atomic emission spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84(3), 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, B. S. Rao and J.-M. Nunzi, A dye functionalized silver–silica core–shell nanoparticle organic light emitting diode, Org. Electron., 2011, 12(7), 1279–1284 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Kulkarni, 
            et al., Plasmon-enhanced charge carrier generation in organic photovoltaic films using silver nanoprisms, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(4), 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Cuong, H. M. T. Nguyen and M. T. Nguyen, Theoretical modeling of optical properties of Ag 8 and Ag 14 silver clusters embedded in an LTA sodalite zeolite cavity, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(37), 15404–15415 RSC .
Á. L. Nogueira, 
            et al., Synthesis and characterization of silver nanoparticles produced with a bifunctional stabilizing agent, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(9), 3426–3434 CrossRef .
H. Wang, 
            et al., Mechanisms of PVP in the preparation of silver nanoparticles, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 94(2), 449–453 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., Synthesis of monodisperse silver nanoparticles for ink-jet printed flexible electronics, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22(42), 425601 CrossRef .
M. C. Dang, T. M. D. Dang and E. Fribourg-Blanc, Silver nanoparticles ink synthesis for conductive patterns fabrication using inkjet printing technology, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 6(1), 015003 Search PubMed .
T. M. D. Dang, 
            et al., Influence of surfactant on the preparation of silver nanoparticles by polyol method, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3(3), 035004 Search PubMed .
M. Vaseem, 
            et al., Inkjet printed fractal-connected electrodes with silver nanoparticle ink, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(6), 3300–3307 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shen, 
            et al., Preparation of solid silver nanoparticles for inkjet printed flexible electronics with high conductivity, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(3), 1622–1628 RSC .
D. Kim, 
            et al., Direct writing of silver conductive patterns: Improvement of film morphology and conductance by controlling solvent compositions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89(26), 264101 CrossRef .
S. Magdassi, 
            et al., Triggering the sintering of silver nanoparticles at room temperature, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(4), 1943–1948 CrossRef CAS .
V. Dua, 
            et al., All-organic vapor sensor using inkjet-printed reduced graphene oxide, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49(12), 2154–2157 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, 
            et al., Graphene-based conducting inks for direct inkjet printing of flexible conductive patterns and their applications in electric circuits and chemical sensors, Nano Res., 2011, 4(7), 675–684 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Shin, J.-Y. Hong and J. Jang, Micropatterning of Graphene Sheets by Inkjet Printing and Its Wideband Dipole-Antenna Application, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(18), 2113–2118 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Le, 
            et al., Graphene supercapacitor electrodes fabricated by inkjet printing and thermal reduction of graphene oxide, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13(4), 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kong, 
            et al., Temperature-dependent electrical properties of graphene inkjet-printed on flexible materials, Langmuir, 2012, 28(37), 13467–13472 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, 
            et al., Scalable, self-aligned printing of flexible graphene micro-supercapacitors, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700285 CrossRef .
R. R. Nair, 
            et al., Fine structure constant defines visual transparency of graphene, Science, 2008, 320(5881), 1308 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, 
            et al., A roadmap for graphene, Nature, 2012, 490(7419), 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, 
            et al., Two-dimensional gas of massless Dirac fermions in graphene, Nature, 2005, 438(7065), 197–200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, 
            et al., Experimental observation of the quantum Hall effect and Berry's phase in graphene, Nature, 2005, 438(7065), 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, 
            et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films, Science, 2004, 306(5696), 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
P. Blake, 
            et al., Graphene-based liquid crystal device, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(6), 1704–1708 CrossRef .
W. J. Hyun, 
            et al., All-printed, foldable organic thin-film transistors on glassine paper, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(44), 7058–7064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rahimi, 
            et al., Flexible supercapacitor based on MnO2 coated laser carbonized electrodes, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2015, 660(1), 012044 CrossRef .
J. M. Tour, Top-down versus bottom-up fabrication of graphene-based electronics, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26(1), 163–171 CrossRef .
W. S. Hummers Jr and R. E. Offeman, Preparation of graphitic oxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80(6), 1339 CrossRef .
N. I. Zaaba, 
            et al., Synthesis of graphene oxide using modified hummers method: solvent influence, Procedia Eng., 2017, 184, 469–477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, 
            et al., High-yield production of graphene by liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3(9), 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, 
            et al., Processable aqueous dispersions of graphene nanosheets, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3(2), 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, 
            et al., Inkjet printing of high conductivity, flexible graphene patterns, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(8), 1347–1351 CrossRef CAS .
F. Torrisi, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed graphene electronics, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(4), 2992–3006 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei, 
            et al., Properties of graphene inks stabilized by different functional groups, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22(24), 245702 CrossRef .
J. Li, 
            et al., Efficient inkjet printing of graphene, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(29), 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pan, 
            et al., Sustainable production of highly conductive multilayer graphene ink for wireless connectivity and IoT applications, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 5197 CrossRef .
H. J. Salavagione, 
            et al., Identification of high performance solvents for the sustainable processing of graphene, Green Chem., 2017, 19(11), 2550–2560 RSC .
Y. Hernandez, 
            et al., Measurement of multicomponent solubility parameters for graphene facilitates solvent discovery, Langmuir, 2009, 26(5), 3208–3213 CrossRef .
S. Wang, 
            et al., Wettability and surface free energy of graphene films, Langmuir, 2009, 25(18), 11078–11081 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, 
            et al., Enhanced conductivity, adhesion, and environmental stability of printed graphene inks with nitrocellulose, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(5), 2332–2340 CrossRef CAS .
K. Arapov, R. Abbel and H. Friedrich, Inkjet printing of graphene, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 173, 323–336 RSC .
M. Michel, C. Biswas and A. B. Kaul, High-performance ink-jet printed graphene resistors formed with environmentally-friendly surfactant-free inks for extreme thermal environments, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 6, 16–21 CrossRef .
E. B. Secor, 
            et al., Rapid and versatile photonic annealing of graphene inks for flexible printed electronics, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(42), 6683–6688 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Xu, 
            et al., Ag–graphene hybrid conductive ink for writing electronics, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25(5), 055201 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed highly conductive transparent patterns with water based Ag-doped graphene, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(44), 19095–19101 RSC .
Y. Seekaew, 
            et al., Low-cost and flexible printed graphene–PEDOT: PSS gas sensor for ammonia detection, Org. Electron., 2014, 15(11), 2971–2981 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chi, 
            et al., Freestanding graphene paper supported three-dimensional porous graphene–polyaniline nanocomposite synthesized by inkjet printing and in flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(18), 16312–16319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Snow, 
            et al., High-mobility carbon-nanotube thin-film transistors on a polymeric substrate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86(3), 033105 CrossRef .
Q. Cao, 
            et al., Medium-scale carbon nanotube thin-film integrated circuits on flexible plastic substrates, Nature, 2008, 454(7203), 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, 
            et al., Highly Stretchable, Integrated Supercapacitors Based on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Films with Continuous Reticulate Architecture, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(7), 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, 
            et al., Stretchable supercapacitors based on buckled single-walled carbon-nanotube macrofilms, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(47), 4793–4797 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed bifunctional carbon nanotubes for pH sensing, Mater. Lett., 2016, 176, 68–70 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, 
            et al., Flexible, stretchable, transparent conducting films made from superaligned carbon nanotubes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20(6), 885–891 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, E. W. Wong and C. M. Lieber, Probing electrical transport in nanomaterials:
conductivity of individual carbon nanotubes, Nature, 1996, 384, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
R. Martel, 
            et al., Ambipolar electrical transport in semiconducting single-wall carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87(25), 256805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-M. Lin, J. Appenzeller and P. Avouris, Ambipolar-to-unipolar conversion of carbon nanotube transistors by gate structure engineering, Nano Lett., 2004, 4(5), 947–950 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sekitani, 
            et al., Stretchable active-matrix organic light-emitting diode display using printable elastic conductors, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8(6), 494–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi, 
            et al., Skin-like pressure and strain sensors based on transparent elastic films of carbon nanotubes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6(12), 788–792 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gracia-Espino, 
            et al., Electrical transport and field-effect transistors using inkjet-printed SWCNT films having different functional side groups, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(6), 3318–3324 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Nguyen, 
            et al., Dispersion of denatured carbon nanotubes by using a dimethylformamide solution, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2(3), 035015 Search PubMed .
P. Beecher, 
            et al., Ink-jet printing of carbon nanotube thin film transistors, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102(4), 043710 CrossRef .
H. Okimoto, 
            et al., Tunable Carbon Nanotube Thin-Film Transistors Produced Exclusively via Inkjet Printing, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(36), 3981–3986 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kordás, 
            et al., Inkjet printing of electrically conductive patterns of carbon nanotubes, Small, 2006, 2(8–9), 1021–1025 CrossRef .
J.-W. Han, 
            et al., Carbon nanotube ink for writing on cellulose paper, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 50, 249–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, 
            et al., Three-dimensional printing of highly conductive carbon nanotube microarchitectures with fluid ink, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(9), 8879–8887 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Shin, 
            et al., A bioactive carbon nanotube-based ink for printing 2D and 3D flexible electronics, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(17), 3280–3289 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Small and M. in het Panhuis, Inkjet printing of transparent, electrically conducting single-walled carbon-nanotube composites, Small, 2007, 3(9), 1500–1503 CrossRef CAS .

          L.-H. Liu, et al., Preparation of carbon nanotube ink via organic hydrazine treatment, 2014 9th International Microsystems, Packaging, Assembly and Circuits Technology Conference (IMPACT), IEEE, 2014, pp. 426–429.
S. G. Bucella, 
            et al., Inkjet Printed Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Based Ambipolar and Unipolar Transistors for High-Performance Complementary Logic Circuits, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2(6), 1600094 CrossRef .
L. Cai, 
            et al., Super-stretchable, transparent carbon nanotube-based capacitive strain sensors for human motion detection, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3048 CrossRef .
W. Wongwiriyapan, 
            et al., Single-walled carbon nanotube thin-film sensor for ultrasensitive gas detection, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44(4L), L482 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, A. K. Sood and N. Kumar, Carbon nanotube flow sensors, Science, 2003, 299(5609), 1042–1044 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Le, et al., Inkjet-printed graphene-based wireless gas sensor modules. Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC), 2012 IEEE 62nd. IEEE, 2012, pp. 1003–1008.
P. Labroo and Y. Cui, Graphene nano-ink biosensor arrays on a microfluidic paper for multiplexed detection of metabolites, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 813, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. Andersson, 
            et al., Inkjet printed silver nanoparticle humidity sensor with memory effect on paper, IEEE Sens. J., 2012, 12(6), 1901–1905 Search PubMed .
S. J. Wind, 
            et al., Vertical scaling of carbon nanotube field-effect transistors using top gate electrodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80(20), 3817–3819 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takenobu, 
            et al., Ink-jet printing of carbon nanotube thin-film transistors on flexible plastic substrates, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2(2), 025005 CrossRef .
J. Li, 
            et al., Ink-jet printed thin-film transistors with carbon nanotube channels shaped in long strips, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109(8), 084915 CrossRef .
S. Y. Cho, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed organic thin film transistors based on TIPS pentacene with insulating polymers, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(5), 914–923 RSC .
M. H. Ervin, L. T. Le and W. Y. Lee, Inkjet-printed flexible graphene-based supercapacitor, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 147, 610–616 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed energy storage device using graphene/polyaniline inks, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Delekta, 
            et al., Inkjet printed highly transparent and flexible graphene micro-supercapacitors, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(21), 6998–7005 RSC .
T. M. Eggenhuisen, 
            et al., High efficiency, fully inkjet printed organic solar cells with freedom of design, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(14), 7255–7262 RSC .
T. M. Eggenhuisen, 
            et al., Digital fabrication of organic solar cells by Inkjet printing using non-halogenated solvents, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 364–372 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mathies, 
            et al., Inkjet-Printed Triple Cation Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(5), 1834–1839 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed metal oxide nanoparticles on elastomer for strain-adaptive transmissive electrochromic energy storage systems, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19(1), 759–770 CrossRef .
S. Lawes, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed silicon as high performance anodes for Li-ion batteries, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 313–321 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, 
            et al., Scalable fabrication and integration of graphene microsupercapacitors through full inkjet printing, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(8), 8249–8256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Milroy, 
            et al., Inkjet-Printed Lithium–Sulfur Microcathodes for All-Printed, Integrated Nanomanufacturing, Small, 2017, 13(11), 1603786 CrossRef .
K.-H. Choi, 
            et al., All-inkjet-printed, solid-state flexible supercapacitors on paper, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(9), 2812–2821 RSC .
J. Diao, 
            et al., Flexible Supercapacitor Based on Inkjet-Printed Graphene@ Polyaniline Nanocomposites with Ultrahigh Capacitance, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2018, 303(6), 1800092 CrossRef .
A. Malik and B. Kandasubramanian, Flexible Polymeric Substrates for Electronic Applications, Polym. Rev., 2018, 58(4), 630–667 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ji, 
            et al., Inkjet printed flexible electronics on paper substrate with reduced graphene oxide/carbon black ink, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29(15), 13032–13042 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, 
            et al., Stretchable, porous, and conductive energy textiles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(2), 708–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Van Horn and H. Henning Winter, Conoscopic measurement of birefringence and orientation in biaxially stretched polymer films and sheets, Macromolecules, 2003, 36(22), 8513–8521 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Gohil, Morphology-permeability relationships in biaxially oriented Pet films: A relationship between oxygen permeability and PROF, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1993, 48(9), 1649–1664 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zardetto, 
            et al., Substrates for flexible electronics: A practical investigation on the electrical, film flexibility, optical, temperature, and solvent resistance properties, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49(9), 638–648 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Laxmidhar Nayak
	Laxmidhar Nayak obtained his MSc degree from Ravenshaw University and Master of Philosophy (MPhil) from Utkal University in physics. He is currently a PhD scholar at the Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM), an R&D wing of the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET). His research interest includes synthesis of nanoparticle inks for inkjet printing in flexible electronic applications.

Smita Mohanty
	Dr Smita Mohanty is a Principal Scientist, Director, School of Advanced Research in Polymers (SARP), LARPM, CIPET, Bhubaneswar. She received her PhD and DSc degrees from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar. She has more than 13 years of research and teaching experience. Her research areas include E-waste recycling, biopolymers from natural resources, polymer electrolytes, etc. She has published more than 150 papers in major international journals and 5 Indian patents. She has supervised more than 15 PhD scholars and successfully completed about 15 research projects.

Sanjay Kumar Nayak
	Prof S. K. Nayak is the Director General of the Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET). He is a dual PhD holder in the fields of polymers and advanced materials. He also has a DSc in the field of bio-based composites. His main research interest includes polymer blends, composites, biopolymers, recycling technology, coatings and adhesives. He has published more than 400 research papers in major international journals, 16 books/book chapters and 15 patents. He has supervised more than 55 PhD scholars and 80 M. Tech students.

Ananthakumar Ramadoss
	Ananthakumar Ramadoss is a Scientist (Jr) at the Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM), SARP, CIPET, Bhubaneswar, India. He received his PhD degree in Mechanical Engineering from Jeju National University, South Korea. He was a Alexander Von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Konstanz, Germany, and a Postdoctoral fellow at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea, as well as a research fellow at the CSIR-CECRI, India. His research interests mainly focus on the development of nanostructured materials and their applications in supercapacitors, nanogenerators, self-powered systems, corrosion protection and bio-implant applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of inkjet printing, process and applications.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)


Ethylene glycol (0.15) + water (0.85)	1059	3.11	54.8	51.08	8.69	17.32
Ethylene glycol (0.25) + water (0.75)	1068	3.69	47.8	43.42	10.07	13.68
Ethyl alcohol (0.75) + ethylene glycol (0.25)	866	4.83	28.9	26.89	13.47	7.32
Ethylene glycol (0.5) + water (0.5)	1094	7.61	45.8	21.56	10.76	6.57
Ethylene glycol (0.75) + water (0.25)	1106	12.3	45.6	13.49	10.91	4.08
Glycerol (0.66) + water (0.33)	1172	16.05	56.2	10.95	9.37	3.57
Diethylene glycol (0.5) + water (0.5)	1111	22.0	41.4	7.58	12.08	2.17
Diethylene glycol	1118	35.1	44.8	4.78	11.23	1.43

 	Fig. 2  Phase diagram for printability in a parameter space of Z and the jet Weber number, Wej*. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the AIP Publishing. *Here in this image Wej refers to the Weber number. In the rest of the paper we designate Weber number as NWe.	 
	(4)
(NWe)1/2(NRe)1/4 = f(r)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Satellite drop formation during printing. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from the IOP Publishing.	 
rate of evaporation = a1 + a2(rb)	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the evaporation process, depicting the capillary flow induced by pinned edges. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Final distribution images of (a) ellipsoids (α = 3.5) and (b) spheres (α = 1.0) after evaporation. ‘α’ refers to the aspect ratios of the major and minor axes of the drop. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV spectra of the synthesized silver nanoparticles: (a) reduced by adipicdihydrazide (456 nm, curve I), dextrose (428 nm, curve II) and the mixed reductants (408 nm, curve III) respectively; (b) the PVP/AgNO3 mass ratios were 3:1 (410 nm, curve IV), 2:1 (412 nm, curve V) and 1:1 (413 nm, curve VI) with the same mixed reductants. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  Infrared spectra of pure PVP and silver nanoparticles coated with PVP. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  UV-visible spectra of Ag nanoparticles at different temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TGA spectrum of Ag nanoparticles capped with PVP. The inset is the structure of PVP. (b) FTIR spectra of PVP and Ag nanoparticles capped with PVP. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  FE-SEM images of Ag nanoparticle films with different annealing temperatures: (a) as-printed and annealed at (b) 100, (c) 150, and (d) 200 °C. (e) Resistivity variation of the Ag conductive lines with different annealing temperatures. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  XRD pattern of silver nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  TG/DTA of silver nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

5	42.16	1.056	2.51	9.94
10	43.37	1.074	2.86	8.93
15	45.29	1.123	3.32	8.04
20	45.69	1.158	3.62	7.52
25	46.65	1.218	4.03	7.00

 	Fig. 13  Electrical resistivity of printed silver patterns as a function of printing time and temperature. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Three-dimensional microscopic images of ink-jet printed single dots obtained from conductive inks with different solvent compositions: (a) 0, (b) 16, and (c) 32 wt% EG. (d) Represents the two-dimensional profiles of corresponding compositions. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from the AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of different ink preparation methods. (a) Exfoliation of graphite powder in ethanol/EC using probe sonication and isolation of graphene/EC powder. (b) Removal of residual large graphite flakes by sedimentation and (c) salt-induced flocculation of graphene/EC. (d) An ink prepared by dispersion of the graphene/EC powder in 85:15 cyclohexanone/terpineol. (e) Prepared graphene ink. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of (a) the CNT film and (b) the printed electrode structure. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 17  Electrical properties at different CNT concentrations: (a) metallic, (b) transistor. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic diagram (left) and digital photograph (right) of graphene based biosensor arrays on a microfluidic paper. (b) Mechanism of biosensor detection. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Transfer characteristics of single-strip SWCNT TFTs with various strip lengths. (b) ON/OFF current ratio and ON current with different channel lengths and (c) ON current as a function of channel length. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from the AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 20  Transfer characteristics of (a) five- and (b) ten-strip SWCNT TFTs. Both (a) and (b) comprise ten independent devices. (c) Output characteristics of a ten-strip SWCNT TFT. (d) Dependence of the ON/OFF current ratio on ON current for SWCNT TFTs with different strip configurations. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from the AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 21  Representation of average mobility of the TIPS pentacene/APC TFTs and the TIPS pentacene/APC ratios and the Gibbs free energy of mixing. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Schematic representation of the supercapacitor device structure. CV profiles of (B) NGP and (C) NGP/PANI electrodes at different scan rates in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. (D) Specific capacitance vs. scan rate in the two electrode system. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism explaining the electrochemical performance of anodes prepared with different binders. When using the PEDOT:PSS binder the SiNPs remain electrically connected throughout charging/discharging and are therefore able to maintain a stable cycling capacity. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  Summary of PET and PEN properties relevant to flexible electronics. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
