A promising technology: solar-driven interfacial evaporation with facilitation strategies, multifunctional applications and perspectives  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CC02452K View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3CC02452K
(Highlight)
Chem. Commun., 2023, Advance Article A promising technology: solar-driven interfacial evaporation with facilitation strategies, multifunctional applications and perspectives
Xinyan Tan, 
He Zhang, 
Lele Li, 
Yuqing Sun and 
Jian Li*
Key Laboratory of Eco-functional Polymer Materials of the Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northwest Normal University, Lanzhou 730070, P. R. China. E-mail: jianli83@126.com; lijian@nwnu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86 0931 7971533
Received 
20th May 2023
, Accepted 6th July 2023First published on 6th July 2023AbstractSolar-driven interfacial evaporation (SDIE) technology has evolved rapidly in the last decade and is an exciting scientific topic. With this high level of attention, it is necessary to continuously summarize previous research to develop SDIE technology well. Therefore, we have prepared this review article to summarize the latest progress in this field. First, photothermal conversion materials are introduced, which play an essential role in SDIE, including plasma metal nanoparticles, semiconductors, and carbon-based and polymer-based materials, and their photothermal mechanisms are explained. Second, strategies to improve SDIE performances, such as enhanced light absorption, water transmission channel design, and thermal management, are discussed, which can well modulate the evaporator performance and improve energy utilization efficiency. Subsequently, the applications of SDIE in various aspects including desalination, sterilization, sewage treatment, and simultaneous generation of water and electricity are presented in detail. At the end, we summarize some of the current bottlenecks encountered by SDIE, offer some insights into the ideal SDIE evaporator, and provide an outlook on the future development of SDIE technology. The potential of SDIE is being demonstrated in a variety of applications and it promises to be a green, economical solution to energy and water shortage problems in the future. This review aims to promote the research and practical application of SDIE and contribute to its development.
1. Introduction
With the rapid increase in the world's population and the development of science and technology, water consumption is increasing and water has now become an indispensable part of people's lives and industries.1 However, increasing water pollution and the long-standing problem of improper water management have led to a gradual increase in various pollutant-related diseases, which are beginning to threaten human health and survival.2 These have become major global concerns in recent decades. Therefore, we must recognize the importance of water resources and ensure that they are protected through the development of new technologies. To alleviate this serious problem, scientists have developed various advanced desalination technologies to obtain water resources,3 such as reverse osmosis,4 multistage flash evaporation,5,6 multi-effect distillation,7–9 mechanical vapor compression,10 and electrodialysis.11 However, these technologies frequently require large amounts of fossil energy support, and the consumption of fossil energy can produce environmentally harmful by-products,12 which is not in line with the current concept of environmentally friendly and sustainable development. Therefore, there is an urgent need for clean water production without pollution.
Solar energy is an inexhaustible green energy source that has been successfully utilized in areas such as photovoltaic power generation.13 In contrast to traditional fossil energy sources, solar energy does not produce polluting by-products during its use. It is this advantage that has attracted attention for a recent study on the application of solar energy. Neumann et al. directly and efficiently generated steam by irradiating nanoparticles dispersed in water with light. It should be noted that in this experiment, most of the light was shone directly on the water surface instead of on the nanoparticles, the light energy was underutilized, and thus the photothermal conversion efficiency was low.14 In order to improve the efficiency of photothermal conversion, Chen's group investigated the concentrated use of sunlight.15 They used a photothermal conversion material that acted as a light-absorbing and heat-generating layer, as shown in Fig. 1, and a large amount of heat was concentrated here to efficiently drive steam generation. Notably, this research opened the door to solar-driven interfacial evaporation (SDIE) technology. In the following decade, the steam generated by thermal positioning received strong attention and was once considered the most promising solution for clean water production.16–18 For the current SDIE system, the heating method mainly adopts interfacial heat concentration. Compared with bottom heating and volume heating, as shown in Fig. 2, the photothermal conversion and interfacial heating are limited to the liquid–gas interface, which has a better evaporation performance.19 For the SDIE process, the light energy is first absorbed by the top layer of the light-absorbing material and converted into thermal energy. Second, the thermal energy is provided to the bulk water in the form of thermal transfer. Finally, the water absorbs the energy for evaporation. Briefly, the SDIE system consists of three parts: (1) photothermal conversion and interfacial evaporation; (2) water transmission channel; (3) thermal management. The photothermal conversion layer is the engine of the SDIE system, providing the power source for the rapid evaporation of water. Notably, the photothermal conversion material is vital in absorbing light energy and converting it into heat energy, which is of great help in evaporating water efficiently. Therefore, careful selection and use of high-quality photothermal conversion materials in SDIE systems is critical. As for photothermal conversion materials, advances in materials science have produced many raw materials with excellent properties, such as carbon-based materials,20–22 semiconductor materials,23 plasma metallic nanomaterials,24 and polymer materials.25 The materials mentioned above are capable of high absorption of the full solar spectrum, which is very helpful for generating high photothermal conversion efficiency, and this is exactly what SDIE needs. In the water transfer layer, a delicate balance between transferring enough water to meet evaporative demand and minimizing thermal losses is important. On the one hand, too much water transfer can dissipate heat into bulk water. On the other hand, too little water transfer can lead to thermal dissipation without efficient use. Therefore, when designing water transfer channels, the focus should be on meeting evaporative demand while reducing thermal loss. The thermal management layer is not independent and can be both macro and micro for the current SDIE system, which is described in detail later. Since thermal loss is an unavoidable problem, significant efforts have been made to minimize it, which is a key issue for the appropriate functioning of the SDIE system, and it remains a critical issue that requires continuous attention and improvement. In general, no matter what improvement strategy is adopted, this work aims to improve the performance of the SDIE system, which drives continued research into SDIE,26 regarding the application of SDIE technology, from the beginning of desalination, and the development to hydropower collaborative production, sterilization, and sewage treatment. The application of SDIE in many fields has proven that it has great potential. Therefore, the development of SDIE technology brings new technology for water purification and benefits for society at the same time.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a typical two-layer photothermal interfacial evaporator. The upper layer is the light and heat conversion and evaporation layer, converting sunlight into heat through light-absorbing materials and using the thermal energy for water evaporation through thermal positioning. The lower layer is a thermally isolated layer that locates the heat in the interfacial evaporation layer and does not transfer it to the bulk water. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. 
 Fig. 2  Three types of heating for SDIE: (a) bottom heating evaporation, (b) volumetric heating evaporation, and (c) interfacial heating evaporation. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
In this review, the photothermal mechanism of photothermal conversion materials and their applications are introduced. It also focuses on the use of macroscopic and microscopic structural design strategies to improve the performance of SDIE evaporators. In addition, the current application areas involved in SDIE are highlighted. Finally, the ideal SDIE evaporator is discussed and the view of future SDIE technology development is presented.
2. Photothermal conversion materials and working mechanism
In SDIE, the solar absorbing material is the most indispensable component of the overall evaporation system, which determines the ability of the evaporator to absorb solar energy. Solar absorbing materials undergo a photothermal effect when exposed to light, converting light energy into heat energy. The heat energy is transferred to the interfacial liquid water through thermal localization, the water absorbs heat and undergoes a phase change process to form water steam. In recent years, various photothermal conversion materials for SDIE have been investigated. Among them, the main ones include plasmonic metallic nanoparticles, semiconductor materials, carbon-based materials, and polymeric materials. In this section, the photothermal mechanisms of some photothermal conversion materials are introduced and their applications in SDIE are described.
2.1. Plasma metallic nanomaterials
Metal nanomaterials have excellent photothermal conversion properties due to their unique localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect.27 When the incident light frequency matches the vibrational frequency of the metallic nanoparticle, the absorption of photon energy by free electrons generates collective oscillation and thus LSPR occurs,28 as shown in Fig. 3(a). Subsequently, the hot electrons can relax to the ground state or transfer to other absorbers, releasing energy into the surroundings mainly in the form of heat.29 Thus, in the SDIE system, the plasma metallic nanomaterials generate electron cloud resonance through the LSPR effect, and the accumulated energy is subsequently transmitted in the form of heat.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photothermal conversion mechanism of metal plasma materials. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (b) The selected natural porous wood is perpendicular to the growth direction and its surface is modified by depositing plasma metallic nanomaterials to obtain the photothermal conversion material. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (c) A bionic photothermal evaporator based on polydopamine-silver was prepared by modifying the surface of wood flower. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) Infrared images of the photothermal conversion process of black gold films NPG-6 and NPG-30 at 1 kW m−2 light intensity. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of plasma TiN nanoparticles photothermal conversion material. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2023. 
Zhu et al. prepared a novel photothermal interfacial evaporator based on plasma metal materials by depositing precious metal nanoparticles such as Pd, Au, and Ag on natural porous wood (Fig. 3(b)).30 Due to the LSPR effect and waveguide effect in the porous wood, it has superb light absorption in the wavelength range belonging to the solar spectrum. Taking advantage of the micro and nanopore channels and low thermal conductivity of natural porous wood, the evaporator achieves 85% photothermal conversion efficiency at 10 kW m−2 of sun illumination. Chen et al. prepared a bionic photothermal evaporator based on silver nanoparticles with dopamine coating by mimicking the lotus flower and lotus leaf structures (Fig. 3(c)).31 The evaporator has good photothermal efficiency and water evaporation performance due to the excellent structural distribution from the bionic design. Many biomasses in nature have unique micro-nanostructures that have excellent properties such as in water transport and thermal insulation.32 Therefore, bio-derived and biomimetic design-based photothermal materials in SDIE systems have great potential for application. Zhang et al. fabricated self-supported nanoporous black gold films with a hierarchical structure and ultra-high porosity by a chemical dealloying strategy (Fig. 3(d)).24 Based on the LSPR effect, the hierarchical porous structure endows the film with broad solar absorption, excellent hydrophilicity, and good water transmission properties. Under a light intensity of 1 kW m−2, the evaporation rate was 1.51 kg m−2 h−1 and the photothermal conversion efficiency reached 94.5%. Considering the economic benefits, the further application of precious metal plasma materials has difficulties. Therefore, it is necessary to seek alternative noble metal plasma materials. Wang et al. prepared an efficient photothermal conversion material consisting of plasma titanium nitride (TiN) nanoparticles and semi-reduced graphene oxide (semir-rGO) with excellent thermal stability and wide solar absorption (Fig. 3(e)).33 Under 1 sun illumination, the evaporation rate is 1.76 kg m−2 h−1, and the photothermal conversion efficiency is up to 99.1%. This indicates that the replacement of precious metal plasma materials by cost-effective plasma materials is feasible and shows potential.
2.2. Semiconductor materials
For semiconductor materials, there are unique photothermal properties. When the incident light energy matches the band gap energy of the semiconductor, the valence electron absorbs the photon energy and undergoes an electron leap, resulting in the creation of an electron–hole pair. Subsequently, the electron–hole pair undergoes relaxation and converts most of the energy into heat through non-radiative relaxation (Fig. 4(a)). Semiconductor materials with narrow band gaps are more likely to produce electron–hole pairs and therefore have a broader absorption of the solar spectrum.35 As a consequence, for semiconductor materials, the magnitude of the band gap energy is able to determine their photothermal conversion properties. In addition, the band gap width of semiconductor materials can be controlled by, for example, doping, adding impurities, and structural defects, which regulate the performance of photothermal conversion.36 Semiconductor materials have promising applications in SDIE due to their advantages such as excellent photothermal conversion properties, good chemical stability, abundant raw materials (many exist in nature in the form of ores), and low cost.23 The incident light energy in the short-wave infrared region is below the band gap of silicon (1.12 eV), so silicon has a poor light absorption performance in this region. And note that the incident light below 1.12 eV accounts for 20% of the entire solar spectrum. Hence, Joo et al. proposed a metal–silicon hybrid nanowire (NW) structure to overcome the problem of poor absorption of solar light by silicon (Fig. 4(b)).37 The metal nanostructures on the surface of silicon NWs are capable of producing the LSPR effect, so the hybrid structure can improve the light absorption performance and achieve more than 91% light absorption in the solar spectral range, resulting in excellent photothermal conversion performance. Based on this specific structure, the evaporation rate reached 1.12 kg m−2 h−1 with a photothermal conversion efficiency of 72.8% under 1 sun illumination. Since MoO3 has limited light absorption due to its structure, Bai et al. doped MoO3 with vanadium(V) and changed the color of the sample from white to black, thus preparing a strong light-absorbing material with more than 90% light absorption within the range of 250–2000 nm (Fig. 4(c)).38 Subsequently, MoO3 doped with V 33.3 mol% was used as a photothermal layer for interfacial evaporation experiments, yielding an evaporation rate of 2.01 kg m−2 h−1 and a photothermal conversion efficiency of 93.44%. In addition, semiconductor materials have photocatalytic properties, thus enabling the combination of photothermal interfacial evaporation and photocatalysis for sewage treatment.39
 Fig. 4  (a) Diagram of the electron–hole generation and relaxation mechanism in classical and narrow-bandgap semiconductor materials. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic representation of plasma metal nanostructures for enhanced solar absorption of silicon NWs. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (c) The color transition process (from white to black) of MoO3 doped with different concentrations of V. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
2.3. Carbon-based materials
Carbon-based materials have a high capacity for light absorption in the solar spectrum. In the absorption spectral range, electronic transitions occur, followed by relaxation of excited state electrons, and conversion of light energy into thermal energy via lattice vibrations, thus exhibiting excellent photothermal conversion capabilities (Fig. 5(a)).34,41 In addition, the advantages of carbon-based materials, such as cost-effectiveness, good stability, and abundant variety, have also made them attract wide attention in SDIE technology.42 Recently, carbon-based materials such as carbon nanoparticles,20 carbon powder,21 carbon black,22 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),43–45 and activated carbon (AC),46,47 have been widely used in SDIE. A multilayer carbon fiber fabric interfacial evaporator with high solar absorption (97%) and excellent photothermal conversion performance was prepared by Tong et al. through surface modification of carbon fiber (Fig. 5(b)).48 Benefiting from its multilayer honeycomb structure, the evaporation rate could reach 3.39 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination, and the photothermal conversion efficiency was not less than 93%. Besides, it also has a good evaporation performance in high-concentration brine and organically contaminated sewage. In terms of two-dimensional (2D) carbon-based materials, such as graphene,49,50 GO,51–53 and rGO,54 they have unique characteristics. For example, GO, which is the product of chemical oxidation and exfoliation of pristine graphite powder, has a high concentration of hydroxyl, epoxide, and carboxyl functional groups.55 In addition, their excellent chemical stability and abundant specific surface area provide good performance and potential application prospects.56 Therefore, SDIE is a promising technology for improving evaporation efficiency through the use of 2D carbon-based materials. Yang et al. prepared a hierarchical porous SDIE evaporator based on rGO and CB by three-dimensional (3D) printing technology and used it for desalination (Fig. 5(c)).57 Since the evaporator has many macroporous structures, it shows excellent water transport performance, which is able to solve the problems of water channel blockage and reduced light absorption capacity caused by salt deposition. As a result, the evaporator shows efficient and stable evaporation performance in 10 wt% brine evaporation experiments.
 Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the photothermal conversion mechanism of carbon-based materials. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (b) Illustration of the evaporative layer at the photothermal interface of a multi-layer carbon fiber fabric. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (c) Evaporation performance of rGO/CB evaporators prepared by 3D printing technology for 3.5 wt% (under 25 kW m−2 simulated sun illumination) and 10 wt% (under 8 kW m−2 simulated sun illumination) of brine. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (d) Physical diagram of carbonized eggplant in different arrangement directions. The evaporation direction is vertically upward. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. 
Biomass carbon materials, with their unique natural structure, are also often used for SDIE. Zhang et al. carbonized eggplant to prepare a solar interfacial evaporator based on natural materials (Fig. 5(d)).58 Due to the unique anisotropic structure of eggplant, it has a good performance in water transport and thermal insulation. Under 1 sun illumination, the evaporation rate reached 1.43 kg m−2 h−1, and the photothermal conversion efficiency was 90.6%. The eggplant evaporator also performs well in high-concentration brine with great salt tolerance. In addition, horizontal channel structure evaporators based on polypyrrole (PPy) and polypropylene (PP) fibers were prepared inspired by eggplant, which also had a high evaporation performance (evaporation rate of 1.64 kg m−2 h−1) and salt resistance. In addition, there are also SDIEs made of biomass carbon materials, wood,29 corncob,59 mushrooms,60 loofah,61 coconut,62 bamboo leaf,63 pomelo peels,64 etc.
2.4. Polymeric materials
For polymers, which consist of long carbon-containing molecular chains, the photothermal conversion mechanism is similar to that of carbon-based materials. Electron transitions first occur, and then the lattice vibrations convert light energy into heat energy. Polydopamine (PDA), PPy, polyaniline (PANI) and conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs) have, recently, been used as solar absorbing layers for SDIE due to their excellent solar light absorption and photothermal conversion properties. Zhang et al. constructed an interconnected porous photothermal matrix (IPPM) by combining rGO and PDA as the micro-skeleton (Fig. 6(a)).65 On one hand, the local interfacial activation effect can effectively reduce the evaporation enthalpy of interfacial water molecules. On the other hand, the interconnected porous structure in the IPPM can provide sufficient water transfer properties. As a result, IPPM exhibits a high evaporation performance of 2.2 kg m−2 h−1 with a photothermal conversion efficiency of 86.3% under 1 sun illumination. And IPPM has a good performance in seawater desalination processes. The average evaporation rate in simulated seawater was able to reach 2.1 kg m−2 h−1, and no salt crystals appeared on the evaporator surface. Shi et al. fabricated a 3D porous SDIE by in situ growth of PPy nanoparticles on delignified spent coffee grounds (D-SCG) (Fig. 6(b)).66 Continuous seawater evaporation experiments were performed under 1 sun illumination, demonstrating excellent evaporation and water transport properties. The material was then combined with polylactic acid (PLA) to produce an even more powerful photothermal evaporator using 3D printing technology, which was able to achieve a photothermal conversion efficiency of 92.7%. This shows that the combination of polymers with food waste for desalination has good performance and is also a good, environmentally friendly and economical strategy for waste utilization. Zhao et al. fabricated a solar evaporator with a high evaporation efficiency of 96.6% by modulating the surface of GO with PANI (Fig. 6(c)).25 In particular, the uniform PANI nanocone array was able to suppress the dispersion of GO in water through electrostatic interactions. In addition, the conical structure was able to reflect light multiple times, enhancing light absorption and increasing the evaporation surface area. Due to the advantages of conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs), such as porous structure, physicochemical stability, and low thermal conductivity, Mu et al. reported the first CMP-based photothermal aerogel for SDIE, and the resulting CMP aerogel achieved a photothermal conversion efficiency of up to 81% under 1 sun illumination (Fig. 6(d)).67 Shi et al. prepared CMPs based on porphyrin and aniline via the Buchwald–Hartwig cross-coupling reaction and then impregnated them onto polyurethane sponges as a photothermal conversion layer (Fig. 6(e)).68 The desalination experiments showed good evaporation rates (1.31 kg m−2 h−1) and photothermal conversion efficiencies (86.3%) under 1 kW m−2 simulated sunlight illumination, as well as excellent performance in dye wastewater treatment. Table 1 shows a comparison of currently employed common photothermal conversion materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the IPPM micro-skeleton. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (b) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of microporous PPy@D-SCG. SCG was first delignified to obtain D-SCG, followed by in situ growth of PPy nanoparticles on D-SCG. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. (c) Schematic diagram of the evaporation process at the interface of the PANI/GO photothermal interfacial evaporator. In this case, the dimples have the effect of thermally localizing and reducing the evaporation enthalpy of water. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2023. (d) Schematic representation of the synthesis of CMPs aerogels and their simulated structures. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (e) Photograph of the polyurethane sponge modified with CMPs. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
Table 1 Comparison between different materials regarding SDIE




Type
Materials
Light absorption (%)
Illumination intensity (kW−2)
Evaporation rate/kg m−2 h−1
Photothermal efficiency (%)
Ref.




Semiconductor materials
Doped Si
>91
1
1.12
72.8
37


V-Doped MoO3
>90
1
2.01
93.44
38


Defect-rich HNb3O8/PAM
≈90
1
1.4
91
69


Plasma metallic nanomaterials
Porous wood-Pd/Au/Ag
≈99
10
11.8
85
30


Ag-PDA nanoparticles
98.65
1
2.08
97
31


Black-gold film
75.0–91.4
1
1.51
94.5
24


Plasmonic-TiN/rGO
—
1
1.76
99.1
33


Carbon-based materials
Multilayer carbon fiber fabric
97
1
3.39
93.41–96.69
48


Hollow-carbon-nanotubes
99
1
1.4406
86.8
43


N-Doped lignosulfonate/GO
91.6
1
1.57
95.2
53


rGO/CB
96
8
10.5 (10 wt% NaCl brine)
92
57


Carbonized eggplant
96.6
1
1.64 ((20 wt% NaCl brine))
90.6
58


Polymeric materials
PANI/GO
>93
1
1.42
96.6
25


PDA/GO
97.7
1
2.2
86.3
65


Spent coffee/PPy
95.7
1
1.54
89.1
66


1,3,5-Triethynylbenzene with 1,4-dibromobenzene/4,4′-dibromobiphenyl/CB
—
1
1.3992
81
67


Porphyrin/aniline-based
84.7
1
1.31
86.3
68




3. Improving solar-driven interfacial evaporation strategies
SDIE technology can be broadly divided into three components (Fig. 7): (1) solar absorption; (2) energy conversion and transfer; (3) water evaporation and transfer. Therefore, improvements in these three components will have an impact on the performance of the evaporator. For (1), solar energy is used as the only input energy source and the effective absorption of sunlight by the evaporator is an essential part of the process. When the sunlight illuminates the surface of the evaporator, it will inevitably cause light reflection, thus consuming a part of the solar energy, so the evaporator should have a wide absorption of the sunlight, and it is particularly important to regulate the light absorption performance. In (2), energy conversion is an inherent characteristic of photothermal conversion materials, the discussion here is about energy transfer, i.e., the thermal management aspect. In the evaporation process, the transfer of thermal energy consists of three components: thermal conduction, thermal convection, and thermal radiation. In interfacial evaporation, it is required that as much thermal energy as possible is used in the evaporation layer and not transferred to other media, otherwise, the evaporation performance will be compromised. Therefore, thermal management of the evaporator is an important factor in improving performance. (3) is also an essential component that influences the performance of the evaporator. In particular, it is important to avoid heat dissipation into bulk water through thermal conduction caused by water transfer. In addition, the rapid phase change of the energy absorbed by the water benefits the evaporation process. Hence, by continuously improving the performance of the interfacial evaporator, it is possible to promote the development of SDIE technology and improve the efficiency of solar energy utilization.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the energy flow in a typical bifunctional layer evaporation device. It should be noted that there is a certain thickness of evaporated material, so the transmission is generally negligible. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
In this section, the strategies for solar absorption properties, thermal management, and water transfer channels are discussed. First, it is worth noting that all these strategies are interrelated and should be considered as a whole, but are discussed separately in this section. For example, in order to obtain better solar absorption performance, it is necessary to design a good thermal management system that can efficiently utilize the absorbed energy. In addition, an excellent water transmission channel plays an important role in improving the SDIE system energy. Furthermore, we summarize some of the improvement strategies and the comparison between them in Table 2. With either strategy, it is important to have a clear understanding of the primary objectives of the SDIE system being designed. For example, while some SDIE systems may prioritize solar absorption characteristics, others may prioritize thermal management or water transfer channels.
Table 2 Improvement strategies, main purpose, and methods




Improvement strategies
Main purpose
Methods




Solar absorption properties
Achieve full-spectrum absorption of sunlight
Doping of materials or structural defects;36 multiple interception and capture of light;71 recovery of heat radiation,72 etc.


Thermal management
Minimize thermal loss due to thermal conduction, thermal radiation, and thermal convection
Insulated evaporator design;73,74 absorbs energy from the environment,75,76 etc.


Water transfer channels
Balancing water evaporation and water transport processes
Confinement capillarity;77 control of pore size of water delivery channels;78 formation of water film,79 etc.


Phase-change energy storage
Recycling of excess energy
Energy storage through latent heat of phase change,80–82 etc.


Water evaporation enthalpy
Increase the rate of water evaporation
Hydrophobic nano water molecule channels;83 Design of microdroplet evaporation surfaces,84 etc.




3.1. Enhanced solar absorption properties
In the SDIE system, sunlight is a critical factor as it is the only source of energy input. To some extent, the amount of solar energy absorbed by a photothermal conversion material determines the conversion of light energy to heat. However, since light is consumed by reflection on the surface of the material, it is important to design the material to improve light absorption and reduce light reflection, which is one of the necessary conditions for an efficient evaporation process. In addition, the inherent light absorption properties of single materials, such as carbon, semiconductors, metals, have performance deficiencies that inhibit their further application in SDIE. There have been numerous studies showing that the problem is able to extend the absorption of light through doping of other materials, structural defects, etc., thus showing that the interaction between different materials is significant.69,85–87
On the other hand, due to the tunability of photothermal materials such as surfaces and channels, most of the regulation of light absorption is currently done from the structural design aspect of the material. Since reflection of light is inevitable, Shi et al. designed a 3D solar evaporator with a hollow cylindrical shape (Fig. 8(a)).72 The structure is capable of intercepting and absorbing the reflected light several times, thereby enhancing light absorption, and the solar absorption rate can reach 99.4%. In addition, the evaporator is able to recover the heat loss caused by thermal radiation, thus reducing energy loss. Based on the discovery that sunflower discs have a blackbody-like structure, Chen et al. fabricated a blackbody-like solar-driven interfacial evaporator that can absorb solar energy by multiple reflections and shows a high light absorption of 99.3% over the entire solar spectrum (Fig. 8(b)).71 In the actual evaporation process, the angle of incidence of light is subject to variation, which leads to limitations in the absorption of light by the evaporator. Ma et al. constructed a thorn labyrinth light capture structure based on zinc oxide nanowires (ZnO NWs) on a carbon-based nanofiber membrane, which is capable of bringing multi-angle light absorption and reflected light absorption (Fig. 8(c)).88 In addition, the incorporation of ZnO NWs broadens the absorption of UV light due to the low light absorption of UV light by carbon-based fibers. The evaporator fabricated based on this structure shows excellent light absorption performance for different incidence angles (0°–80°), with an average absorption of 95% for light in the wavelength range of 200 to 2500 nm and 94% evaporation efficiency in the evaporation process. Liu et al. were inspired by sunflowers to ensure that the angle of incidence of solar light is maintained at 0° by adjusting the tilt angle of the evaporator, thus solving the problem caused by the tilt of solar light and improving the utilization of solar energy (Fig. 8(d)).89 Due to the nanostructure formed by periodic ridges on the surface of the black butterfly wings, it is able to have strong absorption of sunlight. Inspired by black butterfly wings, Ying et al. fabricated a SDIE film based on MXene and rGO, in which MXene covers the surface of rGO nanosheets for modification (Fig. 8(e)).90 Taking advantage of the parallel or wedge-shaped gaps between adjacent MXene nanosheets, light is reflected and trapped multiple times inside when illuminated, promoting light absorption, and resulting in a high evaporation rate of 1.33 kg m−2 h−1 and photothermal conversion efficiency of 85.2%. This suggests that there are many special functions and structures in nature that are worth learning and exploring, in particular for application in SDIE.
 Fig. 8  (a) Multiple light and heat radiation absorption by the 3D hollow cylindrical structure can reduce energy loss and improve the evaporation performance. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Multiple reflection absorption of light by the blackbody model and a schematic diagram of a blackbody-like photothermal interfacial evaporator. The inset shows the incidence of light in a sunflower disk. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic diagram of the angle of incidence and IR image of the interfacial evaporation film after reaching a steady state at different incidence angles (under 1 sun illumination). Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (d) Adjustable angle of the evaporator in response to different incident angle lights. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (e) SEM images of nanostructures in MXene with parallel or wedge-shaped gaps for enhanced light absorption. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
3.2. Enhanced thermal management
In addition to enhancing the absorption of light, SDIE systems need to achieve an efficient evaporation performance by concentrating heat in the evaporation layer and minimizing energy loss in the form of thermal radiation, thermal convection, and thermal conduction. For efficient evaporation, the photothermal layer is most often located at the liquid–gas interface. When the photothermal layer is in direct contact with water, it causes a large amount of heat to be transferred to the water body in the form of thermal conduction, which is detrimental to evaporation. Li et al. prepared an insulated evaporator with a GO photothermal absorber layer on top and a polystyrene foam insulation layer underneath (Fig. 9(a)).73 Due to the existence of physical insulation, the water body does not directly contact the photothermal conversion layer, while the 2D water supply channel is used, that is, the photothermal conversion material does not come into direct contact with bulk water, which can effectively reduce the heat loss problem caused by heat conduction and achieve efficient evaporation. Liu et al. prepared a hanging evaporator made of polyaniline cotton fabric with a large area in contact with air to reduce heat loss (Fig. 9(b)).74 Based on the low thermal conductivity of air (0.0267 W m−1 K−1), the heat generated by the evaporation layer is not significantly lost due to the environment filled with a large amount of air, and the heat can be confined to the photothermal evaporation layer. Meanwhile, only two fabric edges of the evaporator are in contact with water, so water is only transferred by capillary action, which reduces heat loss due to contact with water. Besides, some evaporators with hollow three-dimensional structures are also able to reduce heat loss effectively.91,92 Zhu's group has taken an alternative route to use environmental energy to enhance the evaporative performance of the evaporator.75 In general, the evaporator continues to heat up and exceeds the ambient temperature under light, resulting in energy loss to the environment due to the temperature difference formed between the evaporator temperature and the environment. Therefore, they proposed the strategy of absorbing energy from the environment for evaporation, from which energy can be obtained when the ambient temperature is higher than the evaporator temperature. To prove this experimentally, a 3D cylindrical evaporator based on carbon black nanoparticles was fabricated. As the main photothermal conversion layer, the top of the evaporator absorbs most of the incident light, while the sides, due to their temperature lower than the ambient temperature, exchange heat by means of thermal radiation. This is well illustrated in Fig. 9(c). And the feasibility of the strategy is proved by theoretical calculation and practical application, which provides a novel strategy to improve the evaporation performance. Similarly, Wu et al. prepared a heatsink-type photothermal interfacial evaporator capable of absorbing heat from the environment (equivalent to 170% of the incident light energy) after structural optimization (Fig. 9(d)).76 The evaporation experiments demonstrated that the evaporator temperature could be kept continuously lower than the ambient temperature during operation, which can eliminate the adverse effects caused by thermal convection and radiation, thus improving the evaporation performance.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the 2D water channel spaced interfacial evaporator, which can effectively reduce heat transfer. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabric-suspended evaporator, with the enlarged part showing its working principle. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2019. (c) Infrared image of a solar-driven interfacial evaporator under simulated sun illumination at 1.2 kW m−2. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (d) Infrared plots of the initial state and the steady state after 30 min for a heatsink-type evaporator under 1 sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2021. 
3.3. Design of water transfer channels
When a solar-driven interfacial evaporator is in operation, the transfer of water is particularly important. On the one hand, if the water supply is too rapid, a large amount of water will accumulate on the evaporation surface, causing heat to be dissipated into the water by thermal conduction and increasing the reflection of light. On the other hand, if the water supply is insufficient, continuous and efficient evaporation cannot be achieved and salt crystal precipitation will be generated during the desalination process, which is not allowed in the evaporation process. Therefore, the design of an appropriate water transfer channel can avoid the above problems, improve the evaporator performance, and achieve continuous and efficient steady evaporation. Wang et al. implemented a confinement capillarity strategy on porous sponges to achieve a thin water transport layer, which can significantly improve the evaporation performance (Fig. 10(a)).77 As the porous sponge is filled with water during water transfer, the overflow of steam is then hindered thereby limiting the rate of water evaporation. In addition, for the photothermal interfacial evaporation sponge, the 3D porous structure brings the sunlight into direct contact with the unevaporated water in the pores, resulting in overall heating making heat loss. However, the porous sponge was modified with a black hydrophilic nanoparticle that forms a thin coating inside the pore, which is well able to restrict water transport only in this coating, rather than filling the porous channel. The internal fine water transfer channels (2–5 μm) are smaller than the diameter of the sponge pores (≈200 μm), so there is a sufficient air–water contact area to reduce heat transfer and increase the evaporation area. The effect of this confinement capillarity is significant (3.2 kg m−2 h−1 high evaporation rate). Zhang et al. prepared a double-layer structured photothermal interfacial evaporator to investigate the relationship between evaporation performance and water supply, and the water supply capacity was regulated by controlling the aperture size of the water transfer channel (Fig. 10(b)).78 The larger the sodium alginate (SA) content, the smaller the pore size. Through water evaporation experiments, it was found that different pore sizes have different water supply capacities and the evaporation performance changes. When the water supply capacity matches the interfacial water evaporation, that is, the input is consistent with the output, the evaporation performance of the evaporator is better, even though the surface temperature of the evaporator is not the highest. The evaporation rate reached 1.517 kg m−2 h−1 with an evaporation efficiency of 98.27% under 1 sun illumination. Therefore, the evaporation performance is closely related to the water supply of the evaporator, so it is necessary to design the water supply channel. Zhao et al. fabricated a luffa-based biomass evaporator. Due to the unique multilayer fiber structure of luffa, water was able to form a water film on the fiber surface, as shown in Fig. 10(c).79 It is noteworthy that the water transport occurs only on the fiber surface and does not fill the entire pore channel. During evaporation, the position of evaporated water is immediately replenished due to the capillarity of the fiber, which effectively regulates the moisture content in the evaporator, promotes the balance between water supply and evaporation, and improves the evaporation efficiency.
 Fig. 10  (a) Confinement capillarity (CC) is achieved with black hydrophilic nanoparticles (BHNPs) to improve the evaporation performance. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2021. (b) Comparison graph of evaporator surface temperature and evaporation performance for different SA contents. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (c) Schematic diagram of the operation of a luffa-based polypyrrole-coated solar evaporator and an enlarged view of the water transfer channel. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
Recently, research on water transfer channels has focused on the design of 1D, 2D and 3D water paths. Yang et al. prepared an evaporator with 1D water transfer channels by mimicking plant transpiration, which is designed to reduce heat loss well.47 Chen et al. designed a 2D water transfer channel with a hierarchical micro-nanostructure capable of providing a rapid water supply.93 For 3D water transfer channels, a more representative one is aerogel, which has a porous network skeleton that provides excellent water transfer and evaporation performance.94 Arguably, due to the advantage of vertically aligned nanostructures, most 3D structured evaporators have better water transport.95 The reasonable design of the water transfer channel is of great benefit to the SDIE. In addition to promoting the evaporation rate, a good water transfer channel can also prevent the precipitation of salt crystals during seawater desalination.
3.4. Other strategies
A phase change material (PCM) can absorb heat to change its physical state. Combining PCM with SDIE can, on the one hand, collect excess heat, reduce heat loss, and increase the efficiency of photothermal conversion. On the other hand, it provides a solution to the solar intermittency problem. Combining photothermal interfacial evaporation with phase change energy storage has been well-proven in applications and has excellent potential for long-term seawater desalination.80–82
The enthalpy of water evaporation is not constant, and the less its value in the interfacial evaporation, the easier the water vapor generation. It has recently been shown that the enthalpy of evaporation of water can be reduced in hydrogels, which leads to efficient evaporation.96 Currently, intermediate water theories are available to explain the reduction of water evaporation enthalpy.97 In addition, the design of hydrophobic nano water molecule channels and the construction of micro-meniscus and micro-droplet evaporation surfaces can also effectively reduce the enthalpy of evaporation.83,84 It can be predicted that the strategy of reducing the water evaporation enthalpy will play an essential role in future photothermal interfacial evaporation and is a powerful way to achieve high-performance evaporation. However, a more straightforward explanation of its mechanism of action is needed, and this aspect requires additional research.
4. Applications
4.1. Desalination
Most of the Earth's surface is composed of water. The majority of this water consists of seawater, while the amount of freshwater available for human use is a very small fraction of the Earth's total water content.98,99 Therefore, seawater desalination is very important and helpful for human life. As mentioned previously in this article, current industrial desalination technologies require large amounts of fossil energy to support them. But by using solar energy, the disadvantages of energy consumption can be effectively overcome. Therefore, the interfacial evaporation technology, which is driven by solar energy, has a broad prospect in seawater desalination. However, it is found in the research that white salt crystals will appear during the continuous evaporation process, which continuously accumulates on the surface of the evaporator and blocks the vapor evaporation channel and water transmission channel.100–102 At the same time, these salt crystals inevitably inhibit the light absorption performance of the photothermal conversion material and enhance the light reflection, which is undesirable.103 The presence of salt crystals directly leads to a continuous decrease in the efficiency of the evaporator over time, and therefore to a significant reduction in its long-term stability.104 Hence, the salt resistance of evaporators has become a key performance indicator in their practical application.
Inspired by nature, Finnerty et al. assembled graphene oxide leaf into artificial tree evaporators (Fig. 11(a)).105 The energy conversion efficiency of the graphene oxide blades located above the water surface is 78% due to the benefits of the bionic structure. However, in long-term evaporation experiments, a large number of salt crystals gradually accumulate on the leaf's surface, leading to a decrease in evaporation rate. To return to the original state, the salt crystals need to be physically scraped from their surface in order to be removed. Zhang et al. designed a 3D solar crystallizer device, as shown in Fig. 11(b).106 The outer wall of the device serves as the water evaporation area, and the bottom and inner walls of the device serve as the light absorption area. The water evaporation surface and the light absorption surface are separated by an aluminum sheet. Due to the high thermal conductivity of the aluminum sheet, it helps to conduct the heat generated at the bottom of the device to its walls for water evaporation. The device had a good evaporation rate (1.61 kg m−2 h−1) when treating pure NaCl water at a concentration of 24 wt% under 1 sun illumination. Many salt crystals are deposited on the outer surface of the device during the evaporation process. Due to the structural design, these salt crystals do not obstruct the absorption of light but rather affect the transmission of water to a certain extent, resulting in the inhibition of the evaporation performance of the device. These salt crystals can also be removed by physically scraping them away. It is a good method to precipitate salt crystals locally and then physically remove them, but it has some limitations. On the one hand, the precipitated salt crystals can absorb and reflect the sunlight, leading to a decrease in the energy efficiency of the evaporator. On the other hand, salt crystals not removed in time can damage the evaporator and have irreversible effects. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate some novel methods to solve these problems.
 Fig. 11  (a) A leaf-type photothermal interfacial evaporator prepared by harvesting natural tree inspiration. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic diagram of the solar thermal evaporator and its cross-sectional structure. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021. (c) Asymmetric solar interfacial evaporator with directional ion migration inspired by electron diodes. Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2022. (d) Schematic of a 3D hydrogel interfacial evaporator with vertical radiant vessels breaking. The unique microstructure results in excellent thermal management and salt resistance. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic diagram of the operation of a nanofiber photothermal interfacial evaporator with a Janus structure. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
Recently, a method of directed migration of ions has made great progress in salt removal. Inspired by an electron diode, Yang et al. prepared an asymmetric solar evaporator with carbonized coconut fiber cloth (Fig. 11(c)).107 This evaporator constitutes an asymmetric structure due to the two ends of the water supply side consisting of two legs with different widths. The experimental results show that the narrow leg has stronger ion migration characteristics and is capable of directional selective migration of salt ions. Therefore, the evaporator has excellent salt tolerance. In addition, due to the hydrophilic and porous nature of the carbonized coconut fiber cloth, the evaporation enthalpy of water is reduced and the evaporation performance is improved, and the evaporation rate can reach 7.28 kg m−2 h−1. In addition, the evaporator was subjected to evaporation experiments in 14 wt% NaCl solution for 14 consecutive days (under 4 suns illumination). The performance of this evaporator was stable during the long-term evaporation process, and no salt accumulation was observed on its surface. Liu et al. fabricated a 3D hydrogel evaporator with vertical radiant vessels to solve the balance between thermal localization and salt resistance (Fig. 11(d)).108 The evaporator has a hierarchical structure consisting of a large vertical vessel channel, a radiant vessel, and a porous vessel wall, which has good evaporation properties and salt resistance due to its excellent liquid transport capability and rapid ionic convection and diffusion. In addition to the layered structure, the marvelous swelling capacity of the evaporator to continuously transport brine to the evaporation surface plays a key role in the sustained salt resistance. The evaporator was able to maintain an evaporation rate of 3.53 kg m−2 h−1 in 20 wt% brine during 8 consecutive hours of evaporation (under 1 sun illumination), and no salt deposition occurred during the process. This salt-resistant approach to the salt-free strategy is compelling. Hence, additional attention should be paid to the trade-off between thermal localization and salt tolerance in order to develop evaporators with low heat loss and fantastic salt resistance in desalination. Recently, a Janus structure photothermal evaporator with asymmetric wettability has been investigated for salt resistance strategies. The top layer of the Janus structure evaporator consists of a hydrophobic layer that acts as a photothermal evaporation layer, while the bottom layer consists of a hydrophilic layer that acts as a water transport layer. During evaporation, water transport ceases when it reaches the hydrophilic–hydrophobic interface, where it evaporates, as the hydrophobic layer hinders the flow of water.109 However, this Janus structure does not completely eliminate the problem of salt aggregation. The concentration of salt ions in the brine located at the hydrophilic–hydrophobic interface gradually increases during evaporation, leading to the inevitable crystallization of salt within. In order to overcome this phenomenon, Li et al. prepared a self-descaling Janus evaporator with a movable air–water interface (Fig. 11(e)).110 In the absence of optical conditions, the evaporator exhibits a reversible wettability transition from asymmetric to hydrophilic wettability, which is based on a combination of the photothermal effect of Fe3O4 and the thermal sensitivity of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM). At this point, as the air–water interface moves to the upper surface of the evaporator, the previously accumulated salt region can be cleaned by a large amount of water, thus exhibiting a self-cleaning capability. With this design, the evaporator is capable of having an excellent evaporation rate (1.76 kg m−2 h−1) under 1 sun illumination and has excellent salt resistance and stability (over 5 days) when evaporating solutions with a concentration of 20 wt% NaCl.
4.2. Superheated steam sterilization
In addition to energy and water applications, another important application for SDIE is sterilization. The act of sterilization is achieved through the rapid response of the photothermal material to sunlight and the generation of high-temperature steam. Solar steam sterilization has the advantage of being low-cost and independent of other energy sources, improving some of the current sterilization technique problems and promising a potential sterilization solution for less developed regions.111
Li et al. used biochar and low-cost materials to prepare a solar autoclave sterilizer for interfacial heating, which has a faster reaction rate, higher steam temperature and a more energy-efficient working process to meet the requirements of solar steam sterilization.112 In general, a typical autoclave takes 75–115 min to complete a full sterilization cycle, whereas the interfacial heating system has the ability to complete a typical sterilization cycle in 8.4 min, which is more efficient than a typical sterilization cycle. This continuous sterilization with short and stable cycles provides significant productivity and efficiency gains, demonstrating the potential of solar interfacial heating for sterilization. To demonstrate the sterilization capability of the device, four bacterial nutrient cells were used in the experiment (the Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli (E. coli), Staphylococcus aureus (A.S.), the Gram-positive bacteria Bacillus subtilis (B.S.), and CC09 (belonging to Bacillus amyloliquefaciens)). Shown in Fig. 12(a) is a solar interfacial heating steam sterilization system with extremely high sterilization efficiency. Another key indicator of bacteriocidal performance is spore inactivation, which the system is also capable of achieving efficiently. Thus, this solar steam sterilization based on interfacial heating using low-cost, environmentally friendly materials, and solar energy as a direct energy source has excellent sterilization results and provides a promising solution of sterilization. Chang et al. have created a portable solar steam generator based on SDIE combined with a solar vacuum tube, capable of generating high-temperature steam in excess of 100 °C consistently and efficiently, even under weak or erratic solar illumination (Fig. 12(b)).113 Due to the high light absorption and low heat loss properties of the solar vacuum tubes, it is capable of generating steam by supplying heat to the interfacial evaporator. The steam generated is passed through a copper heat exchanger inside the tube to produce superheated steam. By adjusting the structure of the steam generator, it is possible to adjust the steam generation temperature (between 102 and 165 °C) and to achieve a steam generation efficiency of 49% with 1 sun illumination. In addition, outdoor experiments have proved that superheated steam above 121 °C can be produced stably under natural sunlight conditions. By successfully sterilizing E. coli and Bacillus thermophilus, the device was proven to have excellent sterilization capabilities. Saleque et al. recently prepared a van der Waals heterostructure-based solar-driven interfacial steam sterilization device using metal multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), hafnium telluride (HfTe2), dopamine-treated PU sponge, and cellulose filter paper materials (Fig. 12(c)).114 The device was able to generate superheated steam at 132 °C within 20 min and was able to achieve an evaporation efficiency of 87.43%. To verify the excellent sterilization performance of the device, experiments were performed with E. coli bacteria. After 30 min of sterilization, the sterilization efficiency reached 99.04%, meeting the sterilization standards set by the World Health Organization (WHO), thus demonstrating excellent sterilization performance.
 Fig. 12  (a) The left and right agar plates show the initial bacterial concentration and the bacterial concentration after sterilization by interfacial heating, respectively. The graph on the right about the sterilization efficiency of solar steam sterilization equipment. The black dashed line represents the WHO standard for the sterility of medical devices. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (b) Working schematic and structural design diagram of a portable SDIE sterilization device. A structure of the evaporation zone is mentioned in the illustration. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) Comparison of agar plates before and after sterilization of E. coli cells. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. 
Successful research in the area of interfacial high-temperature steam sterilization will not only expand the application areas of SDIE technology, but also provide a potential sterilization solution for off-grid, resource-poor areas. Therefore, it is important to develop an environmentally friendly and energy-efficient sterilizer based on SDIE technology.
4.3. Sewage treatment
Sewage treatment is another significant application of SDIE technology. In addition to seawater, the use of domestic and industrial wastewater for access to clean water is one of the important ways to address this problem in the face of severe water shortage challenges. Sewage is rich in salt ions, metal ions, bacteria, organic pollutants and other contaminants, and the effects of pollution will get worse if they are not addressed quickly. SDIE is a promising solution to the current water pollution problem and water shortage, as it differs from conventional sewage treatment methods and is able to treat domestic and industrial sewage in an energy-efficient and environmentally friendly manner without secondary pollution.68 Therefore, combining sewage treatment with SDIE to simultaneously remove various pollutants from water and collect clean water is a hot topic of current research.69,115,116
Nowadays, large amounts of dyed wastewater can lead to serious water pollution, adding to the problem of fresh water shortage.117,118 There are already various ways of treating dye wastewater, of which photocatalysis is one of the effective ways for removing pollutants. Recently, there have been a number of investigations related to SDIE techniques combined with photocatalysis to treat dye wastewater. Zhang et al. prepared a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogel based on the novel material MXene combined with porphyrins using a combination of photothermal interfacial evaporation and photocatalysis techniques (Fig. 13(a)).119 The hydrogel has been demonstrated through experiments that have good solar evaporation and photocatalytic properties. Under 1 sun illumination, the photocatalytic degradation rate of the non-volatile organic dye rhodamine B (RhB) is up to 90.5%, with the simultaneous evaporation rate of 1.82 kg m−2 h−1 and a solar energy conversion efficiency of 73.5%. Mu et al. prepared a multifunctional MXene and PPy coated melamine foam with excellent photothermal evaporation and photodegradation properties (Fig. 13(b)).120 The evaporator achieved the evaporation rate of 1.5174 kg m−2 h−1 and a solar energy conversion efficiency of 91.24% under 1 sun illumination. Simultaneously, the degradation rates of the non-volatile organic dyes RhB, methyl orange (MO), and methylene blue (MB) were 88.92%, 91.75%, and 92.38% respectively. In addition, Zhang et al. prepared a Janus photothermal synergistic catalytic evaporator by depositing ink, TiO2, and polydimethylsiloxane on a melamine sponge (Fig. 13(c)).121 The evaporator was able to achieve an evaporation rate of 1.49 kg m−2 h−1 and an evaporation efficiency of 93.54%. At the same time, the degradation rate of the organic dye RhB reached 90.1%.
 Fig. 13  (a) The left part shows the SDIE unit and the right part shows the water sample collected during the treatment process. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (b) Diagram of the photocatalytic mechanism of MF-MXene/PPy aerogels. And the diagram of the water samples, which collected during the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes by MF-MXene/PPy aerogels. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. (c) Schematic diagram of the water purification mechanism of the Janus photothermal interfacial evaporation synergy photocatalytic evaporator. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (d) PANI/ZIF-8 composite photothermal evaporation membrane based on SDIE combined with molecular sieves for sewage treatment. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic of the photocatalytic removal of VOCs by Ag/AgCl particles. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. 
The removal of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) is also an important aspect of wastewater treatment. The low saturation vapor pressure of VOCs allows them to be collected with water vapor during evaporation, resulting in enrichment of VOCs in the collected water.122,123 Therefore, SDIE technology for the removal of VOCs in sewage treatment deserves to be studied in depth. This will not only expand the application of the technology, but will also provide a potential and environmentally friendly technique for the treatment of sewage containing VOCs. Peng et al. combined molecular sieving with SDIE techniques to design a composite photothermal interfacial evaporation membrane to remove VOCs from water via molecular sieving (Fig. 13(d)).124 The sieving layer consists of a modified zeolitic imidazole framework-8 (ZIF-8) and the photothermal conversion evaporation layer consists of polyaniline (PANI). As the pore size of the prepared membrane is smaller than the VOC molecules and larger than the water molecules, the water molecules can pass through during the evaporation process but not the VOCs molecules, thus achieving the purpose of sieving. Under 1 sun illumination, the membrane had an evaporation rate of 1.0 kg m−2 h−1 for VOCs waste water and was able to achieve 99% removal of VOCs. When the VOCs concentration was increased to 400 mg L−1, a 98.7% removal rate was achieved. By combining the molecular sieve effect with SDIE technology, a strategy is available for the photothermal evaporation treatment of sewage containing VOCs. However, it is noted that VOCs, although removed in the collected water, are still present in the source water. So how to achieve the removal of VOCs from the source water is the key issue. Therefore, to achieve simultaneous VOC removal with a photothermal interfacial evaporation, Zhou et al. chose an in situ photodegradation method for VOCs (Fig. 13(e)).125 A solar-driven interfacial evaporator was prepared by depositing polydopamine (PDA) and Ag/AgCl particles on melamine foam. Ag/AgCl particles act as photocatalysts and can promote the local production of H2O2 and ˙OH under light, thus achieving the result of degrading VOCs during vapor generation. The evaporator can evaporate at a rate of up to 2.04 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination and has a removal efficiency of more than 98% for VOCs such as phenol. Furthermore, the evaporator has been experimentally demonstrated to have a stable evaporation performance and VOCs removal rate in a variety of environments.
4.4. Water and electricity cogeneration
The application of solar energy has now covered numerous aspects.126–128 Currently, there are a variety of ways to generate electricity, such as hydroelectric power generation,129 wind power generation,130 nuclear power generation,131 geothermal power generation,132 and thermal power generation,133 and the use of solar energy to convert it into electricity is one of the most important solutions to the energy problem,134 and it has the ability to help in many areas where electricity is scarce. SDIE is an environmentally friendly technology that uses solar energy to produce clean water from seawater or contaminated wastewater. The combination of SDIE with electricity generation has attracted much attention in recent years. In addition to generating electricity while generating solar steam, the combination of water and electricity not only improves the efficiency of solar energy utilization, but also makes it possible to solve water and energy shortages.
Yang et al. found that the rapid evaporation of water from the surface of photothermal materials led to the generation of high concentrations of brine below the interface, causing the creation of salinity gradients (Fig. 14(a)).135 By using a combination of salinity gradient power generation and photothermal evaporation, it is possible to achieve simultaneous production of water and electricity. In this work, the authors used carbon nanotube-modified filter paper as the light-absorbing material and Nafion membrane as an ion-selective membrane to prepare a hybrid system capable of both photothermal evaporation and electricity generation. Under 1 sun illumination, the system has an evaporation rate of 1.1 kg m−2 h−1 and is capable of obtaining approximately1 W m−2 of electricity at the same time. Wang et al. used a combination of a thermogalvanic cell (TGC) and reverse electrodialysis (RED) for SDIE technology, which is capable of generating steam and electricity simultaneously based on temperature and salinity gradients (Fig. 14(b)).136 After experiments, it has been found that the combination of TGC and RED is able to increase the energy output due to the synergistic ion transport that suppresses the concentration polarization of both. Combining the three technologies into one system, therefore, allows for the simultaneous production of steam and electricity. The system was prepared with an evaporation performance of 1.4 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination, while generating 1.11 W m−2 of electricity. In addition, the authors proposed methods such as using carbon nanomaterials with high conductivity and specific surface area as electrodes, optimizing the thermal management of the system, etc., and were able to further increase the generation capacity. This approach, which uses salinity gradients and combines photothermal evaporation to generate both water and electricity, further improves the efficiency of solar energy utilization. Sun et al. found that the ring-opening and cross-linking reactions triggered by graphene oxide nanoribbon (GONR) papers and alkaline earth metal ions led to unique structural changes in GONRs (Fig. 14(c)).51 As a result, GONRs have, for example, excellent broadband solar energy absorption, good mechanical stability, high hydrophilicity, and other unique properties. Therefore, a series of flexible and independent GONRs mediated by alkaline earth metal ions (e.g. Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+) for SDIE were prepared and used for seawater desalination, sewage treatment, and electrical energy generation. It was found that after 60 min of evaporation stability GONRs-Ba was able to achieve an evaporation efficiency of 1.45 kg m−2 h−1 and a photothermal conversion efficiency of 91.6%. GONRs-Ba is also effective in the purification of sewage containing many heavy metal ions (e.g., Cr3+, Pb2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Fe3+). Apart from that, the upper surface of the GONRs-Ba paper produced a much higher temperature compared to the temperature of the mass of water below under simulated sun illumination. Therefore, based on this temperature difference, a solar-to-electric conversion was generated by using a thermoelectric module to collect low-grade heat. The open circuit voltage (Voc) reaches approximately 76 mV under 1 kW m−2 sun illumination, demonstrating the feasibility of generating both clean water and electricity, enhancing the efficiency of solar energy use. This work demonstrated that SDIE is capable of being combined with other technologies that can be combined in the sustainable generation of clean water and electricity. Song et al. investigated the water cycle in hydroelectric generators (HGs) and solar steam generation (SSG) devices and found that both devices involved the evaporation process of water (Fig. 14(c)).137 Therefore, it occurred to the authors that SSG could improve the electrical performance of HGs by increasing the evaporation rate, and that a combination of the two could effectively exploit the evaporation process. Thus, nanostructured silicon nanowire array (SiNW) based HG units are well integrated with the interfacial SSG process to generate both water and electricity driven by sunlight through carbon nanotube fabric electrodes (CNFs). The CNF electrodes bring a continuous water supply capacity, excellent electrical conductivity and strong solar absorption, and form a large evaporation surface with the SiNWs, enhancing the evaporation and power generation process. The SiNWs-based HG/SSG device achieves an output of 0.81 Voc and a short-circuit current (Jsc) of 108.0 μA cm−2 under standard air mass 1.5 (AM 1.5) and 1 sun illumination, with an evaporation performance of 1.31 kg m−2 h−1 at the same time as producing electricity. When the device is connected to an external resistor, the power output is still greater than 80.0 μW cm−2. In addition, a 6 inch wafer-scale SiNWs achieved a water evaporation rate of 1.06 km m−2 h−1, a current of 8.65 mA was generated and an output of 6 mV was achieved over 8 h in simulated outdoor tests.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the device based on the combination of salinity gradient power generation and photothermal evaporation. The enlarged diagram shows the mechanism of electricity production and the physical diagram of the device. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic diagram of photothermal evaporation in combination with TGC and RED to achieve simultaneous production of water and electricity. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2021. (c) Schematic diagram of solar-driven co-production of water and electricity. The enlarged view shows the flexible GONRs-M paper (right) and the thermoelectric module (left). Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (d) Schematic diagram of the structure and working mechanism of HG and SSG. The picture on the right shows the SEM image of the cross-section of SiNWs and the physical image of SiNWs. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2023. 
Therefore, there is great potential to design and develop a system containing SDIE and power generation technology, which could be a good solution to current energy and water problems, and contribute to future environmental protection.
5. Conclusions and outlook
The SDIE technology, which has developed rapidly over the past decade, is a novel evaporation technology that is environmentally friendly, energy efficient and economical. Existing research shows that this technology has great potential for applications in areas such as desalination and is an exciting solution for clean water production. Development of this technology is now focused on expanding applications and improving performance. In this review, the SDIE technology is introduced in three parts. From the aspect of photothermal conversion materials, the photothermal conversion mechanisms of four materials and their applications are introduced. In terms of evaporation performance enhancement strategies, current methods such as enhanced light absorption, water channel design, and thermal management are able effectively to improve evaporator performance. Finally, in the application, besides desalination, SDIE technologies are now well integrated with electrical generation and photocatalytic degradation technology, which shows that there is potential for preparing a composite interfacial evaporator. In addition, the role in the field of sterilization should not be underestimated.
From the discussion, it is known that an ideal SDIE system should have the following advantages: (1) it must have wide light absorption in the whole solar spectrum (250–2500 nm). A high light absorption material is the core basis for achieving efficient interfacial evaporation, which one can guarantee with the subsequent high photothermal conversion efficiency. Recently, plasmonic metallic nanomaterials, carbon-based materials, semiconductors, and polymeric materials have been used for SDIE. In addition to these, some emerging materials, such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and single-molecule materials, have also turned out to be excellent in photothermal interfacial evaporation. With the development of materials science and technology, it is believed that more highly light-absorbing materials will be discovered in the future, which is beneficial to the development of SDIE. Moreover, for the improvement of light absorption performance also from the evaporation material structure design, such as through multiple interception and absorption of reflected light, to improve light absorption. But at present, whether through the choice of materials or structure design, no light absorption material has been able to approach a 100% light absorption rate, so in improving the evaporator performance we should start from other aspects. (2) Excellent water transfer and thermal management performance are indispensable. On the one hand, a reasonable synergy between water transport properties and evaporation rates could well reduce heat loss, salt crystallization, and other problems. Numerous studies have been conducted on the water transfer performance by designing 1D, 2D, and 3D water transfer channels, demonstrating that good water transfer is also beneficial for thermal management. On the other hand, in the photothermal conversion layer of the evaporator, the thermal concentration layer, a large amount of heat is generated and used to drive the rapid evaporation of water. However, thermal dissipation in the form of thermal radiation, thermal convection, and thermal conduction is inevitable, which is detrimental to evaporation and must be addressed in terms of thermal management. Recently, significant progress has been made in thermal management by designing thermal insulated evaporators, reducing evaporator temperature, and other strategies. In addition, 3D-structured evaporators have advantages in water transfer and thermal management, so it is expected that the development of 3D-structured evaporators will be a priority in the future. (3) The ideal evaporator should also have the advantages of abundant raw materials, easy preparation, and cost effectiveness, so that it can turn laboratory theory into industrial production.
The current SDIE has been studied from both macro and micro perspectives, and there are already many strategies to enhance evaporator performance. However, there are still shortcomings that need to be further explored. More research is needed in the future, summarized as:
(1) In particular, it should be noted that by improving the light absorption, water transport, and evaporation performance of the photothermal interfacial evaporation material, the main purpose is to obtain clean water efficiently. Currently, water harvesting systems generally consist of transparent closed devices made of glass or polymers. First, the surfaces of these devices can reflect a certain amount of light, so that the amount of light absorbed by the photothermal conversion material will be reduced. Second, the water droplets formed by condensation on the wall of the device will additionally reflect light, resulting in unnecessary loss of incident light. In addition, since the evaporator is in a confined space, temperature, humidity, and pressure affect the generation of water vapor. Therefore, further research and development are needed for water harvesting systems, which is one of the keys for the SDIE system towards application.
(2) For the current variety of the SDIE system, there should be a unified verification standard in terms of the test procedure and data calculation, so that the different evaporation systems can be well compared. Also, more research is needed for the preparation process. For the preparation cost of the photothermal interfacial material, it should be simple, low-cost, and low-consumption, so that it can meet the original intention of this technology and realize application in remote areas. The formulation of a referenceable standard system can better promote the development of SDIE technology.
(3) It is important to explore more about the impact brought about in practical application scenarios. The geography will vary from region to region and there are many uncertainties in environmental factors. Most of the current work is carried out in a laboratory environment (a relatively ideal environment) and shows promising results. For practical applications, the environmental factors are non-ideal (wind speed, cloud cover, biological effects, etc.), so more research on the applications, in this case, would be helpful to promote the SDIE technology in the real world.
In summary, SDIE is a novel and potential technology. This technology has the potential to be an inexpensive and sustainable means of producing clean water, especially in areas where electricity or conventional water treatment facilities are limited. With further research and development, the technology will become more reliable and efficient, providing an exciting way to solve water and energy problems and contribute to the preservation of the Earth.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
AcknowledgementsThis project was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51872245 and 52103269), the Natural Science Key Foundation of Gansu Province, China (23JRRA680), the Excellent Doctoral Student Project of Natural Science Foundation of Gansu Province (23JRRA695), and the Science and Technology Development Plan project of Lanzhou City (2022-2-78). We also thank the Gansu International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Base of Water-Retention Chemical Functional Materials and Longyuan Young Talent for financial support.
ReferencesC. Tortajada and A. K. Biswas, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain., 2018, 34, 21–25 CrossRef .P. J. J. Alvarez, C. K. Chan, M. Elimelech, N. J. Halas and D. Villagran, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Marinas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Qasim, M. Badrelzaman, N. N. Darwish, N. A. Darwish and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2019, 459, 59–104 CrossRef CAS .A. Al-Othman, M. Tawalbeh, M. El Haj Assad, T. Alkayyali and A. Eisa, Desalination, 2018, 443, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Tripathy, M. Murmu, P. Banerjee and M. A. Quraishi, Desalination, 2019, 472, 114128 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Carballo, J. Bonilla, L. Roca, A. De la Calle, P. Palenzuela and D. C. Alarcón-Padilla, Desalination, 2018, 435, 70–76 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Son, M. W. Shahzad, N. Ghaffour and K. C. Ng, Desalination, 2020, 477, 114266 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guo, M. Bao, L. Gong and S. Shen, Desalination, 2020, 496, 114702 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Jamil and S. M. Zubair, Desalination, 2017, 420, 292–307 CrossRef CAS .S. Al-Amshawee, M. Y. B. M. Yunus, A. A. M. Azoddein, D. G. Hassell, I. H. Dakhil and H. A. Hasan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122231 CrossRef CAS .F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .U. K. Das, K. S. Tey, M. Seyedmahmoudian, S. Mekhilef, M. Y. I. Idris, W. Van Deventer, B. Horan and A. Stojcevski, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 912–928 CrossRef .O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Tian, C. Li, D. Chen, Y. Li, L. Xing, X. Tian, Y. Cao, W. Huang, Z. Liu and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15462–15471 RSC .C. Li, Y. Cao, X. Tian, Y. Shen, J. Xiao, W. Huang, H. Wang and Z. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 461, 141954 CrossRef CAS .P. Mu, L. Song, L. Geng and J. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 271, 118869 CrossRef CAS .P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .Q. Chang, Z. Guo, Z. Shen, N. Li, C. Xue, H. Zhang, C. Hao, J. Yang and S. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2100332 CrossRef CAS .M. Ivan, A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, P. K. Cheng, J. Qiao, T. I. Alam and Y. H. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 7936–7948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Li, F. Qiu, Y. Xia, D. Chen and X. Jiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 19409–19418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .I. Ibrahim, D. H. Seo, A. M. McDonagh, H. K. Shon and L. Tijing, Desalination, 2021, 500, 114853 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Yu, K. Yin and Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhao, X. Meng, H. Zou, Z. Wang, Y. Du, Y. Shao, J. Qi and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 33, 2209207 CrossRef CAS .X. Han, S. Ding, H. Hu and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18509–18541 RSC .Y. Xin, K. Yu, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Yuan, H. Li, L. Wang and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liang, H. Liu, J. Yu, L. Zhou and J. Zhu, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 771–786 CrossRef .A. G. Saad, A. Gebreil, D. A. Kospa, S. A. El-Hakam and A. A. Ibrahim, Desalination, 2022, 535, 115824 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .S. Chen, Z. Sun, W. Xiang, C. Shen, Z. Wang, X. Jia, J. Sun and C.-J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 104998 CrossRef CAS .Y. Geng, K. Jiao, X. Liu, P. Ying, O. Odunmbaku, Y. Zhang, S. C. Tan, L. Li, W. Zhang and M. Li, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 3122–3142 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, C. Wang, S. Huang, Y. Liu, T. Yu, R. Yang, G. Chen, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 3, 2212301 CrossRef .F. Tao, M. Green, A. V. Garcia, T. Xiao, A. T. Van Tran, Y. Zhang, Y. Yin and X. Chen, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 17, 45–84 CrossRef .H. Liu, C. Chen, H. Wen, R. Guo, N. A. Williams, B. Wang, F. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18839–18846 RSC .K. W. Tan, C. M. Yap, Z. Zheng, C. Y. Haw, P. S. Khiew and W. S. Chiu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2022, 6, 2100416 CrossRef CAS .B. Soo Joo, I. Soo Kim, I. Ki Han, H. Ko, J. Gu Kang and G. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 583, 152563 CrossRef CAS .H. Bai, J. Hu, S. H. Lam, Y. Guo, X.-M. Zhu, Z. Yang and J. Wang, ACS Mater. Lett., 2022, 4, 1584–1592 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, J. Zhao, S. Zhang, D. Li, X. Zhang, Q. Zhao and B. Xing, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 2264–2296 RSC .J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .Q. Yin, J. Zhang, Y. Tao, F. Kong and P. Li, Chemosphere, 2021, 289, 133210 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Geng, K. Zhang, K. Yang, P. Ying, L. Hu, J. Ding, J. Xue, W. Sun, K. Sun and M. Li, Carbon, 2019, 155, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .W. Li, X. Li, J. Liu, M. J. Zeng, X. Feng, X. Jia and Z. Z. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22845–22854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. An, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, Q. Sun, B. Guo, B. Gao, W. Zhou and Q. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 301, 122003 CrossRef CAS .A. Chu, M. Yang, H. Yang, X. Shi, J. Chen, J. Fang, Z. Wang and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 36116–36131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Yang, N. Wei, M. Li, R. Xu, Y. Sui, M. Kong, X. Ran and H. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 29788–29796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Tong and B. Song, Desalination, 2022, 527, 115586 CrossRef CAS .L. Li and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105682 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ma, Z. Hu, N. Lu, Y. Niu, X. Deng, J. Li, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 623, 856–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, G. Zhao, Y. Yang, X. Liu, L. Wang, D. Jia, X. Wang and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9184–9194 RSC .C. T. K. Finnerty, A. K. Menon, K. M. Conway, D. Lee, M. Nelson, J. J. Urban, D. Sedlak and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2021, 55, 15435–15445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Xu, Y. Lu, F. Jiang, J. Zhang, Y. Ge and Z. Li, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2023, 233, 123469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Yin, H. Xie, J. Liu, X. Zou and J. Liu, Desalination, 2021, 511, 115116 CrossRef CAS .B. Li, S. Xue, P. Mu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 30192–30204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Li, X. Yin, S. Xue, P. Mu and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 580, 152305 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang, Y. Sun, M. Peng, M. Cai, B. Zhao, D. Li, Z. Liang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 2511–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, H. Wei, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Bao and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 6066–6074 RSC .Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, G. Zhao, L. Wang, D. Jia, Y. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2021, 179, 337–347 CrossRef CAS .N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .C. Zhang, B. Yuan, Y. Liang, L. Yang, L. Bai, H. Yang, D. Wei, F. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Wang and H. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 258, 123998 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Wani, P. Garg and A. Bera, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 3856–3861 RSC .Y. Wu, R. Kong, C. Ma, L. Li, Y. Zheng, Y. Lu, L. Liang, Y. Pang, Q. Wu, Z. Shen and H. Chen, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022, 5, 1323–1331 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, D. D. Mishra, Y. Li, L. Gao, H. Peng, L. Zhang and C. Hu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4571–4582 CrossRef CAS .J. Zhang, J. Ma, D. Liu, D. Liu, Y. Han, Y. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 10548–10556 RSC .C. Shi, X. Zhang, A. Nilghaz, Z. Wu, T. Wang, B. Zhu, G. Tang, B. Su and J. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 455, 140361 CrossRef CAS .P. Mu, W. Bai, Z. Zhang, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18183–18190 RSC .Y. Shi, N. Meng, Y. Wang, Z. Cheng, W. Zhang and Y. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 4522–4531 CrossRef PubMed .M. Q. Yang, C. F. Tan, W. Lu, K. Zeng and G. W. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004460 CrossRef CAS .X. Liu, D. D. Mishra, X. Wang, H. Peng and C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17907–17937 RSC .Y. Chen, G. Zhao, L. Ren, H. Yang, X. Xiao and W. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 46653–46660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Shi, R. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhuo, L. Shi, J. Chang, S. Hong, K.-C. Ng and P. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1171–1186 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Liu, B. Wu, B. Zhu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu and X. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905485 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .X. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Q. Li and H. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Wang, X. Wu, F. He, S. Peng and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011114 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhang, T. Li, W. Liao, D. Chen, Z. Deng, X. Liu and B. Shang, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 7913–7918 RSC .G. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Ren, L. Pan, B. Chen, X. Xiao, R. Hu and W. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 12927–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Gong, H. Yang, S. Wu, Y. Tian, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Appl. Energy, 2021, 301, 117463 CrossRef .L. Geng, L. Li, H. Zhang, M. Zhong, P. Mu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 15485–15496 RSC .S. Xi, L. Wang, H. Xie and W. Yu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3843–3851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. Lu, W. Shi, H. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Yu, R. Gu, Y. Tian, P. Xie, B. Jin and S. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2108586 CrossRef CAS .F. Meng, Z. Ding, Z. Chen, K. Wang, X. Liu, J. Li, T. Lu, X. Xu and L. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9575–9581 RSC .D. Xu, H. Zhong, M. G. Li, S. S. To and L. Lu, Carbon, 2023, 204, 231–237 CrossRef CAS .J. Xu, F. Xu, M. Qian, Z. Li, P. Sun, Z. Hong and F. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .X. Ma, J. Zhao, R. Wang, Y. Li, C. Liu and Y. Liu, Appl. Energy, 2022, 328, 120203 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, N. Wu, R. Zhang, B. Zhu, H. Jin, Y. Zhang, M. Zhu and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13007–13018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Ying, B. Ai, W. Hu, Y. Geng, L. Li, K. Sun, S. C. Tan, W. Zhang and M. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106443 CrossRef CAS .S. Meng, X. Zhao, C.-Y. Tang, P. Yu, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2701–2711 RSC .Z. Zhang, Z. Feng, H. Qi, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Deng and S. Wang, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2022, 32, e00414 CrossRef CAS .K. Chen, L. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 13031–13041 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, X. Shen, E. Kim, M. Wang, J. H. Lee, H. Chen, G. Zhang and J. K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111794 CrossRef CAS .X. Ma, N. Tian, G. Wang, W. Wang, J. Miao and T. Fan, Desalination, 2023, 550, 116397 CrossRef CAS .F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Guo and G. Yu, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .V. G. Gude, N. Nirmalakhandan and S. Deng, Energy, 2011, 36, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .Z. Li, C. Wang, J. Su, S. Ling, W. Wang and M. An, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800206 CrossRef .S. Cao, A. Thomas and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, 62, e202214391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Liu, T. Chen, J. Xu, G. Yao, J. Xie, Y. Cheng, Z. Miao and K. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100310 CrossRef CAS .L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Xu, C. Wang, Z. Li, S. Wu and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2007855 CrossRef .L. Song, P. Mu, L. Geng, Q. Wang and J. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11845–11852 CrossRef CAS .C. Finnerty, L. Zhang, D. L. Sedlak, K. L. Nelson and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11701–11709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Zhang, Y. Shi, L. Shi, H. Li, R. Li, S. Hong, S. Zhuo, T. Zhang and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Yang, H. Feng, W. Que, Y. Qiu, Y. Li, L. Guo and Q. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 33, 2210972 CrossRef .X. Liu, F. Chen, Y. Li, H. Jiang, D. D. Mishra, F. Yu, Z. Chen, C. Hu, Y. Chen, L. Qu and W. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Wang, S. Zhao, X. Zhang and Z. Su, Desalination, 2022, 543, 116085 CrossRef CAS .H.-N. Li, H.-C. Yang, C.-Y. Zhu, J. Wu, A. Greiner and Z.-K. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 20856–20865 RSC .L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, L. Zhang, E. Strobach, A. Leroy, M. K. Yadav, S. Yang, T. A. Cooper, L. A. Weinstein, A. Modi, S. B. Kedare, G. Chen and E. N. Wang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2733–2745 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, M. Du, G. Lv, L. Zhou, X. Li, L. Bertoluzzi, C. Liu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805159 CrossRef PubMed .C. Chang, P. Tao, J. Xu, B. Fu, C. Song, J. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18466–18474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, M. N. A. S. Ivan, M. I. Hossain, W. Qarony, P. K. Cheng, J. Qiao, Z. L. Guo, L. Zeng and Y. H. Tsang, Nano Energy, 2022, 94, 106916 CrossRef CAS .D. Fan, Y. Lu, H. Zhang, H. Xu, C. Lu, Y. Tang and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 295, 120285 CrossRef CAS .C. Song, D. Qi, Y. Han, Y. Xu, H. Xu, S. You, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Wei and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 9025–9033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Hao, Y. Yang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10789–10797 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, L. Li, L. Geng, X. Tan, Y. Hu, P. Mu and J. Li, Chemosphere, 2022, 311, 137163 CrossRef PubMed .B. Zhang, P. W. Wong and A. K. An, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133054 CrossRef CAS .X. Mu, L. Chen, N. Qu, J. Yu, X. Jiang, C. Xiao, X. Luo and Q. Hasi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2023, 636, 291–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Xu, J. Yang, J. Xiao, B. Bai and Q. Wang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 298, 121643 CrossRef CAS .S. Yan, H. Song, Y. Li, J. Yang, X. Jia, S. Wang and X. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 301, 120820 CrossRef CAS .X. Wei, Y. Peng, W. Fang, Z. Hu, W. Li, S. Zhang and J. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 20424–20430 RSC .Y. Peng, X. Wei, Y. Wang, W. Li, S. Zhang and J. Jin, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 8329–8337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhou, R. He, J. Pei, W. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Liu and J. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2022, 56, 10474–10482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. K. Sansaniwal, V. Sharma and J. Mathur, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 1576–1601 CrossRef .G. Alva, L. Liu, X. Huang and G. Fang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 693–706 CrossRef .R. H. E. Hassanien, M. Li and W. Dong Lin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 54, 989–1001 CrossRef .M. K. Chang, J. D. Eichman, F. Mueller and S. Samuelsen, Appl. Energy, 2013, 112, 1–11 CrossRef .S. A. Vargas, G. R. T. Esteves, P. M. Maçaira, B. Q. Bastos, F. L. Cyrino Oliveira and R. C. Souza, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 218, 850–870 CrossRef .S. Carrara, Energy Policy, 2020, 147, 111834 CrossRef .Y. Wang, Y. Du, J. Wang, J. Zhao, S. Deng and H. Yin, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 155, 104670 CrossRef .S. Eguchi, H. Takayabu and C. Lin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 138, 110562 CrossRef .J. Gui, C. Li, Y. Cao, Z. Liu, Y. Shen, W. Huang and X. Tian, Nano Energy, 2023, 107, 108155 CrossRef CAS .P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .H. Wang, W. Xie, B. Yu, B. Qi, R. Liu, X. Zhuang, S. Liu, P. Liu, J. Duan and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100481 CrossRef CAS .Z. Song, C. Ge, Y. Song, Z. Chen, B. Shao, X. Yuan, J. Chen, D. Xu, T. Song, J. Fang, Y. Wang and B. Sun, Small, 2023, 19, 2205265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a typical two-layer photothermal interfacial evaporator. The upper layer is the light and heat conversion and evaporation layer, converting sunlight into heat through light-absorbing materials and using the thermal energy for water evaporation through thermal positioning. The lower layer is a thermally isolated layer that locates the heat in the interfacial evaporation layer and does not transfer it to the bulk water. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 2  Three types of heating for SDIE: (a) bottom heating evaporation, (b) volumetric heating evaporation, and (c) interfacial heating evaporation. Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photothermal conversion mechanism of metal plasma materials. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (b) The selected natural porous wood is perpendicular to the growth direction and its surface is modified by depositing plasma metallic nanomaterials to obtain the photothermal conversion material. Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (c) A bionic photothermal evaporator based on polydopamine-silver was prepared by modifying the surface of wood flower. Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. (d) Infrared images of the photothermal conversion process of black gold films NPG-6 and NPG-30 at 1 kW m−2 light intensity. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of plasma TiN nanoparticles photothermal conversion material. Reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Diagram of the electron–hole generation and relaxation mechanism in classical and narrow-bandgap semiconductor materials. Reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic representation of plasma metal nanostructures for enhanced solar absorption of silicon NWs. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (c) The color transition process (from white to black) of MoO3 doped with different concentrations of V. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Diagram of the photothermal conversion mechanism of carbon-based materials. Reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (b) Illustration of the evaporative layer at the photothermal interface of a multi-layer carbon fiber fabric. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (c) Evaporation performance of rGO/CB evaporators prepared by 3D printing technology for 3.5 wt% (under 25 kW m−2 simulated sun illumination) and 10 wt% (under 8 kW m−2 simulated sun illumination) of brine. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (d) Physical diagram of carbonized eggplant in different arrangement directions. The evaporation direction is vertically upward. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the IPPM micro-skeleton. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (b) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of microporous PPy@D-SCG. SCG was first delignified to obtain D-SCG, followed by in situ growth of PPy nanoparticles on D-SCG. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. (c) Schematic diagram of the evaporation process at the interface of the PANI/GO photothermal interfacial evaporator. In this case, the dimples have the effect of thermally localizing and reducing the evaporation enthalpy of water. Reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2023. (d) Schematic representation of the synthesis of CMPs aerogels and their simulated structures. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (e) Photograph of the polyurethane sponge modified with CMPs. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

Semiconductor materials	Doped Si	>91	1	1.12	72.8	37
V-Doped MoO3	>90	1	2.01	93.44	38
Defect-rich HNb3O8/PAM	≈90	1	1.4	91	69
Plasma metallic nanomaterials	Porous wood-Pd/Au/Ag	≈99	10	11.8	85	30
Ag-PDA nanoparticles	98.65	1	2.08	97	31
Black-gold film	75.0–91.4	1	1.51	94.5	24
Plasmonic-TiN/rGO	—	1	1.76	99.1	33
Carbon-based materials	Multilayer carbon fiber fabric	97	1	3.39	93.41–96.69	48
Hollow-carbon-nanotubes	99	1	1.4406	86.8	43
N-Doped lignosulfonate/GO	91.6	1	1.57	95.2	53
rGO/CB	96	8	10.5 (10 wt% NaCl brine)	92	57
Carbonized eggplant	96.6	1	1.64 ((20 wt% NaCl brine))	90.6	58
Polymeric materials	PANI/GO	>93	1	1.42	96.6	25
PDA/GO	97.7	1	2.2	86.3	65
Spent coffee/PPy	95.7	1	1.54	89.1	66
1,3,5-Triethynylbenzene with 1,4-dibromobenzene/4,4′-dibromobiphenyl/CB	—	1	1.3992	81	67
Porphyrin/aniline-based	84.7	1	1.31	86.3	68

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of the energy flow in a typical bifunctional layer evaporation device. It should be noted that there is a certain thickness of evaporated material, so the transmission is generally negligible. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 

Solar absorption properties	Achieve full-spectrum absorption of sunlight	Doping of materials or structural defects;36 multiple interception and capture of light;71 recovery of heat radiation,72 etc.
Thermal management	Minimize thermal loss due to thermal conduction, thermal radiation, and thermal convection	Insulated evaporator design;73,74 absorbs energy from the environment,75,76 etc.
Water transfer channels	Balancing water evaporation and water transport processes	Confinement capillarity;77 control of pore size of water delivery channels;78 formation of water film,79 etc.
Phase-change energy storage	Recycling of excess energy	Energy storage through latent heat of phase change,80–82 etc.
Water evaporation enthalpy	Increase the rate of water evaporation	Hydrophobic nano water molecule channels;83 Design of microdroplet evaporation surfaces,84 etc.

 	Fig. 8  (a) Multiple light and heat radiation absorption by the 3D hollow cylindrical structure can reduce energy loss and improve the evaporation performance. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (b) Multiple reflection absorption of light by the blackbody model and a schematic diagram of a blackbody-like photothermal interfacial evaporator. The inset shows the incidence of light in a sunflower disk. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic diagram of the angle of incidence and IR image of the interfacial evaporation film after reaching a steady state at different incidence angles (under 1 sun illumination). Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (d) Adjustable angle of the evaporator in response to different incident angle lights. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (e) SEM images of nanostructures in MXene with parallel or wedge-shaped gaps for enhanced light absorption. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of the 2D water channel spaced interfacial evaporator, which can effectively reduce heat transfer. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic diagram of the fabric-suspended evaporator, with the enlarged part showing its working principle. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2019. (c) Infrared image of a solar-driven interfacial evaporator under simulated sun illumination at 1.2 kW m−2. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. (d) Infrared plots of the initial state and the steady state after 30 min for a heatsink-type evaporator under 1 sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Confinement capillarity (CC) is achieved with black hydrophilic nanoparticles (BHNPs) to improve the evaporation performance. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2021. (b) Comparison graph of evaporator surface temperature and evaporation performance for different SA contents. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (c) Schematic diagram of the operation of a luffa-based polypyrrole-coated solar evaporator and an enlarged view of the water transfer channel. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A leaf-type photothermal interfacial evaporator prepared by harvesting natural tree inspiration. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic diagram of the solar thermal evaporator and its cross-sectional structure. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021. (c) Asymmetric solar interfacial evaporator with directional ion migration inspired by electron diodes. Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2022. (d) Schematic of a 3D hydrogel interfacial evaporator with vertical radiant vessels breaking. The unique microstructure results in excellent thermal management and salt resistance. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic diagram of the operation of a nanofiber photothermal interfacial evaporator with a Janus structure. Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The left and right agar plates show the initial bacterial concentration and the bacterial concentration after sterilization by interfacial heating, respectively. The graph on the right about the sterilization efficiency of solar steam sterilization equipment. The black dashed line represents the WHO standard for the sterility of medical devices. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2018. (b) Working schematic and structural design diagram of a portable SDIE sterilization device. A structure of the evaporation zone is mentioned in the illustration. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) Comparison of agar plates before and after sterilization of E. coli cells. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The left part shows the SDIE unit and the right part shows the water sample collected during the treatment process. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (b) Diagram of the photocatalytic mechanism of MF-MXene/PPy aerogels. And the diagram of the water samples, which collected during the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes by MF-MXene/PPy aerogels. Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2023. (c) Schematic diagram of the water purification mechanism of the Janus photothermal interfacial evaporation synergy photocatalytic evaporator. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2022. (d) PANI/ZIF-8 composite photothermal evaporation membrane based on SDIE combined with molecular sieves for sewage treatment. Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022. (e) Schematic of the photocatalytic removal of VOCs by Ag/AgCl particles. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the device based on the combination of salinity gradient power generation and photothermal evaporation. The enlarged diagram shows the mechanism of electricity production and the physical diagram of the device. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (b) Schematic diagram of photothermal evaporation in combination with TGC and RED to achieve simultaneous production of water and electricity. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2021. (c) Schematic diagram of solar-driven co-production of water and electricity. The enlarged view shows the flexible GONRs-M paper (right) and the thermoelectric module (left). Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2022. (d) Schematic diagram of the structure and working mechanism of HG and SSG. The picture on the right shows the SEM image of the cross-section of SiNWs and the physical image of SiNWs. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Wiley, copyright 2023.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
