Kinetic model for photoluminescence quenching by selective excitation of D/A blends: implications for charge separation in fullerene and non-fullerene ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC01077D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC01077D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8755-8769Kinetic model for photoluminescence quenching by selective excitation of D/A blends: implications for charge separation in fullerene and non-fullerene organic solar cells†

        
          
            L. 
            Benatto
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            M. de Jesus 
            Bassi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            L. C. Wouk 
            de Menezes
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            L. S. 
            Roman
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            M. 
            Koehler
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physics, Federal University of Paraná, C. P. 19044, 81531-980, Curitiba-PR, Brazil. E-mail: lb08@fisica.ufpr.br
bCenter of Innovations, CSEM Brazil, C. P. 31035-536, Belo Horizonte-MG, Brazil
Received 
      2nd March 2020
    , Accepted 26th April 2020First published on 27th April 2020AbstractThe details of the charge separation kinetics at organic donor/acceptor (D/A) heterojunctions are still poorly understood. Particularly in the field of organic solar cells (OSCs), it is not yet clear why systems with low energetic offsets (driving force, ΔG) between D and A can efficiently dissociate excitons generated in either phase of the heterojunction. This phenomenon has become ubiquitous after the popularization of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) to replace the fullerene acceptors (FAs) in efficient OSCs. Here we modeled the kinetics of charge separation at the D/A heterojunctions. The time-dependent concentration of singlet excitons (S1) and charge transfer states (CT) at the D/A interface is quantified by a system of coupled differential equations with transition rates obtained from Marcus/Hush theory. We derived analytical expressions for the exciton quenching produced by selective excitation of the donor (QD) or the acceptor (QA) under the steady-state approximation. We then use this model and quantum chemistry calculations to anticipate the basic features of charge separation in the interfaces of PC71BM and ITIC (FA and NFA) with the PTB7-Th copolymer (D). The model predicts QD = QA = 100% for the system with ITIC and QD = 100% for the system with PC71BM. Yet QA ≪ 100% for selective excitation of PC71BM. This effect is basically produced by the high binding energy of S1 excitons in fullerene. These properties of exciton quenching are in agreement with photoluminescence measurements performed in PTB7-Th/PC71BM (ITIC) blends. With the help of the parameters calculated for these systems and assuming a constant energy for the local S1 state, we found that the magnitude of ΔG determines different mechanisms that limit the exciton dissociation. Singlet exciton recombination is dominant over other recombination channels when ΔG is low. This effect is due to a fast back charge transfer from the CT state to recreate the S1 state population. Nevertheless, direct recombination from the CT state is the dominant channel when ΔG is high. Our analysis may inspire new optimizations strategies to achieve even higher OSC efficiencies.
1. Introduction
The photoexcitation of organic semiconductors generates singlet excitons (S1) whose electrostatic binding energy (Eb) needs to be overcome for the production of free charges.1 Due to the poor screening of charges resulting from the low dielectric constant of these materials, in general Eb ≫ kT (where k is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature) at room temperature.2 This feature severely limits the performance of organic solar cells (OSCs) based on single layers.3 As a consequence, the use of bulk heterojunctions formed by an interpenetrating network of electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) components was found to be crucial to enhance the photovoltaic performance of OSCs that now have reached power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over 15%.4
In this bulk heterojunction, the photocurrent generation is directly connected to the kinetics of charge transfer between the D and A species in the active layer of the OSC.5 During this process, excitons are quenched at the D/A interface by creating an intermediary charge transfer state (CT) that can be further separated to generate free charges.6
Yet the mechanism behind the charge separation at the D/A interface remains elusive. It was believed that efficient dissociation of the CT state was possible only when the D/A system had a minimum Gibbs free energy offset between the S1 and CT state (known as driving force, ΔG) so that ΔG > 0.3 eV.7,8 This requirement tends to limit the open circuit voltage of the device and it was usually fulfilled when fullerene acceptors (FAs) were used. However, the recent discovery of new D/A systems using non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) with small ΔG but efficient charge separation severely challenged this picture.9 In the light of these discoveries, the role of the CT state in the exciton dissociation process needs to be revised especially in complexes using NFAs.
Among the many theories proposed to understand exciton dissociation at the D/A interface, charge separation through energetically relaxed CT states has been under intense research.10,11 Dissociation under this mechanism requires that the electron–hole pairs must overcome their mutual electrostatic attraction by a sequence of charge transfer processes between the electronic states at the donor/acceptor interface. The underlying driving forces behind these processes and their relation with the electronic structure of the materials involved are the subject of ongoing theoretical and experimental investigations.12,13 As examples of the complexity of the phenomena, it is known that the interaction of the electronic states of the donor and the acceptor at the D/A interface introduces variations in those states when compared to the isolated materials.14 Moreover delocalization of the CT state between D and A materials may promote charge dissociation.15,16 Also, the hybridization of the local and charge transfer states can enable the direct optical generation of space-separated charges.17,18 Finally, it has been suggested that dark dipoles at the D/A interface,19,20 charge delocalization21,22 and entropic effects23 could also help CT exciton dissociation. Under this context, a kinetic model relating the rates of those charge transfer processes with the energetic profile of the molecules at the D/A interface is especially challenging.24,25
In the present work we study the charge separation processes in D/A systems for fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors. We propose a kinetic model to describe the exciton quenching at the D/A interface and use this model to determine the basic differences in the charge separation process when FAs or NFAs are used. FAs have a low light absorption coefficient26 and consequently their use in OSCs was associated to dissociation of the excitons generated in the donor phase.27 On the other hand, NFAs28 have a higher light absorption coefficient than FAs in the visible range so that the hole transfer from the acceptor to donor material became an excellent strategy to increase the photocurrent of OSCs.29,30 Although the particular structural features between FAs and NFAs have been the subject of great attention,31,32 a detailed analysis of the kinetics of electron (hole) transfer for interfaces containing D/FAs (D/NFAs)33 remains poorly explored in the literature.34,35
In order to fill this gap, we model the charge generation at the D/A interface by considering a charge transfer that transforms the S1 local exciton into a CT exciton. We then rationalize the possible ways by which this CT can either dissociate into free charges, recombine or regenerate the S1 state. All these processes are mediated by transition rates calculated using the semiclassical Marcus–Hush (MH) theory. The temporal variation of the S1 and CT population is then described by a system of coupled differential equations that are solved assuming the steady-state approximation. Using this solution, we are able to quantify the exciton quenching (Q) at the donor/acceptor interface as a function of the transition rates. Here these rates are obtained with the help of density functional theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) calculations of isolated dimers of donor and acceptor molecules.
In particular, we applied our model to study the differences in the exciton quenching induced by electron (hole) transfer at donor/FA(NFA) systems. This analysis was developed for D/A dimers formed by oligomers of the two dimensional conjugated polymer poly[[4,8-bis[5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophene-2-yl]benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl][3-fluoro-2-[(2-ethylhexyl)carbonyl]thieno[3,4-b]thiophenediyl]] (PTB7-Th) as the donor. This copolymer showed very good photovoltaic response when forming blends with FAs and also with NFAs (of the indacenodithiophene (IDT) group).36–38 The FA and the NFA molecules considered here are the [6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) and 3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (ITIC), respectively. These acceptors are commonly used in the active layer of high efficiency OSCs based on the PTB7-Th polymer. Both devices had a similar PCE around 8%, as can be seen in ref. 39–42. The chemical structures of donor polymer and acceptor molecules are presented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structures of donor polymer and acceptor molecules. 
Since the PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC systems showed similar PCE efficiency, we can explore the details of the charge transfer that characterizes these very distinct molecular acceptors. Especially we explore the particular features of the exciton quenching when a selective excitation of the donor or the acceptor induces electron transfer from D to A or hole transfer from A to D. Finally, we verify some of our theoretical predictions using photoluminescence measurements.
Our work highlights the role played by Eb and the energy of the CT exciton (ECT) to determine the kinetics of electron (hole) transfer upon donor (acceptor) excitation. We also discuss how the magnitude of ECT influences the physical mechanisms behind charge recombination in systems with low and high driving forces. Finally our discussion gives some guidelines on how the modification of the quantities Eb and ECT could produce more efficient bulk heterojunction OSCs.
2. Modeling the charge transfer kinetics
Using a simple one-electron picture,43 we modeled the electron and hole kinetics at the D/A interface using a sequence of processes that are characterized by a frequency rate. Let us first consider light absorption in the donor (D) phase. This process corresponds to the HOMOD (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) → LUMOD (Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital) electronic transition and the formation of a singlet exciton S1D in the donor. For the S1D state close to the D/A interface, the excited electron can either recombine with the hole (singlet exciton recombination, SR) or be transferred (ET) to the acceptor to form a CT state (LUMOD → LUMOA transition). The CT state can then be destroyed by electron recombination (ER) with the hole using the LUMOA → HOMOD transition, by electron back (EB) transfer that recreates a S1D exciton (using the LUMOA → LUMOD transition) or by electron separation (ES) characterized by the transfer of the electron from the nearest acceptor molecule adjacent to the donor polymer (molecule 1) to the next-to-the nearest acceptor molecule (molecule 2). The ES process thus involves a LUMOA(1) → LUMOA(2) electronic transition and corresponds to the final process necessary to dissociate the S1D exciton that reached the D/A heterojunction.
Likewise, light absorption in the acceptor phase creates an S1A exciton after the HOMOA → LUMOA electronic transition. The S1A state near the D/A interface can then be destroyed by the SR process or create a CT state by hole transfer (HT) to the donor (HOMOA → HOMOD transition). Once formed, the CT state can disappear by hole recombination (HR) with the electron (HOMOD → LUMOA transition), by hole back (HB) transfer to recreate the S1A exciton (HOMOD → HOMOA transition), or by free charge generation due to hole separation (HS). The HS process is characterized by the hole jump from the nearest donor chain adjacent to the acceptor (chain 1) to the next-to-the nearest donor chain (chain 2) adjacent to the acceptor (HOMOD(1) → HOMOD(2) transition). The HT and HS processes are favorable for exciton dissociation whereas HR and HB processes decrease the free charge generation. Fig. 2 illustrates the processes considered here to model the charge transfer dynamics at the D/A interface.
 Fig. 2  Simplified charge transfer dynamics diagram between the materials of the D/A interface. (a) Electron dynamics from the donor and (b) hole dynamics from the acceptor. The stacked dashed lines represent electronic states (HOMOs and LUMOs) accessible for optical excitation and with lower energies in relation to the fundamental gap (IP–EA). 
Each process described above has a characteristic frequency that can be estimated within the semi-classical theory of Marcus/Hush, given by44,45 (1)where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, λ is the reorganization energy, and β is the electronic coupling (transfer integral). ΔG‡ is the activation energy for charge transfer that is related to λ by46 (2)where ΔG is the Gibbs free energy or the driving force (the energy difference between initial and final states). A negative value for the driving force indicates that the process is thermodynamically favorable. The ΔG‡ for the electron (hole) transfer rate (kE(H)T), recombination rate (kE(H)R), back rate (kE(H)B) and separation rate (kE(H)S) corresponding to the processes described above can be found by performing DFT and TD-DFT calculations of D/A. Using these methods, the charge transfer energy (ECT), first local excited-state energy of the donor (ELE(D)) and first local excited-state energy of the acceptor (ELE(A)) are determined. The ΔG's in eqn (2) for each transfer process are then: ΔGET = ECT − ELE(D), for electron transfer; and ΔGEB = −ΔGET, for electron back transfer;47 ΔGHT = ECT − ELE(A), for hole transfer; and ΔGHB = −ΔGHT, for hole back transfer. By the same token, the driving force for the nonradiative electron (hole) recombination rate can be obtained from ΔGE(H)R = −(ECT − λe(h)),48 where subscripts e and h are the reorganization energies associated to the electron and hole, respectively. Finally we assume that ΔG for the electron (hole) separation process is given by the exciton binding energy in the donor (acceptor) phase plus the driving force for electron (hole) transfer, ΔGE(H)S = Eb,D(A) + ΔGE(H)T. The idea behind this expression is the following. The electron (hole) of the exciton that diffuses to the D/A interface is bounded to the hole (electron) by a potential well with depth given by Eb,D(A) (here the subscript D refers to the binding energy of the exciton created in the donor whereas the subscript A refers to the binding energy of the exciton created in the acceptor). After the electron (hole) transfer to the acceptor (donor) and the formation of the CT state, this depth is reduced by the driving force at the D/A interface since ΔGE(H)T < 0. Therefore, depending on the magnitude of ΔGE(H)T, ΔGE(H)S may approach zero or even become negative with the reduction of Eb,D(A). In this situation, the photovoltaic effect is enhanced by the increase of kE(H)S so that most of the charges that form the CT state are dissociated.27,31 On the other hand, a considerable fraction of those charges do not overcome the Coulomb attraction and recombine when ΔGE(H)S ≫ 0.33. These assumptions are supported by the fact that the decrease of the exciton binding energy (induced by electronic delocalization17,49–51 for instance) increases the exciton dissociation efficiency.15,21
In the ESI,† we write the coupled differential equations that quantify the time variation of the singlet exciton [S1D(A)] and charge transfer exciton [CT] populations as a function of the rates defined above and kD(A),SR, the recombination rate of singlet excitons in the donor (acceptor). Assuming the steady state approximation and writing the exciton quenching as QD(A) = 1 − ([S1,D(A)]/[S1,D(A)′]), where [S1,D(A)′] is the exciton concentration in the pure donor (acceptor) material when submitted to the same illumination conditions of the D/A blend, we obtain (see Section S1 of the ESI† for details) (3)and (4)where QD (QA) is the quenching for selective excitation of the donor (acceptor) phase. The idea here is to study the differences in the exciton quenching when this process is dominated by the electron transfer from the donor to the acceptor or by the hole transfer from the acceptor to the donor. kD(A),SR in eqn (3) and (4) is the inverse of singlet exciton recombination lifetime. For the materials studied in this work, the exciton recombination lifetimes were obtained from experimental data in the literature (93 ps,52 600 ps53 and 256 ps54 for PTB7-Th, PC71BM and ITIC, respectively).
To finish the description of the model for the charge transfer at the D/A heterojunction, we would like to point out that the formalism outlined above neglects the contribution from hot excited states. Yet sophisticated experiments performed by Vandewal et al. on several D/A combinations10 demonstrated that hot excited states rapidly relax to the lowest excited state. These experimental findings indicate that a charge transfer dynamics involving only frontier molecular orbitals can be a reasonable approximation to describe the exciton dissociation at the D/A heterojunction.
3. Experimental section
Films with the electron donor material PTB7-Th (1-Material®) and electron acceptor material PC71BM (Sigma Aldrich®) were processed using the nonhalogenated solvent methylanisol55–57 (Sigma Aldrich®) at a concentration of 5 mg ml−1. In this study we use a 1:1.3 mass ratio of PTB7-Th/PC71BM. The solutions were kept under stirring for 12 hours. The films were deposited on previously washed quartz substrates, where the deposition of the films was by the spin coating method at 900 rpm for 60 s. The photoluminescence spectra were measured at room temperature on a Fluorolog-3 Jobin Yvon Spex fluorescence spectrometer from Horiba®. The absorption spectrum of the films composed of pristine materials was collected on a Shimadzu UV-2450 spectrophotometer using quartz/air as the reference.
4. Computational methods
The parameters necessary to quantify the transition rates of the kinetic model in Section 2 are obtained from ab initio calculations of donor/acceptor, donor/donor and acceptor/acceptor dimers using DFT and TD-DFT calculations. First we obtained the ground state geometry of the molecular acceptors and of the donor oligomer (with 3 mers). We then constructed the dimers and submitted the system to another geometry optimization. All energy minimizations in these steps were done using the 6-31G(d,p) basis set and the ωb97XD58 functional. This functional includes long-range corrections to better describe dispersion forces which is convenient for dealing with intermolecular interactions in dimers.49 After the geometry optimizations of the dimers, we performed TD-DFT single point calculations with the M0659 functional and 6-31G(d,p) basis set to determine the vertical electronic transition energies, following the same methodology described in previous works.60,61 From these calculations we obtained ECT, ELE(D) and ELE(A) for PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC dimers. We added a 100 meV correction to all adiabatic energies in order to account for the medium polarization effects.47
In Section S3 of the ESI,† the details of the calculations applied to determine the inner component of the reorganization energy for electrons (holes) are given. The outer component of reorganization energy (λs) is very small compared to the internal component due to the low static dielectric constant of organic molecules.62,63 Some works neglect this parameter as a first approximation for condensed-state systems.64,65 Here we consider the contribution of λs by adding 36 meV to the intramolecular component of the reorganization energy, which is a physically plausible magnitude for this parameter.66,67
The transfer integral β between each pair of molecular orbitals involved in the electron and hole transfer dynamics was obtained by applying the fragment orbital method46 as implemented in the AOMix68,69 software. This method was also used to determine the total and partial density of states (DOS) of each dimer system. The values of β involved in the rates for the ET (HT), ER (HR) and EB (HB) processes (see Section 2) are found from the calculations applied to PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC dimers (donor/acceptor dimers). We then quantified the electronic coupling between LUMOD and LUMOA, βL−L, a parameter that is involved in the ET and EB processes. In principle the PTB7-Th excitation can induce an electron transfer from LUMOD to one of the three low-lying LUMOA states of PC71BM.70,71 Hence for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM dimer we also determined βL–L+1 and βL–L+2 since the LUMO, LUMO+1 and LUMO+2 levels of the fullerene have similar energies. After the electron transfer to the acceptor, the hole remains in the polymer's HOMO, so that the ER process involves the transfer integral between HOMOD and LUMOA, βH–L. In order to quantify the electron recombination rate, we then calculated βH–L for both dimers. Again, we additionally calculated βH–L+1 and βH–L+2 for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system. Hence the total rates for electron transfer, back and recombination that characterize the electron dynamics at the polymer/fullerene system were obtained by summing all the three contributions from the unoccupied orbitals of PC71BM. For the processes involving hole dynamics, like HT and HB, the rates are calculated using only the HOMOD–HOMOA transfer integral, βH–H, for both dimers. After the hole transfer to the donor, the electron remains in the acceptor's LUMO. Therefore, in the same way as for ER, the HR process involves the transfer integral between HOMOD and LUMOA, βH–L.
For the ES and HS process (see Section 2), the value of β was obtained from calculations for the PTB7-Th/PTB7-Th, PC71BM/PC71BM and ITIC/ITIC dimers (donor/donor or acceptor/acceptor dimers). For HS we calculated the electronic coupling between the HOMOs of two adjacent donor oligomers (HOMOD(1) and HOMOD(2)). On the other hand, ES is found by calculating the electronic coupling between the LUMOs of two adjacent acceptors (LUMOA(1) and LUMOA(2)). All DFT and TD-DFT calculations were performed using the Gaussian 16 package.72
5. Results and discussion
The calculated values of λe and λh for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC dimers are shown in Table 1. The results show a very small difference in the magnitudes of λe and λh for the two systems. Therefore, the reorganization energy will influence the charge dynamics in these two systems in a very similar way. One of the most important parameters that directly influence the dynamics of electrons and holes at the D/A interface is the driving force. The characteristic energies necessary for the determination of ΔG's for PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC systems as obtained using DFT/TD-DFT calculations are listed in Table 1. For instance, ECT is 1.63 eV for the dimer with fullerene and 1.46 eV for the dimer with ITIC. These results are in good agreement with the values reported in the literature (1.54–1.59 eV for PTB7-Th/PC71BM47 and 1.38–1.41 eV for PTB7-Th/ITIC55). Due to the higher ECT, ΔGET is lower for the dimer with PC71BM. The magnitudes of ΔGET and ΔGER in Table 1 for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system are quite similar to recent estimates reported in ref. 47. Curiously both dimers (with fullerene and non-fullerene acceptors) showed very similar values of ΔGHT and ΔGHB. Therefore, the differences in the dynamics of the holes between these two systems will be essentially determined by the variation of ΔGHS. Note that ΔGHS for PTB7-Th/PC71BM is more than six times higher compared to the ΔGHS for PTB7-Th/ITIC. This is because the exciton binding energy in ITIC (Eb,A) is approximately half of Eb,A in PC71BM (see the caption of Table 1).
Table 1 Total reorganization energy (inner + 36 meV) for electron transfer (λe) and for hole transfer (λh), dimer energies and driving forces (remember that ΔGEB = −ΔGET and ΔGHB = −ΔGHT). All results are in eV




Dimers

λ
e


λ
h


E
CT


E
LE(D)


E
LE(A)

ΔGET
ΔGER
ΔGESa
ΔGHT
ΔGHR
ΔGHSb





a For the calculation of ΔGES we use Eb,D for PTB7-Th equal to 0.5 eV, the maximum value for the PTB family of polymers.73
b For the calculation of ΔGHS we use Eb,A for PC71BM and ITIC equal to 1.0 eV and 0.51 eV, the maximum values in accordance with previous works.31,32,60,74






PTB7-Th/PC71BM
0.239
0.228
1.63
1.92
2.03
−0.29
−1.39
0.21
−0.40
−1.40
0.60



PTB7-Th/ITIC
0.223
0.208
1.46
1.92
1.87
−0.46
−1.24
0.04
−0.41
−1.25
0.09




A simple analysis of the total and partial DOS spectrum of the dimers in Fig. 3 revealed that the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system has a higher density of occupied and unoccupied frontier states than the PTB7-Th/ITIC dimer due to the contribution of PC71BM. It is well known that the spherical symmetry of FAs plays an important role in enhancing the DOS and producing degenerate frontier orbitals.75 The functionalization of fullerene generally breaks this degeneracy, but the three energy levels associated to the LUMO are still low-lying enough to participate in the electron transfer dynamics.70 However, a high DOS is not fundamental to promote charge transfer if the electronic coupling between frontier orbitals of the donor and acceptor is small and/or the exciton binding energy is higher.
 Fig. 3  Partial and total density of states for (a) PTB7-Th/PC71BM and (b) PTB7-Th/ITIC dimers. 
The PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC dimer structures are presented in Fig. 4. In this figure we also present the frontier molecular orbitals involved in the charge kinetics and the magnitude of the electronic coupling between them. Each of the electronic coupling values presented in Fig. 4 will be used to calculate the respective electron (hole) transfer, recombination and back rates. In Fig. 5 we present the frontier molecular orbitals and electronic coupling between PTB7-Th/PTB7-Th, PC71BM/PC71BM and ITIC/ITIC dimers. In this case, the electronic coupling values will be used to calculate the electron (hole) separation rate (according to what is described in detail in the previous section).
 Fig. 4  Dimer frontier molecular orbitals and electronic coupling between them for the processes of electron transfer and back, hole transfer and back and electron and hole recombination. 
 Fig. 5  Dimer frontier molecular orbitals and electronic coupling between them for the hole separation process in the case of PTB7-Th/PTB7-Th, and for the electron separation process in the case of PC71BM/PC71BM and ITIC/ITIC. 
All the rates that characterize the electron/hole dynamics at the dimers are listed in Table 2. Important differences among the rates for the systems with fullerene or non-fullerene acceptors are uncovered in this table. For instance, kET for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM dimer is one order of magnitude faster than the electron transfer rate for the PTB7-Th/ITIC dimer. This result is a direct consequence of the three low-lying LUMO states of PC71BM and demonstrates the great capacity of this acceptor to receive electrons from the donor. On the other hand, kHT is one order of magnitude higher for the PTB7-Th/ITIC system compared to the hole transfer rate of the dimer with PC71BM. Because λh and ΔGHT are very similar for both dimers, the difference in the magnitude of kHT is directly related to a higher βH–H for the system with ITIC. In fact βH–H for the dimer using this non-fullerene acceptor is around 5 times higher than for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM dimer. This result highlights the improved features of the non-fullerene acceptors over fullerenes to enhance the photovoltaic response: not only ITIC has a higher light absorption coefficient than PC71BM but it also has a greater capacity to transfer those photogenerated holes. In addition, both kET and kHT have the same order of magnitude for the dimer with ITIC which indicates a more balanced electron–hole transfer. Note that for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system kET is two orders of magnitude greater than kHT. Balanced kET and kHT rates can facilitate charge transport and reduce recombination which can increase the fill factor (FF) and PCE of OSCs.76 These results demonstrate the importance of an effective electronic coupling between donor and acceptor.
Table 2 Electron/hole transfer, back, recombination and separation rates in s−1. Quenching efficiency for donor excitation (QD) and for acceptor excitation (QA) in percentage




Dimers

k
ET


k
EB


k
ER


k
ES


Q
D


k
HT


k
HB


k
HR


k
HS


Q
A






a The total kES was obtained with λe = 0.226 eV calculated for the PC71BM/PC71BM dimer.
b 
k
HS was obtained with λh = 0.240 eV calculated for the PTB7-Th/PTB7-Th dimer.
c 
k
ES was obtained with λe = 0.191 eV calculated for the ITIC/ITIC dimer.






PTB7- Th/PC71BMab
2.52 × 1014
3.37 × 109
7.62 × 10−10
9.72 × 1010
100
1.93 × 1012
3.65 × 105
1.05 × 10−11
1.64 × 102
34



PTB7-Th/ITICb,c
4.56 × 1013
8.48 × 105
2.23 × 10−6
1.83 × 1013
100
2.77 × 1013
3.57 × 106
7.16 × 10−9
3.50 × 1012
100




A remarkable feature of the results in Table 2 is that the charge carrier transfer rates are much higher than the back and recombination rates for both dimers. The charge transfer process is then faster than the other competing processes, especially regarding the recombination. Hence the first step for free charge generation (which corresponds to the production of the CT states) is very efficient for the excitons that reached the D/A interface formed by those systems. As a consequence, the great contribution to losses in the free charge generation is essentially related to the efficient dissociation of the CT state (a key phenomenon that depends on the separation rate). Hence it is important here to discuss in more detail some physical parameters that influence this rate.
In our model, the characteristic energy for charge separation is related to the exciton binding energy and the driving force for charge transfer by ΔGES = Eb,D + ΔGET (for electrons) or ΔGHS = Eb,A + ΔGHT (for holes). These formulas are inspired by the experimental evidence indicating that an efficient charge separation is observed when the exciton binding energy is of the order of the driving force at the D/A interface.31,32 The ΔGES values are small for both systems, leading to an improved kES and QD = 100%. Hence one then expects an exciton quenching close to 100% after PTB7-Th excitation for blends using PC71BM or ITIC as well. From the literature, the comparison of the photoluminescence of pristine PTB7-Th with the photoluminescence of the PTB7-Th/PC71BM blend (by selectively exciting the donor) indicates an almost complete quenching of the excitonic luminescence.41,47 We also obtained experimentally a high quenching of 99% of the PTB7-Th emission when the polymer is blended with PC71BM (see Fig. 6a). In the case of the PTB7-Th/ITIC blend, there is a strong overlap in the absorption spectra of PTB7-Th and ITIC. Therefore, it is not possible to selectively excite only the donor of the PTB7-Th/ITIC blend. Therefore, the almost 100% quenching of the excitonic luminescence observed for the PTB7-Th/ITIC blend in ref. 40 and in our previous work55 indicates that almost all excitons are dissociated in the blended film after PTB7-Th and ITIC excitation. This result suggests that indeed Eb,D ∼ ΔGES for excitons generated in the PTB7-Th phase or Eb,A ∼ ΔGHS for the excitons generated in the ITIC phase. Despite the high exciton dissociation in the PTB7-Th/ITIC blend, the strong superposition in the light absorption of both materials severely limits the PCE of the device based on this blend.28 Reports of OSCs using ITIC blended with copolymers that have a blue-shifted absorption relative to that of PTB7-Th (like BDB-T77 or PBQ-4F78) showed PCEs above 11%, higher than that obtained with PTB7-Th/ITIC blends.
 Fig. 6  PL spectra. (a) Pristine PTB7-Th and blends using the excitation wavelength of 650 nm. (b) Pristine PC71BM and blends using the excitation wavelength of 500 nm. 
Yet the results of Table 2 indicate that there is a great difference in the hole separation rate kHS for the blends with ITIC or PC71BM. The high exciton binding energy of PC71BM31,32 increases the ΔGHS for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system giving rise to a very low kHS when compared to the PTB7-Th/ITIC dimer. This result indicates that the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system is not efficient to quench the excitons generated by the selective excitation of the fullerene. Using the rates in Table 2 and eqn (4), QA is only 34% for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system compared to a QD of 100% when the polymer is selectively excited.
Therefore, a very different behavior is expected when the acceptor phase of the PTB7-Th/PC71BM blend is selectively excited. In principle this measurement can be done because there is no significant overlap between the polymer and the fullerene absorption (see Fig. S3, ESI†). This fact motivated us to perform the experiment despite the difficulties arising from the low PL yield of PC71BM.79 In Fig. 6b we have compared the photoluminescence of pristine PC71BM (which presents a very similar behavior to that obtained in ref. 53) with the PL of the PTB7-Th/PC71BM blend produced by selectively exciting the fullerene. It was observed that the emission of PC71BM is quenched by just 25% in clear contrast to the PL measurements shown in Fig. 6a. This result qualitatively agrees with the theoretical predictions of Table 2. Note that kHS for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM system is almost eight orders of magnitude lower than kES. The slow hole separation is a direct consequence of the high exciton binding energy in PC71BM when compared to the driving force at the PTB7-Th/PC71BM interface. Since kHB ≫ kHS, the high exciton binding energy in the fullerene limits the performance of the solar cell due to an increasing recombination along the acceptor layer. In addition, a high driving force necessary to promote the exciton dissociation also limits the open circuit voltage (VOC) of fullerene-based OSCs.9,80,81
Our photoluminescence measurements were performed with the blend deposited over quartz. In an OPV structure, this would correspond to a measurement under open circuit (OC) conditions. This means that the internal electric field is zero. Under OC conditions, there is no long range charge transport. Under this simplification, the exciton quenching is then necessarily equal to the charge generation yield at the donor/acceptor interface. We even tested the soundness of our mathematical model by writing the expression for the charge generation yield (see Section S2 of the ESI†). When calculating the expression using the numerical values of the rates it gives the same value of the exciton quenching efficiency, as expected. The further development of this analysis considering the influence of an electric field will be the subject of a future work.
The above model can be helpful to explore the impacts of ECT changes on the charge separation dynamics at the donor/acceptor interface. It is known that the energy of the charge transfer state is very sensitive to small variations of the blend morphology.47 For example, it has been reported that an optimized PTB7-Th/PC71BM blend morphology results in high purity acceptor domains which increases the contribution of these materials to the photocurrent generation.39,82 The use of solvent additives to improve the active layer morphology can result in a slight redshift of the CT band.83 Furthermore the aggregates of acceptor molecules delocalize the electronic states84–86 which tends to lower ECT. All these piece of evidence motivated us to analyze the effects of ECT changes when the other parameters that control the dynamics of charge separation are kept fixed.

Fig. 7a–f shows the activation energies, the characteristic rates and the exciton quenching as a function of ECT. The behavior of these parameters characterizes different regimes of the charge kinetics at the D/A interface. First it is clear that a considerable decrease of ECT leads to a drastic reduction of the activation energy for charge recombination  and  (see Fig. 7a and b) which enhances the recombination rates, kER and kHR (see Fig. 7c and d). As ECT decreases, the HOMOD energetically approaches the LUMOA so that the electron–hole recombination becomes easier.
 Fig. 7  Variation of activation energies ((a) and (b)), rates ((c) and (d) in log scale) and quenching efficiency ((e) and (f)) as a function of ECT. The continuous line represents electrons and the dashed line holes. The vertical dashed black line specifies the calculated ECT. The left column is for PTB7-Th/PC71BM and the right column is for PTB7-Th/ITIC. 
A remarkable feature in Fig. 7c and d is the presence of a characteristic ECT* that equalizes the kET (kHT) and kEB (kHB) rates. This is the energy at which the driving force for electron (hole) transfer is zero. For ECT > ECT*, the electron (hole) back rates become faster than the electron (hole) transfer rates because ECT is larger than the energies of the local electronic transitions (ELE(D) and ELE(A)) in this interval. An increase in ECT is related to less negative ΔGET and ΔGHT, which makes ΔGES and ΔGHS more positive. The result is the decrease of the charge separation rates (kES and kHS). The interval ECT > ECT* corresponds then to the energy values of CT that favors exciton recombination.
On the other hand, the difference between kET (kHT) and kEB (kHB) increases when ECT decreases, due to an increase of the driving force for charge transfer in the range ECT < ECT*. When the activation energy barrier for charge transfer tends to zero, the respective transfer rate is at its maximum. As a consequence, there is a narrow window in the values of ECT that maximizes the exciton quenching. This window arises from the fact that at small ECT, kE(H)S is high while kE(H)T is low. As ECT increases, the decrease of kE(H)S is partially compensated by the increase of kE(H)T so that the sum of the two rates that favor the exciton dissociation (kE(H)S + kE(H)T) is approximately constant. However, at small ECT the recombination rate kE(H)R is high (which decreases QD(A)). This rate decreases with increasing ECT so that QD(A) steeply rises and saturates at 100%. As ECT further increases, kE(H)B increases which tends to close the channel for the exciton separation. This effect favors then singlet exciton recombination in the donor (acceptor) and ends up in reducing QD(A). It is important to point out here that for a fixed energy ELE, the variation of ECT determines how the system behaves when the driving force is high or low.
To summarize the above discussion, QD(A)→ 0 when ECT is small (high driving force for charge transfer) because the CT recombination is high in this regime whereas at very high ECT (low driving force for charge transfer), QD(A)→ 0 because the electron (hole) back rate is very high in this regime. As a consequence, the singlet exciton recombination prevails. Hence the physical mechanism that limits the charge generation in the high driving force system is different from the mechanism that limits it in the low driving force blends.
The results discussed above are in qualitative agreement with Nakano et al.,87 where it was found that variation of ECT around 0.4 eV has a major influence on PL quenching efficiency in systems with low driving force for charge transfer. Yet our model indicates that the quenching efficiency is also very sensitive to ECT even for high driving force systems (like those using fullerene as the acceptor).
At this point it is important to make a comment about the use of the semiclassical Marcus/Hush (MH) theory to calculate the recombination rates. This theory tends to underestimate the values of nonradiative recombination rates. Essentially this happens because this theory neglects the contributions of nonadiabatic vibronic coupling associated to low-frequency harmonic oscillations (ℏω ≪ kbT).88 For instance, in ref. 48 the authors calculated the nonradiative recombination rate using the MH theory and also considering the nonadiabatic vibronic coupling (in the low temperature limit, ℏω ≫ kbT) for different geometries of the pentacene/C60 system. They found that non-radiative recombination rates obtained from MH theory are approximately three orders of magnitude lower than the rates obtained in the low temperature limit. Higher magnitudes of kER and kHR would produce a faster convergence of QA and QD to zero in Fig. 7(e and f) when ECT becomes smaller. In this case the range of ECT values in which QA and QD are saturated at 100% becomes narrow. However, for the interval of energies in the vicinities of the calculated ECT (vertical dashed black line), QA and QD do not suffer any significant variation when kER and kHR are increased by three orders of magnitude. This effect occurs because those rates are still much lower than the other rates that control the charge separations kinetics.
Another factor that decisively influences the exciton quenching is the exciton binding energy in the donor or acceptor. The higher values of Eb strongly reduce the separation rate while they do not change the other rates. This significantly narrows the interval of ECT values where QD(A) ∼ 100% (Fig. 7e). For instance, ΔGHT is the same for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM and PTB7-Th/ITIC complexes but QA is very different between these two systems (see Fig. 7e and f). The range of ECT values where QA is 100% is narrower for the system with fullerene. This difference occurs because Eb,A ≫ ΔGHT for the PTB7-Th/PC71BM complex while Eb,A ∼ ΔGHT for the PTB7-Th/ITIC system (see again Table 1).
One additional comment should be made to complement the discussion about the role played by Eb in the dynamics of exciton dissociation. Recently, many studies have been concerned with the role of molecular packing in increasing the exciton delocalization and decreasing Eb.51,89,90 It has been seen that a small decrease in the exciton binding energy due to wave function delocalization can be fundamental to increase the efficiency of the free charge generation process.21 This effect can be more important for fullerenes that may have a higher molecular organization.22,31,91,92 Our model indicates that this hypothesis is very reasonable. For instance, in Fig. 8 we present kHB, kHS and QA for PTB7-Th/PC71BM as a function of Eb,A. The results show that even a small decrease of Eb,A by approximately 0.1 eV is already able to make QA ∼ 100%. Basically this effect is due to the enhancement of the kHS rate which becomes greater than the kHB rate (note that the kHB rate does not depend on Eb,A).
 Fig. 8  Hole back rate and hole separation rate in log scale, kHB and kHS, and exciton quenching efficiency for acceptor excitation, QA, as a function of exciton binding energy of the acceptor, Eb,A, for PTB7-Th/PC71BM. The vertical dashed black line specifies the maximum value of Eb,A for PC71BM in accordance with previous works. 
A final discussion can be made considering the hypothesis of a blend with low driving force for electron (hole) transfer, ΔGE(H)T, and efficient exciton dissociation (it is not the case of the D/A blends employed in this work). We would like to emphasize that our model is perfectly able to explain the occurrence of this effect. Let us assume a low driving force for hole transfer (but the argument is equally valid for electrons as well). In physical terms, a low value of ΔGHT means that the charge transfer energy, ECT, of the D/A blend is similar to the first local excited-state energy of the acceptor, ELE(A), since ΔGHT = ECT – ELE(A). Low values of ΔGHT correspond to the interval ECT+ → ECT*, where ECT* is the value of the charge transfer state that makes the hole transfer rate, kHT, equal to the hole back rate, kHB. When ECT+ → ECT*, the magnitude of kHB increases but is still lower than kHT. In addition, the magnitude of the nonradiative recombination rate kHR is very low for higher values of ECT. Therefore, the main factor that strongly influences the quenching efficiency is the magnitude of the hole separation rate, kHS, relative to kHB. If kHS > kHB, the quenching efficiency will be high which is satisfied (disregarding electronic couplings and reorganization energies) when ΔGHS < ΔGHB. This condition implies that Eb,A < 2 |ΔGHT| since ΔGHS = Eb,A + ΔGHT (remember that ΔGHB = −ΔGHT). This condition is satisfied by some D/NFA blends with low ΔGHT as can be verified in ref. 31 and 32.
6. Conclusions
In this contribution, we investigate the kinetics of charge transfer at D/A interfaces using a discrete level model based on electronic structure calculations combined with the semi-classical theory of Marcus/Hush. We propose a set of coupled differential equations to describe the time-dependent concentration of singlet excitons (S1) and charge transfer states (CT) at the D/A interface. We then calculate the exciton quenching produced by selective excitation of the donor (QD) or acceptor (QA) assuming the steady-state conditions. The application of this formalism to donor/acceptor dimers formed by the donor polymer PTB7-Th with the FA PC71BM and NFA ITIC indicates that the system using NFAs has a very efficient exciton quenching for excitation of either the donor or the acceptor. This happens because the rates associated to the generation of the CT state and the dissociation of this state into free charges are faster than any other rates that favor the recombination. Yet the system with FA has a poor exciton quenching when the fullerene is excited. This effect is due to the high binding energy of S1 excitons in fullerene and the weak quantum mechanical coupling between the occupied states of the polymer and the fullerene. Both features contribute to the decrease of the rate associated to the dissociation of the CT state into free charges. These theoretical predictions were confirmed by photoluminescence measurements of the pristine materials and the blends.
With the help of the parameters calculated for PTB7-Th/PC71BM(ITIC) dimers we investigate how ECT influences the main physical mechanism that limits the exciton quenching. Assuming a fixed energy for the S1 state (local energy state, ELE), the variation of ECT determines how the system behaves when the driving force is high or low. We found that singlet exciton recombination is dominant over other recombination channels when ΔG is low. In this case ΔG does not inhibit the recreation of the S1 state produced by a charge transfer from the CT state. On the other hand, the charge recombination directly from the CT state limits free charge generation when the driving force is high. Hence the physical mechanism that avoids the exciton dissociation in the high driving force system is different from the mechanism that limits this dissociation in the low driving force heterojunctions.
Finally, our model also predicted that a small decrease in the binding energy of the PC71BM excitons can significantly increase the QA values. These findings may provide new strategies to further improve the efficiency of OSCs. In future work we hope to investigate the inclusion of disorder effects in the model and the influence of an external electric field on the quenching efficiency for a more realistic description of the charge dynamics at the D/A interface.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Companhia Paranaense de Energia – COPEL research and technological development program, through the PD 2866-0470/2017 project, regulated by ANEEL. This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior-Brasil (CAPES)-Finance Code 001. This research was developed with the assistance of CENAPAD-SP (Centro Nacional de Processamento de Alto Desempenho em São Paulo), project UNICAMP/FINEP – MCT. Special thanks go to CNPq (grant 380163/2019-5), FAPEMIG and INCT – Nanocarbon for the financial support.
References
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Excitons in Nanoscale Systems, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5(9), 683–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Bredas, Mind the Gap!, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1(1), 17–19 RSC .
T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Charge Photogeneration in Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(11), 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, L. Hong, T. Zhang, Y. Xu, K. Xian, B. Gao, J. Qin, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, 
            et al., Achieving Over 15% Efficiency in Organic Photovoltaic Cells via Copolymer Design, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(14), 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Athanasopoulos, F. Schauer, V. Nádaždy, M. Weiß, F. J. Kahle, U. Scherf, H. Bässler and A. Köhler, What Is the Binding Energy of a Charge Transfer State in an Organic Solar Cell?, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1900814, 1–11 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao and W. Liang, Charge Transfer in Organic Molecules for Solar Cells: Theoretical Perspective, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(3), 1075–1087 RSC .
K. H. Hendriks, A. S. G. Wijpkema, J. J. Van Franeker, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Dichotomous Role of Exciting the Donor or the Acceptor on Charge Generation in Organic Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(31), 10026–10031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Hendriks, W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Small-Bandgap Semiconducting Polymers with High near-Infrared Photoresponse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(34), 12130–12136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, L. Zhan, C. Sun, H. Zhu, G. Zhou, W. Yang, M. Shi, C. Z. Li, J. Hou and Y. Li, 
            et al., Highly Efficient Fullerene-Free Organic Solar Cells Operate at Near Zero Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital Offsets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(7), 3073–3082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking and G. F. Burkhard, 
            et al., Efficient Charge Generation by Relaxed Charge-Transfer States at Organic Interfaces, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(1), 63–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bässler and A. Köhler, “Hot or Cold”: How Do Charge Transfer States at the Donor–Acceptor Interface of an Organic Solar Cell Dissociate?, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(43), 28451–28462 RSC .
E. Collado-Fregoso, P. Boufflet, Z. Fei, E. Gann, S. Ashraf, Z. Li, C. R. McNeill, J. R. Durrant and M. Heeney, Increased Exciton Dipole Moment Translates into Charge-Transfer Excitons in Thiophene-Fluorinated Low-Bandgap Polymers for Organic Photovoltaic Applications, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(23), 7934–7944 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bronstein, J. M. Frost, A. Hadipour, Y. Kim, C. B. Nielsen, R. S. Ashraf, B. P. Rand, S. Watkins and I. McCulloch, Effect of Fluorination on the Properties of a Donor-Acceptor Copolymer for Use in Photovoltaic Cells and Transistors, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25(3), 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. L. Lin, M. A. Fusella and B. P. Rand, The Impact of Local Morphology on Organic Donor/Acceptor Charge Transfer States, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(28), 1–16 Search PubMed .
M. A. Fusella, A. N. Brigeman, M. Welborn, G. E. Purdum, Y. Yan, R. D. Schaller, Y. H. L. Lin, Y. L. Loo, T. V. Voorhis and N. C. Giebink, 
            et al., Band-like Charge Photogeneration at a Crystalline Organic Donor/Acceptor Interface, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(9), 1–10 Search PubMed .
G. D’Avino, L. Muccioli, Y. Olivier and D. Beljonne, Charge Separation and Recombination at Polymer-Fullerene Heterojunctions: Delocalization and Hybridization Effects, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(3), 536–540 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Han and Y. Yi, Local Excitation/Charge-Transfer Hybridization Simultaneously Promotes Charge Generation and Reduces Nonradiative Voltage Loss in Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2911–2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Janković and N. Vukmirović, Origin of Space-Separated Charges in Photoexcited Organic Heterojunctions on Ultrafast Time Scales, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95(7), 1–15 CrossRef .
M. Koehler, M. C. Santos and M. G. E. Da Luz, Positional Disorder Enhancement of Exciton Dissociation at Donor/Acceptor Interface, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 5 CrossRef .
C. Schwarz, S. Tscheuschner, J. Frisch, S. Winkler, N. Koch, H. Bässler and A. Köhler, Role of the Effective Mass and Interfacial Dipoles on Exciton Dissociation in Organic Donor-Acceptor Solar Cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87(15), 1–13 CrossRef .
F. Kahle, C. Saller, S. Olthof, C. Li, J. Lebert, S. Weiß, E. M. Herzig, S. Hu, K. Meerholz and P. Strohriegl, 
            et al., Does Electron Delocalization Influence Charge Separation at Donor−Acceptor Interfaces in Organic Photovoltaic Cells?, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(38), 21792–21802 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, Ultrafast Charge Separation in Organic Photovoltaics Enhanced by Charge Delocalization and Vibronically Hot Exciton Dissociation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(44), 16364–16367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Hood and I. Kassal, Entropy and Disorder Enable Charge Separation in Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(22), 4495–4500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Dimitrov and J. R. Durrant, Materials Design Considerations for Charge Generation in Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26(1), 616–630 CrossRef CAS .
A. Weu, T. R. Hopper, V. Lami, J. A. Kreß, A. A. Bakulin and Y. Vaynzof, Field-Assisted Exciton Dissociation in Highly Efficient PffBT4T-2OD:Fullerene Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30(8), 2660–2667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. K. Pandey, K. Tandy, G. K. Dutta, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, E. B. Namdas and S. Patil, Channel II Photocurrent Quantification in Narrow Optical Gap Polymer-Fullerene Solar Cells with Complimentary Acceptor Absorption, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102(22), 0–5 Search PubMed .
D. M. Stoltzfus, J. E. Donaghey, A. Armin, P. E. Shaw, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Charge Generation Pathways in Organic Solar Cells: Assessing the Contribution from the Electron Acceptor, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(21), 12920–12955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, O. Inganas, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Organic Solar Cells Based on Non-Fullerene Acceptors, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17(2), 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Zhao, Y. Chen, D. Zhu, H. Yao, G. Zhang, W. Ma and R. H. Friend, 
            et al., Efficient Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells with Small Driving Forces for Both Hole and Electron Transfer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(45), 1804215 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Fan, W. Su, Y. Wang, B. Guo, Y. Jiang, X. Guo, F. Liu, T. P. Russell, M. Zhang and Y. Li, Synergistic Effect of Fluorination on Both Donor and Acceptor Materials for High Performance Non-Fullerene Polymer Solar Cells with 13.5% Efficiency, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 537(5), 531–537 CrossRef .
L. Benatto, C. F. N. Marchiori, C. M. Araujo and M. Koehler, Molecular Origin of Efficient Hole Transfer from Non-Fullerene Acceptors: Insights from First-Principles Calculations, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(39), 12180 RSC .
L. Zhu, Y. Yi and Z. Wei, Exciton Binding Energies of Non-Fullerene Small Molecule Acceptors: Implication for Exciton Dissociation Driving Forces in Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(39), 22309–22316 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Material Insights and Challenges for Non-Fullerene Organic Solar Cells Based on Small Molecular Acceptors, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(9), 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gerhard, A. P. Arndt, M. Bilal, U. Lemmer, M. Koch and I. A. Howard, Field-Induced Exciton Dissociation in PTB7-Based Organic Solar Cells, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95(19), 1–12 CrossRef .
S. Few, J. M. Frost and J. Nelson, Models of Charge Pair Generation in Organic Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(4), 2311–2325 RSC .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Next-Generation Organic Photovoltaics Based on Non-Fullerene Acceptors, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12(3), 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Liu, C.-Z. Li, M. Shi and H. Chen, Efficient Organic Solar Cells with Non-Fullerene Acceptors, Small, 2017, 13(37), 1701120 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen and Q. Zhang, Recent Progress in Non-Fullerene Small Molecule Acceptors in Organic Solar Cells (OSCs), J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(6), 1275–1302 RSC .
X. Song, N. Gasparini and D. Baran, The Influence of Solvent Additive on Polymer Solar Cells Employing Fullerene and Non-Fullerene Acceptors, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4(10), 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, An Electron Acceptor Challenging Fullerenes for Efficient Polymer Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(7), 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yi, B. Gautam, I. Constantinou, Y. Cheng, Z. Peng, E. Klump, X. Ba, C. H. Y. Ho, C. Dong and S. R. Marder, 
            et al., Impact of Nonfullerene Molecular Architecture on Charge Generation, Transport, and Morphology in PTB7-Th-Based Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(32), 1–9 CrossRef .
Y. Zang, Q. Xin, J. Zhao and J. Lin, Effect of Active Layer Thickness on the Performance of Polymer Solar Cells Based on a Highly Efficient Donor Material of PTB7-Th, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(29), 16532–16539 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han and Y. Yi, Rationalizing Small-Molecule Donor Design toward High-Performance Organic Solar Cells: Perspective from Molecular Architectures, Adv. Theory Simul., 2018, 1(11), 1800091 CrossRef .
V. Lemaur, M. Steel, D. Beljonne, J. L. Brédas and J. Cornil, Photoinduced Charge Generation and Recombination Dynamics in Model Donor/Acceptor Pairs for Organic Solar Cell Applications: A Full Quantum-Chemical Treatment, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(16), 6077–6086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, N. R. Tummala, Y. T. Fu, V. Coropceanu and J. L. Brédas, Charge-Transfer States in Organic Solar Cells: Understanding the Impact of Polarization, Delocalization, and Disorder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(21), 18095–18102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oberhofer, K. Reuter and J. Blumberger, Charge Transport in Molecular Materials: An Assessment of Computational Methods, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(15), 10319–10357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T. R. Hopper, S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. Chen and J. Zhang, 
            et al., Design Rules for Minimizing Voltage Losses in High-Efficiency Organic Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17(8), 703–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-K. Chen, M. K. Ravva, H. Li, S. M. Ryno and J.-L. Brédas, Effect of Molecular Packing and Charge Delocalization on the Nonradiative Recombination of Charge-Transfer States in Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(24), 1601325 CrossRef .
G. Sini, M. Schubert, C. Risko, S. Roland, O. P. Lee, Z. Chen, T. V. Richter, D. Dolfen, V. Coropceanu and S. Ludwigs, 
            et al., On the Molecular Origin of Charge Separation at the Donor–Acceptor Interface, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(12), 1–15 Search PubMed .
S. L. Smith and A. W. Chin, Ultrafast Charge Separation and Nongeminate Electron-Hole Recombination in Organic Photovoltaics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(38), 20305–20309 RSC .
A. B. Matheson, A. Ruseckas, S. J. Pearson and I. D. W. Samuel, Hole Delocalization as a Driving Force for Charge Pair Dissociation in Organic Photovoltaics, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1050–1056 RSC .
S. D. Dimitrov, B. C. Schroeder, C. B. Nielsen, H. Bronstein, Z. Fei, I. McCulloch, M. Heeney and J. R. Durrant, Singlet Exciton Lifetimes in Conjugated Polymer Films for Organic Solar Cells, Polymers, 2016, 8, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Hedley, A. J. Ward, A. Alekseev, C. T. Howells, E. R. Martins, L. A. Serrano, G. Cooke, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Determining the Optimum Morphology in High-Performance Polymer-Fullerene Organic Photovoltaic Cells, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–10 Search PubMed .
F. Yang, D. Qian, A. H. Balawi, Y. Wu, W. Ma, F. Laquai, Z. Tang, F. Zhang and W. Li, Performance Limitations in Thieno[3,4-c]Pyrrole-4,6-Dione-Based Polymer:ITIC Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(35), 23990–23998 RSC .
L. Cristina Wouk de Menezes, Y. Jin, L. Benatto, C. Wang, M. Koehler, F. Zhang and L. Stolz Roman, Charge Transfer Dynamics and Device Performance of Environmentally Friendly Processed Non-Fullerene Organic Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(9), 4776–4785 CrossRef .
S. Strohm, F. Machui, S. Langner, P. Kubis, N. Gasparini, M. Salvador, I. McCulloch, H. J. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, P3HT: Non-Fullerene Acceptor Based Large Area, Semi-Transparent PV Modules with Power Conversion Efficiencies of 5%, Processed by Industrially Scalable Methods, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(8), 2225–2234 RSC .
K. R. de Almeida Sousa, L. Benatto, L. Wouk, L. S. Roman and M. Koehler, Effects of non-halogenated solvent on the main properties of a solution-processed polymeric thin film for photovoltaic applications: a computational study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 9693–9702,  10.1039/d0cp01303j .
J.-D. Chai and M. Head-Gordon, Long-Range Corrected Hybrid Density Functionals with Damped Atom–Atom Dispersion Corrections, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10(44), 6615–6620 RSC .
Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, The M06 Suite of Density Functionals for Main Group Thermochemistry, Thermochemical Kinetics, Noncovalent Interactions, Excited States, and Transition Elements: Two New Functionals and Systematic Testing of Four M06-Class Functionals and 12 Other Function, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 120(1–3), 215–241 Search PubMed .
L. Benatto and M. Koehler, Effects of Fluorination on Exciton Binding Energy and Charge Transport of π-Conjugated Donor Polymers and the ITIC Molecular Acceptor: A Theoretical Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(11), 6395–6406 CrossRef CAS .
G. Damas, C. F. N. Marchiori and C. M. G. Araujo, On the Design of Donor-Acceptor Conjugated Polymers for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution Reaction: First-Principles Theory Based Assessment, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(47), 26876–26888 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMahon and A. Troisi, Evaluation of the External Reorganization Energy of
Polyacenes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(6), 941–946 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Norton and J. L. Brédas, Polarization Energies in Oligoacene Semiconductor Crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(37), 12377–12384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Hutchison, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Hopping Transport in Conductive Heterocyclic Oligomers: Reorganization Energies and Substituent Effects, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127(7), 2339–2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thomas, R. K. Chitumalla, A. L. Puyad, K. V. Mohan and J. Jang, Computational Studies of Hole/Electron Transport in Positional Isomers of Linear Oligo-Thienoacenes: Evaluation of Internal Reorganization Energies Using Density Functional Theory, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2016, 1089(November 2017), 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gajdos, H. Oberhofer, M. Dupuis and J. Blumberger, On the Inapplicability of Electron-Hopping Models for the Organic Semiconductor Phenyl-C61-Butyric Acid Methyl Ester (PCBM), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(6), 1012–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Idé, D. Fazzi, M. Casalegno, S. V. Meille and G. Raos, Electron Transport in Crystalline PCBM-like Fullerene Derivatives: A Comparative Computational Study, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(35), 7313–7325 RSC .

          S. I. Gorelsky, AOMix: Program for Molecular Orbital Analysis. AOMix Progr, http://www.sg-chem.net/, version 6.85, 2014.
S. I. Gorelsky and A. B. P. Lever, Electronic Structure and Spectra of Ruthenium Diimine Complexes by Density Functional Theory and INDO/S. Comparison of the Two Methods, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 635(1–2), 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Savoie, A. Rao, A. A. Bakulin, S. Gelinas, B. Movaghar, R. H. Friend, T. J. Marks and M. A. Ratner, Unequal Partnership: Asymmetric Roles of Polymeric Donor and Fullerene Acceptor in Generating Free Charge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(7), 2876–2884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Song, J. Li, P. Li and H. Zhang, Modulation of Electron-Donating Ability in D-A-A Small Molecules for Application in Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(2), 1069–1081 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci and G. A. Petersson, et al., Gaussian 09, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
L. Lu and L. Yu, Understanding Low Bandgap Polymer PTB7 and Optimizing Polymer Solar Cells Based on It, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(26), 4413–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Knupfer, Exciton Binding Energies in Organic Semiconductors, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2003, 77(5), 623–626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Joseph, M. K. Ravva and J. L. Bredas, Charge-Transfer Dynamics in the Lowest Excited State of a Pentacene-Fullerene Complex: Implications for Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8(20), 5171–5176 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Q. Hu, S. Zhang, D. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Xie, R. Wang, Y. Qin, W. Li and L. Hong, 
            et al., A Highly Efficient Non-Fullerene Organic Solar Cell with a Fill Factor over 0.80 Enabled by a Fine-Tuned Hole-Transporting Layer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(34), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganäs, F. Gao and J. Hou, Fullerene-Free Polymer Solar Cells with over 11% Efficiency and Excellent Thermal Stability, Adv. Mater., 2016, 4734–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, O. M. Awartani, B. Gautam, D. Liu, Y. Qin, W. Li, A. Bataller, K. Gundogdu, H. Ade and J. Hou, Efficient Charge Transfer and Fine-Tuned Energy Level Alignment in a THF-Processed Fullerene-Free Organic Solar Cell with 11.3% Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(5), 3–8 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cha, S. Wheeler, S. Holliday, S. D. Dimitrov, A. Wadsworth, H. H. Lee, D. Baran, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, Influence of Blend Morphology and Energetics on Charge Separation and Recombination Dynamics in Organic Solar Cells Incorporating a Nonfullerene Acceptor, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(3), 1–11 CrossRef .
Y. Li, D. Qian, L. Zhong, J. D. Lin, Z. Q. Jiang, Z. G. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, L. S. Liao and F. Zhang, A Fused-Ring Based Electron Acceptor for Efficient Non-Fullerene Polymer Solar Cells with Small HOMO Offset, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 430–438 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han and Y. Yi, Origin of Photocurrent and Voltage Losses in Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Theory Simul., 2019, 2(8), 1900067 CrossRef .
Q. Wan, X. Guo, Z. Wang, W. Li, B. Guo, W. Ma, M. Zhang and Y. Li, 10.8% Efficiency Polymer Solar Cells Based on PTB7-Th and PC71BM via Binary Solvent Additives Treatment, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(36), 6635–6640 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vandewal, Z. Ma, J. Bergqvist, Z. Tang, E. Wang, P. Henriksson, K. Tvingstedt, M. R. Andersson and F. Zhang, Quantification of Quantum Efficiency and Energy Losses in Low Bandgap Polymer: Fullerene Solar Cells with High Open-Circuit Voltage, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22(16), 3480–3490 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Kesava, Z. Fei, A. D. Rimshaw, C. Wang, A. Hexemer, J. B. Asbury, M. Heeney and E. D. Gomez, Domain Compositions and Fullerene Aggregation Govern Charge Photogeneration in Polymer/Fullerene Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(11), 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Tamai, Y. Fan, V. O. Kim, K. Ziabrev, A. Rao, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, R. H. Friend and S. M. Menke, Ultrafast Long-Range Charge Separation in Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(12), 12473–12481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. He, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Influence of the Acceptor Crystallinity on the Open-Circuit Voltage in PTB7-Th: ITIC Organic Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(47), 14861–14866 RSC .
K. Nakano, Y. Chen, B. Xiao, W. Han, J. Huang, H. Yoshida, E. Zhou and K. Tajima, Anatomy of the Energetic Driving Force for Charge Generation in Organic Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, Y. Li, F. Ma, T. Pullerits and M. Sun, Photoinduced Electron Transfer in Organic Solar Cells, Chem. Rec., 2016, 16(2), 734–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, Z. Tu, Y. Yi and Z. Wei, Achieving Small Exciton Binding Energies in Small Molecule Acceptors for Organic Solar Cells: Effect of Molecular Packing, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10(17), 4888–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Niu, K. W. Wang, X. Y. Yang, P. Q. Bi, K. N. Zhang, X. J. Feng, F. Chen, W. Qin, J. L. Xia and X. T. Hao, Hole Transfer Originating from Weakly Bound Exciton Dissociation in Acceptor-Donor-Acceptor Nonfullerene Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10(22), 7100–7106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. V. D. Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Ultrafast Long-Range Charge Separation in Organic Semiconductor Photovoltaic Diodes, Science, 2014, 343(6170), 512–516 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Benatto, C. F. N. Marchiori, T. Talka, M. Aramini, N. A. D. Yamamoto, S. Huotari, L. S. Roman and M. Koehle, Comparing C60 and C70 as Acceptor in Organic Solar Cells: Influence of the Electronic Structure and Aggregation Size on the Photovoltaic Characteristics, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 697, 137827 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc01077dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structures of donor polymer and acceptor molecules.	 

 	Fig. 2  Simplified charge transfer dynamics diagram between the materials of the D/A interface. (a) Electron dynamics from the donor and (b) hole dynamics from the acceptor. The stacked dashed lines represent electronic states (HOMOs and LUMOs) accessible for optical excitation and with lower energies in relation to the fundamental gap (IP–EA).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)



PTB7-Th/PC71BM	0.239	0.228	1.63	1.92	2.03	−0.29	−1.39	0.21	−0.40	−1.40	0.60

PTB7-Th/ITIC	0.223	0.208	1.46	1.92	1.87	−0.46	−1.24	0.04	−0.41	−1.25	0.09

 	Fig. 3  Partial and total density of states for (a) PTB7-Th/PC71BM and (b) PTB7-Th/ITIC dimers.	 

 	Fig. 4  Dimer frontier molecular orbitals and electronic coupling between them for the processes of electron transfer and back, hole transfer and back and electron and hole recombination.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dimer frontier molecular orbitals and electronic coupling between them for the hole separation process in the case of PTB7-Th/PTB7-Th, and for the electron separation process in the case of PC71BM/PC71BM and ITIC/ITIC.	 



PTB7- Th/PC71BMab	2.52 × 1014	3.37 × 109	7.62 × 10−10	9.72 × 1010	100	1.93 × 1012	3.65 × 105	1.05 × 10−11	1.64 × 102	34

PTB7-Th/ITICb,c	4.56 × 1013	8.48 × 105	2.23 × 10−6	1.83 × 1013	100	2.77 × 1013	3.57 × 106	7.16 × 10−9	3.50 × 1012	100

 	Fig. 6  PL spectra. (a) Pristine PTB7-Th and blends using the excitation wavelength of 650 nm. (b) Pristine PC71BM and blends using the excitation wavelength of 500 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  Variation of activation energies ((a) and (b)), rates ((c) and (d) in log scale) and quenching efficiency ((e) and (f)) as a function of ECT. The continuous line represents electrons and the dashed line holes. The vertical dashed black line specifies the calculated ECT. The left column is for PTB7-Th/PC71BM and the right column is for PTB7-Th/ITIC.	 

 	Fig. 8  Hole back rate and hole separation rate in log scale, kHB and kHS, and exciton quenching efficiency for acceptor excitation, QA, as a function of exciton binding energy of the acceptor, Eb,A, for PTB7-Th/PC71BM. The vertical dashed black line specifies the maximum value of Eb,A for PC71BM in accordance with previous works.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0tc01077d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
