Metal-encapsulated carbon nanotube arrays for enhancing electrocatalytic nitrate reduction in wastewater: importance of lying-down to standing-up stru ...  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EN00421F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EN00421F
(Paper)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 2841-2853Metal-encapsulated carbon nanotube arrays for enhancing electrocatalytic nitrate reduction in wastewater: importance of lying-down to standing-up structure transition†

        
          
            Yanyan 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huanxin 
            Ma
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Weijian 
            Duan
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Zichao 
            Lin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Chunhua 
            Feng
          
        
      *
      The Key Lab of Pollution Control and Ecosystem Restoration in Industry Clusters, Ministry of Education, School of Environment and Energy, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, PR China. E-mail: 201720141879@mail.scut.edu.cn; chfeng@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      30th April 2022
    , Accepted 22nd June 2022First published on 28th June 2022AbstractMetal-encapsulated and nitrogen-doped carbon-based (M@NC) catalysts have emerged as promising options for electrochemical nitrate reduction reaction (ENRR) because of their excellent activity and stability. However, in the form of powder or the self-supporting metal nanoparticle-embedded carbon layer morphology, they show unsatisfactory denitrification performance when ENRR is performed at a high current density (e.g., >10 mA cm−2). In this work, we comprehensively determined the underlying reasons for this phenomenon and accordingly synthesized a free-standing M@NCNT (carbon nanotube) array on carbon cloth (CC) to resolve the issue. Experimental results show that the utilization efficiency of the active sites of M@NC plays a crucial role in guaranteeing superior ENRR activity under kinetically promoted conditions. Compared with the lying-down morphology, the unique standing-up structure enables more active centers that are accessible to the reactants, thus improving their utilization and overall ENRR performance. The as-prepared Co@NCNT/CC cathode delivered outstanding denitrification activity (with a removal proportion of nearly 100% over 3 h electrolysis at 10 mA cm−2) and good stability (continuously running for ENRR over 30 consecutive cycles without performance deterioration). When operated under the constant-current mode, it was also effective in removing nitrate from groundwater and real coking wastewater effluent. The findings provide important insights into the rational design of advanced M@NC catalysts toward ENRR.

Environmental significance
Electrocatalytic nitrate reduction reaction (ENRR) has been recently considered as a promising and sustainable method to simultaneously decontaminate the toxic nitrate in the wastewater and recover the commercially profitable product (i.e., ammonia). Various cathode catalysts have been developed to promote the efficiency. Metal-encapsulated and nitrogen-doped carbon-based (M@NC) catalysts stand out due to their superior electrochemical stability, tunable functionality, and excellent conductivity. But in the form of powder, they deliver poor performance for ENRR especially under the high-current conditions, which may be ascribed to the limited accessible active centers. In this work, inspired by the phenomenon of an apically dominant mechanism during plant growth, we propose a rational design that changes the catalyst structure from lying down to standing up. Accordingly, the free-standing M@NCNT (carbon nanotube) array on carbon cloth (CC) is successfully fabricated, which exhibits impressive ENRR performance at high currents. This work provides new insights into designing and synthesizing advanced carbon-based catalysts for environmental remediation of nitrate-polluted wastewater.

1. Introduction
The accumulation of nitrate in surface water and groundwater, which, in most cases, stems from intensive fertilizer use in agriculture and poor drainage of wastewater, has drawn increasing public concern because of its potential risk for human health and the ecosystem.1,2 It is widely known that a high concentration of nitrate in the water matrix causes eutrophication, and its transformation product, nitrite, could lead to blue baby syndrome, along with the generation of carcinogenic nitrosamine compounds in the human body. Diverse nitrate removal technologies have been proposed and applied to address nitrate contamination in water bodies. Among them, electrocatalytic nitrate reduction reaction (ENRR), which could be driven by electricity generated from renewable energy sources (e.g., solar and wind energy), has emerged as a promising and powerful method to sustainably achieve the goal of water purification in nitrate-contaminated water matrixes. It offers the advantages of cost efficiency (with electrons from the electrode serving as the reductants and water in the solution serving as the proton source), environmental friendliness (no secondary contamination), and delocalized and decentralized treatment.3–5
In this regard, substantial efforts have been made in recent years toward the rational design and fabrication of electrocatalysts for nitrate reduction because of their pivotal role in the performance of this technology in denitrification.6–9 Nitrogen gas and ammonia are the major end products of ENRR in most cases; the predominance of one product over the other highly depends on electrocatalysts. Recently, nitrate-to-ammonia conversion promoted by non-noble-metal-based electrocatalysts has been reported; it demonstrates exceptional performance and shows promise for simultaneous nitrate removal and ammonia recovery from wastewater.10–13 Because of the likely occurrence of metal corrosion in harsh electrolytes, including both acidic and alkaline media, the development of non-noble-metal-embedded or decorated carbon-based electrocatalysts has also received considerable attention. Transitional metal (TM)-encapsulated nitrogen-doped carbon materials (TM@NC) represent a new class of ENRR catalysts with outstanding performance.14–16 In this unique architecture, TMs transfer electrons to the outside carbon atoms that serve as the activated sites, and the metals are well protected from contact with the harsh medium by the carbon shell, thereby ensuring the durability of long-term operation.17 The doping of more electron-negative nitrogen atoms promotes electron transfer from the inner metal core to the carbon shell and reduces the work function of carbon atoms, expected to enhance their catalytic activity.18 Despite their reported high activity and durability, however, all TM@NC catalysts in the literature are efficient only within a narrow range of current density (e.g., 1 to 5 mA cm−2 corresponding to an applied potential from −0.9 to −1.4 V vs. saturated calomel electrodes [SCE]), as summarized in Table S1,† hence the need for a long electrolysis time for nitrate reduction. Moreover, the addition of a conductive agent and a polymer binder in electrode fabrication weakens the catalytic activity of catalysts because of the change in catalyst morphology, the cover of active centers, and the poor contact between the metallic current collector and the catalysts. As a result, attempts to accelerate ENRR by enlarging the applied current or potential fail when limited active sites are accessible in the powdery electrocatalysts.
To address such a challenging issue that restricts the application of the catalysts to ENRR in real wastewater treatment, we propose a rational design that changes the catalyst structure from lying down to standing up, inspired by the phenomenon of an apically dominant mechanism during plant growth. Along this line, a free-standing Co-encapsulated N-doped carbon nanotube array (Co@NCNT) was grown on the carbon cloth (CC) substrate via pyrolysis of the CoZn-zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)/CC derived from the facile soaking method. Physiochemical characterizations on Co@NCNT/CC were conducted to reveal its unique structure, and its activity toward ENRR was evaluated under different conditions. Reference experiments with powdery counterparts were performed. The mechanism governing ENRR on the Co@NCNT/CC electrode was also investigated. Finally, tests with real wastewater were carried out to verify its potential practical application to nitrate removal by examining its ENRR performance and stability.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Synthesis of Co@NCNT/CC and counterpart catalysts
The free-standing Co@NCNT/CC was synthesized according to the slightly modified procedure reported previously. Specifically, CoZn-ZIF/CC was prepared by facile soaking of CC in a precursor solution consisting of 20 mM Co(NO3)2, 20 mM Zn(NO3)2, and 200 mM 2-methylimidazole (2-MIM) for 3 h. CoZn-ZIF/CC was then subjected to calcination under an Ar atmosphere at 700 °C to obtain the final catalyst Co@NCNT/CC with the typical CNT array configuration. It should be noted that Co@NCL/CC (NCL stands for N-doped carbon layer) was synthesized with the same precursor but annealed at 600 °C. The powdery (P)-Co@NCNT catalyst was prepared by direct calcination of a water evaporation-produced mixture containing 9.5 mM dicyandiamide and 0.7 mM CoCl2 under Ar atmosphere at 700 °C.
2.2. Preparation of the working electrodes and the ENRR tests
The as-prepared Co@NCNT/CC and Co@NCL/CC were directly used as the working electrodes (3 cm × 4 cm) without further treatment. For P-Co@NCNT, a nickel foam (3 cm × 4 cm) was selected as the substrate for the working electrode. A slurry containing the as-obtained powdery catalyst (60 mg), acetylene black (10 mg), and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, 5 wt%, 200 mg) was dissolved in ethanol by ultrasonic mixing for 60 min. The solution was then partially dried to form a plasticine-like substance, which was coated on the Ni foam (NF) via a roller press. It was dried at 60 °C for 4 h and subsequently at 100 °C for 12 h under vacuum.
The ENRR tests were performed in an undivided cell (100 mL) filled with 50 mg L−1 NaNO3-N and 50 mM Na2SO4 as the supporting electrolyte in the presence or absence of chloride ions. A DC power supply (0–50 V, LW5J5, Shanghai Liyou Electric Co., China) and an electrochemical working station (CHI 760E, Shanghai Chenhua Instrument Co., China) were used as power sources for the constant-current tests and constant-potential tests, respectively. For the constant-current mode, the platinum mesh (2 cm × 2 cm) and the Co@NCNT/CC electrode served as the anode and the cathode, respectively. For the constant-potential mode, the Co@NCNT/CC electrode, the platinum mesh, and the SCEs were used as the working, counter, and reference electrodes, respectively. All the potentials reported throughout this paper are referred to as SCEs, unless stated otherwise. For the electrolysis tests, at fixed time intervals, about 1.5 mL of the solution was withdrawn to analyze the concentrations of NO3−-N, NO2−-N, and NH4+-N. For comparison, other conditional experiments were performed under the same conditions as the above, except for the change in the investigated variable. All electrolysis experiments were performed in triplicate, and the average value was presented.
2.3. Real water samples for the ENRR tests
Two real water samples were used for the ENRR tests: one groundwater sample taken from an electronic waste dismantling plant (N 23.5481; E 113.0465) near the town of Longtang (Qingyuan, Guangdong, China) and one industrial wastewater sample taken from a coking wastewater treatment plant (Shaogang, Guangdong, China). The groundwater (pH = 5.8) was composed of 55.3 mg L−1 NO3−-N, 25.8 mg L−1 Ca2+, 1. 9 mg L−1 Mg2+, 956.5 mg L−1 Cl−, and 5.0 mg L−1 COD. The biological effluent of coking wastewater (pH = 7.8) contained 218.3 mg L−1 COD, 60.1 mg L−1 TOC, 68.4 mg L−1 NO3−-N, and 750.6 mg L−1 Cl−.
2.4. Physicochemical characterizations
The surface morphologies and crystalline structures of the resulting samples were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Merlin, Zeiss Co., Berlin, Germany), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, FEI Talos F200S, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and X-ray diffractometery (XRD, X'Pert PRO MRD, PANalytical, the Netherlands). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area and pore features were examined using nitrogen isothermal adsorption/desorption measurements on a Quadrasorb SI system (Quantachrome Instruments, Boynton Beach, FL, USA). The surface chemical composition and heteroatom distribution were analyzed with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The metal content in the catalysts was determined through thermogravimetric analysis (TGA Q500, TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA), and the dissolved metal content after cycled experiments was ascertained using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Agilent 7700s, Tokyo, Japan). The contact angle of all samples was measured with the Theta Flex Biolin Model. The electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra were obtained with a Bruker EMX A300-10/12 (Germany) spectrometer (8.750–9.650 GHz) using 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (DMPO) as the trapping agent.
2.5. Analytical methods for determining the N concentration and data analysis
Nitrate, nitrite, and ammonia in the solutions were measured using a standard colorimetric method with a UV-visible spectrophotometer. N2 selectivity (S%(N2)) or NH4+ selectivity (S%(NH4+)) were calculated according to eqn (1) and (2): (1) (2)where ΔC(NO3−-N), ΔC(NO2−-N), and ΔC(NH4+-N) are the absolute differences in the nitrate, nitrite, and ammonium concentrations before and after the reaction at time t, respectively. The current efficiency of nitrate conversion was calculated based on eqn (3): (3)where n represents the number of electrons transferred to the reduced substance (n = 2, 5, or 8 if NO2−, N2, or NH4+, respectively, is the final product); V is the volume of the cathodic electrolyte (L), ΔC is the concentration of nitrate removed after the reaction at time t; F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1); and I, A, and t are the applied current density (A cm−2), geometrical area (cm2), and electrolysis time (s), respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Morphology and structure characterizations
XRD measurements were performed to study the crystalline structures of all samples. As depicted in Fig. 1a, only two broad diffraction peaks centered at 25.8° and 44.2° were distinguished from the XRD pattern of free-standing Co@NCNT/CC, and they were associated with the (002) lattice plane of the graphitic carbon and the (111) lattice plane of f.c.c. Co, respectively. An additional reflection at 41.8° belonging to the (100) plane of h.c.p. Co was observed in the XRD pattern of Co@NCL/CC.19,20 However, P-Co@NCNT exhibited four characteristic peaks at 25.8°, 44.2°, 51.5°, and 75.88° assigned to the (002) facets of the graphitic carbon and to the (111), (200), and (220) facets of f.c.c. metallic Co, respectively. It is worth noting that the three reflections indexed to Co in P-Co@NCNT were obviously sharper than that of the free-standing samples; this suggests the agglomeration of particles and the random distribution of the carbon matrix in the powdery sample, which may be adverse for the exposure of active sites. XPS technology was carried out to further understand the chemical composition and electronic structure of the three samples. As seen from the survey spectra (Fig. S1†), the C, O, N, and Co elements were detected for all the catalysts without impurities. Note that an obvious downshift in the Co 2p XPS spectrum was seen in Co@NCNT/CC compared with Co@NCL/CC and P-Co@NCNT (Fig. 1b), signifying the lower oxidation state of Co.21,22 This is possibly attributed to the better protection from better-crystallized carbon shells for inner metal particles, which prevents the entry of oxygen from the atmosphere. The Raman spectra of all the obtained porous carbons are also presented in Fig. 1c, where D and G bands are located at 1353 cm−1 and 1588 cm−1, originating from the disordered carbon and graphitic carbon structures.23 The almost identical ID/IG value, which was generally used as the indicator of the degree of defect of carbon materials, was observed for all three investigated samples, indicating a similar carbon structure. Meanwhile, the metallic Co content in the samples was further ascertained via TG analysis (Fig. S2†). The metal content in Co@NCNT/CC and P-Co@NCNT was 16.7 wt% and 16.9 wt%, respectively, whereas Co@NCL/CC had the highest metal content at 30 wt%.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD, (b) Co 2p XPS, and (c) Raman spectra of three catalysts. (d–f) SEM, (g–i) TEM, and (j–l) HRTEM images of (d, g and j) Co@NCNT/CC, (e, h and k) Co@NCL/CC, and (f, i and l) P-Co@NCNT. The red circles in (d) refer to the Co particles. The scale bar in (d–f) is 1 μm. 
The surface morphologies of Co@NCNT/CC, Co@NCL/CC, and P-Co@NCNT were examined, as illustrated in the SEM and HRTEM images (Fig. 1d–l). The free-standing Co@NCNT/CC exhibited a vertically aligned and hierarchically porous framework consisting of interconnected and cross-linked CNTs, representing a standing-up catalyst. This structure was expected to be capable of facilitating the mass transfer of reactants and the exposure of active centers.24,25 The encapsulated metal nanoparticles (NPs) were located at the outward-oriented end of an individual CNT. The Co@NCL/CC, however, had a closely contacted carbon layer structure, manifesting a lying-down morphology. P-Co@NCNT had a hierarchical structure similar to that of Co@NCNT/CC. However, the utilization of the rolling press method for preparation of the P-Co@NCNT/NF cathode led to a structure transition from standing-up to lying-down. Further high-resolution images revealed that the Co@NCNT/CC and P-Co@NCNT samples presented hollow bamboo-like multi-walled CNTs with an average diameter of about 30 nm. Co NPs with an average size of 20 nm, tightly encapsulated inside the multilayered carbon shells, were observed at the tip of the nanotubes, suggesting that Co NPs were used as seeds to germinate N-doped CNTs via the tip-growth mechanism.18,26 The lattice fringes of interplanar spacing were 0.201 nm and 0.338 nm, which corresponded to the (100) plane of Co and the (200) facet of graphene, respectively.27 Conversely, TEM observations of Co@NCL/CC displayed a layer-shaped nanosheet structure, in which Co NPs with an average size of 20 nm were embedded in the relatively poor crystallized carbon layer. The HRTEM elemental mapping of Co@NCNT/CC in Fig. S3† shows that N and C signals were uniformly distributed throughout the CNTs, whereas Co signals were detected only at the black-contrast apical domains of NCNT. Such a distribution was mainly governed by the TM-catalyzed graphitized carbon growth mechanism.18,26,27 Specifically, the carbon-containing small molecules decomposed from organic ligands were first dissolved into metal bulk, accompanied by the formation of intermediate product of metallic carbide within the low temperature region. The carbon components gradually dissolved out and precipitated on the metal surface with increasing temperature and eventually graphitized into the carbon coating.
3.2. Comparisons of ENRR activities and explanations of the differences
To confirm the importance of the lying-down (i.e., P-Co@NCNT/NF and Co@NCL/CC) to standing-up (Co@NCNT/CC) structure transition for ENRR, the catalytic reactivity for nitrate reduction was assessed through electrolysis experiments under the constant-potential or constant-current mode. Fig. 2a shows that, under the constant-potential mode, all the investigated electrodes displayed satisfactory performance for denitrification at −1.3 V, with a removal proportion of 96.3%, 88.25%, and 90.23% for Co@NCNT/CC, Co@NCL/CC, and P-Co@NCNT/NF, respectively. Note that the average current density applied to these cathodes was quite similar, which was in the range of 2 to 3 mA cm−2 (Fig. S4†) at −1.3 V. However, when the experiments were performed under the constant-current mode (i.e., 10 mA cm−2), a large discrepancy in nitrate conversion was observed among the three catalysts. The pure CC exhibited inappreciable catalytic performance for ENRR, with around 23% nitrate removal after 3 h electrolysis (Fig. S5†). Fig. 2b shows that Co@NCNT/CC enabled a higher nitrate conversion efficiency (96.0%) than the P-Co@NCNT/N (37.1%) and Co@NCL/CC (71.9%) cathodes after 3 h operation, demonstrating its capability of ENRR within a relatively short time (Table S1†). Likewise, the Co@NCNT/CC cathode had the highest current efficiency of 25.52%; it was higher than the value of 18.62% for Co@NCL/CC and 9.44% for P-Co@NCNT/NF under the constant-current mode (Fig. S6†). It is also noticeable from Fig. S7† that the increase in the current density from 10 to 30 mA cm−2 further enhanced the denitrification performance of Co@NCNT/CC. However, the adverse effect of the elevated current density on the denitrification efficiency was observed for Co@NCL/CC.
 Fig. 2  Comparisons of the nitrate removal efficiency of three catalysts at (a) the constant-potential mode (−1.3 V vs. SCE after 24 h electrolysis) and (b) the constant-current mode (10 mA cm−2). Comparisons of (c) the nitrate removal efficiency and (d) the corresponding Kapp values of three catalysts during stirring-control experiments. The initial concentration of NO3−-N was 50 mg L−1. 
It is hypothesized that the accessibility of active sites to the reactants was the dominant reason for the distinct variations in ENRR performance at a high current density, even if the catalysts had similar core–shell architectures and comparably quantitative properties. To verify this point, additional stirring-control experiments were performed to study the effect of mass transfer on reactivity.28 As depicted in Fig. 2c, a negligible change was evident for the P-Co@NCNT/NF and Co@NCL/CC cathodes in the presence or absence of moderate stirring (500 rpm) when they were used for treating 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N after 3 h operation. By contrast, the condition of stirring allowed obviously higher extents of nitrate removal than the counterpart without stirring when the Co@NCNT/CC cathode was applied. These observations preliminarily imply that ENRR on Co@NCNT/CC is predominantly a mass-transfer limitation, and that on Co@NCL/CC or P-Co@NCNT/NF is prevailingly a surface-reaction limitation. The apparent kinetic constant (Kapp) of ENRR was calculated, which further supported this view. The Kapp associated with the Co@NCNT/CC cathode with the aid of stirring was approximately two times higher than that under the static condition. The values varied slightly for Co@NCL/CC and P-Co@NCNT under both conditions. The increasing initial NO3−-N concentration resulted in a decrease in the Kapp gap between stirring and not stirring for Co@NCNT/CC (Fig. S8†). All these results suggest that more active sites have been accessed by nitrate for Co@NCNT/CC compared with Co@NCL/CC and P-Co@NCNT/NF, thanks to the standing-up morphology. The lying-down structure leads to the blockage of active sites so that electrons accumulated on the catalyst surface are not efficiently utilized for ENRR.
More evidence from physical and electrochemical characterizations was provided to electorate the differences in ENRR performance between catalysts. The wettability of the electrode is crucial for the affinity of polar reactants and is therefore important for electrocatalytic reactions occurring on the solid–liquid interface.29–31Fig. 3a shows and compares the water contact angles of the different samples. The bare CC had a hydrophobic surface with a contact angle of 146.56°. The in situ growth of Co@NCNT or Co@NCL on CC substantially improved hydrophilicity, with the former (60.04°) having a more pronounced effect than the latter (78.55°). This is possibly due to the introduction of various polar functional groups (e.g., CO and C–OH) and dopants (e.g., pyridinic-N and graphitic-N doping), as well as to the nanotube array structure (more images related to the samples' contact angles are provided in Fig. S9†). Although the as-prepared P-Co@NCNT powders are high hydrophilic (contact angle: 10.65°), as shown in Fig. S10,† the P-Co@NCNT coated on NF by roller-pressing resulted in a very hydrophobic surface (contact angle: 128.77°). This phenomenon was induced by the addition of hydrophobic PTFE and the seriously aggravated stacked morphology during the conventional electrode procedures. The decreasing wettability of the electrode would subsequently affect the performance of the catalysts for ENRR.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of (a) the water contact angles and (b) BET surface areas of the three electrodes. The inset in (b) shows the surface area of P-Co@NCNT. (c) Plots of the current density (at −0.15 V vs. SCE) against the scan rate to obtain the double-layer capacitance. CV curves of (d) Co@NCNT/CC and (e) P-Co@NCNT/NF at different scan rates recorded in 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N and under N2-saturated conditions. 
Both the BET surface area and the electrochemical active surface area (EASA) of the electrodes were determined and compared, which are suggestive of the level of active sites that can be accessed by the reactants. Fig. 3b and S11† show the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and pore-size distributions. The P-Co@NCNT/NF sample displayed the highest specific surface area of 27.21 m2 g−1 among the three samples. Of particular note, the specific surface area of P-Co@NCNT substantially decreased from the initial 162.27 m2 g−1 into the resultant 27.21 m2 g−1 after the conventional electrode loading procedure of the powdery catalysts, implying the severely deteriorated accessibility of the active centers of as-loaded P-Co@NCNT/NF. Furthermore, Co@NCL/CC accommodated a larger BET surface area (11.18 m2 g−1), three times that in the case of Co@NCNT/CC (3.49 m2 g−1), which is possibly attributed to the more popular presence of mesopores and macropores stemming from the inter-stacked carbon layers against the tightly entangled CNT configuration. It is noted that the ranking order of the specific surface area for the three electrodes exhibited the opposite tendency compared with the trend of ENRR performance. This suggests that more proportions in P-Co@NCNT/NF are electrochemically inert. The order of the EASA derived from the double-layer capacitance method (Fig. S12†), however, agreed well with the trend of ENRR activity. As described in Fig. 3c, Co@NCNT/CC delivered the highest EASA at around 16.01 mF cm−2, which was far higher than that of Co@NCL/CC (1.38 mF cm−2) and P-Co@NCNT/NF (1.86 mF cm−2), thanks to the characteristic of free-standing and nanotube array morphology. This implies more potential active sites of Co@NCNT/CC supplied for electrochemical reaction.
Additional cyclic volumetric (CV) experiments were conducted to further confirm the superiority of active center availability for Co@NCNT/CC. Fig. 3d illustrates that a clear reduction peak correlated with nitrate reduction was observed in the CV curves of Co@NCNT/CC at the investigated scan rate, suggesting that mass transfer rather than surface reaction is the rate-limiting step. However, it is evident from Fig. 3e that the original reduction peak indexed to nitrate reduction disappeared when the scan rate was above 2 mV s−1 in the case of P-Co@NCNT/NF (the catalyst loading was 10 times that of Co@NCNT/CC). This observation indicates that the rate-limiting step changes from mass-transfer to surface-reaction step with an increase in the scan rate, implying the lack of sufficient active sites with ENRR capacity on the surface of P-Co@NCNT/NF. For Co@NCL/CC with the moderately higher catalyst loading, the characteristic peak ascribed to nitrate reduction was absent regardless of the degree of scan rate (Fig. S13†). This is attributed to the limited number of active sites of the Co@NCL/CC electrode for nitrate reduction and the sluggish ENRR kinetics. In this regard, the nitrate concentration gradient (origin of peak occurrence) was not established surrounding the electrode surface. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) in Fig. S14† evidenced that Co@NCNT/CC had the best electron transfer capacity, as reflected by the apparently smaller radius, compared with Co@NCL/CC (inset in Fig. S14†) and P-Co@NCNT/NF. It is noted that the Warburg impedance in the mass-transfer-controlled region for P-Co@NCNT/NF was much higher than that of the other free-standing counterparts, which is indicative of poor mass transfer within catalyst layers.32
To summarize, a schematic illustrating the merits of the electrode configuration for ENRR is presented in Fig. 4. The P-Co@NCNT/NF electrode with the lying-down structure suffers from aggregated and entangled problems that are not beneficial for mass transport and electron transfer in the interface; this impairs catalytic activity, especially when the organic polymer binder (e.g., PTFE, Nafion, and PVDF) with the insulated property is introduced.33,34 For the Co@NCL/CC electrode, despite the avoidance of using nonconductive binders and post-coating procedures, the stack-layered morphology is dominantly present, which poses a significantly negative impact on catalytic activity. For the Co@NCNT/CC electrode, the self-supporting nanotube array configuration guarantees the effective electron transfer from catalysts to the collector because it affords a better and stronger connection. More importantly, resembling the growth of plants, in which the upward growth of the top bud is significantly essential for better accessibility to sunlight and hence more effective photosynthesis in comparison with lateral shoot development, this arrayed configuration with metal particles encapsulated at the tip of the protruded CNT offers more simply accessible active sites on the surface of the outer carbon shell. This attenuates the need for reactants diffusing deeply into the bottom section of catalysts, which generally occurs over catalysts with commonly stacked morphology, therefore substantially accelerating the reaction kinetics and elevating the utilized efficacy of active sites. The concept of a self-supporting arrayed structure would shed profound light on the design and application of advanced metal-encapsulated carbon catalysts in various environmental remediation fields beyond ENRR.
 Fig. 4  Scheme illustration of the merits of the electrode configuration for ENRR. 
3.3. Effects of operational parameters on ENRR
The effects of operational parameters (i.e., current density, presence of Cl− and its concentration, reactor volume, solution pH, and initial NO3−-N concentration) on the performance of the Co@NCNT/CC cathodes for ENRR were evaluated using batch electrolysis experiments under the constant-current mode. Fig. 5a shows that the increasing current density facilitated ENRR, with 96.6%, 89.3%, and 69.1% nitrate removal after 3 h operation at current densities of 10, 7.5, and 5 mA cm−2, respectively. The majority of nitrate was converted to ammonium (with a selectivity of around 90%) in the absence of NaCl upon 3 h of electrolysis. At the low current of 5 mA cm−2, ammonia selectivity was relatively lower, and high amounts of nitrite were generated (Fig. S15†) during the early stage. The prolonged electrolysis time and the enlarged current were effective in alleviating the accumulation of nitrite and increasing ammonia selectivity. Fig. 5b presents that the presence of NaCl significantly suppressed ammonium selectivity (decreasing from 90% in the absence of NaCl to 73%, 0.9%, and 0% with 0.5, 1, and 1.5 mg L−1 NaCl, respectively) because of the electrochemical breakpoint chlorination reaction between ammonium and active chlorine species.35–37 The increasing NaCl concentration did not alter the rate of nitrate removal. The increase in the reactor volume was found to negatively affect the reaction rate (Fig. 5c) when the cathode area was fixed at 10 cm2. This is because of the less sufficient active sites compared to the nitrate amounts available in the reactor. More encouragingly, the wide pH working range of Co@NCNT/CC for ENNR can be observed in Fig. 5d; the nitrate conversion efficiency remained above 82% at a pH of 3 to 14. This indicates that the Co@NCNT/CC cathode holds the potential for treating nitrate-containing wastewater with different pH values. Fig. S16† shows that the nitrate conversion ratio gradually declined as a result of the increasing NO3−-N concentration, but the absolute amount of removed nitrate was indeed enhanced from 48.3 to 86.1, 100.8, and 120.0 mg L−1 in relation to 50, 100, 150, and 200 mg L−1 (initial NO3−-N concentration), respectively. This is by virtue of the enhanced mass transfer with higher nitrate concentration and sufficient number of active sites provided by Co@NCNT/CC.
 Fig. 5  Effects of (a) current density, (b) NaCl concentration, (c) reactor volume, and (d) initial pH on the ENRR performance of Co@NCNT/CC. For all the experiments, except for the variable factor, other conditions were fixed at 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N, 1.5 g L−1 NaCl, 100 mL of electrolyte, 10 mA cm−2 current density, and initial pH = 7.5. 
3.4. Proposed reaction mechanism of Co@NCNT/CC for ENRR
The reaction mechanism of ENRR on Co@NCNT/CC was explored using the EPR technology and scavenging experiments. It is generally accepted that ENRR proceeds in two pathways: direct electron transfer and indirect H*-mediated reduction (H* is formed by water electrolysis on the cathode), as expressed in eqn (4) and (5).38,39 NO3− + 8e− + 10H+ → NH4+ + 3H2O (direct electron transfer pathway)(4) NO3− + 8H* → NH4+ + 2OH− + H2O (H*-mediated indirect pathway)(5)It can be observed from the two reaction equations that the decoupled proton–electron transfer is required to participate in ENRR via the direct electron transfer mechanism, while the indirect H* mechanism for ENRR is independent of the proton concentration. This inspires us to identify the effect of pH on ENRR performance and ascertain the dominant reaction mechanism. As shown in Fig. 5d, a slightly better ENRR activity was obtained in the weak alkaline solution compared with the acidic solution for the investigated pH ranging from 3 to 14. This should indirectly manifest that atomic H* is mostly responsible for nitrate reduction.
A set of well-defined peaks with a peak intensity ratio of 1:1:2:1:2:1:2:1:1 assigned to the DMPO–H adduct (hyperfine coupling constants: αN = 16.3 G and αH = 22.5 G) distinctly appeared in Fig. 6a, indicating the generation of atomic H* during the electrochemical process.40 After the addition of 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N, the intensity of DMPO–H peaks considerably declined, suggestive of the possibility of an H*-mediated pathway. Intriguingly, the introduction of D2O into the solution substantially mitigated the peak intensity, suggesting that the dissociation of water molecules plays a pivotal role in the generation of H* and in subsequent electrochemical hydrogenation. Fig. S17† also suggests that the use of D2O as the solvent apparently suppressed the nitrate removal kinetics of Co@NCNT. The addition of tertiary butanol (TBA), an effective scavenger for H*, also resulted in a serious decrease in the peak of DMPO–H, so TBA was able to be used as a reliable scavenger in our system. The influence of TBA and its concentration on ENRR performance was examined. Fig. 6b shows that the presence of TBA caused the inhibition of nitrate reduction, the extent of which was dependent on the ratio of TBA to nitrate. A more pronounced effect was observed with the increasing concentration of TBA. The proportion of nitrate removal declined from 81.6% to 60.0% with the increase in C(TBA)/C(Nitrate) from 10 to 70, and it further dropped to 39.1% when C(TBA)/C(Nitrate) was over 80. We can tentatively state that the indirect H* pathway accounts for 60% of the removal of nitrate, and the direct electron transfer pathway is responsible for the remaining part.
 Fig. 6  (a) EPR spectra of DMPO adducts with the Co@NCNT/CC cathode under different operating conditions. (b) Effect of the C(TBA)/C(nitrate) ratio on ENRR performance with the Co@NCNT/CC cathode. 
3.5. Long-term stability of Co@NCNT/CC and ENRR tests with the real water samples
The long-term stability of catalysts is a vital parameter for evaluating ENRR performance.41Fig. 7a shows that the Co@NCNT/CC cathode preserved excellent catalytic activity toward ENRR over 30 consecutive cycles, with a removal proportion of around 95% and an N2 selectivity (in the presence of NaCl) of 100% for each cycle. Note that the concentration of leaching Co at the end of 30 cycles was 1.9 ng mL−1 (determined by ICP-MS), signifying the outstanding performance consistency of Co@NCNT/CC during extended operation. Meanwhile, no remarkable compositional or structural changes were observed after 30 repeatedly cycled tests, as supported by the post-reaction characterization results of XRD, SEM, and TEM (Fig. S18–S20†). It is also revealed that the Co@NCNT/CC cathode exhibited high stability over all the investigated pH values. For example, Fig. S21† presents the representative data of nitrate removal proportion and N2 selectivity collected at pH 3 and 14, which did not alter upon 8-cycle operation. The concentration of Co dissolved from the cathode was 12.1 ng mL−1 for pH 3 and 8.5 ng mL−1 for pH 14 after 8 cycles.
 Fig. 7  (a) Long-term operation stability of Co@NCNT/CC for ENRR. Reaction conditions: electrolyte containing 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N, 50 mM Na2SO4, and 1.5 g L−1 NaCl; current density of 10 mA cm−2; electrolysis of 3 h; and initial pH = 7.5. ENRR tests of the Co@NCNT/CC cathode with (b) real groundwater containing 55.3 mg L−1 NO3−-N and the (c) pre-treated coke wastewater containing 68.3 mg L−1 NO3−-N. 
Further attempts were made to evaluate the potential possibility of Co@NCNT/CC for practical application. As such, the ENRR performance of the Co@NCNT/CC cathode for two types of wastewater (i.e., real groundwater and biological effluent of coking wastewater) was examined under the constant-current mode. As shown in Fig. 7b, the percentage of nitrate removal for real groundwater remained relatively constant with the increasing cycles, from 97.6% (cycle #1) to 99.2% (cycle #2), 99.5% (cycle #3), 98.8% (cycle #4), and 99.8% (cycle #5). Despite their low concentrations, the presence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ in the groundwater caused the formation of small-amount hydroxide precipitates on the surface of post-reacted Co@NCNT/CC. No pretreatment steps were conducted in the current stage due to the negligible effect on ENRR. For the biologically treated coking water, pretreatment with electrochemical advanced oxidation was used to remove the chemical organics. Fig. 7c shows that the Co@NCNT/CC cathode enabled good ENRR performance over five consecutive cycles, with >90% removal in each cycle and no apparent deterioration for the increasing cycles. These observations demonstrate that the Co@NCNT/CC cathode is effective in removing nitrate from real groundwater/wastewater.
4. Conclusions
Conventional approaches for evaluating the ENRR activity of electrocatalysts in the literature involve their attachment onto the electrode substate using binders and roller-pressing. We find that, although as-obtained catalysts exhibited satisfactory ENRR performance when operated at the constant-potential (e.g., −1.3 V vs. SCE) mode, they showed limited performance improvement under kinetically enhanced conditions when operated at the constant-current mode (e.g., above 10 mA cm−2). This is attributed to the inferior availability of active sites featured with ENRR capacity because of severe stacked behaviors instead of poor intrinsic activity. In this case, a mismatch between rapidly accumulated electrons on the catalyst surface and deficient active centers for ENRR would occur, consequently resulting in the parasitic HER being dominated under a high current density. To address this issue, a unique self-supporting CNT array encapsulating metal Co NPs at the tip end of each individual CNT was successfully prepared using the metal–organic framework (MOF)-assisted pyrolysis method. The structure conversion from lying down to standing up allows more accessible active sites on the protruding carbon shell surface, attenuating the demand for reactants diffusing into the deep section of catalysts. The Co@NCNT/CC cathode demonstrates outstanding performance for ENRR, evidenced by the fact that 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N was completely removed at 10 mA cm−2 with 3 h electrolysis time and over the wide pH range of 3–14. This cathode also shows promise for treating real groundwater/wastewater laden with nitrate, but pretreatment may be required to eliminate the adsorption/precipitation of substances obscuring the active sites.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21876052; U21A2034); the Guangdong Special Support Plan for Innovation Teams (no. 2019BT02L218); the Guangdong Special Support Plan for Young Top-notch Talents (no. 2019TQ05L179); the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province, China (no. 2019A050510009); and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (no. 2021B1515120077).
References
M. Duca and M. T. M. Koper, Powering denitrification: The perspectives of electrocatalytic nitrate reduction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9726–9742 RSC .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, M. Li, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Nitrate electroreduction: Mechanism insight, in situ characterization, performance evaluation, and challenges, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6720–6733 RSC .
X. Chen, T. Zhang, M. Kan, D. Song, J. Jia, Y. Zhao and X. Qian, Binderless and oxygen vacancies rich FeNi/graphitized mesoporous carbon/Ni foam for electrocatalytic reduction of nitrate, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 13344–13353 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, D. Han, G. Zhu, H. Xu, W. Luo, L. Wang, W. Jiang, A. Dong and J. Yang, Tailoring the assembly of iron nanoparticles in carbon microspheres toward high-performance electrocatalytic denitrification, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5423–5430 CrossRef CAS .
W. Teng, N. Bai, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Fan and W.-X. Zhang, Selective nitrate reduction to dinitrogen by electrocatalysis on nanoscale iron encapsulated in mesoporous carbon, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 230–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, H. Guo, S. Hwang, X. Yang, Z. He, J. Braaten, S. Karakalos, W. Shan, M. Wang, H. Zhou, Z. Feng, K. L. More, G. Wang, D. Su, D. A. Cullen, L. Fei, S. Litster and G. Wu, Single cobalt sites dispersed in hierarchically porous nanofiber networks for durable and high-power PGM-free cathodes in fuel cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, M. Sun, F. Chen, Y. Shi, Y. Yu, X. Li and B. Zhang, Unveiling the activity origin of iron nitride as catalytic material for efficient hydrogenation of CO2 to C2+ hydrocarbons, Angew. Chem., 2021, 60, 4496–4500 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Discriminating catalytically active FeNx species of atomically dispersed Fe–N–C catalyst for selective oxidation of the C–H bond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, C. Xie and H.-L. Jiang, Rational fabrication of low-coordinate single-atom Ni electrocatalysts by MOFs for highly selective CO2 reduction, Angew. Chem., 2021, 60, 7607–7611 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Zheng, E. Petit, K. Qi, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, W. Wang, A. Tiberj, X. Wang, M. Chhowalla, L. Lajaunie, R. Yu and D. Voiry, 3.4% solar-to-ammonia efficiency from nitrate using Fe single atomic catalyst supported on MoS2 nanosheets, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, n/a, 2108316 Search PubMed .
H. Yin, Z. Chen, S. Xiong, J. Chen, C. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Kuwahara, J. Luo, H. Yamashita, Y. Peng and J. Li, Alloying effect-induced electron polarization drives nitrate electroreduction to ammonia, Chem Catalysis, 2021, 1, 1088–1103 CrossRef .
G. Wen, J. Liang, Q. Liu, T. Li, X. An, F. Zhang, A. A. Alshehri, K. A. Alzahrani, Y. Luo, Q. Kong and X. Sun, Ambient ammonia production via electrocatalytic nitrite reduction catalyzed by a CoP nanoarray, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 972–977 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, Z. Jin, S. Tang, P. Li, P. Wu and G. Yu, Porous Two-dimensional iron-cyano nanosheets for high-rate electrochemical nitrate reduction, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1072–1081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Cheng, L. Jiang, A. Kong and Y. Shan, Efficient nitrate reduction over novel covalent Ag-salophen polymer-derived “vein-leaf-apple”-like Ag@carbon structures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33186–33195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lan, J. Chen, H. Zhang, W.-X. Zhang and J. Yang, Fe/Fe3C nanoparticle-decorated N-doped carbon nanofibers for improving the nitrogen selectivity of electrocatalytic nitrate reduction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15853–15863 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Ling, Z. Deng and W.-X. Zhang, Nitrogen-doped iron for selective catalytic reduction of nitrate to dinitrogen, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 926–933 CrossRef CAS .
W. Duan, G. Li, Z. Lei, T. Zhu, Y. Xue, C. Wei and C. Feng, Highly active and durable carbon electrocatalyst for nitrate reduction reaction, Water Res., 2019, 161, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Highly active and durable non-precious-metal catalysts encapsulated in carbon nanotubes for hydrogen evolution reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1919–1923 RSC .
N. Li, H. Tan, X. Ding, H. Duan, W. Hu, G. Li, Q. Ji, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, F. Hu, C. Wang, W. Cheng, Z. Sun and W. Yan, Phase-mediated robust interfacial electron-coupling over core-shell Co@carbon towards superior overall water splitting, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 266, 118621 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, S. Zhu, M. Dong and W. Fan, MOF-derived hcp-Co nanoparticles encapsulated in ultrathin graphene for carboxylic acids hydrogenation to alcohols, J. Catal., 2021, 399, 201–211 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai, L. Wang, K. Wang, X. Sang, Z. Li, B. Yang, J. Chen, L. Lei, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Accelerated water dissociation kinetics By electron-enriched cobalt sites for efficient alkaline hydrogen evolution, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, n/a, 2109556 Search PubMed .
H.-H. Wang, S.-N. Zhang, T.-J. Zhao, Y.-X. Liu, X. Liu, J. Su, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Mild and selective hydrogenation of CO2 into formic acid over electron-rich MoC nanocatalysts, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 651–657 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, F. Sun, Z. Xiang, Z. Shen, J. Yun and D. Cao, ZIF-derived in situ nitrogen-doped porous carbons as efficient metal-free electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 442–450 RSC .
L. Yan, Y. Xu, P. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Jiang, L. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Shen, X. Zhao and L. Wang, A freestanding 3D heterostructure film stitched by MOF-derived carbon nanotube microsphere superstructure and reduced graphene oxide sheets: A superior multifunctional electrode for overall water splitting and Zn–Air batteries, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, H. Shan, H. Yu, C. A. Zhong, J. Ge, N. Zhang, W. Chu, W. Yan, Q. Xu, H. A. Wu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Nanopore confinement of electrocatalysts optimizing triple transport for an ultrahigh-power-density Zinc–Air fuel cell with robust stability, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tu, P. Ren, D. Deng and X. Bao, Structural and electronic optimization of graphene encapsulating binary metal for highly efficient water oxidation, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharma, J.-H. Jang, D. Y. Shin, J. A. Kwon, D.-H. Lim, D. Choi, H. Sung, J. Jang, S.-Y. Lee, K. Y. Lee, H.-Y. Park, N. Jung and S. J. Yoo, Work function-tailored graphene via transition metal encapsulation as a highly active and durable catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2200–2211 RSC .
G. Yue, S. Li, D. Li, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, N. Wang, Z. Cui and Y. Zhao, Coral-like Au/TiO2 hollow nanofibers with through-holes as a high-efficient catalyst through mass transfer enhancement, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 4843–4848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jian, W. Chen, D. Zeng, L. Chang, R. Zhang, M. Jiang, G. Yu, X. Huang, H. Yuan and S. Feng, Metal-ionic-conductor potassium ferrite nanocrystals with intrinsic superhydrophilic surfaces for electrocatalytic water splitting at ultrahigh current densities, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7586–7593 RSC .
L. Li, G. Zhang and Z. Su, One-step assembly of phytic acid metal complexes for superhydrophilic coatings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9093–9096 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, Z. Xue, C. Liu, X. Qiao, L. Liu, C. Huang, K. Liu, X. Li, Z. Lu and T. Wang, General strategy to optimize gas evolution reaction via assembled striped-pattern superlattices, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1857–1863 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, G. Zhang, N. Chen, Y. Hu, T. Regier, D. Rawach and S. Sun, Self-reconstruction of Co/Co2P heterojunctions confined in N-doped carbon nanotubes for Zinc–Air flow batteries, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1153–1161 CrossRef CAS .
S. Du, Z. Ren, J. Wu, W. Xi and H. Fu, Vertical α-FeOOH nanowires grown on the carbon fiber paper as a free-standing electrode for sensitive H2O2 detection, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2260–2269 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Q. Hao, Y. Li, J. Yu, C. Xu, H. Liu and S. Yan, Free-standing trimodal porous NiZn intermetallic and Ni heterojunction as highly efficient hydrogen evolution electrocatalyst in the alkaline electrolyte, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106402 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. He, J. Ma and T. D. Waite, Active chlorine mediated ammonia oxidation revisited: Reaction mechanism, kinetic modelling and implications, Water Res., 2018, 145, 220–230 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mandal, M. K. Yadav, A. K. Gupta and B. K. Dubey, Chlorine mediated indirect electro-oxidation of ammonia using non-active PbO2 anode: Influencing parameters and mechanism identification, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 247, 116910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, Z. Dai, W. Zheng, Z. Lei, J. Qiu, W. Kuang, W. Huang and C. Feng, Facile ammonium oxidation to nitrogen gas in acid wastewater by in situ photogenerated chlorine radicals, Water Res., 2021, 205, 117678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, B. Jiang, C. Ni, Y. Qi and X. Bi, Enhanced reduction of nitrate by noble metal-free electrocatalysis on P doped three-dimensional Co3O4 cathode: Mechanism exploration from both experimental and DFT studies, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 123034 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mao, N. Li, H. Lan, X. Zhao, H. Liu, J. Qu and M. Sun, Dechlorination of trichloroacetic acid using a noble metal-free graphene–Cu foam electrode via direct cathodic reduction and atomic H*, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 3829–3837 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mao, X. Zhao, H. Lan, H. Liu and J. Qu, Graphene-modified Pd/C cathode and Pd/GAC particles for enhanced electrocatalytic removal of bromate in a continuous three-dimensional electrochemical reactor, Water Res., 2015, 77, 1–12 CrossRef .
F. Yao, M. Jia, Q. Yang, F. Chen, Y. Zhong, S. Chen, L. He, Z. Pi, K. Hou, D. Wang and X. Li, Highly selective electrochemical nitrate reduction using copper phosphide self-supported copper foam electrode: Performance, mechanism, and application, Water Res., 2021, 193, 116881 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2en00421fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Environmental significance
Electrocatalytic nitrate reduction reaction (ENRR) has been recently considered as a promising and sustainable method to simultaneously decontaminate the toxic nitrate in the wastewater and recover the commercially profitable product (i.e., ammonia). Various cathode catalysts have been developed to promote the efficiency. Metal-encapsulated and nitrogen-doped carbon-based (M@NC) catalysts stand out due to their superior electrochemical stability, tunable functionality, and excellent conductivity. But in the form of powder, they deliver poor performance for ENRR especially under the high-current conditions, which may be ascribed to the limited accessible active centers. In this work, inspired by the phenomenon of an apically dominant mechanism during plant growth, we propose a rational design that changes the catalyst structure from lying down to standing up. Accordingly, the free-standing M@NCNT (carbon nanotube) array on carbon cloth (CC) is successfully fabricated, which exhibits impressive ENRR performance at high currents. This work provides new insights into designing and synthesizing advanced carbon-based catalysts for environmental remediation of nitrate-polluted wastewater.

	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD, (b) Co 2p XPS, and (c) Raman spectra of three catalysts. (d–f) SEM, (g–i) TEM, and (j–l) HRTEM images of (d, g and j) Co@NCNT/CC, (e, h and k) Co@NCL/CC, and (f, i and l) P-Co@NCNT. The red circles in (d) refer to the Co particles. The scale bar in (d–f) is 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparisons of the nitrate removal efficiency of three catalysts at (a) the constant-potential mode (−1.3 V vs. SCE after 24 h electrolysis) and (b) the constant-current mode (10 mA cm−2). Comparisons of (c) the nitrate removal efficiency and (d) the corresponding Kapp values of three catalysts during stirring-control experiments. The initial concentration of NO3−-N was 50 mg L−1.	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of (a) the water contact angles and (b) BET surface areas of the three electrodes. The inset in (b) shows the surface area of P-Co@NCNT. (c) Plots of the current density (at −0.15 V vs. SCE) against the scan rate to obtain the double-layer capacitance. CV curves of (d) Co@NCNT/CC and (e) P-Co@NCNT/NF at different scan rates recorded in 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N and under N2-saturated conditions.	 

 	Fig. 4  Scheme illustration of the merits of the electrode configuration for ENRR.	 

 	Fig. 5  Effects of (a) current density, (b) NaCl concentration, (c) reactor volume, and (d) initial pH on the ENRR performance of Co@NCNT/CC. For all the experiments, except for the variable factor, other conditions were fixed at 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N, 1.5 g L−1 NaCl, 100 mL of electrolyte, 10 mA cm−2 current density, and initial pH = 7.5.	 
NO3− + 8e− + 10H+ → NH4+ + 3H2O (direct electron transfer pathway)	(4)
NO3− + 8H* → NH4+ + 2OH− + H2O (H*-mediated indirect pathway)	(5)

 	Fig. 6  (a) EPR spectra of DMPO adducts with the Co@NCNT/CC cathode under different operating conditions. (b) Effect of the C(TBA)/C(nitrate) ratio on ENRR performance with the Co@NCNT/CC cathode.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Long-term operation stability of Co@NCNT/CC for ENRR. Reaction conditions: electrolyte containing 50 mg L−1 NO3−-N, 50 mM Na2SO4, and 1.5 g L−1 NaCl; current density of 10 mA cm−2; electrolysis of 3 h; and initial pH = 7.5. ENRR tests of the Co@NCNT/CC cathode with (b) real groundwater containing 55.3 mg L−1 NO3−-N and the (c) pre-treated coke wastewater containing 68.3 mg L−1 NO3−-N.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2en00421f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
