Fundamentals of lateral and vertical heterojunctions of atomically thin materials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR08982D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR08982D
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3870-3887Fundamentals of lateral and vertical heterojunctions of atomically thin materials

        
          
            Anupum 
            Pant†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zafer 
            Mutlu†
b, 
      
        
          
            Darshana 
            Wickramaratne
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Cai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roger K. 
            Lake
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Cengiz 
            Ozkan
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Sefaattin 
            Tongay
          
        
      *a
aSchool for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. E-mail: Sefaattin.tongay@asu.edu
bMaterials Science and Engineering Program, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. E-mail: cozkan@engr.ucr.edu
cMaterials Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
dLaboratory for Terahertz and Terascale Electronics, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, California 92521, USA
Received 
      17th December 2015
    , Accepted 20th January 2016First published on 20th January 2016AbstractAt the turn of this century, Herbert Kroemer, the 2000 Nobel Prize winner in Physics, famously commented that “the interface is the device”. This statement has since opened up unparalleled opportunities at the interface of conventional three-dimensional (3D) materials (H. Kroemer, Quasi-Electric and Quasi-Magnetic Fields in Non-Uniform Semiconductors, RCA Rev., 1957, 18, 332–342). More than a decade later, Sir Andre Geim and Irina Grigorieva presented their views on 2D heterojunctions which further cultivated broad interests in the 2D materials field. Currently, advances in two-dimensional (2D) materials enable us to deposit layered materials that are only one or few unit-cells in thickness to construct sharp in-plane and out-of-plane interfaces between dissimilar materials, and to be able to fabricate novel devices using these cutting-edge techniques. The interface alone, which traditionally dominated overall device performance, thus has now become the device itself. Fueled by recent progress in atomically thin materials, we are now at the ultimate limit of interface physics, which brings to us new and exciting opportunities, with equally demanding challenges. This paper endeavors to provide stalwarts and newcomers a perspective on recent advances in synthesis, fundamentals, applications, and future prospects of a large variety of heterojunctions of atomically thin materials.
1. Introduction
Modern electronics, including field-effect transistors (FETs), PN junctions, photodetectors, photovoltaics, and thermoelectrics, all rely on vertical and lateral junctions. The interface formed by dissimilar materials is what delivers new functionalities, which are otherwise unattainable with individual constituent layers. A p–n junction is one such example of a simple device where on/off rectification is only achieved after an electronic equilibrium, i.e., a charge transfer at the interface, which then leads to a large built-in potential across the interface. Examples of vertical heterojunctions include but are not limited to Schottky junction diodes, field effect transistors (FETs), metal–semiconductor FETs (MESFETs), high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs), and vertical FETs (VFETs).
Layered material systems, unlike conventional 3D materials, consist of weakly coupled individual atomically thin (2D) layers that are one-unit cell in thickness.3,4 Best known examples of 2D systems are graphene and monolayer MoS2, which can be isolated from their bulk mineral counterparts, such as graphite and molybdenite.5 The 2D layers of these materials systems are weakly coupled via the van-der-Waal's (vdW) interaction, and each layer possesses a chemically passivated surface.6 Due to their surface inertness, atomic level thinness, and layered nature, dissimilar or similar 2D material systems can be stacked onto each other to form quasi-2D vertical heterojunctions without any chemical (covalent or ionic) bonding across the interface. Weak vdW coupling also implies that vertical heterojunctions do not have strict lattice match/mismatch conditions for fabricating 2D heterostacks.2Fig. 1a (ref. 7) shows vertically stacked monolayers of WS2 on MoS2. Another possibility is where instead of assembling a heterobilayer junction, a lateral heterojunction for a variety of combinations of vdW materials is shown to create strictly 2D junctions with atomically sharp interfaces through CVD (Fig. 1b).7 Integrating vdW into the existing Si manufacturing process by creating devices out of 2D/3D heterojunction (Fig. 1d)8 is an immediate possibility. On the other hand, utilizing the stellar properties of 2D while packing more per monolayer unit area is also a possibility with junctions made out of vertically aligned monolayers (Fig. 1c).9
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of heterojunctions between monolayers of two different transition metal dichalcogenides, for example, between MoS2 and WS2. Mo, W and S atoms are represented by green, pink and yellow spheres, respectively. WS2 can grow on top of MoS2.7 (b) or laterally from MoS2 monolayer by changing the growth parameters during chemical vapor deposition (discussed in the synthesis section).7 (c) The heterostructure consists of the MoS2 on WSe2, in which their van der Waals layers are aligned perpendicular to the substrate.9 (d) Device structure of MoS2/p-Si (2D/3D) heterojunction solar cell.8 
In addition to their promising potential, 2D systems offer rich material properties and cover a broad spectrum owing to their diverse electrical properties. Single layer graphene, for example, is a zero band gap semiconductor covered by the Dirac spectrum;4,10 it interacts with light in the microwave to create an ultraviolet spectrum. Electronic carriers are massless and possess rather high electronic mobility values because of their linear dispersion (Dirac cone). Semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),5,11–15 post-transition metal chalcogenides (PTMCs),16–19 and post-transition metal iodides (PTMIs)20,21 all crystallize in lamellar form, and therefore, their ultrathin or monolayer sheets of pure materials or alloys are often isolated from their bulk counterparts by top-down methods like mechanical exfoliation,22 liquid phase methods23,24 or by bottom-up processes like chemical vapor deposition (CVD),25–30 Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE),31 Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD)32 and Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD).33 TMDCs, PTMCs, and PTMIs, all have the general chemical formula of MX2, PX, or PI2 where M = Mo,W, P = Ga,In,Tl, X = S,Se, and Te, and I is iodine, are semiconductors with finite optical band gaps falling in the near-infrared and visible range. In particular, 2D semiconducting TMDCs are direct gap semiconductors that efficiently absorb and emit photons.34,35 Lastly, transition metal hydroxides, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),36 and mica-based37 layered materials have rather wide band gaps, typically in the range of 4–8 eV, and are potential candidates for 2D dielectric/insulating spacers in 2D heterojunction geometries.38
Thus far, 2D materials research has primarily focused on graphene, graphene derivatives, and TMDC monolayers; as such, the materials library and fundamental properties of these materials are relatively complete. Conversely, there exist other 2D systems as well that have received less attention, and yet, it is anticipated that novel properties and applications from these other classes of 2D materials will eventually emerge. The focus of this article is, however, on 2D heterolayers because of their predominance in semiconducting materials. It presents advances made in semiconducting 2D heterostructures and unique aspects of 2D TMDCs and PTMCs, which can help us improve our understanding of their heterostructure geometries.
2. Brief properties of 2D TMDCs and PTMCs
One of the most important properties of group-VI TMDCs (MX2 M = Mo, W) is that as the monolayers are isolated from their bulk counterparts (3D → 2D transition), their optical band gap increases and they undergo indirect to direct gap transition.5 As a result, in the monolayer form they absorb and emit light rather strongly. Indeed, pound for pound, they have potential to out-perform optoelectronic semiconductors (Fig. 2),43e.g., GaAs, GaN, by three-orders of magnitude when they are in resonant condition. This implies that group-VI TMDCs are of particular interest for light conversion and information technologies. Unlike GaAs or GaN, their band gap is located at K and K′ symmetry points (as opposed to Γ) of the hexagonal Brilliouin zone; thus electrons with valley degree of freedom can exist.41,44–47 Since 2D TMDCs have crystal inversion symmetry, different valleys (K and K′) have different orbital magnetic moments48,49 and circular dichroisms.50 As a result of their unique crystal structure, strong spin–orbit coupling51 and suitably located band gaps in the Brilliouin zone can pump valley carriers on demand by controlling the circular polarization of the incoming/excitation light source. This phenomenon is often referred to as “Valleytronics”41 based on its ability to manipulate carriers at different valleys with different spins (analogous to spintronics in the manipulation of spins).
 Fig. 2  (a) Experimental data of 2D modulus and pretension for various 2D layers and heterostructures.39 (b) PL spectra at different back-gate voltages. Both the neutral exciton (A) and trion (A−) features40 (c) Normalized PL spectra by the intensity of peak A of thin layers of MoS2 for N = 1–6. Feature I for N = 4–6 is magnified and the spectra are displaced for clarity.5 (d) Temperature dependent photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a defective MoS2 monolayer demonstrating the prominence of a bound exciton peak (Xb) at low temperatures.11 (e) Lack of spatial inversion symmetry in MoS2 monolayers. Schematic of proposed valley-dependent selection rules at K and K′ points in crystal momentum space: left (right)-handed circularly polarized light σ+ (σ−) only couples to the band-edge transition at K (K′) points for the sake of angular moment conservation and time reversal symmetry.41 (f) Mobility summary of few-layer phosphorene and black phosphorus thin film transistors with varying thicknesses. Red and green lines are models after ref. 14 with light and heavy hole masses for phosphorene, respectively.42 
Due to much reduced dielectric screening and strong Coulomb interaction at reduced dimensions, these materials possess rich exciton complexes, e.g., trions/charged excitons, biexcitons, bound excitons,52 which are stable even at room temperatures. These exciton complexes strongly influence the optical properties of 2D semiconductors in such a way that their absorption (α) and emission (PL) characteristics are dictated by the nature and types of excitons. Here, we note that the aforementioned characteristics are solely specific to group-VI TMDCs, MoS2, MoSe2, WSe2, and TMDCs involving transition metals from other groups typically have vastly different quantum confinement effects. Despite intensive research and the relatively well-established physics of group-VI TMDCs, our fundamental knowledge of other members of TMDCs still remains relatively unexplored for which readers are advised to read an article written by Prof. Chhowalla et al. on “The Chemistry of 2D materials”.6
There is an increasing effort to understand these new layered compounds beyond the group IV to VI TMDCs. Examples of new low-dimensional layered chalcogenides that have been synthesized are the group III (Gallium, Indium)17,19,53–56 and group IV (Germanium, Tin) sulfides and selenide.57,58 Confining these materials to a few monolayers and a monolayer leads to the emergence of new phenomena and possible application spaces in which these materials can be adopted. When the group III sulfides, selenides and tellurides are confined to a single monolayer from their bulk structure, the parabolic dispersion of the valence band edge at Γ is deformed into a ‘Mexican-hat’ dispersion.59,60 Presence of a ‘Mexican-hat’ dispersion results in a Fermi-ring of states, which can lead to novel phenomena including a 1/√E singularity in the two-dimensional (2D) density of states.17 This singularity in the density of states can further lead to novel correlated phenomena such as itinerant magnetism and superconductivity, with additional practical implications such as enhanced thermo-electric response60–62 and photo response.63 Another relatively less explored class of 2D material is PTMCs. Bulk PTMCs, unlike TMDCs, are direct gap semiconductors, and interestingly, from 3D → 2D, they transform into indirect gap semiconductors. For photonic applications, however, 2D PTMCs are less promising than 2D TMDCs. Nevertheless, their true potential is in the few-layer (quasi-2D) form when they are direct gap semiconductors with relatively small exciton binding energies, which is anticipated to be vital for photovoltaic applications.64
While most of the recent groundbreaking work covered here has been on TMDC and PTMCs, the assortment of 2D materials does not end. There is a whole family of layered van-der-Waal materials or their combinations left to explore such as phosphorene,42,65 Germanene,66 Silicene67 and transition metal Carbides and Carbonitrides (MXenes)68 and many more.69,70 Notably, other interesting hybrids such as h-BNC36 consisting of randomly distributed domains of h-BN and C phases in the monolayer, further widen the range of possibilities offered by these class of materials.
Potential of 2D heterolayers and opportunities at the nanoscale
One might wonder as to why heterojunctions must be made out of atomically thin layers? The answer to this question is hidden in the unique electronic, mechanical, optical, and chemical properties of these heterojunctions. In fact, heterostructures of atomically thin layers (considered just made of surface) lie at the frontier of advanced materials research and offer unparalleled opportunities for multi-functional atomically thin devices in which device operation is dictated by interface physics. Their uniqueness is summarized below:
I. Foremost, 2D layers are self-passivated, i.e., their surface is free of chemically active dangling bonds which limits their interaction with gases (particles in ambient and weakens the interaction strength between adjacent layers or materials6). Indeed, 2D layers interact via weak vdW forces which allows to deposit dissimilar materials with vastly different lattice constants, thereby opening novel routes towards vdW epitaxy.
II. Despite weak interlayer coupling, the physical properties of 2D heterolayers strictly depend on the stacking orientation,71i.e., relative crystalline orientation of constituent layers,72 as well as interlayer coupling strength (interlayer distance),73–75 which offers new design parameters to further control material response and performance on demand.
III. As mentioned in the previous section, 2D TMDCs and PTMCs offer valley-selective dynamics (valleytronics), large exciton binding energies,11,76–80 leading to strong/long-lived excitons,81 and rich exciton complexes82–85 that are not feasible to attain in other material systems. More importantly, group-VI TMDCs become direct gap semiconductors in 2D, thereby emitting and absorbing light rather efficiently.5
IV. Beyond their modest electronic mobility, the true strength of 2D heterolayers is their unusual mechanical,22 chemical, and optical properties. 2D materials have large Young's modulus86–88 values and extreme thinness, and are able to take a large amount of strain before reaching fracture limit. As such, 2D material devices and their heterostructures are anticipated to be extremely flexible compared to conventional TFT and FETs geometries.
V. In addition, the 2D materials library is wide enough that it is possible to choose materials with electronic properties ranging from metallic to near-IR (NIR)19,42,89 to visible (VIS)5,90 to ultra-violet (UV),91 allowing for the design of heterojunction devices with desired band alignment schemes.
VI. From the electronic properties perspective, semiconducting TMDCs, PTMCs, and uniatomic black-phosphorus42,65,92 all offer electronic mobilities approaching that of silicon thin film transistor (TFT). Their mobility values are already far greater than conventional organic semiconductors and even metal–oxide TFTs, showing great promise for optoelectronic applications.93
In the light of the unique advantages of 2D layers in heterojunction device geometries, a combination of these layers in the lateral or vertical geometries provides us with a large number of parameters and materials to design new classes of junctions with novel functionalities at the nanoscale. The onset of this atomically thin materials era opens up marvelous new opportunities, and yet equally demanding challenges. Taking into consideration a large number of pre-existing review articles on fundamental properties of graphene and TMDCs, this review will focus solely on fundamentals, synthesis, and applications of 2D heterojunctions. Section 2 will discuss commonly used synthesis techniques for fabrication of 2D heterolayers, instead of presenting a historical overview of 2D layer fabrication. Readers interested in synthesis of monolayer materials are referred to other recent review articles.29,90 Section 3 will detail the physics of 2D heterolayers from an optics and electronics perspective. Based on the synthesis techniques and novel phenomena at the 2D limit, recent applications on 2D heterolayers will be introduced in section 4. Lastly, section 4 will summarize the overall outlook and grand challenges in the field.
3. Synthesis
This section is devoted to recent advances made in the synthesis of both vertical and in-plane 2D heterostructures. Mechanical exfoliation and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) based methods in conjunction with physical transfer assisted synthesis of heterostructures are evaluated. Also, the synthesis of a relatively newer class of junctions achieved directly through CVD, without any transfers involved, is covered.
Device fabrication methods involving graphene, given its age in the scientific community, have attained a certain level of maturity. So much that there exist established methods that allow fabrication of patterned in-plane h-BN/Graphene heterostructures94 and direct production of N-doped Graphene using CVD methods.95 An established, inexpensive and high-throughput CVD process96 for fabrication of single to few layer graphene on Ni substrates offers the capability of fabricating patterned Graphene layers using pre-patterned catalytic Nickel substrates. It also offers fantastic transferability (a vital characteristic for the fabrication of heterostructures and devices based on these processes) of Graphene to non-specific substrates through wet etching of Nickel. Moreover, strategies like roll-to-roll production,97 which can produce 30 inch predominantly monolayer graphene sheets, have pushed graphene into mainstream application.
Such levels of versatility associated with the fabrication of TMDC and PTMC monolayers is yet to come and is sure to transform this area of research in the coming years. Still, a wide variety of relatively younger 2D materials such as TMDCs and PTMCs has been shown to directly grow onto SiO2, sapphire, or even h-BN98 substrates with varied morphologies using CVD.28,99,100 Several other top-down and bottom-up methods for fabricating atomically thin layers of these relatively newer materials have been reviewed in detail by Wang et al.90
Vertical heterojunctions
Mechanical exfoliation still remains a popular method to obtain vertical junctions, owing to the commendable quality (although much smaller in area) of monolayers obtained by it (Fig. 1a.73). Presently, a typical synthesis of a vertical 2D heterojunction involves mechanical exfoliation or CVD growth of materials onto separate substrates using independent processes. Consequently, by using physical transfer methods100 one of these is transferred onto another, and then onto preferred substrates. Involving mechanically exfoliated layers in the synthesis, although gives better quality, and allows the freedom of including intended spacers73 between the layers to tune the properties, but is clearly associated with smaller effective areas of stacked layers which are not easy to fabricate devices with. Previously, a slightly better method than transferring exfoliated layers (which inevitably introduces impurities), direct CVD growth of MoS2 on exfoliated h-BN layers has seen good success too. This vertical junction (MoS2/h-BN) has been realized with the use of seeding promoters.101 Another study involving no use of seeding promoters has shown a growth of MoS2 on exfoliated h-BN with low preferred rotation; however, a few layers with 6°–30° rotations were seen as well. Similarly, WS2 on h-BN98 has been demonstrated.
Layers that have been grown using CVD (Fig. 1b.102), and then physically transferred over one another have the advantage of producing rather large effective areas of vertical stacks, as demonstrated with MoS2/WSe2,102 for instance. Again, involving physical transfers in the process due to the intermediate chemical agents associated with the process carries a risk of poor coupling (reversed by thermal treatment), which can then introduce interlayer contamination and unpredictable stacking orientation. This outcome will lead to deviant measurements and poor device performances. Thus, while mechanical exfoliation remains an important and a popular method for creating heterostructures and devices for studying the fundamental physics and for performing preliminary device tests in the laboratory environment, designing robust CVD methods such as the aforementioned roll-to-roll printing is an immediate prerequisite for easier and large-scale production of devices involving these younger class of 2D materials.
A certain level of success has been achieved in this aspect with the relatively new one- and two-step CVD processes, which have shown formation of stacked layers of one material over another without the involvement of an intermediate physical transfer. These are discussed in detail in the sub-section that follows.
Lateral heterojunctions
Recently, in the search for robust strategies to fabricate 2D heterostructures, an exciting new class, namely, lateral (or in-plane) 2D heterostructures grown using one and two-step CVD processes have emerged. These methods, unlike physically transferred layers, by the virtue of epitaxy, have thus far been shown to be the most effective in producing seamlessly connected, well-coupled, atomically sharp interfaced, and perfectly aligned heterojunctions free from contamination. Such direct CVD methods to obtain 2D heterostructures have grown both lateral and vertical junctions.
The one-step CVD growth strategy, for instance, has been shown to grow smaller areas (∼20 μm) of both in-plane as well as vertically stacked heterojunctions of WS2 and MoS2.112 In-plane junctions have been reported to grow at lower growth temperature (650 °C) (Fig. 3c and f).109 The lateral epitaxy of WS2 at the edge of MoS2 has been seen to occur preferentially at the zigzag edge. High-resolution STEM Z-contrast imaging shows the seamless connection of both materials stitched laterally with atomic lattice coherence and an overall interface roughness of ∼4 unit cells.
 Fig. 3  (a, b) Schematic and optical image of vertically stacked WS2/MoS2 synthesized using one-step CVD.112 (c) Optical image of the WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructure synthesized using two-step CVD. From the edge to the center are WSe2 bilayer, WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer, and MoSe2 monolayer, respectively, which are marked correspondingly as 1, 2, and 3.109 (d) The labels 1, 2, and 3 indicate regions of WSe2 monolayer, WSe2 bilayer, and WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer, respectively.109 (e, f) Schematic and optical image of in-plane WS2/MoS2 synthesized using one-step CVD.112 (g) High-resolution STEM images taken from the WSe2/MoS2 in-plane heterostructure.116 
Vertical heterojunctions produced using the same strategy with a significantly higher growth temperature (850 °C), possibly a thermodynamic product, have been observed to have grown with native 2H stacking, demonstrating a clear advantage over traditional methods to make vertical junctions (Fig. 3a and b).112 However, a trace interdiffusion (∼3%) of Mo and W into WS2 and MoS2 was observed as well. MoS2, due to its much faster nucleation and growth (when compared with WS2), is assumed to grow first, and is at the bottom in the vertical layers and on the inside of lateral junctions. An inverted arrangement might be possible with a two-step CVD of WS2 first, and then MoS2.
Similar one step growths have also successfully obtained MoSe2/WSe2 junctions using physical vapor transport of MoSe2 and WSe2 powders as precursors.111 Early process parameters favor MoSe2 growth and then a shift in the conditions changes the relative vapor pressures resulting in the growth of only WSe2 at a later stage. A reduction in the WSe2 powder content results in thinner layer of WSe2 surrounding the MoSe2 monolayer.
The direct one-step growth, although scalable and simple, comes with its own set of disadvantages. Firstly, smaller domain sizes greatly limit the applications because they complicate device fabrication. Minute substitutions of elements (as observed by Gong et al.) of one layer into another is small enough to not greatly affect properties, but can be a concern if the same growth strategy was to be extended to other materials. In addition, with a single step there is always a possibility for unpredictable growth with un-tested material systems having similar reaction rates (co-existing vapor species during growth), or even greatly different growth temperatures. Former resulting in a thermodynamically preferred alloy, like in Mo–S–Se systems,117 and later in just a pure material 2D layer.
A two-step CVD process, previously seen with graphene and h-BN,118 comprising of first growth of WSe2 and then a separate CVD process to grow MoS2 on the same substrate, for instance, has been reported to produce atomically sharp interfaces of MoS2 at the edges of WSe2 layers despite having a large lattice mismatch.119 The MoS2 grown in the second step was a single crystal outgrowing to follow the crystal orientation of WSe2 (Fig. 3g)116 The large difference in growth temperatures of 925 °C for WSe2 and 755 °C for MoS2 has been identified as one of the key reasons for the success of this two-step method. The importance of a careful retention of MoO3 and S partial pressures in the second step to avoid alloy formation has also been noted. A similar method used to consecutively grow MoSe2 (at 750 °C) and WSe2 (900 °C) shows a slightly different result. In-plane monolayers are never seen, probably due to a much higher second step growth temperature. Instead, two kinds of results have been reported—one with a bilayer of WSe2 outside of MoSe2 and the other with WSe2 overlapping MoSe2 to form a vertical junction at the edges and a monolayer MoS2 in the center (Fig. 3c). An increase in the growth time of WSe2 results in a second type—a complete coverage of MoSe2 by the second WSe2 layer and a monolayer WSe2 at the edge (Fig. 3d).109
The two-step strategy, although much more complicated, provides the freedom of controlling the domain sizes of individual components of the heterojunctions, simply by adjusting the growth time. Another hybrid style of growth that involves in situ switching of sources from WS2 to WSe2 has produced WS2/WSe2 lateral junctions, and also MoS2/MoSe2 lateral junctions using corresponding precursors.113 While slightly more complicated, this process prevents the passivation of growth fronts of first grown species by skipping environmental exposure between growths, a strong advantage over the two-step process. In addition, it prevents the first grown layers from withstanding a second major change in growth conditions, which can prove to be too harsh for delicate layers. An overview of synthesis routes being used for fabricating vertical and lateral heterojunction structures has been listed in Table 1.
Table 1 A list of popular synthesis techniques presently used to obtain vertical and lateral heterostructures of layered compounds




 
 
Type
References






Transfer based


1
Exfoliate – exfoliate transfer
Vertical
WSe2/MoS2 (and with h-BN spacers),73 MoSe2/WS279


2
CVD – transfer
Vertical
MoS2/Si (3d)103


3
CVD – exfoliate – transfer
Vertical
Black Phosphorus/MoS2104


4
CVD – CVD – transfer
Vertical
MoS2/WSe2,102 MoS2/WS281,105




Transferless


5
PVD – exfoliate
Vertical
WSe2/MoS2106


6
Exfoliate – CVD
Vertical
MoS2/h-BN,101,107,108 WS2/h-BN98


7
CVD – CVD
Vertical, lateral
WSe2/MoSe2109 MoS2/SnS2,110 WS2/SnS2,110 WSe2/SnS2110


8
One-step CVD
Lateral
MoSe2 – WSe2,111 WS2/MoS2,112 WS2 – MoS2112


9
Hybrid one-step vapor growth
Lateral
MoS2 – MoSe2,113 WS2 – WSe2113




Others






10
E-Beam patterning – sulfurization
Lateral pattern
MoSe2 – MoS2114


11
Selenization – sulfurization
Vertical aligned
MoS2/WSe2115


12
Catalytic conversion
Lateral pattern
h-BN – Graphene94




As CVD methods are relatively random processes, E-beam lithography patterning on MoSe2 and consequent sulphurization of unmasked areas to convert them to MoS2, has been shown to be a rather precise method to define the positions of lateral junctions of MoS2 and MoSe2. Moreover, as compared to a single junction obtained by CVD methods, several junctions can be obtained on a single flake using this method. However, interfaces obtained are not as atomically sharp and there is a chance of incomplete sulphurization which might lead to alloy formations at the unmasked positions rather than pure MoS2.114
Compared to one-step growths, there is evidence that much larger areas and more complicated combinations can be more predictably grown using such two-step CVD methods. The two-step strategy has a clear pay-off at the later stages, promising integrated device fabrication and appearing to be the way forward that would probably push TMDCs and PTMCs into mainstream large-scale practical applications. Predictable patterned growths using patterned substrates or defined nucleation points is another front which will allow the younger 2D materials to replace traditional semiconductors one day. When compared to how far CVD methods for graphene have come, there lies a great scope for innovation in this area of research.
4. Fundamentals of 2D heterolayers
Band offsets, type of heterojunctions, and interface interaction models
Band offsets of semiconductors are important and necessary parameters in material and device design. For example, semiconductor/semiconductor interfaces can be categorized into straddling gap (type I), staggered gap (type II) or broken gap (type III), and depending on the type of the heterojunction, different device response is anticipated (Fig. 4c). Naturally, designing heterostructure devices based on 2D semiconductors requires accurate band offset parameters across different materials.
 Fig. 4  (a) Calculated band alignment (CBM and VBM levels) for variety of group-VI TMDCs.120 (b) Orbital diagram summarizing orbital contributions to the CBM and VBM levels.120 (c) Type-I-II-and III heterojunction band alignment schemes. 
One of the early studies tackled this through the predictive approach using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and calculating band offsets across different members of TMDCs120 (Fig. 4a). Before identifying types of junctions forming across a variety of 2D/2D interfaces, it is imperative to understand the origin of CBM and VBM points in the band structure of 2D TDMCs. It has been suggested by different teams that the CBM is composed of M (transition metal) atoms’ dz2 and X (chalcogen) atoms’ (px, py) orbitals, whereas VBM is made of M dx2−y2 and X (px, py) orbitals, as shown in Fig. 4b.120–122 Interestingly, for increasing atomic number for X, i.e., S, Se, and Te, the orbital radius and coupling with d orbitals increase, as a result of which CBM and VBM values increase in energy across S, Se, and Te for a given transition metal atom (Fig. 4b).120 For common X systems, i.e., for known chalcogen but varying transition metals, CBM and VBM values are determined by the position of the d orbitals of the cation: for W atom, 5d orbital is located at higher energies, therefore CBM and VBM values for WX2 systems always remain higher than MoX2 systems for a given chalcogen atom. This implies that any 2D/2D heterojunction across WX2 and MoX2, such as MoS2/WS2 or WSe2/MoSe2, will yield type-II (staggered gap). A close look at the calculated band offsets shows that most of the 2D TDMCs actually tend to form type-II junctions with a few exceptions forming type-I (MoSe2/WS2, MoTe2/WSe2, and WSe2/WTe2).

Interacting vs. non-interacting models. 
Even though these calculations offer a preliminary idea regarding the nature of the heterojunction, experimental determination of the heterojunction type and interpretation of interface physics have proven to be rather difficult. From a phenomenological viewpoint, the interface interaction and electronic relaxation process can be described by equally controversial and contradicting models:
Anderson's non-interacting model123 is considered the simplest model to describe semiconductor heterojunctions. The Andersen model suggests that the vacuum levels of semiconductors on each side of the junction must be at the same energy (aligned) level when constructing the band alignment scheme. The underlying assumption is that semiconductors are large non-interacting, meaning the imaginary spacing between two sides is assumed to be large. Therefore, this model fails especially for strongly interacting systems where chemical bonds formed at the interface strongly alter the surface energetics. Despite its weakness for conventional materials, 2D layers are also known to interact rather weakly with each other. This simple model, therefore, may be applicable to 2D systems especially when layers are separated by chemically inert h-BN layers. Thus far, 2D heterostructure research and data interpretation predominantly uses this model to explain interface phenomena with some degree of success. It is important to mention that presence of defects, a common source of chemically active sites on 2D materials, are anticipated to cause deviation from this model especially when constituent layers are highly defective.
Contrary to the Anderson model, the Tersoff model124 accounts for the interlayer interaction. For semiconductor/semiconductor junctions, it postulates that a “dipole layer” is formed at the interface after electronic relaxation (charge transfer across the interface) to match the Fermi level of both sides. A formed dipole layer, in return, changes the interface potential distribution and influences the overall dynamics. For metal/semiconductor (Schottky) junctions, the model suggests that the metal atoms introduce gap states (metal induced gap states – MIGS) on the semiconductor side, which affects the electronic and optical response of the 2D heterolayers. It is worth mentioning that these MIGS do not diffuse deep into the conventional (3D) semiconductors, but is anticipated to play a significant role in atomically thin layers. Traditionally, the Tersoff model is known to successfully explain trends in conventional II–VI and III–V semiconductors as well as 2D electron-gas (2DEG) systems.
The bond Polarization model125 suggests that the interface characteristics depend on the bonding and structure at the interface. These two parameters dictate bonding structure, band alignment, interface potential, and the microstructure of the materials, which then directly influence the properties of heterojunctions. Indeed, this model has been widely applied in heterogeneous structures to explain experimental data and commonly observed spatial non-uniformity. However, owing to their chemically passivated surfaces and absence of interface chemical bonding across layers, this model may not be best applicable to describe 2D heterojunctions.

Optical effects and excitonic dynamics at 2D heterojunctions

Charge transfer across 2D heterojunctions. 
2D heterostructures of TMDCs are particularly exciting for optoelectronic and light-harvesting applications, because many group-VI TMDCs monolayers are direct-bandgap semiconductors with remarkably strong light–matter interactions and light emission properties. As discussed in section 2, theoretically, many stacked 2D TMDCs heterostructures can form type-II semiconductor heterojunctions that facilitate efficient electron–hole separation for light detection and harvesting. Here, the important question then is how does fact charge transfer take place across atomically sharp 2D interfaces? The answer to this question will ultimately determine the true potential in optoelectronic applications. This is because electron–electron interactions are much enhanced in 2D materials due to weak dielectric screening and quantum confinement effects, which increases exciton binding energy in group-VI 2D TMDCs to ∼500 meV (which in turn are at least an order of magnitude greater than found in Si, GaAs, and GaN crystals). While large exciton binding energy warrants long exciton lifetimes, simultaneously it introduces increased difficulties in separating electrons and holes from each other to generate light (photovoltaics) or signal (detectors/sensors).
Earlier studies much focused on understanding how strong electron–electron (e–e) and excitonic effects influence charge transfer process. Using photoluminescence spectroscopy and pump–probe measurements, it has been reported that charge transfer across type-II MoS2/WS2 2D heterojunctions occurs only within 50 ps, suggesting that charge separation in 2D heterostructures is very efficient even though exciton binding energy within the constituent layers is much larger than conventional semiconductors (Fig. 5a–c). Fast charge separation at the 2D interface has been primarily attributed to strong Coulomb interactions resulting in bound exciton states and stabilizing charge transfer excitons (CTCs).126 These exciton states with electrons and holes residing in different layers are anticipated to be energetically favorable compared to an exciton confined to only the MoS2 layer, and are likely to be responsible for the efficient charge separation observed in MoS2/WS2 heterostructures. Here, charge transfer across layers is also responsible for reduced PL signal due to reduced number of neutral excitons residing solely on MoS2 and WS2 sides. Due to the inherently constrained lateral resolution of traditional optical techniques the dynamics at lateral junctions have remained relatively unexplored. Although W. Bao et. Al. have accomplished sub-wavelength resolution spectroscopic imaging of exciton recombination in MoS2 monolayers using ‘Campanile’ nano-optical probe technique,127 excitonic recombination is yet to be explored in lateral heterojunctions.
 Fig. 5  (a) Type-II MoS2/WS2 heterojunction band alignment diagram and proposed charge transfer complex process.126 (b) Observed PL and ref. 126 (c) time-resolved PL (TRPL) signal demonstrating hole transfer from MoS2 to WS2 within 10 ps timescales.126 

Effects of interlayer coupling and crystalline orientation
Since the CTCs’ dynamics are strongly influenced by the interlayer interaction between adjacent layers, PL characteristics of 2D heterojunctions are expected to depend on the degree of layer-layer coupling strength. Studies on another type-II MoS2/WSe2 heterojunctions (Fig. 6a) have shown that a new PL peak emerges at energies far below the optical band gap of MoS2 (1.9 eV) and WSe2 (1.65 eV), associated with CTC recombination processes involving electrons in CBM on MoS2 and holes in VBM band on WSe2 side (Fig. 6b (ref. 73)). Interestingly, new PL peak slowly weakens at the intrinsic luminescence peak of MoS2, and WSe2 emerges after h-BN spacers are introduced (N = 0→3), as shown in Fig. 6c and d. Even though, similar studies have been performed by a number of teams, conditions at which CTCs PL (process 3 in Fig. 6a) emerge remains open. It is anticipated that different 2D heterolayer growth and preparation techniques are likely to introduce different density and types of impurities at the interface, directly influencing actual interlayer coupling strength and excitonic dynamics.
 Fig. 6  (a) Type-II band offset between 1 L WSe2/MoS273 (b) PL spectrum of MoS2, WSe2, and their heterojunctions73 (c) h-BN spacers placed between MoS2/WSe2 and ref. 73 (d) observed PL spectrum for different number of h-BN spacers.73 
In addition to interlayer spacing, interlayer stacking order and degree of misorientation (given as Phi in Fig. 7a) by changing the coupling strength and influencing the electronic band structure is another parameter that affects the optical properties of 2D heterolayers.102,128 Although the interaction between stacked 2D layers is relatively weak, electron orbitals still extend out of the plane and affect charge carriers in an adjacent 2D layer. Indeed, theoretical and experimental studies point towards strong band renormalization effects when layers are rotated from their AA (stacked onto each other) or AB (Bernal) stacking. For instance, going from AA to random stacking (Fig. 7b and c), the band structure changes from direct to indirect, and therefore the optical absorption and emission characteristics are heavily influenced by the orientation at nanoscale.71 Similar to results in Fig. 6d, when layers are separated from each other, interlayer interaction between layers dramatically reduces and individual layers starts to behave as monolayers (Fig. 7d). Prior studies have shown rotational faults in bilayer graphene or heterostructures between graphene and other vdW materials can decouple the two layers,129 increase contact resistance, or affect thermal conductivity130 and modulate the intrinsic Fermi velocity of graphene.131 Relative orientation of the layers in a heterojunction can significantly alter its electronic structure as well as 2nd harmonic generation (SHG) properties.132–135 Firstly, SHG has been proved to be a handy tool in determining precise crystalline orientations from 0° to 30° and even locating twin boundaries in mono or tri-layer TMD materials and producing false colored images of grains in a large area CVD sheet for instance.136 This is possible because the SHG intensity is strongly related to the azimuthal crystal orientation for odd-numbered layer materials (due to the absence of centrosymmetry in odd layer 2H stacks). But more importantly, in artificially stacked hetero-bilayers, as the stacking is not strictly 2H. As relative flake orientations of artificially transferred layers preserve the non-centrosymmetry, the relative orientations can be precisely determined using SHG G.137
 Fig. 7  (a) Misorientation between two dissimilar 2D TMDCs given by angle ϕ.73 (b–d) Calculated band structure of 1 L-MoS2 for different stacking angles.71 
5. Applications of 2D heterolayers
Soft opening
The formation of heterojunctions from 2D materials opens avenues to create novel diodes in 2D confined spaces. Under dark room conditions, when 2D layers are not interacting with external light source such as sun, a laser source, or room light, diodes are designed in such a way that two oppositely charged semiconductors are slabbed onto each other through various chemistry or conventional semiconductor growth techniques; the resulting junction assumes on/off response by allowing carriers to be transmitted in one direction and blocked in the opposite. This forms the basis for rectifiers present in nearly all electronic devices. Furthermore, under light exposure photoinduced electron–hole pairs separate and recombine at a heterojunction interface yielding photovoltaic, light emitting diode (LEDs), and photodetector applications. In this view, 2D systems offer unique opportunities owing to their chemically inert surfaces, offering vdW stacked/atomically sharp interfaces. Their thinness imply that 2D heterojunction devices can be biased more effectively at relatively low voltages, while their high Young's modulus offers new venues towards all flexible 2D heterojunctions. Despite their large exciton binding energies, which in principle can prevent photoexcited carriers to be separated, recent studies suggest that charge transfer excitons allow fast charge transfer at the interface, thereby overcoming one of the greatest challenges to fabricate PV devices based on 2D materials.
Forming heterojunctions with materials in different dimensions

2D/3D junctions103. 
Even though this review article is solely on 2D heterojunctions, in reality heterojunctions with material in other dimensions also offer rather unique ways to achieve exciting device performance and applications (Fig. 8). For example, a vertically-stacked hybrid photodiode consisting of a thin n-type MoS2 and p-type silicon p–n diodes has been shown to exhibit notable photoconductivity, where diodes possess a broad spectral response due to direct and indirect band transitions of 2D MoS2.103 These results mark a significant step towards scalable fabrication of vertical devices from 2D materials and conventional materials (Fig. 8c). Shortly thereafter, similar device geometry was proposed for LED103,138 applications. Fig. 8c shows the optical and proposed band alignment of MoS2/Si heterojunction diodes. Their results demonstrated that classical diodes and all related optoelectronic devices could be prepared by combining an atomically thin 2D semiconductor and a conventional semiconductor. Overall, 2D/3D junctions are of particular interest as they allow for rapid fabrication, development, and manufacturing of these kinds of devices at industrial scales. Given the exciting properties and decent benefits over conventional 3D/3D junctions, 2D/3D device formation is likely to be picked up by industry before 2D/2D or other sophisticated layered materials become competitive. This is simply because 2D/3D junction fabrication only relies on synthesis of good quality 2D layers, and eliminates questions regarding extra synthesis steps required for fabrication of 2D heterolayers and orientation dependent material performance. Nevertheless, advances in 2D/2D heterojunctions have been remarkable, as described next.
 Fig. 8  (a) 2D/1D MoS2/CNTs139 (b) 2D/2D MoS2/Black phosphorus and ref. 104 (c) 2D/3D MoS2/Silicon pn-junctions as an active part of solar cell, on/off diode, and LED diode applications.103 


2D/2D junctions104. 
A number of heterojunctions have been fabricated using a large variety of materials (Table 1). In an earlier work, the authors demonstrated that p–n junctions of 2D materials form after transferring a single flake of monolayers WSe2 onto MoS2. Careful data acquisition and studies on the carrier transport along the heterobilayer interface showed that monolayer MoS2 and WSe2 devices exhibited n- and p-channel characteristics, respectively. However, the device consisting of one contact on the monolayer WSe2 and the other on monolayer MoS2, with the two layers overlapping in the central region exhibited a distinct rectifying behavior, consistent with type II band alignment of the hetero-bilayer.73 This rectification provided additional evidence for electrical coupling and proper contact potential between the two constituent layers. Furthermore, vertical structures made of the same materials (MoS2/WSe2) even revealed electroluminescence response with excellent current rectification behavior with an ideality factor of 1.2 (ref. 106) and maximum external quantum efficiency up to 12%. The studies revealed that distinct layer-number dependent emission characteristics exist and, therefore, provide further insight into the origins of hot-electron luminescence and the nature of electron–orbital interactions in TMDCs.106


2D/1D junctions139. 
When 1D materials such as CNTs, nanowires, or nanoribbons meet 2D surfaces, they form 2D/1D heterojunctions, offering rather interesting surface interface phenomena at the interface. Even though, current knowledge is rather limited in this front, one of the pioneering works on CNTs and MoS2 has shown that these junctions have the potential to offer unique properties and applications. In particular, semiconducting CNTs are proposed for p–n junction diodes. The vertical stacking of these two direct band gap semiconductors has displayed a type-II heterojunction with electrical characteristics that can be tuned with an applied gate bias to achieve a wide range of charge transport behavior, ranging from insulating to rectifying, with forward-to-reverse bias current ratios exceeding 104. In this particular design, the heterojunction of two direct gap semiconductors benefits from much enhanced light trapping and quantum confinement. Furthermore, random or aligned networks of CNT films can be fabricated at relatively large scales allowing easy integration with existing 2D materials. However, it is also known that CNT manufacturing, especially semiconducting CNTs, is challenging. Manufacturing difficulties arise from poor control over chirality (n, m) of CNTs, which defines if they are metallic or semiconducting (and if semiconducting their band gap also depends on the (n, m) values). These issues are likely to be problematic in the long term towards large-scale CNT/2D materials. On the other hand, networks of metallic CNTs have been demonstrated to be feasible and scalable. In this view, CNT/2D semiconductor metal/semiconductor Schottky junction diodes are possible candidates for unique device applications. Another possibility involves integration of 1D nanowire materials into 2D systems to properties that are unattainable using conventional material systems. At the time of this writing, the field is still well under-studied and likely to be invested in over the next few years.

6. Grand challenges and opportunities
We conclude this review article by presenting the current grand challenges in the field from a fundamental physics, synthesis, and manufacturing perspective. It is worth noting that research on heterostructures of atomically thin materials began only a few years ago, most of which has primarily focused on graphene and TMDC based heterostructures.
Synthesis and manufacturing
Any industrial level application will require large-area synthesis of 2D heterolayers with ultimate control over their crystalline properties. Currently, reported 2D heterojunction synthesis techniques primarily deal with the demonstration and feasibility of different types of 2D heterolayers, as well as understanding their fundamental properties mostly using optical and electrical techniques. For any realistic application of these 2D heterolayers, it is essential to grow them at large-scales—1 cm2 and preferably on wafers with diameters larger than 2 inches, to be competitive with other conventional but promising semiconductors, such as GaN, AlGaN, ZnO, an mercury cadmium telluride (MCT), which can be deposited onto desired substrates at large scales using industrially compatible growth techniques. Current 2D heterolayer growth techniques are mainly based on chemical vapor deposition, physical vapor deposition, and physical vapor transport techniques, which generally yields rather small areas with poor control over their microcrystalline, structural, physical, and optical properties. Preliminary work on atomic layer deposition (ALD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) has shown promising directions towards techniques to achieving these sophisticated heterolayers too. Alternatively, self-assembly of nucleation centers (for example transition metal oxides or organic catalysis agents PTCDA) may enable two-step growth techniques to achieve these atomically thin junctions. Still, it is daunting to achieve a reliable, reproducible, and controllable set of growth parameters to realize large-area 2D heterolayers. In this view, large-area synthesis is likely to be most problematic and challenging for successful integration of these materials into industrial level applications.
As discussed earlier, heterojunctions of 2D materials other than TMDCs and graphene based materials are likely to offer unique applications and functionalities. One particular example is black phosphorus (BP). Based on their high mobility performance, integration of BPs into other 2D materials and devices is anticipated to boost electronic performance of the resulting heterolayers. Recent studies on these junctions are still in the early stages, wherein device size is limited to only a couple of microns in size and devices are fabricated using non-scalable exfoliation techniques, but they show great premise in flexible electronics applications. Thus, scalable techniques to synthesize dissimilar 2D materials (TMDCs/BPs, TMDCs/PTMCs, TMDCs/Hydroxides) layer by layer, up to desired thickness are highly anticipated to increase the total number of 2D/2D combination to achieve broad range of properties and device functions.
Crystallinity and orientation matters
It is also highly likely that potential advances in large-area synthesis will not warrant their integration into optoelectronic devices so easily: even though heterojunctions of these unique sets of materials have outstanding performance in nano- and micro-length scales, poor control over interlayer interaction/registry is likely to raise concerns over large-scale reliability and manufacturability. This is particularly true of heterolayers formed by stacking two polycrystalline 2D materials onto each other, which is likely to result in a broad distribution of interlayer rotation angle across the wafer. Consequently, local regions may behave differently under the same excitation conditions, i.e., bias, laser excitation, thermal agitation, and their vastly different physical properties (electronic mobility, optical band gap, absorption, excitonic relaxation, and doping levels). On possible route to overcome this challenge is to synthesize single crystalline materials or polycrystalline materials with large single crystal domain sizes, and stack second and consecutive layers onto each other using well-optimized parameters using ALD or MBE technologies. It is worth mentioning that recent reports also suggest when substrate (sapphire) surface is treated under certain conditions, 2D layers grow in preferential orientation. Even though this is not directly linked to 2D heterolayers, new techniques may emerge for fabrication of 2D heterolayers with decent control over interlayer orientation.
Crystalline imperfections
Another grand challenge is related to presence of crystalline imperfections in 2D heterolayers. Since electron wavefunction is tightly localized in 2D, defects are anticipated to influence material properties much more dramatically when compared with conventional materials. Even though, studies exist on 2D layers, they are often focused on understanding the effects of defects in 2D materials and not 2D heterolayers, and they fail to address how to minimize unintentional imperfections during synthesis. As mentioned in the fundamentals section, defects may change the way constituent layers interact with each other, directly affecting the material properties. Additionally, shallow or deep defect levels created by these imperfections are expected to influence excitonic dynamics, optical properties, and even material stability under ambient conditions. The ultimate aspiration is to take unintentional impurities under control during growth to be able to fabricate materials that could be compatible with existing technologies.
Electronic doping
Related to imperfections discussed in the previous chapter, interstitials and substitutionals, also called electronic dopants, are an essential part of material design and modern device applications. Similar to silicon technologies, it is very hard to imagine any realistic application unless extrinsic doping concentration can be controlled in situ (during synthesis). With a few exceptions, current 2D heterolayer device demonstrations rely heavily on intrinsic doping concentration of 2D layers to form desired type-II p–n junctions. More specifically, MoS2 is known to be an n-type semiconductor where free electrons are believed to originate from presence of defects in the crystal matrix as well as intrinsic carriers (thermally excited carriers), whereas WSe2 is speculated to have p-type characteristics. Often times, synthesis techniques fabricate these 2D layers without any concern over their doping levels and research mostly targets demonstration of p–n junction or FETs response. On the contrary, modern applications strictly require doping levels be defined to achieve decent device performance with limited power consumption. In this regard, we expect to witness increased interest in finding feasible synthesis techniques to introduce dopants either during growth (in situ) or after (post-processing) the synthesis. Here, an easily contrived method is to introduce selected amount of reactive gases to blend foreign (doping) atoms into the crystal matrix. However, it is necessary to find synthesis techniques and parameters that introduce either interstitial or substitutional dopants into the material. An alternative solution might be introducing dopants after the material is grown using laser processing techniques commonly used for introducing dopants or ion-implantation technologies. Here, we note that the latter technique is likely to face increased difficulties compared to other techniques due to 2D layers’ extreme thinness.
Fundamental questions
From a fundamental perspective, we are still in the seminal stages of understanding interface physics at the interface. Recent studies have already shed some light on the interface phenomena of TMDCs and graphene based heterojunctions, and based on our experience with these heterolayers, it is essential to establish the library and physics of other 2D materials and their junctions. Moreover, there is an urgent need to develop current-transport models specific to 2D systems, going well beyond conventional theory for 3D materials, to interpret properly 2D Schottky diodes, p–n junctions, and FETs. Others outstanding question are how valleytronic and excitonic dynamics change under different crystallographic orientations, as well as the presence of intentional or unintentional defects, and impurities at the interface. Naturally, related questions for other classes of layered materials and their heterojunctions with each other and other material systems also need answering.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by National Science Foundation (DMR-552220). This work is supported in part by FAME, one of six centers of STARnet, a Semiconductor Research Corporation program sponsored by MARCO and DARPA and the NSF ECCS-1124733.
References
H. Kroemer, Quasi-Electric and Quasi-Magnetic Fields in Non-Uniform Semiconductors, RCA Rev., 1957, 18, 332–342 Search PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, van der Waals heterostructures, Nature, 2013, 499(7459), 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films, Science, 2004, 306(5696), 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Two-dimensional atomic crystals, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102(30), 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Atomically thin MoS2: A new direct-gap semiconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105(13), 2–5 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5(4), 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Duesberg, Heterojunctions in 2D semiconductors: A perfect match, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(12), 1075–1076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, C.-I. Wu, L.-J. Li, L.-J. Chen and J.-H. He, Monolayer MoS2 heterojunction solar cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(8), 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yu, H. R. Lee, S. S. Hong, D. Kong, H.-W. Lee, H. Wang, F. Xiong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, Vertical Heterostructure of Two-Dimensional MoS2 and WSe2 with Vertically Aligned Layers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Two-dimensional gas of massless Dirac fermions in graphene, Nature, 2005, 438(7065), 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ramasubramaniam, Large excitonic effects in monolayers of molybdenum and tungsten dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2012, 86(11), 1–6 CrossRef .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan, D. R. T. Zahn, S. Michaelis de Vasconcellos and R. Bratschitsch, Photoluminescence emission and Raman response of monolayer MoS_2, MoSe_2, and WSe_2, Opt. Express, 2013, 21(4), 4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Influence of quantum confinement on the electronic structure of the transition metal sulfide TS_{2}, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 83, 1–4 CrossRef .
S. Tongay, H. Sahin, C. Ko, A. Luce, W. Fan, K. Liu, J. Zhou, Y.-S. Huang, C.-H. Ho, J. Yan, D. F. Ogletree, S. Aloni, J. Ji, S. Li, J. Li, F. M. Peeters and J. Wu, Monolayer behaviour in bulk ReS2 due to electronic and vibrational decoupling, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3252 Search PubMed .
A. Ramasubramaniam, D. Naveh and E. Towe, Tunable band gaps in bilayer transition-metal dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 84(20), 1–10 CrossRef .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, H. S. S. R. Matte, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Rapid characterization of ultrathin layers of chalcogenides on SiO 2/Si substrates, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22(9), 1894–1905 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, L. Yu and B. Huang, Tunable electronic and dielectric behavior of GaS and GaSe monolayers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15(19), 7098–7105 RSC .
S. Lei, L. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, R. Kappera, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, H. Yamaguchi, G. Gupta, R. Vajtai, A. D. Mohite and P. M. Ajayan, Evolution of the electronic band structure and efficient photo-detection in atomic layers of InSe, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(2), 1263–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, T. Ren, A. Patanè, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, P. H. Beton, Z. D. Kovalyuk, G. V. Lashkarev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi and A. I. Dmitriev, Tuning the bandgap of exfoliated InSe nanosheets by quantum confinement, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(40), 5714–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Song, Z. Zhang, K. Ding, F. Huang and B. Sun, Layered ultrathin PbI 2 single crystals for high sensitivity flexible photodetectors, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3(17), 4402–4406 RSC .
M. Lin, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, W. Huang, W. Jiang, W. Zheng, S. Zhao, C. Jin, Y. Guo, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Controlled growth of atomically thin In2Se3 flakes by van der Waals epitaxy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(36), 13274–13277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Q. Yan, M. Chen, W. Fan, Y. Sun, J. Suh, D. Fu, S. Lee, J. Zhou, S. Tongay, J. Ji, J. B. Neaton and J. Wu, Elastic Properties of Chemical-Vapor-Deposited Monolayer MoS2, WS2, and Their Bilayer Heterostructures, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(9), 5097–5103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Two-dimensional nanosheets produced by liquid exfoliation of layered materials, Science, 2011, 331(6017), 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Liquid Exfoliation of Layered Materials, Science, 2013, 340(6139), 1226419 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Synthesis of large-area MoS2 atomic layers with chemical vapor deposition, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(17), 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Gong, G. Shi, W. L. Chow, K. Keyshar, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, Z. Liu, E. Ringe, B. K. Tay and P. M. Ajayan, Chemical vapor deposition growth of crystalline monolayer MoSe2, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(5), 5125–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, W. Zhang, J.-K. Huang, K.-K. Liu, Y.-H. Lee, C.-T. Liang, C.-W. Chu and L.-J. Li, Wafer-scale MoS2 thin layers prepared by MoO3 sulfurization, Nanoscale, 2012, 4(20), 6637–6641 RSC .
J.-K. Huang, J. Pu, C.-L. Hsu, M.-H. Chiu, Z.-Y. Juang, Y.-H. Chang, W.-H. Chang, Y. Iwasa, T. Takenobu and L.-J. Li, Large-Area Synthesis of Highly Crystalline WSe 2 Monolayers and Device Applications, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(1), 923–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Li and L.-J. Li, Recent advances in controlled synthesis of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides via vapour deposition techniques, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(9), 2744–2756 RSC .
A. L. Elías, N. Perea-López, A. Castro-Beltrán, A. Berkdemir, R. Lv, S. Feng, A. D. Long, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Endo, H. R. Gutiérrez, N. R. Pradhan, L. Balicas, T. E. Mallouk, F. López-Urías, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Controlled synthesis and transfer of large-area WS2 sheets: From single layer to few layers, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(6), 5235–5242 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Liu, L. Jiao, L. Xie, F. Yang, J. L. Chen, W. K. Ho, C. L. Gao, J. F. Jia, X. D. Cui and M. H. Xie, Molecular-beam epitaxy of monolayer and bilayer WSe 2: a scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy study and deduction of exciton binding energy, 2D Mater., 2015, 2(3), 034004 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Ho, C.-H. Ma, T.-T. Luong, L.-L. Wei, T.-C. Yen, W.-T. Hsu, W.-H. Chang, Y.-C. Chu, Y.-Y. Tu, K. P. Pande and E. Y. Chang, Layered MoS 2 grown on c -sapphire by pulsed laser deposition, Phys. Status Solidi, 2015, 9(3), 187–191 CAS .
L. K. Tan, B. Liu, J. H. Teng, S. Guo, H. Y. Low and K. P. Loh, Atomic layer deposition of a MoS2 film, Nanoscale, 2014, 3–5 Search PubMed .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan, D. R. T. Zahn, S. M. De Vasconcellos and R. Bratschitsch, Photoluminescence emission and Raman response of monolayer MoS2, MoSe2, and WSe2, Opt. Express, 2013, 21(4), 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Photoluminescence from chemically exfoliated MoS 2, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(12), 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Srivastava, Z. F. Wang, K. Storr, L. Balicas, F. Liu and P. M. Ajayan, Atomic layers of hybridized boron nitride and graphene domains, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9(5), 430–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Wojtaszek, N. Tombros, N. Agraït, B. J. Van Wees and G. Rubio-Bollinger, Atomically thin mica flakes and their application as ultrathin insulating substrates for graphene, Small, 2011, 7(17), 2491–2497 CAS .
H. Wang, T. Taychatanapat, A. Hsu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero and T. Palacios, BN/Graphene/BN Transistors for RF Applications, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32(9), 1209–1211 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Q. Yan, M. Chen, W. Fan, Y. Sun, J. Suh, D. Fu, S. Lee, J. Zhou, S. Tongay, J. Ji, J. B. Neaton and J. Wu, Elastic Properties of Chemical-Vapor-Deposited Monolayer MoS2, WS2, and Their Bilayer Heterostructures, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5097–5103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, C. Lee, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, T. F. Heinz and J. Shan, Tightly bound trions in monolayer MoS2., Nat. Mater., 2013, 12(3), 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. Cui, Valley polarization in MoS2 monolayers by optical pumping, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(8), 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, Phosphorene: An unexplored 2D semiconductor with a high hole mobility, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(4), 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Extraordinary sunlight absorption and one nanometer thick photovoltaics using two-dimensional monolayer materials, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(8), 3664–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mai, A. Barrette, Y. Yu, Y. G. Semenov, K. W. Kim, L. Cao and K. Gundogdu, Many-body effects in valleytronics: Direct measurement of valley lifetimes in single-layer MoS2, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 202–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Control of valley polarization in monolayer MoS2 by optical helicity, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(8), 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Aivazian, Z. Gong, A. M. Jones, R. L. Chu, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, C. Zhang, D. Cobden, W. Yao and X. D. Xu, Magnetic Control of Valley Pseudospin in Monolayer WSe2, arXiv, 2014, 1406, 2546.
A. Srivastava, M. Sidler, A. V. Allain, D. S. Lembke, A. Kis and A. Imamoglu, Valley Zeeman effect in elementary optical excitations of monolayer WSe2, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11(2), 141–147 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lu, X. Wu, W. Guo and X. C. Zeng, Strain-dependent electronic and magnetic properties of MoS2 monolayerbilayer, nanoribbons and nanotubes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(37), 13035 RSC .
S. F. Wu, J. S. Ross, G. B. Liu, G. Aivazian, A. Jones, Z. Y. Fei, W. G. Zhu, D. Xiao, W. Yao, D. Cobden and X. D. Xu, Electrical tuning of valley magnetic moment through symmetry control in bilayer MoS2, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9(3), 149–153 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang, B. Liu and J. Feng, Valley-selective circular dichroism of monolayer molybdenum disulphide, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xiao, G. Bin Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu and W. Yao, Coupled spin and valley physics in monolayers of MoS 2 and other group-VI dichalcogenides, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 1–5 Search PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Spectral and dynamical properties of multilexcitons in semiconductor nanocrystals, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 635–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, M.-W. Lin, A. A. Puretzky, J. C. Idrobo, C. Ma, M. Chi, M. Yoon, C. M. Rouleau, I. I. Kravchenko, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Controlled Vapor Phase Growth of Single Crystalline, Two-Dimensional GaSe Crystals with High Photoresponse, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5497 CAS .
P. Hu, L. Wang, M. Yoon, J. Zhang, W. Feng, X. Wang, Z. Wen, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Miyamoto, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Highly responsive ultrathin GaS nanosheet photodetectors on rigid and flexible substrates, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1649–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, J. Luo, A. Yan, H. S. S. R. Matte, M. Grayson, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, GaS and GaSe ultrathin layer transistors, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(26), 3549–3554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lei, L. Ge, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, G. Shi, G. You, J. Lou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Synthesis and photoresponse of Large GaSe Atomic Layers, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(6), 2777–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Han, Z. Dai, H. Pang, Y. Zheng, Y. Q. Lan, J. Bao and J. Zhu, Two-dimensional tin selenide nanostructures for flexible all-solid-state supercapacitors, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(4), 3761–3770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Li, B. Zhou, X. Wang, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Shape-controlled synthesis of SnE (E = S, Se) semiconductor nanocrystals for optoelectronics, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26(11), 3515–3521 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres, F. Guinea and A. H. Castro Neto, Fermi liquid theory of a Fermi ring, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2007,(75), 1–10 Search PubMed .
D. Wickramaratne, F. Zahid and R. K. Lake, Electronic and thermoelectric properties of van der Waals materials with ring-shaped valence bands, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118(7), 075101 CrossRef .
J. P. Heremans, B. Wiendlocha and A. M. Chamoire, Resonant levels in bulk thermoelectric semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(2), 5510 CAS .
L. D. Hicks and M. S. Dresselhaus, Thermoelectric figure of merit of a one-dimensional conductor, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 47(24), 16631–16634 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, H. Shimotani, H. Shang, T. Kanagasekaran, V. Zólyomi, N. Drummond, V. I. Fal'Ko and K. Tanigaki, High-sensitivity photodetectors based on multilayer GaTe flakes, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(1), 752–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, A. Pant, H. Cai, J. Kang, H. Sahin, B. Chen, K. Wu, S. Yang, A. Suslu, F. M. Peeters and S. Tongay, Engineering excitonic dynamics and environmental stability of post-transition metal chalcogenides by pyridine functionalization technique, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17109–17115 RSC .
A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-L'Heureux, N. Y.-W. Tang, P. L. Lévesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Photooxidation and quantum confinement effects in exfoliated black phosphorus, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(8), 826–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, C. P. Chuu, C. M. Wei and M. Y. Chou, Stability and electronic properties of two-dimensional silicene and germanene on graphene, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2013, 88(24), 2–7 CrossRef .
B. Feng, Z. Ding, S. Meng, Y. Yao, X. He, P. Cheng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Evidence of silicene in honeycomb structures of silicon on Ag(111), Nano Lett., 2012, 12(7), 3507–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Intercalation and delamination of layered carbides and carbonitrides, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Miró, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, An atlas of two-dimensional materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 6537–6554 RSC .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ProgressChallenges, and Opportunities in Two-Dimensional Materials Beyond Graphene, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(4), 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Heo, J. H. Sung, S. Cha, B.-G. Jang, J.-Y. Kim, G. Jin, D. Lee, J.-H. Ahn, M.-J. Lee, J. H. Shim, H. Choi and M.-H. Jo, Interlayer orientation-dependent light absorption and emission in monolayer semiconductor stacks, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yu, H. R. Lee, S. S. Hong, D. Kong, H.-W. Lee, H. Wang, F. Xiong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, Vertical heterostructure of two-dimensional MoS2 and WSe2 with vertically aligned layers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(2), 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J. S. Kang, H. A. Bechtel, S. B. Desai, F. Kronast, A. A. Unal, G. Conti, C. Conlon, G. K. Palsson, M. C. Martin, A. M. Minor, C. S. Fadley, E. Yablonovitch, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, Strong interlayer coupling in van der Waals heterostructures built from single-layer chalcogenides, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111(17), 6198–6202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, W. Fan, J. Kang, J. Park, U. Koldemir, J. Suh, D. S. Narang, K. Liu, J. Ji, J. Li, R. Sinclair and J. Wu, Tuning interlayer coupling in large-area heterostructures with CVD-grown MoS2 and WS2 monolayers, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(6), 3185–3190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, H. S. J. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, Folded MoS2 layers with reduced interlayer coupling, Nano Res., 2014, 7(4), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Xiao, Y. Gong, Z. Wang, Y. Kang, S. Zu, P. M. Ajayan, P. Nordlander and Z. Fang, Active Light Control of the MoS 2 Monolayer Exciton Binding Energy, ACS Nano, 2015, 150914154309007 Search PubMed .
A. Chernikov, T. C. Berkelbach, H. M. Hill, A. Rigosi, Y. Li, O. B. Aslan, D. R. Reichman, M. S. Hybertsen and T. F. Heinz, Exciton Binding Energy and Nonhydrogenic Rydberg Series in Monolayer WS2, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113(7), 076802 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Cui, Exciton binding energy of monolayer WS2, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9218 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Bellus, F. Ceballos, H. Chiu and H. Zhao, Tightly Bound Trions in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Heterostructures, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(6), 6459–6464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Klots, A. K. M. Newaz, B. Wang, D. Prasai, H. Krzyzanowska, D. Caudel, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, B. L. Ivanov, K. A. Velizhanin, A. Burger, D. G. Mandrus, N. H. Tolk, S. T. Pantelides and K. I. Bolotin, Probing excitonic states in ultraclean suspended two-dimensional semiconductors by photocurrent spectroscopy, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, S. Hu, L. Su, L. Huang, Y. Liu, Z. Jin, A. A. Purezky, D. B. Geohegan, K. W. Kim, Y. Zhang and L. Cao, Equally Efficient Interlayer Exciton Relaxation and Improved Absorption in Epitaxial and Nonepitaxial MoS 2 /WS 2 Heterostructures, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(1), 486–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. You, X.-X. Zhang, T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman and T. F. Heinz, Observation of biexcitons in monolayer WSe2, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11(6), 477–481 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thilagam, Exciton complexes in low dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116(5) CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Chan, C. Manolatou and F. Rana, Absorption of light by excitons and trions in monolayers of metal dichalcogenide Mo S2: Experiments and theory, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 89(20), 12–16 CrossRef .
S. Tongay, J. Suh, C. Ataca, W. Fan, A. Luce, J. S. Kang, J. Liu, C. Ko, R. Raghunathanan, J. Zhou, F. Ogletree, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Defects activated photoluminescence in two-dimensional semiconductors: interplay between bound, charged, and free excitons, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2657 Search PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Measurement of the Elastic Properties and Intrinsic Strength of Monolayer Graphene, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, L. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Large scale growth and characterization of atomic hexagonal boron nitride layers, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(8), 3209–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yue, J. Kang, Z. Shao, X. Zhang, S. Chang, G. Wang, S. Qin and J. Li, Mechanical and electronic properties of monolayer MoS2 under elastic strain, Phys. Lett. A, 2012, 376(12–13), 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Lezama, A. Arora, A. Ubaldini, C. Barreteau, E. Giannini, M. Potemski and A. F. Morpurgo, Indirect-to-Direct Band Gap Crossover in Few-Layer MoTe 2, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(4), 2336–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(11), 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Deep ultraviolet light-emitting hexagonal boron nitride synthesized at atmospheric pressure, Science, 2007, 317(5840), 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Layer-controlled band gap and anisotropic excitons in few-layer black phosphorus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 89(23), 235319 CrossRef .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(5), 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, H. Lim, K. Y. Ma, A.-R. Jang, G. H. Ryu, M. Jung, H.-J. Shin, Z. Lee and H. S. Shin, Catalytic Conversion of Hexagonal Boron Nitride to Graphene for In-Plane Heterostructures, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(7), 4769–4775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Synthesis of n-doped graphene by chemical vapor deposition and its electrical properties, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(5), 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Large AreaFew-Layer Graphene Films on Arbitrary Substrates by Chemical Vapor Deposition, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(1), 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. Il Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Roll-to-roll production of 30-inch graphene films for transparent electrodes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5(8), 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okada, T. Sawazaki, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguch, H. Hibino, H. Shinohara and R. Kitaura, Direct Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of WS2 Atomic Layers on Hexagonal Boron Nitride, ACS Nano, 2014, 2–6 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Synthesis of Large-Area MoS 2 Atomic Layers with Chemical Vapor Deposition, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(17), 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, L. Yu, H. Wang, W. Fang, X. Ling, Y. Shi, C.-T. Lin, J.-K. Huang, M.-T. Chang, C.-S. Chang, M. Dresselhaus, T. Palacios, L.-J. Li and J. Kong, Synthesis and Transfer of Single-Layer Transition Metal Disulfides on Diverse Surfaces, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(4), 1852–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ling, Y.-H. Lee, Y. Lin, W. Fang, L. Yu, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Role of the Seeding Promoter in MoS 2 Growth by Chemical Vapor Deposition, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(2), 140129131422004 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-H. Chiu, M.-Y. Li, W. Zhang, W.-T. Hsu, W.-H. Chang, M. Terrones, H. Terrones and L.-J. Li, Spectroscopic Signatures for Interlayer Coupling in MoS 2 –WSe 2 van der Waals Stacking, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(9), 9649–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yim, M. O'Brien, N. McEvoy, S. Riazimehr, H. Schäfer-Eberwein, A. Bablich, R. Pawar, G. Iannaccone, C. Downing, G. Fiori, M. C. Lemme and G. S. Duesberg, Heterojunction Hybrid Devices from Vapor Phase Grown MoS2, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5458 CAS .
Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, Black Phosphorus–Monolayer MoS 2 van der Waals Heterojunction p–n Diode, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(8), 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Ultrafast charge transfer in atomically thin MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Cheng, D. Li, H. Zhou, C. Wang, A. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Electroluminescence and Photocurrent Generation from Atomically Sharp WSe 2 /MoS 2 Heterojunction p–n Diodes, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(10), 5590–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yan, J. Velasco Jr., S. Kahn, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, F. Wang, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, Direct growth of single- and few-layer MoS2 on h-BN with preferred relative rotation angles, Nano Lett., 2015, 150828131038006 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, X. Wang and J. H. Warner, All Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of MoS 2: h-BN Vertical van der Waals Heterostructures, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(5), 5246–5254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Lei, G. Ye, B. Li, Y. He, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Lou, Z. Liu, R. Vajtai, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Two-Step Growth of Two-Dimensional WSe 2 /MoSe 2 Heterostructures, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(9), 6135–6141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, F. Meng, J. R. Christianson, C. Arroyo-Torres, M. A. Lukowski, D. Liang, J. R. Schmidt and S. Jin, Vertical heterostructures of layered metal chalcogenides by van der Waals epitaxy, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(6), 3047–3054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Lateral heterojunctions within monolayer MoSe2-WSe2 semiconductors, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(12), 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Vertical and in-plane heterostructures from WS2/MoS2 monolayers, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13(12), 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. X. Duan, Lateral epitaxial growth of two-dimensional layered semiconductor heterojunctions, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(12), 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, M.-W. Lin, K. Wang, A. R. Lupini, J. Lee, L. Basile, A. Boulesbaa, C. M. Rouleau, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. Yoon and D. B. Geohegan, Patterned arrays of lateral heterojunctions within monolayer two-dimensional semiconductors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yu, H. R. Lee, S. S. Hong, D. Kong, H.-W. Lee, H. Wang, F. Xiong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, Vertical Heterostructure of Two-Dimensional MoS 2 and WSe 2 with Vertically Aligned Layers, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(2), 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Epitaxial growth of a monolayer WSe2-MoS2 lateral p-n junction with an atomically sharp interface, Science, 2015, 349(6247), 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Su, Y. Te Hsu, Y. H. Chang, M. H. Chiu, C. L. Hsu, W. T. Hsu, W. H. Chang, J. H. He and L. J. Li, Band gap-tunable molybdenum sulfide selenide monolayer alloy, Small, 2014, 10(13), 2589–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Park, D. A. Siegel, K. F. McCarty, K. W. Clark, W. Deng, L. Basile, J. C. Idrobo, A.-P. Li and G. Gu, Heteroepitaxial Growth of Two-Dimensional Hexagonal Boron Nitride Templated by Graphene Edges, Science, 2014, 343(6167), 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Epitaxial growth of a monolayer WSe2-MoS2 lateral p-n junction with an atomically sharp interface, Science, 2015, 349(6247), 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Band offsets and heterostructures of two-dimensional semiconductors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102(1), 012111–012114 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, R. M. Ribeiro, M. Toh, A. Carvalho, C. Kloc, A. H. Castro Neto and G. Eda, Origin of indirect optical transitions in few-layer MoS2, WS2, and WSe2, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(11), 5627–5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, K. Lo, T. S. Matthews, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Thermally driven crossover from indirect toward direct bandgap in 2D semiconductors: MoSe2 versus MoS2, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(11), 5576–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Anderson, Germanium-Gallium Arsenide Heterojunctions [Letter to the Editor], IBM J. Res. Dev., 1960, 4(3), 283–287 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tersoff, Theory of semiconductor heterojunctions: The role of quantum dipoles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1984, 30(8), 4874–4877 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Tung, Recent advances in Schottky barrier concepts, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2001, 35(1–3), 1–138 CrossRef .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Ultrafast charge transfer in atomically thin MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, N. J. Borys, C. Ko, J. Suh, W. Fan, A. Thron, Y. Zhang, A. Buyanin, J. Zhang, S. Cabrini, P. D. Ashby, A. Weber-Bargioni, S. Tongay, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, J. Wu, M. B. Salmeron and P. J. Schuck, Visualizing nanoscale excitonic relaxation properties of disordered edges and grain boundaries in monolayer molybdenum disulfide, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Rigosi, H. M. Hill, Y. Li, A. Chernikov and T. F. Heinz, Probing Interlayer Interactions in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Heterostructures by Optical Spectroscopy: MoS2/WS2 and MoSe2/WSe2, Nano Lett., 2015, 150717105243008 Search PubMed .
M. Kindermann and P. N. First, Local sublattice-symmetry breaking in rotationally faulted multilayer graphene, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 83(4), 1–6 CrossRef .
J.-W. Jiang, X. Zhuang and T. Rabczuk, Orientation dependent thermal conductance in single-layer MoS2, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2209 Search PubMed .
A. Luican, G. Li, A. Reina, J. Kong, R. R. Nair, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim and E. Y. Andrei, Single-layer behavior and its breakdown in twisted graphene layers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106(12), 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kim, S. Coh, L. Z. Tan, W. Regan, J. M. Yuk, E. Chatterjee, M. F. Crommie, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, Raman spectroscopy study of rotated double-layer graphene: Misorientation-angle dependence of electronic structure, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108(24), 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yang, G. Chen, Z. Shi, C.-C. Liu, L. Zhang, G. Xie, M. Cheng, D. Wang, R. Yang, D. Shi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Y. Yao, Y. Zhang and G. Zhang, Epitaxial growth of single-domain graphene on hexagonal boron nitride, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12(9), 792–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Malard, T. V. Alencar, A. P. M. Barboza, K. F. Mak and A. M. de Paula, Observation of intense second harmonic generation from MoS2 atomic crystals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2013, 87(20), 201401 CrossRef .
W. T. Hsu, Z. A. Zhao, L. J. Li, C. H. Chen, M. H. Chiu, P. S. Chang, Y. C. Chou and W. H. Chang, Second harmonic generation from artificially stacked transition metal dichalcogenide twisted bilayers, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(3), 2951–2958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, Z. Ye, D. A. Chenet, Y. Ye, K. O'Brien, J. C. Hone and X. Zhang, Edge Nonlinear Optics on a MoS2 Atomic Monolayer, Science, 2014, 344(6183), 488–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Hsu, Z.-A. Zhao, L.-J. Li, C.-H. Chen, M.-H. Chiu, P.-S. Chang, Y.-C. Chou and W.-H. Chang, Second Harmonic Generation from Artificially Stacked Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Twisted Bilayers, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(3), 2951–2958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Koman, A. Fontcuberta, I. Morral, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Light generation and harvesting in a van der waals heterostructure, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(3), 3042–3048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, C.-C. C.-C. Wu, P. L. Prabhumirashi, M. L. Geier, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Gate-tunable carbon nanotube-MoS2 heterojunction p-n diode, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110(45), 18076–18080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors have contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of heterojunctions between monolayers of two different transition metal dichalcogenides, for example, between MoS2 and WS2. Mo, W and S atoms are represented by green, pink and yellow spheres, respectively. WS2 can grow on top of MoS2.7 (b) or laterally from MoS2 monolayer by changing the growth parameters during chemical vapor deposition (discussed in the synthesis section).7 (c) The heterostructure consists of the MoS2 on WSe2, in which their van der Waals layers are aligned perpendicular to the substrate.9 (d) Device structure of MoS2/p-Si (2D/3D) heterojunction solar cell.8	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Experimental data of 2D modulus and pretension for various 2D layers and heterostructures.39 (b) PL spectra at different back-gate voltages. Both the neutral exciton (A) and trion (A−) features40 (c) Normalized PL spectra by the intensity of peak A of thin layers of MoS2 for N = 1–6. Feature I for N = 4–6 is magnified and the spectra are displaced for clarity.5 (d) Temperature dependent photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a defective MoS2 monolayer demonstrating the prominence of a bound exciton peak (Xb) at low temperatures.11 (e) Lack of spatial inversion symmetry in MoS2 monolayers. Schematic of proposed valley-dependent selection rules at K and K′ points in crystal momentum space: left (right)-handed circularly polarized light σ+ (σ−) only couples to the band-edge transition at K (K′) points for the sake of angular moment conservation and time reversal symmetry.41 (f) Mobility summary of few-layer phosphorene and black phosphorus thin film transistors with varying thicknesses. Red and green lines are models after ref. 14 with light and heavy hole masses for phosphorene, respectively.42	 

 	Fig. 3  (a, b) Schematic and optical image of vertically stacked WS2/MoS2 synthesized using one-step CVD.112 (c) Optical image of the WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructure synthesized using two-step CVD. From the edge to the center are WSe2 bilayer, WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer, and MoSe2 monolayer, respectively, which are marked correspondingly as 1, 2, and 3.109 (d) The labels 1, 2, and 3 indicate regions of WSe2 monolayer, WSe2 bilayer, and WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer, respectively.109 (e, f) Schematic and optical image of in-plane WS2/MoS2 synthesized using one-step CVD.112 (g) High-resolution STEM images taken from the WSe2/MoS2 in-plane heterostructure.116	 


	Transfer based
1	Exfoliate – exfoliate transfer	Vertical	WSe2/MoS2 (and with h-BN spacers),73 MoSe2/WS279
2	CVD – transfer	Vertical	MoS2/Si (3d)103
3	CVD – exfoliate – transfer	Vertical	Black Phosphorus/MoS2104
4	CVD – CVD – transfer	Vertical	MoS2/WSe2,102 MoS2/WS281,105

	Transferless
5	PVD – exfoliate	Vertical	WSe2/MoS2106
6	Exfoliate – CVD	Vertical	MoS2/h-BN,101,107,108 WS2/h-BN98
7	CVD – CVD	Vertical, lateral	WSe2/MoSe2109 MoS2/SnS2,110 WS2/SnS2,110 WSe2/SnS2110
8	One-step CVD	Lateral	MoSe2 – WSe2,111 WS2/MoS2,112 WS2 – MoS2112
9	Hybrid one-step vapor growth	Lateral	MoS2 – MoSe2,113 WS2 – WSe2113

	Others	
	

10	E-Beam patterning – sulfurization	Lateral pattern	MoSe2 – MoS2114
11	Selenization – sulfurization	Vertical aligned	MoS2/WSe2115
12	Catalytic conversion	Lateral pattern	h-BN – Graphene94

 	Fig. 4  (a) Calculated band alignment (CBM and VBM levels) for variety of group-VI TMDCs.120 (b) Orbital diagram summarizing orbital contributions to the CBM and VBM levels.120 (c) Type-I-II-and III heterojunction band alignment schemes.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Type-II MoS2/WS2 heterojunction band alignment diagram and proposed charge transfer complex process.126 (b) Observed PL and ref. 126 (c) time-resolved PL (TRPL) signal demonstrating hole transfer from MoS2 to WS2 within 10 ps timescales.126	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Type-II band offset between 1 L WSe2/MoS273 (b) PL spectrum of MoS2, WSe2, and their heterojunctions73 (c) h-BN spacers placed between MoS2/WSe2 and ref. 73 (d) observed PL spectrum for different number of h-BN spacers.73	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Misorientation between two dissimilar 2D TMDCs given by angle ϕ.73 (b–d) Calculated band structure of 1 L-MoS2 for different stacking angles.71	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) 2D/1D MoS2/CNTs139 (b) 2D/2D MoS2/Black phosphorus and ref. 104 (c) 2D/3D MoS2/Silicon pn-junctions as an active part of solar cell, on/off diode, and LED diode applications.103	 
Footnote
† These authors have contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
