Phototrophic microbial fuel cells: a greener approach to sustainable power generation and wastewater treatment  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3SE00237C View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00237C
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, Advance Article Phototrophic microbial fuel cells: a greener approach to sustainable power generation and wastewater treatment
Jayesh M. Sonawane

*ab, 
Ankisha Vijay

c, 
Tianyang Deng

a, 
Prakash C. Ghosh

d and 
Jesse Greener

*ae
aDépartement de Chimie, Faculté des sciences et de génie, Université Laval, Québec City, QC, Canada. E-mail: jay1iisc@gmail.com; jayesh.sonawane.1@ulaval.ca; jesse.greener@chm.ulaval.ca
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering & Applied Chemistry and Centre for Global Engineering University of Toronto, M5S 3E5, Canada
cDepartment of Biotechnology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida, 201307, Uttar Pradesh, India
dDepartment of Energy Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, 400 076, India
eCHU de Québec, Centre de recherche, Université Laval, 10 rue de l'Espinay, Québec, QC, Canada
Received 
24th February 2023
, Accepted 7th May 2023First published on 15th May 2023AbstractMicrobial fuel cells (MFCs) rely on the capacity of electrode-adhered electroactive bacteria to oxidize organic matter and generate electrons. Typical MFCs are highly engineered systems that can be applied as green tools to alleviate the burden of waste streams. Phototrophic MFCs (PhMFCs) are a promising variant that can be implemented indoors or outdoors and use the power of the sun to boost efforts in on-site environmental remediation, biomass generation, and power generation. PhMFC variations include plant-based and algal-based MFCs. Algal-based MFCs can incorporate special photosynthetic action at either the anode or cathode, enhancing or replacing the role of other bacteria in regular bacterial MFCs. Plant-based MFCs can be more complex due to the role of the root system near an electrode and its interaction with electrode-adhered bacteria, and they are nearly universally operated outdoors in either natural or engineered conditions. This review emphasizes the potential of phototrophic MFCs in achieving true carbon neutrality, producing bioelectricity, and detecting toxic substances in wastewater sources. It also identifies gaps, such as the need for certain optimizations, coupling with new enabling technologies and the potential for combining photosynthetic microbes and plants into the same system. Overall, the future prospects for phototrophic MFCs to contribute to sustainable wastewater treatment and energy generation are promising.Jayesh M. SonawaneDr Jayesh Sonawane earned his PhD from the IIT Bombay and Monash University. Recently he was awarded the prestigious Fulbright Fellowship in the United States with Prof. Derek Lovley at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, where he is working on protein nanowires for clinical and environmental sensing applications. Dr Sonawane is the recipient of the “Excellence Research Award 2016–18” from Prime Minister Narendra Modi and a Shastri Fellowship from the Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute. His background is in development of conducting polymer electrodes for microbial fuel cells, hybrid bioelectrochemical treatment processes, and microfluidic bioelectrochemical systems for live biofilm imaging.Ankisha VijayDr Ankisha Vijay is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biotechnology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida currently. She did her postdoc from Department of Energy Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay. She did her PhD in Environmental Biotechnology from IIT Jodhpur. She has worked on waste to energy conversion processes to develop sustainable biotechnological solutions to water pollution and energy. Her doctoral work addressed the challenge of simultaneous removal of U(VI) and nitrate from nuclear waste in microbial fuel cells (MFC). Her core area of research is environmental biotechnology/engineering and bioremediation.Tianyang DengTianyang Deng received his Bachelor's degree at East China University of Science and Technology, and his Master's at Imperial College London. He is currently a PhD student in Department of Chemistry, Laval University. His research focuses on developing new sampling accessory for ATR-FTIR spectroscopy and classification of cyanobacteria by applying machine learning model on microscopic hyperspectra.Prakash C. GhoshDr Prakash C Ghosh is a Professor in the Department of Energy Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay. He obtained his doctoral degree in Mechanical Engineering from RWTH Aachen, Germany, and has received BOYSCAST and ERASMUS MUNDUS fellowships. Dr Ghosh is an expert in the fields of solar energy, hydrogen fuel cells, microbial fuel cells and hydrogen energy, with over 60 international journal papers and several patents. He has led numerous international projects and collaborations in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and the United States.Jesse GreenerJesse Greener has a Bachelor's degree in chemical physics from the University of Waterloo and a doctorate in physics at the University of Western Ontario. His postdoctoral fellowship was in the Chemistry department at the University of Toronto, where he co-founded FlowJEM Microfluidics. He is currently a full professor of chemistry at Université Laval in Quebec City. His research group develops microfluidic analytical tools to study microscale chemistry and biocatalysis of microbiological systems such as biofilms and bioelectrochemical systems.
1 Introduction
Freshwater aquatic life faces threats due to pollution from pesticides, pharmaceuticals, heavy metals, and herbicides, all of which find can their way into natural waterways.1,2 In response, demands are growing for real-time water quality monitoring and new methods for remediating polluted environmental sites.3,4 At the same time, the continued use of fossil fuels, which has pushed CO2 levels from 388.5 ppm in 2009 to 421 ppm in 2022,5 underscores the urgent need for alternative solutions based on renewable sources such as solar and biomass.
The typical microbial fuel cell (MFCs) is a promising green technology that uses heterotrophic electroactive biofilms (EABs) to produce energy by degrading organic compounds, including polluting substances.6–9 The chemical energy present in such compounds is converted into electricity by a redox process that couples to the metabolic pathway of microorganisms present in the EAB.10–12 The components of the MFC include an anode and cathode separated by a proton exchange membrane (PEM). Typically, the anode-adhered EAB oxidizes dissolved organic compounds and transfers electrons into the external circuit. From there, electrons perform work across an electrical load before arriving at the cathode, where electron acceptors are reduced and complete the redox cycle.13,14 The performances of all types of MFC devices are characterized by certain figures of merit, which include substrate conversion rates, conversion efficiency, electrode overpotential, membrane transport properties, internal resistance, and power output.
Noteworthy factors that affect these figures of merit are bacterial species, solution pH, temperature, electrode materials, electrode surface area, concentration of biological oxygen demand, and chemical oxygen demand (COD).15 The two most important figures of merit are power density (eqn (1)) and conversion efficiency (eqn (2)): 
PA = V2/RextA
(1)where PA is the areal normalized power density, V is the measured cell potential, Rext is the external resistance, and A is the projected area of the electrode (anode). Coulombic efficiency (ηC) is defined as the ratio of the total amount of charge generated from organic molecule substrate molecules that is transferred to the MFC external circuit to the theoretical maximum charge that can be generated from these molecules.16–18 
(2)where M is the molecular weight of oxygen (32 g mol−1), Q is the total charge collected from substrate oxidation (C), F is Faraday's constant (C mol−1), n is the number of electrons exchanged per mole of oxygen (4), V is the volume of the anode chamber (L), and CODEF is the percent cumulative COD removal efficiency (%). We note that COD is often used as a convenient measure of substrate concentration.
MFC variants have proliferated, including those that incorporate photosynthetic elements such as plants and algae, which are classified as phototrophic MFCs (PhMFCs)19,20 (Fig. 1). In these devices, electroactive and photosynthetic organisms work symbiotically to generate and enhance MFC performance. A typical figure of merit for PhMFCs quantifies the efficiency in electron production based on the local light intensity (eqn (3)). 
ΦA = I/Fp
(3)where ΦA is the apparent quantum yield, which is based on the ratio between the current (I) and Fp, the average photon flux.21 Phototrophic MFCs are further classified as natural plant MFCs (NPMFCs), constructed wetland MFCs (CWMFCs), and marine-rooted plant MFCs (MPMFCs). Algae-based MFCs are further classified as anode algal MFCs (AAMFCs), in which the photosynthetic process at the anode helps produce power, and algal carbon capture cells (ACCC), in which algae at the cathode chamber transform CO2 by-products from the anode into biomass with the aid of energy from absorbed photons. The classification of PhMFCs is illustrated in Fig. 1. We note that the vast majority of PhMFC papers deal with systems with distinct plant or algal phototrophs. However, while there exists some work in which both types of phototrophs are used in the same device,22,23 they are not reviewed here.
 Fig. 1  Classification of phototrophic microbial fuel cells (PhMFC). PhMFCs are classified based on use of plants and algae for power generation. 
2 Plant and algae primer
Plants are complex photosynthetic organisms that localize photosynthesis largely in their leaves. They also possess a complex root system that provides anchorage, water absorption, and nutrition. The root system is protected from harmful bacteria and fungi by secretions that form a gelatinous polysaccharide layer that coats the root segments. Root secretions into the surrounding soil (called rhizodeposits) also include proteins, enzymes, amino acids, DNA, and sugars. Together these components help to create a niche in which the roots and supporting microorganisms can thrive. Different plant-based MFCs exist, but all involve the interaction of the root system with the anode, primarily through the symbiotic relationship between electrode-adhered electroactive bacteria and the plant root rhizodeposits.
The other major class of phototrophs is algae. Algae are a highly varied class of aquatic photosynthetic microorganisms and their clusters, which can also inhabit hydrated soils and other complex matrices. Algae vary in size and life cycle and especially in photosynthetic pigments and other cellular features, more so than plants. In this context, authors are generally referring to microalgae, cells with typical sizes in the micron range, though PHMFCs can include larger algae, which are, therefore, not excluded in our use of the term “algae”. Algae (eukaryotes) differ from cyanobacteria (prokaryotes) in that they contain nuclei, and they lack the reproductive structure, roots, leaves, and stem systems of plants. Similar to cyanobacteria and plants, algae contain the apparatus for photosynthesis. Early classification of algae was based on their characteristic color (e.g., green, red, and brown), which is derived from different light-absorbing (chloroplast) pigments, including chlorophylls (a and b), phycobiliproteins (which largely absorb blue or red light), and carotenoids (which largely absorb blue and green light). These definitions resulted in the consideration of cyanobacteria as algae, even though the two microbes are fundamentally different. As there is much overlap in naming of photosynthetic microorganism species, some references may also be made to plankton (including picoplankton),24 which are a mix of algae and bacteria, including photosynthetic variants.25 For the sake of simplicity, however, we do not differentiate between different photosynthetic microorganisms, when discussing algal-based MFCs.
Apart from their historic and ongoing planetary importance in oxygen production, which is responsible for 75% of global oxygen,26 algae are the traditional sources of crude oil and food sources and form the basis of new markets related to pharmaceuticals and other industrial products. Engineered photobioreactors are rapidly advancing towards closed, illuminated systems in which physical and chemical parameters can be highly tuned to maximize the growth of algal biomass with minimal cost.27,28 In the context of the current application, algae (and cyanobacteria) are also emerging as critical components in both natural environment and engineered PhMFCs. Specific to their role in enhancing MFC performance, algae can efficiently produce carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and pigments and absorb CO2, which can aid the growth of anode-adhered electroactive bacteria. Algae can also produce O2 to enhance oxygen reduction at the cathode.
In either plant-based or algal photosynthesis, the overall reaction of photosynthesis and its Gibbs free energy change per mole of glucose produced are shown in eqn (4). 
(4)
Once photons are captured by the pigment, they are transferred to photosystems (PS) that are embedded in the intracellular thylakoid membrane within the cytoplasm. Universally, there are two types of photosystems, PSI and PSII, which work synergistically. First, water is split at PSII by a charge separation step, which activates manganese-based catalysis step to separate protons and molecular oxygen. This process can be simplified as shown in eqn (5), along with the potential (V) based on the per mol Gibbs free energies involved. 
(5)
Electrons are transferred via heme-containing proteins (cytochromes, such as the membrane-bound Cyt b6f) to PSI, where the process of converting NADP+ to NADPH begins. A proton flux to the enzyme ATP-synthase (ATP-ase) drives the conversion of ADP to ATP. Finally, NADP, ATP, and CO2 are integrated into the Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle (Calvin cycle) to produce simple sugars (e.g., sucrose and glucose) and higher order polysaccharides (e.g., starch). These steps are summarized in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the photosynthetic processes occurring in plant and algal thylakoid membranes and the protein complexes involved. Figure adapted from ref. 29 with permission from [MDPI], copyright [2022]. 
3 Role of plants and algae in different phototropic microbial fuel cells
The process by which solar energy is absorbed and by which organic matter is transported within the PhMFC is used as a means for categorization. There are four major mechanisms involved in all PhMFCs, namely, (1) photosynthesis, (2) mass transport of organic compounds to the anode compartment, (3) oxidation of organic matter though the metabolism of the EAB and through that of other anode-chamber consortia members, and (4) bioelectrochemical reduction reactions at the cathode, including oxygen reduction. This is illustrated in Fig. 3,30 which demonstrates fundamental differences between anode supporting PhMFCs (all plant-based MFC (NPMFC, CWMFC, MPMFC) and AAMFCs) and ACCC MFCs. The process of photosynthesis in plants uses solar energy to fix carbon dioxide in the form of carbohydrates. In regards to plant-based MFCs, as much as 60% of the fixed carbon can be moved to plant roots depending on the MFC variant, plant age, species, and environmental conditions.31
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of different PhMFCs, including those in which photosynthetic elements (A) interact with the anode (algal MFCs and plant-based MFCs) and (B) interact with the cathode (algal carbon capture cells). Figure adapted from ref. 30 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2011]. 
Further information about each PhMFC variant is given in Table 1, including the primary role, location of each electrode, and common substrates. For example, in addition to producing power, some PhMFC aid in the remediation of contaminated waste streams (CWMFC), while others (ACCC) can produce different useful compounds such as ethanol, hydrogen, methane, and H2O2.32 In AAMFCs, some of the by-products or the algae themselves can be useful as substrates for electroactive bacteria.33–35 It should be noted that the importance of factors such as pH and biocatalyst composition can influence PhMFC performance, we refer the reader to other works that address these issues.36
Table 1 Various types of phototrophic microbial fuel cells




MFC variations
Anode position
Cathode position
Substrates
Function(s)




Natural plant (NPMFC)
Area surrounding the rhizosphere
Soil–water interface
Rhizodeposits from plants
Bioelectricity from plants


Constructed wetland (CWMFC)
Aquatic rhizosphere
Area in water
Contaminants in wastewater
Wastewater treatment


Marine-rooted plant (MPMFC)
Sediment
Area in water
Natural organic sediment
Bioelectricity and wastewater treatment


Anode algal MFC (AAMFC)
Habitat for electrogenic microalgae
Inoculating cathode with algae
Algae biomass and by-products
Bioelectricity and wastewater treatment


Algal carbon capture (ACCC)
Habitat for any bioanode producing CO2
Photosynthetic algae, bacteria
Organic matter
CO2 fixation into by-products




This review discusses the most recent 5 years of progress in and applications of phototrophic MFCs (PhMFCs) related to plants and algae, with a focus on plant-based systems. First, we describe the working mechanism and factors related to the performance of plant-based and algal-based MFCs. Second, we critically discuss the application of PhMFC devices and indicate the existing gaps. Finally, we assess future perspectives associated with these devices.
4 Plant-based microbial fuel cell
In all plant-based MFCs, electrodes are found in a natural earthen matrix (soil or benthic sediment), where electroactive bacteria produce electrons. This contrasts with soil, and benthic MFC, where the earthen matrix material serves as the sole source of inoculum and nutrients for anode-adhered EABs, and nutrients supplied to the anode-adhered EAB in plant-based MFCs are supplemented by root exudates (fluids emitted through the plant roots)36–41 and related dead cell material. In addition to having a high availability of substrate molecules, the anode chamber should also be free of electron acceptors such as nitrate, CO2, and oxygen. Similarities between plant-based MFCs and soil or benthic MFCs are found in the mechanism of electron production, transport, and organic removal.42–44 Plant roots play a critical role in plant-based MFCs by producing various organic compounds, carbon dioxide, ethylene, enzymes, carbohydrates, organic acids, sugars, and dead cell materials.45 The process of plant-root release is called rhizodeposition, and the products are known as rhizodeposits, accounting for approximately 40% of the productivity due to photosynthesis.46 Rhizodeposition is present throughout the root environment but is most pronounced at the root tips.47 Thus, the nutrient support from plant roots in plant-based MFCs consists of by products from photosynthesis.48
In addition to feeding EABs, carbon sources presented in the rhizodeposits are also used by other microorganisms, which help to maintain and protect the plant roots and, potentially, the EAB. The combination of nutrient support and maintenance of healthy culture conditions has been shown to increase the activity of the microbes present in the soil near the root of a plant by nearly a factor of 10.49 Plant-based MFCs serve a similar role as other MFCs and are able to remediate plant root environments (soil, sediment) while providing energy, but they distinguish themselves by also supporting the growth of plant biomass and CO2 conversion to O2. It should be noted, of course, that CO2 fixation is followed by CO2 emissions at the bioanode during EAB conversion of nutrients, including those from rhizodeposits. The productivity of any of these roles depends on the efficiency of key processes. Thus, the advantages and drawbacks should be evaluated and compared with other methods along the lines of energy efficiency, degree and rapidity of environmental remediation, and economic viability.
Because plant-based MFCs obtain substrate molecules from photosynthesis, the supply of exogenous nutrients or organic elements from sources other than the plant roots can be avoided.50 The production of oxygen and fixation of CO2 by the plants for photosynthesis can be divided into three categories based on photosynthesis conditions, namely, plants carrying out photosynthesis with ideal temperatures of 15–25 °C (C3), tropical plants carrying out photosynthesis with ideal temperatures of 30–40 °C (C4), and plants carrying out photosynthesis in semi-dry climatic conditions with ideal temperatures greater than 40 °C (CAM).51 The highest levels of photosynthetic activity and rhizodeposition are exhibited by plants belonging to the C4 category due to the combined benefit of well-hydrated environments and improved metabolic activity due to elevated temperatures.52
Among the plant-based MFC subclasses is the natural-plant MFC (NPMFC). This variant has emerged as a promising technology in green roofs, reactive barriers, and environmental biosensors. Although NPMFCs were originally developed for the production of bioenergy from the rhizodeposits,53 they have also been demonstrated for wastewater treatment, food production by utilization of waste organic material, and degradation of starch and biocathode autotrophic denitrification.54–56 The EAB metabolism in NPMFCs is directly related to current generation,57,58 which indicates that there are no secondary processes related to plant-roots that contribute directly to electrical outputs. Because EAB metabolisms are sensitive to the presence of different bioactive compounds, changes in current are the basis of MFC environmental sensors.59 Similarly, a self-powered NPMFC architecture was designed with a wireless-based sensor network to analyze the environment. The NPMFC was designed using the Sansevieria asparagaceae plant, which generated a stable voltage such that DC current was harvested for the sensor network.60 The sensors monitored ozone and CO2 via a combination of the NPMFC with EH. A tubular NPMFC designed in a paddy field generated continuous bioelectricity and improved the health of the plants.61 The most abundant microbes were Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, Planctomycetes, and Acidobacteria. However, there was no current production during the low rainfall season. Data acquisition was conducted through a LoRa data logger, which offers a prospective use in environmental monitoring. NPMFC was demonstrated for heavy metal detection under light and dark conditions by combining a CuO/ZnO photocathode with an electroactive anode. The developed sensor showed a wide detection range for Cd2+ and Cu2+ (0.1–4 mg L−1 of Cd2+ and 10–80 mg L−1 of Cu2+). The sensor sensitivity was mainly attributed to the intimate P–N heterojunctions formed in the CuO/ZnO.62
An example schematic of a NPMFC is shown in Fig. 4. In this work, three separate NPMFCs were constructed with different plants: fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum), mustard (Brassica juncea), and a decorative plant (Canna Stuttgart). A carbon brush anode that could support microorganisms in the EAB was planted beneath the roots, with the electrical lead emerging from the soil into the air, where a connection was made to a multi-meter. The entire anode environment was encased in a novel clay separator that could exchange ions and limit electron acceptors from contaminating the anode compartment. The cathode was formed from hydrated carbon cloth around the clay separator, which was otherwise exposed to air. The highest voltage was obtained with Canna Stuttgart due to its tuberous roots, which produced large quantities of exudates depending on the amount of organic matter available for the microorganisms. The highest diurnal variation was observed with Brassica juncea, based on the lower quantities of root exudates. In contrast, the lowest diurnal variation was shown by Canna Stuttgart.63 Although power generation was stable for all three plants, the highest power density was produced by Canna Stuttgart because the exudates from the plant were easily degraded by the microorganisms, resulting in faster oxidation kinetics, higher voltage, and efficient electron donation.63 A summary of NPMFCs—including various types of plants used, anode and cathode type, type of substrate, and power production from the system, is given in Table 2.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the natural-plant microbial fuel cell system and working principle. Figure adapted from ref. 63 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2017]. 
Table 2 Summary of selected studies on NPMFCs, including different types of plants used, anode and cathode type, type of substrate, and power production from the system




Plant types
Anode
Cathode
CODEF/VFA/Cr removal (%)
Substrate/nutrient Solution
PA (mW m−2)
Ref.




G. maxima
Graphite granules
Graphite felt
NA
Hoagland medium
80
66


G. maxima
Graphite granules
Graphite felt
NA
Hoagland medium
67
67


E. crassieps
Graphite discs
Graphite discs
87 (CODEF)
Domestic and fermented distillery wastewater
225
68


72 (VFA)


L. perenne
Graphite granules
Carbon felt
99 [Cr(VI)]
Hoagland medium with sodium acetate
55
69


S. anglica
Graphite rod in graphite grains
Graphite felt
NA
Hoagland medium
222
39


O. sativa
Graphite granules
Graphite granules
NA
Hoagland solution
33
70


P. setaceum
Graphite plate
Graphite plate
NA
Red soil
163
71


O. sativa
Graphite felt
Carbon/polytetrafluorethylene coated
NA
Acetate/glucose, Bacto yeast, electrolyte solution
19
72


O. sativa
Graphite granules
Graphite felt
NA
Vermiculite with Hoagland solution
72
73


S. anglica
Graphite granules
Graphite felt
NA
Modified Hoagland solution buffered with phosphate buffer
100
74




A comparative study that evaluated the performance of stainless steel mesh and graphite-rod anode material in NPMFCs was conducted using two sets of systems. The plant Vigna radiate Wilzeck was common to both NPMFCs. The NPMFC with the stainless steel exhibited better performance based on its lower internal resistance,64 but contributions from electrode corrosion should be ruled out. Plant growth was better in the NPMFCs, which was attributed to the accelerated accumulation of photosynthetic products due to the improved metabolic process of the plants.43 Another set of two NPMFCs was designed using the plant S. anglica along with marine sediment and activated carbon as the bioanodes in each case. Although each NPMFC exhibited a considerable power output, the efficiency of the NPMFC was optimal with 33% activated carbon.65 Furthermore, the presence of marine sediment and activated carbon promoted the growth of the plants, but the growth was lower in the NPMFC with the activated carbon bioanode. Although the microbes present in the activated carbon and marine sediment were different, the most prominent bacteria in the soil were Proteobacteria. The results demonstrated that the mixture of marine sediment and activated carbon was suitable for bioanodes, instead of pristine marine sediment bioanodes or activated carbon bioanodes, for effective performance of the NPMFC.
5 Constructed wetland microbial fuel cells
CWMFCs are a type of plant-based MFC, but in the CWMFC, flow is controlled so that organic matter from wastewater is spread evenly among the wetland plants. The anode and a cathode in a CWMFC are separated by fibrous materials, soil area, or PEM, as shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Working principle and basic setup for a constructed wetland-microbial fuel cell (CWMFC). Figure adapted from ref. 75 with permission from [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019]. 
The biosystem of the CWMFC is categorized as bioprocess and biocontrol. The microbial community is part of the bioprocess, which generates energy from the exudates at the roots. The plant acts as the biocontrol, which absorbs sunlight for transformation into current.43 Both environmental factors and operating parameters such as temperature, humidity, organic loading, hydraulic retention time (HRT), and redox condition influence the activity of the CWMFC devices. Different aquatic plants can be used, and the primary advantage of the device is production of bioelectricity from natural water without the requirement of external organic substrates, thus lowering the production of methane.
A study was conducted on a CWMFC using dried alum sludge from wastewater treatment plants and powdered activated carbon (PAC) to modify the area around the anode for production of electricity during the treatment of swine wastewater.76 COD removal and denitrification were increased due to the formation of a denitrification biocathode77 and electrical stimulation.78 The COD removal efficiency was 70% for the control system devoid of PAC modification. In comparison, the system with 10% PAC modification exhibited an enhanced COD removal of 80%, which was attributed to the absorption capability of PAC.77 Reactive phosphate was also efficiently removed thanks to adsorption between phosphorus in the influent and aluminum in the dewatered alum sludge, primarily through ligand exchange and adsorption by PAC.79 Total nitrogen was decreased due to the presence of aerobic denitrifiers, which used oxygen or nitrate as terminal electron acceptors.80 The nitrogen in ammonia and total nitrogen was removed due to adsorption by PAC. The secretion of metabolites to the extracellular space was enhanced by the presence of more microbes, thereby creating a larger concentration of extracellular polymeric substances containing proteins and polysaccharides.81
Agricultural wastewater, including swine slurry, contains a high concentration of various pollutants, organic matter, nutrients, phenols, and heavy metals. The presence of heavy metals inhibited the growth of microorganisms in the swine slurry.82–84 In CWMFCs, these undesired substances can be adsorbed by substrate layers modified with PAC. The anode potential reduced the PAC addition in the anodic chamber as the microbial growth was restrained. However, granular activated carbon behaved like an electron capacitor when used as a support material for exoelectrogenic bacteria. This study evaluated the effect of the distance between the anode and cathode on system performance by manipulating the depth of anode and cathode in up-flow CWMFCs. The electron transfer efficiency in the anode depends on factors such as the substrates and the probability of contact at the surface. Microbial growth is favoured at the cathode by the addition of PAC to form the biocathode and improve the performance.82 The increase in PAC enhanced the resistance of the electrolyte while decreasing the anodic and cathodic resistances. The formation of biocatalysts enhanced the reduction reactions and decreased the resistance at the cathode. Similarly, the conductivity of the substrates at the anode was augmented due to the presence of PAC, which led to a reduction in the anodic resistance.85 However, the electrode distance plays a pivotal role in the internal resistance of the system. A decrease in this distance reduced the IR of the device. The CE was found to be the highest with 2% of PAC.
Another CWMFC was designed using two stems of Phragmites australis and was tested for treatment of grey wastewater, where it removed 90% of the COD.86 A comparative study for nitrate removal in wetlands indicated that the removal rate was 99% with CW reactors but 86% with CWMFC reactors. The nitrate and the anode compete to accept electrons in the CWMFC device; hence, most of the electrons were used to produce electricity instead of reducing the nitrate.87 The anode respiring bacteria Geobacter sulfurreducens was found to be an appropriate choice for enhancing the efficiency of this CWMFC system. The CWMFC was designed for treatment of greywater in batch cycle mode to eliminate phosphate, nitrate, and COD and enhance electricity production.
Another study compared the efficiency of double-chamber and single-chambered CWMFCs in paddy fields.88 This study was conducted to treat wastewater generated from a fishery, where the double-chamber CWMFC was found to be more efficient. The tillering and seedling stage of the paddy field crops generated the largest amount of power due to excess exudates and high microbial activities. Thus, the vegetative stage was significant because it produced more current than the reproductive stage. Fewer rhizodeposits and formation of a thick biofilm towards the later stage reduced the current production. The efficiency of pollutant removal was enhanced because clogging (caused by the formation of the biofilm) was reduced due to the roots of the plants. Thus, the movement of protons was facilitated by the electrochemically active bacteria. The amino acids and carbohydrates present in the root exudates serve as a source of substrates for carbon production. Additionally, power production by the double-chamber CWMFC was also efficient. Another group reported powering an ultra-low-power receiver using a CWMFC, which could be applied in wireless technology as a future prospect.89 The power from the CWMFC was sufficient to maintain the on-demand switch for the wake-up device. Additionally, a low-power wireless sensor was rebooted to the initial state after each interval. It is worth mentioning that the CWMFC placed outdoors provided more energy than that placed indoors. A double-chamber CWMFC was designed in which the inner cathode chamber was separated from the anode by a terracotta separator equipped with an air cathode assembly and paddy root matrix, which exhibited better efficiency.90 This CWMFC, equipped with an internal cathode chamber and a separator-electrode assembly, was studied for the first time. This design reduced the cost of the system while enhancing the recycling process and water recovery. Bioelectricity can be generated by applying this technology in household terracotta pots and may aid in balancing the water-energy-food nexus.
In another study, a CWMFC was scaled up to treat 30 L of wastewater with four anodes immersed at different depths and one U-shaped cathode placed at the top, as shown in Fig. 6, and removed 55% of the COD.91 Aeration and circulation further enhanced the COD removal due to the increase in oxygen in the parallel mode of MFC connection. Additionally, the MFC connection mode is significant for eliminating COD. Under parallel connection conditions, COD removal was further boosted. In both combined and parallel connections, cathodes with aeration and circulation showed less COD removal than those with only circulation. Aeration was hindered in cathodes with parallel and combined connections due to the consumption of dissolved oxygen (DO) at the MFC cathode instead of COD digestion. The thick biofilm layer at the water/air interface and on the cathode prevented air diffusion. Thus, circulation and aeration enhanced the DO concentration, which influenced the nitrogen removal efficiency in the open circuit CWMFC, which was further enhanced in closed circuits.
 Fig. 6  Schematic description of the pilot-scale CWMFC, actual photographs, and the anatomy of the electrode placement within the operation. Figure adapted from ref. 91 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2019]. 
The area of the cathode above the water remained dry, indicating that it was inactive. The raw system behaved simply as an up-flow CW. Circulation failed to introduce enough oxygen compared to aeration. The part of the cathode above the water was dampened after circulation, making it active by inducing oxygen diffusion to the required area. Thus, the synergistic effect of circulation and aeration was mandatory for improving the output of the system. A parallel connection with a multiple anode system was better than the combined anode system.92 The IR of the MFC was dictated by the charge transfer resistance between the electrodes and the surface resistance of the electrodes.
Three different wastewater types were studied using a CWMFC to generate bioelectricity, which proved that an efficient current could be generated in the presence of nutrients as influents.93 However, nitrate-free wastewater showed the best output, although the CE was low for all of the systems. Heterotrophic microorganisms and the EAB are abundantly present in the CWMFC, which uses organic matter in synthetic wastewater for electricity production. Thus, alteration of the microbial community at the anode due to different wastewater does not affect its performance. The active carbon granules have excellent adsorption capability, which shows good COD removal efficiency, especially nitrate with a carbon anode. Ammonium was removed from the air cathode. The microbial community at the anode consisted of Desulfobulbus, Geothrix, Geobacter, and Desulfovibrio.
In another study, an integrated vertical flow CW (IV-CW) was assembled with a MFC for treatment of swine wastewater, and the energy for pumping the influent was decreased due to a larger difference in the gradient of the redox potential.94 The COD removal efficiency (CODEF)was higher in the closed circuit system than the open circuit system because the anode acts as the electrode acceptor and aids in anaerobic treatment.95 The IV-CWMFC exhibited an aerobic–anaerobic–aerobic process in which the microbes at the roots of Canna indica degraded organic matter and nitrogen. The electrogenic bacteria used hydrolytic products such as acetic acid etc., to remove pollutants.96,97 The anode improved the growth of the biomembrane, thus reducing the COD. The internal resistance was low due to good conducting electrodes and a continuous flow of water.98 The low CE value was attributed to the dynamic transfer limit due to the resistance in charge transfer based on the sluggish rate of activation at the electrodes. The microbes were identified as Desulfuromonas and Geobacter.
Degeneration of nitrobenzene-containing wastewater was carried out using a CWMFC with water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes) as the plant species and showed improved bioelectricity production.99 The roots of the water hyacinth plant provided the required oxygen to the cathode and increased its efficiency.100 Because the internal resistance of CWMFC is affected by the spacing of the electrodes, the optimum distance was maintained at 13 cm. The anaerobic bacteria converted the nitrobenzene to aniline, which was removed efficiently by the system. Additionally, nitrobenzene was also absorbed and deposited in the rhizosphere of the plants.
A membraneless CWMFC was fabricated with graphite and gravel as the anode constituents to treat domestic wastewater.101 The response time is paramount for biosensing tools used in real-time monitoring.102 The system with graphite and gravel anodes exhibited better values of R2 because the prolonged time (20 h) of the organic matter within the system led to more degradation of the organic matter. The contact time was significant for organic matter with low concentration. Additionally, the organic matter used for electricity generation came from both the influent and the organic matter prevalent in the anode chamber. COD detection was better with graphite, and the pilot plant examination demonstrated that the cell potential was enhanced with the augmentation of the organic matter concentration.
The naturally occurring redox gradient between the organic sediments and surface water was exploited to design a green MFC known as the sediment or benthic or marine-rooted plant MFC (MPMFC).103 The introduction of plants into the MPMFC led to the development of the CWMFC. The basic principle of the CWMFC is to obtain energy by placing the anode in de-oxygenated sediment near the roots of the plants and placing the cathode in the oxygenated water above, as shown in Fig. 7. The plants provide the carbon source to the anode-adhered EAB, and thus, regulating the water flow in the wetlands results in a constant supply of carbon and absorption of contaminants by the plants for their growth.104
 Fig. 7  A schematic representation of constructed wetland microbial fuel cells (SMFC) and application of the SMFC system in a (constructed) wetland. The anode matrix is positioned in the root zone and the cathode in the overlying water layer. Figure adapted from ref. 104 with permission from [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2008]. 
Grass-like plants that grow with their roots submerged in water provide the necessary anerobic conditions for the anode-adhered EABs in NPMFCs. It was found previously that the voltage was higher in the NPMFC to which compost was added. The addition of compost boosted the growth of plants, and the soil microflora was also enhanced, thereby augmenting the NPMFC function.105 NPMFC start-up operation increased the soil temperature by 10 °C, which resulted in a decrease in the kinetics of soil heterotrophic bacteria by up to 30 °C and stimulated photosynthesis.106 NPMFC also been shown for 0.3 nmol d−1 per m3 hydrogen production.107
Four different wetland plants were examined for use in a CWMFC, namely, Cyperus alternifolius L., Acorus calamus, Canna indica, and Arundo donax.108 Arundo donax was found to be suitable due to low IR, good adaptability, and long-developed roots that could clean sewage water efficiently. The CODEF of different CWMFC are shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Efficiency of COD removal (CODEF) by various CWMFC




Plant species
CODEF (%)
PA (mW m−2)
Ref.




Phragmites australis
76.5
9.4
109


Phragmites australis
64
28
110


Phragmites australis
87
33
86


Ipomoea aquatic
94.8
30.2
111


Canna indica
75
15.7
112


Iris pseudacorus
99
9.6
113


Typha latifolia
91.2
93
114




5.1 Factors affecting CWMFC in wastewater treatment
The factors affecting wastewater treatment using an up-flow CWMFC system were studied by designing an orthogonal experiment.115 Thus, the optimal operating conditions were identified for standardizing the elimination of nutrients and organic matter in CWMFCs. The granular graphite volume ratio was altered in the substrates, and parameters such as external resistance, concentration of DO in the cathode compartments, and HRT were considered. The treatment efficiency of pollutants was augmented by returning the effluent to the systems. The anaerobic environment of the anodic cell was influenced by the refluxed effluent, which affected the output of the system and prompted a study on the influence of the effluent's reflux ratio. The HRT, reflux of the effluent, and concentration of DO play vital roles in the removal of CODCr, nitrogen-NH3, and TN, respectively. TN removal was exclusively affected by the volume ratio of the granular graphite and external resistance. The contact time between the microbes and the substrates was enhanced by increasing the HRT, whereby the reaction time for degradation of the pollutants through adsorption could also be improved.116 The removal efficacy of pollutants increased up to a threshold limit on enhancing the HRT. Beyond the threshold limit, the efficiency is reduced as the anaerobic condition is exacerbated in the CW. The reversed effluent enhanced the HRT by diluting the wastewater influent and improved the removal of pollutants. The introduction of DO at the bottom of the CWMFC increased the aerobic degeneration of the organic compounds. The nitrogenous compounds were removed by denitrification of the anodic compartment. Optimal performance was reported with a 50% reflux ratio of effluents. The presence of the MFC, along with the CW, increased the nitrobacteria and beta-Proteobacteria. Additionally, the presence of denitrifying bacteria was increased in the CWMFC with a closed circuit. The output voltage obtained from the CWMFC increased with enhancement of the external resistance while the current was reduced. Additionally, a rapid rate of consumption of the organic compounds by the electrogens increased the current.117 However, the low current provided fewer electrons for the denitrification process at the cathode. Thus, an increase in the external resistance reduced the removal of nitrogen and organic compounds in the CWMFC. However, the removal of P was not affected by the MFC but was influenced by the physicochemical process of the substrates.118 The electron acceptor in the MFC is increased by enhancing the concentration of the DO in the cathode zone, which produces high electricity through aerobic degradation of the organic compounds.119 Nevertheless, a high DO concentration negatively affected the aerobic environment within the anodic cell, which negatively impacted power generation.120 The concentration of DO should be appropriate for pollutant elimination and electricity generation. The porous nature of the graphite increased the concentration gradient of DO in the cathode zone, which influenced the anaerobic and anoxic microenvironment within the aerobic area of the cathode. Thus, an increase in the amount of granular graphite enhanced the removal of nitrogen in the CWMFC.
5.2 Flow patterns in CWMFCs
Wastewater flows into the wetlands by two different hydrological patterns, namely, subsurface flow and surface flow, and subsurface flow is favored for the CWMFC.116 The organic materials move into the anode through subsurface flow, and the effluent finally moves into the cathode, thereby separating both electrodes. The combination of the flow in the anode and the down-flow in the cathode in the CWMFC can be tuned to enhance the power output in the devices.82 The major disadvantage of this system is that elimination of organic compounds was decreased compared to devices with up-flow patterns. Additionally, the growth of heterotrophic bacteria on the cathode was increased, which used up the oxygen in the cathodic chamber. Thus, the amount of oxygen for autotrophic bacteria is limited for catalysis of the reaction to reduce oxygen. However, horizontal flow is preferred for large-scale devices.121
A study was conducted to optimize the relationship between the electrode distance and the flow regimes; in the CWMFC in this study, the cathode was buried, and swine wastewater was treated.110 Graphite granules were used as electrodes. Issues such as the requirement for an anoxic condition at the anode and aerobic conditions at the cathode, and the separation between the electrodes were overcome by introducing up-flow and down-flow simultaneously in the CWMFC. Moreover, the power density was improved as the IR was diminished due to the up-flow and down-flow movement.
5.3 Modified constructed wetland microbial fuel cells
5.3.1. Biofilm electrode reactor coupled to constructed wetland microbial fuel cells. A biofilm electrode reactor (BER) was operated with the aid of a stacked MFCCW for reduction of the antibiotic-reducing genes and antibiotics (SMX), as shown in Fig. 8.122
 Fig. 8  Schematics of continuous flow biofilm electrode reactor microbial fuel cell – constructed wetland (BER-MFCCW) and its associated components. Figure adapted from ref. 122 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2018]. 
The concentration of the SMX was decreased by using BER as a pre-processing unit. The effluent could enter the MFC-CW system, where the SMX was degraded completely, thus leading to diminished genes for antibiotic reduction. The power required by the BER was supplied by two MFC-CW units connected in series. Additionally, bioelectricity generation was not decreased even in the presence of a high concentration of SMX. The SMX was degraded in the BER system by electrons moving from the anode through wires, which augmented the removal of glucose and SMX due to the improved activity of the microorganisms.123 The higher voltage in the stacked unit improved the efficiency of the removal of SMX. The BER system maintained the stability of the complete system. The enhanced removal rate was attributed to sorption of the substrate layer, microbial degradation, and hydrolysis.124 The anode removed the maximum amount of SMX (42–55%), with 20% removal by the bottom layer, whereas the cathode and the middle layer removed approximately 1%. Thus, the ARGs and bacteria were effectively inhibited in the MFCCW unit. The COD was due to the biorefractory compound (SMX) and the co-substrate (glucose). The effluent in the BER remained a high amount of glucose when operated at low HRT, whereas more glucose was consumed when the HRT was longer. There was no voltage reversal issue with the system.

5.3.2. Microbial electrosynthesis coupled to constructed wetland microbial fuel cells. The density and community of the microbes, along with the purification of sewage water, were studied in another CWME system, which consisted of graphite electrodes and Eichhornia crassipes (water hyacinth).125 The application of high voltages facilitated removal of the nitrogen in ammonium ions in the anode under anaerobic conditions.126 The reduced diffusion of oxygen transforms the NH4+–N to NO3–N, which is used in the reduction of autotrophic N on the cathode.127 Accordingly, sulphates and phosphates and COD were also removed. Bioelectricity was generated by oxidizing the organic matter available in the sewage water. The microbes present in the system were predominantly Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes/Bacillota.
5.3.3. Capacitors. External capacitors have been used to enhance the performance of PhMFCs by acting as energy storage components and to help to smooth out fluctuations in power output. One approach to using external capacitors in PhMFCs is to apply them in combination with a charging and discharging (CDC) mode. In this mode, the capacitors are charged during periods of high-power output and then discharged during periods of low power output, which can help to maintain a steady power output over time. Another approach is to use the capacitors in a DC/CDC mode, in which the capacitors are charged during periods of high-power output and then rapidly discharged to generate a potential gradient within the biofilm on the anode. This can increase charge transport within the biofilm matrix and lead to faster removal of organic matter, resulting in improved performance of the PhMFC.89,128The efficacy of the CWMFC by adding external capacitors, which were also applied to scale a multi-electrode CWMFC.129 The frequency of charging and discharging (D) plays a pivotal role in the efficiency of the system because an enhanced TOV is obtained with a lower D value. Additionally, for a system with high IR, as in the case of the CWMFC, the loss in voltage can be eliminated using the CDC operation mode. Thus, the electrons generated during oxidation were stored in the capacitors. The charge release at a high rate generates a potential gradient at the biofilm on the anode, which increases the charge transport within the biofilm matrix.130 COD was removed at a faster rate in DC/CDC mode. Overall, the use of external capacitors can be a valuable strategy for improving the efficiency and stability of PhMFCs, particularly in applications where a steady power output is required. The application of capacitors in PhMFCs is still a relatively new and unexplored research area. Therefore, further studies are required to comprehensively evaluate their performance and determine the optimal conditions for their utilization in PhMFC.

6 Marine-rooted plant microbial fuel cells
Marine-rooted plant microbial fuel cells (MPMFCs) are used in a natural system like CW and work on the natural oxygen gradient principle, which separates the anode from the cathode instead of a membrane.131 The electrode of the cathode is placed in water. Simultaneously, the anode is immersed in the sediment and placed in the vicinity of the rhizosphere of plants so that the organic compounds eliminated by the roots can be utilized.132,133 The power output of the MPMFC is low based on its high internal resistance and the inadequate supply of electron acceptors and donors. Conversely, the maintenance of this system is minimal, which is an asset for its use in deep waters. Phragmites australis and Ipomoea aquatica are two plants that are mainly used in MPMFC. The efficacy of the MPMFC is enhanced due to the increased level of DO, which is attributed to the plant roots.82 The microbes in the cathode are augmented due to the presence of plants, with a slight increase in the population of Geobacter sulfurreducens at the anode. Fig. 9 gives a schematic representation of the experimental setup used in the study. In this study, four different types of architecture were tested to check the optimum arrangement, such that the internal resistance can be reduced by reducing the electrode space.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the experimental setup for the marine-rooted plant MFC with four variable configurations to understand the overall performance of the system. Figure adapted from ref. 82 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2016]. 
The two main species of bacteria present in the soil are Geobacter spp. and Shewanella spp., which produce electricity and can metabolize minerals such as lead and iron in the soil. In one study, the soil from barren land was added in three different MFC units and stacked in parallel and series using titanium wires. Although power was generated, the output was low in the MFC set-up, and there is ample room to improve the system architecture for enhanced performance.134 Fig. 9 shows a schematic of the marine-rooted plant MFCs.
7 Algae-based microbial fuel cells
Algal-based MFCs are based on cathode inhabiting algae (ACCC) and anode inhabiting algae (AAMFCs), with the latter being further categorized based on the solar energies being captured and the transfer mechanism of organic molecules and electrons.
7.1 Anode algal microbial fuel cells
MFCs with algae in the anode chamber containing an EAB can produce substrate molecules as by-products or from the algae themselves after lysing; this can simplify the operation of the system to allow development to focus on light management. In addition, consumption of CO2 in the anode chamber can help deacidify the EAB growth environment, however, the production of O2 in the anode chamber can harm EABs, which is likely the main reason these variants of algal MFC are less represented in the literature compared to ACCC (algae in the cathode). However, there are recent examples of AAMFCs, including those in which algae are cultured directly on the anode and electrons are extracted directly from the photosynthesis metabolic process or related photochemical processes. AAMFCs also show a potential for use as sensors due to a noted sensitivity toward contaminants present in water, such as pharmaceuticals and herbicides.135
A humidity-preventive membrane electrode assembly (MEA) was used in the design of a vertically stacked triple-chamber AAMFC in which the PEM was fabricated using a hot press136 to sandwich stainless steel anodes between two cathodes, as shown in Fig. 10. The electrodes were fabricated as a mesh type with a large surface area, and the transparency was optimized by altering the pitch and diameter of the mesh. Microcystis aeruginosa was used as the green algae species, and thus the power density was increased compared to a single cathode chamber.
 Fig. 10  Graphical representation of a dual-cathode chamber (stacked) algal microbial fuel cell with internal components. Figure adapted from ref. 136 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2015]. 
The use of Pt catalysts at the cathode is essential for the effective reaction process and production of current density.137 A study was conducted in the absence of the Pt catalyst using carbon-based air cathodes operating in batch mode, such that the surface area of the cathode was immersed in the solution. Carbon cathodes were designed by attaching different carbon materials to the PEM (Nafion 115) using a hot pressing process, and ZACC FM10 was found to be effective.138 The anode was fabricated from ceramic with a similar cathode surface area. The power density of the device was a function of the anode surface area. Electrochemical analysis of the internal electrode surface area is carried out by measuring the capacitance of the double layer of a particular sample composed of similar material with a known surface area.139 The active surface area of the cathode dictates the difference in the power output of an AAMFC. The surface area of the carbon paper was very low, whereas carbon felt could not endure the hot-pressing procedure because the interconnecting carbon fibres were destroyed. However, ZACC FM10 exhibited durability under high pressure. The cathode was examined in a flow AAMFC in the absence of redox mediators with a ceramic anode coated with TiO2 in the presence of C. emersonii, and Synechocystis spp. PCC 6803 as the microbial culture generated a considerable amount of power output.
An AAMFC was developed in which the efficiency of different cultures of algae-like Nannochloropsis, Spirulina, and Chlorella was studied, among which Nannochloropsis was found to be effective because it proliferated over a long duration along with an electricity generation of 35 mW.140 However, the photometric absorption rate for the other two species was lower, exhibiting a diffusion limit and diminishing their power output efficiency. The PEM was fabricated using a mixture of electrolytic polymers.
A portable paper-based MFC was designed using purple photosynthetic bacteria to form a dry surface biofilm.141 A very thick biofilm did not yield effective performance because oxygen diffusion was hindered. The bacterial load varied in various electrodes, and the size of the bacteria cells was 2–3 μm. The bacteria population was greater on the carbon nanotube-coated electrodes compared to that on the carbon-coated electrodes. Additionally, the ozone-treated electrodes exhibited better performance due to enhanced hydrophilicity, thus enhancing the ability to absorb water. Thus, ozone-treated CNT-coated carbon electrodes exhibited better performance in the MFC.141
In another study, the cathode in the AAMFC was inoculated with the eukaryotic microalgae Scenedesmus obliquus and treated Atrazine by monitoring alteration in the DO levels in the catholyte.142 The production of hydroxide increased the pH of the catholyte, which finally enhanced the amount of DO and hindered the growth of heterotrophic bacteria, resulting in a lower current. Other factors influencing the low output of the system were the crossover of oxygen to the anode, the absence of catalysts, the low conductivity of the electrolytes, and an excess amount of DO. The response time to atrazine was weak due to the dense biofilm on the surface of the ITO, which hindered the identification of the DO. A summary of results from some prominent anode algal MFCs studies for power production, the duration of active microbes and other properties are given in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of power production in anode algal microbial fuel cells (AAMFCs)




AAMFCs Type
Anode
Cathode
Duration (days)
PA (mW m−2)
CE (%)
CODEF (%)
Ref.




Dual-chamber
Chlorella. regularis
PBS (50 mM, pH = 7.2)
33
1070
61.5
65.2
143


Dual-chamber
Spirulina platensis
Tapioca wastewater
192
14.47
NA
67
144


Dual-chamber
Microcystis aeruginosa
Potassium ferricyanide (50 mM)
600
83
7.6
67.5
145


Dual-chamber
Chlorella pyrenoidosa
Potassium ferricyanide
5
6030
NA
NA
146


Single-chamber
Synechocystis spp.
BG11
19
10
NA
NA
147


Single-chamber
Chlorella emersonii
Air cathode
6
7.4
NA
NA
138


Single-chamber
Photosynthetic pond culture/BG 11
Air cathode
8
3.4
NA
NA
148


Single-chamber
Natural hot spring community
Air cathode
8
9
NA
NA
149




7.2 Cathode considerations in anode algal MFCs
To a large degree, the anode material dictates the power density, however, in the absence of Pt at the cathode, which is an efficient surface of oxygen reduction reaction, the reaction on the surface of the cathode may become rate limiting.137 Carbon-based cathodes with a large surface area of fibrous carbon can be used in AAMFCs, where the cathode was hot pressed and attached to the PEM, but this can reduced the electroactive surface area.138 To measure the total electroactive surface area of the electrode, a double-layer capacitance measurement can be made and compared with the same from a sample with a known surface area.139 By this method, ZACC FM10 + Nafion 115 was revealed as the most effective air cathode, and was found to delivered highest voltages, whereas cathodes with low surface area carbon paper generated the lowest power density.
7.3 Flow cells in the absence of an artificial redox mediator
In some biophotovoltaic cells, power can be generated by extracting electrons directly from photosynthetic metabolic processes and related photochemical processes, but this often requires a mediator, since extracellular electron transport is usually not supported. This can present certain disadvantages, since mediators can be toxic and expensive. Thus a flow-cell AAMFC was examined in the absence of redox mediators by using porous TiO2 ceramic anodes and air cathodes in the presence of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 and C. emersonii as cultures.138 The anode was covered with a green biofilm, which produced higher voltages during the day than during the dark night period, and the voltage obtained from C. emersonii was ten times lower.
7.4 Algal carbon capture cells
Algal photosynthesis is developed with an ACCC in which oxygen is generated in situ through the photosynthesis of algae within the cathode compartment.150,151 An ACCC is algal-MFC variant that facilitates terminal electron reduction in the MFC using O2 produced by algae in the cathode chamber. This can increase power production while simultaneously removing CO2, which is produced from degradation of the substrate in the anode chamber.152,153 Thus, AAMFCs have been used for current production and wastewater treatment, which requires an uninterrupted supply of CO2 to the cathode chamber.135 In the absence of aeration, CO2 emission is effectively curtailed with a promising voltage output in ACCCs.154,155 After the MFC is operated for a certain period, a film of electrochemically active bacteria is formed on the anode, and a biofilm of algae is formed on the cathode. The parameters affecting the cathode chamber in ACCCs are mainly pH and DO, and CO2 crossover takes place through the PEM to the cathode chamber from the anode.156
The reactions taking place in the photocathode chamber include primarily the reduction of oxygen produced during photosynthesis, reduction of CO2, and transfer of electrons through the self-produced mediators. Among the three reactions, the most significant is the reduction of oxygen to form a hydroxyl anion157 due to photosynthesis in the ACCC, where the rate of production of oxygen depends on the CO2 absorption rate by the algae. The reaction at the anode and the cathode is shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Reaction occurring at the electrodes in an ACCC. 
In general, the experimental oxygen reduction reaction potential can be higher than the theoretical oxygen reduction reaction potential due to the formation of alkali at the cathode. This can be improved by lowering the pH in the catholyte chamber, which is achieved by enabling the diffusion of CO2 and protons from the anode chamber.158 The working principle is shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Working principle of the algal carbon capture cell (ACCC); CO2 transportation and EAB anode and algal-based cathode reactions are involved. Figure adapted from ref. 159 with permission from [Hindawi], copyright [2015]. 
A PhMFC that behaved like an ACCC was designed using polybenzimidazole (PBI) as the membrane and a biocathode with a pure culture of Scenedesmus acutus microalgae and domestic wastewater as the anolyte. The algae in the biocathode produced oxygen through photosynthesis. The microalgae used the CO2 generated from the degradation of the wastewater at the anode for photosynthesis, thereby producing oxygen. This study examined the performance of two ACCCs in which the gas diffusion electrode at the cathode was made of Pt and the other was free of Pt.160 The incorporation of PBI composites into the membrane prevented microbial adhesion and improved membrane resistance to structural and mechanical degradation, leading to a reduction in membrane biofouling. The biofilm deposited on the anode was stable in both cases. The electrocatalyst (Pt) presence accelerated the oxidation–reduction reaction and produced excess power and better COD removal. The loss of performance was more noticeable in the ACCC with the Pt catalyst because agglomerates were deposited during the electrochemical process, thus blocking the electroactive sites on the surface. The oxidative stress condition of the microalgae within the device led to the accumulation of bioactive substrates such as lutein and fatty acids, which aided in their survival over a long duration of time.161
Significant factors dictate the output of an ACCC, whereby both the photobioreactor and the MFC mutually gain an advantage. Thus, a statistical evaluation was conducted by adopting the Box–Behnken design to assess parameters such as the concentration of the lipid-extracted algae (LEA) of the various microalgae cultures present in the anodes and the concentration of nitrates in the catholyte.162 Although there is no interactive effect among the parameters (LEA, photoperiod, and nitrate) on the power density, each parameter exhibits significant individual effects. The growth of the algae depends on the duration of light and the concentration of nitrate. The concentration of the DO in the cathodic chamber is again influenced by the growth of the algae, which affects the capacity of power production.163 There is a saturation concentration for the DO in the catholyte.164 Thus, the effect of the parameters on light generation becomes insignificant after the catholyte reaches the saturation concentration. The duration of light influences the productivity of the algae because it dictates nutrient uptake.
A miniature single-chamber ACCC was designed with an air cathode to identify toxic compounds in water.165 The system was supplied with the flow, which enhanced the current, proving that adequate nutrients were mandatory for the electrogenesis process. Additionally, the current output was greater during the day, indicating that the electron source is the photolysis of water. Again, the heterotrophic bacteria present in the biofilm oxidize the organic compounds eliminated by the microalgae to generate electrons. These two effects of heterotrophic microorganisms and photosynthesis are synergistic in the process.
The reduction in current was attributed to the accretion of DO in the anodic chamber with a gradual enhancement of the pH value to 9.166 The system exhibited high internal resistance and was used to detect formaldehyde. The accumulation of bacteria was higher in the portion exposed to formaldehyde because the microalgae present in the biofilm became detached in the presence of formaldehyde.
A summary of results from some representative algal carbon capture cells is given in Table 5.
Table 5 Summary of power production in algal carbon capture cells (ACCCs)




ACCC Type
Anode
Cathode
PAa (mW m−2)
[DO] (mg L−1)
CE (%)
CODEF (%)
Ref.




a Volumetric power density (mW m−3).




Dual-chamber
Activated sludge
Chlorella vulgaris
2.5a
NA
9.4
84.4
167


Dual-chamber
Pre-acclimated (from domestic wastewater)
Chlorella vulgaris
5.6a
7.6
NA
NA
152


Dual-chamber
Wastewater
Scenedesmus obliquus
153
15.7
NA
NA
168


Sediment
Sediment
Chlorella vulgaris
38
5.8
NA
NA
169


Tubular
Anaerobic sludge from a wastewater treatment plant
Chlorella
6.4
NA
NA
NA
170


Dual-chamber
Cow manure
Chlorella vulgaris
2.7a
NA
0.0782 kW h m−3
0.0136 kW h kg−1
171


Dual-chamber
Bacterial consortium with the previously enriched anode
Chlorella vulgaris
62.7
NA
NA
NA
154


Dual-chamber
Activated sludge
Chlorella vulgaris
126a
9.5
70
5.47
172


Dual-chamber lagooning
Activated sludge
Mixed microalgae
12.6a
8
NA
NA
173


Single-chamber
Textile wastewater
Chlorella vulgaris
123.2a
NA
19
98
174


A concentric cylinder
Anaerobic sludge
Chlorella vulgaris
390
3800
NA
NA
175


Dual-chamber
Swine wastewater
Chlorella vulgaris
3720a
NA
NA
NA
176




8 Effects and strategies to improve illumination of electrode
Optimization of electrode illumination (intensity and spectral composition) is an important route to PhMFC enhancement. A study investigated the effect of light intensity on the performance of PhMFC with Desmodesmus sp. A8 as the cathodic microorganism. The results showed a three-fold increase in current output with increasing light intensity.177 There are limits to how much light can be absorbed by the organism without causing damage or inhibition. In addition to increasing the light intensity, the spectral composition of the light can also be optimized to enhance the performance of PhMFCs.178
The optimization of electrode illumination is crucial for the performance of PhMFCs. There are several strategies to enhance electrode illumination, including the use of transparent electrodes like indium tin oxide (ITO) or fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) to increase light penetration,138 light-scattering materials such as TiO2 nanoparticles to distribute light more evenly throughout cathode chamber, and optimizing the distance between the electrode and the light source.179 Using specific photosynthetic organisms that can tolerate higher light intensities has also been suggested to improve PhMFC performance. Future directions can include mathematical modeling, to help predict the effects of different illumination strategies and identify optimal conditions.
9 Advantages and challenges of phototropic MFCs
The major challenge associated with PhMFCs is maintaining the electrode function over a long duration and maintaining the plants and algae. Thus, an analysis of the microbes and their area of existence is mandatory for enhancing the electrochemical performance of PhMFCs. The presence and location of EAB is a major consideration, in this respect. For example, a metagenomic and molecular phylogenetic survey of some plant-based PhMFCs together and their respective rhizospheres, indicated that the EAB present in the anodes of the glucose-fed MFC and rhizosphere PhMFC is similar in many aspects and produces electricity by a similar mechanism.72 Electricity is generated by the EAB from rice plants and fermentative bacteria in the rhizosphere PhMFC and glucose fed MFC through syntrophic interaction. Electrons are donated by acetates from the roots of the rice to the EAB in the rhizosphere PhMFC. This aids in the prevalence of the Geobacter EAB. In another the ubiquity of EAB was again demonstrated, this time showing that the EAB covered both the surface of the roots of Glyceria maxima, and the granular graphite electrode.66 Because anaerobic cellulolytic bacteria were also present at these sites, cellulosic hydrolysis produced the current in the cell. The graphite granules accepted electrons in this system, and methanogens that use acetate were not as active as electron donors.
In one study, Eichornia, the abundant microbe, showed good performance in a floating macrophyte-based ecosystem.68 The O2 required for bacteria is acquired from nitrate or DO. Denitrification occurs when bacteria consume DO, and nitrate becomes the sole O2 source for bacteria. The concentration of DO was dictated by Eichornia and the amount of sunlight. The level of DO increase throughout the day and reached a maximum in the evening due to photosynthesis by Eichornia. This variation of DO from morning to evening is an asset because it initiates the growth of nitrogen-removing bacteria and substrate-degrading bacteria.
PhMFC also shows promise as a tool to remediate heavy metals present in the wastewaters. Cr(VI) was eliminated in situ using Lolium perenne as the plant in PhMFC, where the cost of operation was substantially decreased using a combined technique of bioelectrochemical phytoremediation.69 Cr(VI) uptake by plants was considerably enhanced by this method. The plants in which Cr was deposited can be collected and incinerated after a specific duration, which is a green method of removing Cr from the system. However, the recovery of Cr from the electrodes requires further improvement. Additionally, a very concentrated level of toxic Cr(VI) has adverse effects on plants and microbes. Hence, the level of Cr(VI) tolerance for microbes and plants should be accurately analyzed to obtain the optimum efficacy. A study demonstrated the remediation of Cu-contaminated sediment using Ipomoea aquatica in PhMFC. The remediation was shown in the form of Cu2+ to Cu nanoparticles on cathode site while generating electricity through the existence of root exudates.180 A PhMFC based on Ipomoea aquatica Forsk was used to treat azo dye. The study demonstrated decolorization efficiency and COD removal of up to 99.64% and 92.06%, respectively.181 Mishra et al., 2022 reported the use of Dunaliella salina to treat saline water for the first time.182
Another study39 reported evaluating concurrent biomass and electricity generation using S. anglica and A. anomala in two separate PhMFCs. Both systems generated an equal amount of electricity, but the maximum power production differed. This phenomenon was due to the influence of the membrane potential of each microbe on the density of current. A smaller membrane potential boosts the movement of ions across the membranes. A PhMFC with plants from salty water (S. anglica) is better because these plants have abundant ions obtained from the salts, thereby lowering the membrane potential compared to a PhMFC with plants from freshwater (A. anomala). Rhizodeposits from paddy plants were used in the construction of a PhMFC,70 establishing the fact that electricity can be produced from wetland crops. The substrate is oxidized to methane during current generation, and this technology offers great potential for power production in remote areas. This system is devoid of any costly techniques and unwanted reactions such as metal methylation.
Several studies showed that methane emission could be mitigated by PhMFCs by introducing a bioelectrochemical anode in the rhizosphere for current production via microbial metabolism.73 However, the presence of excess organic constituents can boost methane production during the crop-growing season. This problem can be solved by constructing a bioelectrochemical system on a pilot scale. Moreover, it was found that hydrogen was a significant precursor for methane generation in the anode, which can be addressed by increasing the competition for hydrogen at the acetoclastic methanogenesis level. A lifecycle analysis of a CWMFC revealed that an anode consisting of gravel negatively impacted the environment compared to a graphite anode or a conventionally constructed wetland system.183 Thus, a graphite anode is preferred for constructed wetland MFC systems and decreases the footprint by 20%. Nevertheless, this system is more expensive than the conventional CW system.
The abundance of oxygen that is produced by algal photosynthesis at the cathode of an ACCC can be helpful not only for root growth, but the reactive nature of molecular oxygen can also be exploited for soil decontamination. Scenedesmus obliquus (a photoautotrophic algae) generated oxygen for electricity production by adhering to the cathode surface of an MFC.168 In contrast, Chlorella vulgaris (another alga) was used to produce oxygen at the cathode in PhMFC.169 The reduction rate of oxygen and the DO concentration were enhanced at the cathodes by photosynthetic algae. Another photosynthetic MFC was fabricated with stainless steel as a cathode, and the microbial colony was analyzed, revealing the presence of Chlorella in abundance. After multiple operations, the algae were retained on the electrode and actively initiated the oxygen reduction reaction when illuminated.170 Lipids from cathode-harvested algae were extracted and used as substrate in an MFC, which exhibited more efficacy than fruit-waste-fed MFCs. A biocathode composed of microalgae showed substantial improvement compared to one containing platinum. The biocathode can be exposed to air and showed good potential for treating dye wastewater from textile industries.174
10 Future perspectives and conclusion
This review summarizes the use of different phototrophic MFCs (PhMFCs), including plant- and algae-based systems, to produce bioelectricity and detect toxic substances in various wastewater sources. Compared to traditional MFCs, which produce CO2 during substrate oxidation and consume O2 at the cathode to complete the redox cycle, PhMFCs are a route to achieving true carbon neutrality. To maximize their benefits optimization is required for factors such as the intensity of sunlight, photosynthetic pathways, and controllable parameters in engineered systems (e.g., CWMFCs), such as pH, flow rate, COD levels, should be optimized. In order to improve the uptake and commercialization of PhMFC technology, construction, and components should be evaluated closely as well, with special attention being paid to electrode materials and separation membranes. And finally, the types of phototrophic organisms and their implementation (e.g., crop rotation schedules and maintenance) will be a central area of focus for future development.
While the field of phototrophic MFCs is rapidly developing, numerous gaps still exist (e.g., type of microbes or substrates, pH, operational procedures like batch mode or continuous mode, design of the device, etc.), requiring enhancement of the wastewater detection and power production capabilities. Thus, multidisciplinary research is needed to study rhizosphere mechanisms between the bacteria, plants (along with rhizodeposition) and electrode environment should be carefully considered for the optimal performance of PhMFCs. To this end, new technology may help probe the nexus between phototrophic organisms and MFCs. One promising direction involves microfluidic lab-on-a-chip systems, which enable growth and real-time monitoring of living organisms such as soil bacteria,184–187 biofilms,188,189 and even plant roots under highly controlled conditions.190–192 For example, there are an increasing number of studies using microfluidics to study naturally fluorescent photosynthetic bacteria, sometimes termed nanoaquariums. Such studies usually take advantage of pigment autofluorescence and advanced analytical and analysis techniques ranging from deep learning from hyperspectral images and, integrated micro optics have been used for applications including species segregation, optimizing growth conditions,193–196 and studies into interactions with plant roots.195 In parallel, there exists a growing trend in microfluidic MFCs,197 with especially relevant properties such as those which can grow very mature electroactive biofilms that can study device optimal operation conditions,198,199 and the ability to directly visualize the electroactive bacteria.200 We look forward to these tools being leveraged for detailed studies into the interactions between photosynthetic organisms and their subsystems (e.g., roots) with electrode environments in MFCs.
Finally, we note that there exists a broad spectrum of microbial electrochemical technologies (METs) that may benefit from the inclusion of photosynthetic organisms. These include but are not limited to: microbial desalination cells (MDCs); microbial electrolysis cells (MECs), which are usually used for hydrogen gas production; microbial electrosynthesis systems (MESs) that are designed to produce soluble organic molecules, such as acetate; and microbial methanogenesis cell (MMC), which produces methane from the cathode.194 The use of plants and photosynthetic microbes should be investigated as a way to enhance and diversify the performance of such emerging systems.
Abbreviations

ACActivated carbon
ACCCAlgal carbon capture cell
AAMFCAnode algal microbial fuel cell
BERBiofilm electrode reactor
CECoulombic efficiency
CODChemical oxygen demand
CWConstructed wetlands
CWMFCConstructed wetland microbial fuel cell
DODissolved oxygen
EABElectroactive bacteria
HRTHydraulic retention time
MFCMicrobial fuel cell
MPMFCMarine-rooted plant microbial fuel cell
NPMFCNatural-plant microbial fuel cell
PAPower normalized by anode area
PACPowdered activated carbon
PEMProton exchange membrane
PhMFCPhototrophic microbial fuel cell

Author contributions
Jayesh M. Sonawane: outline generation, original draft preparation, compilation of the sections, table preparations, writing – review and editing. Ankisha Vijay: original draft preparation, figure generation; Tianyang Deng: original draft preparation; Prakash Ghosh: writing – review and editing; Jesse Greener: original draft preparation, compilation of sections, figure generation, table preparation, project administration, writing – review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have influenced the work reported in this paper.
AcknowledgementsThe authors acknowledge financial support from the Shastri–Indo Canadian Institute, Sentinelle Nord, and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
ReferencesI. Bashir, F. A. Lone, R. A. Bhat, S. A. Mir, Z. A. Dar and S. A. Dar, in Bioremediation and Biotechnology: Sustainable Approaches to Pollution Degradation, Springer International Publishing,  2020, pp. 1–26 Search PubMed .P. J. B. van den and M. L. Ralf and B. Schafer, in Ecological Impacts of Toxic Chemicals (Open Access), Bentham Science Publishers,  2012, pp. 111–137 Search PubMed .C. J. Houtman, J. Integr. Environ. Sci., 2010, 7, 271–295 CrossRef .J. M. Sonawane, C. I. Ezugwu and P. C. Ghosh, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 2297–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Lindsey, Climate Change: Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide, https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide, accessed 7 September 2020 Search PubMed.J. M. Sonawane, S. A. Patil, P. C. Ghosh and S. B. Adeloju, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 103–114 CrossRef CAS .M. Siegert, J. M. Sonawane, C. I. Ezugwu and R. Prasad, in Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, Springer, Cham,  2019, pp. 1–23 Search PubMed .A. Vijay, A. Khandelwal, M. Chhabra and T. Vincent, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124157 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Sonawane, R. Mahadevan, A. Pandey and J. Greener, Heliyon, 2022, 8(12), e12353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. P. B. R. M. Allen, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 1993, 39, 27–40 CrossRef .J. M. Sonawane, C. I. Ezugwu and P. C. Ghosh, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 2297–2316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Vijay, S. Arora, S. Gupta and M. Chhabra, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 256, 391–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Sonawane, A. Yadav, P. C. Ghosh and S. B. Adeloju, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 90, 558–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Sonawane, D. Pant, P. C. Ghosh and S. B. Adeloju, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1891–1902 CrossRef CAS .C. Corbella and J. Puigagut, Contrib. Sci., 2015, 11, 113–120 Search PubMed .J. M. Sonawane, A. Gupta and P. C. Ghosh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 5106–5114 CrossRef CAS .B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. Rozendal, U. Schröder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. E. Logan, Microbial Fuel Cells, Wiley,  2008 Search PubMed .A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, R. W. Bradley, R. Thorne, T. Wenzel and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1092–1109 RSC .J. Tschörtner, B. Lai and J. O. Krömer, Front. Microbiol., 2019, 10, 866 CrossRef PubMed .S. W. Hogewoning, E. Wientjes, P. Douwstra, G. Trouwborst, W. van Ieperen, R. Croce and J. Harbinson, Plant Cell, 2012, 24, 1921–1935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Srivastava, S. Gupta, V. Garaniya, R. Abbassi and A. K. Yadav, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2019, 17, 1045–1051 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Sarma, B. Malakar and K. Mohanty, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2023, 1–14 CAS .A. Coello-Camba and S. Agustí, Front. Mar. Sci., 2021, 8, 429 Search PubMed .X. Yang, L. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Wang, S. Wang and Z. Ye, Environ. Sci. Eur., 2020, 32, 1–13 Search PubMed .G. Venkata Subhash, R. Chandra and S. Venkata Mohan, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 136, 644–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Sirohi, A. Kumar Pandey, P. Ranganathan, S. Singh, A. Udayan, M. Kumar Awasthi, A. T. Hoang, C. R. Chilakamarry, S. H. Kim and S. J. Sim, Bioresour. Technol., 2022, 349, 126858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Fabris, R. M. Abbriano, M. Pernice, D. L. Sutherland, A. S. Commault, C. C. Hall, L. Labeeuw, J. I. McCauley, U. Kuzhiuparambil, P. Ray, T. Kahlke and P. J. Ralph, Front. Plant Sci., 2020, 11, 279 CrossRef PubMed .J. J. Eaton-Rye, Photosynth. Res., 2013, 116, 111–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. P. B. T. B. Strik, R. A. Timmers, M. Helder, K. J. J. Steinbusch, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 41–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Lynch and J. M. Whipps, Plant Soil, 1990, 129, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .H. V. M. Hamelers, A. Ter Heijne, T. H. J. A. Sleutels, A. W. Jeremiasse, D. P. B. T. B. Strik and C. J. N. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1673–1685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 532–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Dharinee, K. Dhayalini and R. Ranjeet Skanda, in 2022 2nd International Conference on Advances in Electrical, Computing, Communication and Sustainable Technologies, ICAECT 2022, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,  2022 Search PubMed .F. Y. Lin, Y. Y. Lin, H. T. Li, C. S. Ni, C. I. Liu, C. Y. Guan, C. C. Chang, C. P. Yu, W. S. Chen, T. Y. Liu and H. Y. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2022, 325, 119807 CrossRef CAS .S. Maddalwar, K. Kumar Nayak, M. Kumar and L. Singh, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 341, 125772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. De Schamphelaire, A. Cabezas, M. Marzorati, M. W. Friedrich, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2010, 76, 2002–2008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Takanezawa, K. Nishio, S. Kato, K. Hashimoto and K. Watanabe, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 2010, 74, 1271–1273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Helder, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers, A. J. Kuhn, C. Blok and C. J. N. Buisman, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3541–3547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y.-Y. Lin, H.-T. Li, H.-Y. Chen and T.-Y. Liu, ECS Meeting Abstracts,  2022, vol. MA2022-01, p. 52 Search PubMed .M. E. Toal, C. Yeomans, K. Killham and A. A. Meharg, Plant Soil, 2000, 222, 263–281 CrossRef CAS .L. Gong, M. Abbaszadeh Amirdehi, A. Miled and J. Greener, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 671–677 RSC .R. Nitisoravut and R. Regmi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 76, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, Y. Tian, Y. Qu, Y. Qiu, J. Liu and Y. Feng, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .H. P. Bais, T. L. Weir, L. G. Perry, S. Gilroy and J. M. Vivanco, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2006, 57, 233–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. M. Lynch, The Rhizosphere, John Wiley & Sons,  1990 Search PubMed .J. Pausch and Y. Kuzyakov, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci., 2011, 174, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .S. Enríquez, C. M. Duarte and K. Sand-Jensen, Oecologia, 1993, 94, 457–471 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Kuzyakov, Soil Biol. Biochem., 2010, 42, 1363–1371 CrossRef CAS .M. Eisenhut, A. Bräutigam, S. Timm, A. Florian, T. Tohge, A. R. Fernie, H. Bauwe and A. P. M. Weber, Mol. Plant, 2017, 10, 47–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. K. Sivaram, P. Logeshwaran, S. R. Subashchandrabose, R. Lockington, R. Naidu and M. Megharaj, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–10 CAS .C. Wang, L. Guo, Y. Li and Z. Wang, BMC Syst. Biol., 2012, 6, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. Terlouw, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 81, 659–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Chen, W. Cai and A. Garg, Acta Geotech., 2023, 1–14 Search PubMed .T. Kuleshova, A. Rao, S. Bhadra, V. K. Garlapati, S. Sharma, A. Kaushik, P. Goswami, T. R. Sreekirshnan and S. Sevda, Biomass Bioenergy, 2022, 167, 106629 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, S. Pang, T. Liang, R. Ren and Y. Lv, Chemosphere, 2021, 280, 130776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Di Lorenzo, A. R. Thomson, K. Schneider, P. J. Cameron and I. Ieropoulos, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 62, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Babauta, R. Renslow, Z. Lewandowski and H. Beyenal, Biofouling, 2012, 28, 789–812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Jiang, P. Liang, C. Zhang, Y. Bian, X. Yang, X. Huang and P. R. Girguis, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 190, 367–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Ayala-Ruiz, A. Castillo Atoche, E. Ruiz-Ibarra, E. Osorio De La Rosa and J. Vázquez Castillo, Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput., 2019, 2019, 8986302 CrossRef .E. Sudirjo, P. De Jager, C. J. N. Buisman and D. P. B. T. B. Strik, Sensors, 2019, 19, 4647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Lu, X. Hu, L. Tang, B. Peng, J. Tang, T. Zeng, X. Zhang and Q. Liu, Chemosphere, 2022, 302, 134779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. C. Sophia and S. Sreeja, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2017, 21, 59–66 Search PubMed .K. R. S. Pamintuan and K. M. Sanchez, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 703, 012037 CAS .E. Sudirjo, C. J. N. Buisman and D. P. B. T. B. Strik, Water, 2019, 11, 1810 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Timmers, M. Rothballer, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, M. Engel, S. Schulz, M. Schloter, A. Hartmann, B. Hamelers and C. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 94, 537–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Sarkar and S. Bhattacharyya, Arch. Thermodyn., 2012, 33, 23–40 CAS .S. Venkata Mohan, G. Mohanakrishna and P. Chiranjeevi, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 7036–7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Habibul, Y. Hu, Y. K. Wang, W. Chen, H. Q. Yu and G. P. Sheng, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 3882–3889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. De Schamphelaire, L. Van Den Bossche, S. D. Hai, M. Höfte, N. Boon, K. Rabaey and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 3053–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Chiranjeevi, G. Mohanakrishna and S. Venkata Mohan, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 364–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Kouzuma, T. Kasai, G. Nakagawa, A. Yamamuro, T. Abe and K. Watanabe, PLoS One, 2013, 8, 2–11 CrossRef PubMed .J. B. A. Arends, J. Speeckaert, E. Blondeel, J. De Vrieze, P. Boeckx, W. Verstraete, K. Rabaey and N. Boon, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 3205–3217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. A. Timmers, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 86, 973–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .O. Guadarrama-Pérez, T. Gutiérrez-Macías, L. García-Sánchez, V. H. Guadarrama-Pérez and E. B. Estrada-Arriaga, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 5106–5127 CrossRef .L. Xu, Y. Zhao, L. Doherty, Y. Hu and X. Hao, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .P. Clauwaert, K. Rabaey, P. Aelterman, L. De Schamphelaire, T. H. Pham, P. Boeckx, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 3354–3360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Tong, M. Zheng, Y. Zhao, C. Tian, H. Liu and C. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 423–429 CrossRef CAS .A. O. Babatunde, Y. Q. Zhao, R. J. Doyle, S. M. Rackard, J. L. G. Kumar and Y. S. Hu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 5645–5652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Hu, Y. Zhao and A. Rymszewicz, Sci. Total Environ., 2014, 470–471, 1197–1204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Yu, L. Xu, N. Graham and J. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Doherty, Y. Zhao, X. Zhao and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 266, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .W. Qu, P. Loke Show, T. Hasunuma and S. H. Ho, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 305, 123072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Nagarajan, A. Kusmayadi, H. W. Yen, C. Di Dong, D. J. Lee and J. S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 289, 121718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. S. Malvankar, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5790–5797 RSC .I. Araneda, N. F. Tapia, K. L. Allende and I. T. Vargas, Water, 2018, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .C. Sukkasem, S. Xu, S. Park, P. Boonsawang and H. Liu, Water Res., 2008, 42, 4743–4750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Athulya and K. Anitha, Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol., 2020, 1265–1272 Search PubMed .R. Piyare, A. L. Murphy, P. Tosato and D. Brunelli, in Proceedings – 2017 IEEE 42nd Conference on Local Computer Networks Workshops, LCN Workshops 2017,  2017, pp. 18–25 Search PubMed .V. Kiran Kumar, K. Man Mohan, S. P. Manangath and S. Gajalakshmi, Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res., 2018, 13, 14948–14955 Search PubMed .C. Tang, Y. Zhao, C. Kang, Y. Yang, D. Morgan and L. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 150–160 CrossRef CAS .S. Venkata Mohan, S. Srikanth, S. Veer Raghuvulu, G. Mohanakrishna, A. Kiran Kumar and P. N. Sarma, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 2240–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Wang, Y. Guo, J. Cai, H. Wen, Z. Mao, H. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Ma and M. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 21460–21472 RSC .F. Liu, L. Sun, J. Wan, A. Tang, M. Deng and R. Wu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 5384–5393 RSC .C. Duvvury, T. C. Holloway, D. Paradis and A. K. Duong, Time, 2015, 195, 4–7 Search PubMed .F. Rezaei, T. L. Richard and B. Logan, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 101, 1163–1169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Sharma, S. Gajbhiye, S. Chauhan and M. Chhabra, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 340, 125645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Doherty and X. Zhao, Ecol. Eng., 2015, 79, 8–14 CrossRef .T. Xie, Z. Jing, J. Hu, P. Yuan, Y. Liu and S. Cao, Ecol. Eng., 2018, 112, 65–71 CrossRef .I. D. Widharyanti, M. A. Hendrawan and M. Christwardana, Int. J. Renew. Energy Dev., 2020, 10, 71–78 CrossRef .C. Corbella, M. Hartl, M. Fernandez-gatell and J. Puigagut, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 660, 218–226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu and B. Mattiasson, Water Res., 2002, 36, 3786–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wu, L. Wang, M. Jin, F. Kong, H. Qi and J. Nan, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 283, 129–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. De Schamphelaire, K. Rabaey, P. Boeckx, N. Boon and W. Verstraete, Microb. Biotechnol., 2008, 1, 446–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. G. Burns, Soil Biol. Biochem., 1982, 14, 423–427 CrossRef CAS .M. Valdez-Hernández, L. N. Acquaroli, J. Vázquez-Castillo, O. González-Pérez, J. C. Heredia-Lozano, A. Castillo-Atoche, L. Sosa-Vargas and E. Osorio-de-la-Rosa, Energy Sources, Part A, 2022, 44, 2715–2729 CrossRef .T. E. Kuleshova, A. G. Ivanova, A. S. Galushko, I. Y. Kruchinina, O. A. Shilova, O. R. Udalova, A. S. Zhestkov, G. G. Panova and N. R. Gall, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 24297–24309 CrossRef .Y. Zhou, D. Xu, E. Xiao, D. Xu, P. Xu, X. Zhang, Q. Zhou, F. He and Z. Wu, J. Environ. Sci., 2018, 70, 54–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Zhao, S. Collum, M. Phelan, T. Goodbody, L. Doherty and Y. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 229, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .L. Doherty, X. Zhao, Y. Zhao and W. Wang, Ecol. Eng., 2015, 79, 8–14 CrossRef .Z. Fang, H. L. Song, N. Cang and X. N. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 144, 165–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. K. Yadav, P. Dash, A. Mohanty, R. Abbassi and B. K. Mishra, Ecol. Eng., 2012, 47, 126–131 CrossRef .D. Wu, L. Yang, L. Gan, Q. Chen, L. Li, X. Chen, X. Wang, L. Guo and A. Miao, Ecol. Eng., 2015, 84, 624–631 CrossRef .Y. L. Oon, S. A. Ong, L. N. Ho, Y. S. Wong, F. A. Dahalan, Y. S. Oon, H. K. Lehl and W. E. Thung, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 203, 190–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, Y. Tian, H. Liu, X. Zhao and S. Peng, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 653, 860–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Wu, J. Zhang, H. H. Ngo, W. Guo, Z. Hu, S. Liang, J. Fan and H. Liu, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 175, 594–601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, S. Cheng and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 5488–5493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Lan, J. Zhang, Z. Hu, M. Ji, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, F. Li and G. Yao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 335, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .Y. L. Oon, S. A. Ong, L. N. Ho, Y. S. Wong, Y. S. Oon, H. K. Lehl and W. E. Thung, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 186, 270–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. L. Oon, S. A. Ong, L. N. Ho, Y. S. Wong, F. A. Dahalan, Y. S. Oon, H. K. Lehl, W. E. Thung and N. Nordin, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 224, 265–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Villaseñor, P. Capilla, M. A. Rodrigo, P. Cañizares and F. J. Fernández, Water Res., 2013, 47, 6731–6738 CrossRef PubMed .H. Li, H. L. Song, X. L. Yang, S. Zhang, Y. L. Yang, L. M. Zhang, H. Xu and Y. W. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 637–638, 295–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, H. L. Song, X. L. Yang, K. Y. Yang and X. Y. Wang, Chemosphere, 2016, 164, 113–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Zhang, H. L. Song, X. L. Yang, Y. L. Yang, K. Y. Yang and X. Y. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 95999–96005 RSC .M. Kumar and R. Singh, Environ. Sci., 2020, 6, 795–808 CAS .M. Qin, E. A. Hynes, I. M. Abu-Reesh and Z. He, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 149, 856–862 CrossRef CAS .S. Puig, M. Serra, A. Vilar-Sanz, M. Cabré, L. Bañeras, J. Colprim and M. D. Balaguer, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 4462–4467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Final Report Summary – PLANTPOWER (PlantPower – Living plants in microbial fuel cells for clean, renewable, sustainable, efficient, in situ bioenergy production), FP7|CORDIS|European Commission, https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/226532/reporting, accessed 29 April 2023 Search PubMed.L. Xu, B. Wang, X. Liu, W. Yu and Y. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2018, 214, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .Y. K. Wang, G. P. Sheng, B. J. Shi, W. W. Li and H. Q. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1864 CrossRef PubMed .D. R. Lovley, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 497–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Kouzuma, N. Kaku and K. Watanabe, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2014, 98, 9521–9526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Wareen, M. Saeed, N. Ilyas, S. Asif, M. Umair, R. Z. Sayyed, S. Alfarraj, W. A. Alrasheed and T. H. Awan, Chemosphere, 2023, 313, 137422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Bose, A. Bose, S. Mitra, H. Jain and P. Parashar, Nat., Environ. Pollut. Technol., 2018, 17, 311–314 CAS .S. Pandit, B. K. Nayak and D. Das, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 107, 97–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. G. Ha, S. K. Lee, S. J. Bai, Y. S. Song, Y. K. Kim, Y. M. Shin and J. H. Park, in 2015 Transducers – 2015 18th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems, TRANSDUCERS,  2015, pp. 1929–1932 Search PubMed .S. Oh, B. Min and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 4900–4904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Schneider, R. J. Thorne and P. J. Cameron, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2016, 374, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .S. Ahl, P. J. Cameron, J. Liu, W. Knoll, J. Erlebacher and F. Yu, Plasmonics, 2008, 3, 13–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Fleury, bioRxiv,  2017, preprint, 166793,  DOI:10.1101/166793.K. Iwai, D. T. Nguyen and K. Taguchi, Jpn. Soc. Appl. Electromagn. Mech., 2019, 27, 102–107 CrossRef .L. Gonzalez Olias, P. J. Cameron and M. Di Lorenzo, Front. Energy Res., 2019, 7, 1–11 CrossRef .F. Ndayisenga, Z. Yu, Y. Yu, C. H. Lay and D. Zhou, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 270, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Hadiyanto, M. Christwardana and C. da Costa, Energy Sources, Part A, 2023, 45(2), 3409–3420 CrossRef CAS .J. Ali, L. Wang, H. Waseem, B. Song, R. Djellabi and G. Pan, Environ. Pollut., 2020, 266, 115373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Xu, K. Poon, M. M. F. Choi and R. Wang, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22, 15621–15635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. G. Smith, A. C. Fisher and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4699–4709 RSC .Y. Zou, J. Pisciotta and I. V. Baskakov, Bioelectrochemistry, 2010, 79, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Nishio, K. Hashimoto and K. Watanabe, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2010, 86, 957–964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Xiao, E. B. Young, J. A. Berges and Z. He, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 11459–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Sharma and M. Chhabra, Bioresour. Technol., 2021, 338, 125499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Wang, Y. Feng, J. Liu, H. Lee, C. Li, N. Li and N. Ren, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 2639–2643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. E. Elshobary, H. M. Zabed, J. Yun, G. Zhang and X. Qi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 3135–3159 CrossRef CAS .L. Gouveia, C. Neves, D. Sebastião, B. P. Nobre and C. T. Matos, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 154, 171–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Das, R. Raj, S. Das and M. M. Ghangrekar, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2022, 1, 1–18 Search PubMed .R. Jiang and D. Chu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 5(6), 1071–1079 Search PubMed .S. C. Popat, D. Ki, B. E. Rittmann and C. I. Torres, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1071–1079 CrossRef CAS .L. Zhuang, S. Zhou, Y. Li and Y. Yuan, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3514–3519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Liu, L. Rao, Y. Yuan and L. Zhuang, Sci. World J., 2015, 2015, 864568 Search PubMed .S. Angioni, L. Millia, P. Mustarelli, E. Doria, M. E. Temporiti, B. Mannucci, F. Corana and E. Quartarone, Heliyon, 2018, 4, e00560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Angioni, L. Millia, G. Bruni, D. Ravelli, P. Mustarelli and E. Quartarone, J. Power Sources, 2017, 348, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .B. Neethu, V. Tholia and M. M. Ghangrekar, Process Biochem., 2020, 95, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhao, T. Chen, Q. Zhang, W. Peng and J. Xie, Huanjing Kexue Xuebao, 2014, 34, 2754–2758 CAS .C. Santoro, C. Arbizzani, B. Erable and I. Ieropoulos, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 225–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Chouler, M. D. Monti, W. J. Morgan, P. J. Cameron and M. Di Lorenzo, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 309, 392–401 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yongjin, J. Pisciotta, R. B. Billmyre and I. V. Baskakov, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 939–946 CrossRef PubMed .M. Zhou, H. He, T. Jin and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 216–219 CrossRef CAS .R. Kakarla and B. Min, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10275–10283 CrossRef CAS .D. Bin Wang, T. S. Song, T. Guo, Q. Zeng and J. Xie, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 13224–13230 CrossRef .J. Ma, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, T. D. Waite and Z. Wu, Water Res., 2017, 108, 356–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Khandelwal, A. Vijay, A. Dixit and M. Chhabra, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 247, 520–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. Bazdar, R. Roshandel, S. Yaghmaei and M. M. Mardanpour, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 261, 350–360 CrossRef CAS .J. Lobato, A. González del Campo, F. J. Fernández, P. Cañizares and M. A. Rodrigo, Appl. Energy, 2013, 110, 220–226 CrossRef CAS .W. Logroño, M. Pérez, G. Urquizo, A. Kadier, M. Echeverría, C. Recalde and G. Rákhely, Chemosphere, 2017, 176, 378–388 CrossRef PubMed .G. Li, H. Chang, Y. Zou, J. Yue, Y. Zheng, H. Feng, H. Wu, W. Wu, J. Lou, X. Qi and X. Zhang, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 3531–3537 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao and M. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2019, 26, 6182–6190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. cheng Wu, Z. jie Wang, Y. Zheng, Y. Xiao, Z. hui Yang and F. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2014, 116, 86–90 CrossRef .G. Rong and Q. Hu, OAlib, 2017, 04, 1–7 CrossRef .M. E. Khan, M. M. Khan, B. K. Min and M. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–12 Search PubMed .C. W. Lin, L. K. Alfanti, Y. S. Cheng and S. H. Liu, Desalination, 2022, 542, 116079 CrossRef CAS .S. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Feng and S. H. Pyo, Environ. Res., 2023, 216, 114625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Mishra and M. Chhabra, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2022, 19, 101199 CrossRef CAS .C. Corbella, J. Puigagut and M. Garfí, Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 584–585, 355–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. M. Mafla-Endara, C. Arellano-Caicedo, K. Aleklett, M. Pucetaite, P. Ohlsson and E. C. Hammer, Commun. Biol., 2021, 4, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .H. Dai, Y. Zhuang, E. Stirling, N. Liu and B. Ma, Soil Ecol. Lett., 2023, 5, 21–37 CrossRef .R. Rusconi, M. Garren and R. Stocker, Annu. Rev. Biophys., 2014, 43, 65–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. E. Stanley, G. Grossmann, X. CasadevallI Solvas and A. J. DeMello, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 228–241 RSC .S. Subramanian, R. C. Huiszoon, S. Chu, W. E. Bentley and R. Ghodssi, Biofilm, 2020, 2, 100015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Pousti, M. P. Zarabadi, M. Abbaszadeh Amirdehi, F. Paquet-Mercier and J. Greener, Analyst, 2019, 144, 68–86 RSC .A. Sanati Nezhad, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 3262–3274 RSC .L. Verhage, Plant J., 2021, 108, 301–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Guichard, E. Bertran Garcia de Olalla, C. E. Stanley and G. Grossmann, in Methods in Cell Biology, Academic Press,  2020, vol. 160, pp. 381–404 Search PubMed .S. C. C. Shih, N. S. Mufti, M. D. Chamberlain, J. Kim and A. R. Wheeler, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2366–2375 RSC .P. Bodénès, H. Y. Wang, T. H. Lee, H. Y. Chen and C. Y. Wang, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2019, 12, 1–25 Search PubMed .Y. Hanada, K. Sugioka, I. Shihira-Ishikawa, H. Kawano, A. Miyawaki and K. Midorikawa, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 2109–2115 RSC .T. Deng, D. DePaoli, L. Bégin, N. Jia, L. T. De Oliveira, D. C. Coté, W. F. Vincent and J. Greener, Anal. Chem., 2021, 93(25), 8764–8773 CrossRef CAS .P. Parkhey and R. Sahu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 3105–3123 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Amirdehi, N. Khodaparastasgarabad, H. Landari, M. P. Zarabadi, A. Miled and J. Greener, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 2227–2235 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Amirdehi, L. Gong, N. Khodaparastasgarabad, J. M. Sonawane, B. E. Logan and J. Greener, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 139771 Search PubMed .D. Ye, P. Zhang, J. Li, X. Zhu, R. Chen and Q. Liao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 14651–14658 CrossRef CAS .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Jayesh M. Sonawane	Dr Jayesh Sonawane earned his PhD from the IIT Bombay and Monash University. Recently he was awarded the prestigious Fulbright Fellowship in the United States with Prof. Derek Lovley at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, where he is working on protein nanowires for clinical and environmental sensing applications. Dr Sonawane is the recipient of the “Excellence Research Award 2016–18” from Prime Minister Narendra Modi and a Shastri Fellowship from the Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute. His background is in development of conducting polymer electrodes for microbial fuel cells, hybrid bioelectrochemical treatment processes, and microfluidic bioelectrochemical systems for live biofilm imaging.
Ankisha Vijay	Dr Ankisha Vijay is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Biotechnology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida currently. She did her postdoc from Department of Energy Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay. She did her PhD in Environmental Biotechnology from IIT Jodhpur. She has worked on waste to energy conversion processes to develop sustainable biotechnological solutions to water pollution and energy. Her doctoral work addressed the challenge of simultaneous removal of U(VI) and nitrate from nuclear waste in microbial fuel cells (MFC). Her core area of research is environmental biotechnology/engineering and bioremediation.
Tianyang Deng	Tianyang Deng received his Bachelor's degree at East China University of Science and Technology, and his Master's at Imperial College London. He is currently a PhD student in Department of Chemistry, Laval University. His research focuses on developing new sampling accessory for ATR-FTIR spectroscopy and classification of cyanobacteria by applying machine learning model on microscopic hyperspectra.
Prakash C. Ghosh	Dr Prakash C Ghosh is a Professor in the Department of Energy Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay. He obtained his doctoral degree in Mechanical Engineering from RWTH Aachen, Germany, and has received BOYSCAST and ERASMUS MUNDUS fellowships. Dr Ghosh is an expert in the fields of solar energy, hydrogen fuel cells, microbial fuel cells and hydrogen energy, with over 60 international journal papers and several patents. He has led numerous international projects and collaborations in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and the United States.
Jesse Greener	Jesse Greener has a Bachelor's degree in chemical physics from the University of Waterloo and a doctorate in physics at the University of Western Ontario. His postdoctoral fellowship was in the Chemistry department at the University of Toronto, where he co-founded FlowJEM Microfluidics. He is currently a full professor of chemistry at Université Laval in Quebec City. His research group develops microfluidic analytical tools to study microscale chemistry and biocatalysis of microbiological systems such as biofilms and bioelectrochemical systems.

PA = V2/RextA
	(1)

	(2)

ΦA = I/Fp
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Classification of phototrophic microbial fuel cells (PhMFC). PhMFCs are classified based on use of plants and algae for power generation.	 

	(4)

	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the photosynthetic processes occurring in plant and algal thylakoid membranes and the protein complexes involved. Figure adapted from ref. 29 with permission from [MDPI], copyright [2022].	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of different PhMFCs, including those in which photosynthetic elements (A) interact with the anode (algal MFCs and plant-based MFCs) and (B) interact with the cathode (algal carbon capture cells). Figure adapted from ref. 30 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2011].	 

Natural plant (NPMFC)	Area surrounding the rhizosphere	Soil–water interface	Rhizodeposits from plants	Bioelectricity from plants
Constructed wetland (CWMFC)	Aquatic rhizosphere	Area in water	Contaminants in wastewater	Wastewater treatment
Marine-rooted plant (MPMFC)	Sediment	Area in water	Natural organic sediment	Bioelectricity and wastewater treatment
Anode algal MFC (AAMFC)	Habitat for electrogenic microalgae	Inoculating cathode with algae	Algae biomass and by-products	Bioelectricity and wastewater treatment
Algal carbon capture (ACCC)	Habitat for any bioanode producing CO2	Photosynthetic algae, bacteria	Organic matter	CO2 fixation into by-products

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the natural-plant microbial fuel cell system and working principle. Figure adapted from ref. 63 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2017].	 

G. maxima	Graphite granules	Graphite felt	NA	Hoagland medium	80	66
G. maxima	Graphite granules	Graphite felt	NA	Hoagland medium	67	67
E. crassieps	Graphite discs	Graphite discs	87 (CODEF)	Domestic and fermented distillery wastewater	225	68
72 (VFA)
L. perenne	Graphite granules	Carbon felt	99 [Cr(VI)]	Hoagland medium with sodium acetate	55	69
S. anglica	Graphite rod in graphite grains	Graphite felt	NA	Hoagland medium	222	39
O. sativa	Graphite granules	Graphite granules	NA	Hoagland solution	33	70
P. setaceum	Graphite plate	Graphite plate	NA	Red soil	163	71
O. sativa	Graphite felt	Carbon/polytetrafluorethylene coated	NA	Acetate/glucose, Bacto yeast, electrolyte solution	19	72
O. sativa	Graphite granules	Graphite felt	NA	Vermiculite with Hoagland solution	72	73
S. anglica	Graphite granules	Graphite felt	NA	Modified Hoagland solution buffered with phosphate buffer	100	74

 	Fig. 5  Working principle and basic setup for a constructed wetland-microbial fuel cell (CWMFC). Figure adapted from ref. 75 with permission from [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic description of the pilot-scale CWMFC, actual photographs, and the anatomy of the electrode placement within the operation. Figure adapted from ref. 91 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2019].	 

 	Fig. 7  A schematic representation of constructed wetland microbial fuel cells (SMFC) and application of the SMFC system in a (constructed) wetland. The anode matrix is positioned in the root zone and the cathode in the overlying water layer. Figure adapted from ref. 104 with permission from [John Wiley and Sons], copyright [2008].	 

Phragmites australis	76.5	9.4	109
Phragmites australis	64	28	110
Phragmites australis	87	33	86
Ipomoea aquatic	94.8	30.2	111
Canna indica	75	15.7	112
Iris pseudacorus	99	9.6	113
Typha latifolia	91.2	93	114

 	Fig. 8  Schematics of continuous flow biofilm electrode reactor microbial fuel cell – constructed wetland (BER-MFCCW) and its associated components. Figure adapted from ref. 122 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2018].	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the experimental setup for the marine-rooted plant MFC with four variable configurations to understand the overall performance of the system. Figure adapted from ref. 82 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2016].	 

 	Fig. 10  Graphical representation of a dual-cathode chamber (stacked) algal microbial fuel cell with internal components. Figure adapted from ref. 136 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2015].	 

Dual-chamber	Chlorella. regularis	PBS (50 mM, pH = 7.2)	33	1070	61.5	65.2	143
Dual-chamber	Spirulina platensis	Tapioca wastewater	192	14.47	NA	67	144
Dual-chamber	Microcystis aeruginosa	Potassium ferricyanide (50 mM)	600	83	7.6	67.5	145
Dual-chamber	Chlorella pyrenoidosa	Potassium ferricyanide	5	6030	NA	NA	146
Single-chamber	Synechocystis spp.	BG11	19	10	NA	NA	147
Single-chamber	Chlorella emersonii	Air cathode	6	7.4	NA	NA	138
Single-chamber	Photosynthetic pond culture/BG 11	Air cathode	8	3.4	NA	NA	148
Single-chamber	Natural hot spring community	Air cathode	8	9	NA	NA	149

 	Scheme 1  Reaction occurring at the electrodes in an ACCC.	 

 	Fig. 11  Working principle of the algal carbon capture cell (ACCC); CO2 transportation and EAB anode and algal-based cathode reactions are involved. Figure adapted from ref. 159 with permission from [Hindawi], copyright [2015].	 


Dual-chamber	Activated sludge	Chlorella vulgaris	2.5a	NA	9.4	84.4	167
Dual-chamber	Pre-acclimated (from domestic wastewater)	Chlorella vulgaris	5.6a	7.6	NA	NA	152
Dual-chamber	Wastewater	Scenedesmus obliquus	153	15.7	NA	NA	168
Sediment	Sediment	Chlorella vulgaris	38	5.8	NA	NA	169
Tubular	Anaerobic sludge from a wastewater treatment plant	Chlorella	6.4	NA	NA	NA	170
Dual-chamber	Cow manure	Chlorella vulgaris	2.7a	NA	0.0782 kW h m−3	0.0136 kW h kg−1	171
Dual-chamber	Bacterial consortium with the previously enriched anode	Chlorella vulgaris	62.7	NA	NA	NA	154
Dual-chamber	Activated sludge	Chlorella vulgaris	126a	9.5	70	5.47	172
Dual-chamber lagooning	Activated sludge	Mixed microalgae	12.6a	8	NA	NA	173
Single-chamber	Textile wastewater	Chlorella vulgaris	123.2a	NA	19	98	174
A concentric cylinder	Anaerobic sludge	Chlorella vulgaris	390	3800	NA	NA	175
Dual-chamber	Swine wastewater	Chlorella vulgaris	3720a	NA	NA	NA	176
AC	Activated carbon
ACCC	Algal carbon capture cell
AAMFC	Anode algal microbial fuel cell
BER	Biofilm electrode reactor
CE	Coulombic efficiency
COD	Chemical oxygen demand
CW	Constructed wetlands
CWMFC	Constructed wetland microbial fuel cell
DO	Dissolved oxygen
EAB	Electroactive bacteria
HRT	Hydraulic retention time
MFC	Microbial fuel cell
MPMFC	Marine-rooted plant microbial fuel cell
NPMFC	Natural-plant microbial fuel cell
PA	Power normalized by anode area
PAC	Powdered activated carbon
PEM	Proton exchange membrane
PhMFC	Phototrophic microbial fuel cell

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
