 Block copolymer based composition and morphology control in nanostructured hybrid materials for energy conversion and storage: solar cells, batteries ...  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CS00034E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00034E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 520-535Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Block copolymer based composition and morphology control in nanostructured hybrid materials for energy conversion and storage: solar cells, batteries, and fuel cells†

        
          
            M. Christopher 
            Orilall
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ulrich 
            Wiesner
          
          
        
      *
      Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. E-mail: ubw1@cornell.edu; chrisorilall@gmail.com;   Tel: +1 607-255-3487
Received 
      8th July 2010
    First published on 13th December 2010AbstractThe development of energy conversion and storage devices is at the forefront of research geared towards a sustainable future. However, there are numerous issues that prevent the widespread use of these technologies including cost, performance and durability. These limitations can be directly related to the materials used. In particular, the design and fabrication of nanostructured hybrid materials is expected to provide breakthroughs for the advancement of these technologies. This tutorial review will highlight block copolymers as an emerging and powerful yet affordable tool to structure-direct such nanomaterials with precise control over structural dimensions, composition and spatial arrangement of materials in composites. After providing an introduction to materials design and current limitations, the review will highlight some of the most recent examples of block copolymer structure-directed nanomaterials for photovoltaics, batteries and fuel cells. In each case insights are provided into the various underlying fundamental chemical, thermodynamic and kinetic formation principles enabling general and relatively inexpensive wet-polymer chemistry methodologies for the efficient creation of multiscale functional materials. Examples include nanostructured ceramics, ceramic–carbon composites, ceramic–carbon–metal composites and metals with morphologies ranging from hexagonally arranged cylinders to three-dimensional bi-continuous cubic networks. The review ends with an outlook towards the synthesis of multicomponent and hierarchical multifunctional hybrid materials with different nano-architectures from self-assembly of higher order blocked macromolecules which may ultimately pave the way for the further development of energy conversion and storage devices.
M. Christopher Orilall
Mahendra Chris Orilall comes from the tiny country of Guyana. He conducted his undergraduate studies at Concordia College, Moorhead, MN, where he double majored in ACS Chemistry (Honors) and Mathematics in 2004. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry at Cornell University in 2009, with work in the research groups of Prof. Ulrich Wiesner (MS&E) and Prof. Frank DiSalvo. He did a postdoc studying the microstructure of catalyst layers of fuel cells at the Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation, National Research Council of Canada, Vancouver, BC. He is currently employed at Applied Materials, working on a DOE funded Li-ion battery research project.
Ulrich Wiesner
Ulrich (Uli) Wiesner studied Chemistry at the University of Mainz, Germany, and UC Irvine, CA, gaining his PhD in 1991 with work under Prof. H. W. Spiess at the Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz. After a two year postdoc at the Ecole Superieure de Physique et de Chimie Industrielle de la ville de Paris (E.S.P.C.I.), France, with Prof. L. Monnerie, in 1993 he returned to the group of Prof. H. W. Spiess where he finished his Habilitation in 1998. He joined the Cornell University, NY, MS&E faculty in 1999 as a tenured Associate Professor, became a Full Professor in 2005, and since 2008 is the Spencer T. Olin Professor of Engineering.
1. Introduction
In this review, recent advancements in nanostructured hybrid materials prepared by employing block copolymers as structure-directing agents for use in photovoltaics, batteries and fuel cells will be described. Rather than attempting a broad overview, general features, challenges and novel approaches will be highlighted through examples of recent work of the Wiesner group and collaborators. The review will begin with an introduction to energy conversion and storage devices and some of the limitations that these technologies currently face. We will then present the thermodynamics of block copolymer self-assembly and show how it has been utilized to structure-direct materials with compositional and morphological control on the nanometre length scale. Examples will be shown of nanostructured and porous ceramics, ceramic–carbon composites, ceramic–carbon–metal composites and metals. As an illustration of some of the potential uses for these fascinating materials, their applications in dye-sensitized solar cells, lithium (Li)-ion batteries and fuel cells will be presented.
1.1 Energy conversion and storage
Energy is one of the biggest challenges that humanity faces over the next 50–100 years. The ever-growing demand for energy is coupled with environmental concerns associated with carbon-based energy sources. In 2006, the world's primary energy consumption was estimated to be about 14 TW y and is estimated to reach 20 TW y by 2030.1 Over 80% of current usage comes from carbon-intensive sources such as oil, coal and natural gas. However, the rapidly increasing price of oil is an indication that oil production is reaching its peak. Ultimately, these sources will be limited making research into alternative sources of energy important.2 Future dependence on carbon-intensive energy sources brings into play another major issue that needs to be taken into consideration: the impact that carbon intensive sources have on the environment. These carbon-intensive sources produce CO2, a long-lived greenhouse gas which is difficult to capture and mitigate. The steady increase in CO2 concentration over the years has been linked to the simultaneous increase in average world temperatures (global warming).1,3 With these growing environmental concerns, the challenge to cap the usage of carbon intensive energy sources is imperative. As a result, an onus has been placed on the development of clean and efficient means of energy conversion and storage devices, such as solar cells, fuel cells and batteries.
Solar energy is a sustainable energy source and could provide up to 1500 TW y annually.4,5 Photovoltaic devices convert solar energy directly into electrical energy. Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) provide a low-cost alternative to conventional solid-state photovoltaics. Here, a nanocrystalline titania (TiO2) film is sensitized with a monolayer of dye molecules at the photoanode. Absorption of a photon by the dye coincides with the excitation of an electron, which is then rapidly injected into the conduction band of TiO2. The oxidized dye molecules are regenerated via hole transfer to either a liquid electrolyte or a solid-state hole-transporter. The holes are transported to the cathode where they recombine with the electrons which travel from the anode across an external load.6–8 The current maximum solar conversion efficiency is 11.3% for liquid-electrolyte DSCs9 to around 5.1% for solid-state DSCs.10
Batteries represent a leading candidate for energy storage devices. Li-ion batteries provide an efficient, light-weight and rechargeable alternative for electrochemical energy storage systems. Today, Li-ion batteries are vastly used for portable devices, from cell phones to laptops and are the technology of choice for hybrid electric vehicles. The operating principle is such that the negative electrode or anode (usually graphite) is separated from the positive electrode or cathode (e.g., LiCoO2) by a non-aqueous liquid electrolyte. Upon charging, Li ions are de-intercalated from the layered LiCoO2, travel across the electrolyte to the anode where they intercalate within the graphite layers. The reverse process occurs upon discharge, i.e., the Li ions are de-intercalated from the graphite, travel across the electrolyte and are intercalated into the CoO2 at the cathode. At the same time, electrons travel from the anode to the cathode across an external circuit.11

Fuel
          cells are attractive energy conversion devices, especially for portable applications. A fuel cell is the combination of two electrochemical half-cells. At the anode, the fuel (e.g., hydrogen) is oxidized to produce protons and electrons. The protons travel across a proton conducting medium or a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) which separates the anode from the cathode in the case of a proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC). The electrons travel from the anode across an external load to the cathode, where they combine with the protons to reduce oxygen to water.12 The flow of electrons represents electricity and so, fuel cells convert chemical energy directly to electrical energy. When hydrogen is used as the fuel, the only by-product is water.
1.2 Materials design and limitations
While these energy conversion and storage devices are promising for a sustainable future, there are many limitations which prevent the commercialization of these technologies. In DSCs, intimate contact is required between the sensitizer-dye, the semi-conducting medium and the hole-conducting medium. Typically, a porous electrode is fabricated by sintering crystalline titania nanoparticles, which is sensitized by a monolayer of dye molecules. Infiltration of the mesopores by a hole-transporter and capping electrodes finalizes the device.8 Some of the key issues include enhancement of light absorption by the dye, improvement of the infiltration of the hole-transporter into the mesoporous structures and improvement of the materials properties of the semi-conducting phase.13 Here, maximizing crystallinity and minimizing grain-boundaries help prevent charge trapping and recombination.14 For example, a highly ordered nanostructured and porous titania material with high crystallinity may lead to better performance as compared to a disordered material derived from jammed titania particles.8,15
In batteries, current electrodes are composed of millimetre-sized particles in the form of powders. A major limitation is the intrinsic diffusivity of lithium ions in these solids. Nanomaterials are preferred as shorter distances/shorter diffusion paths would increase the rate of lithium insertion or reduction and enhance electron transport. Also, the higher surface area associated with these nanomaterials could provide better contact with the electrolyte and hence, higher lithium ion flux across the interface.11 While Li-ion batteries are attractive because of their relatively high energy densities compared to other types of batteries, their power densities are relatively low because of large polarization at high charge–discharge rates due to slow lithium diffusion in the active materials. Together with higher overall energy densities, this is the main challenge to overcome if Li-ion batteries are to meet future demands of, e.g., hybrid electric vehicles. It has been hypothesized that these limitations can be overcome by designing and fabricating nanostructured electrode materials that provide high surface area for intimate contact with the electrolyte and short diffusion paths for ionic transport and electronic conduction.16,17 Nanostructured and porous materials are thus attractive materials choices for use in Li-ion batteries.
In current fuel cell technology, cost, performance and durability issues still remain big challenges. This can directly be related to the materials choice and design. The catalyst currently used in PEMFCs is based on platinum, which is one of the most expensive metals. Oxidation or reduction occurs at reaction sites on the surface of the electrocatalyst. To maximize the surface area of the electrocatalyst, nanoparticles are often employed. In order to access the electrocatalyst nanoparticles, there must be a pathway for the fuel or oxidant to reach the electrocatalyst and so, the material must be porous. Additionally, there needs to be an electron conducting medium and a proton conducting medium in close proximity to the reaction site. These requirements are referred to as the triple-phase boundary condition.12 However, current electrode design merely employs a heterogeneous mixture of the platinum nanoparticles, electrically conducting carbon and a proton conducting ionomer. Highly porous, nanostructured electrodes, once fabricated, could maximize reaction surface area, improve mass transport, reduce ohmic resistance and optimize performance.12,18
From a materials perspective, a common approach addressing the current limitations in photovoltaics, batteries and fuel cells is to generate advanced hybrid materials with specific or combinations of specific properties having architectures on the nanometre length scale. Precise compositional and morphological control down to these dimensions may prove to be the engineering tool needed for the necessary breakthroughs.19,20 A further challenge is to synthesize materials that meet these criteria in a very cost-effective manner. As will be demonstrated, current research strategies to achieve these goals employ bottom-up approaches using organic structure-directing agents like block copolymers to control the morphology of inorganic materials.21 This review will focus on illustrating how the thermodynamic principles of structure formation in block copolymers can be utilized to achieve compositional and morphological control in multi-functional materials down to the nanometre regime.
1.3 
          Block copolymers: a unique platform for nanostructured materials design
The self-assembling properties of block copolymers provide a unique platform for structuring materials with tunable sizes on the nanometre scale.22Block copolymers consist of two or more chemically distinct polymer blocks covalently bonded together. These blocks may be thermodynamically incompatible with each other (like oil and water) as the entropy of mixing per unit volume is small and varies inversely with molecular weight. In the bulk, diblock copolymers micro-phase separate on the molecular scale (5–100 nm) to produce complex nanostructures with various morphologies, depending on the relative volume fraction of one block with respect to the other.23,24 The Flory–Huggins interaction parameter, χAB, describes the driving force for this micro-phase separation (see eqn (1)).24 (1)where z is the number of nearest neighbors per monomer in the polymer, kBT is the thermal energy, and εAB, εAA, and εBB are the interaction energies per monomer between A and B, A and A, and B and B, respectively (a negative or positive ε indicates favorable or unfavorable interactions, respectively).

χ
AB multiplied by N (the degree of polymerization or number of monomers per chain) represents the interaction per chain. From self-consistent field theory (SCFT) of a symmetric diblock copolymer, if χABN is greater than 10.5, micro-phase separation occurs. This well-studied phenomenon has been summarized in a theoretical phase diagram which predicts morphologies of block copolymers as a function of volume fraction, fA,, of block A (see Fig. 1).25
 Fig. 1  Theoretical phase-diagram of a diblock copolymer (top) and illustrations of the resulting morphologies (bottom) with increasing volume fraction (f) of one block with respect to the other. From left to right, the structures include bcc spheres (CPS/Q229), hexagonal cylinders (H), cubic bicontinuous gyroid (Q230) and lamellar structures (L). For cubic structures, the corresponding symmetry space groups are provided. The phase diagram is adapted from ref. 25. The morphology illustrations are adapted from ref. 26. 
The structures that form in a diblock copolymer melt are a result of two competing factors: interfacial energy between the two blocks (an enthalpic contribution) and chain stretching (an entropic contribution). To begin with, the entropy of mixing between the two blocks is small but the blocks are covalently bonded to each other and so, macro-phase separation cannot occur. Instead, phase separation occurs on the molecular level and the system is forced to adopt extended chain conformations. To minimize the interfacial energy, the two blocks want to separate from each other in a way to minimize interfacial surface area. Phase separation induces chain stretching away from the most preferred coiled polymer chain conformation and depends on the volume fraction of one block with respect to the other. The resulting equilibrium morphology therefore represents the most favorable configuration for a specific block copolymer minimizing these competing factors.24,26
2. From block copolymers to nanostructured functional materials: first steps
2.1 
          Block copolymers as structure-directing agents of amorphous silica
The concept of organic molecule self-assembly was first utilized to make highly ordered nanostructured silicates at the beginning of the nineties.27,28 Here, low-molecular-weight cationic surfactants were employed as the structure-directing agents. A sol–gel process was used to make silica in the presence of the liquid-crystalline array of surfactants. The self-assembly of these surfactants produced various nanostructured hybrids. By removing the organic components, silicates with highly ordered mesopores (up to 10 nm) were obtained. Later, the Stucky group demonstrated this idea with anionic surfactants29 and the Pinnavaia group was able to extent this work to nonionic surfactants, i.e., low-molecular-weight block copolymer-type surfactants.30
Connecting the fields of inorganic chemistry and polymer science, large-molecular weight block copolymers only soluble in organic solvents were used as structure-directing agents by the Wiesner group in 1997.31 Here, organically modified aluminosilicate mesostructures were synthesized by mixing an aluminosilica-type sol into poly(isoprene-block-ethylene oxide) (PI-b-PEO) block copolymers. A sol–gel process of a mixture of two metal alkoxides was employed which selectively swelled the PEO block of the copolymer. Self-assembly resulted in ordered organic–inorganic hybrid nanostructures. By varying the amount of inorganic, the group demonstrated a facile, well-controlled pathway for the preparation of various silica-type morphologies, see Fig. 2a. This work has been reviewed in various articles22,32 and was recently summarized in a ternary morphology diagram, see Fig. 2b.33 Furthermore, from composites with, e.g., inverse cubic or hexagonal morphologies mesoporous silica-type materials could be prepared by heat treatment at elevated temperatures. Tailoring of the PI-b-PEO molecular weight between 10000 and 100000 grams per mole through polymer synthesis allowed facile preparation of materials with varying pore sizes between 10 and 50 nm, and considerable wall thickness, thus going well beyond the capabilities of pluronics-type structure directing agents, as demonstrated by the Wiesner group in 2001.32
 Fig. 2  (a) Organically modified aluminosilicate nanostructures using PI-b-PEO block copolymer as a structure-directing agent. Aluminosilicate sol particles selectively swell the PEO block of the copolymer (top). Structure control is achieved by the amount of sol added. Organically modified aluminosilicate morphologies as resulting from increasing volume fractions of inorganic are shown schematically as well as in TEM images (middle). The TEM images of this figure were adapted from ref. 31 and 32. (b) Ternary morphology diagram for various compositions (in weight fractions) of PI-b-PEO block copolymers and aluminosilicate sol nanoparticles (bottom), adapted from ref. 33. 
2.2 A challenge: highly crystalline nanostructured transition metal oxides
Following the work on nanostructured amorphous polymer–inorganic hybrid materials and mesoporous solids,34block copolymers were used as structure-directing agents for the synthesis of nanostructured transition metal oxides.35 Here, amphiphilic pluronic P123, poly(ethylene oxide-block-propylene oxide-block-ethylene oxide), was employed and the corresponding inorganic precursors were, e.g., added to a non-aqueous solution of the polymer. As-made organic–inorganic hybrids with, e.g., hexagonally arranged cylindrical morphology were calcined in air to remove the organics and resulted in nanostructured and porous transition metal oxide structures. Often such materials were not fully crystalline but instead consisted of nano-crystallites embedded mainly in an amorphous matrix.36 Heat treatments were often only possible up to 400–450 °C without structural collapse. For some metal oxides like Nb2O5,37 however, heat treatments to higher temperatures are required in order to obtain high crystallinity. It thus remained a challenge to simultaneously obtain highly crystalline transition metal oxides while retaining the nanostructure control directed from the soft structure-directing agents.
An alternative approach developed in order to obtain highly crystalline nanostructured and porous transition metal oxides is the use of hard templates such as mesoporous silica or carbon.38 Here, the inorganic precursors are back-filled into pre-ordered templates. Crystallization through high temperature treatments is possible as the hard templates prevent structure collapse as the crystalline domains grow. Finally, the templates are removed either by calcining in air to remove carbon or by etching (e.g., with hydrofluoric acid, HF) to remove silica. While the hard templating methods allow for high crystallinity without structural collapse, the synthetic approaches are often long and tedious. For example removal of the template can be cumbersome and often involves the use of chemicals like HF, which is undesirable. Furthermore, it may be difficult to completely fill the pores of the hard template, even when multiple-impregnation steps are used.
2.3 A combined assembly by soft and hard chemistries
In order to overcome the limitations of previous soft and hard templating approaches, respectively, the Wiesner group recently developed a novel, one-pot approach to make highly crystalline nanostructured transition metal oxides.37 This method, referred to as the combined assembly by soft and hard (CASH) chemistries, utilizes the structure-directing properties of soft block copolymers with the ability of one block to produce an in situ-type hard template. One block of the copolymer contains sp2 hybridized carbon atoms and is converted to an in situ amorphous-graphitic carbon material when heated under an inert environment. In a first example, PI-b-PEO was employed as the structure-directing agent to make highly crystalline, ordered nanostructured and porous TiO2 and Nb2O5. A non-hydrolytic sol–gel route was used for the synthesis of the metal oxides with the oxide sols selectively swelling the PEO block of the block copolymer. Heat-treatment of the as-made hybrids to high temperatures under an inert environment resulted in highly crystalline, nanostructured and porous metal oxide–carbon composites. The in situ generated carbon acts as a scaffold (hard template), preventing the collapse of the nanostructure while allowing for full conversion of the amorphous metal oxide to crystalline material. The presence of carbon was confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and Raman spectroscopic analysis.37 In a final step, the carbon was oxidatively removed by heat-treatments in air at lower temperatures, leaving behind the highly crystalline nanostructured and porous transition metal oxides, see schematic Fig. 3a.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic showing the CASH method for obtaining highly crystalline nanostructured and porous transition metal oxides; TEM images of (b) as-made nanostructured organic–Nb2O5 composite, (c) nanostructured Nb2O5–C composite, (d) nanostructured Nb2O5 (with carbon removed); (e) SAXS analysis of A: as-made nanostructured organic–Nb2O5 composite, B: nanostructured Nb2O5–C composite, C: nanostructured Nb2O5 (with carbon removed); (f) electron diffraction pattern of nanostructured Nb2O5 showing the highly crystalline nature of the material. The figure is adapted from ref. 37. 
To verify the effectiveness of this method, various analytical techniques were used to characterize the materials at each step. This is illustrated for niobia in Fig. 3 through transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of local sections of the as-made nanostructured organic–Nb2O5 composite (structure-directed by the block copolymer), see Fig. 3b, the nanostructured Nb2O5–C composite with the in situ generated carbon scaffold (Fig. 3c) and finally the nanostructured and highly crystalline Nb2O5 (with carbon removed), see Fig. 3d. From these images, the nanostructure is retained while crystallizing the Nb2O5 at 700 °C. To further confirm structure retention, small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) was used, see Fig. 3e (A–C). Finally, the high crystallinity of the resulting nanostructured transition metal oxides was confirmed by wide-angle X-ray diffraction (XRD) and electron diffraction techniques, see Fig. 3f.
In the case of nanostructured TiO2 the anatase crystal polymorph was obtained with an average crystallite size of 10 nm while for niobia, Nb2O5, average crystallite sizes of 35 nm in one plane and 12 nm in other directions were observed suggesting preferential crystallite growth parallel to the pores. The average pore sizes and surface areas of the final materials as determined from nitrogen physisorption measurements were about 23 nm and 90 m2 g−1 for titania and about 35 nm and 54 m2 g−1 for niobia. Please note that these pore sizes are considerably larger than what would be typically obtained from pluronic type structure directing agents and can be tailored according to the chosen block copolymer molecular weight, which is adjustable through polymer synthesis, see also comments in Section 2.1.
3. Nanostructured titania for solar cells
Transition metal oxides (ceramics) are attractive materials for many applications, providing unique electronic, optical and catalytic properties. Nanostructured ceramics are particularly interesting because they offer high surface area for greater accessibility. The development of the CASH method paved the way for the exploration of highly crystalline nanostructured and porous transition metal oxides in various applications. In photovoltaics, these highly crystalline nanostructured materials are especially appealing as amorphous regions are known to be trap sites for the recombination of holes and electrons.8 In DSCs, nanocrystalline titania is used as the semiconductor into which electrons are injected after excitation of the sensitizer dye. Though most current state-of-the-art DSC technology employs randomly jammed anatase TiO2 nanocrystals,6 ordered nanostructures/pores of TiO2 films may perform better because ordered pores with high surface area would provide better accessibility to both the dye and the hole-transporter.8 There have been several studies to investigate the role of high surface area nanostructured and porous TiO2 using block copolymers as structure-directing agents in DSCs. However, the materials used often were not highly crystalline because of the limitation of keeping the nanostructure during the crystallization process.39–42 It has been speculated that further improvements could be achieved if the crystallinity of the nanostructured and porous TiO2 skeleton was increased.15,41 The following examples of the Wiesner group and collaborators will illustrate systematic investigations of the use of block copolymer directed TiO2 nanostructures in DSCs.
3.1 Structure–property relations in block copolymer based ssDSCs
Nedelcu et al. investigated the role of morphology and crystallinity of nanostructured and porous anatase TiO2 in solid-state dye sensitized solar cells (ssDSC).13 The amphiphilic block copolymer PI-b-PEO was used as the structure-directing agent for detailed control of the TiO2 morphology on the 10 nm length scale. PI-b-PEO of three different sizes (i.e., with molecular weights of Mn = 15.5 kg mol−1, Mn = 33.5 kg mol−1, and Mn = 84.4 kg mol−1 and PEO weight fractions of 0.23, 0.23 and 0.14, respectively) allowed for tuning the inter-pore spacing and the pore diameter of the resulting anatase TiO2 nanostructures. By varying the amount of the TiO2 precursor added, control over the morphology and connectivity of the pores and the TiO2 network was achieved. The results indicated that higher power conversion efficiencies were obtained with larger open pore structures and were attributed to the enhanced dye loading and infiltration by the hole-transporter.
Nedelcu et al. also investigated the role of crystallinity of the nanostructured and porous anatase TiO2 in these devices. Since the PI block contains sp2 hybridized carbon atoms, they employed the CASH method to this amorphous organic–inorganic hybrid to obtain highly crystalline nanostructured and porous TiO2. The CASH method allowed for heat treatment of the amorphous organic–inorganic hybrids to temperatures between 450 °C and 600 °C under an inert environment without collapse of the nanostructure. The in situ generated amorphous-graphitic carbon material acted as a scaffold to the pores and was removed in a subsequent step by calcining in air at lower temperatures. The results indicated that there is a marked increase in all the solar cell performance parameters when the TiO2 processing temperature was varied from 450 °C to 550 °C. The open-circuit voltage Voc increased from 0.65 V to 0.76 V, the short-circuit (Jsc) photocurrent increased from 0.71 mA cm2 to 2.54 mA cm2, the fill factor (FF) increased from 0.54 to 0.61, and most importantly, the power conversion efficiency improved from 0.25% to 1.2%.13 While the power conversion efficiencies achieved with only 700 nm thick devices utilizing these nanostructured materials were lower than current optimized state-of-the-art devices, the results highlighted rational optimization strategies that may ultimately lead to desired performance improvements.
A significant limitation for the use of block copolymers to structure-direct sol–gel derived thicker films is the formation of cracks and film delamination. This is in part a result of the condensation and crystallization processes that occur during calcination. To overcome this issue, Nedelcu et al. employed a monolithic route to efficient DSCs.43 Here, the CASH method employing PI-b-PEO was first used to obtain highly crystalline nanostructured and porous anatase titania, as described earlier. This titania material was not used directly as a film on an electrode substrate, however, but was ground into small particles. Subsequently, a paste was prepared using these particles, a polymer and a binder. This allowed for large-area coatings and the formation of thicker films. In this work, the evolution of the morphology of the materials at various stages of the fabrication process was examined. While it was found that to a large extent the self-assembled structure was lost during the processing steps, the compartmentalization of the initial micellar copolymer morphology enabled the control of important parameters. These parameters, such as crystal size, overall crystallinity and nanoparticle surface structure, proved vital to the DSC device performance. The results indicated a solar to power conversion efficiency of over 6.4% for liquid electrolyte DSCs using full sun conditions and over 8% using lower light levels.43 The improved performance was attributed to separate control of TiO2 crystal morphology and device mesostructure. This was possible through the morphology control that block copolymers enable for both the inorganic and organic components of the DSCs.
Building on the findings of this study, Docampo et al. recently utilized the defined morphological confinement that arises from the self-assembly of block copolymer–inorganic hybrids to investigate the crystallization environment of anatase titania and its relationship to DSC performance.44 Here, the influence of changing the oxide∶polymer ratio in the nanostructured hybrids on the electronic nature of the ensuing nanostructured and porous titania was investigated. Three morphologies were studied by systematically changing the mass ratio of titania to polymer. A 1∶3 ratio yielded titania cylinders inside a matrix of PI while a 2∶1 ratio resulted in the inverted structure where cylinders of PI were surrounded by a matrix of titania. A 1∶1 ratio resulted in a micellar morphology with PI micelles in a titania matrix, see Fig. 4. The ability to control the morphology of the titania on the nanometre length scale provided a new degree of freedom in the optimization of DSCs.
 Fig. 4  (a–d) Schematic representation of the formation of titania–block polymer composition dependent morphologies (titania is represented by dark domains). (e–g) Corresponding bright field TEM images of the nanostructured composite materials before calcination. This figure is adapted from ref. 44. 
The three different morphologies created different local environments for the crystallization of titania. Powder XRD was used to probe the titania crystal polymorph and size throughout the heating process. The resulting structured materials were employed in solar cell devices and current collection and voltage perturbation measurements were used to probe the location and density of sub band gap states. It was found that subtle changes to the crystallization landscape have a profound influence on the electronic structure of the titania and the resulting solar cell functionality.44 It was noted that by controlling the mesoscale morphology of the TiO2 by diblock copolymer assisted self-assembly, it is possible to systematically vary the distribution of electronic sub band gap states in the resulting materials not easily achieved otherwise. Increasing the depth and breadth of the density of sub band gap states correlated well with an increase in photocurrent generation. This suggested, for the first time, that a high density of sub band gap states is critical for efficient photo-induced electron transfer and charge separation in such DSCs.
3.2 Bi-continuous cubic double gyroid titania
In the previous section, examples of ordered nanostructured and porous titania with various morphologies (spherical, cylindrical or worm-like cylindrical pores), derived from block copolymer self-assembly were shown. The detailed investigations of structure–property correlations elucidated several crucial design parameters to improve DSC device performance. In solar cell devices, it is important that there is continuous connectivity of all electronically active phases to the device electrodes. However, morphologies such as hexagonally arranged cylinders are continuous in only one dimension thus requiring control over nanostructure orientation for optimal device performance. This often imposes additional processing steps. One way to overcome this limitation is to target the cubic bicontinuous double gyroid morphology of diblock copolymers, see Fig. 5. In this structure, domains of the two blocks are fully and continuously interconnected in all three dimensions (3D structure). Cho et al. had previously investigated the role of dimensionality and connectivity of nanostructured materials on charge transport.45 In this work, the self-assembly of amphiphilic dendrons extended with linear PEO chains and their Li-ion complexes was used to access various mesophases with micellar (zero-dimensional, 0D), cylindrical (1D), lamellar (2D) and cubic bicontinuous double gyroid structures (3D), see Fig. 5. At about the same time, Kamien et al. studied the theoretical morphology diagram of diblock copolymers with one branched block.46,47 The experimental results of Cho et al. showed that ion conductivity was highest for the 3D cubic double gyroid structure compared to the other structures.45 The work suggested that bicontinuous cubic structures of block copolymers could be ideal and may lead to improved performance in applications where charge transport in domains of nanoscopic dimensions is important such as energy conversion and storage devices. It is important to note that these highly sophisticated structures are accessible through organic molecule (block copolymer) self-assembly but would be difficult to generate, e.g., by top-down manufacturing techniques.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representations of various mesophases used for the investigation of morphology–charge transport correlations: (A) zero-dimensional micelles, (B) 2D lamellae, (C) 1D hexagonal cylinders and (D) co-continuous cubic 3D double gyroid network. It was found that charge transport is optimum in the 3D network. This figure is adapted from ref. 45. 
Crossland et al. investigated the first use of a block copolymer based bicontinuous cubic double gyroid anatase TiO2 morphology in an electronic device, i.e., in ssDSCs.48 In a variation to obtaining nanostructured transition metal oxides directly from block copolymers as structure-directing agents, the block copolymer morphology in this study was used as a porous template for backfilling with titania. In this route, the diblock copolymer employed was poly(4-fluorostyrene-block-D,L-lactide) (PFS-b-PLA) with a molecular weight of 36 kg mol−1 and containing 60% by weight PFS. Self-assembly of this polymer resulted in a bicontinuous cubic double gyroid copolymer morphology. The PFS-b-PLA gyroid was prepared as a film on a glass substrate with transparent conducting oxide coating (FTO glass) and then the minority PLA networks were selectively removed by etching to leave a voided PFS gyroid template. TiO2 was deposited in the remaining PFS template via anodic oxidative hydrolysis of aqueous TiCl3 in a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell. The resulting polymer–inorganic hybrid was annealed to 500 °C under argon to crystallize the amorphous TiO2 and then under oxygen to remove the polymer template leaving a free-standing double gyroid network titania. A bicontinuous bulk hetero junction solar cell architecture was produced by sensitizing the anatase titania with a dye, back-filling the array with a solid-state hole transporting material and capping the film with a suitable counter electrode, see Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the formation of bi-continuous gyroid titania and its assembly in a hybrid solar cell. (a) PFS-b-PLA gyroid block copolymer morphology; (b) the minority PLA networks are selectively removed; (c) electrochemical replication followed by PFS template removal leaves a free standing double gyroid titania network array; (d) the final bicontinuous bulk hetero junction solar cell architecture. This figure is adapted from ref. 48. 
Solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells incorporating ∼400 nm thick sensitized anatase TiO2 gyroid arrays exhibited peak external quantum efficiencies (EQEs) as high as 33% with an overall power conversion efficiency of 1.7%. This result is comparable with state-of-the-art ssDSCs of similar thickness for the active layer. The relatively high efficiency is due to the fact that the gyroid morphology ensures accessible and highly ordered pores through the monodisperse titania channels and struts that are fully interconnected throughout the active layer. This allows, e.g., easier backfilling with the solid-state hole transporter compared to jammed-particle systems. One limitation of the approach was the thickness of the active layer. It is currently a challenge to produce gyroid ssDSCs with thicker active layers because of the volume contraction of the titania during the required annealing steps, causing stresses and failure, e.g., at the film–substrate interface. Despite this current limitation, the work suggests that bicontinuous cubic block copolymer structures may play an important role in the future development of ssDSCs.
Crossland et al. subsequently investigated the exact role of titania morphology in liquid-electrolyte DSCs.49 In this study, 1D nanowires and 3D bicontinuous double gyroid TiO2 morphologies were replicated from block copolymer templates using the approach described above. The performance of these materials was tested and compared to nanocrystalline TiO2 nanoparticles in liquid-electrolyte DSCs, see Fig. 7. The results indicated that the power conversion efficiency was highest for the gyroid structure and lowest for the 1D nanowire array. However, it was found that the 1D system displayed better electron charge transport and significantly inhibited charge recombination compared to the 3D system. It was noted that other factors such as the location of traps, trap densities and limitations to transport such as grain boundaries may have played a role. Nevertheless, the performance of the 1D system was inferior to the corresponding 3D network and this was attributed to the lack of structural integrity which led to reduced internal surface area. This work represented the first comparative study of various block copolymer derived structures with traditional nanoparticle film morphologies in devices such as liquid-electrolyte DSCs and paves the way for a better understanding of the important role of nanostructure on performance in the area of non-silicon based photovoltaics.
 Fig. 7  
            SEM images of top view (a–c) and cross section (d–f) of various nanostructured titania morphologies investigated in liquid-electrolyte DSCs: (a, d) standing TiO2 cylinders; (b, e) gyroid network and (c, f) sintered nanoparticles. This figure is adapted from ref. 49. 
4. Nanostructured and porous ceramic–carbon composites for batteries
Nanostructured and porous transition metal oxide–carbon composites are an interesting alternative for electrode materials as they combine the electrochemical functionality of transition metal oxides with the electrical conductivity of carbon. Zhao et al. first reported the synthesis of nanostructured and porous TiO2–carbon composites using P123 block copolymers50 but did not employ these materials in devices. Though an interesting approach, the pore size of the resulting materials was smaller than 3.5 nm. Nanostructured and porous transition metal oxide–carbon composites with larger (>5 nm) pores are desirable, however, to provide easy access of electrolyte molecules to such a functional composite.
In Section 2, the CASH method was introduced to obtain highly crystalline nanostructured and porous ceramics. The in situ generated amorphous-graphitic carbon served as an intermediate scaffold (or hard template) during the crystallization process of the ceramic and was subsequently removed by oxidation. While the nanostructured and porous crystalline ceramic–carbon composites were not desirable for photovoltaic materials, they are interesting as electrode materials for batteries. However, some limitations of these materials stem from the low carbon yield and degree of graphitization of the sp2 hybridized carbon containing a hydrophobic (polyisoprene) block. To overcome these limitations, one option is to structure-direct another carbon source along with the transition metal oxide to increase the yield of carbon. Another route is to use a copolymer as the structure-directing agent with a high carbon-yield hydrophobic block, such as polyacrylonitrile (PAN). PAN is well known to be an excellent source for the graphitization of carbon. The following examples demonstrate the achievable morphology control in nanostructured ceramic–carbon composites using approaches leading to higher carbon content and their performance in battery applications.
4.1 Nanostructured and porous carbon–crystalline titania composites
Lee et al. recently reported the one-pot synthesis of nanostructured, porous and highly crystalline anatase TiO2–carbon composites with large (>5 nm), tunable and uniform pores.51 The performance of such materials was investigated as anodes in Li ion batteries. The copolymer PI-b-PEO was used to structure-direct TiO2 as described earlier. But here, an additional carbon source, poly(furfuryl alcohol), was added to the block copolymer–TiO2 solution, which also, like the titania precursors, selectively swells the hydrophilic PEO block of the block copolymer. In this case, a worm-like morphology was obtained. During heat-treatment of the as-made materials at 700 °C under an inert atmosphere (using the CASH method),37PEO was calcined off, while the amorphous TiO2 and poly(furfuryl alcohol) were converted to crystalline TiO2 and conducting carbon, respectively. At the same time, the sp2 hybridized carbon containing PI blocks were converted to an amorphous-graphitic carbon scaffold, increasing the overall carbon content, while giving rise to porosity, see Fig. 8. The resulting carbon scaffold kept the nanostructure intact while crystallization occurred.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of “one-pot” synthesis of nanostructured and porous crystalline TiO2–carbon composites with large and uniform poresvia carbonization of nanostructured PI-b-PEO–amorphous TiO2–poly(furfuryl alcohol) composites. The figure is adapted from ref. 51. 
In this study, two different pore sizes, 17.4 nm and 8.2 nm, as measured by nitrogen physisorption, were investigated by utilizing a larger PI-b-PEO copolymer with Mn = 27220 g mol−1, 16.7 wt% PEO and polydispersity index 1.02, and a smaller copolymer with Mn = 15640 g mol−1, 13.9 wt% PEO and polydispersity index 1.03, respectively. The average crystallite size of anatase titania was around 8 nm. When the anodic performance of the resulting structure-directed TiO2–carbon composites was investigated, the results showed that the first insertion and desertion capacities were 0.65 and 0.55 Li/Ti, for the larger and smaller polymer derived materials respectively. Both of these values exceeded 0.5 Li/Ti, which has been accepted as the maximum insertion value at room temperature. Non-porous TiO2–carbon composites heat-treated to 700 °C were only lithiated to 0.15 Li/Ti. It was also shown that the nanostructured TiO2–carbon composites exhibited a stable cyclic performance. This was attributed to the nano-size effects of the TiO2 grains, which allowed for better accommodation of volume changes upon insertion–desertion processes, and the stable electronic conduction paths provided by the carbon. While the materials showed promising rate performance capabilities, further optimization is certainly required.
Adding another carbon source like poly(furfuryl alcohol) is one way to increase the carbon yield in these nanostructured ceramic–carbon composites. Limitations of this approach include the amount of poly(furfuryl alcohol) that can be added and the degree of graphitization upon annealing under an inert environment. An alternative approach is the use of an amphiphilic block copolymer where the hydrophilic block structure directs the inorganic components and the hydrophobic block acts as a high-yield source for carbon. To this end Stefik et al. employed the diblock copolymer poly(ethylene oxide-block-acrylonitrile), PEO-b-PAN, as the structure-directing agent for making nanostructured carbon–crystalline anatase titania nanocomposites.52 In a one-pot approach, the block copolymer was combined with a non-hydrolytic sol–gel route to the transition metal oxide as described above. The resulting nanostructured block copolymer–TiO2 hybrid materials were first heat treated in air to stabilize the PAN by cyclization and then heat-treated under argon to 700 °C to obtain highly crystalline composites. During this processing, PAN is converted to partially graphitic carbon as confirmed by Raman Spectroscopy. The resulting crystalline TiO2–carbon composites were nanostructured as determined by XRD, and electron microscopy.52 In order for these materials to have potential for use in batteries, as described earlier, porosity needs to be introduced. As shown in the next section, this can be achieved by going from a diblock to a triblock copolymer.
4.2 Three component porous-carbon–titania from block terpolymers
To demonstrate the versatility of block copolymers as structure-directing agents, Stefik et al. subsequently employed ABCBA block terpolymers to obtain three component porous-carbon–titania nanocomposites.53 While high carbon yields could be obtained employing PAN as the carbon source, vide supra, the PEO-b-PAN diblock copolymer discussed above did not allow for control over carbon content and porosity independently. In contrast, utilizing the block terpolymer PAN-b-PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO-b-PAN which has three chemically distinct blocks, Stefik et al. demonstrated that it is possible to simultaneously achieve independent control over three separate components: the carbon amount determined by the molecular weight of the PAN part; the pore size determined by the molecular weight of the PPO part; and the thickness of the transition metal oxide domains controlled by the PEO molecular weight and the amount of inorganic precursors added. To demonstrate the morphological control possible with such terblock copolymers, different terpolymer compositions and molecular weights were tested. For example, to increase the amount of carbon in the nanocomposites, a terpolymer with larger fraction of PAN was used. This study demonstrated, for the first time, the ability to synthesize a three-component nanocomposite material with exact control over the choice and size of each component. The resulting hybrids represented a new class of materials referred to as block sequence directed materials (BSDMs).53 BSDMs open a whole realm of possibilities for the exploration of advanced multifunctional materials in energy conversion and storage devices.
5. Nanostructured and porous materials for fuel cells
As described earlier, the main criterion for designing materials for use in fuel cells is the triple-phase boundary condition. Here, an electron conducting medium and a proton conducting medium are required to be in close proximity to the electrocatalyst nanoparticles while still maintaining a pathway for the fuel or oxidant to reach the electrocatalyst. Highly porous, nanostructured electrodes, once fabricated, could maximize reaction surface area, improve mass transport, reduce ohmic resistance and optimize performance.12,18 The previous examples of nanostructured and porous transition metal oxides and metal oxide–carbon composites are applicable in solar cells and batteries, respectively, but these materials fall short of the criteria for use as electrode materials in fuel cells. The following examples demonstrate alternative materials approaches for use in fuel cells. The first example shows how block copolymers can be used to structure-direct the electrocatalyst in addition to the metal oxide and carbon to obtain a nanostructured ceramic–carbon–metal composite, all in a one-pot approach. The subsequent examples will show how block copolymers can be used to structure-direct nanostructured and porous metals and metal-mixtures, which could serve as both the electrocatalyst and the electron conducting medium in fuel cells.
5.1 Nanostructured ceramic–carbon–metal composites
While the nanostructured and porous ceramic–carbon composites described in the previous sections are potentially useful as electrocatalyst supports, they are not fully functional materials for use in fuel cells. To be useful for fuel cells, there needs to be an electrocatalyst such as metal nanoparticles made out of, e.g., Pt. More so, Pt-based inter-metallic nanoparticles are attractive alternatives to reduce the amount of Pt used and have shown to be more resistant to poisoning.54 It is possible to add such inter-metallic nanoparticles to the nanostructured and porous ceramic–carbon nanocomposites via a post-deposition step. However, the versatility of block copolymers as structure-directing agents allows for the synthesis of inter-metallic nanoparticle containing nanostructured and porous ceramic–carbon systems in a one-pot approach. The following example shows the first attempt to simultaneously structure-direct such a nanostructured ceramic–carbon–metal nanoparticle composite for use in fuel cells.
To this end Orilall et al. showed the one-pot synthesis of Pt-based inter-metallic nanoparticles decorating the walls of nanostructured and porous niobium oxide–carbon composites.55 Here, PI-b-PEO was used to simultaneously structure-direct niobium oxide sols and the Pt (and Pb) precursor(s) of the catalyst nanoparticles. The niobium oxide sol mixed with the PEO block of the copolymer. Self-assembly led to a hexagonally arranged cylindrical morphology with an oxide/PEO matrix. The hydrophobic Pt (and Pb) precursor(s) mixed with the PI block to form the cylinders. Heat treating this amorphous organic–inorganic nanostructured hybrid material under inert gas flow at high temperatures simultaneously removed the PEO components of the hybrid, reduced the metal precursors to nanoparticles, carbonized the PI block and converted the amorphous metal oxide into a highly crystalline nanostructured and porous Nb2O5 structure, see Fig. 9. The carbonization of the PI enabled high temperature treatments without collapse of the nanostructure. Because the Pt and Pb precursors were mixed in with the PI block, the resulting nanostructure had Pt–Pb inter-metallic nanoparticles (∼10 nm) decorating the walls of the nanostructured and crystalline niobium oxide–carbon pores (∼30 nm diameter). The niobia crystallite size was around 30 nm as estimated from the [001] and [002] reflections and around 12 nm for all other reflections. The anisotropic growth was consistent with earlier studies, see Section 2.3. The precise control in the design of the morphology of these nanostructured composites was possible through the self-assembling properties of block copolymers. After further reduction to NbO2, the resulting hybrid materials were tested for formic acid oxidation. They showed lower onset potential and four times higher mass activity than the previously best reported values for formic acid oxidation using PtPb inter-metallic nanoparticles supported on conducting carbon. These encouraging results represent a step in the right direction towards finding alternative materials with optimized architectures for use in fuel cells. Furthermore, the one-pot block copolymer approach provides a facile method for exploring various nanostructured ceramic–metal composites as electrocatalyst materials since the inorganic precursors can be independently varied allowing rapid screening of compositions.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the one-pot synthesis of Pt-based intermetallic nanoparticles decorating the walls of the pores of nanostructured niobium oxide. Adapted from ref. 55. 
5.2 Nanostructured metals
So far block copolymers have been described as structure-directing agents for various inorganic systems where precursors for inorganic materials, mostly oxides, were mixed in a common organic solvent together with the copolymer and subsequently self-assembled into nanostructured hybrids with well defined morphologies and compositions through heat processing. In comparison to ceramics, structure-directing metals into nanostructured and porous hybrids is even more challenging as metals have higher surface energies favoring low surface areas. Previous attempts with block copolymers were only successful in structure-directing metal nanoparticles at low concentrations while obtaining hybrids in the dense nanoparticle regime56 remained futile. Recently, Warren et al. were able to overcome existing limitations. They described ordered nanostructured and porous platinum in the bulk obtained from the self-assembly of metal nanoparticles and block copolymers.57 This work thus represented the first successful example for the use of block copolymers with molecular weights in the tens of thousands as structure-directing agents for nanostructured and porous metals. Warren et al. overcame previous problems by synthesizing suitable ligand-stabilized nanoparticles that co-assembled with the block copolymer. Here, the design of the metal nanoparticle was crucial. The ligand was based on a thiol-containing ionic liquid which provided high solubility in organic solvents. The ligand was relatively short to assure sufficient metal volume fractions in the resulting as-synthesized hybrids and final nanostructured hybrids. Poly(isoprene-block-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PI-b-PDMAEMA) was used as the block copolymer. PDMAEMA provides additional enthalpic interactions between the tertiary amine and the Pt nanoparticle surface, thus enabling selective mixing. Self-assembly of metal nanoparticles and the block copolymer resulted in ordered polymer–metal hybrids. In the first study, examples for lamellar and hexagonally arranged cylindrical structures were demonstrated while in a subsequent study the morphological control was extended to other morphologies,58 see below. The CASH method was employed to transform the as-made materials into ordered nanostructured and porous metal–carbon composites while simultaneously limiting Oswald ripening of the metal nanoparticles, which would otherwise prevent structure control. A pure nanostructured and porous metal was obtained by either Ar–O plasma treatment or acid treatment of the carbon–metal hybrids, see Fig. 10. Electrochemical data from these nanostructured and porous Pt samples showed similar current–voltage characteristics to bulk Pt verifying that the Pt metal surface was indeed exposed. The work paves the way for the formation of other nanostructured and porous metals, metal alloys, or even inter-metallic materials structure-directed by block copolymers.59 At the same time it signals a paradigm shift from the conventional ‘heat and beat’ methods to structure metals used throughout the past millennia towards an approach that allows metal nanostructure control on the basis of soft matter (“matière molle”) self-assembly.
 Fig. 10  Schematic showing each stage towards nanostructured and porous platinum: (A) hydrophilic ionic-liquid based ligand, (B) ligand-stabilized platinum nanoparticle, (C) PI-b-PDMAEMA block copolymer, (D) as-made nanostructured polymer–metal hybrid, (E) porous metal–carbon composite, and (F) final nanostructured and porous metal. The figure is adapted from ref. 57. 
The resulting materials have potential for a number of applications including energy conversion and storage. For example, in fuel cells, nanostructured and porous metals or inter-metallic materials could be utilized as both the electrocatalyst and the electron-conducting medium. This would exclude the need for a triple phase boundary condition and only contact between the nanostructured and porous metal and the proton conducting medium would be required. Another feature of the use of block copolymers is that the pore and wall sizes are tunable by choice of the polymer molecular weight and composition, which could be advantageous, e.g., for optimizing backfilling conditions for the proton conducting medium.
5.3 Nanostructured and porous metal-mixtures
In a follow-up to the initial work on nanostructured and porous metals, Liet al. conducted a detailed investigation on the criteria needed for the successful self-assembly of metal nanoparticles and block copolymers.58 They outlined various specifications to which the metal nanoparticles should be tailored in order to achieve morphological control. They also explored the morphology space of PI-b-PDMAEMA/Pt nanoparticle hybrids and unlocked regions of two new morphologies: spherical micellar and worm-like cylinders. Going a step further, the authors showed the preparation of shape-controlled metal nano-objects by the disassembly of metal nanoparticle–block copolymer composites, analogous to previous work on silica hybrids.60 Here, isolated metal nanoparticle-based nanospheres, cylinders, and sheets were generated by the disassembly of hybrids with spherical, wormlike micellar, and lamellar morphologies, respectively.
The metal work revealed the dynamic nature of the field of tailored and blocked macromolecules and their hybrids. It provides a clue to future possibilities that may exist for the creation of multifunctional nanomaterials based on a better understanding of the fundamental underlying morphological design criteria. By tuning macromolecular chemistry and architecture (e.g., moving from diblock to multiblock copolymers) as well as inorganic chemistry, other fascinating materials and structures should be accessible including morphologies with bi- or triply continuous 3D domains. The criteria outlined by Warren et al.57 and Liet al.58 open the door, e.g., for the controlled preparation of ordered nanostructured metals of other elements, disordered alloys, or even ordered inter-metallics. The possibility also exists to employ metal nanoparticles of various shapes and composition. The novel electrical, optical and catalytic properties that these unexplored materials may provide could be the key to the development of improved materials for applications in energy conversion and storage devices.
6. The future: multicomponent and hierarchical functional hybrid materials
6.1 Multiple component nanocomposites from ABC triblock copolymers
In Section 2.3, an alternative method to the one-step co-assembly of organic (i.e., block copolymer) and inorganic (precursor/nanoparticle) species into nanostructured organic–inorganic hybrids was introduced where block copolymers were used as real templates. Subsequent backfilling with oxide led to bi-continuous cubic inorganic nanostructures. One reason for utilizing this backfilling approach is the narrow phase window (2–6 vol%)61 over which such bi-continuous structures are obtained from diblock copolymer systems. An alternative, very powerful way to overcome this limitation is to use triblock terpolymers with a significantly larger phase composition window (4–14%)62,63 for co-continuous phases. To this end Stefik et al. recently demonstrated that ABC triblock terpolymers can be used as structure-directing agents for the synthesis of highly ordered oxide nanocomposites with multiple plies.64 Here, poly(isoprene-block-styrene-block-ethylene oxide) referred to as ISO was used as the structure-directing agent. The third block provides an additional degree of freedom in the design of multifunctional materials. Stefik et al. were able to successfully structure-direct aluminosilicate and niobia sols using this triblock terpolymer into ordered nanocomposites. The resulting morphologies included core–shell hexagonal, core–shell double gyroid, three-domain lamellae and core–shell inverse hexagonal structures. All of these nanocomposites had three- or five-ply morphologies with domains that were continuous in one, two or three dimensions. Oxygen plasma removal of the organics resulted in ordered nanostructured and porous oxide materials such as free-standing nanostructured and porous double gyroid aluminosilicates, see Fig. 11. This latest development opens the door for the exploration of new multifunctional nanostructured materials with fascinating architectures. Because of the wider range of accessible morphologies and the larger phase composition window for co-continuous cubic structures, it is reasonable to assume that future work on nanostructured materials from block copolymers will most likely see a shift towards a greater emphasis on block terpolymers.
 Fig. 11  
            TEM images and model (inset) of free-standing nanostructured and porous double gyroid aluminosilicate structure obtained from an ABC triblock terpolymer as the structure-directing agent. The figure is adapted from ref. 64. 
6.2 Hierarchical functional composites: morphology control over multiple length scales
The examples shown so far have demonstrated the ability to control the morphology on the mesoscopic length scale, i.e., in the ∼5–80 nm regime. A closer look at nature reveals organisms like diatoms that display fascinating interwoven materials from both organic and inorganic components with structural control ranging from the near atomic scale all the way to the macroscale. Such natural and complex materials provide inspiration and guidance on how to control the morphology over multiple length scales.65,66 Recently, Kamperman et al. demonstrated that hierarchical structure control over eight different length scales can be integrated with catalytic functionality.67 Here, block copolymers were used to structure-direct Pt–organic compounds and polymer derived ceramics (PDC) precursors on the near-atomic and mesoscopic length scales. Self-assembly was combined with a colloidal crystal templating (CCT) approach of two differently sized PS colloids within the channels of a PDMS micromold to achieve structure control on multiple length scales, all the way to the macroscopic level. The final heat-treated material consisted of Pt nanoparticles (∼2 nm) embedded inside a hierarchically structured porous high-temperature ceramic material, see Fig. 12, and demonstrated stable performance in the high temperature combustion reactions of methane. This example illustrates how other templating techniques, such as CCT68 and micromolding, can be combined with block copolymer self-assembly to achieve structure and pore control from the near-atomic to macroscopic scales, thus potentially combining high surface area with high flux in catalytic applications. The ability to fabricate functional materials with structural variations over multiple length scales thus provides an opportunity for the further exploration of such novel materials in various applications, including energy conversion and storage.
 Fig. 12  (a) Photograph, (b) light microscope, (c–f) SEM and (g–i) TEM images showing the morphology control that can be achieved over eight different length scales by combining block copolymers as structure-directing agents, colloidal crystal templating and micromolding techniques. The figure is adapted from ref. 67. 
7. Conclusions
Through examples of research of the Wiesner group at Cornell University and collaborators this tutorial review has highlighted some of the more recent progress in the field of block copolymers as structure-directing agents for nanostructured polymer–inorganic hybrid materials for energy conversion and storage devices. It is evident from the research over the last fifteen years that powerful design criteria are emerging for the generation of tailored composites with exquisite control over composition andnanostructure. They are based on an emerging fundamental understanding of the thermodynamics, i.e., the enthalpic, entropic, and kinetic contributions to the self-assembly processes that take place when block copolymers mix with inorganic (sol) nanoparticles and/or precursors. Particular emphasis has been devoted to what we refer to as “one-pot” approaches: all components necessary to provide the final composition are mixed together in solution and the final structure ultimately determining materials properties/performance is obtained upon simple solvent evaporation induced self-assembly directed by a block copolymer. This overarching theme had already been demonstrated in the very first publication of the Wiesner group on this topic in 1997.31 Simple heat treatments may subsequently convert the as-made composites into the desired compositions, while preserving the original morphology. The rationale for these “one-pot” approaches is straightforward: the potential impact of these materials will scale inversely with the number of required processing steps, i.e., the simpler the better.

Co-assembly processes utilizing the selective interactions of amphiphilic block copolymers with inorganic nanoparticles have been applied toward structure directing of a broad range of materials resulting, e.g., in nanostructured silicates, transition metal oxides, carbons, and metals with well controlled morphologies. While these advances are impressive, for energy conversion and storage devices, multicomponent materials with structure control on the nanometre scale are required. In this context, the triple-phase-boundary in fuel cell electrode materials discussed in this article is amongst the most challenging and interesting problems that tailored materials synthesis faces. This review has demonstrated first examples of how to approach such materials challenges. While the results are encouraging, a lot remains to be done in order to provide materials solutions that can facilitate the necessary advances in energy conversion and storage devices to become performance and cost competitive with existing technologies.
Finally, it is conceptually interesting to look at the role of block copolymers as structure-directing agents. Obviously, at thermodynamic equilibrium, the information about the final self-assembled structure of the resulting composites is carried in the block structure, and thus in the primary monomer sequence of the copolymer. While the analogy to biology is far-fetched, where the concept of macromolecules as carriers of information is of fundamental importance, it is still worthwhile to think along these lines. Compared to the complexity of bio-macromolecules, the fact that in the synthetic approaches discussed in this review only diblock and most recently triblock copolymers were utilized, with sequence control over only two or three monomers, is humbling. At the same time it suggests a wealth of potential materials discoveries associated with moving to higher order blocked macromolecules and their assemblies with inorganic species. As polymer synthetic methodology advances and becomes more mainstream, exciting new opportunities for materials development in the areas of energy conversion and storage may emerge.
Acknowledgements
This paper is mostly based on research performed in the Materials Science and Engineering Department of Cornell University over the last ten to fifteen years. It gives us great pleasure to thank all of our colleagues and co-workers who have contributed to the work. UW would like to thank the National Science Foundation, which through funding by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) has enabled continuous progress in the Wiesner group over the years at Cornell on block copolymer based hybrid research. The energy conversion and storage related work was further supported by the Cornell Fuel Cell Institute (CFCI) and the Energy Materials Center at Cornell (EMC),2 an Energy Frontier Research Center (EFRC) funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001086, as well as by the KAUST-CU center at Cornell. Special thanks go to Morgan Stefik for carefully reading the manuscript.
References
International Energy Outlook 2009, Energy Information Administration, Department of Energy, Washingston, DC,  2009 Search PubMed .

          J. Holdren, Robert C. Barnard Environmental Lecture at American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, DC,  2007 Search PubMed .
D. Talbot, Tech. Rev., 2006, 40–41 Search PubMed .

          N. Lewis, California Institute of Technology, http://nsl.caltech.edu/files/energy6.pdf Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef .
M. Gratzel, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 23–27 CAS .
H. J. Snaith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187–3200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2006, 14, 429 CAS .
A. J. Moule, H. J. Snaith, M. Kaiser, H. Klesper, D. M. Huang, M. Graetzel and K. Meerholz, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 073111 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .

          R. O'Hayre, S. W. Cha, W. Colella and F. B. Prinz, Fuel Cell Fundamentals, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Nedelcu, J. Lee, E. J. W. Crossland, S. C. Warren, M. C. Orilall, S. Guldin, S. Huettner, C. Ducati, D. Eder, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 134–139 RSC .
B. Ohtani, Y. Ogawa and S.-i. Nishimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 3746–3752 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. J. Moule, C. Klein, K. Meerholz, R. H. Friend and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3372–3376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2251–2269 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4384 CAS .
G. G. Wallace, J. Chen, A. J. Mozer, M. Forsyth, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Wang, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsakalakos, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 62, 175–189 CrossRef .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 2009, 3851–3878 CrossRef .
U. Wiesner, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2003, 146, 407–411 CAS .

          M. Kamperman and U. Wiesner, in Block Copolymers in Nanoscience, ed. M. Lazzari, G. Lui and S. Lecommandoux, WILEY-VCH Verlag GgbH & KgaA, Weinheim,  2006, p. 309 Search PubMed .

          I. W. Hamley, The Physics of Block Copolymers, Oxford University Press Inc, New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Phys. Today, 1999, 52, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Cochran, C. J. Garcia-Cervera and G. H. Fredrickson, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2449–2451 CrossRef CAS .

          M. C. Orilall, PhD thesis, Cornell University,  2009 Search PubMed .
T. Yanagisawa, T. Shimizu, K. Kuroda and C. Kato, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1990, 63, 988–992 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710–712 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huo, D. I. Margolese, U. Ciesla, P. Feng, T. E. Gier, P. Sieger, R. Leon, P. M. Petroff, F. Schueth and G. D. Stucky, Nature, 1994, 368, 317–321 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bagshaw, E. Prouzet and T. J. Pinnavaia, Science, 1995, 269, 1242–1244 CrossRef .
M. Templin, A. Franck, A. Du Chesne, H. Leist, Y. Zhang, R. Ulrich, V. Schadler and U. Wiesner, Science, 1997, 278, 1795–1798 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. W. Simon, R. Ulrich, H. W. Spiess and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3464–3486 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Garcia, M. Kamperman, R. Ulrich, A. Jain, S. M. Gruner and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5397–5405 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Frederickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, D. Zhao, D. I. Margolese, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Nature, 1998, 396, 152–155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, D. Zhao, D. I. Margolese, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2813–2826 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, M. C. Orilall, S. C. Warren, M. Kamperman, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
U. Ciesla, S. Schacht, G. D. Stucky, K. K. Unger and F. Schueth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 541–543 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kartini, D. Menzies, D. Blake, J. C. D. d. Costa, P. Meredith, J. D. Riches and G. Q. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2917–2921 RSC .
K. Hou, B. Tian, F. Li, Z. Bian, D. Zhao and C. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2414–2420 RSC .
M. Zukalova, A. Zukal, L. Kavan, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wei, Y. Konishi, H. Zhou, M. Yanagida, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1287–1293 RSC .
M. Nedelcu, S. Guldin, M. C. Orilall, J. Lee, S. C. Warren, S. Huettner, E. J. W. Crossland, C. Ducati, P. R. Laity, D. Eder, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1261–1268 RSC .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Hüttner, H. Sai, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787–1796 CAS .
B. K. Cho, A. Jain, S. M. Gruner and U. Wiesner, Science, 2004, 305, 1598–1601 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Grason, B. A. DiDonna and R. D. Kamien, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 058304 CrossRef .
G. M. Grason and R. D. Kamien, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 7371–7380 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Kamperman, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, U. Wiesner, D. M. Smilgies, G. E. S. Toombes, M. A. Hillmyer, S. Ludwigs, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 2807 .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2813–2819 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lui, Y. Ren, Y. Shi, F. Zhang, L. B. Tu and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 1140 .

          J. Lee, Y. S. Jung, S. C. Warren, M. Kamerman, S. M. Oh, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Direct Access to Mesoporous Crystalline TiO2/Carbon Composites with Large and Uniform pores for Use as Anode Materials in Lithium Ion Batteries, Macromol. Chem. Phys., in press Search PubMed.
M. Stefik, J. Lee and U. Wiesner, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2532–2534 RSC .
M. Stefik, H. Sai, K. Sauer, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6682–6687 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roychowdhury, F. Matsumoto, V. B. Zeldovich, S. C. Warren, P. F. Mutolo, M. Ballesteros, U. Wiesner, H. D. Abruna and F. J. DiSalvo, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3365–3372 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Orilall, F. Matsumoto, Q. Zhou, H. Sai, H. D. Abruña, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9389–9395 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain and U. Wiesner, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 5665–5670 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren, L. C. Messina, L. S. Slaughter, M. Kamperman, Q. Zhou, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Science, 2008, 320, 1748–1752 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. Sai, S. C. Warren, M. Kamperman, H. Arora, S. M. Gruner and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5578–5584 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and U. Wiesner, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 73–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
G. Floudas, B. Vazaiou, F. Schipper, R. Ulrich, U. Wiesner, H. Iatrou and N. Hadjichristidis, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 2947–2957 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Bailey, C. M. Hardy, T. H. Epps and F. S. Bates, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 7007–7017 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Tyler, J. Qin, F. S. Bates and D. C. Morse, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4654–4668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefik, S. Mahajan, H. Sai, T. H. Epps, F. S. Bates, S. M. Gruner, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5466–5473 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Yuan and B.-L. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 663–677 RSC .
A. Corma, P. Atienzar, H. Garcia and J.-Y. Chane-Ching, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 394–397 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamperman, A. Burns, R. Weissgraeber, N. van Vegten, S. C. Warren, S. M. Gruner, A. Baiker and U. Wiesner, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2756–2762 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Orilall, N. M. Abrams, J. Lee, F. J. DiSalvo and U. Wiesner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8882–8883 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

M. Christopher Orilall
	Mahendra Chris Orilall comes from the tiny country of Guyana. He conducted his undergraduate studies at Concordia College, Moorhead, MN, where he double majored in ACS Chemistry (Honors) and Mathematics in 2004. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry at Cornell University in 2009, with work in the research groups of Prof. Ulrich Wiesner (MS&E) and Prof. Frank DiSalvo. He did a postdoc studying the microstructure of catalyst layers of fuel cells at the Institute for Fuel Cell Innovation, National Research Council of Canada, Vancouver, BC. He is currently employed at Applied Materials, working on a DOE funded Li-ion battery research project.

Ulrich Wiesner
	Ulrich (Uli) Wiesner studied Chemistry at the University of Mainz, Germany, and UC Irvine, CA, gaining his PhD in 1991 with work under Prof. H. W. Spiess at the Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz. After a two year postdoc at the Ecole Superieure de Physique et de Chimie Industrielle de la ville de Paris (E.S.P.C.I.), France, with Prof. L. Monnerie, in 1993 he returned to the group of Prof. H. W. Spiess where he finished his Habilitation in 1998. He joined the Cornell University, NY, MS&E faculty in 1999 as a tenured Associate Professor, became a Full Professor in 2005, and since 2008 is the Spencer T. Olin Professor of Engineering.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Theoretical phase-diagram of a diblock copolymer (top) and illustrations of the resulting morphologies (bottom) with increasing volume fraction (f) of one block with respect to the other. From left to right, the structures include bcc spheres (CPS/Q229), hexagonal cylinders (H), cubic bicontinuous gyroid (Q230) and lamellar structures (L). For cubic structures, the corresponding symmetry space groups are provided. The phase diagram is adapted from ref. 25. The morphology illustrations are adapted from ref. 26.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Organically modified aluminosilicate nanostructures using PI-b-PEO block copolymer as a structure-directing agent. Aluminosilicate sol particles selectively swell the PEO block of the copolymer (top). Structure control is achieved by the amount of sol added. Organically modified aluminosilicate morphologies as resulting from increasing volume fractions of inorganic are shown schematically as well as in TEM images (middle). The TEM images of this figure were adapted from ref. 31 and 32. (b) Ternary morphology diagram for various compositions (in weight fractions) of PI-b-PEO block copolymers and aluminosilicate sol nanoparticles (bottom), adapted from ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic showing the CASH method for obtaining highly crystalline nanostructured and porous transition metal oxides; TEM images of (b) as-made nanostructured organic–Nb2O5 composite, (c) nanostructured Nb2O5–C composite, (d) nanostructured Nb2O5 (with carbon removed); (e) SAXS analysis of A: as-made nanostructured organic–Nb2O5 composite, B: nanostructured Nb2O5–C composite, C: nanostructured Nb2O5 (with carbon removed); (f) electron diffraction pattern of nanostructured Nb2O5 showing the highly crystalline nature of the material. The figure is adapted from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–d) Schematic representation of the formation of titania–block polymer composition dependent morphologies (titania is represented by dark domains). (e–g) Corresponding bright field TEM images of the nanostructured composite materials before calcination. This figure is adapted from ref. 44.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representations of various mesophases used for the investigation of morphology–charge transport correlations: (A) zero-dimensional micelles, (B) 2D lamellae, (C) 1D hexagonal cylinders and (D) co-continuous cubic 3D double gyroid network. It was found that charge transport is optimum in the 3D network. This figure is adapted from ref. 45.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the formation of bi-continuous gyroid titania and its assembly in a hybrid solar cell. (a) PFS-b-PLA gyroid block copolymer morphology; (b) the minority PLA networks are selectively removed; (c) electrochemical replication followed by PFS template removal leaves a free standing double gyroid titania network array; (d) the final bicontinuous bulk hetero junction solar cell architecture. This figure is adapted from ref. 48.	 

 	Fig. 7  
            SEM images of top view (a–c) and cross section (d–f) of various nanostructured titania morphologies investigated in liquid-electrolyte DSCs: (a, d) standing TiO2 cylinders; (b, e) gyroid network and (c, f) sintered nanoparticles. This figure is adapted from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of “one-pot” synthesis of nanostructured and porous crystalline TiO2–carbon composites with large and uniform poresvia carbonization of nanostructured PI-b-PEO–amorphous TiO2–poly(furfuryl alcohol) composites. The figure is adapted from ref. 51.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the one-pot synthesis of Pt-based intermetallic nanoparticles decorating the walls of the pores of nanostructured niobium oxide. Adapted from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic showing each stage towards nanostructured and porous platinum: (A) hydrophilic ionic-liquid based ligand, (B) ligand-stabilized platinum nanoparticle, (C) PI-b-PDMAEMA block copolymer, (D) as-made nanostructured polymer–metal hybrid, (E) porous metal–carbon composite, and (F) final nanostructured and porous metal. The figure is adapted from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 11  
            TEM images and model (inset) of free-standing nanostructured and porous double gyroid aluminosilicate structure obtained from an ABC triblock terpolymer as the structure-directing agent. The figure is adapted from ref. 64.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photograph, (b) light microscope, (c–f) SEM and (g–i) TEM images showing the morphology control that can be achieved over eight different length scales by combining block copolymers as structure-directing agents, colloidal crystal templating and micromolding techniques. The figure is adapted from ref. 67.	 
Footnote
† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
