Uncovering the role of the ZnS treatment in the performance of quantum dot sensitized solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP20290A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP20290A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12024-12032Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsUncovering the role of the ZnS treatment in the performance of quantum dot sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Néstor 
            Guijarro
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            José M. 
            Campiña
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Shen
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Taro 
            Toyoda
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Teresa 
            Lana-Villarreal
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Roberto 
            Gómez
          
        
      *a
aInstitut Universitari d'Electroquímica i Departament de Química Física, Universitat d'Alacant, Apartat 99, E-03080 Alacant, Spain. E-mail: nestor.guijarro@ua.es; roberto.gomez@ua.es;  Fax: +34 965903537;   Tel: +34 965903748
bDepartment of Engineering Science, Faculty of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro Communications, 1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan
cPRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
Received 
      2nd February 2011
    , Accepted 9th May 2011First published on 31st May 2011AbstractAmong the third-generation photovoltaic devices, much attention is being paid to the so-called Quantum Dot sensitized Solar Cells (QDSCs). The currently poor performance of QDSCs seems to be efficiently patched by the ZnS treatment, increasing the output parameters of the devices, albeit its function remains rather unclear. Here new insights into the role of the ZnS layer on the QDSC performance are provided, revealing simultaneously the most active recombination pathways. Optical and AFM characterization confirms that the ZnS deposit covers, at least partially, both the TiO2 nanoparticles and the QDs (CdSe). Photoanodes submitted to the ZnS treatment before and/or after the introduction of colloidal CdSe QDs were studied by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry and photocurrent experiments. The corresponding results prove that the passivation of the CdSe QDs rather than the blockage of the TiO2 surface is the main factor leading to the efficiency improvement. In addition, a study of the ultrafast carrier dynamics by means of the Lens-Free Heterodyne Detection Transient Grating technique indicates that the ZnS shell also increases the rate of electron transfer. The dual role of the ZnS layer should be kept in mind in the quest for new modifiers for enhancing the performance of QDSCs.
Introduction
The need for renewable and low-cost energies has boosted an impressive research in the field of photovoltaics, which includes the so-called Quantum-Dot sensitized Solar Cells (QDSCs).1 The potential of QDSCs lies in the unique properties of quantum dots,2,3 namely, (1) high extinction coefficient, (2) easily tunable band gap and (3) the possibility of generating more than one e−–h+ pair per photon absorbed (multiple exciton generation), which would lead to achieve quantum yields over 100%, as recently reported by Sambur et al.4 Unfortunately, the best energy conversion efficiencies reported so far are still quite modest, revealing both the poor understanding of the fundamental processes controlling the efficiency and the remarkable difficulties found in the preparation of nanoscaled hybrid assemblies. Nevertheless, in the past few years, an encouraging improvement in the overall performance of liquid electrolyte QDSCs has been attained by means of new routes of sensitization (e.g. different modes of attachment,5 cosensitization6–8), optimized counter-electrodes (nano-sulfide/carbon composites9), and also photoanode post-treatments (such as ZnS7 or SiO210 treatments, dipole adsorption,11fluoride ion insertion,12 modification induced by CdCl213 or annealing14).
One of the most widely extended post-treatments consists of the deposition of ZnS over the sensitized electrode, taking advantage of the straightforward preparation and the striking enhancement of the efficiency achieved. This strategy was pioneered by Yang et al. in 2002, proving that a ZnS layer grown by SILAR (Successive Ionic Layer Adsorption and Reaction) over a PbS/CdS sensitized TiO2 electrode not only prevented chalcogenide photocorrosion, but also improved the output parameters of the cell.7 However, owing to the poor energy conversion reported, this procedure was unregarded for several years, until some of us managed to almost double the efficiencies of CdSe-based solar cells by means of this method.12,15 Thereafter, ZnS deposition has arisen as a current treatment in the preparation of QDSCs. In fact, it has been successfully applied to TiO2 electrodes sensitized by CdSe either grown by chemical bath deposition12 or adsorbed from colloidal dispersions.16 Moreover, until now, the best performance in CdSe-sensitized solar cells (conversion efficiency of 4.22%8) has been obtained by combining this treatment with TiO2 cosensitization with layers of CdS and CdSe prepared by chemical bath deposition (CBD).
An attempt to unravel the role of this coating can be found in a previous paper from Toyoda's group.15 Specifically, the efficiency enhancement was ascribed to both the blockage of the TiO2 surface (reducing the leakage of electrons injected into the oxide toward the electrolyte) and the passivation of the QD surface states (preventing electron trapping). Recent articles dealing with QDSCs using ZnS coatings are in agreement with these ideas.6,8 In other cases, the improvement in the performance of the devices is fundamentally attributed to either the passivation of QDs14 or the blockage of the TiO2 surface.17 This paper aims at contributing to the understanding of the ZnS role.
Colloidal solutions of QDs overcoated with a capping layer of another semiconductor (core–shell QDs) have been successfully synthesized. These onion-like QDs have been extensively studied in photoluminescence (PL) experiments.18,19 In fact, the reported increase in the PL quantum yield when ZnS is capping CdSe QDs clearly indicates that the coating reduces efficiently the density of surface states (passivation of QDs).20 However, very few reports focus on the sensitization of wide band gap oxides with core–shell QDs. Several groups have measured the electron injection rate constants from CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs to TiO2, revealing similar results to those obtained when using plain CdSe QDs. A more systematic study is needed, because the comparison among results obtained with different techniques and QDs with disparate capping ligands is not straightforward.21 In any case, in spite of the large band gap of the ZnS outer shell, efficient electron and hole injection are observed.
We present here a new approach to untangle the role of the ZnS coating in the enhancement of the solar cell performance. Different deposition sequences of the ZnS layer and the CdSe QDs allow us to analyze separately the blockage of the TiO2/electrolyte interface and the passivation of the CdSe QD surface, and therefore, to assess the dominant mechanism in the improvement of the solar cell characteristics. The characterization of the modified electrodes is carried out by means of cyclic voltammetry and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) to follow the blockage of the TiO2 surface, whereas the effect of passivating the CdSe QDs is clearly revealed by photocurrent experiments. In addition, optical characterization using emission and absorption spectra of ZnS-modified electrodes is presented. Topographic investigation of the ZnS layer is performed by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements. The Lens-Free Heterodyne Detection Transient Grating (LF-HD-TG) technique (with resolution in the sub-picosecond range) is employed to investigate the effect of the ZnS coating on the electron injection rate.
Experimental
1. Synthesis of CdSe QDs. Colloidal dispersions of CdSe QDs capped with trioctylphosphine were prepared by following the solvothermal route proposed by Wang et al.,22 which allows us to select the size of the QDs by controlling the reaction time. In this study, the reaction time was fixed at 15 h.
2. Preparation of TiO2electrodes. Nanoporous TiO2 electrodes were prepared by spreading (doctor blading) 7 μL per cm−2 of an aqueous slurry of Degussa P25 over the substrates, and subsequently sintering the samples at 450 °C in an oven for 1 h. The slurry was prepared by grinding a mixture of 1 g of TiO2 powder, 2.0 mL of H2O, 30 μL of acetylacetone (99+%, Aldrich), and 20 μL of Triton X100 (Aldrich). The thickness of the film was measured to be ∼5 μm by means of SEM. As substrates, either F–SnO2 (FTO) coated glass or thermally treated Ti foil, were employed. The latter was obtained by heating Ti foil at 550 °C for 1 h in air, in order to grow a nanocrystalline TiO2 compact layer on the surface. The area of the electrodes was 3 cm2 in all cases.
3. Sensitization of electrodes and ZnS treatment. CdSe-sensitized TiO2 samples were prepared by direct adsorption of presynthesized QDs. The procedure relies on the immersion of the electrode in a CH2Cl2 (99.6%, Sigma Aldrich) CdSe QD dispersion as described elsewhere.23 In this case, the soaking time was fixed at 2 h and 30 min in all cases. The ZnS coating was applied by an optimized successive ionic layer adsorption-reaction (SILAR) method (2 cycles), as proposed by Diguna et al.,12 whereby the electrode is alternatively dipped in 0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2 and 0.5 M Na2S aqueous solutions for 1 min, washing thoroughly with water prior to each immersion to remove the excess of non-adsorbed/unreacted ions. Different electrodes have been prepared by changing the deposition order of the ZnS layer and the CdSe QDs. Accordingly, the electrodes are termed as follows below: TiO2; TiO2/CdSe; TiO2/CdSe/ZnS; TiO2/ZnS; TiO2/ZnS/CdSe; TiO2/ZnS/CdSe/ZnS.
4. Optical characterization. Absorption and emission spectra were obtained for both colloidal dispersions and modified electrodes. UV-Vis absorption spectra were recorded with a Shimadzu UV-2401PC spectrophotometer. Concretely, the diffuse reflectance spectra of modified TiO2 electrodes were measured by means of an integrating sphere using BaSO4 (Wako) as background. A Kubelka–Munk transformation was undertaken to facilitate the analysis of the reflectance data. Emission spectra were measured by means of a FluoroMax-A spectrofluorometer equipment. The excitation wavelength was fixed at 450 nm in all the cases.
5. Electrochemical measurements. Electrochemical measurements were performed at room temperature in a three-electrode cell equipped with a fused silica window and using a computer-controlled Autolab PGSTAT30 potentiostat. All potentials were measured against and referred to a Ag/AgCl/KCl (sat) reference electrode, whereas a Pt wire was used as the counter electrode. A N2-purged 1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH aqueous (ultrapure water) solution (polysulfide) was used as the working electrolyte. The full output of a 150 W Xe arc lamp (Osram) equipped with a UV-filter (cut-off λ < 380 nm) was employed for electrode illumination, yielding an irradiance of 73.0 mW cm−2, recorded with an optical power meter (Oriel model 70310) equipped with a photodetector (thermo Oriel 71608). A slightly lower irradiance is expected on the electrode surface, due to light absorption in the electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetry was carried out in the dark at a sweep rate of 20 mV s−1. Photocurrent experiments were performed by applying a constant potential of −0.6 V, in which a negligible dark current was observed (see ESI† for details). EIS measurements were undertaken in the dark, using a frequency range from 10 mHz to 10000 Hz, a potential of −1.0 V and a perturbation of 10 mV. EIS data were fitted following the model proposed by Sutter et al.24 to obtain the charge transfer resistance (RCT) at the electrode/electrolyte interface (see ESI† for details).
6. Morphological characterization by AFM. AFM measurements were carried out by means of a Nanoscope III (Digital Instruments) operated at room temperature in air. Images were obtained in the tapping mode using silicon tips at a driving frequency of ∼270 kHz. A rutile TiO2 (110) single crystal was purchased from Commercial Crystal Laboratories, Inc. In order to define an atomically smooth surface, the single crystal was treated as described previously.23 The ZnS treatment was performed following the same experimental procedure as for the nanoporous TiO2 electrodes.
7. Sub-pico-second time-resolved carrier dynamics. The principle and setup of the LF-HD-TG technique have been described in depth elsewhere.25,26 In this experiment, the laser source was a titanium/sapphire laser (CPA-2010, Clark-MXR Inc.) with a wavelength of 775 nm, a repetition rate of 1 kHz, and a pulse width of 150 fs. The light was splitted into two parts. One of them was used as a probe pulse. The other was used to pump an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) (a TOAPS from Quantronix) to generate light pulses with a wavelength tunable from 290 nm to 3 μm used as pump light in the LF-HD-TG measurement. In this study, the pump pulse wavelength was 470 nm and the probe pulse wavelength was 775 nm.
Results and discussion
1. Optical characterization
The absorption and emission spectra of the colloidal dispersion of CdSe QDs used in this work are depicted in Fig. 1. The well defined band (1st excitonic peak) observed in the absorption spectrum evidences a narrow size distribution centered at ca. 3.5 nm.27 The photoluminescence spectrum shows a sharp peak centered at around 580 nm and a broad, low intensity band at higher wavelengths. The differences between both spectra are not unexpected, taking into account that each one involves different mechanisms. As it is widely known, albeit not well-understood, the main PL band is clearly shifted toward lower energies with respect to the excitonic peak in the absorption spectra. These results suggest that prior to electron–hole radiative recombination, either an energy relaxation via surface states or the splitting of the HOMO occurs.28 In any case, the intense PL band could be associated to radiative recombination between electrons and holes located around the LUMO and HOMO energetic levels, respectively. The broad emission band located at higher wavelengths (650–800 nm) has been widely described in the literature and attributed to recombination from trap states without further characterization.18 Recently, a collection of exhaustive photoluminescence studies based on a controlled modification of the QD surface with amines and thiols supports such a notion.29,30
 Fig. 1  Absorption and emission spectra of the colloidal dispersion of CdSe QDs in CH2Cl2 employed in this work. PL excitation wavelength: 450 nm. 

Fig. 2A shows the Kubelka–Munk transformation of the diffuse reflectance spectra obtained for the TiO2 electrode before and after sensitization with CdSe QDs and once the ZnS treatment was applied. The strong signal recorded at wavelengths lower than 400 nm is given by TiO2 absorption. Upon adsorption of QDs, the electrode response is extended toward higher wavelengths, matching quite well that recorded for the colloidal dispersion. Eventually, the ZnS treatment induces both a slight red shift (∼10 nm) in the spectrum and a loss of definition of the 1st excitonic peak. These findings can be ascribed to a lower degree of quantum confinement, which is in agreement with the existence of a ZnS shell deposited on the CdSe QDs, as suggested previously.17 The fact that the QDs are capped with TOP molecules does not preclude the ZnS deposition.
 Fig. 2  Kubelka–Munk transformation of the diffuse reflectance spectra for TiO2 electrodes before and after modification with CdSe and ZnS (A). Comparison among emission spectra of the colloidal solution and the TiO2, TiO2/CdSe and TiO2/CdSe/ZnS thin films (B). PL excitation wavelength: 450 nm. 
The emission spectrum of the colloidal dispersion of QDs is compared with those obtained for TiO2 electrodes before and after modification with QDs (Fig. 2B). The large signal recorded at wavelengths below 500 nm is due to excitation light reflected in the sample. Upon QD adsorption on TiO2, their PL undergoes a sharp drop, because of the appearance of a new competitive pathway for electron leakage from the QDs, which hinders the radiative recombination observed in the colloidal medium. Once a QD is attached to the TiO2, the band alignment favors electron transfer from the excited QDs to the oxide, leading to an effective charge separation that quenches the QD intrinsic radiative recombination. It should be stressed that, probably, ZnS only coats the outer surface of the QDs (that exposed to the electrolyte), in contrast to the situation in presynthesized CdSe/ZnS core–shell QDs.
On the other hand, the growth of a ZnS shell onto the CdSe QDs apparently increases their photoluminescence. Similar results have been extensively discussed in the research with colloidal dispersions and were ascribed to the reduction of the trap state density in the presence of a ZnS shell.18 In our case, as illustrated in Chart 1, non-radiative recombination present in both colloidal (A) and TiO2-attached plain QDs (B) would be suppressed partly by the ZnS treatment (C), which may favor competitive processes such as radiative recombination and electron injection. As shown, the main emission bands for CdSe-sensitized TiO2 electrodes before and after the ZnS treatment are centered at around 600 nm, that is, they are shifted ∼20 nm from that of the colloidal dispersion. This is not unexpected taking into account the change of the medium surrounding the QDs, and the loss of quantum confinement associated to the deposition of a ZnS shell. As mentioned above, a similar red shift is also discerned in the absorption spectra after the application of the ZnS coating.
 Chart 1  Routes of radiative recombination and trapping in surface/interfacial states (SS), for carriers photogenerated in CdSe QDs: in colloidal dispersion (A), after attachment to TiO2 (B) followed by ZnS treatment (C). The arrow width qualitatively indicates the number of carriers involved in the corresponding pathway. 
2. Morphological characterization
To study the morphology of the ZnS layer deposited on TiO2, a single crystal was employed as a substrate instead of the typical nanoporous substrate. Difficulties in imaging the modification of a nanoporous TiO2 surface derived from its high roughness can be easily solved by exploiting the characteristic flat surface of a single crystal.23AFM images of a rutile (110) single crystal before and after the ZnS treatment are given in Fig. 3. Prior to the ZnS coating, the surface morphology of the bare single crystal is characterized by terraces and monoatomic steps. Conversely, after coating with ZnS, the surface becomes heterogeneously covered by rather flat nanoparticles around 10–15 nm in diameter (Fig. 3B and D). At this point, it should be noted that no Raman signal was detected for ZnS deposited on either FTO or TiO2, pointing to the amorphous nature of these nanoparticles. It is noteworthy that after only two deposition cycles the amount of ZnS is quite high, leading to a significant coverage of the TiO2 surface.
 Fig. 3  
            AFM images of a rutile (110) single crystal before (A and C) and after the ZnS treatment (B and D). 
3. Electrochemical studies
As mentioned before, there is still no consensus on the role of the ZnS treatment in the enhancement of the cell efficiency. Both the blockage of the TiO2 surface and the passivation of the QDs seem to be implied. Here, we propose a new approach aimed to separately quantify the effect of both mechanisms, based on the sequential modification of TiO2 electrodes with CdSe QDs followed by ZnS or vice versa, and their in-depth characterization by means of cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and photocurrent experiments. All the experiments were carried out in a three-electrode configuration, which permits us to investigate the behavior of the photoanode without the interference of the counter electrode, as it happens in a two electrode configuration. These experiments were performed for TiO2 electrodes modified in different ways, in an aqueous electrolyte containing the redox couple S2−/S (polysulfide)31 (Fig. 4 and 5).
 Fig. 4  
Cyclic voltammetry (A), electrochemical impedance spectra (B) and charge transfer resistance (RCT) (C) for TiO2 electrodes sequentially modified with CdSe QDs and ZnS. All measurements were performed in 1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte, using thermally treated titanium foil as a substrate for the electrode. Voltammetry was recorded at 20 mV s−1. EIS data were obtained in the range from 10 mHz to 10000 Hz, at an applied potential of −1.0 V and the oscillation amplitude was 10 mV. RCT values were calculated by fitting the EIS data. 
 Fig. 5  
Cyclic voltammetry (A), electrochemical impedance spectra (B) and charge transfer resistance (RCT) (C) for TiO2 electrodes sequentially modified with ZnS, CdSe QDs and a second treatment of ZnS. Experiments were carried out as described in Fig. 4. 

Fig. 4A shows the cyclic voltammograms obtained for the bare TiO2 electrodes and for CdSe QD-sensitized electrodes before and after being submitted to the ZnS treatment. At potentials more negative than −0.9 V, faradaic currents associated to the reduction of polysulfide by TiO2 electrons develop in agreement with I–V curves of QDSCs presented elsewhere.16 Therefore, it is not unreasonable to connect the magnitude of this faradaic current to the fraction of bare TiO2 surface directly exposed to the electrolyte. As observed, the deposition of the CdSe QDs triggers a drop in the current, which is further diminished by the application of the ZnS layer.

Fig. 4B illustrates the Nyquist plot of the electrode sequentially modified following the classical procedure. Impedance spectra are characterized by a single semi-arc. The Bode phase plots (see Fig. S2, ESI†) obtained in the accumulation region (−1.0 V) for the nanoparticulate TiO2 semiconductor electrodes prepared in this work displayed two peaks, even when they were modified with ZnS and/or CdSe (and independently of the order of deposition). This evidence clearly indicates the need of a two-time-constant equivalent circuit for the successful fitting of the experimental data, such as the equivalent circuit proposed by Sutter et al.24 employed herein. The calculated charge transfer resistance (RCT) is displayed in Fig. 4C. It increases upon the adsorption of the QDs and, additionally, after the ZnS treatment. CdSe QDs can physically block part of the oxide surface preventing its contact with the electrolyte. On the other hand, the hydrophobic capping molecules that surround the QDs can efficiently preclude the approach of hydrophilic solution species. Mora-Seró et al. reported an important blockage of the TiO2 surface when a layer of CdSe was deposited by CBD.17 In contrast to the results presented here, poor blockage was obtained when using directly adsorbed colloidal QDs, likely due to the very low QD coverage attained in comparison to that obtained in CBD-sensitized specimens. On the other hand, recombination of TiO2 electrons with the electrolyte could also occur viaCdSe QDs (see below). Such a recombination, together with that occurring directly through the oxide/solution interface, would be efficiently impeded by the ZnS coating because it acts not only as a physical barrier (as the QDs), but also as a potential barrier owing to the large band gap of ZnS, giving the so-called “type I” band alignment.20
In a separate series of experiments, a TiO2 electrode was modified sequentially by ZnS, CdSe and, again, by ZnS. The voltammograms in polysulfide solution in the different stages are depicted in Fig. 5A. After coating with ZnS, the cathodic current falls dramatically. There is, however, a slight increase of the cathodic current after the subsequent QD adsorption. Finally, it sharply decreases upon the application of a second ZnS layer. The impedance spectra for these electrodes are given in Fig. 5B. The charge transfer resistance values obtained from appropriate fittings24 are given in Fig. 5C.
It is worth noting the apparent “de-blockage” observed both in voltammograms and RCT values after the QD attachment. The QDs may behave as leakage centers since the energetic position of the CdSe conduction band (CB) edge, besides the probable existence of QD surface states energetically located close to the TiO2 conduction band edge and/or surface states, would favor recombination with the electrolyte,32 especially if the ZnS layer is partially removed where the QD adsorption is taking place (see Chart 2). Moreover, a minor contribution from a partial detachment of the ZnS layer during long-term immersion of the electrode in CH2Cl2 QD colloidal dispersions cannot be discarded (see Fig. S5, ESI†).
 Chart 2  Energy diagram for TiO2/ZnS/CdSe assembly in polysulfide at an applied potential of −1.0 V vs.Ag/AgCl. The arrows represent the pathway for the electron recombination with polysulfide via QD surface states or conduction band. 
The drop in the cathodic current as well as the increase in RCT after a second ZnS treatment is not unexpected. In fact, as observed in the voltammograms, the previous treatments with ZnS and CdSe QDs yield an almost completely blocked oxide surface. The subsequent ZnS treatment mainly increases the thickness of the ZnS layer and blocks the QD surface. Both facts prevent recombination with the electrolyte and lead to a rise in RCT. At this point it is interesting to compare the results of RCT obtained for the different series of electrodes discussed so far. The charge transfer resistance for the TiO2/CdSe electrode has a value of 2.47 kΩ, similar to that found for the TiO2/ZnS/CdSe electrode (2.80 kΩ), but significantly larger than that of the bare TiO2 electrode (0.7 kΩ). This suggests that, irrespective of the presence of the ZnS layer, the QDs could operate as electron leakage centers. More importantly, the final coating with ZnS leads to a drastic increase in RCT in both cases, mainly due to the passivation of the QD surface. However, the values of RCT are 5.81 and 7.47 kΩ for the TiO2/CdSe/ZnS and TiO2/ZnS/CdSe/ZnS electrodes, respectively. This indicates that the second ZnS layer leads to a better blockage of the TiO2 surface.
Photocurrent experiments carried out with the electrodes previously characterized by cyclic voltammetry are presented in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6A, upon the ZnS treatment, there is a dramatic increase in the photocurrent. When a first ZnS layer is deposited prior to sensitization of the electrode with CdSe (TiO2/ZnS/CdSe in Fig. 6B), the resulting photocurrent is slightly higher than that obtained for the TiO2/CdSe electrode (Fig. 6A). As the QD coverage degree is similar in both cases, the photocurrent increase is likely due to a better blockage of the oxide surface in the presence of the ZnS layer, as discussed previously. A significant increase in the photocurrent is recorded after covering the electrode with a second layer of ZnS (TiO2/ZnS/CdSe/ZnS in Fig. 6B). Previously deposited ZnS and CdSe QDs should have efficiently blocked the oxide surface. Therefore, the effect observed for the additional layer of ZnS should be linked to the passivation of the QD surface. These results clearly indicate that both the blockage of the TiO2 surface and the passivation of the QDs are involved in the enhancement of the photoanode performance, albeit the passivation of the QDs seems to be more important. In this context, it is interesting to remark the existence of a direct correlation between jph and RCT (Fig. 6C), revealing that, as the resistance for recombination at the electrode–electrolyte interface increases, more electrons can be collected. Therefore, under the experimental conditions employed in this study, the behavior of the photoanodes is mainly determined by recombination with the electrolyte. From a more practical viewpoint, the introduction of an additional ZnS layer between the oxide and the QDs improves the performance of the photoanode and, possibly, that of the complete solar cell.
 Fig. 6  Photocurrent experiments for TiO2/CdSe and TiO2/CdSe/ZnS electrodes (A) or TiO2/ZnS/CdSe and TiO2/ZnS/CdSe/ZnS electrodes (B). Stationary photocurrent vs. RCT (Fig. 4 and 5) (C). Electrolyte: 1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH. Measurements of photocurrent were performed at a constant potential of −0.6 V. The electrodes were illuminated with white light using a UV-filter (cut-off λ < 380 nm), irradiance = 73.0 mW cm−2. 
4. Ultrafast carrier dynamics
Once evidenced the effect of the ZnS layer on electron recombination, a sub-pico-second time resolved technique (LF-HD-TG) has been employed to uncover an eventual effect of the ZnS coating on the rate of electron injection. As discussed in detail in recent reports,33 the TG signal is proportional to the change of the refractive index (Δn(t)) of the sample upon an excitation pulse (pump beam). The excitation photogenerates free electrons and holes inside the QDs, which according to Drude's model cause the refractive index to change. The value of Δn(t) is proportional to the density of carriers via their effective masses in the material. The TG decay can be associated to the depopulation (trapping, transfer and recombination) of the free carriers, but, in our case, due to the low pump intensities (2 mW), only one body processes are monitored, i.e. hole trapping and electron transfer and trapping. Experiments are done in air and thus photogenerated holes cannot be transferred.

Fig. 7 shows the TG signal for a CdSe-sensitized TiO2 electrode before and after the application of ZnS. After covering the sample with ZnS, the TG signal, which is proportional to the density of free carriers, drops faster than in the absence of the ZnS coating. Therefore, the photogenerated free carrier lifetime is substantially diminished in the presence of the ZnS layer. According to recent studies, it seems appropriate to fit the relaxation of the TG signal (y) to a double exponential decay (eqn (1)). Fitting parameters are summarized in Table 1 y = A1e−t/τ1 + A2e−t/τ2(1)
 Fig. 7  
TG signal for the CdSe-sensitized electrode before and after the treatment with ZnS. The signals were normalized to their maximum value. 
Table 1 
TG signal fitting parameters according to eqn (1)




Sample

A
1


τ
1/ps

A
2


τ
2/ps





                    TiO2/CdSe
0.48 ± 0.01
4.3 ± 0.2
0.47 ± 0.01
209 ± 11



                    TiO2/CdSe/ZnS
0.55 ± 0.02
3.9 ± 0.4
0.35 ± 0.01
148 ± 16




As treated in-depth by us recently, the fast signal decay (A1, τ1) can be ascribed to electron injection from QDs in direct contact with the oxide surface (and hole trapping), whereas the slow decay (A2, τ2) is associated to electron injection from QDs located in outer layers (as a result of QD aggregation) and electron trapping in surface states.33 As shown in Table 1, both τ1 and τ2 decrease upon the application of the ZnS layer, pointing to an enhancement in electron injection. Taking into account that hole trapping is unaffected by surface modification as proved by Klimov et al.,34 the decrease in τ1 should be ascribed to a more efficient electron injection after covering with ZnS. Such an enhancement in electron injection would also extend to the slow component as deduced from the decrease observed in the value of τ2. Admittedly, the slow TG decay also contains the contribution of electron trapping, which is not favored by the ZnS treatment according to the PL results (see above). This should lead to an increase in τ2, which is not observed because the dominant effect is the enhancement of the slow component of electron injection. The change of the ratio A1/A2 is also remarkable. Prior to the ZnS treatment its value is 1.02, whereas afterward it rises to 1.58, indicating that fast electron transfer becomes more important after the ZnS treatment.
The enhancement observed in electron transfer may be due to a shift in the QD energy bands. It also suggests that the ZnS layer may be able to passivate the electron traps generated at QD/QD interfaces, which may play a role in the slow component of the electron transfer. To our knowledge, this is the first time that the influence of the ZnS shell on the electron injection rate has been unveiled. Sambur and Parkinson21 have recently emphasized the importance of core–shell QDs to improve the stability of the corresponding solar cells. It may happen that the deposited ZnS layer yields better performances than using pre-synthesized core–shell QDs, since the route of electron injection is not hampered by an intermediate barrier layer of ZnS.
Conclusion
Several techniques have been applied to QD-sensitized photoanodes to clarify the role of the ZnS treatment. Optical characterization demonstrates that the ZnS layer covers the CdSe QDs and passivates their surface states, bringing out presumably a rough core–shell structure, i.e. ZnS probably coats the QD surface exposed to the electrolyte, leaving unaltered the TiO2/CdSe interface. On the other hand, AFM images obtained with a rutile single crystal demonstrate that the ZnS coating efficiently covers the TiO2 surface. A new approach alternating the order of the different coatings (QDs and ZnS) has been used to decipher the role of the ZnS layer. Our findings evidence that both the blockage of the TiO2 surface and the passivation of the QDs are involved, the latter being more important. Concretely, electrochemical measurements demonstrate that the QDs are also effective in blocking the TiO2 surface. Although electron leakage to the electrolyte would also occur via the CdSe QDs. Such a leakage would be mostly suppressed by the ZnS coating. This is evidenced by an increase in both the charge transfer resistance (associated to recombination) and the photocurrent, in contact with a polysulfide solution, once the ZnS is applied on the TiO2/CdSe electrode, regardless of the previous deposition of another ZnS layer. Complementarily, the ZnS layer would also avoid direct recombination of TiO2 electrons with the electrolyte. Finally, the ultrafast carrier dynamics study reveals that upon coating the CdSe QD with the ZnS shell, electron injection is also favored, revealing for the first time the double role of the ZnS layer in improving the performance of the photoanode. All these results provide a better insight into the role of modifiers such as ZnS, which should open new ways for the enhancement of the QDSC performance.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación of Spain, under the projects CONSOLIDER HOPE CSD2007-00007 and MAT2009-14004 (Fondos FEDER). Part of this research was supported by PRESTO program, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Grant in Aid for Priority Area (470) (No.21020014), Scientific Research (No.21310073) from the Ministry of Education, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of the Japanese Government. N.G. thanks the Spanish Ministry of Education for the award of an FPU grant.
Referencesand notes S. Rühle, M. Shalom and A. Zaban, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2290 CrossRef .A. J. Nozik, Physica E (Amsterdam), 2002, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 457, 3 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63 CrossRef CAS .N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21928 CrossRef CAS .Y.-L. Lee, B.-M. Huang and H.-T. Chien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6903 CrossRef CAS .S.-M. Yang, C.-H. Huang, J. Zhai, Z.-S. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1459 RSC .Y.-L. Lee and Y.-S. Lo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 604 CrossRef .M. Deng, Q. Zhang, S. Huang, D. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and Q. Meng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 986 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, M. Miyauchi, Y. Uemura, Y. Cui, K. Hara, Z. Zhao, K. Sunahara and A. Furube, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 233107 CrossRef .E. M. Barea, M. Shalom, S. Giménez, I. Hod, I. Mora-Seró, A. Zaban and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6834 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116 CrossRef .I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462 CrossRef CAS .S.-Q. Fan, D. Kim, J.-J. Kim, D. W. Jung, S. O. Kang and J. Ko, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1337 CrossRef CAS .Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi, L. J. Diguna and T. Toyoda, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 084304 CrossRef .S. Giménez, I. Mora-Seró, l. Macor, N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, R. Gómez, L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 295204 CrossRef .I. Mora-Seró, S. Giménez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, R. Gómez, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda and J. Bisquert, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1848 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 486 .D. Chen, F. Zhao, H. Qi, M. Rutherford and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1437 CrossRef CAS .P. Reiss, M. Potière and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Sambur and B. A. Parkinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2130 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wang, D. Pan, S. Jiang, X. Ji, L. An and B. Jiang, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 286, 83 CrossRef CAS .N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4208 CrossRef CAS .P. Pu, H. Cachet and E. M. M. Sutter, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5938 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, A. Sato, A. Katayama, T. Sawada and T. Toyoda, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2007, 27, 1514 CrossRef CAS .Q. Shen, M. Yanai, K. Katayama, T. Sawada and T. Toyoda, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 442, 89 CrossRef CAS .W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Z. Guo and X. G. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingswoth, C. A. Leatherdale, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 290, 314 CrossRef CAS .C. F. Landes, M. Braun and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 10554 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11272 CrossRef CAS .The mixture of Na2S and S in aqueous electrolyte gives rise to a complex family of molecular chains described as Sx2− with wide distribution of lengths, the so-called polysulfide.G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17778 CrossRef CAS .N. Guijarro, Q. Shen, S. Giménez, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert, T. Lana-Villarreal, T. Toyoda and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22352 CrossRef CAS .V. I. Klimov, Ch. J. Schwarz, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 60, R2177 CrossRef CAS .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Determination of the potential to carry out the photocurrent transients. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: equivalent circuit description and fittings to the experimental data. Effect of immersion in CH2Cl2 on TiO2/ZnS electrode voltammograms. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp20290aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Absorption and emission spectra of the colloidal dispersion of CdSe QDs in CH2Cl2 employed in this work. PL excitation wavelength: 450 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Kubelka–Munk transformation of the diffuse reflectance spectra for TiO2 electrodes before and after modification with CdSe and ZnS (A). Comparison among emission spectra of the colloidal solution and the TiO2, TiO2/CdSe and TiO2/CdSe/ZnS thin films (B). PL excitation wavelength: 450 nm.	 

 	Chart 1  Routes of radiative recombination and trapping in surface/interfacial states (SS), for carriers photogenerated in CdSe QDs: in colloidal dispersion (A), after attachment to TiO2 (B) followed by ZnS treatment (C). The arrow width qualitatively indicates the number of carriers involved in the corresponding pathway.	 

 	Fig. 3  
            AFM images of a rutile (110) single crystal before (A and C) and after the ZnS treatment (B and D).	 

 	Fig. 4  
Cyclic voltammetry (A), electrochemical impedance spectra (B) and charge transfer resistance (RCT) (C) for TiO2 electrodes sequentially modified with CdSe QDs and ZnS. All measurements were performed in 1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH aqueous electrolyte, using thermally treated titanium foil as a substrate for the electrode. Voltammetry was recorded at 20 mV s−1. EIS data were obtained in the range from 10 mHz to 10000 Hz, at an applied potential of −1.0 V and the oscillation amplitude was 10 mV. RCT values were calculated by fitting the EIS data.	 

 	Fig. 5  
Cyclic voltammetry (A), electrochemical impedance spectra (B) and charge transfer resistance (RCT) (C) for TiO2 electrodes sequentially modified with ZnS, CdSe QDs and a second treatment of ZnS. Experiments were carried out as described in Fig. 4.	 

 	Chart 2  Energy diagram for TiO2/ZnS/CdSe assembly in polysulfide at an applied potential of −1.0 V vs.Ag/AgCl. The arrows represent the pathway for the electron recombination with polysulfide via QD surface states or conduction band.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photocurrent experiments for TiO2/CdSe and TiO2/CdSe/ZnS electrodes (A) or TiO2/ZnS/CdSe and TiO2/ZnS/CdSe/ZnS electrodes (B). Stationary photocurrent vs. RCT (Fig. 4 and 5) (C). Electrolyte: 1 M Na2S + 0.1 M S + 1 M NaOH. Measurements of photocurrent were performed at a constant potential of −0.6 V. The electrodes were illuminated with white light using a UV-filter (cut-off λ < 380 nm), irradiance = 73.0 mW cm−2.	 
y = A1e−t/τ1 + A2e−t/τ2	(1)

 	Fig. 7  
TG signal for the CdSe-sensitized electrode before and after the treatment with ZnS. The signals were normalized to their maximum value.	 


                    TiO2/CdSe	0.48 ± 0.01	4.3 ± 0.2	0.47 ± 0.01	209 ± 11

                    TiO2/CdSe/ZnS	0.55 ± 0.02	3.9 ± 0.4	0.35 ± 0.01	148 ± 16
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Determination of the potential to carry out the photocurrent transients. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: equivalent circuit description and fittings to the experimental data. Effect of immersion in CH2Cl2 on TiO2/ZnS electrode voltammograms. See DOI: 10.1039/c1cp20290a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
