New cubic perovskites for one- and two- photon  water splitting using the computational materials repository  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22341D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22341D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9034-9043Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNew cubic perovskites for one- and two-photon water splitting using the computational materials repository

        
          
            Ivano E. 
            Castelli
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David D. 
            Landis
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kristian S. 
            Thygesen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Søren 
            Dahl
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ib 
            Chorkendorff
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Thomas F. 
            Jaramillo
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Karsten W. 
            Jacobsen
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Atomic-scale Materials Design, Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: kwj@fysik.dtu.dk
bCenter for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality, Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Received 
      25th May 2012
    , Accepted 20th July 2012First published on 20th July 2012AbstractA new efficient photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) is one of the possible solutions to the energy and climate problems of our time. Such a device requires development of new semiconducting materials with tailored properties with respect to stability and light absorption. Here we perform computational screening of around 19000 oxides, oxynitrides, oxysulfides, oxyfluorides, and oxyfluoronitrides in the cubic perovskite structure with PEC applications in mind. We address three main applications: light absorbers for one- and two-photon water splitting and high-stability transparent shields to protect against corrosion. We end up with 20, 12, and 15 different combinations of oxides, oxynitrides and oxyfluorides, respectively, inviting further experimental investigation.

Broader context
The development of semiconductors suitable for photo-electrochemical water splitting under solar light is currently under intense investigation. In particular the focus has been on oxides and oxynitrides where a few materials have shown good activity for light-induced splitting of water. We have performed a computational screening of about 19000 cubic perovskites obtained by combining 52 different metals with oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur and fluorine as anions. We have focused on three applications: one- and two-photon water splitting and transparent shielding against corrosion. We have also implemented a database and presentation system, the Computational Materials Repository, for easy access and analysis of the data. Since a successful material should collect a significant part of the solar spectrum, we have performed our screening based on criteria of size and position of the bandgap as well as on stability. We find 20, 12, and 15 materials with potential interest for one- and two-photon water splitting, and shielding purposes, respectively. Among them, 7, 4, and 6 are already known in the cubic perovskite structure and/or in the water splitting community. 13, 8, and 9 new materials invite further experimental investigation.

Introduction
The conversion of solar light into energy by photoelectrochemical reactions is one of the possible ways to address the world's pressing energy supply and storage problem.1 This technology is based on the direct harvest of photons by semiconductor materials (SCs) and using the energy from the created electron–hole pairs to run certain chemical reactions. One example is the water-splitting reaction which turns water into hydrogen and oxygen which may then be used later as fuels in for example fuel cells. The number of photons collected to run the reactions, the number of different materials involved and the size of their bandgaps can be combined and optimized in order to obtain the highest possible efficiency.2–5 The simplest way to construct such a device is to use a single material with a bandgap in the visible range, well positioned with respect to the redox potential of water. This method has been known since 1972 for water splitting under UV-light using TiO2 (ref. 6) albeit with very low efficiency and high additional electrical and chemical bias. A more complicated but also a potentially more efficient way is to use two photons and combine two SC materials to split water in a tandem cell.4,7
The search for new materials using ab initio quantum mechanical calculations has been possible because of the methodological improvements and the increase of computational powers. Examples include the construction of semiconductor superlattices,8 the development of battery cathodes,9 searching for high stability alloys,10 screening for inorganic scintillator materials,11 for high-performance piezoelectrics,12 for organic photovoltaics using molecules,13–15 and bandgap engineering.16,17
Here, we search for materials to be used in such water-splitting devices. We focus mainly on perovskite oxides with one or more replacements for oxygen neighbors in the periodic table. The space of investigation is composed of around 19000 compounds collected and analyzed in the Computational Materials Repository (CMR).18,19
The present work expands on previous studies of perovskite materials20 both by considering a broader range of compositions with new elements and by studying not only one-photon water splitting but also two-photon (Z-scheme) water splitting and transparent shielding of photocatalysts.
Our study suggests five and twelve new materials for the one- and two-photon processes, respectively, and fifteen for the transparent shield. These materials therefore lend themselves to further experimental investigation. In addition, we have analyzed the correlation between the bandgap and the heat of formation for the different datasets in order to obtain a more general picture of the material requirements.
Methods
Our screening is performed using the Density Functional Theory (DFT) real space code GPAW23,24 with a standard DFT-GGA exchange–correlation functional in the form of the RPBE-approximation25 for the evaluation of the stabilities and a more sophisticated semi-local functional called GLLB-SC26,27 for the calculation of the bandgaps. The latter functional is computationally cheaper than many-body methods like GW and its precision is of the order of 0.5 eV. The details about the method have been described and validated in a previous paper20 where we proposed 15 oxides and oxynitrides (ABO3 and ABO2N) for the one-step water splitting.
A linear programming (LP) algorithm has been adopted to determine whether a compound is stable or not with respect to the pool of reference systems listed in Table 1. This method has been used in the past for example for obtaining effective cluster interactions,28 and more recently for prediction of thermodynamically reversible hydrogen storage reactions29 and for the design of new semiconductors for water splitting.20 We choose the chemical potential for oxygen to refer to water in the gas phase because the materials have to work in an aqueous environment. Indeed, it has been recently shown that the presence of a water film is a necessary condition to run the water splitting reaction since it increases the mobility of H+.30 The Gibbs free energy of the reaction with water in the liquid phase following Nørskov et al.31 is estimated to be within 0.1 eV of the calculated DFT total energy difference. The oxygen reference has been calculated as the energy difference between water and hydrogen (H2O–H2) in the gas phase. Otherwise the chemical potentials for nitrogen, sulfur and fluorine have been taken from the standard references in the gas phase, i.e. N2, S8, and F2. An ABON2 compound is considered stable when its DFT energy relative to the best outcome from the LP, ΔE, is no more than 0.2 eV per atom. The small positive value allows for some metastability and inaccuracy in the calculations. The energy difference, ΔE, can thus be written as (1)where all the chemical formulae are reported in Table 1. The LP problem is solved with the constraints (2)which ensure the correct stoichiometry of ABON2 and with ci ≥ 0,(3)which guarantees that only the references containing A, B, N, or O are taken into account. A similar investigation has been performed for the other compounds considered in this work.
Table 1 Pool of systems chosen as references in the linear programming algorithm as available from the ICSD database21 and from the Materials Project.22 M indicates the metallic element in the composition




Chemical formula
Description




Mx
Most stable, single-metal bulk


MxOy, MxNy, MxSy, MxFy
Most stable, single-metal oxide, nitride, sulfide, fluoride


MxNyOz, MxSyOz, MxFyOz
Most stable, single-metal oxynitride, oxysulfide, oxyfluoride


Mx1My2Oz, Mx1My2Nz, Mx1My2Sz, Mx1My2Fz
Most stable, bi-metal oxide, nitride, sulfide, fluoride


Mx1My2NzOk, Mx1My2FzOk
Most stable, bi-metal oxynitride, oxyfluoride




To evolve hydrogen and oxygen, a matching between the positions of the band edges of the compound and the redox potential of water is required. It is complicated and computationally expensive to calculate the band edges using DFT because it requires the investigation of one or more material surfaces, and the outcoming results are complicated further by the role of water present on the surface and of the pH of the environment. For these and other issues, we use an empirical formula based on the electronegativity and on the size of the bandgap32,33 to estimate the positions of the edges. According to this formula the positions of the valence and conduction band edges, EVB,CB, are given by EVB,CB = E0 + (χAχBχOχN2)1/5 ± Egap/2,(4)where E0 is the difference between the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) and the vacuum (E0 = −4.5 eV) and χM is the electronegativity of the neutral atom M in the Mulliken scale. Eqn (4) refers to the ABON2 perovskite; for the other combinations, we need to change the χOχN2 in the geometric mean to, for example, χO2χF for the ABO2F perovskites. The evaluation of the position of the band edges given by this equation is of sufficient quality to be used during the screening process.33
Results and discussion
The crystal structure selected for the screening is the cubic perovskite (space group Pmm) because of its simplicity, and its wide applicability in general.34 We select 52 metals from the periodic table to occupy the A- and B-ion positions in the structure. We have previously investigated the results of a nitrogen substitution in an ABO3 cell20 and the beneficial effects that a lower-electronegativity element, like nitrogen, has for the design of new water splitting materials based on a one-photon process. Driven by this, we here screen for other anion combinations than O3 and O2N. In particular, we are interested in unit cells with a larger concentration of nitrogen (ABON2 and ABN3) and in replacing oxygen with its neighbors in the periodic table (ABO2S and ABO2F). A combination of oxygen, nitrogen, and fluorine (ABOFN) has been studied as well.
A material needs at least three main properties to be used in a water splitting device: (i) it needs to be stable, (ii) it needs to have a bandgap in an appropriate range and (iii) its band edges need to match the redox potential of water. As described above (i) is considered based on a comparison between the DFT energy of the perovskite compound and the DFT energies of a pool of references into which each compound can split (LP). In this comparison, we take the chemical potential of oxygen from water (instead of the oxygen molecule) in order to get a more realistic heat of formation for a compound in contact with water. We note that this stability measure does not take into account any influence from the illumination. (ii) is treated by calculating the bandgap using the GLLB-SC functional. (iii) uses the bandgap obtained in (ii) and eqn (4).
The database – general trends
Oxides are well known for their high stabilities and for their large bandgaps, even though metallic oxides have been synthesized. Efficiency for light harvesting requires a material with a bandgap below 3 eV, well positioned around the hydrogen and oxygen evolution potentials. This matching is difficult to accomplish in the oxide class.
The most natural element to be used as a replacement for oxygen is nitrogen because of its similar atomic radius. Oxynitrides are less stable than oxides and the loss in stability is correlated to the increase of the nitrogen/oxygen ratio in the unit cell. Nitrogen is slightly less electronegative than oxygen. This has two effects: a general reduction in the width of the bandgaps and a shifting up in the valence band positions. These effects are very interesting for the design of the next generation of light harvesters.

Fig. 1 shows the correlation between the bandgaps and heats of formation for all the classes of materials considered in this work. Results are shown relative to both the standard states of the elements, except for oxygen which is taken from water vapor (upper panel), and the larger pool of reference systems used here (lower panel) where we thus include the possibility of phase separation into single compounds like single-metal oxides or other systems in the pool of references (Table 1). A wider bandgap is seen to correspond to a higher stability for both sets of reference systems even if stable zero-gap compounds are also found. The correlation is most clear for the standard reference systems. A large bandgap in a two-metal compound is a sign of stability, even when the heat of formation is calculated relative to a broad set of reference systems that may already exhibit a bandgap. The resulting stability of the two-metal oxides is therefore smaller than when the comparison is made with metals in their standard states. The most stable compounds are oxides, and an oxygen replacement with another non-metal brings about a reduction of both the stability and the size of the gap.
 Fig. 1  Correlation between bandgap and heat of formation for the datasets under investigation. The figure includes only the compounds showing a gap (>0.2 eV). The upper figure shows the calculated standard heat of formation relative to the elements in their standard states except the oxygen chemical potential which is taken from water vapor because our material has to be stable in a water environment. The lower figure shows the heat of formation relative to the larger pool of reference systems as explained in the text. The heat of formation threshold of 0.2 eV is also displayed. 
Sulfur is close to nitrogen in electronegativity, with the same charge as oxygen but a larger radius. On the one hand, the bandgaps are of the same order of magnitude as for the oxynitrides and with well positioned band edges; on the other hand, the distortion introduced into the cells due to a too large radius reduces the stabilities of the compounds and the heats of formation are generally above 0.2 eV which we set as the threshold. No stable combination has been found in the ABO2S perovskite and other structures have to be considered.
Fluorine is the most electronegative element. The oxyfluorides show a wide range of gaps like the oxides. The radius of fluorine is slightly smaller than that of oxygen, with the consequence of a reduction in the stability of the compounds due to a reduction of the symmetry in the unit cells.
A co-doping of N and F in TiO2 to TiOxNyFz has been shown to be effective for water oxidation.35 The sizes of the gap for the ABONF compounds are comparable with the oxynitrides, but the highly distorted cells result in low stabilities and heats of formation above 0.2 eV.
Handling the data using the computational materials repository
The Computational Materials Repository (CMR)20,36 is a set of computational tools and a database for handling large amounts of computational electronic-structure data. The CMR software36 supported the present screening by storing the calculated results (Fig. 1) and making the analysis possible through its python and web interfaces. In order to make the process of finding the results efficient, the individual calculations and combinations thereof (so-called computational “groups”) were annotated with keywords like “perovskite” and fields (name/value pairs) such as “gllbsc_dir_gap = 0.3” or “A = Bi”, “B = Si” and “anion = N3” for BiSiN3. After choosing a combination such as ABN3 or ABO2S and the set of reference energies in the web interface, the necessary data to determine the heat of formation are automatically fed into the linear programming algorithm. The results can then be further restricted by other fields as for example the position of the band edges.

Fig. 2 shows an example of a search in the CMR database. We are here interested in ABON2 combinations that are stable, i.e. with a heat of formation smaller than 0.2 eV, a bandgap in the visible range, i.e. between 1.5 and 3 eV, and band edges matching the redox potential of water. The results are shown in Fig. 3. As we will discuss later on, these properties are required for materials to be used in the one-photon (overall) water splitting device shown in Fig. 4(a). Two materials for overall water splitting have been found in the ABON2 combination: LaTaON2 and YTaON2. The figure reports the crystal structure (using JMol37) and some interesting properties like heat of formation, size and position of the bandgap, paper where the computation for this structure appears for the first time, etc. It is also possible to download the atomic positions as an xyz-file; all details of the calculations are for further use.
 Fig. 2  Example of a search in CMR for materials with particular properties, like bandgap in the visible range and matching the redox potential of water. A stability criterion is also required. Other properties can be easily investigated. 
 Fig. 3  Result for the search table of Fig. 2. Two candidates for one-photon water splitting have been found in the ABON2 combination. 
 Fig. 4  (a) Overall water splitting scheme. One photon creates an electron–hole pair that evolves simultaneously oxygen and hydrogen from water. (b) The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure with potential for a photocatalytic water splitting device. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. The levels for hydrogen and oxygen evolution are also indicated. 
The same approach proposed here has been used for all the different applications we are going to describe in the next sections. All involved calculations and the analysis tools are available at https://cmr.fysik.dtu.dk.
One-photon water splitting
In 1972 Honda and Fujishima reported their results on electrochemical photolysis using TiO2.6 For 40 years, numerous efforts have been made to find an efficient material for simultaneous production of both H2 and O2 (one-photon or overall water splitting) under visible light irradiation, but so far the ideal material has not been found.3 The overall water splitting process is schematized in Fig. 4(a): an electron–hole pair is created by a single photon, the electron and the hole, after reaching two different regions of the surface in order to avoid recombination, evolve hydrogen and oxidize water, respectively.
The criteria for a candidate to be used for solar light capture that we shall use here are: (i) chemical and structural stability, (ii) bandgap in the visible light range, i.e. between 1.5 and 3 eV, (iii) band edges straddling with the oxygen and hydrogen evolution potentials, and (iv) high mobility to avoid recombination. Properties (i), (ii), and (iii) are taken into account during this screening. The requirements are schematized in Table 2.
Table 2 Screening parameters used for the applications considered




Screening parameters
One-photon WS
Two-photon WS
Transparent shield (TS)




Chemical/structural stability (ΔE)
ΔE ≤ 0.2 eV
ΔE ≤ 0.2 eV
ΔE ≤ 0.2 eV


Bandgap (Egap)
1.5 ≤ Egap ≤ 3 eV
1.3 ≤ Egap ≤ 3 eV

E
dirgap > 3 eV


Band edges
VBedge > 1.23 eV
VBanodeedge > 1.23 eV
Photoanode TS
Photocathode TS


(VBedge, CBedge)
CBedge < 0 eV
CBcathodeedge < 0 eV
1.7 < VBedge < 2.5 eV
−0.7 < CBedge < 0 eV


 
 
VBcathodeedge > CBanodeedge
 
 





Fig. 4(b) reports the 20 candidates resulting from the screening. On the left of the figure, there are the ABO3 and ABO2N combinations published in a previous paper20 and included here for completeness. Out of the remaining 5 compounds, one, LaTaON2, is already known and performing relatively well for hydrogen evolution when a noble metal is deposited on it, but no O2 evolution was detected.38 No experimental photoelectrochemical studies have been reported for the last four materials. There is no evidence of other competing crystal structures with the same chemical composition and thus they can be suggested for experimental investigation. Considering all datasets, we have found in total 20 materials suitable for collecting visible light and for the evolution of both hydrogen and oxygen.
Once the electron–hole pair is formed, the electron and the hole need to reach two different points at the surface to evolve hydrogen and oxygen. This mechanism depends on the mobility of the charges and thus the effective masses. It is presently not well understood what the optimal values for the mobility or the free electron mass are so we cannot use this as a criterion for the screening. However, we can perform an a posteriori investigation of the effective masses for the materials resulting from the screening.
The effective mass m* is defined as (5)i.e., as the second derivative of the energy band with respect to two orientations, i and j, in reciprocal space evaluated at the LUMO (HOMO) for the electron (hole). The parabolical approximation of the band is true only in a small interval of the LUMO (HOMO), thus we need to run calculations with finer sampling of k-points. While the effective mass is a 3 × 3 matrix with eigenvalues depending on the coordinate system, the trace of the mass matrix, defined as (6)is a unique number independent of the orientation.
For all the candidates in Fig. 4(b), the LUMO is at the Gamma-point, Γ = (0,0,0). The role of the different metals and anions is more crucial for determining the HOMO: the oxides show the HOMO mostly at R = (½,½,½) and at Mxz = (½,0,½) or Mxy = (½,½,0), the oxynitrides and oxyfluorides at Γ and R.
The upper panel of Fig. 5 shows the electron and hole masses (calculated using eqn (6)) for the 20 candidates. The masses span over one order of magnitude. In general, the oxides show very light electron masses and hole masses above l me, one order of magnitude higher than the electron masses. In addition to the hole masses shown in the figure, NaSbO3, SrGeO3, CaGeO3, BaSnO3, and SrSnO3 have also heavier hole masses, not included in the figure, of more than 10 me due to a degeneracy of the HOMO (at R-point). The gap between the electron and hole masses close to the oxynitrides and the masses have values between 0.5 and 1 me with lighter hole masses compared to the oxides. For the oxyfluorides, the hole masses are heavier than the ones of the oxynitrides while the electron masses are of the same order of magnitude. The green region highlights the materials known to evolve hydrogen/oxygen in the presence of a sacrificial agent and the orange region indicates the material known for failing as a photocatalyst possibly due to defect assisted recombination.39 It seems that a light electron mass and a heavy hole mass are not a good combination because it is difficult to maintain the neutral charge of the compound and to avoid fast recombination. It would be possible to analyze further the role of the effective masses if some of the other compounds proposed here would be synthesized.
 Fig. 5  Average effective masses calculated using eqn (6) (upper panel) and ratio between the highest and lowest effective masses for the candidates in Fig. 4(b). The upper-arrow indicates a very high anisotropy between the masses in different directions. In the green area, the materials that are able to split water in the presence of a sacrificial agent are shown. In the orange area the material known to not work as a photocatalyst because of defect assisted recombination is shown. 
The lower panel of Fig. 5 shows the ratio between the highest and lowest values of the electron and hole masses for each combination. The oxides with the HOMO at the R-point are isotropic in the three directions both for the electron and hole masses. For the others, the LUMO (HOMO) shows a flatband in at least one direction leading to an anisotropy in the mass. Both the oxynitrides and the oxyfluorides show anisotropy for the electron and hole masses due to a flatband in one direction generated by the oxygen substitution. An additional investigation on the relationship between the effective masses, the different orientations and the photocatalytic activity will be performed in the future since such properties could be potentially used for designing water splitting devices. An ideal device could be highly anisotropic, for example a pillared structure, with a long direction for efficient harvesting of the light and short directions to allow the electrons and holes to reach the surfaces.
Two-photon water splitting
A rough calculation of the efficiency of the overall scheme of Fig. 4(a), considering the losses, results in a conversion efficiency limit of around only 7%.40
A different approach to achieve the water splitting under visible light is to divide the process into a two-step mechanism,4,41 called Z-scheme or tandem cell (Fig. 8(a)), where two photons are required and two different semiconductors are responsible for the H2 and O2 evolution.
The requirements for the two-step water splitting process are: (i) structural/chemical stability, (ii) visible light bandgaps with the appropriate sizes for a good efficiency, and (iii) an optimal matching between the band edges of the semiconductors and the redox potential of water. (iv) in addition to the usual requirements for the position of the band edges for the overall water splitting, the electron transfer in the tandem cell also requires that the electron generated in the anode that oxidizes water to oxygen is higher in energy than the hole generated by the cathode reducing 2H+ to H2.

Fig. 6 shows the ideal efficiency of such a device without any losses considering the spectral distribution of the solar photon flux at AM1.5 and calculating the different ratios of absorbed photons from the layered semiconductors. The maximum efficiency is obtained when the two materials absorb the same number of photons. For working in a photocatalytic tandem cell, the sum of the bandgaps of the two semiconductors needs to be at around 2.8 eV (black line in Fig. 6). This value is obtained based on the estimates shown in Fig. 7. The bare energy required to split water is 1.23 eV. However, additional energy is required to overcome the overpotential for the oxygen and hydrogen evolution processes and to compensate for the positions of the quasi Fermi levels within the bandgaps. We take as a rough estimate the sum of the two overpotentials to 0.5 eV, 0.1 eV for the cathode and 0.4 eV for the anode.42 When the system is running, the electrons and holes are in a non-equilibrium distribution described by quasi Fermi levels. Those levels correspond to the work that the electrons and holes can do and they reduce the effect of the bandgap by around 0.5 eV per semiconductor. Allowing for an additional 0.1 eV related to the electron transfer between the semiconductors we reach the limiting sum of the two bandgaps to be 2.8 eV. The problem of band banding required for e−–h+ separation is not considered as it can be solved by appropriate doping of the SC and by the pn-junction.3
 Fig. 6  Theoretical efficiency of the two-photon water splitting. The blue line corresponds to the experimental bandgap of silicon and the black line is the minimum combination of gap for running the reaction. The purple line corresponds to the highest efficiency achievable once the H2 photocatalyst is chosen. The numbers in the contour plot correspond to the ideal efficiency. 
 Fig. 7  Sketch of the electronic levels in the tandem device. The positions of the quasi Fermi levels and the required overpotentials result in a minimal requirement for the sum of the two bandgaps of 2.8 eV. 
Returning to the calculated efficiencies in Fig. 6 we see that the optimum values of the bandgaps are 1.7 eV and 1.1 eV. A perfect candidate for the hydrogen evolution semiconductor is therefore silicon with a bandgap of 1.1 eV as indicated by the vertical blue line in the figure. In fact, the DFT GLLB-SC calculation of bulk silicon in the diamond structure gives a 1.2 eV indirect bandgap with a perfect match of the conduction band edge with the hydrogen potential. In addition, it is a well-known material with an advanced fabrication technology at hand and it has recently been shown to work well with non-noble hydrogen evolution catalysts.43 A theoretical efficiency of more than 25% is seen to be obtained by combining silicon with a ∼1.7 eV bandgap-semiconductor.
In order to find interesting candidates for the anode, we shall in the following screen for semiconductors with bandgaps in the range between 1.3 and 3.0 eV (Table 2). The losses described above give a lower limit of 1.7 eV for a semiconductor to be combined with silicon. However, we widen the search window a bit in order to take the inaccuracy of the GLLB-SC bandgap calculations of about 0.5 eV into account.
All the compositions shown in Fig. 4(b) are possible materials to be used in a Z-scheme cell for hydrogen or oxygen evolution. In particular, the oxynitrides, that are able to reduce water in the presence of a sacrificial agent,44 might also be used for the same purpose in a tandem cell instead of silicon. This class of materials is characterized by a bandgap of ∼1 eV larger than the theoretical optimum for the hydrogen evolution photocatalyst. The best solution in terms of efficiency is obtained by swapping the two layers with respect to Fig. 8(a) so the part of the solar spectrum at higher energy is absorbed by the hydrogen evolution photocatalyst (now with a larger bandgap than silicon) and the remainder goes through and is absorbed by the oxygen photocatalyst, i.e. the large bandgap does not necessarily need to be the anode side.
 Fig. 8  (a) Tandem cell scheme in which two photons and two semiconductors are required for the evolution of oxygen and hydrogen. (b) The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure with potential for a tandem cell device. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. The valence band for silicon (calculated using eqn (4) and the GLLB-SC bandgap) and the levels for hydrogen and oxygen evolution are also indicated. 

Fig. 8(b) shows the candidates for oxygen evolution not yet presented in Fig. 4(b). None of the oxides are experimentally known and all of them are possible solutions to the oxygen evolution problem. Some of the niobates oxynitride (CaNb2N, SrNbO2N, BaNbO2N, and LaNbON2) have been recently synthesized.45 The GLLB-SC bandgaps for those materials are slightly smaller than the experimental values because of a small distortion in the crystal cells that contributes to opening up the gaps. CaNbO2N shows activity both in water oxidation and reduction with sacrificial agents, and SrNbO2N has a low rate of O2 evolution. No activity has been found for both BaNbO2N and LaNbON2 probably because of too small gaps that are insufficient to overcome the overpotentials required for starting the reaction or due to a recombination enhanced by defects. The other oxynitrides have not been investigated.
If we relax the criterion that the conduction band edge of the semiconductor has to be above the valence band edge of silicon we find only one more material, TlNbO3. This material could potentially be used for oxygen evolution in combination with a hydrogen evolution photocatalyst with a lower valence band than silicon (like the tantalate or niobate oxynitrides). TlNbO3 has a gap of 1.3 eV, small enough for achieving a good efficiency, and the VB position is well positioned in energy compared with the oxynitrides for allowing the electron transfer between the materials to take place.
No candidates for only H2 evolution have been found because the stability requirement seems to automatically lead to bandgaps which are positioned fairly low relative to the water redox potentials.
Transparent shield
One problem related to the use of materials for oxygen production is photocorrosion. A possible solution is to develop a highly stable and at the same time transparent thin film to cover the oxygen evolution photocatalyst as a protective shield, as shown in Fig. 9(a). The transparency can be obtained with a semiconductor with a large bandgap of, say, more than 3 eV, and as we have seen a large bandgap generally nicely correlates with high stability (Fig. 1), especially when we consider the standard references (upper panel).
 Fig. 9  (a) Scheme of a tandem cell with a transparent protecting shield on the oxygen evolution photocatalyst for avoiding photocorrosion. (b) The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure to be used as a transparent shield for a photoanode material. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. 
The device illustrated in Fig. 9(a) is the photoanode protecting shield for a tandem cell but the principle can also be used for the one-photon scheme. The electron with higher energy evolves hydrogen, while the hole at lower energy moves through the transparent film and evolves oxygen. The size of the gap and the position of the edges are crucial for such a material: it needs a direct bandgap in the UV range in order to avoid absorbing a part of the visible light spectrum, and the valence band level needs to be placed between the edges of the photocatalyst and the potential of oxygen evolution so that the hole can reach the reaction region with a small energy loss (<0.5 eV). Here we do not consider the possibility of tunneling charge transport through the protective layer46 as the dominant mechanism. The screening criteria can be summarized as Edirgap > 3.0 eV, 1.7 eV < VBedge < 2.5 eV.(7)
VBedge is chosen to take into consideration the errors in the bandgap and in the positions of the band edges and the overpotential of oxygen. As before we furthermore apply a stability threshold of 0.2 eV per atom (Table 2).
Eight compounds fulfill the selected criteria (Fig. 9(b)). Because of the large bandgap required, the only perovskite classes of interest are the oxides and the oxyfluorides. SrSnO3, CaSnO3, and SrTiO3 are stable in the perovskite structure (SrSnO3 and CaSnO3 are experimentally known in the distorted perovskite structure with even larger bandgaps than the ones predicted here). In particular, SrTiO3 is a well-known material for water splitting under UV light, it has all the requirements for being used also as a transparent shield in a visible-light device. The other 5 candidate compounds have not been synthesized yet.
The same idea can be used to develop a protecting shield for the photocathode.47 In this device, the electron with higher energy is transported from the photocathode conduction band to the one of the protecting shield where it evolves hydrogen. As shown in Table 2, the only change in the screening parameters is the position of the conduction band edge that has to be between −0.7 and 0 eV. This range allows the candidates to work with silicon and various other photocathodes.

Fig. 10 shows the nine candidates as protecting materials for the cathode. AgNbO3 is known as a good photocatalyst and it can also be used as a protecting shield because of its direct bandgap in the UV range (the indirect bandgap is in the visible part of the solar spectrum). AgTaO3 and KTiO2F are experimentally known to exist in the perovskite structure, while the other six compounds are currently unknown. Only two combinations, RbTiO2F and BaInO2F, can be used as a transparent shield in combination with both a cathode and an anode.
 Fig. 10  The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure to be used as a transparent shield for a photocathode material. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. The conduction band of silicon is also indicated. 
Conclusions
In this work, we have combined the screening approach and a database to investigate several properties related to the problem of light harvesting and water splitting. The method proposed here has been applied to about 19000 different compounds and we identify some 20 candidates for the overall water splitting, 12(+20) for the development of a tandem cell device, and 8 and 9 to be used as transparent protecting shields for the oxygen and the hydrogen evolution reactions, respectively. Some of these materials are already known in the water splitting community, but several are also completely new suggestions. The same method described here could also be applied to search for other applications like the design of new highly-stable conductors to be used as electrodes.
The most important limitation of the study is the focus on only a single crystal structure, the cubic perovskite, but the extensive stability analysis involving many different combinations and also different crystal structures for the reference systems lend credibility to the identified candidates. However, in future work it would be natural to combine our approach with structure prediction tools to widen the scope of the materials search even further.
We finally note that the issues addressed here of efficient absorption of solar light and appropriate electron–hole mobilities only constitute one part of the challenges behind the function of an optimal photoelectrochemical device. Another key issue is to find appropriate (co-)catalysts to minimize the overpotentials which lead to energy loss in the chemical reactions.3,48
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Danish Center for Scientific Computing through grant HDW-1103-06 and from the Catalysis for Sustainable Energy (CASE) initiative funded by the Danish Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. The Center for Atomic-scale Materials Design (CAMD) is sponsored by the Lundbeck Foundation. The Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality (CINF) is funded by the Danish National Research Foundation. T.F.J. and K.W.J. are supported by the Center on Nanostructuring for the Efficient Energy Conversion (CNEEC) at Stanford University, an Energy Frontier Research Center founded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award number DE-SC0001060.
References
N. Lewis and D. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Laursen, S. Kegnaes, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5577–5591 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 100–101 CrossRef CAS .
A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, Nature, 1999, 402, 60 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ceder, Y.-M. Chiang, D. R. Sadoway, M. K. Aydinol, Y.-I. Jang and B. Huang, Nature, 1998, 392, 694 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Johannesson, T. Bligaard, A. V. Ruban, H. L. Skriver, K. W. Jacobsen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 255506 CrossRef CAS .
W. Setyawan, R. M. Gaume, S. Lam, R. S. Feigelson and S. Curtarolo, ACS Comb. Sci., 2011, 13, 382–390 CrossRef CAS .
R. Armiento, B. Kozinsky, M. Fornari and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 14103 CrossRef .
J. Hachmann, R. Olivares-Amaya, S. Atahan-Evrenk, C. Amador-Bedolla, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, A. Gold-Parker, L. Vogt, A. M. Brockway and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2241–2251 CrossRef CAS .
R. Olivares-Amaya, C. Amador-Bedolla, J. Hachmann, S. Atahan-Evrenk, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, L. Vogt and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4849–4861 CAS .
N. M. O'Boyle, C. M. Campbell and G. R. Hutchison, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16200–16210 CAS .
W.-J. Yin, H. Tang, S.-H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045106 CrossRef .
M. d'Avezac, J.-W. Luo, T. Chanier and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 027401 CrossRef .

Center for Atomic-scale Materials Design, http://www.camd.dtu.dk/.

Computational Materials Repository, https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/cmr/(Documentation)and https://cmr.fysik.dtu.dk/(Database).
I. E. Castelli, T. Olsen, S. Datta, D. D. Landis, S. Dahl, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5814 CAS .

ICSDWeb, http://www.fiz-karlsruhe.de/icsd_web.html.

Materials Project – A Materials Genome Approach, http://materialsproject.org/.
J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 35109 CrossRef .
J. Enkovaara, C. Rostgaard, J. J. Mortensen, J. Chen, M. Dulak, L. Ferrighi, J. Gavnholt, C. Glinsvad, V. Haikola, H. A. Hansen, H. H. Kristoffersen, M. Kuisma, A. H. Larsen, L. Lehtovaara, M. Ljungberg, O. Lopez-Acevedo, P. G. Moses, J. Ojanen, T. Olsen, V. Petzold, N. A. Romero, J. Stausholm-Møller, M. Strange, G. A. Tritsaris, M. Vanin, M. Walter, B. Hammer, H. Hakkinen, G. K. H. Madsen, R. M. Nieminen, J. K. Nørskov, M. Puska, T. T. Rantala, J. Schiotz, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 253202 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 7413–7421 CrossRef .
O. Gritsenko, R. van Leeuwen, E. van Lenthe and E. J. Baerends, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1995, 51, 1944 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuisma, J. Ojanen, J. Enkovaara and T. T. Rantala, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 115106 CrossRef .
G. D. Garbulsky and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1995, 51, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ozolins, E. H. Majzoub and C. Wolverton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl, A. Xiong, K. Maeda, K. Domen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2937–2942 CAS .
J. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
M. A. Butler and D. S. Ginley, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 228–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and M. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 543–556 CAS .

          T. Ishihara, Perovskite Oxide for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, Springer Verlag,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. Nukumizu, J. Nunoshige, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2003, 196 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Landis, J. S. Hummelshoj, S. Nestorov, J. Greeley, M. Dulak, T. Bligaard, J. K. Norskov and K. Jacobsen, Comput. Sci. Eng., 2012 Search PubMed  in press.

Jmol: an open-source Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D, http://jmol.sourceforge.net/.
M. Liu, W. You, Z. Lei, T. Takata, K. Domen and C. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2006, 27, 556–558 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Tang and J. Ye, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 1859–1871 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Weber and M. J. Dignam, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1986, 11, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Chem. Lett., 2005, 8–13 CrossRef .
S. Trasatti, Croat. Chem. Acta, 1990, 63, 313–329 CAS .
Y. Hou, B. Abrams, P. Vesborg, M. Bjorketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. Setti, C. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yamasita, T. Takata, M. Hara, J. Kondo and K. Domen, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 172, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
B. Siritanaratkul, K. Maeda, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Prange, S. Dhnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. Chidsey and P. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51 DOI:10.1002/anie.201203585 .
L. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296–3313 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
The development of semiconductors suitable for photo-electrochemical water splitting under solar light is currently under intense investigation. In particular the focus has been on oxides and oxynitrides where a few materials have shown good activity for light-induced splitting of water. We have performed a computational screening of about 19000 cubic perovskites obtained by combining 52 different metals with oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur and fluorine as anions. We have focused on three applications: one- and two-photon water splitting and transparent shielding against corrosion. We have also implemented a database and presentation system, the Computational Materials Repository, for easy access and analysis of the data. Since a successful material should collect a significant part of the solar spectrum, we have performed our screening based on criteria of size and position of the bandgap as well as on stability. We find 20, 12, and 15 materials with potential interest for one- and two-photon water splitting, and shielding purposes, respectively. Among them, 7, 4, and 6 are already known in the cubic perovskite structure and/or in the water splitting community. 13, 8, and 9 new materials invite further experimental investigation.

	(1)
	(2)
ci ≥ 0,	(3)

Mx	Most stable, single-metal bulk
MxOy, MxNy, MxSy, MxFy	Most stable, single-metal oxide, nitride, sulfide, fluoride
MxNyOz, MxSyOz, MxFyOz	Most stable, single-metal oxynitride, oxysulfide, oxyfluoride
Mx1My2Oz, Mx1My2Nz, Mx1My2Sz, Mx1My2Fz	Most stable, bi-metal oxide, nitride, sulfide, fluoride
Mx1My2NzOk, Mx1My2FzOk	Most stable, bi-metal oxynitride, oxyfluoride
EVB,CB = E0 + (χAχBχOχN2)1/5 ± Egap/2,	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Correlation between bandgap and heat of formation for the datasets under investigation. The figure includes only the compounds showing a gap (>0.2 eV). The upper figure shows the calculated standard heat of formation relative to the elements in their standard states except the oxygen chemical potential which is taken from water vapor because our material has to be stable in a water environment. The lower figure shows the heat of formation relative to the larger pool of reference systems as explained in the text. The heat of formation threshold of 0.2 eV is also displayed.	 

 	Fig. 2  Example of a search in CMR for materials with particular properties, like bandgap in the visible range and matching the redox potential of water. A stability criterion is also required. Other properties can be easily investigated.	 

 	Fig. 3  Result for the search table of Fig. 2. Two candidates for one-photon water splitting have been found in the ABON2 combination.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Overall water splitting scheme. One photon creates an electron–hole pair that evolves simultaneously oxygen and hydrogen from water. (b) The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure with potential for a photocatalytic water splitting device. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. The levels for hydrogen and oxygen evolution are also indicated.	 

Chemical/structural stability (ΔE)	ΔE ≤ 0.2 eV	ΔE ≤ 0.2 eV	ΔE ≤ 0.2 eV
Bandgap (Egap)	1.5 ≤ Egap ≤ 3 eV	1.3 ≤ Egap ≤ 3 eV	
E
dirgap > 3 eV
Band edges	VBedge > 1.23 eV	VBanodeedge > 1.23 eV	Photoanode TS	Photocathode TS
(VBedge, CBedge)	CBedge < 0 eV	CBcathodeedge < 0 eV	1.7 < VBedge < 2.5 eV	−0.7 < CBedge < 0 eV
 	 	VBcathodeedge > CBanodeedge	 	 
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Average effective masses calculated using eqn (6) (upper panel) and ratio between the highest and lowest effective masses for the candidates in Fig. 4(b). The upper-arrow indicates a very high anisotropy between the masses in different directions. In the green area, the materials that are able to split water in the presence of a sacrificial agent are shown. In the orange area the material known to not work as a photocatalyst because of defect assisted recombination is shown.	 

 	Fig. 6  Theoretical efficiency of the two-photon water splitting. The blue line corresponds to the experimental bandgap of silicon and the black line is the minimum combination of gap for running the reaction. The purple line corresponds to the highest efficiency achievable once the H2 photocatalyst is chosen. The numbers in the contour plot correspond to the ideal efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 7  Sketch of the electronic levels in the tandem device. The positions of the quasi Fermi levels and the required overpotentials result in a minimal requirement for the sum of the two bandgaps of 2.8 eV.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Tandem cell scheme in which two photons and two semiconductors are required for the evolution of oxygen and hydrogen. (b) The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure with potential for a tandem cell device. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. The valence band for silicon (calculated using eqn (4) and the GLLB-SC bandgap) and the levels for hydrogen and oxygen evolution are also indicated.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Scheme of a tandem cell with a transparent protecting shield on the oxygen evolution photocatalyst for avoiding photocorrosion. (b) The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure to be used as a transparent shield for a photoanode material. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps.	 
Edirgap > 3.0 eV, 1.7 eV < VBedge < 2.5 eV.	(7)

 	Fig. 10  The identified candidates in the cubic perovskite structure to be used as a transparent shield for a photocathode material. The figure shows the calculated band edges for both the direct (red) and indirect (black) gaps. The conduction band of silicon is also indicated.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
