Coal analysis by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: a tutorial review  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9JA00016J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9JA00016J
(Tutorial Review)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2019, 34, 1047-1082Coal analysis by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: a tutorial review

        
          
            Sahar 
            Sheta
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Sher 
            Afgan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zongyu 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shun-Chun 
            Yao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhe 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Lab of Power Systems, Department of Energy and Power Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: zhewang@tsinghua.edu.cn
bNational Institute of Laser Enhanced Science, Cairo University, Cairo 12613, Egypt
cSchool of Electric Power, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510640, China
dState Key Laboratory of Quantum Optics and Quantum Optics Devices, Institute of Laser Spectroscopy, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China
Received 
      16th January 2019
    , Accepted 21st February 2019First published on 22nd February 2019AbstractCoal is one of the world's most abundant primary energy sources. Real-time coal analysis technology is imperative for coal blending, combustion optimization, pollution reduction, and pricing. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) has been a promising candidate for coal analysis because of its uniquely fast, in situ, and online capabilities. Coal is a sedimentary rock with a complex and heterogeneous composition, and therefore, laser–coal interaction exhibits multiple phenomena. A systematic study of the experimental conditions required for stable coal–plasma formation and evolution is a headway for enhancing LIBS results. In coal-fired power plants, LIBS offers three installation sets, namely, inline, at-line, and offline, with minimal space requirements and ease of retrofit. Moreover, LIBS is a safer technique with lower installation and maintenance costs and fits the concern of coal-fired power plants for multielemental detection in fast records. Coal analysis mainly includes calorific heat value determination, proximate analysis, ultimate analysis, and other related analyses. LIBS data is handled with continuously developing mathematical and statistical modeling techniques to provide the smart extraction of the required spectral information for coal analysis. In this tutorial review, we summarize the previous research contributions utilizing LIBS for coal analysis, including fundamentals and key factors, operation modes, data processing, and analytical results. Over and above, LIBS contribution in fly ash analysis and certain literature concerning combustion diagnostics might be included to present a simple guideline for researchers interested in LIBS applications for coal utilization.
1. Introduction
Coal is an inhomogeneous mineral substance, formed from prehistoric plants in marshy environments where the presence of water restricted the oxygen supply and allowed anaerobic thermal and bacterial decomposition to occur. Coal is composed of major elements (C, H, O, N, and S) and various minor and trace elements.1,2 As one of the oldest fossil fuels in human history, coal has been the foundation of energy generation since the first industrial revolution of the 1800s. However, being criticized as an outdated primary energy source as it possibly causes major environmental pollution, clean coal industry3 is facing challenges with sufficient coal reserves to balance the power grid. Currently, coal is the major energy source in many countries with proven coal reserves worldwide, which are sufficient to last for 200 years or more. In 2017, the production and consumption of coal in China were 17410 million tons of oil equivalent (mtoe) and 18930 mtoe, respectively; further, 64% of the primary energy consumption was from coal.4 Considering the significant amount of coal utilized in the current industrial and civil societies, coal analysis—particularly real-time coal analysis—is undoubtedly of vital importance in coal production and consumption for improvement in utilization efficiency and pollution reduction: it requires substantial attention on its technological progress.
In principal, coal analysis includes calorific value calculation,5 proximate analysis,6 ultimate analysis,7 and other related analyses. Calorific value (or heat value) is the amount of energy that a particular quantity of coal produces upon burning. It is a crucial property for coal utilization as it is a direct indication of the coal energy content, as well as serves as a classification index for coal ranks. Proximate analysis encompasses moisture content, ash content (inorganic residue leftover after combustion), volatile matter (vapors driven off during pyrolysis), and fixed carbon (nonvolatile fraction of coal). Ultimate analysis is a comprehensive analysis of quantitatively determining the elemental composition of coal, chiefly the C, H, O, N, and S concentrations. In addition, the concentration measurement of the trace elements that occur in coal is a part of the ultimate analysis, even if it is normally not included in real applications. Coal analysis has four major applications: coal pricing, coal washing, coal mixing/blending, and combustion optimization. Normally, calorific value and sulfur and ash contents are the most pertinent parameters in these applications. Currently, there are several analytical techniques for coal analyses. Over the years, standard test methods based on chemical processes have been established and formatted for ultimate and proximate analyses. A number of chemical analysis methods have been regarded as standard methods for coal analysis. However, these methods normally utilize a few grams of coal samples from tons of material travelling on a conveyor belt and may not be able to provide representative results due to the inhomogeneity inherent in coal. Moreover, several hours are required to complete an analysis; this obviously hampers real-time requirements. Currently available physical analysis methods include X-ray fluorescence (XRF),8 prompt gamma neutron activation analysis (PGNAA),9 near-infrared spectrometry (NIRS),10 inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES),11 atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS),12 Fourier-transform infrared spectrometry (FT-IR),13 and microwave analysis.14 Among these, XRF, PGNAA, NIRS, and microwaves can provide real-time measurements (either online or in situ). The advantages and disadvantages of these techniques are listed in Table 1. As shown, XRF and PGNAA, as the most preferable techniques, still suffer from low accuracy, high cost, and/or radiation risk, and they have not satisfactorily encompassed the needs of the coal industry. With regard to mining, it is helpful to scan the chemical composition of passing coal rocks. A safer real-time technology with low cost and satisfactory analytical performance is still imperative to realize better control over coal production/utilization and tremendous amount of coal trading.
Table 1 Comparison of the existing online coal analysis methods




Technique
Description
Advantage(s)
Disadvantage(s)




XRF
Analysis of the characteristic emission of secondary X-rays after material bombarding with high-energy X-rays
Simple spectra
Limited analysis of elements with atomic number > 11


Non-destructive
Low precision and sensitivity


Potential hazardous of X-ray radiation


Correlations for a full report of C, H, ash deposition and heating value are required


PGNAA
By continuously irradiating the sample with a neutrons beam, the constituent elements absorb neutrons and emit prompt γ rays of which the energies identify the characteristic elements
No sample destruction
Expensive price and maintenance


All-elements analysis
Potential hazardous due to exposed radiation to the human body


Bulky machines (∼3200 kg)


NIRS
Using Fourier-transform infrared absorption spectral analysis to characteristically identify the analyte
No sample destruction
Influenced by the operation environment easily


Simultaneous analysis of many properties (moisture ash content, volatile content etc.)
Low precision


Expensive


Microwave technology
By calculating the attenuation of microwave intensity and frequency after microwave interacting with water molecule in coal, moisture content can be identified
Fast analysis of moisture content
Restricted to moisture content analysis




Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) is a frontier elemental analytical technique, which has experienced a spectacular growth from the time of its first application: it has been crowned as a future superstar. LIBS yields a unique list of advantages such as real-time, standoff analysis capabilities; quasi nondestructive ablation; simultaneous all-element detection; safe operation; and necessitating only optical access with little or no sample preparation.15–26 Relative to other coal analysis techniques, LIBS can provide highly sensitivity discrimination of low atomic number elements (unlike XRF), trace element detection, and safe operation (unlike PGNAA), as well as being comparatively cheap with the possibility of portable analyzers (unlike NIRS). Research on LIBS applied to coal analysis/utilization was reported in the late 1980s. In Sandia National Laboratories,27–30 LIBS was used to characterize single coal particles in flowing environments. Inorganic elements present in such coal particles with concentrations >100 ppm were observed, including Mg, Ca, Al, Si, Fe, and Ti. Early research introduced LIBS as a potential solution to the real-time monitoring of the elemental composition of ash deposits formed during the coal combustion processes and confirmed its capabilities for online detection in harsh environments. Since then, coal analysis research using LIBS has been progressively carried out in both laboratory and industrial fields with literature reported from Australia,31–34 Bangladesh,35,36 Belarus,37 China,38–94 Colombia,95–97 France,98 Hungary,99 Israel,100–102 Italy,103,104 Indonesia,105,106 Japan,107–110 Spain,111–114 and the USA.115–124
Currently, the application of LIBS for coal analysis has become critical for achieving wide commercialization in the power industry, coal chemical processing industry, and coal mining industry.125 Therefore, it is the right time to summarize all the contributions made for coal analysis using LIBS over the decades. The purpose of this tutorial article is to offer the up-to-date progress of LIBS in coal analysis with experimental and instrumental challenges at the focus. The introduction is followed by the fundamental principles of LIBS operation for coal analysis. Comparative studies involving different experimental variables, physical and chemical matrices of coal, and environmental factors are provided in Section 2. Section 3 is devoted to devices, illustrating three modes of operations for coal analyzers: inline, at-line, and offline. Some desktop LIBS systems used as coal analyzers are listed at the end of this section. Thereafter, data processing with special considerations and suggestions for better modeling of coal data are presented in Section 4. Analytical results including calorific value, proximate analysis, and ultimate analysis are covered in Section 5. With the aim of providing good coverage of LIBS contribution in coal utilization applications and with the observed growing interest of online LIBS combustion monitoring, the end of Section 5 introduces the literature for LIBS systems applied in combustion environments, as well as the analysis of fly ash (as a substantial combustion byproduct). As customary, summary and future perspectives briefly summarize the recent advances and provide an outlook for the near-future challenges and predictions for LIBS coal analysis, which are provided at the end of this review. To facilitate readability, acronyms used herein are listed before the references. This article has been written to provide a guideline for researchers interested in LIBS coal analysis with a focus on collating information from the fundamentals to the industrial developments in this area. With continuous research efforts, LIBS will be technically mature for coal analysis at various industrial sites.
2. Fundamentals and impact factors
A successful application of any technique starts with the fundamental understanding behind its enginery. Basically, several factors need to be understood in order to comprehend the plasma physics involved in a LIBS study. When a high-power laser pulse strikes a material, the high electric field generated at the focal spot causes an electric breakdown and leads to a certain amount of mass ablation. The evaporated mass expands in the form of a plasma plume and compresses the surrounding atmosphere by releasing a shockwave. The plasma plume is a high-temperature dense collection of electronically excited atoms and ions of the ablated mass, whose radiation emission should be efficiently collected by a detection system.126 Despite the fact that the plasma is a complex state of matter, the emission intensity of the atomized species with the assumption of a uniform plasma temperature is given by eqn (1): (1)where Ii (J s−1) is the emission intensity of species i, Ai (J m3 s−1) is a variable that refers to species i, ni (m−3) is the concentration of species i, g(j)i is the statistical weight of species i at the upper energy level j, E(j)i (J) is the upper energy level of species i, k (J K−1) is the Boltzmann constant, and T (K) is the plasma temperature. However, to compensate for the nonuniformity found in real plasma, temperature correction factors are determined via the ratio of spectral line intensities of the same atom as that in eqn (2). If g(1)i and g(2)i are known, the plasma temperature T can be determined, and therefore, temperature correction factors can be determined using eqn (3).127,128 I(1)i/I(2)i = g(1)i/g(2)iexp[−(E(1)i − E(2)i)/kT](2) αi = KiIibo[I(1)j/I(2)j]b1(3)where αi is defined by the use of the intensity ratio in eqn (2), Ki and bo are the correction factors for species i, I(1)j and I(2)j are the emission intensities from upper energy levels 1 and 2 of species j, respectively, and b1 is the plasma temperature correction factor for the emission pair I(1)j and I(2)j. Therefore, the laser energy–material coupling, material ablation, species excitation, plasma evolution/kinetics, plasma interaction with surrounding gases, shockwave propagation, and local thermodynamic equilibrium are fundamental parameters required to address the impact factors for heuristic plasma modeling, spectral perception, and, above all, setup optimization. An optimized LIBS system correctly employs its components (basically, a laser source(s), optical configuration, sample handling modes, and detection system) to obtain the best correlation for plasma formation and spectral detection. For a detailed description of LIBS fundamentals, several books and review articles have already formed a satisfactory list.15–26
In the case of laser–coal interactions, the process includes multiple phenomena due to the heterogeneous physical and chemical properties of coal relative to other materials in general.129,130 As a result of its origin, coal is a mixture of organic and inorganic molecules, considerably varying in size and structure. Fig. 1 shows a chemical structure model for bituminous coal.131,132 Carbon is the major element. It is bound in aromatic units that increase with coalification, and simultaneously, the oxygen and hydrogen contents slightly decrease. Although not a single compound, coal can be expressed as CxHyOzNmS, where the subscripts x, y, z, and m indicate the relative compositions of C, H, O, and N, respectively. For example, sub-bituminous coal can be approximated by the general formula C135H96O9NS (with a variable mixture of organic and inorganic compounds, <1% S).133 Moreover, coals contain nearly all the elements present in the earth's crust (minor and trace elements) in different concentrations and distributions. With such a complicated material, coal–LIP suffers from strong matrix effects, which emphasize multiple sources of spectral uncertainty and create difficulties in data processing. Carbon emission signals are used in main coal analysis and diagnosis. The coal–LIP spectrum is effectively dominated by neutral atomic carbon, C2, and CN molecular band emissions. Atomic carbon lines are significant and can be identified based on NIST databases.134 In the UV/VIS spectral range, two atomic carbon lines, namely, C I 193.09 nm and C I 247.8 nm, are detected. Coal samples contain aromatic cycles (five- and six-membered rings) and diatomic structures C–C, CC, and C–N as intermolecular bonds, and therefore, show molecular C2 and CN emission bands, too. The molecular C2 emission comes from the swan system (d3 Πg → a3 Πμ), while CN comes from the violet system (B2 ∑+ → X2 ∑+). The diatomic structures (single bonds C–C or double bonds CC exhibited by the sample) are the main contributors for C2 molecular band formation (C + C + M ↔ C2 + M). For longer delay times, C2 formation may be attributed to the reaction of C atoms with CN and CH: C + CN ↔ C2 + N and C + CH ↔ C2 + H. The generation mechanism of CN radicals is more complicated. In general, coal contains lower than 1 wt% N. Therefore, there are three proposed routes: (1) reaction of atomic C in the plasma plume with N from the surrounding air; (2) excitation of CN intermolecular bonds with low excitation energies from the sample; and (3) recombination of C and N excited atoms in the plasma plume. Table 2 lists the wavelengths, vibrational bands, excitation energies, and electronic transitions for rudimentary C atomic lines and molecular bands used for coal–LIP analysis.135,136
 Fig. 1  Structural model of bituminous coal proposed by Shinn–Haenel.131,132 
Table 2 Commonly used atomic lines and molecular bands in coal–LIP spectra




Species
Wavelength (nm)
Vibrational bands
Excitation energy (eV)
Electronic transitions




C I
193.09
—
7.684766

1D–1P1


247.80
—
7.684766

1S0–1P1


C2 swan system
516.32
(0–0)
3.2
d3 Πg → a3 Πμ


512.93
(1–1)


509.77
(2–2)


473.71
(1–0)


471.52
(2–1)


469.76
(3–2)


468.48
(4–3)


CN violet system
388.34
(0–0)
3.2
B2 ∑+ → X2 ∑+


387.14
(1–1)


386.19
(2–2)


385.47
(3–3)


385.09
(4–4)


359.04
(1–0)


358.59
(2–1)


358.39
(3–2)




A systematic study of the experimental conditions required for stable coal–plasma formation and evolution is imperative for enhancing LIBS results. Until now, there is no such systematic work for the comprehensive understanding of laser–coal plasma physics. The research work reported can be classified into three parts: (1) experimental configuration, including work done on testing different laser sources and optical adjustments for better signals formation and detection; (2) coal matrix study, including the impact of different physical and chemical properties of coal on the laser energy–coal coupling process, such as coal particle size, addition of binders, surface smoothness (i.e., compressive force for pellets production), moisture, volatile matter, and ash contents; and (3) environmental factors, including the impact of different ambient gases, external pressures, and spatial confinement on plasma propagation. The studied factors partly determined a guideline for the analytically useful generation of coal plasma. Accurate qualitative and quantitative analyses of the elements in a specific coal stream are the core of coal ranking, analysis, and utilization. With regard to ranking,1,2,137 it is scientifically an often neglected fact that C contents and heat values of different coals can be globally used as a base for coal ranks with a narrowly shuffled range of variations. On a dry ash-free basis, there are four coal ranks:
• Lignite (brown coal) is the least mature, most impure, moist, and can be crumbled into a powder. It contains between 60 and 70 wt% C and has the lowest energy content (<7000 Btu lb−1).
• Sub-bituminous is brownish in color, poorly indurated, contains 71–77 wt% C, and has higher energy content than lignite (>7000–11000 Btu lb−1).
• Bituminous is a black, soft, and shiny rock. It contains 77–87 wt% C, and the most commonly used coal with higher energy content than sub-bituminous (10000–15000 Btu lb−1).
• Anthracite is a glassy cluster rock, blacker and harder than other coal types, and dense with fewer impurities. It has a C content in excess of 87 wt% and heat value of ∼13000 Btu lb−1.
Coal ranks indicate the progressive alteration, or coalification, from lignite to anthracite. With increasing coalification, the moisture content decreases, while both carbon and energy contents increase. LIBS has been used as an effective qualitative tool to discriminate between different coal types.77,99 With regard to coal analysis, the calorific heat value calculation and proximate and ultimate analyses require data derived from strong and well-resolved spectra. The spectral features vary significantly with even slight changes in the coal matrices. Fig. 2 shows the spectra of coal samples with different moisture and volatile matter contents. With an increase in the moisture content,66 the line intensities decreased throughout the spectra, indicating changes in the laser energy–coal coupling. Given the earlier evaporation of moisture, a portion of the laser energy is used to evaporate and dissociate the water, which forms splashed particles and shields more energy from interacting with coal constituents. Hence, the actual mass ablated is smaller with increasing moisture, resulting in the detection of weaker lines. However, the coal char sample showed higher intensities of mineral elements relative to its coal sample under the same experimental conditions.85 Changes in the matrix composition led to stronger variations in the coal spectra, and hence, they have a higher impact on coal quality analysis. With regard to coal utilization, coal properties related to combustion are the most important. When coal is combusted, coal reacts with oxygen in the presence of a heat source to form CO2 and water. This is an exothermic reaction, releasing the energy trapped in the chemical bonds of coal. The calorific value is an index to evaluate the oxygen amount required to combust a specific amount of coal and the thermodynamic efficiency of a gasifier. Moreover, minor constituents (sulfur, halogens, mercury, etc.) evaporated during coal combustion result in a number of environmental problems. Timely and accurate coal analysis is of utmost importance for combustion optimization.
 Fig. 2  LIBS spectra for (a) coal samples with lower and higher moisture contents (Ml: 1.19%; Mh: 22.25%);66 and (b) a coal sample with 20.76% volatile matter content and its coal char (devolatilized sample).85 
Two terms, namely, accuracy and precision, are required to be determined when operating a LIBS experiment. The measurement accuracy is a measure of the closeness in agreement between the experimental results and actual values (standard values, tests, or limits of detection). Precision is a measure of the agreement between the test results obtained under similar conditions. Moreover, LIBS standardization (research conducted to study the optimization and limitations of LIBS as a standard technique for a specific application) compels increased attention toward spectral repeatability and reproducibility. Repeatability is the precision with which a test can be repeated under the same experimental conditions, while reproducibility is the precision with which a test can be obtained from different experimental circumstances. A fundamental study should focus on achieving the most accurate/precise and repeatable/reproducible results.138 Insofar, fundamental studies have outlined the understanding of coal analyzers' operation modes (Section 3 of this paper) that occurs before data interpretation utilizing spectral processing algorithms to achieve high-performance quantitative analysis (which is delineated in Section 4).
2.1. Experimental configuration
Experimental protocols are relatively complicated for materials with a heterogeneous nature, such as coal. To optimize the various parameters affecting online coal analysis and for precise out-site analysis, sundry research work was conducted under simulated conditions. The measurement accuracy is sensitively affected by multiple factors mainly included within the experimental factors. Instrument precision, optical configuration, detection system, photoelectric properties, etc. should be studied and optimized to achieve highly reproducible signals.

Laser parameters. 
Commonly used laser sources for coal analysis are Nd:YAG lasers due to space reduction and compactness. High-energy lasers with bigger power units or harmonic separators that result in tighter packing conditions are difficult from a commercial point of view. LIBS measurements are fundamentally influenced by the laser source parameters, such as laser wavelength, energy, and repetition rate. Indeed, laser sources with different laser wavelengths generate photons of different energies, which affect the spectral lines and measurement precision and accuracy.
The performances of the 1st and 3rd harmonic wavelengths (1064 nm and 355 nm) of Nd:YAG laser were compared by Mateo et al.111 for the quantitative analysis of Fe, Mg, Si, Al, and Ca elements in 8 coal mine samples. Laser light with a pulse width of 6 ns, beam diameter of 9 mm, and pulse energies of 500 mJ and 70 mJ for 1064 nm and 355 nm, respectively, was focused on a sample by a 300 mm plano-convex lens. Two modes of operations were compared: dynamic analysis (30 surface laser pulses at 10 Hz and 2.5 mm s−1 sample motion speed) and static analysis (10 accumulated laser shots). The static mode of analysis revealed better RSD results due to the contamination effects from the surface in the case of dynamic mode. Better repeatability could be achieved when using the 1064 nm wavelength due to higher laser energy, while higher accuracy was obtained for the 532 nm wavelength as compared to the AAS results. When comparing the 1st and 4th Nd:YAG harmonic wavelengths, it was revealed that the 4th harmonic had better ablation due to lower thermal effects, provided better laser–sample coupling, and reduced plasma shielding.65 Using 18 standard bituminous coal samples, uniformly deeper craters could be observed in the case of the 266 nm wavelength laser relative to the 1064 nm wavelength laser (12 μm vs. 6 μm, respectively). The 4th harmonic proved to yield a higher C line intensity and better signal reproducibility with RSD = 5.62% as compared to 10.81% for the 1st harmonic. Qian et al.139 utilized the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd harmonic wavelengths of the Nd:YAG laser to study the temporal evolution of Mg II 279.6 nm, C I 247.9 nm, and Al I 308.2 nm lines. With a fixed gate width of 100 ns and laser energy of 100 mJ per pulse, 532 nm wavelength showed higher line intensities for all the tracked lines. The same result was obtained with a fixed delay time of 250 ns, while laser energies varied from 40 to 280 mJ per pulse. The authors suggested the utilization of 532 nm laser wavelength to maintain high coal quality measurement for industrial applications. Studies confirmed the better performance of UV over IR radiation for the qualitative and quantitative analyses of coal. Therefore, the commercialization of UV radiation sources in the coal LIBS industry can yield better analytical performance.
Wang et al.72 studied the laser energy and repetition rate optimization under fixed focusing and detection parameters. SNRs and RSDs of C I 247.9 nm and Si I 288.2 nm showed the optimum values at 100 mJ per pulse laser energy and 10 Hz repetition rate. With laser energies higher than 100 mJ per pulse, intensity saturation was observed due to plasma shielding, as shown in Fig. 3. The authors claimed better results for 10 Hz repetition rate due to the shaking off of the ablated ash material from the sample surface, leading to more stable signals.
 Fig. 3  RSDs and SNRs of C I 247.9 nm and Si I 288.2 nm lines with varying laser energies (70–120 mJ per pulse) and repetition rates (1, 5, and 10 Hz); Wang et al.72 


Optical configuration. 
Geometrical factors, such as the lens-to-sample distance (LTSD), considerably affect the ablated mass, and consequently, the analytical results. The optimization of the detection system is one of the principle parameters for enhancing the analytical results, as well.140 For the application of LIBS in industrial systems, one of the challenges is optical system adjustment due to the variable height of the coal rocks on a conveyor belt. Using an ultrasonic sensor, Gaft et al.101 maintained an optical focus with changes in the rock height within ±12.5 cm. The nominal focal distance to the material was 35 cm, and the depth of field was ±2 cm. In an offline study using coal blocks on a simulated conveyor belt (rotating stage), Redoglio et al.103,104 used a mirror-based detection system that displayed a 17.8 cm depth of field when the distance between the holed spherical mirror and the plasma plume was 1 m. The authors assured that a tradeoff between the mirror size and curvature radius was mandatory. Wang et al.72 used a beam expander before the focusing lens to obtain smaller spot sizes and to reduce the beam divergence angle. The spot size or laser focal position was investigated from 5 mm on the inside to 14 mm above the surface for 7 coal samples. The best SNR and RSD values of C I 247.9 nm and Si I 288.2 nm lines were obtained at 7.5 mm above the surface. The authors claimed that with an increase in the crater depth, the laser–sample energy coupling might decrease, which resulted in lower SNRs and higher RSDs. Without using a beam expander, Li et al.41,42 studied the LTSD to find the optimal value at −3 mm (inside the sample) with the lowest RSD, as shown in Fig. 4. When the LTSD was higher than the focal length of the lens, lower signal repeatability was observed due to air breakdown and change in laser–sample coupling (lower ablation efficiency). However, when the LTSD was much smaller than the focal length of the lens, the line intensities decreased due to colder plasma formation. In a study reported by Chen et al.,59 two collection paths (back-side and side paths) were compared for a pulverized coal stream formed by a solid–gas particle flow system. In the back-side path, the plasma emissions were collected by a center-holed mirror, while at the side path, the collection lens were at a 45° angle between the laser beam and coal stream. The results showed higher intensities for C 247.86 nm, Mg 285.21 nm, Al 308.19 nm, Si 288.15 nm, Fe 344.11 nm, and Ti 334.18 nm lines in the case of the side path relative to the back-side path. However, RSDs for the same lines were higher for the side path due to plasma fluctuations and blocking effects caused by the coal stream in the field of vision of the collecting lens.
 Fig. 4  RSDs of the emission line intensities as a function of the distance from the focal plane (0 indicates the sample is located at the focal length of the lens; negative values indicate that the distance between the sample and lens is smaller than the focal length). Lowest RSDs for Mg and Ca atomic and ionic lines were located 3 mm inside the sample; Li et al.41,42 

2.2. Coal matrix
Coal analysis is a challenging application for LIBS. This is because of the coal matrix. As mentioned earlier, coal is a metamorphic rock, composed primarily of carbon with variable amounts of many other elements. For such an extremely complex material, the interaction between the laser pulses and coal samples is a complicated process. The coal matrix causes nonlinear laser–coal interactions to occur during ablation, plasma formation, and vaporization. Moreover, the lack of matrix-matched reference coal samples is one of the main problems behind the reduction in LIBS accuracy. Generally, matrix effects can be reduced using two ways: (1) sampling: utilizing appropriate sample preparation methods to initially provide a representative sample of a relatively large amount of coal without bias; (2) data processing: involving data pretreatment and multivariate calibration models based on physical backgrounds. It is noteworthy that the standardization of the coal matrix reduction conditions is essential for obtaining results that are comparable within one laboratory or between different laboratories (necessity of repeatability for industrial applications). Since there is no general theory describing the entire influence of all the coal's matrices on the plasma parameters, a number of studies were conducted to illustrate the effect of particular properties such as particle size, addition of binders, compressive force for pellets production, and moisture and volatile contents on the analytical results.

• Physical matrices. 
Particle size. 
Grinding is significant to compensate for coal heterogeneity and to achieve sample homogeneity where mixing the rock's surface and bulk composition can be achieved. The LIBS analysis of raw coal blocks suffers from low representativeness due to irregularities in the shape of coals. The addition of binders and compressive force applied to coal powder with optimized particle size are proven ways to decrease matrix effects and improve the results.
Yu et al.38 prepared 4 different particle sizes from the Pingdingshan bituminous coal to cover the following diameter ranges: <100, 100–150, 200–300, and 300–560 μm. Boltzmann plots were formulated with 4 nonresonant C lines (392.07, 426.73, 505.22, and 786.09 nm). The results showed a remarkable increase in the plasma temperature (less fluctuated) with a decrease in the particle size due to faster and more sufficient thermal diffusion from the laser to the coal particles. Li et al.41 studied the effect of 4 particle sizes (0–0.1, 0.1–0.2, 0.2–0.3, and 0.3–0.6 mm) on the RSDs of C I 247.9 nm, Mg II 279.6 nm, and Mg I 285.2 nm lines. RSDs showed the lowest values for samples with particle sizes of 0–0.1 mm and 0.3–0.6 mm. For the particle size of 0–0.1 mm, the plasma was stable due to larger intermolecular forces and rigid coal pellets. For the particle size of 0.3–0.6 mm, the particles have a higher surface area that absorbs more energy, making the plasma more stable and reducing the RSD. However, pellets with larger particle size are more breakable; therefore, smaller particle sizes were recommended as optimum for further experiments. Using the Anderson cascade impactor, Deguchi et al.109,110 quantitatively measured the size-segregated particles in pulverized coal samples. The authors modified the structure of the impactor to allow the measurement of the particle diameters in real time by placing a pipe with a vacuum pump at each stage. Then, LIBS was applied at each stage for quantitative analysis. With temperature correction factors, signal stability was significantly improved. The diameters of 50% particles for these 6 stages were 5.60, 3.73, 2.56, 1.54, 0.90, and 0.55 μm. The concentration ratio C/SiO2 decreased when reducing the particle sizes from stages 1 to 6. This ensured that the content of different species in the fine particles remained uneven.
Compressive force. 
The homogeneity of a coal sample considerably affects the precision and accuracy of LIBS. Therefore, the pretreatment of powdery samples by pressing them into compact and smooth surfaces using tablet machines is an important sampling procedure that can be used to decrease matrix effects. Wang et al.72 studied the effect of compressing pressures on coal pellets in the range of 5–30 MPa. With increasing pressure, SNRs for C I 247.9 nm and Si I 288.2 nm improved and RSDs decreased with optimal values at 25 MPa pressure. Li et al.41 found that the RSDs of C I 247.9 nm, Mg II 279.6 nm, and Mg I 285.2 nm lines decreased from greater than 16% to less than 10% when pressing forces increased from 0 to 3 ton, where 0 force means analysis of the powder sample (investigated range: 0–15 ton). With compressive forces less than 3 ton, the samples were loose and fragile such that the laser pulses formed persistent aerosols and bigger craters. A further increase in the pressing force did not improve the RSDs; however, 10 ton of pressing force was selected as the optimum value. Repeatability improvement at optimum compressive forces can be attributed to the relative stability of the pulse-to-pulse ablated mass.


• Chemical matrices. 
Moisture variation. 
Water content in all forms (except water of crystallization with mineral matter) that resides within the coal matrix is defined as the moisture content. There are mainly two forms of water existing in coal: free water and bound water. The moisture content ranges from 6 wt% for anthracite to 45 wt% for lignite. Experiments have shown that there is severe obstruction by moisture content to most analytical lines including the major elements in the coal matrix. When a laser interacts with the sample, water consumes part of the pulse energy to evaporate, and a mixed zone is formed that consists of water vapor in the upper region and coal vapor in the lower region. Subsequently, plasma evaporation is accompanied by splashed molten particles. Both laser energy deposition and absorption by coal particles decrease with an increase in the moisture content, and this unstable locally coupled radiation energy induces considerably high uncertainty in the results. Moreover, the outer portion of the laser-induced plasma is derived from water ablation, and hence, results in fluctuations in the detection of the emission lines of the constituents of coals (Fig. 6).
Chen et al.66 studied the effects of moisture content variations (1.19–22.25%) on the properties of laser-induced plasma and its spectral signals. The results showed a decrease in the line intensities (SNRs and SBRs) of most spectral lines, including H and O, with an increase in the moisture content. However, the RSDs of the same lines increased with the moisture content. Spatially resolved spectra and plasma evolution images confirmed that moisture evaporates before the coal constituents, leading to laser energy shielding and formation of splashed particles. Gaft et al.101 reported that varying the moisture contents led to substantial errors in ash evaluation for inline LIBS systems. Further, Body et al.32 investigated low-ash lignite in a power plant where the moisture content was 67%. The decrease in the moisture content showed better quantitative results for the mineral elements. Yuan et al.58 reported the difficulty in establishing a dominant-factor-based partial least squares (PLS) model to specifically correlate with the elemental O and H line intensities and moisture content due to the lack of a physical background. Instead, a conventional PLS model was applied to statistically associate the entire spectral information with the moisture content. At either end, H can exist in the organic components of coal and O can come from the surrounding air. Consequently, LIBS experiments are preferable in an air-dried basis.
Volatile matter variation. 
As mentioned in the Introduction, volatile matter involves the vapors driven off during pyrolysis and mainly comprises a mixture of short- and long-chain hydrocarbons, aromatic hydrocarbons, and some sulfur. Volatile matter can be comprehensively determined using the spectral lines of the main organic elements (C, H, O, and N) and other mineral elements (Si, Al, Ca, Fe, etc.). Recently, Yao et al.85 studied the effect of volatile matter variations using 5 coal samples with volatile values of 8.94–35.10%, and their coal chars (devolatilized coals). Coal char spectra showed higher line intensities for C, H, O, N, Si, Ca, Fe, Al, Mg, Na, and K elements relative to the coal samples, as shown in Fig. 2b. The change in the matrix from coal to char (decrease in the volatile matter content) emphasized considerable changes in the coal plasma evolution, and hence, the spectral properties. A considerable amount of the laser pulse energy is consumed by the evaporation, dissociation, and ionization of volatiles (laser pyrolysis). Furthermore, as the volatile content in coal samples increases, more vaporized volatiles are pushed to the upper layers of the plasma plume (similar to water vapor shielding in high-moisture-content coals), causing inhibition of the mineral element intensities. Saturation of some mineral lines was observed, and the authors attributed this to the separation of mineral elements from carboxyl-containing functional groups in coal and recombination with the coal char matrix. No settled relationship was observed between the line intensities of major elements (C, H, O, and N) and volatile content.
Ash content. 
Coals have variable amounts of ash-forming mineral elements. Ash is mainly generated from the inorganic constituents of coal during combustion. In the combustion process, moisture and volatile (combustible) contents are burnt out and the mineral substances undergo a series of chemical reactions to form ash. Coal ash is mainly composed of various oxides of mineral elements, such as Al2O3, SiO2, Na2O, K2O, CaO, MgO, Fe2O3, Ti2O3, etc. Under optimized conditions, ash content should exhibit a linear relation with the concentration of its oxides in the coal matrix. However, LIBS measures the total number of atoms of each corresponding element in the coal matrix, regardless of the compound involved. Moreover, mineral matter has a complex behavior in coal plasma, and therefore, the elemental intensity ratios are used for better correlation with the corresponding molar/concentration ratios. Further, multivariate analysis methods are employed to extract the ash content with higher accuracy.101,121,141
Addition of binders. 
Sufficient mechanical strength of samples is critical for LIBS analysis. It is difficult to press pulverized anthracite, unlike bituminous, into pellets, and the pressed surfaces are not tenacious enough to sustain multiple laser shots. Therefore, laser pulse interaction with pulverized anthracite suffers from pulse-to-pulse high uncertainty. Therefore, the addition of binders is considered to be an essential step. Organic and inorganic binders are used to achieve the mechanical strength required to undergo laser interaction, as well as to enhance elemental detection. Generally, there are two key issues in the addition of binders to pulverized coal samples. First, the binder chemical composition, size, and percentage should be carefully selected. Second, the homogeneous mixing of pulverized coal and binder powder might be ensured. The influences of different binders on the signal detection of the element and enhancement were studied.
Yuan et al.53 compared the effects of the addition of three binders, namely, KBr, Na2SiO3·9H2O, and H3BO3, to sustain adhesive pellets and also on the enhancement of C content measurement using 22 anthracite samples. The optimum percentage of each binder was chosen by the lowest RSD for the C I 247.86 nm line as 80% for KBr, 50% for Na2SiO3·9H2O, and 50% for H3BO3. The best results were achieved using Na2SiO3·9H2O as the binder. Yao et al.80 studied the effect of different KBr binder percentages for quantitative C content measurement in coal. Four groups of mixed-pressed pellets were prepared from 9 coal samples (8 samples were bituminous coal and 1 was lignite coal) and 4 KBr concentrations (0, 30, 60, and 90 wt%). The SEM images of the craters revealed irregular crater shapes without the binder and reduction in crater border deformations with increasing binder content (Fig. 5). These results revealed that 60 wt% KBr binder concentration was the best concentration for improving the quantitative analysis.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of the craters formed on the coal pellet surfaces with different percentages of KBr binder: (a) 0 wt%; (b) 30 wt%; (c) 60 wt%; and (d) 90 wt%; Yao et al.80 
 Fig. 6  Proposed laser–coal interaction with a high-moisture-content sample. (a) Laser energy deposition, (b) moisture vaporization, (c) mixed zone of water and coal vapors, (d) plasma formation within water–coal mixed vapor and formation of splashed particles, and (e–h) plasma decay with outer cooler layer formed by water vapor leading to shielded detection of coal constituents; Chen et al.66 
Compacting fly ash into pellets is more complicated as compared to powder coal as it is a fragile fine-grained combustion byproduct. Hence, it is intuitive that the addition of binders is a fast and simple method for fly ash analysis. Ctvrtnickova et al.112,113 studied the effect of four binders (KBr, wax, PVA, and carbon tape) on the spectral analysis of fly ash. Eight samples of powder fly ash with different elemental compositions were provided by a Spanish coal-fired power company (Endesa, S.A.). The KBr binder was suitable for C content measurement because it contains no C. Moreover, “on tape” sticking presented the fastest way of sample preparation, but induced problems of interference, as well as PVA and wax. Stankova et al.98 utilized two binders: cellulose and cellulose/silver powder (1:1) for major element (Ca, Fe, Mg, Al, and Si) analysis in fly ash. Nine fly ash samples were employed in the study as obtained from coal-fired power plants and domestic incinerators. It was found that cellulose-containing samples exhibited better mechanical stability, while LoD enhancement of ∼1.6 was recorded in the case of cellulose/silver powder with notable noise reduction. It is worth nothing that silver addition enhanced the signal intensities and sensitivities. Pan et al.67 used pure Na2SiO3 as a binder to press fly ash samples into pellets. Two kinds of ash samples were taken from the ash discharge port of the ash hopper under electrostatic precipitator in different coal-fired power plants. The fly ash to Na2SiO3 ratio was optimized to be 1:2 for good mechanical strength.

2.3. Environmental factors

Ambient gas. 
The interaction between the plasma plume and ambient gas significantly influences the optical emission and spectral information available for a chemical analysis. Several studies reported the ambient gas impact on plasma evolution and properties for coal analysis. Dong et al.119 performed a time-resolved study under different ambient gases. The temporal evolution of C I 247.8 nm line showed fast decay with an increase in the gate delay; however, for the molecular C2 (0–0) band, there was an initial increase up to 300–500 ns followed by a decrease with increasing time. Generally, the collisions of O and N in air with C enhance the formation of molecular species like CN, C2, CO, etc. with a reduction in atomic C emission. The CN band showed considerable intensity in air, while lower intensities were recorded for He and Ar environments (N content in the sample was ∼1%), as shown in Fig. 7. The excitation temperatures were estimated to be 9027 ± 361 K in Ar, 7423 ± 256 K in He, and 7102 ± 225 K in air. The electron number densities were the highest for Ar and the lowest for He with faster temporal decay than temperature. By simulating the experimental spectra with best-fit synthetic spectra of the C2 band, the rotational temperatures were measured to be 6973.9 ± 73 K, 6412.8 ± 70 K, and 5268.3 ± 76 K for Ar, air, and He, respectively.
 Fig. 7  Time evolution of (a) integrated intensity of atomic carbon C I 247.8 nm; (b) integrated intensity of molecular C2 band; and (c) intensity of CN band head (0–0) at 388.3 nm for three ambient gases, namely, air, argon, and helium; Dong et al.119 
Wang et al.52 studied the effect of ambient He and Ar gases on the intensities of C I 193.09 nm, H I 656.28 nm, and N I 746.83 nm lines in 24 bituminous coal samples. Again, the plasma temperatures for different samples were higher in Ar and He than those in air. For Ar, this was attributed to the lower thermal conductivity that helped to preserve plasma heat (caging effect). However, for He, more energy was deposited into the plasma due to higher ionization energy of the gas. The C I 193.09 nm and H I 656.28 nm lines exhibited 2–3 times enhancement in Ar, while N I 746.83 nm was visible only in air. For simple N content measurement in coal, Lahna et al.106 plotted the N calibration curve using the intensity ratio of CN 388.3 nm band/C I 247.8 nm line as a function of 7 different CN concentrations. Coal samples with >1% N was detected in He gas at 2 kPa. Pan et al.67 tracked the molecular CN band formed in air, Ar, and N2. Three routes for CN formation were expected: (1) direct vaporization from the sample due to the existence of CN radicals as intermolecular bonds with low excitation energy; (2) chemical reaction between the C atoms in plasma and N in air; (3) chemical reaction between C2 in plasma and N in air. No CN bands or N lines were observed in ambient Ar gas, which confirmed the formation of CN from the reaction between the C in plasma and N from air. Li et al.41 studied the effect of ambient gases in inorganic line intensities like Mg and Ca in 4 bituminous coal samples. The line intensities of Mg II 279.6 nm, Mg I 285.2 nm, Ca II 393.4 nm, and Ca I 422.7 nm were higher in air than those in N2. Argon ambient demonstrated the highest line intensities with ∼3–4 times enhancement. Further, the O I 777.4 nm line intensity was higher in air than that in N2 by a factor of 4, showing that the spectral O line in air is obtained from O in both coal and air. In another type of study,46 a free oscillated Nd:YAG laser was employed to induce air plasma on the surface of a heated coal target in air and in a combustible mix of hydrogen and oxygen (H2:O2 = 2:1), as shown in Fig. 8. In air, the plasma temperature was calculated by fitting the experimental spectrum of the B2 ∑+ → X2 ∑+ CN radical band with the simulated spectrum. The plasma temperature ranged from 5000 K to 9000 K with the laser pulse varied between 100 and 500 mJ per pulse, and the electron density was estimated by using the Kramer's formula in the order of 1018 cm−3. In the gas mix, the plasma formation and evolution were restrained by OH radicals production through chain branch reactions. Hence, the plasma size was found to be smaller in the case of combustible environments relative to the plasma formed in air. Moreover, the glow explosion of gas was observed due to seed-free electrons and radicals formed during the laser–coal interaction.142
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram for a plasma evolution study of heated coal in a combustion cell; Yang et al.46 


Ambient pressure. 
The ambient pressure plays an important role in plasma evolution and morphology. When the pressure is too low, the mean free path of an atom is long such that the collision probability is low for both excitation and ionization. In contrast, high pressure causes the mean free path to shorten, which induces sufficient velocity in atoms for collisions. With increasing ambient pressure, the surrounding ambient density increases, leading to higher plasma shielding effects (i.e., reduction in ablated mass and signal intensities).
Noda et al.107 applied an automated LIBS unit to measure the C content under high-temperature/pressure conditions for pulverized coal, char, and fly ash samples. As the pressure increases in the range of 0–3 MPa, the C/Si signal ratio rapidly decreased due to high plasma-quenching rate. Moreover, ambient pressure affects the optimum delay time. The C signal persisted for a reduced time-delay period: with increasing pressure, the optimum delay time range became shorter and narrower. The LIBS spectra under high-pressure conditions are buried in the background noise during the period of high plasma temperature and they appear at rather low plasma temperatures. Under laser ignition conditions, Yang et al.46 found that with an increase in the initial pressure of premixed gas (H2:air = 0.26:1) in a coal combustion cell, the minimum ignition energy decreases drastically at a fixed laser energy. In the laser ignition process, the laser beam provides the energy required for ablation of seed-free electrons and the production of active radicals from a heated coal target. Therefore, with an increase in the gas pressure, the number of molecules in the focal region increased, causing efficient absorption of the laser energy and efficient ignition, too. It is noteworthy that this is the same reason behind smaller plasma size formed in the combustible gas relative to the one formed in air. When the initial pressure was higher than 20 kPa, the minimum ignition energy was estimated to be ∼7.2 mJ.


Spatial confinement. 
Several types of literature have reported the spatial enhancement of LIBS signals using cavity configurations (cylindrical and hemispheric). The dimensions and materials of the cavities are essential parameters toward enhancement. Shockwave compression, plasma radiation reflections from the chamber walls, and relative permittivity of the chamber material are reported as explanations for signal enhancement using cavities. Cylindrical cavities have been analyzed for the enhancement of coal properties. Studies have shown that spatial confinement can regularize the plasma morphology to be uniform and elongated (thinner) with lesser fluctuations. Improved signal precision and repeatability can be attributed to the restricted electrons in a caged plume with each pulse detection.143
Li et al.78 used nitrile butadiene rubber (NBR) as a confinement ring to study the spectral enhancement in 58 coal samples. The ring had a diameter of 3 mm and height of 1 mm (D3H1). The spectral enhancement was attributed to the high relative permittivity of the ring material, which struck and reflected the formed shockwaves inducing compression effects on the plasma. Signal enhancement of ∼2 was recorded through a set of 240 spectra for each sample. The same enhancement factor was reported when Wang et al.51 used a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) plate with a thickness of 1.5 mm and diameter of 3 mm as a cylindrical cavity. RSD reductions of 21% and 36% were achieved for C I 193.09 nm line when using laser energies of 80 and 130 mJ per pulse, respectively. The plasma temperature and electron density were higher when using a cavity, ensuring the satisfaction of the LTE condition. However, plasma relaxation time and diffusion length were shorter, attributable to the compression effect of the shockwave in the cavity case. Repeatability improvement was attributed to the regulation in plasma morphology. To minimize the uncertainty from variations in laser cavity alignment, the experimental configuration was modified from a multicavity ring moving with the sample into a single-cavity ring adjusted relative to the laser shot (to ensure that the laser shot is strictly inside the hole), while the sample is moved using a step motor. Moreover, an air fan was used to blow off the aerosols after each laser pulse. The RSD of C I 193.09 nm was reduced from 9.6% using a multicavity ring (different centers and no air flow) to 4.1% using a single-cavity ring (fixed laser-hole position and an air flow). Moreover, better repeatability and SNRs were achieved when combining the cylindrical confinement with a spark discharge,87,88 as shown in Fig. 9. The plasma morphology was investigated using integrated pixels on ICCD. The RSDs of 40 data (40 laser shots) for each pixel were calculated to reveal the large fluctuation and instability when using the discharge process. Spatial confinement clearly enhanced the repeatability by stabilizing the plasma propagation morphology. Data was processed using the spectrum standardization method combined with dominant-factor-based PLS model for C content detection.89 The results were compared to yield R2, RMSEP, ARE, and AAE values of 0.99, 1.63%, 1.83%, and 1.27% without the cavity and 0.99, 1.35%, 1.66%, and 1.08% with the cavity, respectively. This is the best reported result for cylindrical confinement enhancement so far.
 Fig. 9  RSDs of the coal–plasma morphology utilizing different spatial confinement procedures. (a) Conventional plasma; (b) cylindrical cavity; (c) spark discharge; and (d) cylindrical cavity + spark discharge. The average RSDs were 20.8%, 7.8%, 30.3%, and 12.6%, respectively; Wang et al.51 

3. Operation modes
For applications in coal analysis, there are three different situations, installation sets, or modes of operation for a coal analyzer: inline, at-line, and offline. An inline analyzer is placed over the coal conveyer belt or besides the coal powder flow, where the analyzed coal form is the same as that in the coal stream, without pellet preparation (i.e., no sampling system is required to feed the analyzer). The at-line analyzer usually comprises the LIBS system and automated sampling system, which takes the coal sample from the belt, grinds, mixes, presses it into a pellet, analyzes, and finally sends it back to the coal stream. The offline analyzer is a separated LIBS system which is the same as the laboratory analyzer, but located near the coal utilization line where the sample handling is manually operated. To realize real-time online analysis, the most convenient way is to use an inline analyzer shooting the laser directly onto the coal blocks or powder on a conveyor belt. However, this configuration usually suffers from severe measurement errors and high uncertainty. Offline analyzers utilizing pressed pellets can yield reliable results, but they consume time and human labor. At-line analyzers are a compromise; they can automatically make a sample with a flat surface and high representativeness to improve the analysis performance, while the disadvantages are complexity and high price.
3.1. Inline
Within the four processes of coal analysis, namely, pricing, washing, mixing/blending, and combustion optimization, the distinction is as follows: coal analyzers directly shooting at coal blocks over-the-belt or pulverized coal stream and other analyzers in a power plant/mine. In this section, the installation, operation, and performance of LIBS systems over a conveyor belt are reported.
In South Africa, Gaft et al.100,101 ran a performance test for the laser detect systems (LDS) in LIBS units at Optimum Colliery over a four-month period with regard to the coal ash content. The compact system (dimensions: 150 × 80 × 130 cm; weight: 250 kg) was installed on a conveyer belt in an inline manner with a Coalscan 9500X PGNAA analyzer. The number of coal blocks moved per minute on the conveyor belt was ∼120000. The depth of field was ±2 cm; since the coal height varied beyond this, an ultrasonic sensor was used to maintain a fixed focal distance by moving the optical system. The system was calibrated using 5 laboratory samples with ash content varying from 12.5 to 53.9%. Moreover, the moisture content was incorporated in the software. The results revealed an SD value of 0.21 and R2 = 0.99 for correlation between the laboratory ash analysis and system results. The LDS system successfully achieved an average standard error of 0.32% as compared to the PGNAA analyzer (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Inline LDS system mounted over a conveyor belt with coal blocks; Gaft et al.100,101 
The Energy Research Company (ERCo)144 installed a LIBS unit at PPL Generation's Montour Power Station, Pennsylvania, USA. The plant has two 775 MW coal-fired units and coal blocks arrive via a rail train to be fired upon by a laser over the conveyor belt before reaching the crushing station. The belt speed reported by Romero et al.117,118,121 was 500 ft min−1 and the data was processed using an artificial neural network (ANN, standard back-propagation and Kohonen unsupervised algorithms). The developed software compensated for surface composition, heating value, ash fusion temperature, slagging indices, and blending ratio. The results for over 73 h of operation showed worthwhile accuracy and repeatability for Al, C, Ca, K, Mg, Na, Fe, S, Si, and Ti elemental measurements. The RMSDs for Fe, S, fusion temperature, and coal heating value were 1.07%, 0.14%, 33.16 °F, and 75.86 Btu lb−1, respectively.
At the Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, California, USA, Ottesen et al.27–30 performed in situ direct quantitative measurements of the inorganic constituents of Si, Al, Mg, Ca, Fe, and Ti on single coal particles. The stream of coal particles in the size range of 105–125 μm from 4 coal samples were introduced using a syringe-type feeder in a premixed flat flame burner. A spectrometer with insufficient resolution was able to detect elements having concentrations above 100 ppm. Single-particle LIBS results were in reasonable agreement with the standard bulk coal analysis data. The upgrading of the Sandia LIBS system was reported by Blevins et al.116 (Echelle spectrometer and improved optical probes for harsher conditions). In coal–biomass boilers, the analysis was performed at a temperature of 1170 K and 18 L min−1 flow of N2 purge (to clean the lenses of the probe). The emission lines of Mg, Si, Ti, Fe, Ca, Al, Na, and K in the spectral range of 260–790 nm were used to make the calibration curves in the concentration range of 0–55 mg m−3 at 300 K and 0.1 MPa, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Inline Sandia LIBS system with a soot blower housed on the right-hand side of the probe; Blevins et al.116 
At the General Electric Global Research Center, Niskayuna, USA, Deng et al.39 presented the preliminary LIBS results for fast online analysis of coal solids and syngas in IGCC power plants to replace comparatively time-consuming offline analysis methods. Inorganic components of Fe, Al, Ca, Mn, Zn, and Na, as well as the majority species of C, H, O, and N were present in the spectra of the coal samples, matching with the results obtained by EDS.
At the University of Tennessee Space Institute's magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) test facility, Zhang et al.115 applied LIBS on a gas stream at a temperature of ∼2550 K and a velocity of 1000 m s−1. The emission lines of several elements present in fly ash such as Ca, Al, Ba, Ti, Mg, Fe, and Mn were detected. By assuming LTE, the plasma temperature was found to be within ∼6000–7000 K, which could be attributed to the fluctuations in the ash particle size and density, thereby affecting the breakdown process. The results presented were not quantitative; however, the study demonstrated the capability of LIBS measurements for the simultaneous determination of different elements in a harsh practical environment.
In Japan, Deguchi et al.108 installed MLIBS-UC2002 prototype unit on the exhaust of the unit 1 boiler of the Haramachi thermal power plant for the analysis of unburnt C in fly ash. The instrument was capable of measuring 0–10% of unburnt C, installed over a 1 year period: more than 20 types of coals were used. The results showed that coal with a low-fuel ratio had lower content of unburnt C in fly ash, and a switch from a high-fuel ratio to a low-fuel ratio was clearly observed. The results had a SD value of 0.27% relative to JIS M8815, showing sufficient accuracy.
3.2. At-line
A fine at-line coal analyzer utilizes an automated sampling system, and it can be mounted besides the main conveyer belts or feeding devices (after milling). An automatic sample handling unit is meant to take coal samples (rocks or pulverized coal) from the belt (or out of the stream), grind (if required), mix, press into pellets, feed to the LIBS analysis unit, and finally send the samples back to the coal stream. Therefore, at-line coal analyzers are considered to be a high-priority requirement in the technical choices and considerations of power plants. With each coal bank from a specific ore origin (or according to the field management considerations), LIBS systems would be more fitted for inline coal analysis with the ability to provide competitive, fast, and accurate results. Advanced LIBS systems programmed with advanced data interpretation methods would be, indeed, a huge achievement for this field. Until now, at-line analyzers are still upgrading.93
In a Powder River Basin mine, USA, a Progression Titan CCA unit145 was installed for S, ash, moisture, and Na2O detection. Coal was transported to 4 loadout silos by 60" conveyors at rates of 3000–6000 ton h−1. A two-stage sweep-arm sampling system was installed on the belt, where a coal stream was pushed into the unit for analysis. The unit utilized a magnetic resonance (MR) chamber for the direct determination of moisture content, while LIBS unit was operated for the fast detection of S, six major constituent elements of ash (Si, Al, Fe, Ca, K, and Ti), and Na2O emissions (Na levels were below the detection threshold of PGNAA analyzers). Over a three-week operation period, the unit showed outstanding results for the determinations of calorific value and ash and moisture contents, as well as AFT and accurate base-to-acid ratio estimation.
In Australia, Chadwick et al.31–34 designed an integrated LIBScan™ unit utilizing multiple spectrographs and CCD detectors with a footprint of 50 × 60 × 30 cm. The unit was applied in two power plants (Loy Yang Power) for the fast analysis of Si, Al, Fe, Mg, Na, K, Ca, C, and H elements in low-ash lignite (1.6% ash + 67% moisture content) coal samples. The mine samples were crushed to have a homogeneous size < 100 μm (automatically pressed into pellets), while moist samples were treated by light crushing. For each sample located on a fast translation stage, up to 300 surface laser shots were recorded. The instrument could automatically construct the calibration curve by univariate regression over the elemental concentration range. The results showed a LoD value of ∼0.01% and repeatability of ±10% (over a month-long run) at an affordable price of <$40000.
In Japan, Deguchi et al.107 designed a system utilizing an automated LIBS unit and a furnace to detect the C content in fly ash, char, and pulverized coal under high-temperature high-pressure conditions resembling those in gasification thermal power plants. The furnace could be operated in the temperature and pressure ranges of 300–1000 K and 0.1–3 MPa, respectively. If a pressure increase was detected, a valve would automatically close and the measurement would remotely shut down. Satisfactory results were obtained within 1 min, which is fairly fast in comparison to the over 30 min sampling time required by other conventional methods.
In China, Yin et al.45,49 developed a fully software-controlled LIBS system comprising LIBS apparatus and sampling equipment. The sampling equipment was designed into two parts: (1) entrance and exit pipes (sampling module) and (2) cyclone collector, optical transmitter-receivers, vibrator, and unloading valve (sample preparation module). The LIBS apparatus was controlled by a computer through a special triggering source and the optical components were cleaned by a high-pressure gas cleaning device to prevent optical contamination by aerosols, as shown in Fig. 12. By using the “Bode Rule/DC Level” normalization and the proposed data conversion methods, elemental (C, Ca, Mg, Ti, Si, H, Al, Fe, etc.), net calorific value, and proximate analyses of pulverized coals could be accomplished. The relative measurement errors for elemental analysis were within 10%, while those of ash content (dried) were in the range of 2.29–13.47%.
 Fig. 12  At-line LIBS system developed by Yin et al.,45 illustrating the sampling equipment. 
3.3. Offline
The offline mode of operation deals with coal analyzers utilizing manually prepared pressed pellets. Coal analysis using pressed pellets is considered to be the best solution to obtain precise LIBS results. By grinding and mixing the coal powder, representative samples can be formulated. Moreover, the pressed surfaces yield better analytical results due to the formation of more stable plasma and repeatable signals relative to both direct analysis on coal blocks and analysis on coal powder flow in transportation pipelines to the coal furnaces. In this section, the offline mode of operation is reviewed, followed by an epitomized list of some desktop LIBS systems for coal analysis to provide a guideline to researchers interested in instrumentation development.
In USA, Romero et al.117 developed a LIBS system to be installed in a power plant that utilized coal from 3 mines. The samples were grabbed from a conveyor belt, crushed, sieved to 250 μm, and dried to remove superficial moisture. The LIBS unit achieved measurement accuracy for elemental composition (for Al, Ca, K, Mg, Na, Fe, Si, and Ti elements) within ±15% (absolute). The results indicate an AFT error of ±56 °C and average precision of ±14 °C when compared to ASTM standard measurements. Stipe et al.120 performed the quantitative analysis of silica particles in coal dust accumulated on filters. Four types of coal dusts (Pure silica Min-U-Sil™ 5, Georgia kaolin, Pittsburgh-4, and Illinois-6) were deposited on 37 mm PVC filters. Using the integrated peak area of Si I 288.16 nm line, the RSDs varied from 10–15% using 20 surface laser shots per sample; the LoD and LoQ values for silica were 0.16 and 0.53 μg cm−2, respectively. The results revealed 25 times sensitivity for LIBS over the time-consuming standard technique based on FT-IR for silica content measurement in coal dust.
In Spain, Ctvrtnickova et al.114 applied both LIBS and TMA for predicting the slagging propensity of coal and coal blends. High slagging means the risk of a thick layer of hard deposits created on boiler walls. While only tested in a laboratory, coal samples from various mines (Kideco and Adaro, Indonesia; Virginia, USA; and Teruel, Spain) were milled to particle sizes ≤75 μm and tested using LIBS, TMA, and ICP-OES. For TMA and ICP-OES, the coal blends were ashed in an oven for 7 h under 750 °C. While the LIBS technique provided fast and precise elemental detection of C, H, Si, Al, Fe, Ti, Ca, Mg, Na, K, Mn, Sr, and Ba elements without ashing, TMA analysis was applied to calculate the slagging indices. The authors suggested the applicability of LIBS and TMA to replace the time-consuming and costly ICP-OES technique.
In China, Zhang et al.70 designed a fully software-controlled LIBS unit comprising LIBS apparatus, analysis chamber, and control module. The analysis chamber included a sample stage (driven by a stepping motor) and a jet pump (driven by high-speed compressed air utilized to create continuous negative pressure in the nozzle near the plasma in order to suck all the generated aerosols). The control module could control the entire system including the sample motion, laser firing, laser energy stabilization, spectral saving, and analysis results. Here, 550 samples were collected from different mines, crushed to ∼100 μm, and pulverized into pellets. After a 1 month term test, the RSDs of the laser energy reduced from ±5.2% to ±1.3%. The unit was developed for measuring the ash content, volatile matter content, and caloric heat value by using SVM combined with the PCA modeling software.
In Italy, Redoglio et al.103,104 analyzed 7 raw coal rocks using a moving system at the laboratory level, as shown in Fig. 13. The apparatus comprised a 500 mm-diameter circular array, housing the coal samples, which rotates around a vertical axis at a constant speed. A mirror-based optical system with a large depth of field was utilized to overcome the changing height of the coal samples. The combination between the optical system and controlled rotating tray allowed scanning the entire sample surface at the desired sampling frequency.
 Fig. 13  Laboratory tests using a motorized moving system to mimic coal samples on a conveyor belt; Redoglio et al.103,104 
As mentioned above, LIBS systems have already shown promising potential for coal analysis with special advantages offered for coal power plants: above the belt (inline) installation with minimal space requirements and ease of retrofit, at-line rapid sampling and analysis of large volumetric flows, full-elemental analysis capability in one measurement, good tradeoff between short-time analysis and high precision, safe operation at a low cost, and competitive compactness with the ability of creating handheld analyzers.146–150 It is clearly concluded that LIBS systems offer a strong justification for installation in coal-fired power plants with different modes of operations. Therefore, companies that develop LIBS coal analyzers would form a bigger market in the near future. A number of benchtop LIBS systems have already been used for coal analysis, such as J200 LIBS instrument developed by Applied Spectra Incorporated to handle the most demanding trace elements analyses in coal,151 MX2500+ developed by Ocean Optics for coal analytical requirements,152 ChemReveal LIBS Desktop Elemental Analyzer developed by TSI Incorporated for the direct chemical analysis of solid materials including coal153 (see Fig. 14), Spectrolaser 4000 system developed by XRF Scientific,154 and CoalCAM produced by Brightray for ash and S analyses.155 Moreover, other LIBS systems, generally developed for online mining applications, have an opportunity to be used for coal analysis, such as Honeybee LIBS analyzer,156 ECCO® 2 developed by Foster + Freeman Ltd.,157 LIBSlab developed by Lasertechnik Berlin (LTB),158 OFUR developed by Advanced Mining Technologies,159 and mobile double-pulse (DP) LIBS instruments.160
 Fig. 14  ChemReveal integrated LIBS unit for offline coal analysis.41,153 
4. Data processing
Data processing is the bridge connecting the raw spectral and measurement results, which is one of the most important procedures in LIBS measurement process. Data processing mainly includes data pretreatment and calibration models. Coal spectrum is highly complicated and replete with redundant and interfered information. Therefore, it is imperative to process spectral data by a delicate choice of statistical modeling (or using combined models) for spectral information extraction. In this section, data interpretation encompassing data pretreatment methods, as well as univariate and multivariate calibration models proposed for the classification and quantification of coals, are reviewed. Thereafter, basic special considerations for coal analysis are summarized.24,161
4.1. Data pretreatment
Data pretreatment is usually applied for improving the repeatability, bettering the SNR, or reducing the matrix effects. Different pretreatment methods can be combined to enhance the analysis performance. Nevertheless, care must be taken for the selection of a pretreatment method since the selection of an improper pretreatment method may lead to the worsening of the analysis results. Repeatability is one of the most important aspects to be ensured while establishing a calibration curve; hence, it should be specially considered when designing the data pretreatment procedure.

Accumulation and averaging. 
Accumulation and averaging multiple spectra are the simplest methods to reduce noise as well as to improve repeatability and SNRs. Usually, the accumulation number is selected to make the spectral intensity higher while avoiding intensity saturation. Keeping this criterion in view, the averaging number can be as large as possible. However, according to statistical theory, if the noise that affects the reproducibility of line intensity is random noise obeying normal distribution with expectation μ and standard deviation σ, the average intensity of the multiple spectra (e.g., n spectra) would have expectation μ and standard deviation σ. Therefore, with a larger accumulation number, a further increase in the averaging number would have a marginal impact on the repeatability improvement of the signal. Sometimes, increasing the averaging number has a limit for RSD reduction. For coal analysis, especially for coal blocks or powder measurement, it is important to use multiple laser pulses and use accumulative or averaged spectrum to cancel out unintended noise.162


Data filtering. 
Data filtering methods are introduced from the digital signal processing field. Data filtering methods mainly include smoothing, mean filtering, Kalman filter, Wiener filtering, adaptive filtering, wavelet transform, etc. These methods provide the tools to divide the spectra into “signal” and “noise” and then eliminate the “noise” part from the spectra to increase the SNR and enhance repeatability. However, it is convoluted to define “signal” and “noise”. Hence, the physical background of a filtering method and its implication on LIBS must be considered prior to the application on spectral data. Usually, an optimization process based on qualitative/quantitative performance is used to determine the parameters of data filtering. For example, moving average is a typical smoothening method, which can be applied on the spectrum of each sample to reduce the errors caused by noise signals from the instrument and ambience. The width of the moving window is an important parameter and has to be carefully determined. If the moving window is too narrow, the smoothening effect is limited, while if the moving window is too wide, the resolution of the spectrum can be affected, resulting in poor performance of the qualitative/quantitative analysis. Li et al.84 tested different spectral preprocessing methods such as smoothing, standard normal variate transformation, multiplicative scatter correction, mean centering, and derivation by convolution (Savitzky–Golay filter) to measure the calorific heat values in 44 coal samples. The quantitative model obtained the best performance with the application of 11-point smoothing combined with second-order derivation.


Normalization. 
Normalization is the most popularly used method to reduce the uncertainty of a signal and to improve the signal–elemental concentration correlation. The reference signal could be the spectral area, internal standard, acoustic, image, electric current, Mie scattering, etc. The preferred reference signal should be proportional to the ablated mass or other plasma properties, but it should be independent of the analyte content; therefore, the uncertainty could be reduced without affecting the concentration information. Unfortunately, there are no standardized theoretical methods for reference signal selection; in most cases, the reference method selection relies only on experience. Therefore, normalization can partially and indirectly reduce signal fluctuations, sometimes even leading to worse repeatability or accuracy than the case without normalization. Internal standard is a special normalization method. The key problem is to maintain the internal elemental concentration as a constant for a series of samples (including the test samples). Yin et al.45 used the “Bode Rule/DC Level” normalization to establish the ultimate and proximate analyses in a fully software-controlled LIBS unit. Yao et al.71 evaluated the performance of a multivariate calibration model coupled with fixed and changed internal normalization. C 247.86 nm, CN band at 388.34 nm, and C2 at 516.32 nm were proposed to be changed as per the normalization with respect to the lines of inorganic elements, which are distributed in the same spectral channel. The results showed a significant improvement in the quantitative analysis with changed normalization. Body et al.33 investigated conventional peak area analysis, discarding “outlying” data points, calculating the ratio of the peak areas to the total plasma emission intensity (pulse-to-pulse intensity normalization), and spectral deconvolution methods on 250 spectra per samples from 6 coal samples. It was concluded that using the average integrated peak areas and comparison to standards yielded low levels of accuracy enhancement and that pulse-to-pulse analysis is necessarily required. Spectral deconvolution methods showed enhanced results from spectral systems having moderate resolution.


Spectrum standardization. 
Since normalization only uses the approximate relationship between the reference and measured signals, it can only partially and indirectly reduce the signal fluctuations, sometimes even lead to worse repeatability or accuracy than the data obtained without normalization. Li et al.163 proposed a more direct method with physical and theoretical backgrounds to reduce uncertainty, which is called spectrum standardization. Spectrum standardization assumed the existence of a “standard state” for the measured sample set, under which the plasma temperature (T), electron number density (ne), and total number density of the measured species (ns) would have standard values. Each measurement signal could be regarded as the standard state value plus the deviation caused by the variation in T, ne, and ns. By converting each measured spectrum into the spectrum under the standard state, the measurement uncertainty can be considerably reduced. Different from normalization, spectral standardization compensates for the signal fluctuations using the plasma parameters. This is because all the fluctuation sources such as laser energy, delay time, spot size, etc. lead to signal fluctuations through plasma parameter fluctuations, which is a concept with a physical background. With a physical background, spectrum standardization usually results in better repeatability and has a wider application scope as compared to that with normalization. The spectrum standardization method has been applied not only to coal analysis,48,94 but also onto brass analysis,164,165 steel analysis,146 and cement analysis.166 Moreover, the spectrum standardization method effectively works to reduce the sample-to-sample measurement uncertainty for repeated measured samples, although the method is designed for reducing the pulse-to-pulse RSD.73

4.2. Classification/quantification models

• Calibration models. 
Calibration curves are used to establish the relationship between the concentration of an element and the intensity of its corresponding analytical lines and can be plotted using conventional univariate models that often fail to yield precise data due to matrix effects, elemental interferences, and spectral fluctuations. Spectral signals have interdependent relations between their variables and regression models, where numerous self variables need to be considered. Multivariate calibration models make full use of the LIBS spectral information in various statistical ways that should be correctly employed to achieve the best accuracy for a specific application.
Univariate calibration model. 
The univariate calibration model is based on the physical principle that the characteristic line's intensity of a measured element is proportional to its concentration in the sample. A univariate model becomes more robust with a wider concentration range. However, univariate calibration utilizes the spectral information of one or a few number of lines and generally cannot provide accurate results for complex samples (like coal). Univariate calibration models usually suffer from nonlinearity at high elemental concentrations due to self-absorption and matrix effects.38
Multivariate calibration models. 
Chemometric methods such as principal component analysis (PCA),167 partial least square (PLS),168 support vector machine (SVM),169 artificial neural network (ANN),170etc. employ multiple-line information, and therefore, can considerably improve the measurement accuracy. However, most of the chemometric methods ignore the physical background of LIBS spectra as they are basically dependent on statistical correlation or curve fitting,171 which may lead to noise over-fitting and eventually ruin the measurement accuracy of the samples outside the matrix of the calibration sample set.172
Multiple linear regression. 
Multiple linear regression173 is a generalization of linear regression by considering more than one independent variable and a special case of general linear model formed by restricting the number of dependent variables to one. The basic model for linear regression is given by eqn (4): y = k0 + k1x1 + k2x2 +…+ knxn + ε(4)
Usually, the least squares method has been used to calculate the coefficients. When applying multiple linear regression, the number of observations (samples) should be obviously more than the variables (spectral lines) to avoid over-fitting. In LIBS, we have several lines but limited samples in most of the cases; therefore, line selection is important for multiple linear regression modeling. Lines can be selected according to the physical basis of LIBS or by using mathematical methods such as forward selection, backward elimination, stepwise regression, etc. Zheng et al.63 used multiple linear regression methods to establish the calibration curves for fixed C content in 22 coal flows. The emission line intensities of the main elements are used as independent variables (C 247.8 nm, Ca 393.4 nm, Al 308.2 nm, Fe 344.1 nm, Mg 285.1 nm, Si 288.1 nm, H 656.3 nm, O 777.2 nm, N 746.8 nm, and K 766.5 nm lines). The rejection of the partial breakdown spectra was found to enhance the model performance.
Principal component analysis. 
PCA167 is a statistical procedure that uses orthogonal transformation to convert a set of observations of possibly correlated variables into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated variables called principal components (PCs). The number of distinct PCs is equal to the smaller of the number of original variables or the number of observations minus one. This transformation is defined in such a way that the first PC has the largest possible variance, and each successive component, in turn, has the highest variance possible under the constraint that it is orthogonal to the preceding components. The resulting vectors are an uncorrelated orthogonal basis set. Then, the PCs were used as the input variables for classification or regression. PCA can be successfully used for the dimensionality reduction of data. However, since PCA extracts the components with high variance and the first several PCs with large variances are usually chosen for analysis while PCs with smaller variances are usually neglected, this process might be improper when the variables with relatively smaller variance are crucial for classification or calibration. PCA is sensitive to the relative scaling of the original variables; therefore, centering and rescaling of raw data is commonly used as a pretreatment method. Dong et al.47 applied PCA to establish an accurate calibration model for the quantitative analysis of volatile matter content using 17 calibration coal samples, and 3 PCs were employed from the matrix factorization of the variables.
Partial least square regression. 
PLS168 regression is a statistical method that bears some resemblance to PC regression. Instead of finding hyperplanes of maximum variance between the response and independent variables, it determines a linear regression model by projecting the predicted and observable variables onto a new space. PLS is used to find the fundamental relations between two matrices (X and Y). A PLS algorithm finds the multidimensional direction in the X space that explains the maximum multidimensional variance direction in the Y space. PLS regression is particularly suited when the matrix of predictors has more variables than observations and when there is multicollinearity among the X values. A PLS model is a commonly used multivariate calibration model combined with LIBS and can yield better results than a univariate model. However, being a statistical method, PLS ignores the physical background of LIBS measurement and is mostly dependent on statistical correlation or curve fitting, which may lead to noise over-fitting and eventually ruin the measurement accuracy for samples outside the matrix of the calibration sample set. Li et al.78 combined PCA and PLS to determine the C, ash, and volatile contents in 58 coal samples utilizing an NBR confinement ring. Yao et al.50 combined LIBS with PLS for the quantitative analysis of ash content in coal. Yuan et al.62 proposed a PLS and wavelet-transform hybrid model to measure the C content in 24 bituminous coal samples. The wavelet coefficients were determined after environmental denoising and background reduction steps to correctly represent the reconstructed signals. The processed wavelet coefficients were considered as independent variable inputs to set up the hybrid model.
Dominant-factor-based PLS model. 
Although PLS is a popular multivariate quantification model, PLS ignores the physical background of LIBS measurement and is mostly dependent on statistical correlation or curve fitting, which may lead to noise over-fitting and eventually ruin the measurement accuracy for samples outside the matrix of the calibration sample set. Feng et al.48 proposed a dominant-factor-based PLS method to combine the advantages of univariate model and tradition PLS method. In detail, a conventional univariate model with a physical background was applied to model the major concentration information (called the dominant factor) and PLS was further applied to compensate for the residual errors in the dominant factor. In another paper,58 authors proposed a dominant-factor-based PLS model for coal property analysis in 53 coal samples. The dominant factor was used to enhance the correlation between the nonlinear physical mechanisms in coal plasma and the spectral data. By applying a secondary PLS to statistically correlate the spectral information, the calibration model performance was enhanced. Moreover, Li et al.89 combined spectrum standardization and dominant-factor-based PLS model to measure the C content in 24 standard bituminous coal samples. The combined model results were enhanced utilizing a PTFE cylindrical ring for spatial confinement. The best results were achieved by Hou et al.73 proposing a hybrid model, which includes three main processes: spectral line standardization, identification, and dominant-factor-based PLS model to measure the heat value, as well as C, H, ash, and volatile contents, in 77 standard bituminous coal samples. The measurement errors were lower than the values stated by the national standards.
Support vector machine. 
SVM169 is a supervised learning model with associated learning algorithms that can analyze data used for classification and regression analyses. A SVM constructs a hyperplane or a set of hyperplanes in a high- or infinite-dimensional space, which can be used for classification, regression, or other tasks like outlier detection. Intuitively, good separation can be achieved by the hyperplane that has the largest distance to the nearest training data point of any class (so-called functional margin). In general, the larger the margin, the lower is the generalization error of the classifier. Zhang et al.70 combined SVM with PCA for the analysis of ash content, volatile matter content, and caloric heat value in 550 air-dried coal samples. LIBS spectra were fitted with a combination of Lorentzian and linear functions. After intensity normalization, SVM regression calibration method was established to realize the quantitative analysis of coal properties. Wang et al.72 combined SVM with PCA to establish a calibration model for ash content in 35 coal samples. A beam expander was used before the focusing lens to enhance the beam quality and repeatability. A slight accuracy improvement was obtained with the experimental configuration adjustment.
Artificial neural network. 
ANN170 or connectionist systems progressively learn to improve performance involving tasks by considering examples, generally without task-specific programming. ANN is based on a collection of connected units or nodes called artificial neurons. In common ANN implementations, the signal at a connection between the artificial neurons is a real number, and the output of each artificial neuron is calculated by a nonlinear function as a sum of its inputs. Artificial neurons and connections typically have a weight that adjusts with learning progress. The weight increases or decreases the strength of the signal at a particular connection. The optimizations of the structure and parameters of ANN are a crucial task for improving the performance of ANN models. Unfortunately, till now, most of the optimization is based on experience. Lu et al.81 proposed an ANN model for the determination of caloric heat value in 27 bituminous coal samples. First, the input variables (C and H analyte lines) were selected according to the physical mechanism and mathematical significance of plasma; it should be noted that the entire spectral data was not utilized to decrease complexity. Second, a genetic algorithm was used to generate the optimal architecture for the ANN model. Wei et al.75 evaluated the quantitative analysis of ash contents in 45 coal samples with a KBr binder using wavelet neural network (WNN) as compared to ANN. Wavelet threshold denoising and Kalman filtering were used for noise filtering, and PCA was used to extract the input variables for both the models. WNN showed better prediction for coal ash over ANN. Zhang et al.77 used ANN and WNN for the classification and identification of 45 coal ash samples. At first, PCA was employed to identify and remove the abnormal spectra for training set optimization. Then, independent component analysis (ICA) was performed to select and optimize the input variables for the training models. Both ICA-ANN and ICA-WNN showed good classification performance for the test set, with a ICA-WNN showing a slightly better performance. Romero et al.117 measured the ash fusion temperature of 16 coal samples by relating their spectral data with known temperature values using the ANN model. This model was based on the trial-and-error method and the architecture with a minimal training error was selected.
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA). 
LDA174 is a generalization of Fisher's linear discrimination, which is a statistical method used for pattern recognition and machine learning to find a linear combination of features that characterizes or separates two or more classes of objects or events. Metzinger et al.99 used LDA to classify 6 different coals based on their spectra. The manual selection of the relevant spectral features was adopted to choose between 18 spectral features (wavelengths) associated with major and minor components present in the coal spectra. The model achieved classification accuracy up to 95.33% according to the cross-validation set of the model.
Kernel-based extreme learning machine (K-ELM). 
Different from learning algorithms with decreasing gradient, K-ELM175,176 randomly initializes weights and biases between an input layer and a hidden layer, while the weights between a hidden layer and an output layer are selected by minimum-norm least squares method. ELM can avoid the slow training speed and over-fitting problems suffered by traditional neural network training algorithms. Recently, Yan et al.76 applied a kernel matrix for ELM using a Gaussian function to measure the C and S contents in 26 standard coal samples. The K-ELM model was compared with SVM, LS-SVM, and BP-ANN models to yield better performances relative to the other models both in calibration and prediction sets.


• Calibration-free (CF) methods. 
At present, LIBS quantitative analysis includes calibration models based on univariate or multivariate calibration curves and non-calibration methods based on CF177 methods that do not require standard samples. Instead, the elemental information of a sample can be independently determined. The application of conventional CF methods is conditional: for complex samples, such as coal, accurate quantitative measurement is very difficult. Aragon et al.178–180 recently proposed the Csigma graph method that can be used as a CF method or with standard samples. However, the implementation of the Csigma method requires stoichiometric ablation and excitation. There is no literature on the application of CF methods for coal analysis up to the publication of this article.

4.3. Special considerations for coal data processing
Coal samples have complicated LIBS spectra, with obvious matrix effects due to the heterogeneous composition of the material. To yield an accurate analysis, the following basic considerations should be noted:
(1) Major elements in coal are nonmetallic elements C, H, O, N, and S, whereas minor and trace elements include Al, Fe, Mg, Ca, K, Ti, Na, and Si, a majority of which are metallic. Minor and trace elements are not evenly distributed in the coal matrix. Hence, to identify coal samples, analytical lines of the major elements should be referred to for calibration and prediction purposes. Moreover, standardized carbon line intensities should be utilized to establish accurate dominant factors for the determination of coal properties.
(2) Minor and trace elements have lower concentrations, but reveal more spectral lines with sensitive high intensities (relative to their concentrations) due to their metallic nature. For example, in a typical coal spectrum, there are two isolated carbon lines, C I 193.09 nm and C I 247.856 nm; however, nearly 100 lines from Fe are present. The existence of these lines considerably affects the calibration/prediction and identification processes. Changes in these elemental concentrations influence the plasma parameters, which, in turn, significantly alter the spectral intensities of the major nonmetallic elements. To this end, the classification of coal samples according to the spectral information for nonmetallic elements should be initially performed followed by a specific identification and calibration model for each category.
(3) C is the fundamental constituent of coal and is instrumental in defining the calorific value. Nonetheless, C is difficult to be ionized and excited, but easier to recombine, resulting in C2 and CN molecular band emissions (where the N atom in the CN band may come from the coal sample or ambient gas). Therefore, when quantitatively analyzing C content in coal, C2 and CN molecular bands should be considered in the calibration model.
(4) Volatile and ash contents are two important indexes of coal for combustion and slagging property determination. For LIBS measurements, volatile and ash contents have a strong impact on laser ablation and plasma evolution, leading to strong matrix effects. Therefore, establishing calibration models based on coals with different levels of volatile and ash contents may become appropriate, particularly for cases where a wide range of coal properties has to be investigated.
(5) In addition, moisture content affects the spectral line intensities. Since LIBS is a sensitive surface analytical technique, surface moisture (if it remarkably differs from bulk moisture) might ruin the sample representativeness. Consequently, using different moisture contents to construct a calibration curve is not a feasible solution. Using LIBS to analyze air-dried coal samples is a preferred choice for analysis.
(6) Large databases utilizing a large number of coals and shuffled tested data pretreatment and calibration models yield an avenue to provide accurate measurements for coal analysis in real-world industrial applications and to open the door for large-scale commercialization of LIBS.
5. Analytical results
5.1. Calorific value
Calorific value (also called the heat content, caloric heat value, or heating value) is the total heat released from the complete combustion of coal with oxygen under standard conditions.5 Therefore, it is an important indicator for the coal combustion efficiency and used to control the combustion temperature of coal utilization devices like furnaces and gasifiers. Moreover, the heat value is used to determine the coal ranks and theoretical fuel energy available for the production of steam. Using an oxygen bomb calorimeter and a few grams of coal powder, the caloric heat value can be calculated and the measurement process approximately takes a few hours. For LIBS, the contents of the organic elements (C, H, O, and S) in coal are determined, which are then used to calculate the heat value via an empirical formula. Ash and moisture contents are proven to absorb energy during combustion due to the decomposition of the mineral compounds and moisture evaporation. Therefore, the Mott–Spooner formula can be used for determining the calorific value based on the heat of reaction of the organic constituents and the overall consideration of ash and moisture contents, as given by eqn (5):181 Q = 80.30C + 339H + 22.50S − 34.7O + k1Cash + k2Cmoisture(5)where C, H, S, and O are the weight percentages of the corresponding elements; k1 and k2 are constant coefficients; and Cash and Cmoisture are the calculated ash and moisture contents, respectively. Noda et al.107 measured the caloric heat values using 4 different coals under high-pressure/temperature conditions as that in a gasification power plant. A gas mixture (98% N2 and 2% O2) was pumped at a temperature of 720 K and pressure of 3.0 MPa into the analysis furnace. The results were compared with those obtained using conventional methods (JIS M8814), which showed good agreement. Zhang et al.70 determined the caloric heat value in 550 air-dried coal samples utilizing a fully software-controlled LIBS system. The results showed better correlation with the certified values (GB/T 212-2008) using an SVR model combined with PCA (500 samples for calibration, and 50 samples for validation). The R2, RMSEP, ARE, and AAE values were improved to 0.91, 0.85 MJ kg−1, 3.68%, and 0.65%, respectively. Yuan et al.58 determined the caloric heat value using 53 collected and air-dried coal samples. The data processed using the dominant-factor-based PLS model showed a remarkable improvement over those obtained using the conventional PLS model. The R2 value improved from 0.94 to 0.97, while the RMSEP, RMSE, and ARE values decreased from 1.63 to 1.33 MJ kg−1, 1.05 to 0.82 MJ kg−1, and 3.55% to 2.71%, respectively, using 40 samples for calibration and 13 samples for validation. The AAE value was 0.6 MJ kg−1, which is double the standard value (0.3 MJ kg−1). Li et al.84 used 44 coal samples to test the optimization of the PLS model with different preprocessing methods for calorific heat value measurement. Better results were obtained relative to a standard offline method using the PLS model with 11-point smoothing combined with a second-order derivation. The correlation coefficient of the calibration set (Rc), correlation coefficient of the validation set (Rv), RMSECV, and RMSEP values were 0.9909, 0.9972, 0.47 MJ kg−1, and 0.276 MJ kg−1, respectively, using 33 samples for calibration and 11 samples for validation. Hou et al.73 used the hybrid model (spectral line standardization, spectral identification, and dominant-factor-based PLS model) to predict the heat value in 77 standard bituminous coal samples. The results showed an AAE value of 0.067 MJ kg−1, completely meeting the requirements of the national standards (<0.3 MJ kg−1). Table 3 summarizes the calorific heat values obtained using LIBS experiments across the literature.
Table 3 Analytical results for the caloric heat value




Operation mode
Sample form
Experimentala
Data processing
Results
Ref.





a Experimental: laser wavelength, pulse duration, laser energy, repetition rate, delay time, gate width, and any experimental settings (if any).





Online
Powder flow
1064 nm, 7 ns, 360 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, 500 ns, 200 ns, gas composition: 98% N2 and 2% O2, temperature 720 K, pressure 3.0 MPa
Plasma temperature correction (4 samples)
Good correlation with the conventional methods

107



Offline
Pellets
1064 nm, 8 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, 2 μs, 10 ms
SVM–PCA combined model (500 samples for calibration and 50 for validation)

SVM model: R2 = 0.90, RMSEP = 1.23 MJ kg−1, ARE = 5.4%, AAE = 0.91%

70




SVM combined with PCA model: R2 = 0.91, RMSEP = 0.85 MJ kg−1, ARE = 3.68%, AAE = 0.65%


532 nm, 5 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, 1.5 μs, 1 ms
Dominant factor PLS model (40 samples for calibration and 13 for validation)

Conventional PLS model: R2 = 0.94, RMSEP = 1.63 MJ kg−1, RMSE = 1.05 MJ kg−1, ARE = 3.55%

58




Dominant factor PLS model: R2 = 0.97, RMSEP = 1.33 MJ kg−1, RMSE = 0.82 MJ kg−1, ARE = 2.71%


1064 nm, 6 ns, 50.75 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, 1.664 μs, 1.1 ms
PLS model with 11-point smoothing and second derivative (33 samples for calibration and 11 for validation)

PLS model: Rc = 0.855, Rv = 0.724, RMSECV = 1.89 MJ kg−1, RMSEP = 2.36 MJ kg−1

84




PLS model with 11-point smoothing: Rc = 0.9906, Rv = 0.9961, RMSECV = 0.481 MJ kg−1, RMSEP = 0.305 MJ kg−1



PLS model with 11-point smoothing and second derivative: Rc = 0.9909, Rv = 0.9972, RMSECV = 0.47 MJ kg−1, RMSEP = 0.276 MJ kg−1


1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, 0.5 μs, 1 ms
Hybrid model (spectral line standardization, spectral identification, and dominant factor based PLS model)
Calibration set error = 0.0 MJ kg−1, validation set error = 0.856 MJ kg−1, all error = 0.067 MJ kg−1, mean RSD = 0.317%

73





5.2. Proximate analysis
The proximate analysis of coal is an assay defined by a group of test methods that include moisture content, ash content, volatile matter, and fixed carbon. These quantities are determined by measuring the mass loss that a coal sample undergoes when heated to 900 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere and then in air at the same temperature. Proximate analysis reveals the coal quality, and hence, impacts coal pricing and the determination of the most efficient use for each coal shipment. Table 4 lists the repeatability and reproducibility requirements for proximate analysis of coal, allocated by the Chinese national standards using traditional chemical analyses.
Table 4 Requirements for traditional chemical analysis methods as per Chinese national standards206




Property
Content range
Repeatability requirement
Reproducibility requirement




Moisture
<5%
0.2%
—


5–10%
0.3%
—


>10%
0.6%
—


Ash
<15%
0.2%
0.3%


15–30%
0.3%
0.5%


>30%
0.5%
0.7%


Volatile
<20%
0.3%
0.5%


20–40%
0.5%
1.0%


>40%
0.8%
1.5%


Caloric heat
—
120 J g−1
300 J g−1





Moisture content. 
There are two main forms of water existing in coal: free water and bound water. The moisture content in coal refers to free water; its presence significantly influences the calorific value. Free water in coal exists in four forms: surface moisture, which surrounds the coal due to washing or environmental conditions; hydroscopic moisture, which is present in the microscopic passageways inside the coal sample; decomposition moisture, which belongs to the incorporated organic material rather than of the coal itself; and mineral moisture, which exhibits the presence of clay and other wet minerals.58 Usually, coal samples used in research studies are air-dried. This means that the samples under investigation have a relatively low moisture content, which can be ignored. However, for onsite measurements, the moisture content of the coal samples may drastically vary in a wide range, which can very well influence the quantitative measurement of different elements in coals. The literature has shown that there are observable fluctuations and high uncertainty in the LIBS spectra with moisture content variations. While testing the LDS LIBS unit for online ash analysis in coal, Gaft et al.101 found that strong moisture variations led to substantial alternations in the spectral results, inducing errors in ash evaluation. The correlations between the moisture contents and spectral changes showed better ash analysis results (which were unsatisfactory). Furthermore, Body et al.32 investigated low-ash lignite (1.6% ash content and 67% moisture content) when testing the performance of a LIBS unit in a power plant. The analysis of the “as-received” coal sample with ∼70% moisture content was a challenge in itself, proving that LIBS was a strong contender for coal analysis. Chen et al.66 studied the effects of moisture content variations on the spectra and plasma morphology. Plasma images, spectral evolution, and spatially resolved spectra illustrated that moisture evaporates at the earlier stages of laser irradiation as compared to that of coal constituents. Yuan et al.58 measured the moisture content in 53 air-dried coal samples, where moisture was regarded as internal free water (moisture content < 18%). Due to the lack of a physical background behind the sources of O and H in the spectra, the PLS model was used instead of the dominant-factor-based PLS model to formulate the calibration curve for moisture content. At either end, the emitted elemental O lines could come from the moisture content or ambient air, too. However, the emitted H could come from the organic compounds in coal instead of solely from water. The results showed that the R2, RMSEP, RMSE, and ARE values are 0.97, 0.87%, 0.72%, and 26.2%, respectively, relative to the certified values determined by TGA (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Moisture content analysis using a PLS model for 53 coal samples utilizing 40 samples in the calibration set and 13 samples in the validation set; Yuan et al.58 


Volatile matter content. 
Volatile matter in coal is the component that remains unchanged at higher temperatures (900 ± 5 °C) in the absence of air. It is a mixture of short- and long-chains hydrocarbons, aromatic hydrocarbons, and sulfur. The weight loss of a sample under volatile test conditions is correlated for the products released during heating, exclusive of moisture in the form of vapor. The determination of volatile matter content is important for coal classification since the coal rank increases as the volatile matter content decreases. Moreover, volatile content is used for the evaluation of combustion and carbonization. For LIPs, volatile matter is measured by integrating the line intensities of the organic elements (C, H, O, and N), taking into consideration the importance of establishing the appropriate correlation between both volatile content and line intensities. Each elemental concentration has an empirically different value depending on the different kinds of coal, and therefore, the analytical accuracy of the volatile matter content is limited by the eventual analysis. Generally, coal–LIP is formed in air under ambient conditions. Therefore, O and N originating from the surrounding air and reaction of O with the minerals in coal to form ash have to be taken into account during data handling. In addition, S is also volatilized as sulfur dioxide, with hardly detectable lines, in many experimental protocols. This ensures the importance of enhancing LIBS coal analysis for both volatile matter content and S content measurements, too.
Dong et al.47 employed multiple regression analysis to establish a relationship between spectral characterization and volatile matter for 20 air-dried samples. The standard volatile matter values were determined via TGA (range: 11.01–30.04 wt%). The LIBS data was processed using PCA after partial correlation coefficients calculation to yield R = 0.991 relative to the standard TGA values (17 samples for calibration and 3 samples for validation). Zhang et al.70 used PCA to extract the related information with volatile matter content directly from the LIBS spectra rather than indirectly from the main elemental concentration of volatile matter. The extracted PCs were used as the input data for SVM model. Standard 550 air-dried samples were utilized, where 500 were used for model calibration and the remaining 50 samples were used for prediction. The results showed an enhancement in data obtained from the SVM–PCA combined model over that from the SVM model to yield R2, RMSEP, and ARE values of 0.95, 1.22%, and 4.42%, respectively. Moreover, the AAE value was reduced to 1.09% for the samples with volatile matter content < 20%. Using a confinement ring made of NBR, Li et al.78 measured the volatile matter content from the enhanced spectra of 58 coal slices. The enhanced spectra were processed by a PCA–PLS combined model (40 standard samples for calibration and 18 unknown samples for validation). The results showed close values for the prediction set relative to the actual ones, with R2, RMSEP, and ARE values of 0.99, 0.66%, and 1.96%, respectively. Yuan et al.58 used the dominant-factor-based PLS model to predict the volatile matter content in 53 air-dried samples. Standard volatile matter values were determined using TGA. The integrated line intensities of the organic elements (C, H, O, and N) were processed using dominant-factor-based PLS model, which yielded better results relative to that obtained from a conventional PLS model due to correlations of the physical principles for the former. The results revealed R2, RMSEP, RMSE, and ARE values of 0.97, 1.41%, 1.42%, and 5.47%, respectively (40 samples for calibration and 13 samples for validation). The best prediction results for volatile matter content were achieved by Hou et al.73 A hybrid model (including spectrum standardization, large spectral identification database, and dominant-factor-based PLS) was used for 77 samples, processing the intensity of every single line in the spectra. The results revealed that errors for samples with volatile matter content < 20% and samples with volatile matter content ranging from 20–40% were 0.03% and 0.11%, which are far lower than that required by national standards (<0.5%, and <1%, respectively). The samples with volatile matter contents > 40% still have not been reported yet. Table 5 summarizes the works done on volatile matter measurement.
Table 5 Analytical results for volatile matter content




Operation mode
Sample form
Experimentala
Data processing
Results
Ref.





a Experimental: laser wavelength, pulse duration, laser energy, repetition rate, delay time, gate width, and any experimental settings (if any).





Offline
Pellets
532 nm, 8 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1417 ns, gate width 2 ms
Partial correlation and PCA (17 samples for calibration and 3 for validation)

R = 0.991, ARE < 10%, AAE < 3%

47



1064 nm, 8 ns, 60 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 2 μs, gate width 10 ms
SVM–PCA combined model (500 samples for calibration and 50 validation)

SVM model: R2 = 0.91, RMSEP = 1.69%, ARE = 5.83%, AAE = 1.11% (volatile content < 20%) and 1.52% (volatile content > 20%)

70




SVM–PCA combined model: R2 = 0.95, RMSEP = 1.22%, ARE = 4.42%, AAE = 1.09% (volatile content < 20%) and 1.02% (volatile content > 20%)


532 nm, 5 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1.5 μs, gate width 1 ms
Dominant factor PLS model (40 samples for calibration and 13 for validation)

Conventional PLS model: R2 = 0.96, RMSEP = 1.69%, RMSE = 1.54%, ARE = 5.95%

58




Dominant factor PLS model: R2 = 0.97, RMSEP = 1.41%, RMSE = 1.42%, ARE = 5.47%


1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms
Hybrid model (spectrum standardization, identification, and a dominant factor PLS)
Measurement errors = 0.03% (volatile content < 20%) and 0.11% (volatile content in the range of 20–40%)

73



Slices
1064 nm, 5 ns, 30 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, nitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR) confinement ring
PCA–PLS combined model (40 samples for calibration and 18 for validation)

R
2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 0.66%, ARE = 1.96%

78







Ash content. 
Ash is the noncombustible residue left after coal is burned, and it represents the bulk minerals (exclusive of unaltered inorganic minerals) after moisture and volatile matters have been driven off during combustion. Ash is primarily composed of oxides and sulfates. The use of coals with high-alkali-oxide ash results in slagging and fouling problems, and therefore, ash content measurement becomes important to determine both the extent of slagging and fouling problems and the viscosity of coal ash in furnaces. Moreover, ash content is a crucial parameter for the use of highly purified coal in the chemical industry. By default, ash composition of unprocessed raw coals differs according to the mining location and natural variations within the deposit. For LIBS, and similar to volatile matter content, ash content measurement is a challenge, as well. The line intensities of mineral elements that would form oxides such as Al2O3, SiO2, Na2O, K2O, CaO, MgO, Fe2O3, etc. should be able to provide information required for ash content measurement. However, the physical background of a coal matrix should be taken into consideration while constructing a calibration model.
Using an inline LIBS unit, Gaft et al.101 measured the ash content for 5 raw coal samples and evaluated the results relative to both laboratory-scale conveyor simulations and PGNAA. For laboratory data, 1000 laser pulses were averaged/one position, sum of Mg, Al, Si, and Fe line intensities were used for ash content measurement, and C was used for internal standardization. The results yielded R2 = 0.99 and SD = 0.21, which reflected good correlation between the volume laboratory ash analysis and surface LIBS data. In comparison to PGNAA, the results showed R2 = 0.72 and SD = 0.73 (1500 laser pulses averaged per one position for the test period of 3 days). With regard to the laboratory, Yuan et al.58 predicted the ash content in 53 air-dried coal samples using the entire spectral information with residual errors using the dominant-factor-based PLS model. The line intensities of minerals were selected to construct the dominant factor. The results showed better correlation with the standard ash contents obtained using the dominant-factor-based PLS model over those obtained using conventional PLS. The R2, RMSEP, RMSE, and ARE values were 0.93, 3.49%, 3.18%, and 12%, respectively, for the dominant-factor-based PLS model. Zhang et al.70 used the SVM–PCA combined model to measure the ash content in 550 air-dried coal samples gathered from different mines. The certified ash content varied in the range of 15–60% for the studied samples. The combined model showed better performance over the SVM model. The results showed R2, RMSEP, and ARE values of 0.96, 1.82%, and 5.48%, respectively (500 samples for calibration and 50 samples for validation). Moreover, the AAE value was 1.37% for ash content < 30% and 1.77% for ash content > 30%. The hybrid model was successfully applied for determining the ash content by Hou et al.73 using 77 standard coal samples. The ash content measurement results were extremely lower than the values stated by the national standards. For ash contents <15%, 15–30%, and >30%, the hybrid model yielded measurement errors of 0.07%, 0.17%, and 0.23%, respectively (standard national values are <0.3%, <0.5%, and <0.7%, respectively). The combination of spectrum standardization, spectral identification, and dominant-factor-based PLS model provided the best physical implementation of coal–LIPs, which facilitated the understanding and correlation of the matrix effects, and furthermore, enhancing the sample-to-sample measurement accuracy. Yin et al.45 employed a fully software-controlled unit to determine the ash content in pulverized coal, and the experimental error was in the range of 2.29–13.47%. Ctvrtnickova et al.112,113 used LIBS to plot the calibration curves for ash oxides using 9 samples collected from a coal-fired power plant. Good correlation was achieved using the single-pulse (SP) configuration relative to standard concentrations determined using ICP-OES for Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2, Fe2O3, K2O, MgO, CaO, and BaO contents. The double-pulse (DP) configuration was not suggested due to the large occupation and complicated operation, which is clearly not a favorite for online requirements. The same group114 combined LIBS with TMA for determining slagging predictive indices with the aim of providing a faster and accurate replacement of ICP-OES. Nine coal samples were utilized, and the LIBS data was processed using PCA. TMA offered an estimation of the behavior of coal blends at higher boiler temperatures. Using a cylindrical cavity to enhance the results, Li et al.78 measured the ash content in 58 coal slices. The data was processed using PLS–PCA combined model to yield R2, RMSEP, and ARE values of 0.98, 0.77%, and 4.029%, respectively (40 samples for calibration and 18 samples for validation). Yao et al.50 used 17 air-dried samples to measure the ash content with standard ash values in the range of 7.74–51.02 wt% determined by TGA. The PLS model was used to extract the ash content from the LIBS spectra rather than that from ash-forming elements. For the 4 samples used for model validation, the correlation coefficient was 0.97 and the RSD for repeated measurements was in the range of 6.53–7.71%. Wang et al.72 added a beam expander to their experimental configuration with the aim of improving the signal quality and repeatability. The optimized experimental setup was used to measure the ash content in 35 coal samples. Using 30 samples for calibration and 5 samples for validation in a SVM–PCA combined model, the results yielded linear regression coefficient (R) of 0.9976, measurement accuracy of 0.31%, and AAE value of 2.36% (standard ash values were determined via TGA). Haider et al.36 proposed a simple method for estimating the ash content fraction without ashing. Recently, Wei et al.75 predicted the concentrations of ash oxides in 45 coal samples using WNN and ANN models. The results revealed better performance of WNN for 7 ash oxides (namely, SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, CaO, MgO, MnO2, and TiO2) with R > 0.9725 and RMSE < 0.2591. In Table 6, the analytical results of the ash content measurement by LIBS are listed.
Table 6 Analytical results of ash content




Operation mode
Sample form
Experimentala
Data processing
Results
Ref.





a Experimental: laser wavelength, pulse duration, laser energy, repetition rate, delay time, gate width, and any experimental settings (if any).





Online
Coal rocks
1064 nm, 30 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, delay time 1 μs, gate width 1.2 ms, ultrasonic sensor for focal adjustment of ±12 cm
Univariate calibration (5 samples)

On-site data compared to offline data: R2 = 0.99, SD = 0.21

101




On-site data compared to PGNAA: R2 = 0.72, SD = 0.73


Pulverized coal
1064 nm, 120 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 200 ns, gate width 10 ms
Univariate calibration (8 samples)
ARE = 2.29–13.47%

36



Offline
Pellets
532 nm, 5 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1.5 μs, gate width 1 ms
Dominant factor PLS model (40 samples for calibration and 13 for validation)

Conventional PLS model: R2 = 0.91, RMSEP = 4.13%, RMSE = 3.73%, ARE = 13.2%

58




Dominant factor PLS model: R2 = 0.93, RMSEP = 3.49%, RMSE = 3.18%, ARE = 12%


1064 nm, 8 ns, 60 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 2 μs, gate width 10 ms
SVM–PCA combined model (500 samples for calibration and 50 for validation)

SVM model: R2 = 0.92, RMSEP = 2.74%, ARE = 8.30%, AAE = 2.08 (ash content < 30%), and 2.56% (ash content > 30%)

70




SVM–PCA combined model: R2 = 0.96, RMSEP = 1.82%, ARE = 5.48%, AAE = 1.37 (ash content < 30%), and 1.77% (ash content > 30%)


1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms
Hybrid model (spectrum standardization, identification, and a dominant factor PLS)
Measurement errors of 0.07%, 0.17%, and 0.23%, for ash contents' values <15%, 15–30%, >30%

73



532 nm, 8 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1.4 μs, gate width 2 ms
PLS model (13 samples for calibration and 4 for validation)

R = 0.97

50



1064 nm, 8 ns, 80 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 2 μs, gate width 10 ms, beam expander
SVM–PCA combined model (30 samples for calibration and 5 for validation)

R = 0.9976, measurement accuracy = 0.31%, AAE = 2.36%

72



1064 nm, 10 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, delay time 1.5 μs, gate width 100 μs, KBr binder
WNN model

R > 0.925 and RMSE < 0.2591 for 7 oxides

75



Slices
1064 nm, 5 ns, 30 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, nitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR) confinement ring
PCA–PLS combined model (40 samples for calibration and 18 for validation)

R
2 = 0.98, RMSEP = 0.77%, ARE = 4.029%

78



Pellets and pulverized coal

SP: 1064 nm, 6 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, delay time 1 μs, gate width 10 μs, H3BO3 binder for pellets, “on-tape” for pulverized samples
Univariate calibration (9 samples)
Good agreement with standard results by ICP-OES for Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2, Fe2O3, K2O, MgO, CaO, and BaO

112 and 113




DP: 1064 nm, 6 ns, 300 mJ per pulse, inter-pulse delay 1 μs






Fixed carbon. 
Fixed carbon is the material remaining after the determination of moisture, volatile, and ash contents. It differs from the carbon content in coal (determined by ultimate analysis) as a certain amount carbon is already been driven off as hydrocarbons along with the volatile matter. Evaluating the fixed carbon content is significant as it influences the efficiency of coal-burning equipment. Fixed carbon is indirectly measured by subtracting the moisture, volatile, and ash contents from the entire coal mass. In traditional offline measurements, the fixed carbon content is simply determined using eqn (6): FCad = 100% − [Mad + Vad + Aad](6)where FCad, Mad, Vad, and Aad denote the fixed carbon content, moisture content, volatile content, and ash content, respectively, of air-dried coal. In a particle coal flow (particles diameter < 200 μm), Zheng et al.63 enhanced the fixed carbon quantitative analysis by the rejection of the partial breakdown spectra. The selection threshold was chosen as the background of the representative spectra plus three times the SD of the same background. The results showed enhancement for 17 calibration samples and 5 validation samples with correlation coefficient, RMSEC, and RMSEP values in the range from 0.921 to 0.930, 2.86 to 2.92%, and 7.30 to 2.40%, respectively, without and with spectral selection. More research is needed for fixed carbon measurements, which, in fact, is related to LIBS accuracy in the determination of moisture, volatile, and ash contents.

5.3. Ultimate analysis
Ultimate analysis is a comprehensive elemental analysis for quantitatively determining the elemental constituents of coal, including the main elements (C, H, O, N, and S) and other elements within the coal sample. It is essential to determine the ultimate concentrations of coal elements to evaluate the oxygen/coal mixing ratio in boiler combustion. Table 7 lists the repeatability and reproducibility requirements for the ultimate analysis of coal, as stated by the Chinese national standards for chemical methods (GB/T 476-2001 and GB/T 214-2007).205
Table 7 Requirements for the ultimate analysis of coal as per Chinese national standards205




Element
Repeatability requirement
Reproducibility requirement




C
0.5%
1%


H
0.15%
0.25%


S
<1.5%
0.05%
0.1%


1.5–4%
0.1%
0.2%


>4%
0.2%
0.3%


N
0.08%
0.15%





Carbon content. 
Carbon is the major component of coal and the principle source of heat. The quantitative analysis of carbon is considered to be difficult relative to the detection of inorganic elements in coal. The characteristic C lines with no interference, free of overlapping, and sufficiently strong without saturation require optimization of the experimental parameters and special data processing models. As China is the largest coal market in the world, the critical requirements for traditional methods were set by the Chinese national standards as the absolute error of C detection should be <1.0%. This absolute error value is the ultimate goal for C content measurement through different techniques used for coal analysis.
Utilizing a fully software-controlled LIBS unit with sampling equipment, Yin et al.45 plotted the univariate calibration curve for the C content in 8 pulverized coal samples. The “Bode Rule/DC Level” method was applied to discard uncertain events (shot-to-shot RSDs > 8.2% within 100 consecutive laser shots per sample). Nonlinearity was more pronounced with high C concentrations due to self-absorption and additional plasma instability (coal in a powdery form). The results showed an error of 0.09–5.2% relative to the certified standards. In a laboratory study,103,104 a coal rotation unit was developed to mimic the conveyor belt in the industrial case, and 7 different coal samples were used. The C calibration curve exhibited a linear relation with good accuracy between the molar concentrations (derived from ASTM analysis bulletin) and the spectral line intensities (C I 193.0 nm and 247.9 nm lines).
The optimization of the experimental parameters was proven in an earlier section to enhance the detection of different elements. The accuracy of the C content measurement was improved by utilizing cylindrical cavities. Li et al.89 utilized a cylindrical cavity drilled in PTFE and processed the data by dominant-factor-based PLS model for C content measurement using 24 bituminous coal samples. The results yielded R2, RMSEP, ARE, and AAE values of 0.99, 1.35%, 1.66%, and 1.08% when using a cavity, respectively, while the respective values were 0.99, 1.63%, 1.82%, and 1.27% when a cavity was not used. Moreover, the ratios of the CN molecular band to the C I 247.856 nm line intensity decreased when a cavity was used due to weakening of the air–plasma interaction. The AAE value (1.08%) was fairly close to the reproducibility critical difference (1.0%) required by the Chinese national standards. In another study,78 NBR was used as a confinement ring to enhance the C content measurement in 58 coal samples. The higher relative permittivity of NBR (∼15–20) could be attributed to its selection over PTFE, nylon/Dacron, and silica gel due to the additional localization of plasma energy. Data was processed using a combined PCA–PLS model and the results for C content measurement yielded R2, RMSEP, and ARE values of 0.99, 0.68, and 1.17%, respectively. For the binder-enhanced results, Yuan et al.53 prepared 22 anthracite coal pellets using three different binders, namely, Na2SiO3·9H2O, H3BO3, and KBr. The best results for the C content measurement were obtained using Na3SiO3·9H2O and the Si I 390.55 nm line was used for internal calibration. The R2, RMSEP, maximum relative error, and ARE values were 0.76, 6.25%, 18.99%, and 10.14%, respectively, for the optimized binder condition. Using bituminous and lignite coal samples, Yao et al.80 achieved the best results for C content measurement using 60 wt% KBr as the binder and Si I 288.16 nm line as the internal standard (R2 = 0.983). Using different laser source wavelengths, Li et al.64,65 prepared 18 standard bituminous coal pellets to compare the performances of 266 nm and 1064 nm wavelengths for C content measurement. The integrated intensity of C I 247.856 nm showed better RSD of 5.62% than that by 266 nm. By using the PLS model, the calibration curves yielded R2 and RMSEP values of 0.99 and 1.64% for 266 nm, respectively, while the respective values were 0.99 and 1.55% for 1064 nm. The results were further improved to 0.99 and 1.51%, respectively, for 266 nm wavelength after applying the dominant-factor-based PLS model. Yu et al.38 determined the C content in 6 coal samples covering typically available Chinese coals. The samples were pulverized to <100 μm; the decrease in the powder size showed a remarkable increase in the plasma temperature. The univariate calibration curve (using C I 786.09 nm) showed good linearity at lower C contents; however, at higher contents, a deviation from linearity was observed due to self-absorption. In different ambient gases, Wang et al.52 plotted the C calibration curve using 24 bituminous coal samples. The PLS model had the optimal performance using Ar as the ambient gas; for C I 193.09 nm, the RSD was 8.50%; RMSEP, 3.49% (17 samples for calibration); RMSE, 2.69%; ARE, 2.98%; and R2, 0.95.
To improve sample-to-sample reproducibility, different models have been proposed and applied for C content measurement. Yuan et al.62 proposed a PLS-wavelet transform hybrid model to determine the C content in 24 bituminous coal samples. The calibration and prediction results showed R2 of 0.98, RMSEP of 1.94% (7 samples for validation), and ARE of 1.67% using the hybrid model. Hou et al.73 proposed a hybrid quantification model using 77 standard powdery bituminous coal samples to achieve the best correlation between the standard and predicted C contents. The sample-to-sample RSD of C content measurements was reduced to 0.3% from 6.47% for the traditional PLS model and 2.9% for the univariate model. The results showed an average calibration error of 0%, average validation error of 2.32%, and average measurement error of 0.42% for C content measurement using the proposed model. Recently, Yan et al.76 prepared a comparison between K-ELM, SVM, LS-SVM, and BP-ANN for C content measurement using 26 standard coal samples. The best results were achieved using the K-ELM model, with R2 and RMSE values of 0.9994 and 0.3762 wt%, respectively.


Oxygen content. 
O in dry coal samples exists in both organic (–COOH, –OH, CO, –OCH3, etc.) and inorganic (oxides) forms. Organic O is one of the most abundant substances in coal and crucial for monitoring boiler combustion. Zhang et al.40 built a calibration curve for organic O using 8 anthracite coal samples by subtracting inorganic oxygen from the total O content. A linear relationship was obtained with no zero interception due to the breakdown of atmospheric O. The results revealed R > 0.98, measurement accuracy of 1.15–1.37%, and ARE of 19.39%. Yu et al.38 plotted a calibration curve for O using 777.19 nm spectral line intensities for 6 pulverized coal samples (<100 μm). The univariate calibration curve showed deviation from linearity at higher O concentrations (1.834–4.931%).


Sulfur content. 
There are two challenges regarding S detection in coal. First, the strong S emission lines lie in the vacuum UV (VUV) (125–180 nm) and NIR (>900 nm) spectral ranges. Second, excited S reacts with O to form oxides, which results in quenched lines in air. Moreover, coal combustion is accompanied by a large emission of SO2. With the aim of reducing the air pollutant emissions from coal-fired power plants, considerable efforts have been focused on the treatment of S after accurate quantitative measurements. Gaft et al.102 performed a detailed study on the S emission spectra in the VUV to IR range on coal samples mixed with different S concentrations (1–50%) and actual coal samples with S content between 0.4 and 0.7%. The best correlation was obtained in the VUV emission range (180.8, 182.1, and 182.6 nm S lines) using a N2-filled spectrometer and a sample–spectrograph distance of 20 cm or less. Two different algorithms were used to recalculate the signal intensities into wt% of S. The S calibration curve showed R2 of 0.88, SD of 0.11, and ARE of 7.5% for two sets of coal samples from South Africa and Australia. Using a DP configuration, Burakov et al.37 plotted the S calibration curve for 5 pressed coal samples with S concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 16 wt%. Using S II 545.38 nm line intensities, the minimal S concentration that could be measured was 2 wt% (above the required detectable values of 0.1–0.5 wt%). The calibration curve showed good linearity, with R2 = 0.989. The authors suggested the importance of high-resolution spectrometers for the detection of S lines in the UV and NIR ranges. In the paper reported by Yan et al.,76 the K-ELM model was applied for S content measurement in 26 coal samples with S concentrations ranging from 0.20 to 6.45 wt%. The results revealed that the K-ELM model had better performance as compared to those of SVM, LS-SVM, and BP-ANN models, with R2 of 0.9832 and RMSE of 0.7704 wt% (8 samples as a prediction set). Zhang et al.56 used 9 pulverized coal samples with S concentrations ranging from ∼0.25 to 3.5 wt% to plot the S calibration curve. It was reported that the S I lines (921.3, 922.8, and 923.8 nm) strongly interfered with O I 926.1 nm, and they could not be observed until the laser energy exceeded 160 mJ per pulse. The calibration curve revealed R2 of 0.97 and SD of 23.1%. Yu et al.38 used 6 coal samples pulverized to <100 μm and with S concentrations ranging from 0.52 to 2.74 wt% to plot a univariate calibration curve. Using S 769.67 nm line intensities, the calibration curve showed nonlinearity at higher concentrations due to self-absorption.
In summary, S detection is a challenging application for LIBS due to its sparse emission lines, higher excitation potential, overlapping with other elements, and quenching of S UV emission lines in ambient air. To achieve satisfactory results for S detection and measurement, first, the experimental parameters should be optimized. The problem is that the emission lines in the VUV range are absorbed by atmospheric oxygen, which leads to considerable diminishing of line intensity in air. Undoubtedly, using vacuum or N2/He-filled spectrometers and reducing sample–detector distances can enhance the detection intensity. Moreover, since S usually exists as Fe2S3 or Fe2(SO4)3, the use of chemometric methods could yield worthwhile results (Table 8).182,183
Table 8 Ultimate analysis results summary




Element
Operation mode
Sample form
Experimentala
Data processing
Results
Ref.





a Experimental: laser wavelength, pulse duration, laser energy, repetition rate, delay time, gate width, and any experimental settings (if any).





C
Online
Pulverized coal (40–70 μm)
1064 nm, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 200 ns, gate width 10 ms
Univariate calibration (8 samples)
Relative error ∼ 0.09–5.2%

45



Offline
Coal rocks
1064 nm, 4 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, gate width 1.1 ms
Univariate model (7 samples)
Linear relation

103 and 104



Pellets
532 nm, 5 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, with/without 1.5 H × 3 D mm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) cylindrical cavity
Spectrum standardization and dominant factor based PLS model (16 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)

Without cavity: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.63%, ARE = 1.82%, AAE = 1.27%

89




With cavity: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.35%, ARE = 1.66%, AAE = 1.08%


1064 nm, 5 ns, 30 mJ per pulse, with nitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR) cylindrical cavity
PCA–PLS combined model (40 samples for calibration and 18 for validation)

R
2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 0.68, ARE = 1.17%

78



532 nm, 5 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, Na2SiO3·9H2O binder
Univariate model (15 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)

R
2 = 0.76, RMSEP = 6.25%, ARE = 10.14%

53



266 nm, 4 ns, 16.2 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.7 μs, gate width 2 ms, KBr binder
Multivariate model (9 samples)

R
2 = 0.983

80



1064 and 266 nm, 7 ns, 40 mJ per pulse, delay time 1 μs, gate width 1 ms
PLS model (12 samples for calibration and 6 for validation)

For 1064 nm: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.55%

64 and 65




For 266 nm: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.64%


532 nm, 7 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, ambient conditions (air, He, and Ar)
PLS model (17 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)

In air: RSD = 9.76%, RMSEP = 4.25%, RMSE = 3.91%, R2 = 0.87, ARE = 4.96%

52




In He: RSD = 13.25%, RMSEP = 3.32%, RMSE = 2.43%, R2 = 0.96, ARE = 2.81%



In Ar: RSD = 8.50%, RMSEP = 3.49%, RMSE = 2.69%, R2 = 0.95, ARE = 2.98%


532 nm, 5 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, He ambient condition
PLS-wavelet transform combined model (17 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)

R
2 = 0.98, RMSEP = 1.94%, ARE = 1.67%

62



1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 3 μs, gate width 100 μs
K-ELM model (18 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)

K-ELM: R2 = 0.9994, RMSE = 0.3762 wt%

76




SVM: R2 = 0.9485, RMSE = 5.5791 wt%



LS-SVM: R2 = 0.9356, RMSE = 5.0273 wt%



BP-ANN: R2 = 0.9317, RMSE = 14.6857 wt%


1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms
Spectrum standardization method-dominant factor based PLS model
Calibration set error = 0, validation set error = 2.32, all samples error = 0.42, mean RSD = 0.3%

73



H
Offline
Pulverized coal (<100 μm)
532 nm, 5 ns, 50–120 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.4 μs, gate width 0.4 μs
Univariate model (6 samples)
Deviation from linearity with high concentrations

38



Pellets
532 nm, 7 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, ambient conditions (air, He, and Ar)
PLS model (17 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)

In air: RSD = 6.75%, RMSEP = 0.48%, RMSE = 0.34%, R2 = 0.82, ARE = 6.69%

52




In He: RSD = 9.84%, RMSEP = 0.27%, RMSE = 0.21%, R2 = 0.91, ARE = 4.56%



In Ar: RSD = 6.19%, RMSEP = 0.24%, RMSE = 0.15%, R2 = 0.98, ARE = 2.78%


1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms
Spectrum standardization method and dominant factor based PLS model (69 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)
Calibration set error = 0, validation set error = 0.08, all samples error = 0.049, mean RSD = 0.546%

73



Coal rocks
1064 nm, 4 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, gate width 1.1 ms
Univariate model (7 samples)
Linear relation

103 and 104



O
Offline
Pulverized
1064 nm, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 200 ns, gate width 10 ms
Univariate model (8 samples)

R > 0.95, measurement accuracy = 1.15–1.37%, ARE = 19.39%

40



N
Offline
Pulverized (<100 μm)
532 nm, 5 ns, 50–120 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.4 μs, gate width 0.4 μs
Univariate model (6 samples)
Deviation from linearity with high concentrations

38



S
Offline
Pellets
1064 nm, 8–10 ns, 50 mJ per pulse, delay time 1 μs, gate width 5 μs
Univariate model (14 samples)

R
2 = 0.88, SD = 0.11, ARE = 7.5%

102



1064 nm, 60 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 2 ms, double-pulse mode
Univariate model (5 samples)

R
2 = 0.989

37



1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 3 μs, gate width 100 μs
K-ELM model (18 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)

K-ELM: R2 = 0.9832, RMSE = 0.7704 wt%

76




SVM: R2 = 0.9572, RMSE = 1.6179 wt%



LS-SVM: R2 = 0.9686, RMSE = 1.5944 wt%



BP-ANN: R2 = 0.9413, RMSE = 2.0655 wt%






Other elements. 
As mentioned before, the ultimate analysis of coal is the comprehensive analysis of elements present in coal along with C, H, O, N, and S. It involves elemental analysis including minor/trace elemental measurements even if it is normally not included in actual industrial applications. Yin et al.45 plotted the calibration curves of Ca, Mg, and Ti using the “Bode Rule/DC Level” normalization and data conversion methods in 7 pulverized coal samples. Linear and nonlinear fittings are applied to compensate for the self-absorption and low-concentration samples. The relative measurement errors were within 10%. Li et al.41 used seven coal samples to plot the calibration curves for Ca and Mg elements. The results showed that with lower concentrations (∼0.3–1% for Ca and ∼0.025–0.3% for Mg), Mg II 279.6 nm and Ca II 393.4 nm lines showed better results than Ca I 422.7 nm and Mg I 285.2 nm when utilized to construct the calibration curves. Wallis et al.31 plotted the calibration curves for Ca, Al, Na, Fe, Mg, and Si elements in low-ash lignite coals. Their results revealed LoD values of 60 ppm for Ca and Al, 70 ppm for Na, 90 ppm for Fe, and 200 ppm for Mg and Si, with a 95% confidence level. Mateo et al.111 constructed the calibration curves for Fe, Mg, Si, Al, and Ca using Fe II 274.948 nm, Mg I 285.213 nm, Si I 288.158 nm, Al I 309.271 nm, and Ca II 315.887 nm lines. With 8 coal mine samples, the results obtained using a 355 nm laser source showed a better fit relative to the 1064 nm laser source. Bolshakov et al.124 applied LAMIS184 to quantitatively determine C isotopes in natural and isotope-enriched coal samples utilizing shifts in the CN and C2 molecular bands. The calibration curve of the 13C isotopic content showed a 95% confidence interval using CN spectra in the PLS model, and good agreement with the measurements by isotope ratio mass spectrometry performance (13C/12C = 1.08%).

5.4. Other applications related to coal utilization
The aim of the present review is to comprehensively summarize the different aspects of coal analysis by LIBS. Nevertheless, there is a growing interest for online LIBS analysis in combustion monitoring for alkali release, which is responsible for the fouling and corrosion of gasifier parts and heat transfer surfaces.52 With the improvement in the LIBS systems, the applications of LIBS in nonconventional combustion environments are expected to increase due to its uniqueness for online analysis under extreme and harsh environments. In addition to the coal quality analysis and combustion monitoring, several researchers have applied LIBS for the analysis of coal combustion products, such as fly ash. Fly ash consists of finely grained particulate matter exhausted from coal-fired power plants. According to a 2016 survey by the American Coal Ash Association, 60% of fly ash produced in the USA was consumed in different industries.185 The single largest industrial use of fly ash was in the construction industry as high-quality cost-effective concrete filler, which accounts for more than 60% of all fly ash consumption. The other notable use was in blended cement.186,187 LIBS analysis of fly ash from power plant exhausts can facilitate the operational optimization of power plants with an online feedback system, as well as for fly ash classification for other utilities.

Combustion environment. 
Determining the composition of entrained coal, char, and mineral matter particles in the combustion zone of a reactor is one of the most difficult problems in developing diagnostics methods for coal combustion research. LIBS was applied as an online monitor in an operating combustor for the simultaneous measurement of single-coal-particle compositions.27–30 Furthermore, LIBS has been used to determine the quantitative axial and radial profiles of local equivalence ratio in laminar premixed methane flames and to evaluate C, H, O, and N at various equivalence ratios.188–191 One of the vital aspects is the release of alkali metals at the pyrolysis and gasification stages. Several research works have been conducted to quantitatively measure this release in the flue gas with LIBS experimental data used to extract the global kinetic constants via modeling.192 The released alkali compounds are responsible for reduced heat transfer, disturbance of gas flow, corrosion to the gasifier parts, and erosion of heat transfer surfaces due to fouling, slagging, and agglomeration. Hsu et al.193 performed the online quantitative analysis of alkali release, namely, Na and K, during the combustion of Australian Loy Yang brown coal particles with laminar premixed methane/air flame. A 23 ± 3 mg brown coal particle was burnt on a flat flame burner and LIBS analysis was performed 10 mm above the burning fuel particles. The system was calibrated for Na and K emission lines by injecting different known concentrations of aerosolized sodium sulfite (Na2SO3) and potassium sulfate (K2SO4) solutions into the flame. The maximum [Na]total and [K]total values were 9.27 and 5.90 ppm during the char phase at the equivalence ratio of 1.149 and LoDs of 29 and 72 ppb during the ash phase, respectively. It is noteworthy that LIBS allows the detection of alkali metals released into the flame during three stages of combustion, namely, devolatilization, char, and ash cooking. Li et al.194 studied the temporal and spatial distributions of Na and K in a single-coal-particle combustion flame in different gas environments (O2/N2 and O2/CO2) using CO2 laser ignition. Their results indicated that the alkali release process was influenced by the type of coal (longer release duration for coals with higher carbonization level with lesser release concentrations in the devolatilization stage relative to the char and ash cooking stages), oxygen concentration (increased release with higher O2 concentrations), carbon dioxide concentration (inhibited release with higher CO2 concentrations), and flame temperature (diffusion effects). At higher temperatures, Yuan et al.195,196 examined the dynamic behavior of Na release in different heights above the burner during pulverized coal combustion of Zhudong lignite. At 1800 K, 60–70% of Na was released accompanied by lignite devolatilization. Under different O2 concentrations (10, 20, and 30%) and at a temperature of 1500 K, the dynamic behavior was the same due to the similar devolatilization and ignition mechanisms. The solid phase formed from Na would not be considerably affected by soot aerosols at such high gas temperatures.186,187
To improve the thermal efficiency of a power plant, indeed, fouling deposits should be reduced by mixing the coal with screening additives. The main function of these additives is to reduce the concentrations of low-melting compounds and increasing the melting temperature of the deposits so that they can be easily eliminated. Balakrishnan et al.197 used LIBS to determine the Na and K inhibition efficiencies using 5 additives, namely, alumina (Al2O3), silica (SiO2), kaolinite (Al2O7Si2·2H2O), magnesium oxide (MgO), and pumice (14% Al, 32% Si, and 39% Ca), in 4 Indian coals. The additives were added prior to ash preparation using the standard method that involves the burning of coal samples at 900 °C and 1100 °C for 2 h. The results revealed that all the additives have considerable alkali retention. Magnesia showed the lowest ratio of sodium retention, i.e., <0.4, for all the coals; however, kaolinite and pumice showed improved sodium retention in all the coals even at increased temperatures and concentrations. Recently, Liu198–201 applied the multipoint LIBS technique for mineral additive analysis on Na release inhibition during coal combustion. In multipoint LIBS, the Na emission signal was taken on different radial points on the same horizontal plane with the surface normal to the flame direction and all the radial points were mathematically integrated to determine Na release flux passing through the plane. Five coal-additive samples were prepared by mixing coal with 3% silica, alumina, and natural minerals of kaolin, mica, or pyrophyllite and combusted with laminar premixed methane/air flame. For all the additives, the Na retention efficiency was >70%. Alumina was suggested as the better choice than silica with Na retention efficiency of 74.5% and increased AFTs. Kaolin, as a natural mineral additive, showed Na retention efficiency of 91.4%, but with minimal impact when the AFTs decreased. Henceforth, additives with a combination of Al and Si (aluminosilicates, which are able to bind with alkaline elements) are suggested for higher Na and K retention.202


Fly ash analysis. 
Coal combustion products are waste residues derived from burning coal in power plants, and they include fly ash, bottom ash, boiler slag, and flue gas materials. Fly ash is the dominant portion of the combustion products. It is mainly recovered by precipitation or mechanical filtration and comprises unburnt carbon (UC) and oxides of Si, Al, Fe, Ca, and other inorganic elements. UC in fly ash is a measure of the combustion efficiency of coal-fired power plants. A higher amount of UC in fly ash indicates lower combustion efficiency, which can result in increased operational costs. Depending on the UC content, fly ash is disposed as an industrial waste or as a raw material for the production of concrete in the construction sector. Online UC monitoring by LIBS with an active feedback system can facilitate in maintaining UC at an acceptable level by optimizing the air–coal ratio.203
Noda et al.107 measured the UC in four fly ash samples using an automated LIBS unit and a furnace under typical conditions encountered in gasified thermal power plants. The results showed good agreement with the conventional method (JIS-8815) under the following conditions: T = 570 K, P = 0.1 MPa, and gas composition of 74% N2, 8% H2O, 15% CO2, and 3% O2. A low CO2 percentage tended to be less affected by the measurement conditions, and therefore, yielded better results. Moreover, at elevated pressures, the C I 247.9 nm line intensity decreased drastically due to plasma-quenching effects. Therefore, shorter delay and gate times should be optimum at high-pressure conditions relative to ambient air. The unit was installed at the unit 1 boiler of the Haramachi thermal power plant (inline operation mode) with operational conditions of 0.001 m3 s−1 sampling rate, 373 K, and 0.1 MPa.108 The UC ranged within 0–10% and LIBS results corresponding to a min moving average of 1–5 were used to control the boiler control system every 15 s. The SD value of (UCJIS − UCLIBS) was 0.27%, showing promising potential for LIBS systems to be integrated into boiler control systems to achieve optimal and stable combustion. Zhang et al.49 measured the UC in 19 fly ash samples collected from the flue gas stream using an at-line LIBS unit. A second-order polynomial multivariate inverse regression was used and the following results were obtained: SD of 0.18%, R of 0.997, measurement accuracy of 0.26%, and ARE of 3.81% relative to LOI (C content varied from 0.59 to 19.69 wt%).
By using multivariate calibration models, Yao et al.54,67,69,86 achieved better results for UC measurement as compared to traditional univariate calibration. Here, 14 fly ash samples were prepared by placing coal samples in a muffle furnace and heated at 815 ± 10 °C for different durations. The results from both these models confirmed that matrix effects are the main contributor behind the worsening of the LIBS accuracy, particularly for ashes from different coals. The linear regression model revealed R2 of 0.994 and 0.981 for fly ash samples from the same kind and different kinds of coal, respectively. Moreover, the authors coupled the linear regression model with plasma temperature and self-absorption corrections. The head of the molecular CN band at 388.3 nm was proposed for the quantitative analysis and to overcome the interference from C I 247.86 nm and Fe 247.98 nm, as well as the poor SNR of C I 193.09 nm. The results showed REP, RSD, and LoD values of 0.26%, 4.77%, and 0.16 wt%, respectively, relative to LOI (12 samples for calibration and 3 samples for validation). Moreover, the combination of C I 247.86 nm line and the CN band with the plasma temperature correction was reported.83
A gas–solid flow system was developed to simulate the gas–solid flow conditions in the duct of a coal-fired power plant.79,204 Fly ash samples were fed into a steel pipe by a power feeder and mixed with air by a fan at 20 m s−1. Four fly ash samples were collected from different power plants using automatic isokinetic samplers located at the preheaters at the air outlet. False spectra were rejected if Si I 288.15 nm line had SNR < 5. The optimum mass flow rate was found to be between 4 and 8 kg h−1, where good agreement between the normalized intensity of C I 247.86 nm and UC content could yield R2 of 0.98. Deguchi et al.109,110 employed an Anderson cascade impactor to detect UC and mineral contents in 0.47–6.75 μm size-segregated fly ash samples. The concentration ratio of Fe2O3/SiO2 was not dependent on the particles diameter at the different stages; however, the concentration ratios of C/SiO2, Al2O3/SiO2, and CaO/SiO2 decreased according to a decrease in the particle diameter. The UC content decreased with particle size, which is consistent with an efficient combustion status.
Ctvrtnickova et al.112,113 focused on the impact of the binder on pelletizing fly ash samples and determined the C, Ba, Mg, Ti, Fe, and Si contents in 8 fly ash samples. The C calibration curve was plotted using samples with KBr as a binder and the peak area of C I 247.9 nm to yield R of 0.9978 relative to the standard concentrations provided by TGA. For mineral measurements, the calibration curves were plotted using the net intensities (background-corrected) of Ba II 455.4 nm, Mg I 285.213 nm, Ti II 334.9 nm, Fe II 275.6 nm, and Si I 288.158 nm lines and using different binders. For Ba and Mg, KBr showed better results. However, wax was used for Ti and Fe measurements and PVA was used for Si. Sticking fly ash samples on a carbon tape yielded the fastest way for sample preparation, but exhibited interference problems. Overall, the optimized results indicated that LIBS is a fast technique for fly ash monitoring in comparison to ICP-OES (where only a few minutes were required as compared to the 6–8 h required for the standard technique). Stankova et al.98 studied the feasibility for the quantitative analysis of Ca, Al, Mg, Si, and Fe elements in 9 fly ash samples using a silver and cellulose (1:1) binder. The measurement repeatability was improved with an increase in the pulse energy with the Si I 288.158 nm line RSD decreasing from 22% to <10%. The calibration curves showed good correlation relative to the standard concentrations obtained by ICP-OES.

6. Summary and future perspectives
The world is moving toward the implementation of renewable energy technologies involving biomass, solar, wind, and geothermal energies. However, coal still forms the most important resource for cost-effective electricity generation and industrial production of chemicals. Fast coal analysis is required for an efficient and environment-friendly utilization of coal. Not surprisingly, LIBS has proven to be entirely capable of providing fast, qualitative, and quantitative information regarding coal pricing (still needs to improve coal analysis performance and formulate a standard procedure), coal washing, coal blending (with coal analyzers balanced over different stream locations and modes of operations), and combustion optimization and diagnostics, as shown in Fig. 16.206
 Fig. 16  Installation points of LIBS systems in a power plant (modified206). 
In this review, we summarize the previous research contributions utilizing LIBS for coal analysis. LIBS researchers have already achieved worthwhile progress in coal analysis, including fundamentals, experimental configuration optimization, plasma regulation, data processing, and development of practical coal analyzers. The feasibility of quantitative analysis of coal using LIBS has been proven, and industrial demonstration projects are also under deployment. However, for the complete commercialization and industrialization of LIBS coal analysis, there are still two main challenges: (1) quantitative analysis performance, particularly long-term repeatability and reproducibility performance under harsh real industrial environments; (2) adoption of LIBS coal analyzers for different kinds of coal, which may need a considerable amount work involving the studying of coal matrix effects on LIBS signals. That is, to realize the wide commercialization of LIBS coal analysis, research on the fundamentals, data processing, and application is imperative.
It is of paramount importance to understand the mechanism of interaction between the laser, coal, plasma, and ambient conditions. As predicate logic, LIBS standardization revolves on three axes: experimental, data interpretation, and instrumental development. Systematic experiments for the sake of the fundamental understanding of laser–coal plasma formation, evolution, and kinetics are the foremost tasks to be mentioned on this list. Different coal ranks (with diverse chemical compositions and supplement sources), particle sizes, compressive forces, moisture contents, and with/out binders should be carefully reported, taking into consideration the experimental protocols and procedures used. LIBS researchers are well aware of the fact that the quantitative correlation between line intensities of a specific element and its concentration depends on several factors (other than solely on the concentration), including matrix effects and interelemental interference. Recalling the ultimate heterogeneity of coal materials, it is of no-way-out to correlate the line intensities of the elements to their concentrations in the coal matrix using univariate calibration models or even multivariate models that do not consider the physical processes involved in coal–LIP. Moreover, the direct correlation between the LIBS spectra and coal analysis tests (calorific value, as well as ultimate and proximate analyses) requires multivariate calibration models with physical backbones that will require timely upgradation. Therefore, data modeling and programming should become the crux for LIBS standardization. For data interpretation, we believe that large databases utilizing successfully applied multivariate calibration models and testing shuffled preprocessing models would be the first step for industrial calibration and backup of quantification utilities. Multivariate models should be based on physical backgrounds to improve the adaptability for different types of coals. Indeed, selecting a set of calibration samples with worthwhile representativeness is effective to improve adaptability. Moreover, major element measurement, proximate analysis, and detection of sulfur and trace elements are important topics to focus upon due to industrial usage. Researchers should pay attention on how to improve the quantitative performance of LIBS analysis based on understandable mechanisms. LIBS combined with other technologies (microwave, XRF, Raman etc.) may provide a solution.
LIBS should maximize its unique advantages based on its ability of performing inline and at-line analyses. In order to open the inline and at-line markets, first, LIBS has to resolve its own problems, mainly how to calibrate inline/at-line coal analyzers and how to increase sample representativeness and long-term stability. Considering these problems, the at-line mode is the preferred choice. Second, LIBS systems have to be integrated with combustion optimization or controlling systems to benefit the end user (save coal consumption, reduce pollutant emission, and increase safety of the industrial system). For environmental studies, LIBS is a reliable technique for the fast detection of toxic, impurities, and inorganic content in coal. Coal combustion releases several pollutants such as oxides of sulfur (SOx) and nitrogen (NOx), particulate matter, and greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). Both online speciation of elemental release from coal combustion and a fairly accurate determination of concentration levels can launch LIBS as a worthwhile competitor to other technical options for coal purification.110 The pricing of LIBS coal analyzers is still at an early complicated stage since there are huge economic interests among the different stakeholders in the coal production and utilization chain. Before different stakeholders can cooperate to fabricate a standing LIBS system for fast coal pricing, it will become difficult to successfully apply LIBS as an offline system with demand in such a wide industrial market. In summary, coal analysis is a worthwhile application field and market for LIBS technology. The successful application of LIBS for coal will boost LIBS to other fields and help LIBS be a real “superstar”.
Appendix: glossary of terms

AAEAverage absolute error
AASAtomic absorption spectrometry
AFTAsh fusion temperature
AREAverage relative error
ASTMAmerican society for testing and materials
BP-ANNBack-propagation artificial neural network
CCDCharge-coupled device
EDSEnergy-dispersive spectrometry
FESFlame emission spectroscopy
FT-IRFourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
ICCDIntensified charge-coupled device
ICP-AESInductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry
IGCCIntegrated gasification combined cycle
JISJapanese industrial standards
LA-ICP-MSLaser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
LIPLaser-induced plasma
LoDLimit of detection
LoILoss on ignition
LoQLimit of quantification
LS-SVMLeast squares support vector machine
NBRNitrile butadiene rubber
NIRNear-infrared spectroscopy
NISTNational Institute for Standards and Technology
PGNAAPrompt gamma neutron activation analysis
PMTPhotomultiplier tube
PSOParticle swarm optimization algorithm
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PVCPolyvinyl chloride

R
2
Coefficient of determination
REPRelative error of prediction
RMSDRoot-mean-square deviation
RMSERoot-mean-square error
RMSEPRoot-mean-square error of prediction
RSDRelative standard deviation
SBRSignal-to-background ratio
SEMScanning electron microscope
SNRSignal-to-noise ratio
SVMSupport vector machine
SVRSupport vector regression
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
TMAThermomechanical analysis
UCUnburned carbon
XRFX-ray fluorescence

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial supports from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61675110) and National Key Research and Development Program Key Projects of China (No. 2016YFC0302102).
References

          J. G. Speight, Handbook of coal analysis,  2015 Search PubMed .

          J. G. Speight, The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 3rd edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. Na, J. Yuan, Y. Xu and Z. Hu, Energy Strateg. Rev., 2015, 7, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Zhufeng and Z. Xingzhou, Int. J. Glob. Energy Issues, 2005, 24, 211–227 CrossRef .
D. M. Mason and K. N. Gandhi, Fuel Process. Technol., 1983, 7, 11–22 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Donahue and E. A. Rais, J. Chem. Educ., 2009, 86, 222–224 CrossRef CAS .
A. White and J. Whittingham, Fuel, 1983, 62, 1058–1061 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, Z. Xinlei, J. Wenbao, S. Qing, L. Yongsheng, H. Daqian and C. Da, Appl. Spectrosc., 2016, 70, 272–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Marshall and J. F. Zumberge, Nucl. Geophys., 1989, 3, 445–459 CAS .
M. Kaihara, T. Takahashi, T. Akazawa, T. Sato and S. Takahashi, Spectrosc. Lett., 2002, 35, 369–376 CrossRef CAS .
S. Caroli, A. F. Mazzeo, A. Laurenzi, O. Senofonte and N. Violante, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1988, 3, 245–248 RSC .
A. Baysal and S. Akman, Talanta, 2011, 85, 2662–2665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Li, P. M. Fredericks, C. R. Ward and L. Rintoul, Org. Geochem., 2010, 41, 554–558 CrossRef CAS .
E. Binner, E. Lester, S. W. Kingman, C. Dodds, J. P. Robinson, T. Wu, P. Wardle and J. P. Mathews, J. Microw. Power Electromagn. Energy, 2014, 48, 35–60 Search PubMed .

          D. A. Cremers and L. J. Radziemski, Handbook of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, Wiley,  2006 Search PubMed .

          J. P. Singh and S. N. Thakur, Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, Elsevier,  2007 Search PubMed .

          D. A. Cremers and L. J. Radziemski, Handbook of Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy, 2nd edn,  2013, pp. 1–407,  DOI:10.1002/9781118567371 .
F. J. Fortes, J. Moros, P. Lucena, L. M. Cabalin and J. J. Laserna, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 640–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Musazzi and U. Perini, Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy: Theory and Applications,  2014, 182, pp. V–Vii Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, T.-B. Yuan, Z.-Y. Hou, W.-D. Zhou, J.-D. Lu, H.-B. Ding and X.-Y. Zeng, Front. Phys., 2014, 9, 419–438 CrossRef .
R. Noll, C. Fricke-Begemann, S. Connemann, C. Meinhardt and V. Sturm, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2018, 33, 945–956 RSC .
L. J. Radziemski, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57, 1109–1113 CrossRef .
R. Noll, C. Fricke-Begemann, M. Brunk, S. Connemann, C. Meinhardt, M. Scharun, V. Sturm, J. Makowe and C. Gehlen, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2014, 93, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. El Haddad, L. Canioni and B. Bousquet, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2014, 101, 171–182 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Rusak, B. C. Castle, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 1998, 17, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. R. Bauer and S. G. Buckley, Appl. Spectrosc., 2017, 71, 553–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Ottesen, J. C. F. Wang and L. J. Radziemski, Appl. Spectrosc., 1989, 43, 967–976 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Ottesen, L. L. Baxter, L. J. Radziemski and J. F. Burrows, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .

          D. K. Ottesen, in Advances in Coal Spectroscopy, ed. H. L. C. Meuzelaar, Springer US, Boston, MA,  1992, pp. 91–118,  DOI:10.1007/978-1-4899-3671-4_5 .

          D. K. Ottesen, in 1987 International Conference on Coal Science: Proceedings, ed. H. A. G. Chermin, Elsevier Science Ltd, New York,  1987, p. 984 Search PubMed .
F. J. Wallis, B. L. Chadwick and R. J. S. Morrison, Appl. Spectrosc., 2000, 54, 1231–1235 CrossRef CAS .
D. Body and B. L. Chadwick, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2001, 72, 1625–1629 CrossRef CAS .
D. Body and B. L. Chadwick, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2001, 56, 725–736 CrossRef .
B. L. Chadwick and D. Body, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56, 70–74 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. M. Y. Haider, M. A. Rony, R. S. Lubna and K. M. Abedin, Opt. Laser Technol., 2011, 43, 1405–1410 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. M. Y. Haider, M. A. Rony and K. M. Abedin, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 3725–3729 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Burakov, N. V. Tarasenko, M. I. Nedelko, V. A. Kononov, N. N. Vasilev and S. N. Isakov, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64, 141–146 CrossRef .
L. Y. Yu, J. D. Lu, W. Chen, G. Wu, K. Shen and W. Feng, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2005, 7, 3041–3044 CrossRef CAS .

          K. L. Deng, J. T. Wu, Z. Wang, B. Lee and R. Guida, Photorefractive Fiber and Crystal Devices: Materials, Optical Properties, and Applications Xii,  2006, vol. 6314, p. 631410 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Dong, H. P. Dou, W. B. Yin and S. T. Jia, Appl. Spectrosc., 2008, 62, 458–463 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, J. Lu, Z. Lin, S. Gong, C. Xie, L. Chang, L. Yang and P. Li, Opt. Laser Technol., 2009, 41, 907–913 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Lu, Z. Lin and C. Xie, J. Huazhong Univ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 37, 112–116 Search PubMed .
S. Yao, J. Lu, Z. Lu, C. Xie, J. Li, S. Pan, M. Jiang and P. Li, Acta Opt. Sin., 2009, 29, 1126–1130 CrossRef CAS .
S.-c. Yao, J.-d. Lu, S.-h. Pan, M.-c. Jiang, C.-l. Xie, J. Li and P. Li, Proc. Chin. Soc. Electr. Eng., 2009, 29, 80–83 Search PubMed .
W. Yin, L. Zhang, L. Dong, W. Ma and S. Jia, Appl. Spectrosc., 2009, 63, 865–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang and Z. Peng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4715–4722 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dong, J. Lu, S. Yao, J. Li, J. Li, Z. Zhong and W. Lu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26, 2183–2188 RSC .
J. Feng, Z. Wang, L. West, Z. Li and W. Ni, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400, 3261–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. G. Ma, L. Dong, X. J. Yan, Z. Y. Hu, Z. X. Li, Y. Z. Zhang, L. Wang, W. B. Yin and S. T. Jia, Appl. Spectrosc., 2011, 65, 790–796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, J. Lu, M. Dong, K. Chen, J. Li and J. Li, Appl. Spectrosc., 2011, 65, 1197–1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Hou, S.-l. Lui, D. Jiang, J. Liu and Z. Li, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A1011–A1018 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, T. B. Yuan, S. L. Lui, Z. Y. Hou, X. W. Li, Z. Li and W. D. Ni, Front. Physiol., 2012, 7, 708–713 CrossRef .
T. Yuan, Z. Wang, L. Li, Z. Hou, Z. Li and W. Ni, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51, B22–B29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, J. Lu, J. Zheng and M. Dong, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27, 473–478 RSC .
W.-b. Yin, L. Zhang, L. Wang, L. Dong, W.-g. Ma and S.-t. Jia, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2012, 32, 200–203 CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Y. Hu, W. B. Yin, D. Huang, W. G. Ma, L. Dong, H. P. Wu, Z. X. Li, L. T. Xiao and S. T. Jia, Front. Phys., 2012, 7, 690–700 CrossRef .
J. Feng, Z. Wang, L. Li, Z. Li and W. Ni, Appl. Spectrosc., 2013, 67, 291–300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yuan, Z. Wang, S.-L. Lui, Y. Fu, Z. Li, J. Liu and W. Ni, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2013, 28, 1045–1053 RSC .
S. Chen, J. Lu, Z. Zhong, F. Pan, G. Pan, X. Zhang, S. Yao, J. Luo and J. Li, Acta Photonica Sin., 2013, 42, 326–330 CrossRef .
Z.-y. Hu, L. Zhang, W.-b. Yin, W.-g. Ma, L. Dong and S.-t. Jia, J. Atmos. Environ. Opt., 2013, 8, 26–35 CAS .
X. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Fu, Z. Li and W. Ni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2014, 99, 82–86 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Yuan, Z. Wang, Z. Li, W. D. Ni and J. M. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 807, 29–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, J. Lu, B. Zhang, M. Dong, S. Yao, W. Lu and X. Dong, Appl. Spectrosc., 2014, 68, 672–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Mao, Z. Wang and R. E. Russo, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2015, 17, 928–932 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Fu, Z. Li and W. Ni, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2015, 17, 621–624 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, T. Yuan, Z. Hou, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 112, 23–33 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pan, J. Lu, M. Dong, S. Yao, Z. Xie and J. Fan, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2015, 17, 625–631 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, J. Xu, X. Dong, B. Zhang, J. Zheng and J. Lu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 110, 146–150 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, Y. Shen, K. Yin, G. Pan and J. Lu, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 1257–1263 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Gong, Y. Li, X. Wang, J. Fan, L. Dong, W. Ma, W. Yin and S. Jia, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 113, 167–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shunchun, X. Jialong and B. Kaijie, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2015, 17, 938–943 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Fan, Y. Li, Y. Gong, L. Dong, W. Ma, W. Yin and S. Jia, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2015, 17, 914–918 CrossRef .
Z. Hou, Z. Wang, T. Yuan, J. Liu, Z. Li and W. Ni, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31, 722–736 RSC .
D. Wang, J. D. Lu, M. R. Dong, S. C. Yao, J. Fan, Z. H. Tian, L. Wang and S. S. Li, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2016, 36, 2607–2612 CAS .
J. Wei, J. Dong, T. Zhang, Z. Wang and H. Li, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 1674–1680 RSC .
C. H. Yan, J. Qi, J. X. Ma, H. S. Tang, T. L. Zhang and H. Li, Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst., 2017, 167, 226–231 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Zhang, C. H. Yan, J. Qi, H. S. Tang and H. Li, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2017, 32, 1960–1965 RSC .
A. Li, S. Guo, N. Wazir, K. Chai, L. Liang, M. Zhang, Y. Hao, P. F. Nan and R. B. Liu, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 27559–27569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, J. Xu, J. Zhao, K. Bai, J. Lu and Z. Lu, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 4681–4686 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, J. Zhao, J. Xu, Z. Lu and J. Lu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2017, 32, 766–772 RSC .
Z. M. Lu, J. H. Mo, S. C. Yao, J. B. Zhao and J. D. Lu, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 3849–3855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Li, W. Y. Lu, J. B. Zhao, G. X. Feng, D. M. Wei, J. D. Lu, S. C. Yao and Z. M. Lu, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2017, 37, 2575–2579 CAS .
G. Pan, M. R. Dong, J. H. Yu and J. D. Lu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2017, 131, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Lu, M. Dong, S. Lu, J. Yu, S. Li, J. Huang and J. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 24–32 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, J. Zhao, Z. Wang, Y. Deguchi, Z. Lu and J. Lu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2018, 149, 249–255 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bai, S. Yao, J. Lu, J. Zhao, J. Xu and Z. Lu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31, 2418–2426 RSC .
Z. Hou, Z. Wang, J. Liu, W. Ni and Z. Li, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 15974–15979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Hou, Z. Wang, J. M. Liu, W. D. Ni and Z. Li, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 12909–12914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Yin, Z. Wang, Y. Fu, Z. Li and W. Ni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 111, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, J. Qi, J. Liang, T. Zhang and H. Li, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2018, 33, 2089–2097 RSC .
S. Yao, L. Zhang, K. Yin, K. Bai, J. Xu, Z. Lu and J. Lu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2018, 33, 1676–1682 RSC .
P. Haobin, C. Guohua, C. Xiaoxuan, L. Zhimin and Y. Shunchun, Plasma Sci. Technol., 2019, 21, 034008 CrossRef .
S. Yao, J. Mo, J. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Zhang, W. Lu and Z. Lu, Appl. Spectrosc., 2018, 72, 1225–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Fu, Z. Li, J. Liu and W. Ni, Appl. Spectrosc., 2014, 68, 955–962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Rebolledo, P. Pacheco, R. Sarmiento, R. Cabanzo and E. Mejia-Ospino, 2nd International Meeting for Researchers in Materials and Plasma Technology,  2013, vol. 466, p. 012015 Search PubMed .

          L. P. Vera, J. A. Perez and H. Riascos, 15th International Congress on Plasma Physics (Icpp2010) & 13th Latin American Workshop on Plasma Physics (Lawpp2010),  2014, vol. 511, p. 012063 Search PubMed .
L. P. Vera-Londono, J. A. Perez-Taborda and H. Riascos-Landazuri, Rev. Fac. Ing., Univ. Antioquia, 2016, 78, 69–72 Search PubMed .
A. Stankova, N. Gilon, L. Dutruch and V. Kanicky, Fuel, 2010, 89, 3468–3474 CrossRef CAS .
A. Metzinger, D. J. Palasti, E. Kovacs-Szeles, T. Ajtai, Z. Bozoki, Z. Konya and G. Galbacs, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 10306–10313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaft, I. Sapir-Sofer, H. Modiano and R. Stana, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2007, 62, 1496–1503 CrossRef .
M. Gaft, E. Dvir, H. Modiano and U. Schone, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2008, 63, 1177–1182 CrossRef .
M. Gaft, L. Nagli, I. Fasaki, M. Kompitsas and G. Wilsch, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64, 1098–1104 CrossRef .
D. Redoglio, E. Golinelli, S. Musazzi, U. Perini and F. Barberis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 116, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Redoglio, E. Golinelli, S. Musazzi, U. Perini and F. Barberis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2016, 123, 179–183 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Idris, M. Ramli, M. A. Taleb, R. Hedwig, Z. S. Lie and K. H. Kurniawan, 3rd International Conference on Theoretical and Applied Physics 2013 (Ictap 2013),  2014, vol. 1617, pp. 175–178 Search PubMed .
K. Lahna, R. Idroes, N. Idris, S. N. Abdulmadjid, K. H. Kurniawan, M. O. Tjia, M. Pardede and K. Kagawa, Appl. Opt., 2016, 55, 1731–1737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Noda, Y. Deguchi, S. Iwasaki and N. Yoshikawa, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57, 701–709 CrossRef .
M. Kurihara, K. Ikeda, Y. Izawa, Y. Deguchi and H. Tarui, Appl. Opt., 2003, 42, 6159–6165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deguchi, T. Kamimoto, Z. Z. Wang, J. J. Yan, J. P. Liu, H. Watanabe and R. Kurose, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2014, 73, 1453–1464 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Wang, Y. Deguchi, M. Kuwahara, T. Taira, X. B. Zhang, J. J. Yan, J. P. Liu, H. Watanabe and R. Kurose, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2013, 87, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Mateo, G. Nicolas and A. Yanez, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 254, 868–872 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ctvrtnickova, M.-P. Mateo, A. Yanez and G. Nicolas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64, 1093–1097 CrossRef .
T. Ctvrtnickova, M. P. Mateo, A. Yanez and G. Nicolas, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2010, 65, 734–737 CrossRef .
T. Ctvrtnickova, M. P. Mateo, A. Yanez and G. Nicolas, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 5447–5451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. P. Singh, F. Y. Yueh and R. L. Cook, Appl. Spectrosc., 1995, 49, 1617–1623 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Blevins, C. R. Shaddix, S. M. Sickafoose and P. M. Walsh, Appl. Opt., 2003, 42, 6107–6118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Romero, R. De Saro, J. Craparo, A. Weisberg, R. Moreno and Z. Yao, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 510–517 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. Yao, C. E. Romero, R. De Saro, C. Joseph, S. Lam, R. Silfies, R. Plangemann and F. Lyter, presented in part at the 2011 International Pittsburgh Coal Conference, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Dong, X. Mao, J. J. Gonzalez, J. Lu and R. E. Russo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2012, 27, 2066–2075 RSC .
C. B. Stipe, A. L. Miller, J. Brown, E. Guevara and E. Cauda, Appl. Spectrosc., 2012, 66, 1286–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Romero and R. De Saro, Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectrosc., 2014, 182, 511–529 CAS .
T. X. Phuoc, P. Wang and D. McIntyre, Fuel, 2016, 163, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dong, D. Oropeza, J. Chirinos, J. J. González, J. Lu, X. Mao and R. E. Russo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 109, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bol'shakov, X. L. Mao, J. Jain, D. L. McIntyre and R. E. Russo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2015, 113, 106–112 CrossRef .
P. M. Lemieux, J. V. Ryan, N. B. French, W. J. Haas, S. Priebe and D. B. Burns, Waste Manage., 1998, 18, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .

          H. R. Griem, in Fast Electrical and Optical Measurements: Volume I—Current and Voltage Measurements/Volume II—Optical Measurements, eds. J. E. Thompson and L. H. Luessen, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  1986, pp. 885–910,  DOI:10.1007/978-94-017-0445-8_34 .
H. R. Griem, Phys. Rev., 1962, 128, 997–1003 CrossRef .
H. R. Griem, Phys. Rev., 1963, 131, 1170–1176 CrossRef .
J. Yu and R. Zheng, Front. Phys., 2012, 7, 647–648 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, S. X. Zhao, Y. F. Li, Y. Gong, L. Dong, W. G. Ma, W. B. Yin, S. C. Yao, J. D. Lu, L. T. Xiao and S. T. Jia, Front. Physiol., 2016, 11, 114211 CrossRef .
M. W. Haenel, Fuel, 1992, 71, 1211–1223 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shinn, Fuel, 1984, 63, 1187–1196 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Gertsch, A. Abbud-Madrid, C. Dreyer, R. Jedicke, A. Krot, D. L. Linne, J. Mantovani, M. Schlesinger, J. Sercel and E. Unobe, in 10th Symposium on Space Resource Utilization, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,  2017, pp. 1–12 Search PubMed .

          N. A. S. D. L. Form, https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/ASD/lines_form.html, https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/ASD/lines_form.html.
M. R. Dong, J. D. Lu, S. C. Yao, Z. M. Zhong, J. Y. Li, J. Li and W. Y. Lu, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 17021–17029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Acquaviva, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2004, 60, 2079–2086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. M. Flores, in Coal and Coalbed Gas, ed. R. M. Flores, Elsevier, Boston,  2014, pp. 167–233 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, S. Sheta, Z.-Y. Hou and Z. Wang, Front. Phys., 2018, 13, 135201 CrossRef .
Y. Qian, S. Zhong, Y. He, W. Ronald, Z. H. Wang and K. F. Cen, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2017, 37, 1890–1895 CAS .
T. Li, S. Sheta, Z. Hou, J. Dong and Z. Wang, Appl. Opt., 2018, 57, 6120–6127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ward, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2016, 165, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Phuoc, Optic Laser. Eng., 2006, 44, 351–397 CrossRef .
Y. Li, D. Tian, Y. Ding, G. Yang, K. Liu, C. Wang and X. Han, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2017, 1–35,  DOI:10.1080/05704928.2017.1352509 .

          E. R. Company, http://er-co.com/libs-coal.html.

          C. Titan, http://www.womp-int.com/story/2013vol06/story027.htm.
M. S. Afgan, Z. Hou and Z. Wang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2017, 32, 1905–1915 RSC .
N. Mketo, P. N. Nomngongo and J. C. Ngila, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 85, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
V. Majidi and M. R. Joseph, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 1992, 23, 143–162 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lopez-Moreno, S. Palanco and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22, 84–87 RSC .
S. Buckley, Spectroscopy, 2015, 30, 24–31 Search PubMed .

          J. L. S. Applied Spectra, https://appliedspectra.com/products/j200-libs-instrument.html.

          L. M. S. Ocean Optics, https://oceanoptics.com/product/laser-induced-breakdown-spectroscopy-libs/.

          ChemReveal LIBS System, TSI, http://www.tsi.com/ChemReveal-LIBS-Desktop-Analyzer/.

          S. System, https://www.prweb.com/releases/2011/03/prweb5174634.htm.

          C. b. Brightray, http://www.brightray.cn/.

          H. L. analyzer, https://www.honeybeerobotics.com/portfolio/libs-mineral-analyzer/.

          E. F. Freeman, http://www.fosterfreeman.com/index.php/trace-evidence/ecco-col-180-laser-induced-breakdown-spectrometer.

          L. L. Berlin, http://www.ltb-berlin.de/en/products/analyzers/libslab/.

          O. A. M. Technologies, https://www.imr.rwth-aachen.de/index.php/ofur_en.html.
A. Bertolini, G. Carelli, F. Francesconi, M. Francesconi, L. Marchesini, P. Marsili, F. Sorrentino, G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaioli, V. Palleschi, L. Pardini and A. Salvetti, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Zhang, S. Wu, H. S. Tang, K. Wang, Y. X. Duan and H. Li, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2015, 43, 939–948 CAS .
B. C. Castle, K. Talabardon, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, Appl. Spectrosc., 1998, 52, 649–657 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Wang, T. Yuan, Z. Hou, Z. Li and W. Ni, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2011, 26, 2274–2280 RSC .
Z. Wang, L. Li, L. West, Z. Li and W. Ni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2012, 68, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Z. Wang, Z. Li and W. Ni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2010, 65, 549–556 CrossRef .
H. Yin, Z. Hou, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Wang and Z. Li, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31, 2384–2390 RSC .

          I. T. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis,  1986 Search PubMed .

          H. Abdi, Partial Least Square Regression PLS-Regression, in Encyclopedia of Social Sciences Research Methods, ed. M. Lewis-Beck, A. Bryman and T. Futing,  2003 Search PubMed .
C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, Mach. Learn., 1995, 20, 273–297 Search PubMed .

          S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach,  1994 Search PubMed .
J. L. Yu, Z. Y. Hou, S. Sheta, J. Dong, W. Han, T. J. Lu and Z. Wang, Anal. Methods, 2018, 10, 281–289 RSC .
A. Safi, B. Campanella, E. Grifoni, S. Legnaioli, G. Lorenzetti, S. Pagnotta, F. Poggialini, L. Ripoll-Seguer, M. Hidalgo and V. Palleschi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2018, 144, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .

          L. S. Aiken, S. G. West and R. R. Reno, Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions,  1991 Search PubMed .

          L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen and C. J. Stone, Classification and Regression Trees,  1984 Search PubMed .
S. Ding, L. Guo and Y. Hou, Neural Comput. Appl., 2017, 28, 1975–1984 CrossRef .
G. Huang, Q. Zhu and C. K. Siew, Neurocomputing, 2006, 70, 489–501 CrossRef .
M. Corsi, G. Cristoforetti, M. Hidalgo, S. Legnaioli, V. Palleschi, A. Salvetti, E. Tognoni and C. Vallebona, Appl. Geochem., 2006, 21, 748–755 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aragon and J. A. Aguilera, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2014, 149, 90–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Aguilera, C. Aragon and J. Manrique, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer, 2015, 160, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aragon and J. A. Aguilera, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1009, 12–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Given, D. Weldon and J. H. Zoeller, Fuel, 1986, 65, 849–854 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paris, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 174, 1 Search PubMed .
W. E. Straszheim, R. T. Greer and R. Markuszewski, Fuel, 1983, 62, 1070–1075 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bol'shakov, X. Mao, J. J. González and R. E. Russo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2016, 31, 119–134 RSC .
J. Zhou, X. Zhuang, A. Alastuey, X. Querol and J. Li, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2010, 82, 51–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, J. Zhu, B. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Li, M. Alden and K. Cen, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 1123–1130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, R. Whiddon, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. Liu and K. Cen, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 1082–1090 CrossRef CAS .
P. Stavropoulos, A. Michalakou, G. Skevis and S. Couris, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ferioli, P. V. Puzinauskas and S. G. Buckley, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57, 1183–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sturm and R. Noll, Appl. Opt., 2003, 42, 6221–6225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Phuoc and F. P. White, Fuel, 2002, 81, 1761–1765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Zhong, Y. He, K. Qiu, Z. Wang and K. Cen, Laser Technol., 2017, 41, 101–105 Search PubMed .
L.-J. Hsu, Z. T. Alwahabi, G. J. Nathan, Y. Li, Z. S. Li and M. Alden, Appl. Spectrosc., 2011, 65, 684–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, M. Dong, J. Lu, Z. Tian, Z. Hou, W. Lin, B. Yu, Q. Lai, S. Chen and J. Qiu, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 4452–4460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, S. Li and Q. Yao, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2015, 35, 2339–2346 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, S. Q. Li, Y. Yuan, Y. Y. Zhang and Q. Yao, Fuel, 2015, 158, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balakrishnan, V. M. Reddy, A. Mehta, N. J. Vasa and R. Nagarajan, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 399, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Z. Liu, Z. H. Wang, Y. Lv, K. D. Wan, Y. He, J. Xia and K. F. Cen, Fuel, 2018, 212, 498–505 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, Y. Z. Liu, R. Whiddon, K. D. Wan, Y. He, J. Xia and K. F. Cen, Combust. Flame, 2017, 176, 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wang, Y. A. Liu, Y. He, R. Whiddon, K. D. Wan, J. Xia and J. Z. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2016, 30, 8977–8984 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, K. Z. Qiu, R. Whiddon, Z. H. Wang, Y. Q. Zhu, Y. Z. Liu, Z. S. Li and K. F. Cen, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 1927–1934 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kyi and B. L. Chadwick, Fuel, 1999, 78, 845–855 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hower, J. G. Groppo, U. M. Graham, C. R. Ward, I. J. Kostova, M. M. Maroto-Valer and S. F. Dai, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2017, 179, 11–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Yao, L. F. Zhang, J. L. Xu, Z. Y. Yu and Z. M. Lu, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 12093–12099 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. Standards, http://en.cnis.gov.cn/.

          W. Commons, https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4a/Coal_fired_power_plant_diagram.svg/1280px-Coal_fired_power_plant_diagram.svg.png.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

XRF	Analysis of the characteristic emission of secondary X-rays after material bombarding with high-energy X-rays	Simple spectra	Limited analysis of elements with atomic number > 11
Non-destructive	Low precision and sensitivity
Potential hazardous of X-ray radiation
Correlations for a full report of C, H, ash deposition and heating value are required
PGNAA	By continuously irradiating the sample with a neutrons beam, the constituent elements absorb neutrons and emit prompt γ rays of which the energies identify the characteristic elements	No sample destruction	Expensive price and maintenance
All-elements analysis	Potential hazardous due to exposed radiation to the human body
Bulky machines (∼3200 kg)
NIRS	Using Fourier-transform infrared absorption spectral analysis to characteristically identify the analyte	No sample destruction	Influenced by the operation environment easily
Simultaneous analysis of many properties (moisture ash content, volatile content etc.)	Low precision
Expensive
Microwave technology	By calculating the attenuation of microwave intensity and frequency after microwave interacting with water molecule in coal, moisture content can be identified	Fast analysis of moisture content	Restricted to moisture content analysis
	(1)
I(1)i/I(2)i = g(1)i/g(2)iexp[−(E(1)i − E(2)i)/kT]	(2)
αi = KiIibo[I(1)j/I(2)j]b1	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Structural model of bituminous coal proposed by Shinn–Haenel.131,132	 

C I	193.09	—	7.684766	
1D–1P1
247.80	—	7.684766	
1S0–1P1
C2 swan system	516.32	(0–0)	3.2	d3 Πg → a3 Πμ
512.93	(1–1)
509.77	(2–2)
473.71	(1–0)
471.52	(2–1)
469.76	(3–2)
468.48	(4–3)
CN violet system	388.34	(0–0)	3.2	B2 ∑+ → X2 ∑+
387.14	(1–1)
386.19	(2–2)
385.47	(3–3)
385.09	(4–4)
359.04	(1–0)
358.59	(2–1)
358.39	(3–2)

 	Fig. 2  LIBS spectra for (a) coal samples with lower and higher moisture contents (Ml: 1.19%; Mh: 22.25%);66 and (b) a coal sample with 20.76% volatile matter content and its coal char (devolatilized sample).85	 

 	Fig. 3  RSDs and SNRs of C I 247.9 nm and Si I 288.2 nm lines with varying laser energies (70–120 mJ per pulse) and repetition rates (1, 5, and 10 Hz); Wang et al.72	 

 	Fig. 4  RSDs of the emission line intensities as a function of the distance from the focal plane (0 indicates the sample is located at the focal length of the lens; negative values indicate that the distance between the sample and lens is smaller than the focal length). Lowest RSDs for Mg and Ca atomic and ionic lines were located 3 mm inside the sample; Li et al.41,42	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of the craters formed on the coal pellet surfaces with different percentages of KBr binder: (a) 0 wt%; (b) 30 wt%; (c) 60 wt%; and (d) 90 wt%; Yao et al.80	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed laser–coal interaction with a high-moisture-content sample. (a) Laser energy deposition, (b) moisture vaporization, (c) mixed zone of water and coal vapors, (d) plasma formation within water–coal mixed vapor and formation of splashed particles, and (e–h) plasma decay with outer cooler layer formed by water vapor leading to shielded detection of coal constituents; Chen et al.66	 

 	Fig. 7  Time evolution of (a) integrated intensity of atomic carbon C I 247.8 nm; (b) integrated intensity of molecular C2 band; and (c) intensity of CN band head (0–0) at 388.3 nm for three ambient gases, namely, air, argon, and helium; Dong et al.119	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram for a plasma evolution study of heated coal in a combustion cell; Yang et al.46	 

 	Fig. 9  RSDs of the coal–plasma morphology utilizing different spatial confinement procedures. (a) Conventional plasma; (b) cylindrical cavity; (c) spark discharge; and (d) cylindrical cavity + spark discharge. The average RSDs were 20.8%, 7.8%, 30.3%, and 12.6%, respectively; Wang et al.51	 

 	Fig. 10  Inline LDS system mounted over a conveyor belt with coal blocks; Gaft et al.100,101	 

 	Fig. 11  Inline Sandia LIBS system with a soot blower housed on the right-hand side of the probe; Blevins et al.116	 

 	Fig. 12  At-line LIBS system developed by Yin et al.,45 illustrating the sampling equipment.	 

 	Fig. 13  Laboratory tests using a motorized moving system to mimic coal samples on a conveyor belt; Redoglio et al.103,104	 

 	Fig. 14  ChemReveal integrated LIBS unit for offline coal analysis.41,153	 
y = k0 + k1x1 + k2x2 +…+ knxn + ε	(4)
Q = 80.30C + 339H + 22.50S − 34.7O + k1Cash + k2Cmoisture	(5)


Online	Powder flow	1064 nm, 7 ns, 360 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, 500 ns, 200 ns, gas composition: 98% N2 and 2% O2, temperature 720 K, pressure 3.0 MPa	Plasma temperature correction (4 samples)	Good correlation with the conventional methods	
107

Offline	Pellets	1064 nm, 8 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, 2 μs, 10 ms	SVM–PCA combined model (500 samples for calibration and 50 for validation)	
SVM model: R2 = 0.90, RMSEP = 1.23 MJ kg−1, ARE = 5.4%, AAE = 0.91%	
70


SVM combined with PCA model: R2 = 0.91, RMSEP = 0.85 MJ kg−1, ARE = 3.68%, AAE = 0.65%
532 nm, 5 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, 1.5 μs, 1 ms	Dominant factor PLS model (40 samples for calibration and 13 for validation)	
Conventional PLS model: R2 = 0.94, RMSEP = 1.63 MJ kg−1, RMSE = 1.05 MJ kg−1, ARE = 3.55%	
58


Dominant factor PLS model: R2 = 0.97, RMSEP = 1.33 MJ kg−1, RMSE = 0.82 MJ kg−1, ARE = 2.71%
1064 nm, 6 ns, 50.75 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, 1.664 μs, 1.1 ms	PLS model with 11-point smoothing and second derivative (33 samples for calibration and 11 for validation)	
PLS model: Rc = 0.855, Rv = 0.724, RMSECV = 1.89 MJ kg−1, RMSEP = 2.36 MJ kg−1	
84


PLS model with 11-point smoothing: Rc = 0.9906, Rv = 0.9961, RMSECV = 0.481 MJ kg−1, RMSEP = 0.305 MJ kg−1

PLS model with 11-point smoothing and second derivative: Rc = 0.9909, Rv = 0.9972, RMSECV = 0.47 MJ kg−1, RMSEP = 0.276 MJ kg−1
1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, 0.5 μs, 1 ms	Hybrid model (spectral line standardization, spectral identification, and dominant factor based PLS model)	Calibration set error = 0.0 MJ kg−1, validation set error = 0.856 MJ kg−1, all error = 0.067 MJ kg−1, mean RSD = 0.317%	
73


Moisture	<5%	0.2%	—
5–10%	0.3%	—
>10%	0.6%	—
Ash	<15%	0.2%	0.3%
15–30%	0.3%	0.5%
>30%	0.5%	0.7%
Volatile	<20%	0.3%	0.5%
20–40%	0.5%	1.0%
>40%	0.8%	1.5%
Caloric heat	—	120 J g−1	300 J g−1

 	Fig. 15  Moisture content analysis using a PLS model for 53 coal samples utilizing 40 samples in the calibration set and 13 samples in the validation set; Yuan et al.58	 


Offline	Pellets	532 nm, 8 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1417 ns, gate width 2 ms	Partial correlation and PCA (17 samples for calibration and 3 for validation)	
R = 0.991, ARE < 10%, AAE < 3%	
47

1064 nm, 8 ns, 60 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 2 μs, gate width 10 ms	SVM–PCA combined model (500 samples for calibration and 50 validation)	
SVM model: R2 = 0.91, RMSEP = 1.69%, ARE = 5.83%, AAE = 1.11% (volatile content < 20%) and 1.52% (volatile content > 20%)	
70


SVM–PCA combined model: R2 = 0.95, RMSEP = 1.22%, ARE = 4.42%, AAE = 1.09% (volatile content < 20%) and 1.02% (volatile content > 20%)
532 nm, 5 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1.5 μs, gate width 1 ms	Dominant factor PLS model (40 samples for calibration and 13 for validation)	
Conventional PLS model: R2 = 0.96, RMSEP = 1.69%, RMSE = 1.54%, ARE = 5.95%	
58


Dominant factor PLS model: R2 = 0.97, RMSEP = 1.41%, RMSE = 1.42%, ARE = 5.47%
1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms	Hybrid model (spectrum standardization, identification, and a dominant factor PLS)	Measurement errors = 0.03% (volatile content < 20%) and 0.11% (volatile content in the range of 20–40%)	
73

Slices	1064 nm, 5 ns, 30 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, nitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR) confinement ring	PCA–PLS combined model (40 samples for calibration and 18 for validation)	
R
2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 0.66%, ARE = 1.96%	
78



Online	Coal rocks	1064 nm, 30 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, delay time 1 μs, gate width 1.2 ms, ultrasonic sensor for focal adjustment of ±12 cm	Univariate calibration (5 samples)	
On-site data compared to offline data: R2 = 0.99, SD = 0.21	
101


On-site data compared to PGNAA: R2 = 0.72, SD = 0.73
Pulverized coal	1064 nm, 120 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 200 ns, gate width 10 ms	Univariate calibration (8 samples)	ARE = 2.29–13.47%	
36

Offline	Pellets	532 nm, 5 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1.5 μs, gate width 1 ms	Dominant factor PLS model (40 samples for calibration and 13 for validation)	
Conventional PLS model: R2 = 0.91, RMSEP = 4.13%, RMSE = 3.73%, ARE = 13.2%	
58


Dominant factor PLS model: R2 = 0.93, RMSEP = 3.49%, RMSE = 3.18%, ARE = 12%
1064 nm, 8 ns, 60 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 2 μs, gate width 10 ms	SVM–PCA combined model (500 samples for calibration and 50 for validation)	
SVM model: R2 = 0.92, RMSEP = 2.74%, ARE = 8.30%, AAE = 2.08 (ash content < 30%), and 2.56% (ash content > 30%)	
70


SVM–PCA combined model: R2 = 0.96, RMSEP = 1.82%, ARE = 5.48%, AAE = 1.37 (ash content < 30%), and 1.77% (ash content > 30%)
1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms	Hybrid model (spectrum standardization, identification, and a dominant factor PLS)	Measurement errors of 0.07%, 0.17%, and 0.23%, for ash contents' values <15%, 15–30%, >30%	
73

532 nm, 8 ns, 70 mJ per pulse, 1 Hz, delay time 1.4 μs, gate width 2 ms	PLS model (13 samples for calibration and 4 for validation)	
R = 0.97	
50

1064 nm, 8 ns, 80 mJ per pulse, 10 Hz, delay time 2 μs, gate width 10 ms, beam expander	SVM–PCA combined model (30 samples for calibration and 5 for validation)	
R = 0.9976, measurement accuracy = 0.31%, AAE = 2.36%	
72

1064 nm, 10 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, delay time 1.5 μs, gate width 100 μs, KBr binder	WNN model	
R > 0.925 and RMSE < 0.2591 for 7 oxides	
75

Slices	1064 nm, 5 ns, 30 mJ per pulse, 5 Hz, nitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR) confinement ring	PCA–PLS combined model (40 samples for calibration and 18 for validation)	
R
2 = 0.98, RMSEP = 0.77%, ARE = 4.029%	
78

Pellets and pulverized coal	
SP: 1064 nm, 6 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, delay time 1 μs, gate width 10 μs, H3BO3 binder for pellets, “on-tape” for pulverized samples	Univariate calibration (9 samples)	Good agreement with standard results by ICP-OES for Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2, Fe2O3, K2O, MgO, CaO, and BaO	
112 and 113


DP: 1064 nm, 6 ns, 300 mJ per pulse, inter-pulse delay 1 μs
FCad = 100% − [Mad + Vad + Aad]	(6)

C	0.5%	1%
H	0.15%	0.25%
S	<1.5%	0.05%	0.1%
1.5–4%	0.1%	0.2%
>4%	0.2%	0.3%
N	0.08%	0.15%


C	Online	Pulverized coal (40–70 μm)	1064 nm, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 200 ns, gate width 10 ms	Univariate calibration (8 samples)	Relative error ∼ 0.09–5.2%	
45

Offline	Coal rocks	1064 nm, 4 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, gate width 1.1 ms	Univariate model (7 samples)	Linear relation	
103 and 104

Pellets	532 nm, 5 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, with/without 1.5 H × 3 D mm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) cylindrical cavity	Spectrum standardization and dominant factor based PLS model (16 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)	
Without cavity: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.63%, ARE = 1.82%, AAE = 1.27%	
89


With cavity: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.35%, ARE = 1.66%, AAE = 1.08%
1064 nm, 5 ns, 30 mJ per pulse, with nitrile-butadiene rubber (NBR) cylindrical cavity	PCA–PLS combined model (40 samples for calibration and 18 for validation)	
R
2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 0.68, ARE = 1.17%	
78

532 nm, 5 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, Na2SiO3·9H2O binder	Univariate model (15 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)	
R
2 = 0.76, RMSEP = 6.25%, ARE = 10.14%	
53

266 nm, 4 ns, 16.2 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.7 μs, gate width 2 ms, KBr binder	Multivariate model (9 samples)	
R
2 = 0.983	
80

1064 and 266 nm, 7 ns, 40 mJ per pulse, delay time 1 μs, gate width 1 ms	PLS model (12 samples for calibration and 6 for validation)	
For 1064 nm: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.55%	
64 and 65


For 266 nm: R2 = 0.99, RMSEP = 1.64%
532 nm, 7 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, ambient conditions (air, He, and Ar)	PLS model (17 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)	
In air: RSD = 9.76%, RMSEP = 4.25%, RMSE = 3.91%, R2 = 0.87, ARE = 4.96%	
52


In He: RSD = 13.25%, RMSEP = 3.32%, RMSE = 2.43%, R2 = 0.96, ARE = 2.81%

In Ar: RSD = 8.50%, RMSEP = 3.49%, RMSE = 2.69%, R2 = 0.95, ARE = 2.98%
532 nm, 5 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, He ambient condition	PLS-wavelet transform combined model (17 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)	
R
2 = 0.98, RMSEP = 1.94%, ARE = 1.67%	
62

1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 3 μs, gate width 100 μs	K-ELM model (18 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)	
K-ELM: R2 = 0.9994, RMSE = 0.3762 wt%	
76


SVM: R2 = 0.9485, RMSE = 5.5791 wt%

LS-SVM: R2 = 0.9356, RMSE = 5.0273 wt%

BP-ANN: R2 = 0.9317, RMSE = 14.6857 wt%
1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms	Spectrum standardization method-dominant factor based PLS model	Calibration set error = 0, validation set error = 2.32, all samples error = 0.42, mean RSD = 0.3%	
73

H	Offline	Pulverized coal (<100 μm)	532 nm, 5 ns, 50–120 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.4 μs, gate width 0.4 μs	Univariate model (6 samples)	Deviation from linearity with high concentrations	
38

Pellets	532 nm, 7 ns, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 2 μs, gate width 1 ms, ambient conditions (air, He, and Ar)	PLS model (17 samples for calibration and 7 for validation)	
In air: RSD = 6.75%, RMSEP = 0.48%, RMSE = 0.34%, R2 = 0.82, ARE = 6.69%	
52


In He: RSD = 9.84%, RMSEP = 0.27%, RMSE = 0.21%, R2 = 0.91, ARE = 4.56%

In Ar: RSD = 6.19%, RMSEP = 0.24%, RMSE = 0.15%, R2 = 0.98, ARE = 2.78%
1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 1 ms	Spectrum standardization method and dominant factor based PLS model (69 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)	Calibration set error = 0, validation set error = 0.08, all samples error = 0.049, mean RSD = 0.546%	
73

Coal rocks	1064 nm, 4 ns, 100 mJ per pulse, gate width 1.1 ms	Univariate model (7 samples)	Linear relation	
103 and 104

O	Offline	Pulverized	1064 nm, 120 mJ per pulse, delay time 200 ns, gate width 10 ms	Univariate model (8 samples)	
R > 0.95, measurement accuracy = 1.15–1.37%, ARE = 19.39%	
40

N	Offline	Pulverized (<100 μm)	532 nm, 5 ns, 50–120 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.4 μs, gate width 0.4 μs	Univariate model (6 samples)	Deviation from linearity with high concentrations	
38

S	Offline	Pellets	1064 nm, 8–10 ns, 50 mJ per pulse, delay time 1 μs, gate width 5 μs	Univariate model (14 samples)	
R
2 = 0.88, SD = 0.11, ARE = 7.5%	
102

1064 nm, 60 mJ per pulse, delay time 0.5 μs, gate width 2 ms, double-pulse mode	Univariate model (5 samples)	
R
2 = 0.989	
37

1064 nm, 8 ns, 90 mJ per pulse, delay time 3 μs, gate width 100 μs	K-ELM model (18 samples for calibration and 8 for validation)	
K-ELM: R2 = 0.9832, RMSE = 0.7704 wt%	
76


SVM: R2 = 0.9572, RMSE = 1.6179 wt%

LS-SVM: R2 = 0.9686, RMSE = 1.5944 wt%

BP-ANN: R2 = 0.9413, RMSE = 2.0655 wt%

 	Fig. 16  Installation points of LIBS systems in a power plant (modified206).	 
AAE	Average absolute error
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AFT	Ash fusion temperature
ARE	Average relative error
ASTM	American society for testing and materials
BP-ANN	Back-propagation artificial neural network
CCD	Charge-coupled device
EDS	Energy-dispersive spectrometry
FES	Flame emission spectroscopy
FT-IR	Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy
ICCD	Intensified charge-coupled device
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry
IGCC	Integrated gasification combined cycle
JIS	Japanese industrial standards
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
LIP	Laser-induced plasma
LoD	Limit of detection
LoI	Loss on ignition
LoQ	Limit of quantification
LS-SVM	Least squares support vector machine
NBR	Nitrile butadiene rubber
NIR	Near-infrared spectroscopy
NIST	National Institute for Standards and Technology
PGNAA	Prompt gamma neutron activation analysis
PMT	Photomultiplier tube
PSO	Particle swarm optimization algorithm
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PVC	Polyvinyl chloride

R
2
	Coefficient of determination
REP	Relative error of prediction
RMSD	Root-mean-square deviation
RMSE	Root-mean-square error
RMSEP	Root-mean-square error of prediction
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SBR	Signal-to-background ratio
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
SNR	Signal-to-noise ratio
SVM	Support vector machine
SVR	Support vector regression
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TMA	Thermomechanical analysis
UC	Unburned carbon
XRF	X-ray fluorescence

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
