Flexible optoelectronic sensors: status and prospects  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2QM01319C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2QM01319C
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 1496-1519Flexible optoelectronic sensors: status and prospects

        
          
            Zhuoran 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Guozhen 
            Shen
          
          
        
      *
      School of Integrated Circuits and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: gzshen@bit.edu.cn
Received 
      18th December 2022
    , Accepted 14th February 2023First published on 15th February 2023AbstractDifferent from conventional circuits made of bulky semiconductors, flexible electronics bring mechanical flexibility and remove form factor constraints from highly functional systems, which stimulates innovative applications. This leads to rapid progress in relevant fields such as displays, energy, robotics, biomedicine, etc., where flexible sensors play critical roles. Among the different types of sensors, optoelectronic sensors are relatively non-invasive, of high-speed nature, diverse, etc., and hence the advances in flexible photodetectors and systems are of importance and broad interest. However, at the device/system level, the mechanical, optical, and electrical functionalities must be carefully balanced, and thus a comprehensive and critical overview/discussion on the state-of-the-art materials, challenges, and prospects is required. In this review, we discuss, from both fundamental and application points of view, the principles of material selection, device design, and system integration within a flexible platform towards advanced optoelectronic sensing applications such as flexible imaging and biomimic vision systems, human–machine interaction, healthcare and biomedicine.
Zhuoran Wang
Zhuoran Wang received his PhD in the Mining and Materials Engineering from McGill University, QC, Canada in 2017. In 2019 he joined the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO), Barcelona, as a postdoctoral/Marie-Curie research fellow. He is currently a professor at the School of Integrated Circuits and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing. His current research focuses on flexible optoelectronic sensors for biomimic vision.
Guozhen Shen
Guozhen Shen received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China. He is currently a professor at the School of Integrated Circuits and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), and the director of the Institute of Flexible Electronics and Intelligent Manufacturing. Before joining BIT, he worked at Hanyang University (Korea), the National Institute for Materials Science (Japan), the University of Southern California (US), the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (China), and the Institute of Semiconductors, CAS (China). His current research focuses on flexible electronic devices for artificial intelligence and healthcare monitoring.
Introduction
Sensing technologies that convert light, sound, movement, magnetic force, etc. into electrical signals are gaining importance towards the vision that “everything is connected”.1,2 Sensors have been the core driving force behind the recent edge-cutting innovations in robotics (e.g., Boston Dynamics Spot, Tesla Bot, etc.), virtue/amplified reality (e.g., Meta Quest, Haptx Gloves, etc.), biomedicine, space exploration, etc., which just decades back could only be seen in sci-fi movies. Along with the efforts made in pushing the performance limit of sensors or/and squeezing the pixel/channel size (i.e., increasing the level of integration), making them flexible can add attractive features towards new applications.3–6 For example, flexible sensors can be made via low-cost, high-yield processes such as printing and transfer, free of the lithography process that is complex but inevitable in conventional fabrication.7 Moreover, flexible sensors can conveniently adapt to conformal shapes (e.g., human body) or freely deform upon wearing, opening innovative wearable or implantable applications, whereby contrast conventional sensors are incompatible.
Among various sensing techniques, photodetectors are dedicated to conversion of optical modulations into electrical signals, to reconstruct the static or dynamic images, motions, biological signals, etc.8 Due to the non-invasive, diverse, high speed nature of light, optoelectronic sensing has been widely adopted by high-end users like military or space explorers (e.g., night vision, navigation, communication, etc.), as well as for commercial products (e.g., food production, cameras, smart watches, etc.). As a sub-branch of flexible electronics, flexible optoelectronic sensors add a new form factor to conventional systems, which is in particular advantageous in conformal imaging (e.g., artificial vision, X-ray detection, etc.),9 wearable biomedicine (e.g., epidermal and implantable sensors),10 human–machine interfacing (e.g., authentication and VR/AR),11etc. This frontier has been largely promoted by recent advances in optoelectronic materials and chemistry, including both wavily bridged bulk semiconductors (e.g., Si, III–V group, etc.)5 and intrinsically flexible materials (e.g., polymers, low-dimensional materials, hybrid perovskites, etc.).12 Thus far, the state-of-the-art emerging materials for flexible photodetectors, and the terminal applications of imaging, biomedicine, and human–machine interactions, have been extensively studied with specialized review articles being delivered. For example, Simone et al. discussed the progress of organic photodetectors and their application in flexible image sensors.13 Shen et al. reviewed low-dimensional inorganic optoelectronic materials that are intrinsically flexible.14 Yokota et al. reported the recent progress in flexible image sensors targeting biomedical applications.10 However, to enable flexibility in an optoelectronic device/system, balance between its optical, electrical, and more importantly, mechanical properties is the prerequisite, which complicates the design. To advance this frontier further, comprehensive, and also critical discussions on the fundamentals, status and challenges of the current flexible optoelectronic sensing systems are desired. Here in this review, as shown in Fig. 1, we start from the fundamentals of flexible electronics with focus on strategies to fabricate deformable devices; then we come to the core component–flexible photodetector, where its working principles, the state-of-the-art, and more importantly, the role of strain that is vital to a flexible device have been explicitly discussed; in the last section, we systematically overview the advances in edge-cutting applications such as biomimic vision, human–machine interaction, healthcare and biomedicine, where the aforementioned strategies in designing flexible photodetectors have been practiced and integrated into sensing systems that can flex.
 Fig. 1  Introduction to flexible optoelectronic sensors under the scope of flexible electronics, from materials, design, to devices and systems, where a balance between optical and electrical and mechanical properties is critical. Materials. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature (left). Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH (right). Design. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2010 AAAS (upper). Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature (lower). Devices. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. Systems. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH (left). Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature (right). 
Flexible electronics
Flexible electronics integrate functional materials/components/circuits on flexible substrates to achieve unique properties over conventional rigid electronics, such as portability, conformability, deformability, etc. Since 1967 when Crabb and Treble reported the first flexible photovoltaic arrays from thinned silicon modules,21 and Brody and Page printed thin film transistors on a strip of paper for the first time (Fig. 2a),22 flexible electronics has experienced a rapid growth, which was driven by the subsequent emergence/development of polymeric/organic semiconductors, amorphous silicon, and thin film compounds. In particular, recently, the vision towards “everything is connected” as a collection of “Internet of Things” has inspired the exploration of a new form factor in applications of information technology, energy, healthcare, social security, etc. The innovative products that can easily adapt to curved surfaces or even be bent, folded, and/or stretched5,23 as shown in Fig. 2b and c have stimulated interests in both research and market, seeing a new wave of this subject.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photographs of early flexible circuits. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 1996 SID. (b) Stretchable silicon circuits compressed with a glass capillary tube. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2010 AAAS. (c) Flexible light emitting fabric. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (d) Schematic diagram of a thin (thickness h) and long material that flexes to a radius of rb. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2019 AAAS. (e) Mechanical properties of different materials. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2012 The Materials Research Society. 
Materials
In principle, any material that is thin enough can be flexible. According to the definition of bending stiffness (EI):25–27 EI = E × bd3/12(1)where E is the elastic (Young's) modulus, and b and d represent material width and thickness, respectively. Therefore, reduced material thickness results in a three-order reduction in its stiffness, and hence a rigid/brittle bulk material becomes bendable in its thin film form. Apart from the macroscopic geometry, the crystalline and molecular structures determine the intrinsic mechanical properties of a given material and set the limit of deformation. Therefore, when considering both geometry and intrinsic mechanical characteristics, the flexibility of a given material (Fig. 2d) can be quantified as: (2)where rb represents the minimal bending radius before plastic deformation, h is the material thickness, σy is the yield stress, and E is the elastic modulus. The size/shape independent parameter εy (yield strain) determines the intrinsic flexibility, which can serve as a figure of merit (fFOM) to describe quantitatively how much a material can stretch elastically before deforming plastically:4 (3)It allows the direct comparison between different materials, where an intrinsically flexible material should be compliant (small E) and strong (large σy), as opposed to stiff and weak. However, in the current material system, a trade-off between soft-stiff and weak-strong has to be carried out.24 For example, as shown in Fig. 2e, soft materials like natural rubber are weak in general while strong materials like diamonds are stiff. Therefore, an extended, well-explored material system is critical to fabricate highly flexible devices.
An electronic device usually contains a substrate, electrodes, and functional materials. Substrates provide mechanical support and usually constitute most of the device weight\thickness; thus they account for the main mechanical properties. Most inorganic substrate materials like metal and glass possess a large elastic modulus and small fracture strain, and therefore are not suitable for applications requiring a high degree of deformability. By contrast, organics/polymers such as polyethylene naphthalate (PEN), polymide (PI), polyethlylene terephthalate (PET), PDMS, hydrogels, etc. demonstrate a small elastic modulus and large extent of elongation, and are commonly used as flexible substrates.28 Electrodes are responsible for charge injection/collection, where the optical characteristics are often evaluated along with their electrical conductivity.29 Hence another figure of merit was defined as (4)where σDC and σOP are the electrical and optical conductivity, respectively, Rsh is the sheet resistance, and T(λ) is the transmittance. For optoelectronic applications (i.e., light emitting or detecting), σDC/σOP(λ) is usually required to be larger than 35.29 Transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) such as indium tin oxide (ITO) and florin doped tin oxide (FTO) are widely used in displays and photovoltaics. However, the intrinsic brittle nature of the inorganic oxides is unsuitable for large scale, highly deformable applications. By contrast, metallic nanowires (e.g., Ag and Au),30 carbon nanomaterials (e.g., CNTs and graphene),31 organic polymers (e.g., PEDOT:PSS)32 are novel electrode materials with high σDC/σOP(λ) ratios which can simultaneously show conductivity and transparency.33 For example, Ag nanowires show a sheet resistance of ∼10 Ω sq−1 and a transparency of ∼90%, and yield a figure of merit (σDC/σOP(λ)/) of over 400. PEDOT:PSS demonstrates excellent transparency but lower conductivity than metals. But this soft, bio-tissue-like organic material can withstand large tensile/compressive strains of over 100%, suitable for stretchable (wearable) applications.32
Functional materials are the cores of electronic devices. According to eqn (1), the simplest strategy to make flexible devices is to thin the conventional semiconductors of known high quality such as silicon, III–V thin films, etc. Moreover, the designated microstructure/integrated circuit layouts such as neutral plane, “wavy” shaped, and “island-bridge” configurations can largely reduce strain in the bulk functional material and hence simultaneously enable device flexibility and functionality, which will be discussed in the following section.34,35 Another strategy that is promising but more challenging, is to apply functional materials that are intrinsically flexible (i.e., large fFOM in eqn (3)).7 In this regard, polymers/organic semiconductors are typically of high flexibility, whose carrier mobility, however, is one-to-few orders lower than that of the inorganic counterparts.3 Low dimensional inorganics including quantum dots and nanoparticles (0D),36 nanowires (1D),37 and atomic-thin layered materials (2D)15,38 are intrinsically flexible due to small size effects in at least one dimension. More importantly, atomic scale materials are quantum-confined which leads to unique optoelectronic properties (e.g., strong light coupling, multi-exciton generation, tunneling, etc.). Besides, hybrid perovskite materials have demonstrated outstanding optoelectronic properties that are drawing attention.39 Due to the high degree of freedom in material processing, a variety of low-dimensional structures are available for perovskites, which are promising in flexible electronics. However, challenges in process reliability/reproducibility and material stability/toxicity are still preventing these intrinsically flexible materials from being viable solutions.
Designs
Apart from the intrinsic flexibility of materials, designs of electronic devices/circuit layouts are also critical to the ultimate flexibility of the whole system. Depending on the extent of flexibility (or types of deformation), flexible devices can in general be characterized with bendability or/and stretchability.
Bendability in a single material can be easily realized by thinning. However, an electrode device usually consists of multilayers, and hence the complexity is multiplicated; thus the design of architectures becomes important. Fig. 3a shows a simple two-layer (film–substrate) system as an example; if the film and substrate are of the same elastic modulus, then on bending downward to a radius R, the tensile strain in the outmost top layer can be expressed as:40,41 εtop = (df + ds)/2R(5)where df and ds are the thicknesses of the film and substrate, respectively. Therefore, the minimal bending radius R = rb (the inverse of flexibility, eqn (2)) at which εtop reaches the fracture limit, which is determined from the total thickness of the device and hence an ultrathin substrate is beneficial to its bendability (as substrate is usually much thicker than the functional thin film). When the film and substrate are of different elastic moduli, eqn (5) should be changed to: (6)where η and χ stand for the ratios of thickness and elastic modulus for the film and substrate, respectively (η = df/ds, χ = Ef/Es). To demonstrate the influence of substrate material, for instance, stainless steel and plastic are applied with the same film material on top, yielding χ of ∼1 and ∼100, respectively, where Fig. 3c shows ∼5-time lowered surface strain when a soft (e.g., plastic) substrate is used.
 Fig. 3  (a) Simple films on a substrate structure that is bent to a radius of R. (b) Photograph of thin steel foil wrapped around a pencil carrying two transistor islands, (c) normalized strain in the film as a function of the film/substrate thickness ratio. Two substrates are illustrated: steel (Yf/Ys > 1) and plastic (Yf/Ys > 100). Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 1999 American Institute of Physics. (d) Stretched battery. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (e) SEM image of the designed Si wavy ribbons. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2006 AAAS. (f) Stretchable Si membrane on a rubber substrate in a “bridge-island” configuration. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright Copyright 2010 AAAS. 
Strain can be further reduced by embedding a functional thin film into the neutral surface where it is free of any strain. When a homogenous material layer is bent downward, it experiences tension on the top surface while compression at the bottom. Hence strain distributes linearly along the film thickness and crosses the origin point at the middle position (i.e., neutral surface).40 Therefore, in a typical film–substrate system where df ≪ ds, a neutral surface design can be realized with an additional encapsulation top layer either with the same E and d of the substrate, or satisfying: Esds2 = Eede2(7)where Ee and de are the modulus and thickness of encapsulation, respectively. The neutral plane configuration in principle can largely reduce the strain in the functional layer and hence the system bendability could be very high. In a multilayered system, the neutral surface is located at:43 (8)where Ei and di are the modulus and thickness of the ith layer, respectively. The equation assumes pure bending, and no-slip boundaries between the layers, which suggests zero shear deformation in the layers. However, when there is largely mismatched Ei between layers and the shearing forces are no longer negligible under severe bending, eqn (8) may not be valid and multiple neutral surfaces may exist. For example, a PDMS elastomer (small E) sandwiched between two PI hard plastics (large E), was shown to alter the distribution of strain within a three-layer system upon bending, and generated two separate neutral planes at each PI-PDMS interface.44 This is because a silicone layer decouples the in-plane strain in the two PI layers and serves as an effective strain buffer. It consequently reduces the strain by a factor of 5 compared to a single PI layer, which is an important strategy for designing a bendable optical system that could not comply with a deeply embedded neutral surface.45
Stretchability provides extended functionality in a device/system (e.g., Fig. 3d). For example, the sensors that are placed on or implanted in a joint (e.g., knee or elbow) will need to be not only bendable, but also deformable in more diverse manners (e.g., elongation, compression, twisting, etc.). However, it is more challenging to realize a stretchable device as it is usually subjected to much larger strain compared to only bendable devices. For example, an organic thin film transistor (OTFT) was fabricated on a 12.5 μm thin PI substrate, which had achieved a bending radius of as small as 100 μm. Nevertheless, this extreme bending only yielded a strain of 6.25%.46 In another example where an ultrathin flexible device on a 1.4 μm thin PET could be wrapped around a single human hair of diameter 35 μm, the system produced a strain of only 2%. For a stretched device in which the strain can be defined by its elongation: ε = (L − L0)/L(9)where L0 and L are the lengths before and after deformation, respectively. Stretchable devices in general must accommodate a strain of at least 20%∼30% to ensure sufficient compliance for practical uses, which is significantly higher than that of only bendable devices.17,46,47 Therefore, strain engineering/transfer becomes critical in compensating the difficulty in realizing intrinsically stretchable devices.
Designing structures that stretch is effective in developing flexible devices based on conventional semiconductors of known high quality (e.g., silicon, II–V group, etc.). As afore-discussed, thinning is effective in rendering flexibility to bulk semiconductors, which can be further configured into “wavy” shapes and bonded to elastomeric substrates (Fig. 3e),34 yielding systems that can not only flex but also stretch and compress, with a mechanism similar to that of an accordion bellows. This “wavy” microstructure can be obtained by mechanically/thermally/chemically pre-stretching an elastomeric substrate which is released after transferring functional components. The release of pre-strain leads to a controlled buckling effect of the functional components which thereafter become stretchable.48 According to Rogers et al., the maximum allowable prestrain (that triggered the buckling) for the system is approximately:49 (10)where εfracture is the fracture limit of the thin functional material, εc is the critical buckling strain (or the minimum strain needed to induce buckling), defined as: (11)where Ēs and Ēf are the plane-strain modulus of the substrate and film, respectively, defined as: Ē = E/(1 − ν2)(12)where ν is the Poisson ratio. When the buckled system is subjected to an applied strain εapplied, the peak strain in the film can be expressed as: (13)where ξ = 5εpre(1 + εpre)/32. The maximal applicable tensile strain (εapplied > 0) correlates to the system allowable prestrain which, for instance, can reach over 30% in a Si based device whose fracture limit is only 1–2%, indicating an almost 20-time difference, hence the resulting stretchability.34,49
An extended strategy that provides extra stretchability is the “island–bridge” design (Fig. 3f) where functional components (“islands”) closely attach to an elastomeric substrate while the buckled, arc-sharped interconnecting thin wires (“bridges”) can move freely out of the plane to accommodate the strain of the system.50 The corresponding maximal strain in the bridge and island is:51 (14) (15)where h is the thickness of the material and L0bridge is the pristine length of the interconnecting wires. Since hbridge ≪ L0bridge, the bridge can accommodate a much larger prestain (eqn (14)). Eqn (15) further indicates that stiff and thick islands with soft and thin bridges are beneficial in reducing the strain in the core functional components.
Flexible photodetectors
Principles
So far, we have introduced the fundamentals of flexible electronics as background; this section will focus on flexible photodetectors. A photodetector is a device that converts light to electricity, which is the core of optoelectronic sensors. Figures of merit of a photodetector are listed in Table 1 as rubrics for evaluating its overall performance, among which responsivity represents the key sensitivity of the photodetectors in considering both the bandwidth and gain, allowing cross-comparisons among devices of different types.52
Table 1 Figures of merit of photodetectors




Figure of merit
Definition
Explanation




Responsivity (R)




R indicates the sensitivity of photodetector.


Iph: produced photocurrent


Pin: incoming light power






External quantum efficiency (EQE)



EQE directly correlates to R






Internal quantum efficiency (IQE)
IQE = EQE/Aa
IQE indicates the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the absorbed photons


Aa: Light absorption ratio






Response time (τr)




τ
r shows the operational speed of the device






Diffuse time (τdiff)




τ
diff is the diffusion time of carriers at non-equilibrium



D: diffusion coefficient;



L
diff: diffusion length



μ: carrier mobility






Drift time (τdrift)




τ
drift is the time to travel under electrical field



W: width of region with electrical field;






3 dB bandwidth (fc)




f
c shows the frequency characteristics (maximal operating frequency) of the photodetector






Noise equivalent power (NEP)



NEP equals to the input light power at 1 Hz bandwidth, signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 1, which describes the minimal power can be detected






Linear dynamic range (LDR)



LDR is used to characterize the light intensity range where the detector has a constant responsivity



P
sat: the saturation light power under which the photocurrent starts to deviate its linearity






Detectivity (D*)




D* is more universal parameter that allows comparison among different types of photodetectors



S
n: noise spectral density




Depending on whether there is an internal gain, the photodetectors can be divided into two main types: photodiodes and photoconductors. A photodiode is typically of a PN junction, which can also be extended to PIN or Schottky structures. On one hand, photodiodes consist of a built-in electric field in which the excess carriers are screened and dark currents are suppressed. On the other hand, the quantum efficiency is limited to unity (i.e., absence of gain) due to the existence of a potential barrier, unless carrier multiplication (e.g., avalanche photodiodes) takes place. Therefore, a photodiode in general has low responsivity but large bandwidth, which is advantageous in high-speed communication. By contrast, the simplest photoconductor is a photo-sensitive material with Ohmic contacts that operates based on the photoconductive effect, where photoconductive gain is achieved if one type of charge carriers (electrons or holes) is able to circulate many times before it gets recombined. This could be due to the difference in mobilities between electrons and holes (i.e., one type travels faster), or/and more commonly due to the traps that tend to capture one type of carriers. The photoconductive gain is defined as the ratio of carrier recombination lifetime (τlife) to the transit time (τtransit): (16)where VDS is the applied bias and L is the channel length. When τlife > τtransit, G > 1 indicates the presence of photoconductive gain. Trap induced ultra-long lifetime can lead to a high gain, however, at the cost of slow response; thus, a trade-off between the gain and bandwidth should be carefully considered. In addition, the dark current in a photoconductor is usually high due to the absence of a potential barrier. A phototransistor is a special case of a photoconductor where a gate is introduced to modulate the carrier concentration in the conducting channel, so as to improve the noise and gain characteristics. An overview of performance metrics of commercial and emerging photodetector technologies is shown in Fig. 4a, where a high gain-bandwidth and sensitivity at a longer wavelength is desired (indicated by the arrows).8
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Technical status of photodetectors.8,38,59–64 (c) Flexible organic photodiodes. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (d) Inorganic nanowire devices. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH (Upper). Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH (Lower) (e) Flexible graphene/perovskite hybrid photodetector. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019 Science China Press. 
Flexible planar devices
The flexibility in electronic devices can be realized either with designs or materials themselves, where the former have been explicitly overviewed in the previous section. Herein we focus on the advances in functional materials that are intrinsically flexible, and have shown promise in achieving highly flexible photodetectors.
Organic materials that are soft in nature are compatible with flexible substrates and scalable processing (e.g., printing, R2R, slot-die, etc.), with already demonstrated success in various optoelectronic applications such as displays (i.e., OLEDs) and energy (i.e., OPV).13,53 Moreover, organic optoelectronic materials can be tuned to have narrow band absorption (FWHM < 100 nm), which is beneficial in realizing color selective applications.54 Another advantage is that they can be conveniently combined to cover a wide/selective spectral range from UV-vis-NIR, towards highly performing devices and novel applications (e.g., transparent solar cells). However, organic semiconductors generally have difficulty in reaching over 1000 nm,55 which limits their applications in IR sensing that are important for night vision and communication.
The first generation of flexible organic photodiodes uses PEDOT:PSS as transparent conductors instead of rigid ITO.32 For example, Krebs et al. reported the first wearable organic photodiode, which can be integrated into textiles based on a MEH-PPV:PCBM BHJ layer deposited on the PET/PEDOT:PSS substrate.56 Later Lipomi et al. fabricated the first stretchable organic photodiode by placing an intrinsically soft material (P3HT:PCBM) onto a pre-stretched elastomeric substrate (PDMS of ∼200 μm thickness); upon releasing the pre-strain, the organic BHJ layer buckles to the substrate and thus the device becomes stretchable (up to 27% tensile strain).57 Kaltenbrunner et al. further thinned the PET substrate (∼1.4 μm) to fabricate an ultralight, ultrathin, flexible photodiode that has a power density of 10 W g−1, a total device thickness of 2 μm, and a minimal bending radius of 10 μm.17 Moreover, this device can bear over 300% tensile strain when being transferred on a PDMS elastomer. Park et al. also adopted this strategy to further develop flexible devices (Fig. 4c) with an elevated power density of 11.46 W g−1, which were integrated with organic electrochemical transistors to realize self-powered biomedical devices.58
Thus far, flexible photodetectors especially photodiodes/solar cells based on organic semiconductors have already made breakthroughs in balancing the mechanical and optoelectronic functionalities. However, due to the limited IR absorption/response, organic optoelectronic applications at long wavelengths are still pending, not to mention their low mobility compared to inorganic counterparts and instability to oxygen/humidity/heat, etc., to which new organic materials or/and hybrid system, and advanced encapsulation are potential solutions.
Low dimensional inorganic materials show intrinsic flexibility originating from the structures. As discussed before, thinning is effective in reducing bending stiffness; thus scaling down of dimension(s) to nano or even atomic levels will substantially increase flexibility. Additionally, low dimensional materials show novel optoelectronic properties such as strong light coupling, multi-exciton generation, energy band/DOS modulation, etc., which are appealing for device studies. Zero dimensional (0D) materials are nanocrystals or quantum dots. In addition to superior optoelectronic properties due to strong small size effect/quantum confinement, 0D materials are solution processable, and thus are well-suited for fabricating flexible devices.36,68 In 2006, Sargent et al. reported solution processed PbS quantum dot photodetectors, which achieved a high responsivity of over 103 A W−1 and a detectivity of 1013 Jones at a wavelength of 1.3 μm, for the first time surpassing those of the commercial InGaAs photodetectors.36 Apart from PbS, optoelectronic 0D materials such as HgSe NCs, CuInSe2 NCs, CdTe NCs, ZnO NCs, SnO2 NCs, PbSe QDs, CdSe QDs, AgBiS2 NCs, InAs QDs, etc. have been studied, in a wide spectral response range covering UV-Vis-IR (e.g., the detecting limit of HgTe QDs can be extended up to 12 μm).69 Although edge-cutting advances have been made in 0D optoelectronics, drawbacks of low carrier mobility (orders lower than those of standard bulk semiconductors) and complex ligand exchange process have been obstacles for their practical and scalable use.
One dimensional (1D) materials include nanowires, nanotubes, etc., where charge carriers are confined in 1D channels with high mobility and low recombination.9,37 Mechanically, a 1D structure has higher freedom to flex due to largely reduced bending stiffness in the other two dimensions. Early in 2002, Yang et al. reported the first ZnO single nanowire photodetector as shown in Fig. 4d (top).65 Since then, the expanded material system has promoted the exploration of single nanowire photodetectors based on a wide range of absorbers, including single element semiconductors (e.g., Si, Ge, Te, etc.), oxides (e.g., ZnO, SnO2, Ga2O3, Zn2SnO4, etc.), III-V groups (GaAs, InAs, InSb, etc.), and chalcogenides (e.g., CdS, PbS, In2S3, HgCdTe, Sb2Se3, etc.), with spectral response ranging from UV to IR and a high detectivity of up to 1019 Jones.70 Furthermore, heterojunctions have been studied to facilitate the carrier transport and suppress dark current that is usually high in photoconductors. Joselevich et al. applied 1D CdS–CdSe core–shell structures to achieve a gain of 3.8 × 103, a responsivity of 1.2 × 103 A W−1, and more importantly, an extra short response time of 200 ns.71 Lu et al. reported a side-gated nanowire phototransistor, whose carrier concentration can be modulated by applying high ferroelectric field. The resulting InP/CdS nanowire photodetectors show supressed dark current with an ultrahigh gain (4.2 × 105/1.2 × 107) and responsivity (2.8 × 105/5.2 × 106 A W−1), together with superior detectivity (9.1 × 1015/1.7 × 1018 Jones).72 Despite the fact that photodetectors of single nanowires have achieved high detectivity, the ultra-low SNR is not satisfactory for practical applications like image sensors. To tackle this issue, nanowire assembly or/and integration have been studied. Compared with the epitaxially grown nanowire arrays via MOCVD or MBE, post-assembly/transfer of the as-obtained nanowires is more suitable for making flexible devices.37 For example, Javey et al. used liquid assisted contact printing to fabricate highly ordered nanowire arrays (8 NW μm−1, ∼95% directional alignment) on a wafer scale.73 Specifically, the as-prepared nanowires were randomly grown on a substrate, which directionally slid over a receiver wafer. Due to the shearing force and interaction between two substrates, nanowires were realigned and transferred to the receiving substrate, where an oily liquid was applied as a lubricant to facilitate the transfer. Electrospinning is another technique to directly “write” nanowire arrays on flexible substrate. For example, Shen et al. directly electrospined In2O3 and Zn2GeO4 microwires for flexible UV photodetectors (bottom of Fig. 4d).66,74,75 Yet, up to present, how to scale up the processing of nanowire devices with precise control remains an open question.
Two dimensional (2D) materials have atomic-thin layered structures where the carrier transport is confined in the 2D direction.15 Graphene is the most studied 2D material with demonstrated ultrahigh carrier mobility, a bandwidth of 40 GHz and wide absorption from UV to terahertz, resulting in broadband, ultrafast photodetecting. However, single layer, “zero bandgap” graphene showed poor light absorption and large dark current, which limited its practical use. This promoted the development of a new class of 2D materials including transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), black phosphorus (BP), etc. of decent mobility, strong light coupling from vis to mid-IR, which constitute frontiers of the 2D optoelectronics.76 Yet the issues of large-scale fabrication, defects, and stability need to be addressed in the emerged 2D materials. In addition to a single (or few) layered 2D material, van de Waals heterostructures can be conveniently constructed without the constraints of lattice matching and processing compatibility. This gives freedom to merge the advantages of different 2D materials towards superior device performance. For example, atomically thin p-n heterojunctions can be fabricated by simply stacking two different layered materials.77 Furthermore, graphene (Gr) has been widely applied as transparent electrodes in 2D optoelectronics to enable effective out-of-plane (vertical) charge transport.77,78 This will largely enhance the speed of response as the channel length has been reduced to the atomic level. Koppens et al. reported a sandwiched Gr/WSe2/Gr photodetector with an ultrafast response time of 5.5 ps and a high IQE of over 70%, simultaneously having high speed and high efficiency in a single device.78 Apart from 2D heterostructures, dimension hybrids have been intensively studied in recent years. For example, Konstantatos et al. incorporated solution processed 0D PbS quantum dots into a 2D graphene substrate for an IR phototransistor, yielding an ultrahigh responsivity (∼107 A W−1) along with fast speed (∼ms).79 This CMOS compatible technique is promising in accommodating a low-cost and broadband hyperspectral imaging system.80,81 Moreover, 2D materials are intrinsically flexible and suitable for fabricating flexible devices. For example, Zhang et al. fabricated perovskite/graphene van de Waals heterostructures via CVD growth. A high responsivity of ∼107 A W−1 has been achieved with the photodetector which can be incorporated into flexible substrates as image sensors (Fig. 4e).67 Similarly, Koppens et al. reported a flexible graphene based photodetector used as a wearable fitness monitor and a UV sensor.82 Because of the low light absorption in monolayered graphene, PbS quantum dots were applied as sensitizers to realize UV-IR light response to detector PPG signals for health monitoring. This proof-of-concept was designed in the form of a bracelet or a patch to demonstrate its potential in practical wearable applications.
Hybrid lead halide perovskites are a group of emerging materials with excellent optoelectronic properties, which have brought significant advances in solution-processed photovoltaics. Typically, hybrid perovskites have a ABX3 structure where A stands for a monovalent cation such as methylammonium (MA+, CH3NH3+), formamidinium (FA+, HC(NH2)2+), or cesium (Cs+), B is a divalent metal cation such as lead or tin, and X is halide anions (I−, Br−, and Cl−).83,84 This group of materials shows strong light absorption, low defect density, high mobility, and solution processable, promising for flexible and highly performing photodetecting applications.85 The first flexible photoconductive detector was made from MAPbI3 on an ITO/PET substrate, which demonstrated photoresponse at 310–780 nm, and unchanged electrical properties after 120 bending-–recovery cycles.86 To overcome the brittleness of bulk thin films, low dimensional perovskite materials with improved flexibility as well as functionality were also studied for devices. For example, MAPbI3 quantum dots can be fabricated via ligand-assisted re-precipitation technique (LARP). This method can initiate rapid perovskite nucleation in solution at room temperature through changing solvent polarity on adding a miscible antisolvent, yielding size-dependent energy gaps of 3.1–1.7 eV. Zhai et al. reported MAPbI3 QD sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays for flexible, transparent photodetectors, with a transparency of 85% at 400–800 nm, which are bendable up to 180°.87 Hybrid perovskites can also be fabricated into 1D structures (i.e., nanowires), where a mixed solvent of DMF and isopropanol can be used to boost the process of dissolution–recrystallization. Cloutier et al. reported the fabrication of a CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x nanowire network on Kapton tape, constituting a flexible photodetector with a responsivity of 0.62 A W−1, a detectivity of 7.3 × 1012 Jones, a response time of 227.2 μs, and more importantly, stable photocurrent after 5000 times of repeatative bending–recovery cycles.88 Zhai et al. reported a modified MAPbI3 perovskite network, where an enhanced performance was achieved (D* = 2.06 × 1013 Jones, fc = 160 dB, τr < 100 μs) and also a device stability of over 5000 h was demonstrated.89 Fan et al. made use of an AAO template to fabricate aligned nanowire arrays as a curved image sensor.20 In addition, 2D perovskites have also been applied for flexible photodetectors. For example, Zeng first reported an inorganic CsPbBr3 nanoplate based flexible photodetector, demonstrating an on–off ratio of 1000, a rise time of 20 μs, and minor degradation of photocurrent from 2.37 μA to 2.31 μA after 10000 times of bending tests.90 However, the stability and toxicity remain two main challenges for perovskite materials, to overcome which, effective encapsulation, and more importantly the development of new perovskite materials that are stable, lead-free, high performing are desired.
We further compared the performance of photodetectors with the same material on rigid and flexible substrates to discuss the limit in flexible fabrication of planar devices. As shown in Table 2, conventional bulk/thin film materials (i.e., Si91 and InGaAs92) that were thinned/exfoliated for flexible application showed decreased performance (reduced Idark and τrise). It could be mainly due to the increase in surface defects upon thinning/exfoliation, as the defects are closer to the junction.93 Therefore, surface passivation is critical in these devices, in addition to the light trapping design to compensate the absorption loss. As for organic94 and low dimensional material79,82,95,96-based photodetectors, the difference between their rigid and flexible forms is insignificant (the inconsistency of Gr-QD detectors is mainly due to the difference in film thickness, where the gain–bandwidth product is consistent79,82). Therefore, they are more suitable for making flexible optoelectronic devices as the bottom-up process causes negligible damage to the pristine crystalline structures, in addition to the intrinsic material flexibility and strong light-matter interaction. One apparent path towards liable and practical application is to optimize the fabrication, apart from which, a more critical issue is how to maintain a high performance upon applying the highest deformation/strain. This leads to the following discussion on the exploration of a new device architecture (i.e., fibers and fabrics) and mechanism in strain-manipulated optoelectronic functionality.
Table 2 Comparison of photodetectors with the same material on rigid and flexible substrates




Photodetector type
Form

R (A W−1)

I
dark (nA)

τ
rise (ns)

D* (Jones)




Si (photodiode)
Rigid (Thorlabs)
0.2∼0.7
10−3–102
10−2∼102
—


Flexible91
∼0.7
∼103
∼103
∼1013


InGaAs thin film (photodiode)
Rigid (Thorlabs)
0.59–1
10−2–5
0.3–10
—


Flexible92,97
0.53–1
4–102
∼102
∼1011


Polymer (photodiode)94
Rigid
∼0.2
∼10−4
∼104
∼1012


Flexible
∼0.1
∼10−4
∼104
∼1012


Gr-QD (phototransistor)
Rigid (PbS: 60 nm thick)79
∼107
∼105
∼107
∼1013


Flexible (PbS: 30 nm thick)82
∼105
102–103
∼104
—


InGaSb nanowires (photoconductor)
Rigid95
∼103
∼103
∼104
∼109


Flexible96
∼103
∼104
∼104
—




Flexible optoelectronic fibers and fabrics
Compared to planar devices that are bendable via a single axis, a fiber that is long and thin can have highly reduced bending stiffness due to its fourth power correlation to the diameter (eqn (1)).98 In general, there are two ways of fabricating optoelectronic fibers: (1) direct thermal drawing of multimaterial fibers; (2) coating of functional materials on fibers. The former process starts with optical fiber fabrication, starting with a multimaterial macroscopic preform in which bulk materials are arranged at prescribed and well-defined positions/geometry (Fig. 5a).99 Following thermal melting of all constituting materials, desired optoelectronic fibers can be drawn by controlling the temperature and speed.100 However, the following general conditions are needed for the materials: (1) At least one of the fiber materials needs to support the draw stress and yet continuously and controllably deform. (2) All the materials must flow (viscosity <107 poise) at a common temperature. (3) The materials should exhibit good adhesion/wetting in viscous and solid states without cracking even when subjected to rapid thermal cooling. Upon satisfying all conditions, the first thermally drawn metal–semiconductor–insulator optoelectronic fiber, as shown in Fig. 5b, consisted of As40Se50Te10Sn5 functional material, a Sn electrode, and transparent insulating cladding.101 The device constitutes a photoconductor where the incoming light shining anywhere along its length could be detected. A more advanced system based on optoelectronic fibers was demonstrated by Fink et al. who integrated InGaN LEDs with GaAs p–i–n to build a three-megahertz bi-directional optical communication link and applied it for successful heart rate measurements.102 Apart from the well-developed bulk semiconductors such as Si, Ge, III–V group, etc., materials with low melting points such as Se show better microstructural tunability, and hence are more suitable for thermal drawing. For example, Sorin et al. reported a thermally drawn Se photodetecting fiber, yielding a responsivity of ∼0.06 A W−1, an on–off ratio of 700–800, and more importantly, a NEP of as low as 76 pW Hz−1/2 which is compatible with a commercial silicon photodiode.103,104
 Fig. 5  (a) Optoelectronic fibers fabricated by thermal drawing. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM cross-section of As40Se50Te10Sn5 photoconductive fibers and constructed functional fabrics. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2004 Springer Nature. (c) Photodetector made by coating active materials on conductive fibers. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (d) UV sensitive TiO2 coated flexible carbon cloth. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Te@TeSe nanowire coated carbon fabric as a flexible IR detector. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
In contrast, the second approach uses the as-prepared conducting fibers (e.g., metallic wires or carbon fibers) directly as substrates on which the functional materials are conformally coated layer-by-layer. Since a high temperature drawing process has been avoided, this has lifted the rigid requirement for material selection. For example, as shown in Fig. 5c, ZnO nanowire arrays were grown in situ on Zn conducting wires, on top of which PVK, PEDOT:PSS, CNT, and PDMS were applied layer-by-layer as an electron blocking layer, a hole transfer layer, an electrode, and encapsulation, respectively. The final device shows an on–off ratio of 2.18 and a responsivity of 0.03 A W−1.105 They also found that using graphene to replace CNTs could lead to an enhanced responsivity up to 0.9 A W−1.108
However, a single optoelectronic fiber has lower mechanical strength and a small active surface, for which a common solution is to integrate them into fabric. On one hand, an optoelectronic fabric consists of a light-scattering rough surface which is beneficial in light absorption; on the other hand, the flexibility (in particularly stretchability) has been improved due to the generated angular elasticity in a woven structure, especially along 45° in between its warp and weft directions. In addition, a fabric is usually of high porosity (i.e., good air permeability), and thus more suitable for wearable applications where comfort must be considered.98 The simplest strategy is to directly use conductive fabrics as substrates. For example, Shen et al. applied carbon cloths to deposit TiO2 (Fig. 5d)106 and TeSe nanowires (Fig. 5e)107 as flexible photodetectors, demonstrating reliable photoresponse to UV and IR light, respectively. Yet the performance was compromised due to the difficulty in addressing the issue of super-rough contact. In a more sophisticated manner, optoelectronic fabrics can be made using knitting techniques, where each individual fiber is a complete device.109 For example, lithium-ion batteries can be made into fiber shape and knitted to improve voltage from 2.5 V to 10 V.110 Another way is to build a device upon knitting. For example, the warp and weft parts can constitute sub-components, which are combined to fabricate a fully functioning optoelectronic fabric.111 Although there has been a plenty of research on highly performing optoelectronic fibers and fabric, tremendous efforts are needed to develop scalable manufacturing (i.e., be compatible with conventional textile manufacturing) towards more practical uses.
Strain-manipulated optoelectronics
The flexibility of an electronic device can be tested via repetitively deforming (e.g., bending or stretching) from hundred to thousand times while evaluating the degradation of its electrical properties. As for a flexible photodetector, a new dimension of complexity is involved. When an optoelectronic device is being deformed, the most apparent fact is that the area interacting with light is being altered. For example, a stretched organic solar cell led to improved power generation due to an enlarged area, although the actual efficiency was not changed.17 Furthermore, when a semiconductor is strained, its intrinsic optoelectronic characteristics could be changed, leading to modified performance at the device level. It is known that with strain, both electron and hole mobilities in bulk material like silicon can be largely improved (>30%) due to the altered band structure and effective mass, which is an important strategy for CMOS technology.112,113 However, a low fracture limit of ∼1% in silicon has limited the extent of tunability. In contrast, intrinsically flexible semiconductors such as organic and 2D materials, are promising in this regard.
As an example, Bao et al. fabricated a polymeric semiconducting blend (SY/PU) as light emitting material, where PLQE, charge carrier transport density (both electron and hole), as well as the luminance and current density were all enhanced with an increase in applied tensile strain (Fig. 6a).12 The authors attributed this to alignment of the polymer and densifying of the film in the vertical direction under strain, both of which are expected to improve charge and exciton transport. This PL enhancement was further demonstrated universal for other polymeric emitters. The resulting device can be stretched to 100% strain, while preserving its uniformity and bright light emission. Atomic-thin 2D materials like graphene and TMDs also show excellent flexibility (tolerance of ∼20% tensile strain); as a result, their optoelectronic properties can be largely tuned via strain engineering. For example, Nam et al. fabricated flexible photodetectors with crumpled graphene, which showed ∼400% enhanced photoresponsivity compared to a flat graphene device, due to an order-of-magnitude enhanced extinction of graphene (Fig. 6b). Moreover, it showed 100% modulation in responsivity with 200% applied strain, demonstrating a highly stretchable photodetector.114 Javey et al. reported the transition from an indirect to a direct band gap in multi-layered WSe2 under strain, leading to 35 fold photoluminescence.115 In addition, strain induced a piezoelectric effect, which was used to modify the device interface and its photoresponse. Wang et al. fabricated a monolayer MoS2 based flexible photodetector, where the applied strain could tune the Schottky barrier at the interfaces manipulating the photocurrent.116 Therefore, strain is a double-edged sword, the engineering of which should be carefully practiced, on one hand to avoid over-straining of the functional materials, on the other hand, to realize desired/optimal optoelectronic properties.
 Fig. 6  (a) Functioning of flexible OLEDs under different bending conditions and the strain modulated optoelectronic performance. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. (b) Crumpled graphene for strain modulated stretchable photodetector. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
Advanced flexible optoelectronic sensors
After reviewing the basics of flexible photodetecting devices, here in this section, we turn focus on the design of complete systems that involve both sensing and processing units, targeting at advanced applications of flexible imaging and biomimic vision, human–machine interaction, healthcare and biomedicine.
Flexible imaging and biomimic vision
Optoelectronic imaging usually involves two different processes: (1). photodetector arrays for optical-to-electrical conversion and (2). readout circuits for signal processing.10 Therefore, a flexible system requires not only flexible light-sensitive components, but also logical circuits that can deform. A passive pixel sensor (PPS) consists of only a photodetector and a switching element (e.g., diode or transistor) in each pixel. Owing to its simplicity, PPSs have been widely adopted in flexible imaging systems where fabricating complicate circuits is challenging. Someya et al. reported a 72 × 72 flexible imaging system (pixel size of 36 dpi) by integrating organic photodiodes with organic transistors (OFETs), which constituted a large-area, flexible, and lightweight image scanner that is free of any mechanically moving parts and can conveniently adapt to curved surfaces (e.g., pages of an open book, labels affixed to a wine bottle, etc.).117 Larger pixel arrays (256 × 256) have also been fabricated by Gasparini et al. via integration of organic photodiodes with a-Si thin film transistors (TFT).118 Apart from transistors, diodes can also be applied for readout. For example, Lee et al. integrated perovskite photodiodes with Si rectifying diodes to achieve a 10 × 10 flexible image sensor with a pixel size of 2 μm and a device thickness of only 4 μm.119 Someya et al. further reported an ultrathin (total device thickness of 1 μm), highly resolved (262 dpi) organic imaging system of 16 × 16 matrix, which is capable of both steady state and dynamic image acquisition.120
However, the structural simplicity compromises the signal to noise ratio (SNR). Therefore, an active pixel sensor (APS) design has, in addition to the photodetector-switch configuration, further included amplifying circuits to improve the SNR,121 and has been used in commercial CMOS image sensors. An APS that has three transistors for resetting, selecting, and amplifying is called 3T-APS, where additional transistors can further improve the SNR (e.g. 4T, 5T, 6T, etc.) and hence the imaging quality.10 But more transistors occupy additional space in the pixel, which hence reduces the fill factor (FF, the portion of the photoactive area). A low FF affects the sensitivity and dynamic range of the image sensor, and moreover, will complicate the fabrication and increase the difficulty in making flexible devices. For example, De Roose et al. applied IGZO thin film transistors to fabricate a 3T-APS flexible X-ray image sensor with a resolution of 254 dpi.122 To be more compatible with flexible fabrication, a simplified APS has also been fabricated. Wang et al. reported an organic image sensor on a flexible ultrathin (∼10 μm) polymeric substrate of 152 pixels, where each pixel consists of only three components: an organic photodetector, a resistor load, and an OTFT active amplifier.123 Similarly, Shen et al. reported a fully inorganic nanowire based active sensing-amplifying pixel sensor (Fig. 7) with a record high photosensitivity (ratio of photocurrent/dark current) of 7.6 × 104 at 1342 nm infrared light.19 More importantly, this high SNR has facilitated the image recognition in an artificial neural network with high efficiency.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of a flexible image sensor by integrating Bi2Se2S nanowire photodetectors and Ga-doped In2O3 nanowire FETs. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
As a critical application of flexible image sensors, artificial vision consists of photosensitive units and optical lenses to mimic the superior functionality of natural eyes, such as wide FoV, 3D realtime depth sensing, hyperspectral imaging function, etc., which is of importance for advanced robotics, autonomous driving, augmented/virtual reality (A/VR), etc.9 Taking a human visual system as an example, the critical sensing unit, the eye bulb, project the optical image on retina, where millions of photoreceptors transmit the converted neuroelectric signals to the brain via optic nerves. Inspired by this, Fan et al. fabricated an artificial retina made of perovskite nanowire arrays in a hemispherical geometry as shown in Fig. 7a.20 This electrochemical device has a high degree of structural similarity to a human eye with demonstrated potential to achieve high imaging resolution. Moreover, the spherical design of this artificial retina ensures a more consistent distance between pixels and the lens, resulting in a wider FoV and better focusing onto each pixel. Apart from human eyes, other chambered eye structures of fish, birds, and compound eyes of insects have also been successfully imitated, towards special applications demanding scotopic/telescopic vision, wide FoV, and deep DoF.124 For example, learning from the eye structures of aquatic creatures (e.g., fish has a wide FoV of up to 160°), Kim et al. fabricated a miniaturized camera consisting of a single monocentric lens and hemispherical silicon photodiode arrays, featuring a FoV of 120°, a DoF of 20 cm to infinity and minimal optical aberrations with simple accommodation.125 In this design, silicon-based image sensor pixels were interconnected via serpentine design which significantly minimized the induced strain in silicon (∼0.02%, much lower than its fracture limit of ∼1%), rendering superior flexibility of this artificial retina. However, biological eyes are beyond being just intensity-sensitive. To mimic the coloured vision, Son et al. embedded colour selective quantum dots into an elastomeric matrix to enable stretchable, multispectral and multiplexed 5 × 5 × 3 phototransistor arrays that distinguished red, green, and blue patterns both under their flat and hemispherically curved states.126
Despite recent advances in artificial visual systems with morphological and functional similarity, the signals are still collected and processed separately under the conventional von-Neumann architecture, which is far from competing with the human visual system containing millions of photoreceptors per square centimetre in the retina, 1011 neurons and 1015 synapses that simultaneously sense, store, and process data with ultra-high efficiency.127 The recent emergence of neuromorphic devices such as electrical synapses shows similarity to the functioning mode of a human brain, which is promising for neuromorphic computing. For example, Shen, et al. integrated In2O3 photodetectors with Al2O3 thin film memristors, where the light modulated the transition between the high/low resistance mode to simulate the biological visual system (Fig. 8b and c).66 Apart from memristors, devices including thin film transistors, phase-change memories, ferroelectric devices, etc. can integrate with photo-sensitive components in a single pixel for simultaneous sensing-storing-processing. However, the wiring of separating units still leads to problems of incompatibility, complexity, and connecting noises, etc.127 In contrast, optoelectronic synapses that show persistent resistance change in material itself due to light-induced ion migration, defect trapping, phase change, etc., can simulate the biological synaptic responses (e.g., short-term plasticity (STP) and long-term plasticity (LTP), etc.) within the simplest device configuration. For example, via ionization/dissociation of oxygen vacancies, metal oxides such as IGZO, etc. show light-modulated conductivity that persists.128 Traps in materials and interfaces are also effective in prolonging the recombination lifetime with a high photoconductive gain that simulates the STP/LTP behaviors. Shen et al. reported a Cs3Bi2I9 nanocrystal based artificial optoelectronic synaptic device, where synaptic functions such as excitatory postsynaptic current, paired-pulse facilitation (PPF), plasticity, and “learning–forgetting–learning” were realized via a trapping mechanism.129 Furthermore, it demonstrated a flexible and robust device design that can accommodate 1000 bending cycles. It also showed the functionality of recognizing colors and handwritings with high accuracy, demonstrating its potential in neuromorphic vision systems. Another mechanism for designing artificial synapses is light induced phase change that is typically observed in transition metal oxides such as MoO3, WO3 (e.g., Mo5+ ↔ Mo6+, W5+ ↔ W6+).130–132 For example, Chai et al. fabricated an optoelectronic resistive random access memory device (ORRAM) made of MoO3 in a simple two terminal structure.133 It was found that UV light can reduce Mo6+ to Mo5+, thus leading to a switch from a high resistance state (LRS) to a low resistance state (HRS), which can be reset using external bias to enable erasable visual memory functionality.
 Fig. 8  (a) Biomimetic eye with a hemispherical perovskite nanowire array retina. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (b and c) Flexible artificial visual-memory system based on an In2O3 UV photodetector and an Al2O3 memristor. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
Another attractive application for curved imaging is X-ray detection, where the conventional detectors in a rigid form accommodate complex shapes like the human body with difficulty, thus reducing the accuracy of diagnoses.13 The first flexible X-ray detector based on indirect conversion was fabricated by Gelinck et al., where organic detector arrays were integrated with amorphous IGZO TFT to construct an APS image sensor with a 120 × 160 matrix and a pixel size of 126 μm.134 In contrast, direct X-ray conversion yields enhanced image quality and conversion efficiency, and thus has been drawing increasing attention in this regard. For example, Huang et al. reported a nylon membrane filled with perovskites as a direct-type X-ray detector.135 This device demonstrated good flexibility, mechanical stability, and more importantly, the superiority in detecting curved images compared to a planar sensor.
Human–machine interaction
Human–machine interaction (HMI) plays an important role in realizing the Internet of Things (IoT) where everything is connected. The representative applications include authentication, interactive communication/control, augmented/virtual reality (A/VR), etc., where flexible optoelectronic sensing is one of the core techniques in achieving rapid, accurate, and contactless HMI.11
As an important HMI application, identification via biological signals such as fingerprints or veins is widely used. A fingerprint scanner operates via either reflection or transmission, where optical signals are modulated by the ridges and valleys, and hence encoded with the print features.10 Compared to a planar scanner that usually requires one to press the finger firmly against the flat screen and rotate multiple times to capture/construct a full fingerprint, a flexible image sensor is more compatible with curved shapes, yielding advantages in fast and accurate image acquisition. Banach et al. integrated organic thin film transistors with photodetectors to fabricate a 300 μm thick image sensor with a resolution of 500 dpi for high quality fingerprint imaging.136 In a similar manner, Akkerman et al. fabricated a large-scale palm scanner (12 × 16 cm2) via using inorganic IGZO TFT.137 Apart from fingerprints (or palmprints), veins are also important for authentication due to its uniqueness in each individual. Moreover, veins are embedded inside the body and hence are less affected by the scratches/damages on the skin surface compared to fingers/palms. For example, Someya et al. reported a flexible image sensor consisting of an organic photodiode and a silicon transistor, resulting in a total thickness of 15 μm and a high resolution of 508 dpi where the quality of vein imaging is comparable with that of the conventional CMOS.134 This conformal image sensor can read out a photocurrent of less than 10 pA with low noise, and can be applied for vein imaging via soft contact with the skin.
Interactive control of machines (actuators) via modulated optical signals is another important application via optoelectronic sensing. Shen et al. designed a flexible Te@TeSe photodetector textile based mechano-optical communication system, where encoded near-infrared light can be used to control a robot hand as shown in Fig. 9.107 In addition to deliberately encode the optical signal, light can also be spontaneously modulated via interaction with the human body (e.g., absorption, scattering, etc.); the change in the optical signal directly correlates to the body movement, which thus can be extracted to realize remote control. For example, Samuel et al. reported a muscle contraction sensor by measuring the amount of incident light backscattered from skeletal muscle tissue: light travelling parallel to muscle fibers is scattered differently from light perpendicular to fibers and this anisotropy can be detected using a surface-mounted light source and detectors along and perpendicular to muscle fibers.138 Although interactive control can be realized optically, it comes with a prerequisite of not being absorbed or scattered along the travelling distance, and thus adds to difficulty in the situation of low penetration depth of light.139 Therefore, the future IoT would likely involve multimode sensing techniques combining optical, magnetic, electrical, mechanical paths.
 Fig. 9  Near-infrared light triggered mechano-optical communication system using wearable photodetector textiles. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH. 
Healthcare and biomedicine
Optical sensors are relatively accurate and non-invasive, and thus advantageous for medical applications.140 Other than X-ray detectors that have been discussed in the previous section, epidermal optoelectronic sensors can be conformably attached to the skin surface for collection of biological/medical information. For example, photoplethysmography (PPG) is a widely used technique to monitor the blood volume changes in the microvascular bed of tissue. A PPG device consists of light sources (i.e., LEDs) and optoelectronic sensors to obtain biological information such as the heart beat, breath, blood oxygen, etc., via interpreting the interaction between light and tissue. However, commercial PPG devices use silicon photodiodes that are not compatible for wearable/epidermal applications in need of miniaturization, comfort, and accuracy. The recent emerging organic optoelectronics have provided valid solutions. Yokota et al. developed a fully organic PPG sensor made of OLEDs and OPD, which realized a flexible oe-skin of total thickness 3 μm, a bending radius of 100 μm, and a compressive strain tolerance of up to 60%, and demonstrated its multiple functionalities in monitoring the heart rate, SpO2, etc. and simultaneously visualizing health data.141 Fuente-Hernandez et al. further developed a flexible organic photodiode rival of low noise silicon photodiodes in all metrics within the visible range, except response time, which is still video-rate compatible, demonstrating excellent functionality in faint visible light detection that is critical for PPG applications (Fig. 10a).94 In view of the instability, narrowband/poor infrared absorption for organic semiconductors, Koppens et al. fabricated inorganic graphene/PbS QDs based flexible photodetectors for wearable fitness monitoring.82 In addition, functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is another optoelectronic technology that, similar to PPG, can be used to noninvasively examine oxygenation levels in the cerebral cortex due to different interactions of oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin with the NIR light, which is particularly important for the brain study.142,143 Flexible, light-weight fNIRs sensor arrays can improve the wearing comfortability, which is promising in this regard.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of an organic PPG epidermal sensor for biological information collection. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020 AAAS. (b) Retinal histology of a photovoltaic retinal implant in the subretinal space of an RCS rat. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright Springer Nature. (c) Injectable, cellular-scale optoelectronic sensor for wireless optogenetics. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2013 AAAS. 
However, given the limited optical penetration depth in the biological tissue (tens of micrometers to a few millimeters), applications targeting the internal body or organs will need implantable sensors. Retinal prostheses enable electrical stimulation of the preserved neurons in the visual system, aiming at restoring vision in blind patients affected by retinitis pigmentosa (a set of inherited retinal dystrophies causing the progressive loss of retinal photoreceptors while the neurons in the “image-processing” inner layer are relatively healthy).146 The photovoltaic effect in a photodiode can convert the optical signals to electrical stimuli without external power supply, thus compensating the degraded function of photoreceptors. For example, Loudin et al. described a retinal prosthesis system made of silicon photodiode arrays (Fig. 10b), where each pixel (∼70 μm in size) contained three PDs to provide 1.5 V photovoltage stimuli upon NIR illumination.144 This was demonstrated to be successful via in vitro stimulation of healthy and degenerate rat retina. The flexibility in this design was realized by etching trenches between neighbouring pixels to form 0.5 μm thin silicon “springs” as interconnections, which could deform elastically to accommodate the curvature of eyes. However, rigid silicon would inevitably cause discomfort or even damage to the tissue. In contrast, organic materials have high similarity with the biological tissue, and hence are more suitable for implantable applications. Benfenati et al. found that instead of a complete photovoltaic device, just a layer of photoactive organic semiconductor (e.g. P3HT) could function sufficiently as a subretinal prosthetic implant and help blind rats restore light sensitivity (last for 6–10 months).147
Another implantable optoelectronic application is to use optical fibers to deliver light intracranially for deep brain optogenetic stimulation and fluorescence detection in vivo.140 The optical–neural interface can be realized via standard silica glass, fibers, and waveguides based on flexible, stretchable and even biodegradable materials. However, conventional optogenetic implant interconnects external optical and electrical components, which inevitably increases the size of the system. Recent advances in multifunctional fibers that integrate electrodes and microchannels enabled simultaneous optical stimulation, electrophysiological sensing, and drug delivery.148 For example, Bruchas et al. designed a cellular-scale implantable optrode as shown in Fig. 10c, where InGaN LEDs, microelectrodes, silicon photodiodes, and temperature sensors were all integrated on an ultrathin flexible needle (<10 μm), powered by a RF-driven circuit board, enabling optogenetic stimulation of channel rhodopsin-2 expressing neurons and the control of neural activities in vivo.145 Rogers et al. further pioneered in integrating micro-LEDs with microfluidic channels that provided closed-loop feedback for simultaneous neural stimulation and drug delivery.149 In addition, implantable optoelectronic sensors consist of micro-LEDs and CMOS image sensors can be used for deep-brain fluorescence imaging, which is of high value in the study of neural activities.150
Conclusion and prospect
In this article, we reviewed the fundamentals and advances in flexible optoelectronic sensors. First, the fundamentals of flexible electronics have been introduced, where the selection of materials and the design of circuits determine the ultimate flexibility of the system. Challenges persist in the development of intrinsically flexible materials and fabrication processes (e.g., printing and transfer) that meet the desired electrical properties (e.g., mobility, carrier concentration/types, defects, etc.). Then for an individual photodetector that is the core to an optoelectronic sensing system, two types of commonly applied geometries–planar and fiber (fabric) structures–were reviewed. Intrinsically flexible materials such as organic semiconductors, low-dimensional materials, hybrid perovskites have been discussed with representative reports being referred. Furthermore, the role of strain has been discussed as an often-overlooked topic in flexible optoelectronic devices. Driven by the tremendous advances in materials science, excellent figures of merit of individual photodetectors have been achieved. Yet the balance between their optoelectronic and mechanical properties is to be elaborately studied towards practical devices. Finally, sophisticated systems including conformal image sensors, biomimic vision, fingerprint scanners, biosensors, etc. that integrate flexible photodetectors with readout circuits were discussed. Although exciting progress has been delivered in the research frontier, a flexible optoelectronic sensing system is still in its infancy given the technological immaturity of the basic components. Here follows the discussions on the critical challenges and potential solutions:
Materials system has been experiencing the most rapid development in recent decades, yet a perfect combination of intrinsic flexibility and high optoelectronic functionality is still pending. The emergence of low dimensional materials along with organic–inorganic hybrids (e.g., perovskites) offers a lot of promise in this regard, provided the obstacles in scalable fabrication, stability, cost and environmental impact could be solved. Therefore, a fundamental study on uncovering new functionalities of both existing and extended materials, along with the elaborations of advanced manufacturing/process engineering, is essential.
Devices that meet barely half the required mechanical and optoelectronic functionalities still need improvement. First, there is still plenty of room for advancing the current photodetecting technologies. Fig. 4a and b summarize the state-of-the-art, where however the arrow-pointed regions (high gain–bandwidth, sensitivity–wavelength product) remain unoccupied. To date, few technologies have reached a spectral range beyond 2um, with a responsivity of over 103 A W−1, a response time of sub-microseconds, and a detectivity of over 1012 Jones. Referring to recent advances in photodetectors of hybrid material systems and novel architectures, strategies such as van der Waals heterostructures, 0D/2D hybrids, out-of-plane configuration, ferroelectrics, etc., are seen to be promising in filling this blank. Second, apart from accommodating the standard fabricating protocol to a flexible substrate that remains an engineering issue, compromising the optoelectronic performance upon extreme deformation seems inevitable to date, which hinders its value for practical use. The former engineering problem could be addressed with designated routes for flexible manufacturing such as printing or transfer, in considering the characteristics of specific materials (e.g., solution processed perovskite or quantum dots, exfoliated graphene, etc.). As for the latter, which is more challenging, we propose to apply strain engineering strategies on intrinsically flexible materials (e.g., buckled graphene/polymer), explore effective encapsulation that accommodate strain, and establish rubrics for comprehensive evaluation of mechano-optoelectronic functionality.
Systems for flexible optoelectronic sensing show a lot of promise in “connecting everything” towards the vision of future IoT. However, its advancement has been largely limited by the element devices that are still developing. An optoelectronic sensor consists of photodetector arrays and logic circuits, which are required to simultaneously fulfil mechanical flexibility in all components. An acceptable solution in the short term is to make use of a “bridge–island” configuration to accommodate strain. As both flexible photodetectors and electrical components mature, their effective integration (e.g., in/out-sensor, wavy/out-of-plane connection, stacking, etc.) will be vital at a later stage. Furthermore, when it comes to application, it is still quite challenging in sensing information of multiple dimensions with current system layouts. The recent studies have proposed promising solutions for coloured, polarized imaging by adopting the advances in materials/device physics (i.e., quantum confinement, size-dependent waveguide, in-plane anisotropy, etc.), which deserve further elaboration. Moreover, imaging under dynamic deformation (e.g., upon wearing) is a fundamental challenge for flexible imagers because light–matter interactions are highly dependent on relative orientation. So most current flexible imagers can only record reliable signals on curved surfaces in a static mode. To this, we think an advanced algorithm (e.g., artificial neural networks, ANN) implemented using neuromorphic devices/circuits151,152 would be a promising solution that can overcome noises/distortions for precise information extraction and timely decision making.
In summary, breakthroughs are expected to be unlocked by gradually resolving the problems in simultaneously realizing flexible photodetectors and flexible readout circuits, and their intact integration without compromise in functionality, where efforts in fundamentals science and applied engineering spanning materials, optoelectronics, mechanics, and artificial intelligence are indispensable.
Conflicts of interest
The authors claim no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62204015, 61888102) and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (L223006). Z. W. acknowledges the “Teli Young Fellow” program from the Beijing Institute of Technology.
Notes and references
J. Hecht, The Internet of **** things, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 538 Search PubMed .
EU, 100 Radical Innovation Breakthroughs for the future, 2019.
A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, S. Lee, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, D. Chu, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. A. J. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Flexible Electronics: The Next Ubiquitous Platform, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486–1517 Search PubMed .
J. Peng and G. J. Snyder, A figure of merit for flexibility, Science, 2019, 366, 690–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Materials and Mechanics for Stretchable Electronics, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, X. Chen and X. Feng, Flexible Hybrid Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Flexible electronics: from materials to devices, ed. G. Shen and Z. Fan, World Scientific Publishers,  2016 Search PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, Current status and technological prospect of photodetectors based on two-dimensional materials, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lou and G. Shen, Flexible Image Sensors with Semiconducting Nanowires for Biomimic Visual Applications, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000152 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokota, K. Fukuda and T. Someya, Recent Progress of Flexible Image Sensors for Biomedical Applications, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yin, D. Wang, S. Zhao, Z. Lou and G. Shen, Wearable Sensors-Enabled Human–Machine Interaction Systems: From Design to Application, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008936 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Jiang, Y.-X. Wang, Y. Wu, J.-C. Lai, S. Niu, C. Xu, C.-C. Shih, C. Wang, H. Yan, L. Galuska, N. Prine, H.-C. Wu, D. Zhong, G. Chen, N. Matsuhisa, Y. Zheng, Z. Yu, Y. Wang, R. Dauskardt, X. Gu, J. B. H. Tok and Z. Bao, High-brightness all-polymer stretchable LED with charge-trapping dilution, Nature, 2022, 603, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Simone, M. J. Dyson, S. C. J. Meskers, R. A. J. Janssen and G. H. Gelinck, Organic Photodetectors and their Application in Large Area and Flexible Image Sensors: The Role of Dark Current, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904205 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Hu and G. Shen, Low-Dimensional Nanostructure Based Flexible Photodetectors: Device Configuration, Functional Design, Integration, and Applications, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 954–965 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, van der Waals heterostructures, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Müller, S. Goffri, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, H. D. Chanzy, R. A. J. Janssen, M. M. Nielsen, C. P. Radano, H. Sirringhaus, P. Smith and N. Stingelin-Stutzmann, Tough, Semiconducting Polyethylene-poly(3-hexylthiophene) Diblock Copolymers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2674–2679 CrossRef .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Ultrathin and lightweight organic solar cells with high flexibility, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, D. Tan, X. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Flexible, Planar-Integrated, All-Solid-State Fiber Supercapacitors with an Enhanced Distributed-Capacitance Effect, Small, 2013, 9, 1998–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ran, L. Wang, S. Zhao, D. Wang, R. Yin, Z. Lou and G. Shen, An Integrated Flexible All-Nanowire Infrared Sensing System with Record Photosensitivity, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, S. Poddar, Y. Lin, Z. Long, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Shu, X. Qiu, M. Kam, A. Javey and Z. Fan, A biomimetic eye with a hemispherical perovskite nanowire array retina, Nature, 2020, 581, 278–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Crabb and F. C. Treble, Thin Silicon Solar Cells for Large Flexible Arrays, Nature, 1967, 213, 1223–1224 CrossRef .
T. P. Brody, The birth and early childhood of active matrix—A personal memoir, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 1996, 4, 113–127 CrossRef .
X. Shi, Y. Zuo, P. Zhai, J. Shen, Y. Yang, Z. Gao, M. Liao, J. Wu, J. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Tong, B. Zhang, B. Wang, X. Sun, L. Zhang, Q. Pei, D. Jin, P. Chen and H. Peng, Large-area display textiles integrated with functional systems, Nature, 2021, 591, 240–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wagner and S. Bauer, Materials for stretchable electronics, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 207–213 CrossRef .
T. B. Abbott, Why Choose Magnesium?, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2009, 618–619, 3–6 Search PubMed .

          J. Lubliner and P. Papadopoulos, in Introduction to Solid Mechanics: An Integrated Approach, ed. J. Lubliner and P. Papadopoulos, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2014, pp. 397–432 DOI:10.1007/978-1-4614-6768-7_9 .
H. L. Price, Techniques for the measurement of the flexural rigidity of thin films and laminates, NASA Technical Note, 1966, D-3270, 1–32 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Ma and Y. Huang, Material innovation and mechanics design for substrates and encapsulation of flexible electronics: a review, Materials Horizons, 2021, 8, 383–400 RSC .
T. Qiu, E. M. Akinoglu, B. Luo, M. Konarova, J.-H. Yun, I. R. Gentle and L. Wang, Nanosphere Lithography: A Versatile Approach to Develop Transparent Conductive Films for Optoelectronic Applications, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2103842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, W.-Y. Lai, Y.-Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Printable Transparent Conductive Films for Flexible Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, K. Xia, H. Wang, X. Liang, Z. Yin and Y. Zhang, Advanced Carbon for Flexible and Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801072 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, W. Nie, H. Tsai, N. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Cheng, R. Wen, L. Ma, F. Yan and Y. Xia, PEDOT:PSS for Flexible and Stretchable Electronics: Modifications, Strategies, and Applications, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, H. Zhang, S. Shi, J. Xu, X. Qin, Q. He, K. Yang, W. Dai, G. Liu, Q. Zhou, H. Yu, S. R. P. Silva and M. Fahlman, Recent progress in silver nanowire networks for flexible organic electronics, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4636–4674 RSC .
D.-Y. Khang, H. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, A Stretchable Form of Single-Crystal Silicon for High-Performance Electronics on Rubber Substrates, Science, 2006, 311, 208–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Ko, M. P. Stoykovich, J. Song, V. Malyarchuk, W. M. Choi, C.-J. Yu, J. B. Geddes Iii, J. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, A hemispherical electronic eye camera based on compressible silicon optoelectronics, Nature, 2008, 454, 748–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Ultrasensitive solution-cast quantum dot photodetectors, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, Z. Lin, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nanowire Electronics: From Nanoscale to Macroscale, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 9074–9135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Deng, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Su, S. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Li, H. Chen, Z. Zhao, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Three-Dimensional Graphene Field-Effect Transistors as High-Performance Photodetectors, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1494–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-G. Lim, T.-H. Han and T.-W. Lee, Engineering electrodes and metal halide perovskite materials for flexible/stretchable perovskite solar cells and light-emitting diodes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2009–2035 RSC .
Z. Suo, E. Y. Ma, H. Gleskova and S. Wagner, Mechanics of rollable and foldable film-on-foil electronics, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1177–1179 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Gleskova, I. C. Cheng, S. Wagner and Z. Suo, in Flexible Electronics: Materials and Applications, ed. W. S. Wong and A. Salleo, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2009, pp. 29–51 DOI:10.1007/978-0-387-74363-9_2 .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su, H. Zhang, H. Cheng, B. Lu, C. Yu, C. Chuang, T.-I. Kim, T. Song, K. Shigeta, S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. V. Braun, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Stretchable batteries with self-similar serpentine interconnects and integrated wireless recharging systems, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hu, L. Li, H. Lin, P. Zhang, W. Zhou and Z. Ma, Flexible integrated photonics: where materials, mechanics and optics meet [Invited], Opt. Mater. Express, 2013, 3, 1313–1331 CrossRef .

          L. Li, H. Lin, Y. Zou, S. Danto, J. D. Musgraves, K. Richardson and J. Hu, 3-D flexible Glass Photonics, CLEO:2013, San Jose, California,  2013 Search PubMed.
L. Li, H. Lin, S. Qiao, Y. Zou, S. Danto, K. Richardson, J. D. Musgraves, N. Lu and J. Hu, Integrated flexible chalcogenide glass photonic devices, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 643–649 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Z. Chi, Z. Yang, X. Chen, M. S. Arnold, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, Z. Chi and M. P. Aldred, Recent developments of truly stretchable thin film electronic and optoelectronic devices, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5764–5792 RSC .
T. Sekitani, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk and T. Someya, Flexible organic transistors and circuits with extreme bending stability, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 1015–1022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Chen and C. Jiang, Strain engineering of two-dimensional materials: Methods, properties, and applications, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 397–420 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, D.-Y. Khang, J. Song, Y. Sun, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Finite deformation mechanics in buckled thin films on compliant supports, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 15607–15612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, J. Song, W. M. Choi, H.-S. Kim, R.-H. Kim, Z. Liu, Y. Y. Huang, K.-C. Hwang, Y.-W. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Materials and noncoplanar mesh designs for integrated circuits with linear elastic responses to extreme mechanical deformations, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 18675–18680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, Y. Huang, J. Xiao, S. Wang, K. C. Hwang, H. C. Ko, D. H. Kim, M. P. Stoykovich and J. A. Rogers, Mechanics of noncoplanar mesh design for stretchable electronic circuits, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 123516 CrossRef .
N. Huo and G. Konstantatos, Recent Progress and Future Prospects of 2D-Based Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801164 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Ostroverkhova, Organic Optoelectronic Materials: Mechanisms and Applications, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13279–13412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Jansen-van Vuuren, A. Armin, A. K. Pandey, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Organic Photodiodes: The Future of Full Color Detection and Image Sensing, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4766–4802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Y. Chow and T. Someya, Organic Photodetectors for Next-Generation Wearable Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, M. Biancardo, B. Winther-Jensen, H. Spanggard and J. Alstrup, Strategies for incorporation of polymer photovoltaics into garments and textiles, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1058–1067 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi, B. C. K. Tee, M. Vosgueritchian and Z. Bao, Stretchable Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1771–1775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Self-powered ultra-flexible electronics via nano-grating-patterned organic photovoltaics, Nature, 2018, 561, 516–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Kim, S. Kim, D. H. Shin, S. S. Kang, J. M. Kim, C. W. Jang, S. S. Joo, J. S. Lee, J. H. Kim, S.-H. Choi and E. Hwang, High photoresponsivity in an all-graphene p–n vertical junction photodetector, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3249 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiao, X. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Guo, S. Wu, C. Song, S. Huang, X. Huang, X. Tai, T. Lin, H. Shen, H. Yan, W. Hu, X. Meng, J. Chu, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, HgCdTe/black phosphorus van der Waals heterojunction for high-performance polarization-sensitive midwave infrared photodetector, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabn1811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, P. Yu, D. Wu, B. Singh, Q. Zeng, H. Lin, W. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Suenaga, Z. Liu and Q. J. Wang, Atomically thin noble metal dichalcogenide: a broadband mid-infrared semiconductor, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1545 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Long, Y. Wang, P. Wang, X. Zhou, H. Xia, C. Luo, S. Huang, G. Zhang, H. Yan, Z. Fan, X. Wu, X. Chen, W. Lu and W. Hu, Palladium Diselenide Long-Wavelength Infrared Photodetector with High Sensitivity and Stability, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2511–2519 CAS .
M. Peng, R. Xie, Z. Wang, P. Wang, F. Wang, H. Ge, Y. Wang, F. Zhong, P. Wu, J. Ye, Q. Li, L. Zhang, X. Ge, Y. Ye, Y. Lei, W. Jiang, Z. Hu, F. Wu, X. Zhou, J. Miao, J. Wang, H. Yan, C. Shan, J. Dai, C. Chen, X. Chen, W. Lu and W. Hu, Blackbody-sensitive room-temperature infrared photodetectors based on low-dimensional tellurium grown by chemical vapor deposition, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabf7358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo and W. Qi, New materials and designs for 2D-based infrared photodetectors, Nano Res., 2023, 16, 3074–3103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kind, H. Yan, B. Messer, M. Law and P. Yang, Nanowire Ultraviolet Photodetectors and Optical Switches, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 158–160 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Z. Lou, D. Chen and G. Shen, An Artificial Flexible Visual Memory System Based on an UV-Motivated Memristor, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705400 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xia, W. Wu, M. Zhu, X. Shen, Z. Yin, H. Wang, S. Li, M. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Lu, A. Pan, C. Pan and Y. Zhang, CVD growth of perovskite/graphene films for high-performance flexible image sensor, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 343–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Building devices from colloidal quantum dots, Science, 2016, 353, aac5523 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, N. Yazdani, M. Yarema, M. Jansen, V. Wood and E. H. Sargent, Colloidal quantum dot electronics, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 548–558 CrossRef .
J. Fang, Z. Zhou, M. Xiao, Z. Lou, Z. Wei and G. Shen, Recent advances in low-dimensional semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in high-performance photodetectors, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 291–317 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Rechav, R. Popovitz-Biro, I. Nevo, Y. Feldman and E. Joselevich, High-Gain 200 ns Photodetectors from Self-Aligned CdS–CdSe Core–Shell Nanowalls, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1800413 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zheng, J. Wang, W. Hu, L. Liao, H. Fang, N. Guo, P. Wang, F. Gong, X. Wang, Z. Fan, X. Wu, X. Meng, X. Chen and W. Lu, When Nanowires Meet Ultrahigh Ferroelectric Field–High-Performance Full-Depleted Nanowire Photodetectors, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2548–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. C. Ho, Z. A. Jacobson, R. Yerushalmi, R. L. Alley, H. Razavi and A. Javey, Wafer-scale assembly of highly ordered semiconductor nanowire arrays by contact printing, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 20–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Huang, B. Liang, X. Wang, Z. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Zn2GeO4 and In2Ge2O7 nanowire mats based ultraviolet photodetectors on rigid and flexible substrates, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 2982–2991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Z. Lou, D. Chen and G. Shen, Printable Zn2GeO4 Microwires Based Flexible Photodetectors with Tunable Photoresponses, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800050 CrossRef .
T. Tan, X. Jiang, C. Wang, B. Yao and H. Zhang, 2D Material Optoelectronics for Information Functional Device Applications: Status and Challenges, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lee, G.-H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Atomically thin p–n junctions with van der Waals heterointerfaces, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Massicotte, P. Schmidt, F. Vialla, K. G. Schädler, A. Reserbat-Plantey, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. J. Tielrooij and F. H. L. Koppens, Picosecond photoresponse in van der Waals heterostructures, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 42–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistors with ultrahigh gain, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goossens, G. Navickaite, C. Monasterio, S. Gupta, J. J. Piqueras, R. Pérez, G. Burwell, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, T. Galán, E. Puma, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, A. Zurutuza, G. Konstantatos and F. Koppens, Broadband image sensor array based on graphene–CMOS integration, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 366–371 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Liu, D. Chen, T. Shi, X. Qu, L. Chen, T. Wu, J. Ke, K. Xiong, M. Li, H. Song, W. Wei, J. Cao, J. Zhang, L. Gao and J. Tang, A near-infrared colloidal quantum dot imager with monolithically integrated readout circuitry, Nat. Electron., 2022, 5, 443–451 CrossRef .
E. O. Polat, G. Mercier, I. Nikitskiy, E. Puma, T. Galan, S. Gupta, M. Montagut, J. J. Piqueras, M. Bouwens, T. Durduran, G. Konstantatos, S. Goossens and F. Koppens, Flexible graphene photodetectors for wearable fitness monitoring, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. F. W. Bowles, in Encyclopedia of Geology, ed. D. Alderton and S. A. Elias, Academic Press, Oxford, 2nd edn,  2021, pp. 428–441 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-08-102908-4.00185-5 .
X. Han, W. Wu, H. Chen, D. Peng, L. Qiu, P. Yan and C. Pan, Metal Halide Perovskite Arrays: From Construction to Optoelectronic Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005230 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, H. Wang, J. Wu, F. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, D. Liu, S. Li, R. V. Penty and I. H. White, Flexible optoelectronic devices based on metal halide perovskites, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1997–2018 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, High-Performance Flexible Broadband Photodetector Based on Organolead Halide Perovskite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, F. Zhuge, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Gan, X. Zhou, H. Li and T. Zhai, Decorating Perovskite Quantum Dots in TiO2 Nanotubes Array for Broadband Response Photodetector, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703115 CrossRef .
I. M. Asuo, P. Fourmont, I. Ka, D. Gedamu, S. Bouzidi, A. Pignolet, R. Nechache and S. G. Cloutier, Highly Efficient and Ultrasensitive Large-Area Flexible Photodetector Based on Perovskite Nanowires, Small, 2019, 15, 1804150 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wu, Y. Xu, H. Zhou, X. Feng, J. Zhang, X. Pan, Z. Gao, R. Wang, G. Ma, L. Tao, H. Wang, J. Duan, H. Wan, J. Zhang, L. Shen, H. Wang and T. Zhai, Ultrasensitive, flexible perovskite nanowire photodetectors with long-term stability exceeding 5000 h, InfoMat, 2022, 4, e12320 CAS .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Monolayer and Few-Layer All-Inorganic Perovskites as a New Family of Two-Dimensional Semiconductors for Printable Optoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Shen, Y. Li, Z. Yue, W. Zhang, Q. Zhao and Z. Wang, Self-Powered and Fast Response MoO3/n-Si Photodetectors on Flexible Silicon Substrates with Light-Trapping Structures, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2022, 4, 4641–4652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fan, K. Lee and S. R. Forrest, Flexible Thin-Film InGaAs Photodiode Focal Plane Array, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 670–676 CrossRef CAS .
I. Massiot, A. Cattoni and S. Collin, Progress and prospects for ultrathin solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 959–972 CrossRef .
C. Fuentes-Hernandez, W.-F. Chou, T. M. Khan, L. Diniz, J. Lukens, F. A. Larrain, V. A. Rodriguez-Toro and B. Kippelen, Large-area low-noise flexible organic photodiodes for detecting faint visible light, Science, 2020, 370, 698–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, C. Lan, A. Manikandan, S. Yip, Z. Zhou, X. Liang, L. Shu, Y.-L. Chueh, N. Han and J. C. Ho, Ultra-fast photodetectors based on high-mobility indium gallium antimonide nanowires, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1664 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, S. Yip, F. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Meng, X. Bu, X. Kang, C. Lan, C. Liu and J. C. Ho, Flexible Near-Infrared InGaSb Nanowire Array Detectors with Ultrafast Photoconductive Response Below 20 μs, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2001201 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Zhang, C. Yue, X. Tang, Z. Gao, Y. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Deng, H. Jia, W. Wang and H. Chen, High performance visible-SWIR flexible photodetector based on large-area InGaAs/InP PIN structure, Sci. Rep., 2022, 12, 7681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Balilonda, Z. Li, Y. Fu, F. Zabihi, S. Yang, X. Huang, X. Tao and W. Chen, Perovskite fiber-shaped optoelectronic devices for wearable applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6957–6991 RSC .
M. Bayindir, A. F. Abouraddy, J. Arnold, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Thermal-Sensing Fiber Devices by Multimaterial Codrawing, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 845–849 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, A. Page, T. Nguyen-Dang, Y. Qu, F. Sordo, L. Wei and F. Sorin, Advanced Multimaterial Electronic and Optoelectronic Fibers and Textiles, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802348 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bayindir, F. Sorin, A. F. Abouraddy, J. Viens, S. D. Hart, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Metal–insulator–semiconductor optoelectronic fibres, Nature, 2004, 431, 826–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rein, V. D. Favrod, C. Hou, T. Khudiyev, A. Stolyarov, J. Cox, C.-C. Chung, C. Chhav, M. Ellis, J. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Diode fibres for fabric-based optical communications, Nature, 2018, 560, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. D. Orf, O. Shapira, F. Sorin, S. Danto, M. A. Baldo, J. D. Joannopoulos and Y. Fink, Fiber draw synthesis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 4743–4747 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, Y. Qu, T. D. Gupta, A. Darga, D. T. Nguyên, A. G. Page, M. Rossi, M. Ceriotti and F. Sorin, Semiconducting Nanowire-Based Optoelectronic Fibers, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700681 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dong, Y. Zou, J. Song, Z. Zhu, J. Li and H. Zeng, Self-powered fiber-shaped wearable omnidirectional photodetectors, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, B. Liu, W. Qiu, J. Zhang, S. Ran, H. Huang, J. Xu, H. Han, D. Chen and G. Shen, Transferable and Flexible Nanorod-Assembled TiO2 Cloths for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Photodetectors, and Photocatalysts, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8412–8419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, D. Wang, D. Zhang, W. Ran, Y. Yan, Z. Li, L. Wang and G. Shen, Near-Infrared Light Triggered Self-Powered Mechano-Optical Communication System using Wearable Photodetector Textile, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104782 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, D. Ju, Y. Zou, Y. Dong, L. Luo, T. Zhang, D. Shan and H. Zeng, Boosting Fiber-Shaped Photodetectors via “Soft” Interfaces, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12092–12099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Fu, J. He, X. Shi, T. Chen, P. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Application Challenges in Fiber and Textile Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Wang, C.-M. Lo, Y. Zhao, Y. Jiao, G. Zheng and H. Peng, A fiber-shaped aqueous lithium ion battery with high power density, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9002–9008 RSC .
N. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Guo, J. Yang, J. Du, X. Fan and C. Tao, A Wearable All-Solid Photovoltaic Textile, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 263–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tsutsui, S. Mochizuki, N. Loubet, S. W. Bedell and D. K. Sadana, Strain
engineering in functional materials, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 030701 CrossRef .
Z. Dai, L. Liu and Z. Zhang, Strain Engineering of 2D Materials: Issues and Opportunities at the Interface, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kang, M. C. Wang, P. M. Knapp and S. Nam, Crumpled Graphene Photodetector with Enhanced, Strain-Tunable, and Wavelength-Selective Photoresponsivity, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4639–4645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Desai, G. Seol, J. S. Kang, H. Fang, C. Battaglia, R. Kapadia, J. W. Ager, J. Guo and A. Javey, Strain-Induced Indirect to Direct Bandgap Transition in Multilayer WSe2, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4592–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, R. Yu, Y. Liu, S.-H. Wei, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Piezophototronic Effect in Single-Atomic-Layer MoS2 for Strain-Gated Flexible Optoelectronics, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8463–8468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Y. Kato, I. Shingo, Y. Noguchi, T. Sekitani, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Integration of organic FETs with organic photodiodes for a large area, flexible, and lightweight sheet image scanners, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2005, 52, 2502–2511 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gasparini, A. Gregori, M. Salvador, M. Biele, A. Wadsworth, S. Tedde, D. Baran, I. McCulloch and C. J. Brabec, Visible and Near-Infrared Imaging with Nonfullerene-Based Photodetectors, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800104 CrossRef .
W. Lee, J. Lee, H. Yun, J. Kim, J. Park, C. Choi, D. C. Kim, H. Seo, H. Lee, J. W. Yu, W. B. Lee and D.-H. Kim, High-Resolution Spin-on-Patterning of Perovskite Thin Films for a Multiplexed Image Sensor Array, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702902 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zalar, N. Matsuhisa, T. Suzuki, S. Enomoto, M. Koizumi, T. Yokota, M. Sekino and T. Someya, A Monolithically Processed Rectifying Pixel for High-Resolution Organic Imagers, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700601 CrossRef .
R. F. Eric, Active pixel sensors: are CCDs dinosaurs?, SPIE Proceedings, 1993, 1900, 2–14 CrossRef .

          F. D. Roose, K. Myny, S. Steudel, M. Willigems, S. Smout, T. Piessens, J. Genoe and W. Dehaene, 2016. 16.5 A flexible thin-film pixel array with a charge-to-current gain of 59 μA/pC and 0.33% nonlinearity and a cost effective readout circuit for large-area X-ray imaging, 2016 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, 296-297.
H. Wang, H. Liu, Q. Zhao, C. Cheng, W. Hu and Y. Liu, Three-Component Integrated Ultrathin Organic Photosensors for Plastic Optoelectronics, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kim, M. S. Kim, G. J. Lee, S.-H. Sunwoo, S. Chang, Y. M. Song and D.-H. Kim, Bio-Inspired Artificial Vision and Neuromorphic Image Processing Devices, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2022, 7, 2100144 CrossRef .
M. S. Kim, G. J. Lee, C. Choi, M. S. Kim, M. Lee, S. Liu, K. W. Cho, H. M. Kim, H. Cho, M. K. Choi, N. Lu, Y. M. Song and D.-H. J. N. E. Kim, An aquatic-vision-inspired camera based on a monocentric lens and a silicon nanorod photodiode array, Nat. Electron., 2020, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J.-K. Song, J. Kim, J. Yoon, J. H. Koo, H. Jung, K. Kang, S.-H. Sunwoo, S. Yoo, H. Chang, J. Jo, W. Baek, S. Lee, M. Lee, H. J. Kim, M. Shin, Y. J. Yoo, Y. M. Song, T. Hyeon, D.-H. Kim and D. Son, Stretchable colour-sensitive quantum dot nanocomposites for shape-tunable multiplexed phototransistor arrays, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 849–856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and G. Shen, Advances in optoelectronic artificial synapses, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 3, 101037 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, W. Lee, S. Choi, J.-W. Jo, J. Kim, S. K. Park and Y.-H. Kim, Brain-Inspired Photonic Neuromorphic Devices using Photodynamic Amorphous Oxide Semiconductors and their Persistent Photoconductivity, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700951 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, Q. Yang and G. Shen, Flexible Artificial Optoelectronic Synapse based on Lead-Free Metal Halide Nanocrystals for Neuromorphic Computing and Color Recognition, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2202123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H.-C. Chiu, A. Paolella, K. Zaghib and G. P. Demopoulos, Lithium Photo-intercalation of CdS-Sensitized WO3 Anode for Energy Storage and Photoelectrochromic Applications, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2220–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H.-C. Chiu, A. Paolella, R. Gauvin, K. Zaghib and G. P. Demopoulos, A sustainable light-chargeable two-electrode energy storage system based on aqueous sodium-ion photo-intercalation, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4789–4799 RSC .
F. Zhou, Z. Zhou, J. Chen, T. H. Choy, J. Wang, N. Zhang, Z. Lin, S. Yu, J. Kang, H. P. Wong and Y. Chai, Optoelectronic resistive random access memory for neuromorphic vision sensors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 776–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, Z. Zhou, J. Chen, T. H. Choy, J. Wang, N. Zhang, Z. Lin, S. Yu, J. Kang, H. S. P. Wong and Y. Chai, Optoelectronic resistive random access memory for neuromorphic vision sensors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 776–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Gelinck, A. Kumar, D. Moet, J. L. P. J. V. D. Steen, A. J. J. M. V. Breemen, S. Shanmugam, A. Langen, J. Gilot, P. Groen, R. Andriessen, M. Simon, W. Ruetten, A. U. Douglas, R. Raaijmakers, P. E. Malinowski and K. Myny, X-Ray Detector-on-Plastic With High Sensitivity Using Low Cost, Solution-Processed Organic Photodiodes, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2016,(63), 197–204 CAS .
J. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Z. Ni, S. Xu and J. Huang, Perovskite-filled membranes for flexible and large-area direct-conversion X-ray detector arrays, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 612–617 CrossRef .

          M. Banach, S. Markham, R. Agaiby and P. Too, 9-4: Low Leakage Organic Backplanes for High Pixel Density Optical Sensors, SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers, 2018, 49, 90-91.

          H. Akkerman, B. Peeters, A. van Breemen, S. Shanmugam, D. Tordera, J.-L. van der Steen, A. J. Kronemeijer, P. Malinowski, F. D. Roose, D. Cheyns, J. Genoe, W. Dehaene, P. Heremans and G. Gelinck, 39-3: Printed Organic Photodetector Arrays and their use in Palmprint Scanners, SID Symposium Digest of Technical Papers, 2018, 49, 494-497.
A. K. Bansal, S. Hou, O. Kulyk, E. M. Bowman and I. D. W. Samuel, Wearable Organic Optoelectronic Sensors for Medicine, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7638–7644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sitti and D. S. Wiersma, Pros and Cons: Magnetic versus Optical Microrobots, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, L. Yin, C. Liu, X. Sheng and N. Zhao, Recent Advances in Biointegrated Optoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800156 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yokota, P. Zalar, M. Kaltenbrunner, H. Jinno, N. Matsuhisa, H. Kitanosako, Y. Tachibana, W. Yukita, M. Koizumi and T. Someya, Ultraflexible organic photonic skin, Sci. Adv., 1856, 2, e150 Search PubMed .
R. McKendrick, R. Parasuraman and H. Ayaz, Wearable functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): expanding vistas for neurocognitive augmentation, Front. Syst. Neurosci., 2015, 9, 2100144 Search PubMed .
M. Ferrari and V. Quaresima, A brief review on the history of human functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) development and fields of application, NeuroImage, 2012, 63, 921–935 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Mathieson, J. Loudin, G. Goetz, P. Huie, L. Wang, T. I. Kamins, L. Galambos, R. Smith, J. S. Harris, A. Sher and D. Palanker, Photovoltaic retinal prosthesis with high pixel density, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 391–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-I. Kim, J. G. McCall, Y. H. Jung, X. Huang, E. R. Siuda, Y. Li, J. Song, Y. M. Song, H. A. Pao, R.-H. Kim, C. Lu, S. D. Lee, I.-S. Song, G. Shin, R. Al-Hasani, S. Kim, M. P. Tan, Y. Huang, F. G. Omenetto, J. A. Rogers and M. R. Bruchas, Injectable, Cellular-Scale Optoelectronics with Applications for Wireless Optogenetics, Science, 2013, 340, 211–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. L. Chenais, M. J. I. Airaghi Leccardi and D. Ghezzi, Photovoltaic retinal prosthesis restores high-resolution responses to single-pixel stimulation in blind retinas, Commun. Mater., 2021, 2, 28 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ghezzi, M. R. Antognazza, R. Maccarone, S. Bellani, E. Lanzarini, N. Martino, M. Mete, G. Pertile, S. Bisti, G. Lanzani and F. Benfenati, A polymer optoelectronic interface restores light sensitivity in blind rat retinas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 400–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Canales, X. Jia, U. P. Froriep, R. A. Koppes, C. M. Tringides, J. Selvidge, C. Lu, C. Hou, L. Wei, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Multifunctional fibers for simultaneous optical, electrical and chemical interrogation of neural circuits in vivo, Nat. Biotechnol., 2015, 33, 277–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Jeong, J. G. McCall, G. Shin, Y. Zhang, R. Al-Hasani, M. Kim, S. Li, J. Y. Sim, K.-I. Jang, Y. Shi, D. Y. Hong, Y. Liu, G. P. Schmitz, L. Xia, Z. He, P. Gamble, W. Z. Ray, Y. Huang, M. R. Bruchas and J. A. Rogers, Wireless Optofluidic Systems for Programmable In Vivo Pharmacology and Optogenetics, Cell, 2015, 162, 662–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, E. Stark, P.-C. Ku, K. D. Wise, G. Buzsáki and E. Yoon, Monolithically Integrated μLEDs on Silicon Neural Probes for High-Resolution Optogenetic Studies in Behaving Animals, Neuron, 2015, 88, 1136–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Marković, A. Mizrahi, D. Querlioz and J. Grollier, Physics for neuromorphic computing, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2020, 2, 499–510 CrossRef .
P. Yao, H. Wu, B. Gao, J. Tang, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. J. Yang and H. Qian, Fully hardware-implemented memristor convolutional neural network, Nature, 2020, 577, 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:

Zhuoran Wang
	Zhuoran Wang received his PhD in the Mining and Materials Engineering from McGill University, QC, Canada in 2017. In 2019 he joined the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO), Barcelona, as a postdoctoral/Marie-Curie research fellow. He is currently a professor at the School of Integrated Circuits and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing. His current research focuses on flexible optoelectronic sensors for biomimic vision.

Guozhen Shen
	Guozhen Shen received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China. He is currently a professor at the School of Integrated Circuits and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), and the director of the Institute of Flexible Electronics and Intelligent Manufacturing. Before joining BIT, he worked at Hanyang University (Korea), the National Institute for Materials Science (Japan), the University of Southern California (US), the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (China), and the Institute of Semiconductors, CAS (China). His current research focuses on flexible electronic devices for artificial intelligence and healthcare monitoring.

 	Fig. 1  Introduction to flexible optoelectronic sensors under the scope of flexible electronics, from materials, design, to devices and systems, where a balance between optical and electrical and mechanical properties is critical. Materials. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature (left). Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH (right). Design. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2010 AAAS (upper). Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2012 Springer Nature (lower). Devices. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. Systems. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH (left). Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature (right).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photographs of early flexible circuits. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 1996 SID. (b) Stretchable silicon circuits compressed with a glass capillary tube. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2010 AAAS. (c) Flexible light emitting fabric. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (d) Schematic diagram of a thin (thickness h) and long material that flexes to a radius of rb. Reproduced with permission.4 Copyright 2019 AAAS. (e) Mechanical properties of different materials. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2012 The Materials Research Society.	 
EI = E × bd3/12	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
εtop = (df + ds)/2R	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Simple films on a substrate structure that is bent to a radius of R. (b) Photograph of thin steel foil wrapped around a pencil carrying two transistor islands, (c) normalized strain in the film as a function of the film/substrate thickness ratio. Two substrates are illustrated: steel (Yf/Ys > 1) and plastic (Yf/Ys > 100). Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 1999 American Institute of Physics. (d) Stretched battery. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (e) SEM image of the designed Si wavy ribbons. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2006 AAAS. (f) Stretchable Si membrane on a rubber substrate in a “bridge-island” configuration. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright Copyright 2010 AAAS.	 
Esds2 = Eede2	(7)
	(8)
ε = (L − L0)/L	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
Ē = E/(1 − ν2)	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

Responsivity (R)	

	
R indicates the sensitivity of photodetector.
Iph: produced photocurrent
Pin: incoming light power


External quantum efficiency (EQE)	

	EQE directly correlates to R


Internal quantum efficiency (IQE)	IQE = EQE/Aa	IQE indicates the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the absorbed photons
Aa: Light absorption ratio


Response time (τr)	

	
τ
r shows the operational speed of the device


Diffuse time (τdiff)	

	
τ
diff is the diffusion time of carriers at non-equilibrium

D: diffusion coefficient;

L
diff: diffusion length

μ: carrier mobility


Drift time (τdrift)	

	
τ
drift is the time to travel under electrical field

W: width of region with electrical field;


3 dB bandwidth (fc)	

	
f
c shows the frequency characteristics (maximal operating frequency) of the photodetector


Noise equivalent power (NEP)	

	NEP equals to the input light power at 1 Hz bandwidth, signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 1, which describes the minimal power can be detected


Linear dynamic range (LDR)	

	LDR is used to characterize the light intensity range where the detector has a constant responsivity

P
sat: the saturation light power under which the photocurrent starts to deviate its linearity


Detectivity (D*)	

	
D* is more universal parameter that allows comparison among different types of photodetectors

S
n: noise spectral density
	(16)

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Technical status of photodetectors.8,38,59–64 (c) Flexible organic photodiodes. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (d) Inorganic nanowire devices. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH (Upper). Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH (Lower) (e) Flexible graphene/perovskite hybrid photodetector. Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019 Science China Press.	 

Si (photodiode)	Rigid (Thorlabs)	0.2∼0.7	10−3–102	10−2∼102	—
Flexible91	∼0.7	∼103	∼103	∼1013
InGaAs thin film (photodiode)	Rigid (Thorlabs)	0.59–1	10−2–5	0.3–10	—
Flexible92,97	0.53–1	4–102	∼102	∼1011
Polymer (photodiode)94	Rigid	∼0.2	∼10−4	∼104	∼1012
Flexible	∼0.1	∼10−4	∼104	∼1012
Gr-QD (phototransistor)	Rigid (PbS: 60 nm thick)79	∼107	∼105	∼107	∼1013
Flexible (PbS: 30 nm thick)82	∼105	102–103	∼104	—
InGaSb nanowires (photoconductor)	Rigid95	∼103	∼103	∼104	∼109
Flexible96	∼103	∼104	∼104	—

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optoelectronic fibers fabricated by thermal drawing. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM cross-section of As40Se50Te10Sn5 photoconductive fibers and constructed functional fabrics. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2004 Springer Nature. (c) Photodetector made by coating active materials on conductive fibers. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (d) UV sensitive TiO2 coated flexible carbon cloth. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Te@TeSe nanowire coated carbon fabric as a flexible IR detector. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Functioning of flexible OLEDs under different bending conditions and the strain modulated optoelectronic performance. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. (b) Crumpled graphene for strain modulated stretchable photodetector. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of a flexible image sensor by integrating Bi2Se2S nanowire photodetectors and Ga-doped In2O3 nanowire FETs. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Biomimetic eye with a hemispherical perovskite nanowire array retina. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (b and c) Flexible artificial visual-memory system based on an In2O3 UV photodetector and an Al2O3 memristor. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Near-infrared light triggered mechano-optical communication system using wearable photodetector textiles. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of an organic PPG epidermal sensor for biological information collection. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020 AAAS. (b) Retinal histology of a photovoltaic retinal implant in the subretinal space of an RCS rat. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright Springer Nature. (c) Injectable, cellular-scale optoelectronic sensor for wireless optogenetics. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2013 AAAS.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
