Dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis for energy conversion  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00368F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00368F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 3170-3214Dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis for energy conversion

        
          
            Di-Chang 
            Zhong†
, 
      
        
          
            Yun-Nan 
            Gong†
, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhang†
 and 

        
          
            Tong-Bu 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *
      Institute for New Energy Materials & Low-Carbon Technologies, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University of Technology, Tianjin 300384, China. E-mail: lutongbu@tjut.edu.cn
Received 
      31st January 2023
    First published on 18th April 2023AbstractCatalysts featuring dinuclear metal sites are regarded as superior systems compared with their counterparts with mononuclear metal sites. The dinuclear metal sites in catalysts with appropriate spatial separations and geometric configurations can confer the dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis (DMSC) effect, and thus boost the catalytic performance, in particular for reactions involving multiple reactants, intermediates and products. In this review, we summarize the related reports on the design and synthesis of both homogeneous and heterogeneous dinuclear metal catalysts, and their applications in energy conversion reactions, including photo-/electro-catalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), and N2 reduction reaction (N2RR). Particularly, we focus on the analysis of the relationship between the catalyst structure and catalytic performances, where the design principles are presented. Finally, we discuss the challenges in the design and preparation of dinuclear metal catalysts with the DMSC effect and present a perspective on the future development of dinuclear metal catalysts in energy conversion. This review aims to comprehensively summarize the up-to-date research progress on the synthesis and energy-related application of dinuclear metal catalysts and provide guidance for designing energy-conversion catalysts with superior performances.
Di-Chang Zhong
Di-Chang Zhong obtained his BS in 2003 from Gannan Normal University and his MS in 2006 from Guangxi Normal University and PhD in 2011 from the Sun Yat-Sen University. Then, he joined the faculty at Gannan Normal University and was promoted as Professor in 2017. He worked as a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellow at AIST, Japan for two years. In 2020, he moved to Tianjin University of Technology. His interests focus on the design and synthesis of molecular catalytic materials for energy storage and conversion.
Yun-Nan Gong
Yun-Nan Gong obtained his BS in 2008 and MS in 2011 from Nanchang Hangkong University and received his PhD in 2014 from Sun Yat-Sen University. Then, he joined the faculty at Gannan Normal University. He worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2018–2020. In 2021, he moved to Tianjin University of Technology and worked as an Associate Professor. His interests focus on the design and synthesis of porous materials for energy storage and conversion.
Chao Zhang
Chao Zhang obtained his BS in 2006 from Beijing Institute of Technology and his PhD in 2011 from Peking University. He worked sequentially as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Peking University. He joined the faculty of Tianjing University of Technology in 2020 and worked as a Professor. Currently, his research interest is focused on the transport mechanisms across the macro–micro–nano scales in energy-related catalytic reactions.
Tong-Bu Lu
Tong-Bu Lu obtained his BS in 1988 and PhD in 1993 from Lanzhou University. After two years Post-Doctoral Fellowship at Sun Yat-Sen University, he joined the faculty at the same university, and became a Professor in 2000. He worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow in F. Albert Cotton's group at Texas A&M University in 1998 and 2002, respectively. In 2016, he moved to Tianjin University of Technology. His current research interests focus on the study of artificial photosynthesis, including the design of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts for water splitting and CO2 reduction.
1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of the global economy and population, the huge consumption of non-renewable fossil fuels (such as coal and petroleum) has resulted in energy- and environment-related crises.1–3 Therefore, the development of renewable energy sources to replace fossil fuels is urgent, where solar, wind and tidal energies are considered to be the most promising alternatives by virtue of their large capacity, environmental benignity and low cost.4–6 However, infrastructure for both energy storage and conversion is required for these renewables because of their intermittent and distributed nature. Thus, in the past few decades, a wide variety of energy storage and conversion systems have been developed, among which photo-/electro-chemical reactions, including hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR), and nitrogen reduction reaction (N2RR), have attracted extensive attention.7–16 However, to achieve efficient energy conversion in these important reactions, advanced catalysts with high performance and high stability are urgently required.
Conventionally, catalysts can be classified into homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.17–19 Homogeneous catalysts work in the same phase as the reactants and are mainly soluble metal complexes.20–24 They feature well-defined catalytic centers and maximized utilization of metal atoms, often showing high catalytic performances. Moreover, their catalytic mechanisms and structure–activity relationship are easier to elucidate. A series of metal complexes with good catalytic performances and well-recognized catalytic mechanisms in energy conversion reactions have been reported.25–43 For instance, Robert et al. reported that an Fe–quaterpyridine complex could catalyze CO2 photoreduction with high activity and selectivity.29 Sun et al. developed an Ru complex showing excellent OER activity.34 Our group also synthesized a series of non-noble-metal complexes for photocatalytic CO2RR.37–43 In contrast to homogeneous catalysts, heterogeneous catalysts operate in different phases with the reactants and can exist in the form of inorganic materials, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs) and graphitic carbon nitride materials.44–50 These catalysts are extensively used in energy conversion because of their high stability and easy separation from the reaction mixtures. However, most heterogeneous catalysts usually suffer from suboptimal metal atom utilization because only a limited ratio of metal active sites on the catalyst surface can take part in the catalytic reactions. Therefore, numerous efforts have been devoted to downsizing the catalyst particles and/or regulating the surface morphology to expose more metal active sites and improve the catalytic efficiency.51–54
Mononuclear metal catalysts (MMCs), including conventional homogeneous mononuclear metal complexes and the emerging heterogeneous single-atom catalysts with atomically dispersed metals on solid supports, have received ever-growing interest in energy storage and conversion.55–57 By virtue of the maximized utilization of metal active sites, MMCs usually display high catalytic activities and product selectivity. Thus, recently, significant progress has been achieved in the application of MMCs in the HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, N2RR, etc.58–64 However, these catalysts are often associated with the issue of transition states with a high free energy barrier owing to the complicated proton–electron transfer occurring on the single metal active site, which constrains the reaction kinetics. In this case, dinuclear metal catalysts (DMCs), with two adjacent metal centers as the catalytic active sites, are considered superior counterparts to MMCs, and thus have received increasing attention in energy storage and conversion. DMCs well inherit the characteristics of MMCs; more importantly, the neighbouring metal atoms in DMCs can give rise to a synergistic effect to lower the free energy barrier of the transition state, thus improving their catalytic performance.65–69
In 1975, Sonogashira et al. reported the cross-coupling reactions of halocarbons and acetylene using a Pd/Cu bimetallic catalyst. Its catalytic activity was found to be greatly improved after the addition of CuI to the catalytic system, given that copper(I) can function as a co-catalyst, promoting the deprotonation of terminal alkynes and the formation of copper(I) acetylides.70,71 Afterwards, numerous efforts have been devoted to the field of dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis. Recently, dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis has been extensively explored in photo-/electro-catalytic reactions (such as HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR and N2RR) to enhance the catalytic efficiency.72–77 In 2017, we first reported the dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis (DMSC) effect in photochemical CO2 reduction into CO catalyzed by a dinuclear Co complex. The mechanistic study showed that one Co(II) acts as the catalytic center to bind and reduce CO2, while the other Co(II) serves as the assisting site to promote the removal of the OH− group from the COOH* intermediate, thus lowering the free energy barriers of the transition states and greatly boosting the catalytic activity.42
For the future development of the DMSC effect to boost the catalytic performance, it is timely to present a systematic overview of this field. Thus, in this review, we summarize the design and synthesis of both homogeneous and heterogeneous dinuclear metal catalysts for energy conversion reactions, including photo-/electro-catalytic HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR and N2RR (Scheme 1). Furthermore, a series of design protocols and principles is highlighted to reveal the structure–property relationship of the catalysts. Finally, the persisting challenges and future prospects on the design of dinuclear metal catalysts with the DMSC effect in energy conversion are discussed. We hope that this review will help garner the attention of more researchers for DMSC for energy conversion and provide guidance for the design of efficient energy-conversion catalysts.
 Scheme 1  Scope of this review. 
2. DMSC and related catalysts
2.1 Definition, synthesis and catalytic mechanism of DMSC catalysts
Generally, DMSC catalysts are defined as dinuclear metal centers with suitable spatial separations and coordination configurations directly or indirectly taking part in the catalytic process, where catalysts featuring dinuclear metal centers shows a notable enhancement in catalytic activity with respect to their mononuclear counterparts.75 For dinuclear metal complexes and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) with dinuclear metal structural units, their crystal structures can be well analyzed via single-crystal X-ray diffraction (XRD), and thus the metal–metal distances and the coordination configurations can be determined with high precision via structural analysis.67,78 For heterogeneous catalysts without significant long-range order, their structures are relatively unclear, despite the fact that their local structures are usually inferred via aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), Mössbauer spectroscopy and other advanced characterization techniques. Based on the above-mentioned analysis, it is reasonable to classify DMSC catalysts as homo-nuclear and hetero-nuclear diatomic ones.68,69 The periodic or local structures of these catalysts are often deciphered via single-crystal XRD or aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and XAS. Reported examples include dinuclear Co–Co complexes, dinuclear Co–Zn complex, and dinuclear Cu–Cu catalyst.75 The dinuclear metal centers in these catalysts can synergistically catalyze energy conversion reactions, demonstrating catalytic activities tens of times higher than that of their mononuclear counterparts. Besides, in some studies, it has been found that two types of metals randomly dispersed in a catalyst can also show enhanced catalytic activity over single-metal catalysts in energy conversion reactions. Specifically, a synergistic catalytic effect was identified between two metal centers, but their spatial separations and coordination configurations are uncertain. This type of catalyst is the so-called marriage-type bimetallic catalysts.75 However, owing to the difficulty in revealing their structure–performance relationship, these catalysts will be not included and discussed in this review.
According to the types of dinuclear metal catalysts, the related synthesis methods can be divided into direct synthesis, precursor pyrolysis, and sequential deposition.67–69 Direct synthesis is well applicable for the dinuclear metal complexes and MOFs with dinuclear metal structural units, which are usually obtained via the direct reaction of metal ions and organic ligands under specific conditions. Besides, the encapsulation of dinuclear metal complexes in the pores of porous materials and anchoring dinuclear metal complexes on supports via covalent bonds or supramolecular/electrostatic interactions can also be considered direct methods to obtain supported dinuclear metal catalysts. Consequently, the heterogenization of molecular catalysts can be achieved, and their durability and recycling ability can be improved, and thus their significance for practical application can be elevated. Pyrolysis of the precursor is an effective method for the precise preparation of heterogeneous dinuclear metal catalysts, where the precursors are usually MOFs containing dinuclear metal structural units or dinuclear metal complexes supported materials. Although pyrolysis destroys most parts of the MOF structures and the dinuclear metal complex supported materials, the essential dinuclear metal structural units are expected to be retained on the new in situ generated carbonaceous supports with nitrogen (or other heteroatom) doping. The abundant nitrogen and carbon species resulting from pyrolysis can not only provide a carbonaceous support but also stabilize and regulate the coordination structures of dinuclear metal meters through the coordination of C and/or N atoms. These annealed catalysts with dinuclear structural units have been found to synergistically catalyze energy conversion reactions. For example, the precursors of bis(1,5-cyclooctadiene) diiridium(I) dichloride, dicarbonylcyclopentadienyliron, and allylpalladium(II) chloride dimer have been successfully used for the preparation of Ir2, Fe2, and Pd2/mpg-C3N4 DMCs79 and a diatomic Ag2/graphene catalyst was obtained with a dinuclear Ag complex as the precursor.80 The sequential deposition of identical or different metal atoms via atomic layer deposition (ALD) can precisely control the synthesis of bimetallic catalysts, where the key is to avoid the random distribution and aggregation of metal atoms, and thus the selective deposition of the second metal precursor is critical. Diatomic Pt2 sites anchored on graphene were constructed via two-step sequential ALD, in which the steric hindrance induced by trimethyl(methylcyclopentadienyl)–platinum(IV) (MeCpPtMe3) ensured the selective deposition of the second Pt in close proximity to the first Pt atom.81
The synergistically enhanced catalytic activity of dinuclear catalysts has attracted considerable research interest. Their synergistic catalysis mechanisms have also been studied in depth. Remarkably, the specifically synergistic catalysis mechanism of dinuclear metal catalysts is dependent on the catalyst itself, as well as the type of energy conversion reactions. Generally, there are two types of synergistic catalysis modes employed by dinuclear catalysts in catalyzing energy conversion reactions. The first mode features both metal centers directly binding with the substrate molecules or the reaction intermediates. In this case, the substrate molecules are activated by both metal centers, or the reaction intermediates are stabilized by both metal centers.42,43,82 The second mode features only one metal center directly binding and activating the substrate molecules and reaction intermediates, with the neighboring metal center not taking part in the activation or stabilization of the reaction intermediates; nonetheless, this type of structure can slightly modulate the electronic structure of the adjacent metal center, thereby indirectly contributing to boosting the catalytic activity.83 Most dinuclear metal electrocatalysts catalyze energy conversion reactions in this mode. In addition, the neighboring metal center can also bind with H2O or other molecules, and the bonded H2O can form hydrogen bonds with the reaction intermediates attached to the adjacent metal center and stabilize the reaction intermediates, thus also indirectly facilitating the catalytic process.84
2.2 DMSC for energy conversion reactions
As discussed above, dinuclear metal catalysts not only inherit the advantages of mononuclear catalysts, but also have more diverse functionalized sites, thereby meeting the demands of complex reactions. The energy conversion reactions typically include photo-/electro-catalytic HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, and N2RR.65–69,72–77 Designing dinuclear or multinuclear metal catalysts for these reactions may be related to the discoveries in biological studies. It has been found that in biological systems, many catalytic active centers of metalloenzymes have dinuclear metallic complexes as their essential parts, such as [NiFe4(OH)S4] cluster-based carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODHs), CaMn4O4 oxygen evolving center in photosystem II, dinuclear-Fe-based hydrogenase, dinuclear-Cu-based tyrosinase and laccase.85–89 These metalloenzymes are involved in diverse physiological functions in biological systems by metal–metal cooperation to achieve substrate recognition and transformation. Actually, all the above-mentioned energy conversion reactions are related to the formation or activation of stable chemical bonds. For instance, the HER involves the H–H bond formation process. In particular, for the proposed Tafel step after the Volmer step, two adsorbed *H are combined into adsorbed *H2, which eventually desorbs to form free H2.69 The OER process also involves bond formation.77 The typical catalytic pathway of dinuclear metal complexes for the OER is dinuclear cooperative catalysis following the I2M mechanism, in which two M–O units interact to form an O–O bond. The ORR, CO2RR, and N2RR processes involve the activation of di-/tri-atomic molecules of O2, CO2, and N2.66,73,76 The coordination interactions of dinuclear metal centers in dinuclear metal catalysts with suitable metal–metal separation and configuration can contribute to their adsorption and activation, as well as the subsequent stability of the generated reaction intermediate, and thus conducive to the reduction of these molecules.
3. DMSC for energy conversion in homogeneous catalytic system
As the most representative homogeneous catalysts, metal complexes are constructed from metal ions and organic ligands via coordination bonds and have been widely used for photo-/electro-chemical energy conversion reactions.20 Benefiting from the maximized utilization of metal active sites, metal complexes are often efficient and selective for these reactions. In particular, dinuclear metal complexes with suitable metal–metal separations and spatial configurations have recently been scrutinized with increasing interest because the dinuclear active sites show a synergistic catalysis effect to further enhance the catalytic efficiency.66
In this section, dinuclear metal complexes for photo-/electro-catalytic HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, and N2RR in homogeneous catalytic systems will be summarized and discussed. The contents of this section are divided into five parts.
3.1 HER
Hydrogen, as a promising renewable high-energy fuel, has been considered an ideal alternative to conventional fossil fuels.89 Electrochemical HER provides a promising solution to produce high-purity hydrogen gas.90 However, to implement this important reaction, electrocatalysts with high efficiency are required. Recently, a wide library of homo-dinuclear complexes has demonstrated the cooperativity of metal active centers in electrocatalytic HER.91–100 For example, Peters et al. prepared a variety of dinuclear cobalt macrocycle complexes using Co(OAc)2, dioxime precursors and BF3·Et2O, which could be used as highly active electrocatalysts for proton reduction. Because of the directing cooperative substrate binding between the adjacent Co atoms, these dinuclear cobalt macrocycle complexes exhibited excellent electrocatalytic performances with relatively low overpotentials.91 Apfel et al. reported a bimetallic macrocycle complex featuring two cofacially linked Ni–porphyrins for electrochemical HER. Compared with the Ni hangman porphyrin, the dinuclear Ni macrocycle complex achieved two-times higher HER activity with a faradaic efficiency (FE) of 95% and H2 production rate of 1.4 mmol g−1 h−1. The improved catalytic efficiency can be attributed to the synergistic effect between the two Ni centers.92 Zhan et al. synthesized a dinuclear copper complex from Cu(OH)2 and N,N′-bis(3-aminopropyl) oxamido ligand, which could work as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for both water oxidation and reduction. The electrochemical results demonstrated that water oxidation could be initiated at an overpotential of 0.289 V with a TOF of 6.7 s−1, and the water reduction could be driven at the overpotential of 0.689 V with a TOF of 1383 h−1. This dinuclear copper complex also showed high stability for water reduction for over 72 h electrolysis with an FEH2 of 97.4%.93
In addition, Cao et al. designed and synthesized a nickel(II) porphyrinic complex (Ni–P, P = porphyrin) bearing four meso-C6F5 groups for the HER. In the catalytic HER cycle, rapid bimetallic-site-catalyzed homolysis to produce H2 was achieved, as shown by experimental and theoretical studies. The experimental results revealed that Ni–P exhibits high catalytic activity and stability, with a remarkable ic/ip ratio of 77 (ic is the catalytic current and ip is the peak current). The theoretical calculations demonstrated that the intermediate [H–Ni–P] undergoes homolysis to generate H2 with a very low activation energy barrier of 3.7 kcal mol−1, which suggests fast reaction kinetics.94 To further confirm the homolytic H–H bond formation mechanism, the same team prepared three nickel(II) porphyrinic complexes by introducing bulky amido moieties in the ortho- or para-position of meso-phenyl groups. The complex bearing amido moieties at the para-position showed much smaller steric resistance at the direction perpendicular to the porphyrin ring, which underwent bimetallic homolysis to yield H2.95 Moreover, Sakai et al. found that mononuclear platinum(II) complexes formed dimeric structures with a metal–metal bond when they are used to catalyse H2 generation from water. Furthermore, chloride ions were introduced in the platinum(II) complexes to minimize the coulombic repulsion between the two mononuclear units, which enhanced the capability of forming a dimer, thus improving the HER activity.96
Besides, some hetero-dinuclear metal complexes have been synthesized for the HER with the DMSC effect. For instance, Darensbourg et al. prepared an Ni–Fe bimetallic complex from CpFe(CO)2I and Ni(N,N-bis(2-mercaptoethyl)-1,5-diazacycloheptane) for electrochemical HER. This Ni–Fe bimetallic catalyst displayed excellent catalytic performance for H2 generation with a turnover number (TON) and FE of 0.26 ± 0.01 and 96.0 ± 2.9%, respectively, which are superior to that of the homo-dinuclear Fe–Fe catalyst (TON = 1.92 and FE = 77.2%). The computational investigation demonstrated controlled proton–electron and proton–hydride coupling by the [NiFe]-hydrogenase active site to promote H2 production.97
3.2 OER
The OER is a very important half reaction for energy conversion and storage.101 However, this reaction is rather challenging owing to the transfer of four protons and four electrons. Dinuclear metal complexes have attracted broad attention in water oxidation because the two metal centers can activate different water molecules simultaneously to achieve O–O coupling. In recent years, many homo-dinuclear metal complexes have shown outstanding performance for electrocatalytic water oxidation.102–116 In 2012, Mayer et al. prepared the dimeric bis-μ-hydroxide cation [(bipyridine)Cu(μ-OH)]22+ for the OER. The catalytic results demonstrated that this dinuclear complex shows large and irreversible currents at pH 11.8–13.3, indicating its high catalytic activity. The overpotential was 750 mV at pH 12.5, and the catalytic TOF was 100 s−1, suggesting very fast kinetics. This is the first copper-based homogeneous catalyst for water oxidation.102 Moreover, Zhang et al. synthesized a robust dinuclear copper catalyst for water oxidation from Cu(CF3SO3)2 and 2,7-[bis(2-pyridylme-thyl)aminomethyl]-1,8-naphthyridine (BPMAN). The catalytic results demonstrated that this catalyst showed high activity with an overpotential of 0.8 V in phosphate buffer (pH = 7). DFT calculations revealed that the two Cu centers have a cooperative interaction to form O–O bonds, thus efficiently catalyzing water oxidation.103 In addition, Zhang et al. prepared three copper-based complexes involving mononuclear, dinuclear and trinuclear copper clusters for electrocatalytic water oxidation. The trinuclear copper complex exhibited excellent activity with TOF of 20000 s−1, which is 15 times and 150 times higher than that of dinuclear and mononuclear copper complexes, respectively. Control experiments together with theoretical calculations showed that the cooperation between multiple metals plays a crucial role in O–O bond formation.104
Besides, Kieber-Emmons et al. prepared a dinuclear copper complex, {[(Me2TMPA)Cu(II)]2(μ-OH)2}(OTf)2, via the metalation of Me2TMPA (Me2TMPA = bis((6-methyl-2-pyridyl)methyl)(2-pyridylmethyl)amine) for electrocatalytic water oxidation. This catalyst displayed a high FE of 90% and moderate TOF of 33 s−1 at ∼1.0 V (vs. NHE). The kinetic isotope effect of the catalyst was calculated to be 20 at 1.5 V (vs. NHE), suggesting that proton-coupled electron transfer is the rate-determining step (RDS). DFT calculations revealed that both the nucleophilic attack of intermolecular water and redox isomerization of {[LCu(III)]2(μ-O)2}2+ are energetically accessible pathways for O–O bond formation.105 Maayan et al. also fabricated a dinuclear copper catalyst for water oxidation, which demonstrated high performance and stability (Fig. 1). The TOF reached 129 s−1 (peak current measurements) or 5503 s−1 (foot-of-the-wave analysis). The experimental TON value was 21.8 with FE of 95% in 2 h at an overpotential of ∼600 mV. This catalyst could work stably for at least four cycles of potentiostatic electrolysis, as confirmed via spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques. The high catalytic performance of this dinuclear copper catalyst can be attributed to the cooperative interactions between the two Cu sites, as well as the –OH groups of the ethanolic side chains promoting proton transfer and borate species coordinated on one of the Cu sites, thus facilitating O–O bond formation.106
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration showing the cooperative water oxidation process with high activity over a dinuclear copper complex. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
In addition to dinuclear copper complexes, some other dinuclear metal complexes have been constructed for electrocatalytic water oxidation. For instance, Zhang et al. synthesized a dinuclear cobalt complex bearing five- and six-coordinated sites, which can be used as a stable and efficient water oxidation catalyst. Different from O–O coupling, this catalyst has a “one-site catalysis with two-site oxidation” mechanism, that is, water oxidation occurs on two metal sites and the O–O bond is formed on one site with an FE of over 90% under neutral conditions.107 Åkermark et al. prepared a series of dinuclear manganese complexes with different substituents in the ligand scaffold for electrocatalytic water oxidation. It was found that all these complexes can oxidize H2O to O2, among which the manganese-based complex containing distal carboxyl group exhibited the highest catalytic activity. The significantly improved performance is attributed to the hydrogen bonding between the Mn–hydroxy group and distal carboxyl group, which promotes the proton-coupled electron transfer, thus accelerating O–O bond formation during H2O oxidation.108
3.3 ORR
The ORR is of utmost importance for energy storage and conversion technologies, such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries.117 In 1964, Jasinski et al. synthesized a cobalt–phthalocyanine complex, which was first used as a molecular catalyst for the ORR under alkaline conditions.118 Afterwards, a wide library of molecular catalysts has been developed for this reaction, among which dinuclear metal complexes have attracted considerable attention due to the synergistic effect of two metal centers promoting the activation and catalytic conversion of O2.119–127 Duboc et al. synthesized a dinuclear non-heme iron complex from Fe(BF4)2·6H2O and 2,2′-(2,2′-bipyridine-6,6′-diyl)bis(1,1-diphenylethanethiolate) ligand, which can act as a high-efficiency ORR catalyst for the selective reduction of O2 into H2O2 or H2O. Under conventional chemical conditions, H2O2 is the main product with a selectivity of 95%, whereas under electrochemical conditions, H2O is dominant, with <10% H2O2 produced. Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the production of H2O2 is thermodynamically and kinetically feasible under chemical conditions. When electrochemically driven, H2O2 is further reduced to H2O owing to the fast electron transfer occurring in the reaction diffusion layer to break the O–O bond.119 Moreover, Tanaka et al. prepared a dinuclear iron complex with both Fe–porphyrin and Fe–phthalocyanine as the catalytic centers for electrochemical ORR. This complex could catalyze the four-electron reduction of O2 into H2O with an onset potential of 0.78 V (vs. RHE). The excellent catalytic efficiency of the catalyst can be attributed to the electrostatic repulsion between the active metal center and the adjacent ammonium cations.120
In 2018, Maron et al. constructed a dinuclear cobalt complex based on a dianionic pentadentate ligand for the electrochemical reduction of O2 to H2O. This complex contained a diamagnetic CoIII–O–O–CoIII peroxo dimer, with an O–O distance of 1.43 Å, which is longer than that in O2 (1.21 Å). This suggests a formally doubly reduced peroxo complex. Both the experimental and computational results demonstrated facile O–O bond cleavage and formation in the catalytic process, and the dianionic nature of the ligand plays a central role in the O–O bond cleavage to form H2O. This is a new reaction pathway for the reduction of O2 to H2O by CoIII–O–O–CoIII peroxo intermediates.121 Furthermore, Cao et al. designed and synthesized an asymmetrical Pacman dinuclear cobalt complex with the face-to-face configuration of two porphyrin moieties for electrochemical ORR (Fig. 2a). The catalytic results demonstrated that this complex is more efficient and selective than the corresponding mononuclear cobalt complex and symmetrical dinuclear cobalt complex for the four-electron reduction of O2 to H2O (Fig. 2b). The enhanced catalytic activity of the dinuclear cobalt complex is attributed to the cooperation between the two Co ions, that is, one Co–porphyrin moiety is likely the O2 binding and reduction site, while the other may be used as a Lewis acid to assist the O2 binding and activation (Fig. 2c).122 Similarly, a series of other dinuclear cobalt cofacial porphyrin–corrole dyads have been constructed, which displayed good activities for electrochemical O2 reduction.123–125
 Fig. 2  (a) Molecular structures of asymmetrical (left) and symmetrical (right) dinuclear cobalt complexes. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode measurements for the ORR with asymmetrical (black) and symmetrical (red) dinuclear cobalt complexes, as well as mononuclear cobalt complex (blue) in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (c) Proposed catalytic cycle for the ORR over asymmetrical dinuclear cobalt complexes. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020. 
Besides, Cao et al. also prepared a water-soluble binuclear CuII complex for the reduction of O2 into H2O under neutral aqueous solution. The electrocatalytic results demonstrated that one CuII center is first reduced by one electron to form CuIICuI species, which can activate an O2 molecule to generate O2˙−. Then, O2˙− is further reduced at the dicopper site to give H2O. These results suggest the cooperation between the two Cu atoms for the ORR.126 Mirica et al. synthesized a mononuclear palladium complex as a molecular homogeneous electrocatalyst for the selective reduction of O2 into H2O. This catalyst exhibited elevated ORR kinetics with a low overpotential of 0.32 V and high FE of 70% in MeCN solution. The electrochemical results imply that a dinuclear PdIII intermediate, most likely a PdIII–peroxo–PdIII species, was formed in solution, which dictates the thermochemistry of the ORR process.127
3.4 CO2RR
CO2RR, powered either photochemically or electrochemically, has been regarded as promising technology to achieve carbon neutrality.128 The activation of the CO2 molecule and the stabilization of the reaction intermediates are the crucial issues. DMCs have been found to be unique for binding, activating and converting CO2 molecules. A series of homo- and hetero-bimetallic complexes has been designed for photo- and electro-catalytic CO2RR with the DMSC effect between two metal centers.

3.4.1 Photocatalysis. 
In 2017, we synthesized a dinuclear CoCo complex by confining two Co atoms in a cryptand for efficient CO2 photoreduction to CO in CH3CN/H2O solution (Fig. 3a). This dinuclear CoCo complex could rapidly absorb CO2 in its cavity to form carbonate with coordinated OH−, as confirmed by single-crystal XRD. Therefore, it exhibited an extraordinarily high catalytic performance for CO2-to-CO conversion, with a TON and TOF of 16896 and 0.47 s−1, which are much higher than that of the corresponding mononuclear Co complex (Fig. 3b and c), respectively. The enhanced catalytic efficiency is due to the DMSC effect between two Co, that is, one Co serves as a catalytic center to bind and reduce CO2, and the other acts as an assisting catalytic site to facilitate the C–OH cleavage of the [OC–OH]‡ intermediate and removal of the OH− group, thus promoting CO production. This has been well supported by the DFT result, where it can be seen that the C–OH cleavage of the [OC–OH]‡ intermediate is the RDS of the CO2 reduction reaction, and in this step the dinuclear CoCo complex has a much lower energy barrier than its mononuclear counterpart (Fig. 3d).42 Then, Robert et al. prepared a dinuclear Co complex bearing a bi-quaterpyridine ligand, which could selectively catalyze photochemical CO2 reduction into HCOO− or CO by two Co atoms acting in synergy towards CO2. In this work, HCOO− was produced with a selectivity of 97% and TON of 821 in basic acetonitrile solution, while CO production was achieved with a selectivity of 99% and TON of 829 in the presence of a weak acid. DFT calculations showed that this dinuclear Co complex undergoes different reaction pathways to reduce CO2 to HCOO− and CO.129 Moreover, Tschierlei et al. designed and synthesized a dinuclear Re complex, in which two (bipyridine)Re(CO)3Cl fragments are linked by a xanthene backbone. The catalytic results demonstrated that this dinuclear Re complex displayed significantly increased activity for photochemical CO2-to-CO conversion compared to its mononuclear parent complex. The enhanced catalytic performance was attributed to the cooperative reaction mechanism between the two Re centers, where one Re center functions as a photosensitizer to assist the second active Re to accomplish CO2 reduction.130 In addition, Wang et al. prepared a dinuclear nickel complex for visible-light-driven CO2 reduction. By using 50 μM dinuclear nickel complex, 3.25 μmol of CO and a selectivity of 99% were achieved, which are higher than 100 μM of the corresponding mononuclear Ni complex (2.60 μmol and 90%, respectively). The enhanced catalytic efficiency of the dinuclear nickel complex can be attributed to the synergy between two Ni sites.131
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the dinuclear Co complex for efficient CO2 photoreduction to CO in CH3CN/H2O solution. (b) Molecular structures of dinuclear and mononuclear Co complexes. (c) CO and H2 yields obtained over dinuclear Co complex (0.025 μM), mononuclear Co complex (0.05 μM) and blank. (d) Energy barriers of CO2 reduction and C–OH cleavage for dinuclear Co complex (top) and mononuclear Co complex (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017. 
Besides homo-dinuclear metal complexes, hetero-dinuclear ones have also been shown to reduce CO2 in synergy. As is known, zinc complexes usually exhibit only marginal photocatalytic activity for the CO2RR, but Zn(II) has a strong binding affinity to the OH− group, which is expected to be an ideal assisting catalytic site to promote the cleavage of the C–OH bond in the process of CO2 reduction, thus improving the catalytic efficiency. Therefore, based on the fact that dinuclear CoCo complexes synergistically catalyse CO2 reduction to CO, we further designed and synthesized a dinuclear heterometallic CoZn complex for photochemical CO2-to-CO conversion. As expected, this CoZn complex showed extremely high photocatalytic activity with TON and TOF values of 65000 and 1.8 s−1, which are 4- and 19-fold higher than that of the homo-dinuclear CoCo and ZnZn complexes, respectively. DFT calculations revealed that the DMSC effect between Co and Zn is significantly strengthened with respect to the Co/Co and Zn/Zn counterparts, therefore dramatically lowering the activation barriers of the transition states, and subsequently increases the catalytic activity for photochemical CO2 reduction to CO.43 Additionally, Kojima et al. synthesized a mononuclear Ni complex based on S2N2-tetradentate ligand with two non-coordinated pyridine pendants, in which the pyridine pendants can capture Lewis-acidic metal ions by coordination to form hetero-binuclear metal complexes for photocatalytic CO2RR (Fig. 4a). Consequently, the Mg, Ca or Zn-bound Ni complexes showed significantly enhanced photocatalytic performance for the reduction of CO2 to CO compared to that of their mononuclear Ni complex without pyridine pendants, which can be ascribed to the cooperativity between the Ni and Mg, Ca or Zn centers for the stabilization of the Ni–CO2 intermediate (Fig. 4b and c).132
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the Mg, Ca or Zn-bound Ni complex for synergistic photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO. (b) CO and H2 yields in photocatalytic CO2RR over Ni complex in the presence of cationic Lewis acids at 1 h. (c) Optimized structure of CO2-coordinated Mg-bound Ni complex. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
Besides, hetero-dinuclear metal complexes containing noble metals can also exhibit the DMSC effect in photocatalytic CO2RR, but the synergistic catalysis mechanism is different from that discussed above. For example, Kuramochi et al. prepared a dinuclear heterometallic complex by covalently connecting an Re complex and Zn–porphyrin complex for photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Because of the rapid electron transfer from the Zn–porphyrin to the Re complex, this hetero-dinuclear metal complex exhibited high activity and selectivity to afford CO, with a TON of >1300 and selectivity of >99.9%, while the mixed system of the Re complex and the Zn porphyrin barely gave any CO.133 A similar conclusion was reported by Schwalbe et al. They constructed a series of hetero-dinuclear complexes based on a phenanthroline extended tetramesityl porphyrin ligand, in which the porphyrin center was implanted with Cu, Pd, Zn, Co, or Fe, and the phenanthroline was coordinated by an Re tricarbonyl chloride unit. Among them, the hetero-dinuclear ZnRe complex showed high photocatalytic performance for CO2-to-CO conversion with a TON of 13 without other noble metal photosensitizers, while the other hetero-dinuclear complexes are inactive under the same condition. These results suggest that cooperative catalysis is possible by the choice of the appropriate metal implanted in the porphyrin moiety. The synergistic mode in these examples is the covalent connection of the catalytic center and photosensitive center, thus accelerating the electron transfer from the photosensitizing center to the catalytic center and boosting the CO2 reduction.134


3.4.2 Electrocatalysis. 
Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction into valuable fuels and chemicals over dinuclear metallic complex catalysts has also attracted considerable research interest.135–139 In 2018, we designed and synthesized a dinuclear Ni complex, which can serve as an electrocatalyst for the reduction of CO2 to CO. The TON and TOF values reached as high as 4.1 × 106 and 190.0 s−1, respectively, which are 38-fold improvement of that of the corresponding mononuclear Ni complex. Moreover, the FECO was 95%, which is also higher than that of the mononuclear Ni complex (62%). The experimental observations together with DFT calculations demonstrated that the significantly improved catalytic efficiency for the electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion of the dinuclear Ni complex can be attributed to the DMSC effect between the two Ni centers.135 Furthermore, Polyansky et al. prepared a mononuclear macrocyclic Co complex for electrocatalytic CO2RR. A series of experimental characterizations and DFT calculations revealed that a bimetallic intermediate was in situ generated from two reduced mononuclear Co species bridged by a CO2 molecule, which is more beneficial for the CO2 reduction to CO compared with the mononuclear pathway.136
In addition to transition metal centers, the DMSC effect between dinuclear noble metal sites in the electrocatalytic CO2RR has also been studied. For example, Jurss et al. designed and synthesized two anthracene-bridged dinuclear Re complexes with cis- and trans-conformers, as well as a mononuclear Re complex for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. The catalytic results showed that the dinuclear Re complex with cis-conformer achieved the TOF value of 35.3 s−1 for the reduction of CO2 to CO, which is larger than that of the trans-conformer (22.9 s−1) and mononuclear catalyst (11.1 s−1) (Fig. 5a). The UV-vis spectroelectrochemical experiments indicated that a broad band at around 850 nm emerged for the trans conformer, suggesting the formation of an Re–Re bonded dimer (Fig. 5b). However, this signal was absent for the cis-conformer, implying there was no intermolecular Re–Re bond (Fig. 5c). Thus, the two Re centers in cis-conformer can bind a CO2via the synergistic mode.137
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration showing the dinuclear Re complex with cis-conformer for synergistic electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO. UV-vis spectroelectrochemistry with 0.5 mM cis- (b) and trans- (c) Re2Cl2 at −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl in Ar-saturated DMF/0.1 M Bu4NPF6 solution. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. 

3.5 N2RR
Photocatalytic or electrocatalytic N2RR is now becoming a promising approach to producing ammonia under mild conditions. However, N2 is thermodynamically stable owing to its extremely strong triple bond (941 kJ mol−1), which requires highly efficient catalysts to achieve N2RR.140 Dinuclear metal complexes have been demonstrated as outstanding catalysts for the reduction of N2 molecules. For example, Arnold et al. synthesized dinuclear uranium and thorium complexes with narrow cavities, which could bind N2 molecules by two metal centers and mediate their reduction. In the presence of a weak acid and alkali metal reductant, the reactions produced ammonia at a slow reaction rate. When an excess of reductant and electrophile was added, this catalyst converted N2 to a secondary silylamine. The bridging ligands may play a key role in controlling product formation because it can provide two protons to take part in N2 reduction.141 Furthermore, Schneider et al. constructed a dinuclear N2-bridged rhenium complex, which was used as an excellent catalyst for the reduction of N2 to benzamide/benzonitrile with an overall yield of 61%. A three-step cycle was demonstrated for N2 reduction with a complex mechanism, involving rapid ReIII/ReII-reduction, N2-binding, halide loss, ReII/ReI-reduction, and ReI/ReIII-comproportionation. The cooperating pincer ligand can act as a 2e−/2H+ reservoir for nitrogen hydrogenolysis and electrochemical rehydrogenation to promote N2 reduction.142
4. DMSC for energy conversion in heterogeneous catalytic systems
Besides homogeneous DMCs, heterogeneous DMCs have also been extensively studied for energy conversion reactions because of their superiority in terms of separation and recycling.75,76 Thus, there are more corresponding reports on the latter. To date, many strategies have been developed to design and prepare heterogeneous DMCs to achieve efficient energy conversion. In this section, heterogeneous DMCs for photo-/electro-catalytic HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, and N2RR will be reviewed and discussed. The contents in this section will also be divided into five parts.
4.1 HER

4.1.1 Photocatalysis. 
Heterogeneous photocatalytic water splitting to produce H2 is a decades-old topic since the pioneering work of Fujishima and Honda, who found that a TiO2 single crystal electrode can decompose water under illumination.143 This aroused the interest of scientific and technological workers in photocatalytic water splitting. Many inorganic catalysts including metal oxides and sulfides have been developed.144,145 Actually, besides inorganic catalysts, organic catalysts have also been explored, where the typical example is graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4). g-C3N4 is a well-known non-metallic organic polymer semiconductor. It has attracted broad attention in energy conversion reactions, not only due to its own good photocatalytic performance, but also for its supporting function to stabilize metal active sites by abundant N atoms.146 Accordingly, Li et al. fabricated an Fe–Co DMC for photocatalytic HER by loading Fe and Co single atoms on mesoporous g-C3N4via a freeze-drying method. Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) demonstrated that many bright spots were evenly distributed on mesoporous g-C3N4, which were identified as Fe and Co single atoms. The photocatalytic hydrogen production rate over Fe–Co DMC was 1958 μmol g−1, which is 10 and 2.4 times higher than that of its monometallic Fe and Co counterparts, respectively. The significantly improved catalytic performance of Fe–Co DMC is attributed to the synergistic effect between Fe and Co.147 Furthermore, Lei et al. constructed Co(II)-modified P-doped g-C3N4 nanosheets via a low-temperature phosphating method. In the photocatalytic HER process, Pt nanoparticles were in situ deposited on the nanosheets. The resulting catalyst exhibited excellent catalytic activity with a hydrogen production rate of 774 μmol g−1 h−1, which is 8.6 times higher than that of pure g-C3N4 nanosheets. In the synergistic effect between Pt and Co, Pt serves as an electron transfer cocatalyst and Co acts as a hole transfer cocatalyst, thus promoting the separation of photogenerated e− and h+, and greatly boosting the photocatalytic HER activity.148
An et al. synthesized two heteronuclear Pt–Au DMCs for photocatalytic water splitting, which was achieved by dispersing Pt and Au atoms on TiO2 with exposed {001} and {101} facets via a two-step deposition–precipitation method. Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM of PtAu/{001}-TiO2 showed numerous bright points, suggesting the even distribution of Au and Pt atoms. However, a few clusters were observed for PtAu/{101}-TiO2. Normalized Pt L3-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy demonstrated dominant peaks at ∼1.6 Å for both PtAu/{001}-TiO2 and PtAu/{101}-TiO2, which can be assigned to Pt–O coordination. The Au L3-edge XANES of PtAu/{001}-TiO2 only showed the Au–O scattering path, whereas the characteristic peak of PtAu/{101}-TiO2 is similar to Au foil, implying the existence of Au nanoparticles in PtAu/{101}-TiO2. These results agree well with the HAADF-STEM results. The photocatalytic results showed that the H2 evolution rate of PtAu/{001}-TiO2 (61.3 mmol h−1 g−1) is 4-times higher than that of PtAu/{101}-TiO2 because the unsaturated Ti4+ in {001}-TiO2 are prone to accommodate Pt and Au single atoms. Moreover, benefiting from the synergistic DMSC effect between Pt and Au, PtAu/{001}-TiO2 achieved 3 and 5 times improvement in catalytic activity than that of its Pt/TiO2 and Au/TiO2 single-atom counterparts, respectively.149 Zhou et al. prepared a Cu1–Ti dual-site catalyst (Cu1–Ti/TiO2) by depositing atomic Cu on TiO2 with abundant surface oxygen vacancies (Ti/TiO2). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Cu1–Ti/TiO2 showed some bright dots, implying the presence of isolated Cu atoms on the surface of Ti/TiO2. The Cu K-edge spectrum in Fourier-transformed extended X-ray absorption fine structure (FT-EXAFS) exhibited a main peak at around 1.5 Å, which can be attributed to Cu–O coordination. No signal of Cu–Cu bond was detected, further suggesting that Cu atoms were single-atomically distributed. The catalytic results demonstrated that Cu1–Ti/TiO2 achieved superb activity for photocatalytic HER with an H2 evolution rate of 3830 μmol g−1 h−1, which is 7.3 and 26.6 times higher than that of Cu1/TiO2 and Ti/TiO2, respectively. DFT calculations revealed that the introduction of Cu atoms offers active sites for the HER to promote the dissociation of water, thus boosting the catalytic performance.150


4.1.2 Electrocatalysis. 
Electrochemical HER provides a tangible approach to produce H2, given that it can continuously generate clean H2, where DMCs have been widely considered as promising electrocatalysts.151–160 For instance, Cui et al. prepared tungsten atomic clusters anchored on P-doped carbon support using W single atoms as the parent material via a thermal migration strategy. The corresponding magnified HAADF-STEM images revealed numerous paired bright spots, which were identified as W2 atom pairs. The R-space plots of the FT-EXAFS profiles presented a weak metal–metal peak, indicating the presence of W–W bonds. The results of alkaline electrochemical HER demonstrate that the synthesized tungsten atomic clusters display outstanding activity with an overpotential of 53 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 38 mV dec−1, which is a remarkable enhancement in HER activity with respect to both tungsten single atoms and tungsten carbide nanoparticles. DFT calculations revealed that the W–W dual-sites of the tungsten atomic clusters facilitate the desorption kinetics of the H* and OH* intermediates, thus accounting for the excellent alkaline HER activity.151
Beside W–W DMCs, studies showed that doping other metals can also form W-based heteronuclear DMCs for electrochemical HER. Fan et al. prepared a W–Mo DMC (W1Mo1-NG) with the W–O–Mo–O–C configuration via a facile two-step method. Specifically, the hydrothermal reaction of Na2WO4·2H2O, (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O and graphene oxide (GO) produced a precursor solution, which was further freeze-dried to produce a spongy column. Subsequently, the sponge column was treated by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in NH3/Ar gas at 800 °C to obtain the W1Mo1-NG DMC (Fig. 6a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image clearly showed some isolated heteronuclear W–Mo atoms with a distance of ∼3.6 Å, which is much longer than the Mo–Mo/W–Mo/W–W bonds (∼3.0 Å), suggesting that there are extra atoms to bridge W and Mo atoms (Fig. 6b and c). The results of FT-EXAFS spectroscopy and DFT calculations demonstrate that the heteronuclear W–Mo atoms are anchored in N-doped graphene by four O and two C atoms to form a W–O–Mo–O–C configuration (Fig. 6d). Consequently, the W1Mo1-NG DMC exhibited an excellent catalytic performance for electrochemical HER with an overpotential of 24 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2 in acidic electrolyte, which is lower than that of Mo2 N-doped graphene (145 mV), W2 N-doped graphene (156 mV), and pristine N-doped graphene (200 mV) electrocatalysts (Fig. 6e). DFT calculations further revealed that heteronuclear W–Mo DMC affords the desirable adsorption strength of H and good HER kinetics, thus facilitating the HER process.152
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration showing the construction of W1Mo1-NG DMC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of W1Mo1-NG DMC. (c) Intensity profile obtained on one individual W–Mo dimer. (d) Corresponding Mo K-edge and W L3-edge FT-EXAFS fitting curves for W1Mo1-NG in R-space. (e) Polarization curves of Mo2-NG, W1Mo1-NG, W2-NG, NG, and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020. 
In 2019, Luo et al. designed and synthesized Cr-doped Co4N nanorod arrays on carbon cloth for electrocatalytic HER in alkaline electrolyte. The obtained material displayed promising catalytic activity with an overpotential of 21 mV at the current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is much better than the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. DFT calculations together with experimental results revealed that the introduction of Cr increased the H2O adsorption and dissociation ability, which is beneficial for both the alkaline Volmer and Heyrovsky steps, thus leading to the high performance.153 Moreover, Chen et al. developed a facile method to construct a conductive bimetallic electrocatalyst by the introduction of Co atoms in conductive Cu-catecholate nanorod arrays on carbon cloth for the HER. The catalytic results demonstrated that the synthesized bimetallic electrocatalyst exhibited excellent activity with overpotentials of 52 and 143 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline and neutral media, respectively, which is significantly lower than that of the benchmark Pt/C electrocatalyst. DFT calculations revealed that Co doping can optimize the adsorption energies of both water and hydrogen, facilitating the Volmer step in the HER process.154
Pt has been regarded as the most efficient catalyst for the HER, but its high cost limits its large-scale applications. Accordingly, the integration of Pt and other metals to form DMCs is a promising strategy to lower the use of Pt and enhance the catalytic efficiency of Pt-based catalysts. For instance, Yao et al. fabricated a Co–Pt DMC with 0.16 wt% of Pt by annealing a cobalt-based MOF and dicyandiamide. This catalyst displayed ultrahigh activity for electrochemical HER with an overpotential of only 27 mV in acidic media and 50 mV in alkaline media at 10 mA cm−2, which are superior to that of the commercial Pt/C (59 mV and 65 mV, respectively). The excellent catalytic performance of Co–Pt DMC was attributed to the synergistic effect of atomic Pt and Co, which induced charge polarization around the atomic Co and lowered the Gibbs free energy change of the intermediates, thus boosting the catalytic activity, as supported by DFT calculation.155 Moreover, Qian et al. prepared well-dispersed PtNi alloy nanoparticles implanted on N-doped carbon via the carbonization of polyaniline-containing Pt and Ni ions. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image demonstrated that numerous PtNi nanoparticles were anchored on the surface of the carbon substrate with a size of ∼6.5 nm. The electrocatalytic results showed that the optimized PtNi catalyst displayed an outstanding HER performance with the current density of 3.78 A mgPt−1 in 1.0 M KOH, which is 13-times higher than that of the benchmark 20% Pt/C catalyst. DFT computations revealed that the incorporation of Pt and Ni elements could help modify their mutual electron distributions and d-band center positions to promote the dissociation of *H2O, thereby enhancing the HER activity.156
Besides, Li et al. synthesized a Pt–Cu DMC containing 1.5 atom% Pt via a two-step approach for electrocatalytic HER. Firstly, atomically dispersed Cu on Pd nanosheets was prepared by adding CuCl2·2H2O aqueous solution to Pd nanosheets; then the mixture was injected into K2PtCl4 solution to obtain the Pt–Cu DMC. The Pt L3-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum showed two main peaks at 2.05 and 2.56 Å, which can be assigned to Pt–Cu and Pt–Pd paths, respectively. These results suggest the presence of Pt–Cu dual sites on the Pd nanosheets. Electrochemical tests showed that the Pt–Cu DMC exhibited outstanding HER activity, with an overpotential of 22.8 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and mass current density of 3002 A g−1(Pd+Pt) at −0.05 V (vs. RHE).157 Sun et al. prepared Pt–Ru dimers with 0.9 wt% of Pt via a two-step ALD process for electrocatalytic HER. As shown in Fig. 7a, the Pt single atoms were first deposited onto N-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs) using trimethyl(methylcyclopentadienyl) platinum (MeCpPtMe3) as the precursor for ALD. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image indicated a large number of Pt atoms anchored on NCNTs. Subsequently, the deposition of Ru atoms on the Pt single atoms to form Pt–Ru dimers was achieved by ALD using bis(ethylcyclopentadienyl)ruthenium as the precursor. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM revealed a number of paired bright and dark spots, implying that Pt–Ru dimers were constructed (Fig. 7b and c), as further confirmed via X-ray absorption spectroscopy. The prepared Pt–Ru dimers showed higher catalytic activity for the HER than Pt single atoms and commercial Pt/C catalysts (Fig. 7d and e). DFT calculations revealed that the synergetic effect between Pt and Ru modulates the electronic structure, resulting in the high HER performance.158
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of Pt–Ru dimers on NCNTs by ALD process. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Pt–Ru dimers/NCNTs. Scale bars: 1 nm. (c) Intensity profile obtained on one individual Pt–Ru dimer. (d) HER curves and (e) normalized mass activity at 0.05 V (vs. RHE) of Pt–Ru dimers, Pt single atoms and Pt/C catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019. 

4.2 OER
It is well-known that the OER is the bottleneck of water splitting owing to the four-electron- and proton-transfer steps, which requires efficient and stable catalysts to achieve this half reaction. A series of heteronuclear DMCs demonstrated that dinuclear metal sites can overcome the obstacles and promote electrocatalytic OER.161–179 In 2019, Hu et al. synthesized an Fe–Co DMC via an in situ electrochemical method for the OER. Firstly, a single-atom Co precatalyst (Co–N–C) was prepared by calcining a mixture of Co complex, phenanthroline and Mg(OH)2, in which Mg(OH)2 was used as a template and dispersing reagent. Then, Co–N–C was tested for the OER in 1 M KOH solution with and without Fe(NO3)3·9H2O. The catalytic results demonstrated that the overpotential is 495 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in Fe-free KOH solution, whereas it is 308 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in Fe-containing KOH solution. A series of experimental characterizations (XAS, in particular) revealed that Fe was electrochemically incorporated in Co–N–C to yield an Fe–Co double-atom catalyst, which consisted of Fe–Co active sites for the OER. The significantly enhanced catalytic activity of the Fe–Co catalyst over the single-atom Co catalyst can be attributed to the synergetic effect between Fe and Co.161 In addition, Bu et al. constructed an Fe–Co DMC embedded in N-doped graphitic carbon by high-temperature annealing ZIF-8 containing bimetallic phthalocyanines macromolecules (FeCoPc). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image demonstrated many paired bright spots, which can be assigned to Fe–Co atom pairs. The FT-EXAFS of Fe–Co DMC at Fe and Co K-edges only displayed Fe–N and Co–N scattering paths, suggesting the atomic dispersion of Fe and Co. The catalytic results showed that the Fe–Co DMC exhibited outstanding activity for the OER in N2-saturated 1.0 M KOH, with an overpotential of 370 mV at 10 mA cm−2, much lower than that of Fe MMC (440 mV) and Co MMC (398 mV). DFT calculations demonstrated that the synergetic effect between Fe and Co optimized the d-band center position of the metal sites and lowered the energy barrier of the RDS, thereby improving the OER performance.162 Xu et al. also designed and synthesized an Fe2Co DMC using the classical host–guest delocalization strategy. The Fe2Co trinuclear metal complex was first immobilized on a zinc-based MOF precursor, followed by pyrolysis of Fe2Co@MOF to form Fe2Co DMC. In the aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image, some paired and isolated spots were observed, corresponding to the dual iron atoms and single Co atoms, respectively, as further confirmed via EELS. The electrochemical measurements demonstrated that the Fe2Co DMC had good catalytic activity for the OER with an overpotential of 350 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is much lower than that of the Fe3 catalyst (447 mV), FeCo DMC (>480 mV) and IrO2 (420 mV).163
Besides Fe–Co, Fe–Ni DMCs have also been investigated for electrocatalytic OER. In 2018, Sun et al. prepared a series of Fe–Ni DMCs (Ni-MOF@Fe-MOF) with different Ni/Fe atomic ratios by decorating hybrid Ni-based MOF nanosheets with Fe-MOF nanoparticles for the OER. Compared with the pure Ni-based MOF, the catalytic activity dramatically increased after the introduction of Fe-MOF nanoparticles. The optimal catalytic activity was achieved with an Ni/Fe atomic ratio of 3.5/1, with an overpotential of 265 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH. This overpotential is much lower than that for Ni-MOF (370 mV) and IrO2 (365 mV). The current density of Ni-MOF@Fe-MOF was 12.8 mA cm−2 at 1.50 V (vs. RHE), which is 10-times higher than that of Ni-MOF (1.0 mA cm−2). During the OER process, NiO nanograins with the size of ∼5 nm were observed in the HRTEM image, which acted as OER active centers. The high catalytic performance of Ni-MOF@Fe-MOF is due to the synergistic effect between the Ni active centers and Fe species.164 Furthermore, Peng et al. synthesized Fe/Ni single atoms embedded in an N-doped carbon (NC) matrix (FeNi SAs/NC) by annealing FeNi-MOF with coated polydopamine (PDA), following by acid etching to remove the Fe and Ni nanoparticles, forming Fe–Ni DMCs for electrocatalytic OER (Fig. 8a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image evidenced the existence of Fe–Ni atomic pairs (Fig. 8b). The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Fe K-edge of FeNi SAs/NC in the R-space showed two strong peaks at 1.50 and 2.27 Å, which were assigned to the Fe–N and Fe–Ni bonds, respectively (Fig. 8c). XANES together with DFT calculations further confirmed an Fe–Ni–N6 structure in this heteronuclear DMC. The prepared Fe–Ni DMC exhibited a high performance for the OER, with a low overpotential of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is much lower than that of FeNi NPs/NC (290 mV), NC (350 mV) and RuO2 (310 mV) (Fig. 8d). DFT calculations further demonstrated that the Ni sites modulated the electronic structure of the Fe active center, which facilitated the four-electron transfer process and lowered the energy barrier of the RDS, thus improving the catalytic efficiency (Fig. 8e).165 Also, Duan et al. constructed an Fe–Ni dual-site catalyst via the pyrolysis of ZIF-8 containing Fe3+ and Ni2+ ions through a theory-guided atomic design and fabrication strategy. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images demonstrated the formation of Fe–Ni dual sites. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Fe displayed two main peaks at 1.52 and 2.48 Å, and these for Ni were 1.58 and 2.44 Å, implying the co-existence of Fe–N, Ni–N and Fe–Ni bonds. The obtained Fe–Ni DMC exhibited excellent OER activity with an overpotential of 395 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is superior to that for Fe and Ni MMCs. DFT calculations revealed that the activation of OH* and O* occurs on the Fe and Ni sites, respectively, and the synergistic effect between Fe and Ni regulates the OOH* formation energy of the RDS, thus facilitating the OER process.166
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of FeNi SAs/NC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of FeNi SAs/NC. (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of the Fe K-edge of FeNi SAs/NC, FeNi NPs/NC, Fe foil, and Fe2O3. (d) OER LSV curves of FeNi SAs/NC, FeNi NPs/NC, NC, and Pt/C in 1.0 M KOH. (e) Free energy diagrams of different OER intermediates OH*, O*, and OOH* at 1.50 V. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
Other Fe-based DMCs were also developed for electrochemical OER. Wang et al. constructed an ultrathin 2D Fe–Mn DMCs by pyrolysis of ZIF-8 encapsulating Fe3+ and Mn2+ ions with the assistance of the KCl/ZnCl2 eutectic salt. Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM showed numerous evenly distributed bright spots, among which 62% were paired spots, corresponding to the Fe–Mn dual atoms. The Fe and Mn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra showed the primary peaks at ∼1.5 Å, which can be assigned to the Fe–N and Mn–N scattering paths, respectively. No metal–metal scattering peak was detected, suggesting the presence of atomically dispersed Fe and Mn on the 2D nanosheet. The Fe–Mn DMC showed excellent OER activity with an overpotential of 405 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is lower than that of Fe (496 mV) and Mn (525 mV) MMCs.167 In addition, Shen et al. prepared Fe- and Mo-modified Ni(OH)2/NiOOH (FeMo:Ni(OH)2/NiOOH) nanosheets grown on commercial nickel foam for the OER. FeMo:Ni(OH)2/NiOOH gave a current density of 134.5 mA cm−2 at 1.53 V (vs. RHE), which is much higher than that of Fe:Ni(OH)2/NiOOH (49.2 mA cm−2), Mo:Ni(OH)2/NiOOH (18.5 mA cm−2), and Ni(OH)2/NiOOH (12.8 mA cm−2). Furthermore, FeMo:Ni(OH)2/NiOOH only required an overpotential of 280 mV to achieve a current density of 100 mA cm−2 and maintained long-term stability over 50 h at this high current density. A series of experiment results confirmed the presence of a synergistic effect between Fe and Mo to improve both the activity and stability.168
In addition to Fe-based DMCs, Co-based DMCs have also attracted considerable attention for electrochemical OER. In 2019, Hu et al. fabricated a Co–Ni DMC by annealing a CoNi-based MOF and polydopamine, followed by acid leaching to remove Co and Ni nanoparticles. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed numerous isolated bright spots, corresponding to Co and Ni single atoms. The Co and Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra demonstrated the major peaks located at approximately 1.49 and 2.22 Å, which can be assigned to the Co–N/Ni–N and Co–Ni bonds, respectively. The resulting Co-Ni DMC displayed good electrocatalytic activity for the OER, with the required overpotential of 340 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is lower than that of the corresponding Co–Ni nanoparticles (440 mV) and IrO2 (400 mV). Experimental and theoretical investigations revealed that the synergistic effect between the Co and Ni atoms lowered the energetic barrier and promoted the reaction kinetics, thereby enhancing the catalytic activity.169 Moreover, Lou et al. prepared an atomically dispersed Ni and Co dual-site catalyst via a multi-step templating strategy for the OER. As shown in Fig. 9a, a thin polydopamine (PDA) layer was first coated on the surface of the NiCo-based acetate hydroxide precursor by the self-polymerization of dopamine. Then, the inner NiCo-precursor cores were partially etched to generate a hollow NiCo-precursor/PDA composite. Subsequently, the composite was carbonized at low temperature, and then NiCo nanoparticles were removed by an acidic solution to obtain the Co and Ni dual-site catalyst (a-NiCo/NC). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image demonstrated atomically dispersed Ni and Co atoms, in which many atomic pairs are observed, suggesting the possible Ni–Co dual-metal sites (Fig. 9b). The FT-EXAFS of Co and Ni K-edges showed that the peaks at 1.42, 1.47 and 2.23 Å are assigned to Ni–N, Co–N and Ni–Co bonds, respectively (Fig. 9c and d). The obtained a-NiCo/NC exhibited outstanding OER activity, with an overpotential of 252 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, which is much lower than that of the corresponding a-Ni/NC (333 mV) and a-Co/NC (354 mV) single-atom catalysts, as well as NiCo nanoparticles (312 mV) and RuO2 (358 mV) (Fig. 9e). It also showed long-term durability over 150 h. DFT calculations demonstrated that the strong synergistic interaction between the Ni and Co sites lowered the reaction energy barrier, thus boosting the catalytic activity (Fig. 9f and g).170
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of a-NiCo/NC by multi-step templating strategy. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of a-NiCo/NC. FT-EXAFS spectra of Co (c) and Ni (d) K-edges of a-NiCo/NC. (e) LSV plots of a-NiCo/NC, a-Ni/NC, a-Co/NC, NiCo and RuO2. (f) Free energy diagram of a-NiCo/NC, a-Ni/NC, and a-Co/NC for the OER. (g) Optimized OER catalytic pathways of a-NiCo/NC. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2022. 
Besides transition metals, a variety of noble metal iridium-based DMCs have also been developed for electrocatalytic OER. For example, Wang et al. synthesized an Ir–Co DMC by trapping Ir single atoms on Co nanosheets with 1.7 wt% Ir. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed many bright spots, which can be assigned to the Ir single atoms. The FT-EXAFS of Ir L-edge in R space showed a major peak at ∼2.20 Å, which is shorter than that of the Ir–Ir bond (2.47 Å), suggesting the formation of Ir–Co bonds. The prepared Ir–Co DMC displayed good OER activity, with an overpotential of 273 mV at 10 mA cm−2, which is lower than that of Ir/C (290 mV) and Co nanosheets (393 mV). DFT calculations in combination with experiments revealed that the cooperation of Ir–Co dual sites is beneficial for stabilizing the OOH* intermediate via hydrogen bonding, thus expediting the OER process.171 Moreover, Chen et al. prepared a diatomic Ir–Co catalyst by pyrolyzing an Ir-impregnated ZnCo-ZIF under a flowing Ar/H2 atmosphere. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image demonstrated some bright dual dots, corresponding to the dinuclear metal configuration. The FT-EXAFS spectra of Co K-edge and Ir L-edge displayed major peaks at 1.44 and 1.64 Å, which can be assigned to the Co–N and Ir–N paths, respectively. The Ir–Co bond was also detected at 2.11 Å in the Ir L-edge spectrum. The Ir–Co catalyst exhibited promising OER activity with an overpotential of 330 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH, which is 69 and 47 mV lower than that of the corresponding Co and Ir MMCs, respectively, and even 21 mV more negative than that for the Ir/C benchmark. Theoretical calculations revealed that the incorporation of Ir atom modulated the Co d-orbital electron configuration, resulting in faster reaction kinetics.172
4.3 ORR
The ORR involves two types of processes, i.e., four-electron transfer to generate H2O and two-electron transfer to form H2O2.180,181 Both processes need efficient catalysts, and thus numerous heterogeneous homo- and heteronuclear DMCs have been developed.182–220

4.3.1 Homonuclear DMCs. 
In 2019, Xiong et al. designed and synthesized an Fe2 DMC via the pyrolysis of ZIF-8 containing dinuclear Fe2(CO)9 and used this catalyst for electrocatalytic ORR in acidic electrolyte. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed numerous bright paired spots, which were assigned to the Fe2 dimers. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Fe K-edge revealed a major peak at ∼1.50 Å and minor peak at 2.46 Å, which can be ascribed to Fe–N and Fe–Fe bonds, respectively. The synthesized Fe2 DMC exhibited outstanding ORR activity in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with a half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.78 V (vs. RHE), which is 65 mV higher than that of the corresponding Fe MMC.182 Furthermore, Xie et al. prepared a planar-like Fe2N6 DMC via thermal treatment of hemin molecules with the typical FeN4 structure. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed a large number of bright dots, most of which were in pairs, corresponding to Fe2 dimers. The planar-like Fe2N6 coordination structure was further confirmed via XAS. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of the Fe K-edge showed a major peak at 1.39 Å and minor peak at 2.19 Å, corresponding to Fe–N/O and the Fe–Fe shell, respectively. The planar-like Fe2N6 DMC displayed high ORR activity with E1/2 of 0.84 V (vs. RHE), which is higher than that for FeN4 MMC (0.76 V vs. RHE). It also achieved a large peak power density of 845 mW cm−2 in proton-exchange membrane fuel cell systems. DFT calculations revealed that the synergic effect between two adjacent Fe2 atoms of Fe2N6 DMC accelerated the catalytic kinetics, thereby promoting the catalytic activity.183
In addition, Xing et al. designed and elaborated three Co2N5 DMCs by pyrolyzing ZnCo-ZIF with different molar ratios of Zn/Co for the ORR. Upon the evaporation of Zn at high temperature, the optimized Co2N5 DMC exhibited bright adjacent spots in the aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image with the distance of 2.1–2.2 Å, suggesting the formation of dinuclear sites. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Co K-edge further confirmed the presence of Co–N and Co–Co bonds. The prepared Co2N5 DMC displayed excellent ORR activity with E1/2 of 0.79 V (vs. RHE), which is 12-times higher than the conventional CoN4 catalyst. Theoretical calculations revealed that the dinuclear metal sites of the Co2N5 DMC promoted the reaction of *OH → H2O, resulting in the high catalytic activity.184


4.3.2 Heteronuclear DMCs. 
4.3.2.1 Fe–Co DMCs. 
In 2017, by the pyrolysis of Co/Zn-ZIF with adsorbed Fe ions, Wu et al. obtained an Fe–Co DMC for the ORR in acidic electrolyte. Numerous evenly distributed bright dual dots were observed in the aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images, which were assigned to the Fe and Co atomic pairs. The FT-EXAFS spectra showed Fe–N, Co–N and Fe–Co scattering paths, further implying the presence of Fe–Co dual sites. The obtained Fe–Co DMC displayed a superior ORR performance with E1/2 of 0.863 V (vs. RHE), which is superior to Fe and Co MMCs. It also exhibited long-term stability over 50000 cycles for electrode measurement and 100 h for H2/air single cell operation. DFT calculations revealed that the outstanding catalytic activity of the Fe–Co DMC is due to the synergistic effect between the Fe and Co sites, which is beneficial for the activation of the O–O bond.185 Using the same strategy, Xing et al. synthesized an Fe–Co DMC (FeCoN5-OH) by pyrolyzing Co/Zn-ZIF containing Fe(acac)3 molecules (acac = acetylacetonate). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed some bright paired dots with the distance of 2.2–2.3 Å, corresponding to the Fe–Co dual-atom sites. The EELS data showed atomically distributed Fe and Co atoms located adjacent to N atoms, further verifying the presence of Fe–Co dual-atom sites. The FT-EXAFS curves of this DMC showed primary peaks at ∼1.5 Å, corresponding to Fe–N and Co–N scattering paths, and no Co–Co, Fe–Fe, and Fe–Co scattering paths were detected. The catalytic results demonstrated that FeCoN5-OH displayed excellent ORR activity with E1/2 of 0.86 V (vs. RHE), with an intrinsic activity over 20 times higher than that of the FeN4 single site. DFT calculations revealed that the electron-withdrawing OH ligand adsorbs on the Fe–Co dual centers to form triangle FeCoN5-OH sites, which tailor their electronic structure to facilitate O–O bond cleavage.186
Xu et al. fabricated another Fe–Co DMC (FeCo@C) for electrocatalytic ORR via the one-step pyrolysis of Zn-based MOF with Fe and Co ions. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping images indicated the existence of Fe and Co atomically dispersed metal sites. The Fe and Co K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra exhibited the main peak at ∼1.5 Å, corresponding to Fe–N and Co–N bonds. The absence of Co–Co, Fe–Fe, and Fe–Co scattering paths further confirmed atomically dispersed Fe and Co atoms. The obtained FeCo@C showed high ORR activities in both alkaline and acidic electrolyte. In 0.1 M KOH, FeCo@C exhibited a more positive onset potential (Eonset) and E1/2 than that of the commercial Pt/C. FeCo@C also displayed high ORR activity in 0.5 M H2SO4, which is close to that for Pt/C.187 In addition, Bu et al. proposed a “pre-constrained metal twin” strategy to construct a contiguous FeN4 and CoN4 DMC (FeCo-DACs/NC). In this work, the bimetallic phthalocyanine macromolecules (FeCoPc) were first implanted in situ in ZIF-8 to form a composite. Then, the high-temperature annealing of the composite generated the Fe–Co DMC embedded in N-doped graphitic carbon (Fig. 10a). Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images showed numerous bright spots, corresponding to Fe and Co atoms (Fig. 10b), among which some dispersed metal pairs were observed with the distance of ∼0.4 nm (Fig. 10c and d). The FT-EXAFS spectra of FeCo-DACs/NC at Fe and Co K-edges only demonstrated dominant peaks at 1.44 and 1.36 Å, which can be attributed to the Fe–N and Co–N scattering paths, and no signals of metal–metal bonds were detected, implying the atomic distribution of Fe and Co atoms (Fig. 10e and f), respectively. The resulting FeCo-DACs/NC exhibited outstanding ORR activity with an Eonset of 0.984 V (vs. RHE) and E1/2 of 0.877 V (vs. RHE), which are better than that of Fe-MMC/NC (0.943 and 0.865 V), Co-MMC/NC (0.909 and 0.822 V), commercial Pt/C (0.962 and 0.836 V) and NC (0.825 and 0.741 V) (Fig. 10g and h), respectively. Impressively, the kinetic current density (Jk) of FeCo-DACs/NC was the largest among the catalysts (Fig. 10h). Theoretical calculations demonstrated the synergistic effect between the Fe and Co atoms, which modulated the d-band center position of the metal centers and optimized the free energy of the *O intermediate, thereby resulting in improved catalytic activity.162
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration showing the construction of FeCo-DACs/NC via the “pre-constrained metal twin” strategy. (b and c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of FeCo-DACs/NC. (d) Intensity profiles obtained for two metals. FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe (e) and Co (f) K-edges of FeCo-DACs/NC. (g) LSV plots and (h) comparison of E1/2 and Jk of FeCo-DACs/NC, Fe-MMC/NC, Co-MMC/NC, Pt/C and N–C. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2022. 
Besides, Luo et al. prepared an FeCo–N-doped hollow carbon catalyst (FeCo–N-HCN) with neighbouring Fe–N4–C and Co–N4–C dual metal sites via the polymerization of pyrrole on porous FeCo oxides followed by pyrolysis. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed some bright dots of single Fe or Co atoms, among which the neighboring Fe and Co atomic pairs were also observed with the distance of ∼0.5 nm. The presence of the Fe and Co atomic pair was further confirmed via EELS because the signals for Fe (707.0 eV) and Co (798.0 eV) atoms were detected. The FT-EXAFS spectra of FeCo–N-HCN at Fe and Co K-edges showed main peaks at ∼1.5 Å, corresponding to Fe/Co–N bonds, and no metal–meal bonds were identified, suggesting that the Fe and Co atoms were atomically dispersed. The electrocatalytic results showed that FeCo–N-HCN displayed superior ORR activity with Eonset and E1/2 of 0.98 and 0.86 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH solution, which are more positive than that of Fe–N-HCM MMC (0.96 and 0.76 V vs. RHE), respectively. The enhanced catalytic performance of FeCo–N-HCN is attributed to the synergistic effect of Fe and Co dual active centers, which lowered the reaction energy barriers for the ORR.188 Fu et al. also designed and synthesized an Fe–Co DMC (Fe, Co SAs-PNCF) by pyrolyzing a mixture of Fe/Co complexes, polyacrylonitrile and ZnO nanoparticles in an N2 atmosphere. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images showed distributed Fe–Co dual-metal single atoms with a distance of 0.23 nm, as further verified via EELS. The FT-EXAFS spectra of the Fe and Co K-edges displayed prominent peaks at 1.50 and 1.30 Å, corresponding to Fe–N and Co–N coordination, respectively, and no signals of metal–metal bonds were found, implying the atomic dispersion of Fe and Co in this catalyst. The obtained Fe, Co SAs-PNCF displayed high ORR activities in both alkaline and acidic media. In 0.1 M KOH solution, the Eonset and E1/2 for the Fe, Co SAs-PNCF were 1.04 and 0.93 V (vs. RHE), which are more positive than that for Fe (1.00 and 0.89 V vs. RHE) and Co (0.96 and 0.83 V vs. RHE) MMCs, respectively. In 0.1 M HClO4 solution, the Eonset and E1/2 of Fe, Co SAs-PNCF were 0.94 and 0.0.78 (vs. RHE), respectively, which are also superior to that of Fe and Co MMCs. Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the synergistic effect of the Fe and Co single-atom sites lowered the energy barrier for O* dissociation, thus promoting the ORR activity.189
4.3.2.2 Fe–Ni DMCs. 
In 2021, Peng et al. reported the preparation of a bimetallic MOF-derived Fe–Ni DMC (denoted as FeNi SAs/NC) for the ORR. Firstly, the bimetallic FeNi-MOF was coated by polydopamine through the in situ polymerization of dopamine to form a composite. Subsequently, the pyrolysis of this composite under NH3 followed by acid etching and further annealing process generated FeNi SAs/NC. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed many bright dots, which were attributed to the isolated Fe and Ni atoms, among which some Fe–Ni atomic pairs were also observed. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of the Fe K-edge presented two strong peaks at 1.50 and 2.27 Å, and similar results were found in the Ni K-edge spectrum, suggesting the existence of Fe–N, Ni–N and Fe–Ni bonds. The prepared FeNi SAs/NC exhibited extraordinary ORR activity with Eonset and E1/2 of 0.98 and 0.84 V (vs. RHE), respectively, in alkaline media, superior to that of FeNi NPs/NC and Pt/C. DFT calculations revealed that the Fe site acts as the catalytic center to realize the ORR, and the Ni site regulates the electronic structure of Fe to reduce the energy barrier of the RDS.165 Furthermore, Lu et al. constructed an Fe–Ni DMC (Fe-NiNC) via a one-step dual-solvent ion deposition method. Specifically, the Fe(NO3)3 aqueous solution was added dropwise to the Ni-doped polydopamine n-hexane solution followed by calcination and leaching to form Fe-NiNC. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed some bright spot pairs with a distance of 0.18 nm, implying the presence of metal–metal bonds. The FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe and Ni K-edges show the main peaks at ∼1.47, 1.38 and 2.43 Å, which can be assigned to Fe–N, Ni–N and Fe–Ni bonds, respectively. The resulting Fe-NiNC displayed good ORR activity with Eonset and E1/2 of 0.86 and 0.75 V (vs. RHE), respectively, in 0.1 M KOH solution, which can be ascribed to the mutual effects of Fe and Ni for charge redistribution to facilitate the ORR performance.175 In addition, Sun et al. synthesized a bimetallic FeNi-NC catalyst for the ORR by heating a mixture of NiCl2, FeCl2, and ZnCl2 and formamide. The results of aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image and FT-EXAFS spectra confirmed the atomic dispersion of Fe and Ni atoms. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) fine scans combined with computational simulations demonstrated the strong synergistic interaction between Fe and Ni. Consequently, the FeNi-NC catalyst delivered high ORR E1/2 of 0.85 V, which is comparable to that of the Pt/C-RuO2 mixture.190
4.3.2.3 Fe–Cu DMCs. 
In 2020, Chen et al. fabricated a highly-dispersed Fe–Cu dual-atom nanozyme as an ORR electrocatalyst (FeCu-DA/NC) to mimic cytochrome c oxidase via the pyrolysis of a mixture of FeCl3·6H2O, CuCl2·2H2O, nano-CaCO3 and polyvinylpyrrolidone. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed some atomic pairs with the distance of ∼0.5 nm, demonstrating the absence of metal–metal bonds. In the FT-EXAFS spectra, only the primary peaks at ∼1.5 Å were observed for both Fe and Cu K-edges, which were assigned to the Fe–N and Cu–N paths, respectively. The resulting FeCu-DA/NC exhibited high ORR activity in both acidic and alkaline conditions. In 0.1 M KOH, the Eonset and E1/2 were 0.96 and 0.86 V (vs. RHE), which are much more positive than that for Fe (0.91 and 0.8 V vs. RHE) and Cu (0.87 and 0.78 V vs. RHE) MMCs, as well as commercial Pt/C (0.94 and 0.83 V vs. RHE), respectively. In 0.5 M H2SO4, FeCu-DA/NC also displayed a much more positive Eonset and E1/2 than Fe and Cu MMCs, and only a gap of 20 mV to that of Pt/C. The improved ORR activity of FeCu-DA/NC can be attributed to the synergistic effect between Fe and Cu, in which Fe acts as the active center to activate O2, and Cu serves as the electron donor to increase the electron density of Fe to promote O2 activation.191 Moreover, Yan et al. prepared a Fe–Cu bimetal site catalyst (FeCu–N-HC) for the ORR by pyrolyzing a mixture of pyrrole, FeCl2·4H2O, CuCl2, and SiO2 nanospheres followed by acid etching. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed some bright paired spots distributed on the carbon support with an interatomic distance of 0.24 nm, suggesting the existence of Fe–Cu atomic pairs. The FT-EXAFS spectra showed prominent peaks at 1.4 Å, 2.0 Å and 2.3 Å in the Fe and Cu K-edges, which can be ascribed to the Fe–N, Fe–Cu and Cu–Fe scattering paths, respectively. In 0.1 M KOH solution, FeCu–N-HC showed an E1/2 of 0.92 V (vs. RHE), which is much better than that for Fe (0.89 V), Cu (0.83 V) MMCs and 20% Pt/C (0.87 V). DFT calculations revealed that the elongation of the O–O bond over FeCu–N-HC favours its dissociation, thereby enhancing the reaction efficiency.192
4.3.2.4 Fe–Mn DMCs. 
In 2018, Chen et al. designed an efficient Fe–Mn electrocatalyst for the ORR via the one-step pyrolysis of ZIF-8 containing Fe and Mn ions. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and XANES results confirmed the presence of highly dispersed Fe and Mn atoms anchored on N-doped carbon. The obtained catalyst displayed high ORR activity with an E1/2 of 0.904 V (vs. RHE), which is 49 mV more positive than that of commercial 20% Pt/C. DFT calculations demonstrated that the introduction of Mn ions regulated the electronic structure of Fe active centers to lower the energy barrier of the ORR process, thus enhancing the catalytic activity.193 Moreover, Dong et al. synthesized a novel Fe–Mn DMC (Fe–Mn–N/S@mC) with atomically dispersed Fe–N4 and Mn–N2S2 sites via the thermal treatment of oleic-acid-capped Mn0.43Fe2.57O4 nanocrystals. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed many bright spots distributed in the carbon framework, corresponding to heavy Fe and/or Mn atoms. A prominent peak at 1.41 Å was observed in the Fe K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum, which was attributed to Fe–N coordination. The Mn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum showed a main peak at 1.72 Å, corresponding to Mn–N/S coordination. In 0.1 M KOH, Fe–Mn–N/S@Mc exhibited excellent catalytic activity for the ORR with an E1/2 of 0.896 V (vs. RHE), outperforming the conventional Pt/C (0.856 V vs. RHE). DFT calculations revealed that the synergistic interaction between Fe and Mn atoms lowers the energy barrier of *OH reduction, resulting in improved ORR activity.194
Besides, Zhang et al. designed and synthesized a dual-metal atomically dispersed Fe,Mn/N–C electrocatalyst via the pyrolysis of dicyandiamide, Fe–phthalocyanine complex and Mn(NO3)2 (Fig. 11a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed some bright paired spots, which were attributed to the Fe/Mn atomic pairs, and further confirmed via EELS (Fig. 11b and c). The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Fe K-edge showed two peaks at 1.4 and 2.16 Å, corresponding to the Fe–N bond and Fe–metal atomic pair, respectively (Fig. 11d). The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Mn K-edge also demonstrated Mn–N bond and Mn–metal atomic pairs (Fig. 11e). The resultant Fe,Mn/N–C displayed excellent ORR performance with an E1/2 of 0.804 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.928 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH, which is comparable to that of the commercial Pt/C (Fig. 11f). Magnetic measurements together with theoretical calculations revealed that the introduction of Mn atoms tuned the spin state of FeIII, resulting in the appropriate bond length and binding energy to stabilize the oxygen intermediate, leading to excellent ORR activities (Fig. 11g).195 Zhao et al. also prepared an atomically dispersed Fe–Mn DMC via the pyrolysis of ZnO@polydopamine containing Fe and Mn ions under an N2 atmosphere. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image illustrated a large number of bright spots on the carbon support, in which some paired dots evidenced the formation of diatomic sites. The diatomic sites were further confirmed via EELS as the Fe and Mn edge peaks at ∼650 and ∼715 eV, respectively. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of the Fe K-edge showed two peaks at 1.48 and 2.41 Å, which can be assigned to the Fe–N and Fe–Mn scattering paths, respectively. The prepared Fe-Mn DMC displayed excellent ORR activity with E1/2 and Eonset of 0.88 and 1.02 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH solution, which are much more positive than that of Fe (0.85 and 0.97 V vs. RHE) and Mn (0.74 and 0.89 V vs. RHE) MMCs, respectively. The mechanistic study demonstrated that the synergic effect of the diatomic site lowered the energy barrier of the intermediate adsorption, and thus improved the ORR activity.196
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of Fe,Mn/N–C. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Fe,Mn/N–C. (c) EELS data of Fe,Mn/N–C. (d) Fe K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe,Mn/N–C and reference samples. (e) Mn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe,Mn/N–C and reference samples. (f) LSV curves of Fe,Mn/N–C, Fe/N–C, Mn/N–C and Pt/C catalyst in 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (g) Optimized atomic structures for the main process of the ORR on Fe,Mn/N–C. Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. 
4.3.2.5 Fe–Mo DMCs. 
Li et al. constructed an Fe–Mo dual site catalyst (FeMo–N–C) by pyrolyzing FeZn-ZIF containing MoO2(acac)2 molecules. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image demonstrated some paired dots, corresponding to Fe–Mo atomic pairs, which was further confirmed via EELS. The FT-EXAFS spectra of FeMo–N–C in R space showed dominant peaks at 1.5 and 1.2 Å, which are attributed to the Fe–N and Mo–N bonds, respectively. The negligible signals for the metal–metal scattering paths imply the presence of atomically distributed Fe and Mo atoms. Consequently, FeMo–N–C delivered outstanding electrocatalytic ORR activity with E1/2 and Eonset of 0.84 and 0.98 V (vs. RHE), respectively, in 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte, which were more positive than that of its Fe–N–C single-atomic counterpart (0.77 and 0.91 V vs. RHE). DFT calculations showed that the presence of Mo modulated the electronic configuration and downshifted the d-band center of Fe, which optimized the adsorption of ORR intermediates, thereby boosting the catalytic activity.197
4.3.2.6 Co–Ni DMCs. 
In 2019, Hu et al. reported the synthesis of an atomically dispersed bimetallic Co–Ni site catalyst (CoNi-SAs/NC) by pyrolyzing dopamine-coated CoNi-MOF for the ORR. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and elemental mapping images demonstrated the presence of isolated Co and Ni atoms. The FT-EXAFS spectra of the Co and Ni K-edges showed major peaks at ∼1.5 Å, corresponding to the Co–N and Ni–N paths, respectively. In addition, a weak peak at ∼2.22 Å was also observed, which can be attributed to the diatomic Co–Ni coordination. In 0.1 M KOH solution, CoNi-SAs/NC displayed outstanding ORR activity with E1/2 and Eonset of 0.76 and 0.88 V (vs. RHE), which are comparable to that of commercial Pt/C (0.82 and 0.90 V vs. RHE), respectively. DFT calculations demonstrated that the synergistic effect between neighboring Co and Ni can lower the energetic barrier and promote the reaction kinetics, thus substantially enhancing the catalytic performance.169 Furthermore, Pan et al. synthesized a Co-Ni DMC (NiCo DASs/N–C) featuring the proximity electronic effect (PEE) by pyrolyzing NiCo@ZIF-8 precursor to synergistically promote the ORR. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed many paired bright spots, suggesting that Co and Ni atomic pairs exist in NiCo DASs/N–C. The distance between the Co–Ni pairs is ∼6.4 Å, indicating the dispersion of Co–Ni diatomic sites. According to the Co K-edge FT-EXAFS curve, a main peak at 1.5 Å was observed in R space, corresponding to Co–N coordination. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Ni K-edge presented a main peak at 1.31 Å, which was assigned to Ni–N coordination. No peak corresponding to metal–metal coordination was observed, indicating the presence of the atomically dispersed Co and Ni atoms. The catalytic results demonstrated that NiCo DASs/N–C exhibited outstanding E1/2 of 0.880 and 0.754 V (vs. RHE) in alkaline and acidic solution, which are much higher than that of single-metal Ni (0.716 and 0.618 V vs. RHE) and Co (0.746 and 0.661 V vs. RHE) catalysts, respectively. The in situ characterization and theoretical calculation results indicated that the Co atom served as the active site for O2 adsorption–activation, and the adjacent Ni site acted as a modulator to promote *OH and *H adsorption on the Co site, thus significantly boosting the ORR activity.198
4.3.2.7 Co/Cu–Zn DMCs. 
In 2018, Sun et al. fabricated a bimetallic Co–Zn site catalyst (Zn/CoN–C) via the pyrolysis of a mixture of chitosan, ZnCl2 and Co(CH3COO)2, followed by acid etching and annealing process (Fig. 12a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed a large number of bright spots on the carbon support, among which some paired bright spots were observed with the distance of ∼0.22 nm, corresponding to the Co–Zn atomic pairs (Fig. 12b and c). The Co K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum of Zn/CoN–C showed two main peaks at 1.4 and 2.1 Å, which can be attributed to the Co–N and Co–metal coordination, respectively (Fig. 12d). In the Zn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum, two primary peaks at 1.44 and 2.1 Å were detected, corresponding to Zn–N and Zn–metal coordination, respectively (Fig. 12e). These results indicate the existence of the Co–Zn bond in Zn/CoN–C. As shown in Fig. 12f, the prepared Zn/CoN–C exhibited excellent ORR activity with the E1/2 of 0.861 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH solution, superior to that of CoN–C (0.793 V vs. RHE) and ZnN–C (0.706 V vs. RHE) MMCs, as well as Pt/C (0.825 V vs. RHE). DFT calculations demonstrated that the bimetallic Co and Zn with N sites could enhance the binding ability of O2 and elongate the O–O bond from 1.23 to 1.42 Å, thereby promoting the cleavage of the O–O bond. The assembled zinc–air battery with Zn/CoN–C as the cathode catalyst delivered the maximum power density of 230 mW cm−2 in 6 M KOH electrolyte, which outperformed its Pt/C counterpart (201 mW cm−2) (Fig. 12g).199
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of Zn/CoN–C. (b and c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Zn/CoN–C. FT-EXAFS spectra of Co (d) and Zn (e) K-edges of Zn/CoN–C. (f) LSV plots of Zn/CoN–C, CoN–C, ZnN–C and Pt/C. (g) Polarization and power density curves of assembled zinc-air battery over Zn/CoN–C and Pt/C as ORR catalyst in 6 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019. 
Moreover, Yang et al. constructed a non-precious-metal-based ORR catalyst (Co/Zn–NCNF) for the ORR with Co–Zn dual active sites via electrospinning, carbonization and post-treatment. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed paired bright dots with a distance of ∼0.23 nm, suggesting the formation of Co–Zn dual sites. In the FT-EXAFS spectra, the Co and Zn K-edges in R spaces showed main peaks at 1.40 and 1.44 Å, which were attributed to the Co–N and Zn–N scattering paths, respectively. The ORR catalytic activity of Co/Zn-NCNF indicated E1/2 and Eonset of 0.797 and 0.997 V (vs. RHE), respectively, in 0.1 M HClO4 solution, outperforming the Co and Zn MMC comparison samples, and only 41 mV more negative than that for commercial Pt/C. DFT calculations revealed that the presence of Co–Zn dual sites lowered the dissociation barrier of the *OOH intermediate, thus improving the ORR activity.200 Besides, Fu et al. constructed a bimetallic single-atom catalyst (Cu/Zn-NC) with Zn–N4 and Cu–N4 by directly pyrolyzing the CuZn-ZIF precursor. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image demonstrated numerous bright spots, which were attributed to atomically dispersed Cu or Zn on the carbon substrate. The FT-EXAFS spectra of Cu and Zn K-edges showed the primary peaks at ∼1.50 and 1.44 Å, corresponding to the Cu–N and Zn–N scattering paths, respectively. No signals of metal–metal bonds were observed, further verifying the atomic dispersion of Cu and Zn atoms in Cu/Zn-NC. The catalytic results of the ORR demonstrated that Cu/Zn-NC displayed an Eonset of 0.98 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, superior to that for Zn (0.86 V vs. RHE) and Cu (0.89 V vs. RHE) MMCs, and similar to that for Pt/C (0.99 V vs. RHE). Operando XANES analyses and DFT calculations revealed that the presence of the Zn atom regulated the d-orbital electron distribution of the Cu active center to promote the cleavage of O–O on the Cu site, thus accelerating the ORR process.201
4.3.2.8 Pt–Fe/Co DMCs. 
In addition to transition metals, some noble-metal-based DMCs have been also constructed for electrocatalytic ORR. For example, Yu et al. prepared a Pt single-atom-grafted Fe–N–C electrocatalyst (Pt1@Fe–N–C) with Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4 active moieties by stirring Fe–N–C powder in H2PtCl6 solution. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image clearly revealed many bright dots, which were attributed to Fe, Pt atoms or Fe/Pt atomic pairs, suggesting the presence of atomically dispersed Fe and Pt atoms. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Fe K-edge demonstrated two main peaks at 1.6 and 1.2 Å, corresponding the Fe–N and Fe–O scattering paths, respectively. The FT-EXAFS data of Pt showed a major peak at 1.6 Å, which can be assigned to the Pt–O scattering path. No metal–metal scattering path was detected in the FT-EXAFS spectra, implying the atomically dispersed Fe and Pt, and the possible Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4 active moieties in Pt1@Fe–N–C. The resulting Pt1@Fe–N–C with 2.1 wt% Pt exhibited outstanding ORR activity in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution with Eonset and E1/2 of 0.93 and 0.80 V (vs. RHE), respectively. The assembled half-cell with Pt1@Fe–N–C as the optimized cathode catalyst displayed a high current density of 280 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V (vs. RHE), which is higher than that of Fe–N–C (211 mA cm−2) and 20% Pt/C (193 mA cm−2). DFT calculations revealed the existence of synergy in the Pt1–O2–Fe1–N4 active moiety, which accelerated the kinetics of proton adsorption and reduction.202 Furthermore, Zou et al. constructed a Pt–Fe DMC (Pt1–Fe/Fe2O3) by loading atomic Pt on α-Fe2O3 (012) facets with 0.13 wt% Pt. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image clearly revealed individual Pt atoms dispersed on Fe2O3. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Pt L3-edge showed two primary peaks at 1.8 and 2.4 Å, which can be attributed to the Pt–O and Pt–Fe contributions, respectively. The catalytic results of the ORR showed that Pt1–Fe/Fe2O3 exhibited a high Eonset and E1/2 of 1.15V and 1.05V (vs. RHE), respectively, in 0.1 M KOH solution, which is superior to that for Fe2O3(012) (Eonset = 0.78V vs. RHE). In addition, Pt1–Fe/Fe2O3 displayed high mass activity of 14.9 A mg−1Pt at 0.95 V (vs. RHE) and stability over 50000 cycles. The outstanding catalytic activity of Pt1–Fe/Fe2O3 was ascribed to the fact that the Pt–Fe pair sites can cooperatively adsorb O2 and dissociate the OO bond, and the key OH* intermediate desorbs over the Pt site.203 In addition, Yao et al. prepared an atomic Pt–Co nitrogen–carbon-based catalyst (A-CoPt-NC) with a Pt content of 0.16 wt% by calcining Co-MOF, followed by electrochemical activation with a Pt wire as the counter electrode. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image clearly showed atomic Pt/Co metals trapped in a vacancy-type defect. The results of the XANES analysis demonstrated that atomic Co–Pt–N–C configurations with Co–N and Pt–N bonds. A-CoPt-NC exhibited high activity for the ORR with an E1/2 of 0.96V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, which is 90 mV superior to that of Pt/C. The ORR mass activity of A-CoPt-NC was 45.47 A mg−1, which is 267 times higher that of the commercial Pt/C. DFT calculations revealed that this high activity can be attributed to the charge redistribution and d orbital shift induced by the synergistic effect of the Pt–Co atomic pair.204
4.3.2.9 Pd–Mo DMCs. 
Using a one-pot wet-chemical approach, Guo et al. prepared a PdMo bimetallene catalyst with excellent ORR performance. The PdMo bimetallene possessed a morphology of two-dimensional nanosheets, with an average thickness of 0.88 nm, as identified via HAADF-STEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The PdMo bimetallene had a large electrochemically active surface area and high atomic utilization, which resulted in high mass activity for the ORR, with the value reaching as high as 16.37 A mg−1Pd at 0.9 V (vs. RHE). This mass activity was 78 and 327 times higher than that of the commercial Pt/C and Pd/C catalysts, respectively. Moreover, the ORR polarization curves showed that PdMo bimetallene/C had an E1/2 of 0.95 V in 0.1 M KOH, which is higher than that for the commercial Pt/C (0.85 V) and Pd/C (0.84 V). DFT calculations revealed that the higher mass activity of PdMo could be ascribed to the cooperative catalysis. Specifically, in PdMo bimetallene, there is substantial charge transfer from Mo to Pd, which makes the Pd d-band center shift towards negative energy. The downshift of the d-band center shifts the oxygen binding energy towards the optimal value. The alloying effect, together with the strain effect and quantum size effect, contributed to the enhanced ORR activity of PdMo bimetallene.205

4.4 CO2RR
Many strategies have also been developed to design and synthesize heterogeneous DMCs to achieve photo- and electrocatalytic CO2RR.221–276 However, more examples have been reported for the latter.

4.4.1 Photocatalysis. 
4.4.1.1 Homonuclear DMCs. 
Encouraged by the successful work on designing homogeneous DMCs for synergistic photocatalytic CO2 reduction, we further prepared two types of ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) Ni-based metal–organic layers (MOLs) with rich (010) crystal facets (Ni-MOL-010) and (100) crystal facets (Ni-MOL-100) exposed for photocatalytic CO2RR (Fig. 13a). Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) showed clear diffraction spots along the [010] and [100] zone axes for Ni-MOL-010 and Ni-MOL-100, indicating their exposed (010) and (100) facets (Fig. 13b and d), respectively. The HRTEM images clearly revealed (001)/(100) and (010)/(001) crystal lattice fringes for Ni-MOL-010 and Ni-MOL-100, respectively, further confirming that the main crystal facets are (010) and (100) (Fig. 13c and e), respectively. The photocatalytic results demonstrated that Ni-MOL-100 displayed a 2.5-fold improvement in catalytic activity for CO2 reduction to CO with respect to that of Ni-MOL-010 (Fig. 13f). The enhanced catalytic performance of Ni-MOL-100 was attributed to the synergistic catalysis between two neighboring Ni sites with a close separation distance of 3.50 Å on the surface of Ni-MOL-100, which lowered the rate-determining free-energy change (ΔG) value for photocatalytic CO2-to-CO conversion, as revealed by the theoretical calculations.221 Moreover, Kim et al. synthesized a series of Co DMCs with different Co contents by pyrolyzing a mixture of melamine, cyanuric acid and cobalt chloride for photo-driven CO2RR. Co DMC-3.5 (3.5% Co atoms) was used as an example, where its aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed numerous bright spot pairs, which were assigned to the diatomic Co2 sites. The FT-EXAFS spectra revealed Co–N and Co–Co shells in Co DMC-3.5. According to the FT-EXAFS fitting results, each Co atom is coordinated by three N atoms, and two adjacent Co atoms are connected through Co–Co bonding. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between the diatomic Co2 sites, Co DMC-3.5 showed excellent catalytic activity for the CO2RR with a CH4 selectivity of 65.0%, which is superior to that of the single-atomic Co counterpart. Theoretical calculations disclosed that the diatomic Co2 sites could help better stabilize the rate-limiting COOH* intermediate than the single-atomic Co site, which accounts for the high catalytic performance.222
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of bulky Ni-MOF, Ni-MOL-010, and Ni-MOL-100. (b) SAED pattern and (c) HRTEM image for Ni-MOL-010. (d) SAED pattern and (e) HRTEM image for Ni-MOL-100. (f) CO and H2 production rates over a bulky Ni-MOF, Ni-MOL-010, and Ni-MOL-100 photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
4.4.1.2 Heteronuclear DMCs. 
The heteronuclear bimetallic active sites in heterogeneous catalysts can also exhibit synergistic effects to give rise to high photocatalytic activity for the CO2RR. For instance, Cu and Ni dual-metal sites were successfully incorporated in a robust MOF (MOF-808) to yield a bioinspired MOF-808-CuNi photocatalyst for CO2-to-CH4 conversion, as reported by Zhong et al. (Fig. 14a). The XANES results demonstrated that both Cu and Ni species are in their single-site forms and four-coordinated with two N and two O atoms from flexible ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). The obtained MOF-808-CuNi resulted in a high CH4 production rate of 158.7 μmol g−1 h−1 and selectivity of 97.5%, which are higher than that of the corresponding MOF-808-Cu and MOF-808-Ni single-site catalysts (Fig. 14b and c). DFT calculations revealed that the synergistic effect and self-adaptive behaviour between Cu and Ni sites can stabilize various C1 intermediates and suppress the formation of undesired by-products, thus leading to high CH4 selectivity (Fig. 14d).82 Furthermore, Lu et al. constructed a series of NixCoy-GR composites (GR = reduced graphene oxide) with porous aerogel structures via a facile in situ growth method for photocatalytic CO2RR. After Co doping, NixCoy-GR displayed significantly enhanced catalytic activity and selectivity due to the synergistic effect of Ni–Co bimetallic hydroxide. Consequently, the Ni7Co3-GR catalyst exhibited an excellent catalytic performance with a high CO formation rate of 941.5 μmol h−1 g−1 and selectivity of 96.3% in the absence of photosensitizers.223 In addition, Li et al. synthesized a carbon nitride (CN) photocatalyst with Mn and Co double single-atom active sites (Mn1Co1/CN). In the process of the CO2RR, the photogenerated holes migrate to the Mn site to promote H2O oxidation, whereas photogenerated electrons migrate to the Co sites to reduce CO2 to CO. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between the Mn and Co active centers, the CO formation rate of Mn1Co1/CN reached 47 μmol g−1 h−1, which is higher than that of the corresponding single-metal site photocatalysts.224
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the implantation and self-adaption of flexible Cu/Ni dual-metal-site pairs in MOF-808 for highly selective CO2 photoreduction to CH4. (b and c) Time-dependent CH4 and CO evolution curves over various photocatalysts. (d) Gibbs free energy diagram for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 over MOF-808-CuNi. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. 
In addition, hetero-dinuclear photocatalysts have been demonstrated as promising candidates to work synergistically to reduce CO2 into C2+ products. For example, Guo et al. successfully prepared an atomically dispersed photocatalyst comprised of In–Cu atomic pairs anchored on polymeric carbon nitride (InCu/PCN) via a facile thermal polymerization approach for photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CH3CH2OH. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed a number of paired bright and dark spots, which were identified as Cu (dark) and In (bright) atoms. The FT-EXAFS spectra showed Cu–N and In–N scattering paths. The results of the EXAFS fittings revealed that each Cu is coordinated by three N atoms, and each In is four-coordinated by four N atoms. The Cu and In atoms are bridged via a shared N atom to form a Cu–In atomic pair. InCu/PCN exhibited excellent catalytic efficiency with a CH3CH2OH production rate of 28.5 μmol g−1 h−1 and selectivity of 92%. Experimental investigation combined with DFT calculations revealed that the electronic structure of Cu was tuned by the introduction of In to facilitate the adsorption of *CO intermediates and lower the energy barrier for C–C coupling, thus further promoting the formation of CH3CH2OH.225 Moreover, Yu et al. prepared a TiO2-based photocatalyst involving asymmetric diatomic sites by replacing adjacent Ti atoms with Ni and Co atoms (NiCo–TiO2) for photocatalytic CO2 reduction into CH3COOH. The immobilization of Ni and Co single sites on TiO2 not only lowered the energy barriers of electron transfer, but also promoted C–C coupling to form CH3COOH. Consequently, NiCo–TiO2 displayed an impressive catalytic performance with CH3COOH production rate of 22.6 μmol g−1 h−1 and selectivity of 71%.226


4.4.2 Electrocatalysis. 
4.4.2.1 Homonuclear DMCs. 
The homonuclear DMCs for electrocatalytic CO2RR mainly include Fe2, Ni2, Cu2, Ag2, and Pd2 DMCs. Han et al. constructed two Fe2 DMCs (Fe2-N6-C-o and Fe2-N6-C-p) via the pyrolysis of Fe-ZIF-8 precursor under different ratios of H2 and Ar. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed numerous well-isolated atomic pairs, confirming the presence of Fe2 bimetallic sites on the support. The FT-EXAFS curves displayed a prominent peak at 1.74 Å, which was assigned to the Fe–N shell. EXAFS fittings indicated that the coordination number of Fe–N is 4 for Fe2–N6–C-o and 3 for Fe2–N6–C-p. The catalytic results showed that the optimal Fe2–N6–C-o DMC achieved excellent activity with an FECO of above 80% over a wide applied potential window from −0.5 to −0.9 V (vs. RHE), which is better than that of its Fe1–N–C MMC counterpart. The enhanced catalytic efficiency of Fe2–N6–C-o DMC is attributed to the synergistic effect on the Fe2 site, which decreased the energy gap between the antibonding and bonding states for *CO adsorption.237
Yao et al. prepared a DMC consisting of Ni2 sites anchored on N-doped carbon support (Ni2/NC) via the pyrolysis of a dinuclear Ni complex and ZIF-8. The Ni2 atomic pairs with the distance of ∼2.9 Å were identified via aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. The FT-EXAFS spectra showed two main peaks at 1.4 and 2.4 Å, corresponding to the Ni–N and Ni–Ni shells, respectively. EXAFS fittings demonstrated that the coordination numbers of Ni–N and Ni–Ni were 4.3 and 1.2, respectively, suggesting that each Ni atom in Ni2/NC is five-coordinated by four N atoms and one neighboring Ni atom. The obtained Ni2/NC showed excellent activity and stability in the electrocatalytic CO2RR. The FECO was 94.3% at the current density of 150 mA cm−2, which is ∼1.3-fold higher than that of the corresponding Ni1/NC MMC. Moreover, the FECO was maintained at 91% after 50 h continuous electrolysis at −0.6 V (vs. RHE). Theoretical simulations revealed that the formation of the O–Ni2–N6 structure in Ni2/NC could help lower the energy barrier for the activation of CO2 in the COOH* intermediate, thus explaining its high catalytic activity.83 Moreover, Zhang et al. constructed a Ni2 DMC by using a two-step method for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. Firstly, nickel acetylacetonate (Ni(acac)2) was introduced in a solution of polyacrylonitrile/polystyrene (PAN/PS) to prepare PAN/PS/Ni(acac)2 fibers via the electrospinning method. Upon pyrolysis in N2, the PAN/PS/Ni(acac)2 fibers were transformed into Ni2 DMC with dinuclear nickel bridging structures (Ni2–N4–C2), as confirmed by EXAFS results. This unique bridging structure could effectively tune the electronic structure of the d-states in Ni2–N4–C2 to promote the favored reduction of CO2 into CO. Consequently, the FECO over Ni2–N4–C2 was >87.0% over a wide potential range from −0.6 to −1.0 V (vs. RHE), with the maximum FECO of 96.6% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE), which is much higher than that for Ni–N3–C MMC.238
Besides, we designed and synthesized a series of Ni2 DMCs (Ni2–NxCy) with modulated electronic structures of Ni atoms for CO2 electroreduction. A dinuclear Ni complex, carbon black and dicyandiamide were pyrolyzed in an Ar atmosphere at different temperatures, producing three Ni2 DMCs with different N and C coordination numbers (namely, Ni2–N7, Ni2–N5C2 and Ni2–N3C4) (Fig. 15a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images clearly revealed many paired bright dots with a distance of ∼3.1 Å, which were assigned to dual Ni atoms (Fig. 15b and c). XPS combined with Ni K-edge XANES spectra showed that the valence states of Ni in these Ni2 DMCs could be tuned via coordination environment engineering (Fig. 15d). The FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni2–N5C2 and Ni2–N3C4 presented Ni–N and Ni–C scattering paths, whereas only the Ni–N scattering path was identified for Ni2–N7 (Fig. 15e). The EXAFS fittings showed that each Ni atom in Ni2–N7, Ni2–N5C2 and Ni2–N3C4 is coordinated by four, three and two N atoms, respectively. The catalytic results demonstrated that Ni2–N3C4 with the lowest N coordination number displayed the highest performance for CO2 reduction into CO, in contrast to Ni2–N7, Ni2–N5C2 and the corresponding Ni–N2C2 MMC (Fig. 15f). At −0.88 V (vs. RHE), the FECO of Ni2–N3C4 was 98.9% (Fig. 15g). DFT calculations revealed that the significantly improved catalytic activity of Ni2–N3C4 is attributed to the electronic structure modulation of the Ni centers to induce proper binding energies for the COOH* and CO* intermediates.239
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of Ni2 DMC catalysts via one-step pyrolysis strategy for CO2 electroreduction to CO. (b and c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Ni2–N3C4, showing Ni2 species highlighted by red circles. (d) Ni K-edge XANES spectra of Ni2–NxCy, Ni–N2C2, Ni foil and NiO. (e) FT-EXAFS spectra at R space of Ni2–NxCy, Ni–N2C2 and Ni foil. (f) LSV curves and (g) FEs for CO at different applied potentials for Ni2–NxCy and Ni–N2C2. Reproduced from ref. 239 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2022. 
Copper is a special catalyst for electrocatalytic CO2RR, given that it can help reduce CO2 into a diverse range of products, in particular, C2+ products. In 2019, Chen et al. fabricated a Cu2 DMC by anchoring atom-pair sites (Cu-APC) on Pd10Te3 alloy nanowires. The experimental and theoretical data demonstrated that the Cu in the Cu-APC sample (0.10% Cu loading) is atomically dispersed and partially oxidized to Cux+ to form Cu4–Ox structures. In this configuration, one Cu atom binds with O to form Cu1x+, which further links with the adjacent Cu atom to generate a stable Cu01–Cu1x+ atom pair. The other two Cu atoms in the Cu4 cluster are accommodated in the defects on nanowires to stabilize the Cu01–Cu1x+ atom pair. The results of electrocatalytic CO2RR showed that the Cu2 DMC exhibited excellent activity with the FECO of 92% at −0.78 V (vs. RHE), which is 6.57-times higher than that of undoped Pd10Te3 nanowires (14%). During the CO2RR, Cu01 adsorbs one CO2, while the neighbouring Cu1x+ binds one H2O to form O–H⋯O hydrogen bond interaction with the oxygen of CO2, thus promoting CO2 activation and conversion.84 Lan et al. synthesized two stable Cu-based coordination polymers (NNU-32 and NNU-33(S); S = sulfate radical), which displayed high selectivity for electrochemical CO2-to-CH4 conversion because of the intramolecular cuprophilic interactions. Single-crystal XRD revealed that NNU-32 contained octanuclear copper clusters with two cuprophilic interactions, and NNU-33(S) featured a cuprophilic interaction in octanuclear copper clusters. Moreover, during the electrocatalytic process, NNU-33(S) would be transformed into NNU-33(H), which contained four cuprophilic interactions. Consequently, NNU-33(H) with enhanced cuprophilic interactions exhibited an improved catalytic performance with an FECH4 of 82% at −0.9 V (vs. RHE), in contrast to NNU-32 (55.1% at −1.0 V vs. RHE). DFT calculations confirmed that the cuprophilic interaction effectively promoted the CO2-to-CH4 conversion by lowering the free energy of the RDS.240
Cu-based electrocatalysts can reduce CO2 to C2+ products because Cu has moderate affinity to CO for promoting C–C coupling. Zhang et al. synthesized three isoreticular Cu-based MOFs with different functional groups on the organic ligands via the solvothermal reaction of Cu2O and dialkyl-1,2,4-triazoles, in which the Cu(I) ions were trigonally bridged to form dimers with a Cu–Cu distance of 3.4 Å. The results of electrocatalytic CO2RR showed that all three MOFs can help reduce CO2 into C2H4, among which the MOF with ethyl groups achieved the highest FEC2H4 of 51.2% ± 2.3% at −1.3 V (vs. RHE). Theoretical calculations demonstrated that the synergetic effect between the two adjacent Cu(I) ions facilitated C–C coupling for the formation of C2H4.241 Similar results were also reported by Zhang et al. They constructed ultrathin boron imidazolate layers with Cl−-bridged dinuclear copper units (BIF-102NSs) for electrochemical CO2RR. The catalytic results showed that BIF-102NSs exhibited higher activity for CO2 reduction into C2H4 than its corresponding single-metal counterparts. Experimental observations combined with DFT calculations revealed that the enhanced catalytic activity is attributed to the cooperative nature of the Cu2 dual-metal sites.242
In addition, Lan et al. designed and synthesized a series of Cu-based single-chain catalysts (Cu-PzX; X = H, Cl, Br, I; Pz = pyrazole) with different halogen atoms on the pyrazole ligands for electrochemical CO2RR (Fig. 16a). The delicate variation in the ligands in these compounds resulted in different distances (from 3.57 to 3.63 Å) and dihedral angles (from 74.48° to 70.87°) in the contiguous active Cu sites, further giving rise to different synergistic effects on the Cu diatomic sites. Among the catalysts, Cu-PzH displayed the highest performance for the reduction of CO2 into C2H4, with an FEC2H4 of 60% and a large current density of 346.46 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V (vs. RHE, Fig. 16b). DFT calculations demonstrated that Cu-PzH exhibited the most negative d-band center, suggesting the strongest interaction between catalytic active sites and the key reaction intermediates, which is beneficial for C–C coupling (Fig. 16c). Moreover, Cu-PzH displayed an enhanced synergistic effect on the Cu diatomic sites to promote C–C coupling compared with the other compounds because of the shortest Cu–Cu distance (Fig. 16d). Liao et al. also synthesized a stable π–π stacking Cu-based framework with pyrazolate-bridged Cu diatomic sites for electrochemical CO2 reduction. The result of single-crystal XRD showed that the Cu–Cu distance is 3.52 Å, and the diatomic sites may serve as active sites for CO2 reduction into multi-carbon products. As expected, this Cu-based catalyst showed an excellent performance for CO2 reduction into C2+ products with a total FE of 73.7% ± 2.8% [i.e., ethylene (44%), ethanol (21%), acetate (4.7%), and propanol (4%)] at −1.3 V (vs. RHE). The control experiments and DFT calculations revealed that the synergistic effect between the active Cu site and intramolecular triazole protons could facilitate C–C coupling, leading to high catalytic activity.243
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the different selectivities of Cu-PzX (where X = H, Cl, Br, I) for electrocatalytic CO2RR. (b) FEs for different products over Cu-PzX at different applied potentials. (c) Partial density of states (PDOS) of Cu 3d for Cu-PzX. (d) Important parameters and RDS of optimized Cu-PzX structure. Reproduced from ref. 243 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
Noble-metal DMCs have also been reported for electrocatalytic CO2RR with the DMSC effect. In 2020, Zhou et al. prepared a diatomic Ag2/graphene catalyst (Ag2–G) via the temperature-programmed pyrolysis of dinuclear Ag complex and graphene, in which AgN3–AgN3 diatomic sites were anchored on the graphene support by Ag–C bonds. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed that the Ag–Ag distance in Ag2–G is about 0.35 nm, consistent with that in the dinuclear Ag complex. Ag2–G catalyzed the CO2RR at a potential of −0.25 V (vs. RHE) and showed a superior FECO of 93.4% with a current density of 11.87 mA cm−2 at −0.7 V (vs. RHE), which is much better than that of its single-atom Ag1/graphene counterpart. DFT calculations revealed that the diatomic Ag2 site in Ag2–G could aid in the formation of the COOH* intermediate of the RDS, thus explaining its excellent catalytic activity.80
Besides Ag2 DMCs, Pd2 DMCs have also been constructed to synergistically catalyze the CO2RR. For example, Wang et al. synthesized a Pd2 DMC via the recombination of a dinuclear Pd complex and acetylene black via anion replacement deposition–precipitation method. The experimental characterization of HAADF-STEM, XPS and XAFS demonstrated that the Pd species in Pd2 DMC has a PdN2O2 coordination structure, consistent with the precursor. The obtained Pd2 DMC exhibited superior activity for the reduction of CO2 into CO with an FECO of 98.2% at −0.85 V (vs. RHE), surpassing the Pd1 MMC. DFT calculations demonstrated that the Pd2 DMC shows a moderate CO* adsorption strength, thus promoting CO production.244
4.4.2.2 Heteronuclear DMCs. 
Several studies on heterogeneous heteronuclear DMCs for electrocatalytic CO2RR have emerged during the past decade. In 2019, Zhao et al. synthesized an Fe–Ni DMC via the pyrolysis of Fe- and Ni-doped ZIF-8 at 1000 °C under an Ar atmosphere. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed many dual dots, which were assigned to the Fe–Ni diatomic sites. The EXAFS spectra of Fe–Ni DMC presented Fe–N, Ni–N and Fe–Ni scattering paths. The EXAFS fitting results demonstrated that both Fe and Ni are coordinated with three N atoms. The results of electrocatalytic CO2RR demonstrated that this Fe–Ni DMC exhibited high activity with an FECO of greater than 90% over a wide potential window from −0.5 to −0.9 V (vs. RHE), with the maximum FECO of 98% at −0.7 V (vs. RHE), which is much higher than that of Fe and Ni MMCs. DFT calculations revealed that the Fe–Ni diatomic centers could lower the reaction barrier for the formation of COOH* and desorption of CO* because of the synergistic effect, which accounts for the excellent catalytic performance.245 Jiang et al. developed a Zn-assisted atomization strategy to synthesize a novel Fe–Ni DMC (Fe1-Ni1–N–C) for electrocatalytic CO2RR. Firstly, the negatively charged ZIF-8 precursor was synthesized via the reaction of Zn2+ and 2-methylimidazole. Subsequently, Fe–ZnO and Ni–ZnO NPs with positive surface charges were co-assembled outside ZIF-8 through electrostatic interaction to form an Fe&Ni-ZnO/ZIF-8 composite. Finally, the direct pyrolysis of this composite generated the Fe1-Ni1–N–C DMC with neighboring Fe and Ni atomic pairs (Fig. 17a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and EELS of Fe1-Ni1–N–C clearly demonstrated the existence of Fe–Ni atomic pairs with a distance of ∼4.1 Å (Fig. 17b and c). The FT-EXAFS analysis showed the presence of Fe–N and Ni–N bonding, but the absence of Fe–Fe, Fe–Ni and Ni–Ni bonding (Fig. 17d and e). EXAFS fittings further verified that the coordination configurations of Fe and Ni are Fe–N4 and Ni–N4, respectively. The results of electrocatalytic CO2RR showed that Fe1–Ni1–N–C exhibited excellent catalytic activity with an FECO of 96.2% at −0.5 V (vs. RHE), which is higher than that of Fe1–N–C and Ni1–N–C MMCs (Fig. 17f and g). The significantly enhanced performance of Fe1–Ni1–N–C is attributed to the synergistic effect between Fe and Ni sites, which lowered the formation energy barrier of the COOH* intermediate.246
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Fe1–Ni1–N–C DMC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Fe1–Ni1–N–C DMC. (c) EELS spectra extracted from atomic pairs in (b). (d) Fe K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe1–Ni1–N–C and Fe1–N–C. (e) Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe1–Ni1–N–C and Ni1–N–C. (f) LSV curves and (g) FEs of CO for Fe1–Ni1–N–C, Fe1–N–C, Ni1–N–C, and N–C in 0.5 M KHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
Besides, Wu et al. designed and synthesized an Fe–Ni DMC for electrocatalytic CO2RR via a two-step synthesis approach. Firstly, an N-doped carbon support (ZIF-NC) was obtained by carbonizing ZIF-8 nanocrystals. Then, Fe and Ni were trapped by the N atoms in ZIF-NC to form ZIF-NC–Ni–Fe, which was further thermally activated at 900 °C under an Ar atmosphere to generate the Fe–Ni DMC. The Fe–Ni pairs were confirmed via high-resolution STEM, aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and EELS. The Fe and Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra displayed Fe–N and Ni–N coordination shells. EXAFS fittings together with DFT calculations demonstrated that both Fe and Ni were coordinated with four N atoms to generate Fe–N4 and Ni–N4 configurations, which were connected through Fe–Ni bonding and shared two N atoms. The electrocatalytic results showed that this Fe–Ni DMC exhibited excellent catalytic performance with a maximum FECO of 97.8% at −0.6 V (vs. RHE), which is higher than that of the corresponding Fe and Ni MMCs. DFT calculations further simulated three possible configurations including non-bridged (Fe–Ni)N6, 2N-bridged (Fe–Ni)N6, and 1N-bridged (Fe–Ni)N7 sites, in which 2N-bridged (Fe–Ni)N6 DMC with Fe and Ni sites bridged by two shared N atoms was predicted to have the highest activity for the CO2RR. The outstanding catalytic performance of the 2N-bridged (Fe–Ni)N6 DMC was attributed to the suitable distance between Fe and Ni, producing a synergistic effect to facilitate COOH* adsorption and CO* desorption in the CO2RR.247 Chen et al. also constructed an Fe–Ni DMC via the pyrolysis of L-alanine (an amino acid), ferric(II) acetate, nickel(II) acetate tetrahydrate, and melamine, in which the hetero-diatomic pairs were anchored on N-doped graphene. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image suggested the presence of Fe–Ni atomic pairs, which was further confirmed via EELS. The results of the FT-EXAFS spectra suggested the existence of Fe–N, Ni–N and Fe–Ni bonds, and both Fe and Ni were coordinated with four N atoms. The obtained Fe–Ni DMC displayed an outstanding electrocatalytic performance for the reduction of CO2 into CO with an FECO of 94.5% and current density of 50.4 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 0.69 V, outperforming the corresponding Fe and Ni MMCs. The advanced experiments and theoretical calculations revealed that the orbital coupling between Fe and Ni led to a higher oxidation state of the catalytic center Fe and weakened binding strength with the intermediates, thus boosting the catalytic performance.248
Fan et al. also synthesized an Fe–Ni DMC (H-NiFe/NG) with surface oxygen vacancies via a steam-assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method through a three-step procedure. Firstly, the hydrothermal treatment of ferric nitrate, nickel nitrate and graphene oxide (GO) formed a precursor solution, in which the Fe3+ and Ni2+ ions were anchored on the surface of GO. Next, this mixture was treated under NH3/Ar gas via the CVD technique to generate Fe–Ni NPs dispersed on N-doped graphene (NiFe/NG). Finally, NiFe/NG was further treated through the CVD technique under H2/H2O/Ar gas by high-temperature annealing to form H-NiFe/NG. After the introduction of oxygen vacancies, the valence states of Fe3+ and Ni2+ ions decreased to +2 and +1, respectively, which is conducive to adsorb and activate CO2. Therefore, H-NiFe/NG exhibited outstanding catalytic activity for electrocatalytic CO2RR with the maximum FECO of 94% at −0.80 V (vs. RHE), which is twice as high as that for NiFe/NG without surface oxygen vacancies. Moreover, H-NiFe/NG showed higher catalytic activity than H-Ni/NG and H-Fe/NG MMCs because of the synergetic effect between Ni and Fe. DFT calculations confirmed that H-NiFe/NG featured the lowest energy barrier for the formation of the COOH* intermediate, thus exhibiting a superior catalytic performance for the CO2RR.249
Liu et al. reported the synthesis of an Fe–Cu DMC for electrochemical CO2RR via the thermal pyrolysis of Fe- and Cu-doped ZIF-8. The Fe–Cu dual sites were confirmed by aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM given that many distinct dual dots were observed on the substrate. The EXAFS results showed that both Fe and Cu were coordinated with three N atoms to form Fe–N3 and Cu–N3 configurations, which were linked by the formation of an Fe–Cu bond. The Fe–Cu DMC could effectively help to reduce CO2 to CO with a maximum FECO of 95.5% at −0.4 V vs. RHE, which is higher than that for Fe (68.3%) and Cu (47.7%) MMCs. The significantly enhanced catalytic performance can be attributed to the fast proton and electron transfer induced by cooperative Fe–Cu and extra active pyridine N sites.250 Moreover, He et al. synthesized an Fe–Cu DMC for electrocatalytic CO2RR via an MOF-assisted approach. Firstly, the Cu2+ and Fe(acac)3 molecules were in situ-doped in the ZIF-8 framework to form an Fe/Cu@ZIF-8 composite, in which the Zn2+ nodes were partially replaced by Cu2+, and Fe(acac)3 was encapsulated in the cavities of ZIF-8. Subsequently, Fe/Cu@ZIF-8 was pyrolyzed at 1000 °C under an Ar atmosphere to obtain Fe–Cu diatomic sites anchored on an N-doped porous carbon matrix. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed many bright dual spots, suggesting the existence of diatomic sites. EELS further confirmed that the adjacent double spots were Fe and Cu atomic pairs. The XAS results demonstrated that the coordination structures of neighboring Fe and Cu sites were Fe–N4 and Cu–N3 linked by an Fe–Cu bond. Electrochemical investigations revealed that the Fe–Cu DMC exhibited excellent catalytic activity with the maximum FECO of 99.2% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) and high TOF of 5047 h−1 at −1.1 V vs. RHE, which are higher than that of the corresponding Fe and Cu MMCs. DFT calculations revealed that the significantly improved catalytic efficiency of Fe–Cu DMC is due to the synergistic effect between the Fe–Cu diatomic pair, which promoted charge transfer and regulated the position of the d-band center, thus lowering the energy barriers for COOH* formation and CO* desorption.251
Besides Fe-based DMCs, Co-based DMCs have also been developed for electrocatalytic CO2RR. For example, Zhuang et al. synthesized a Co–Ni DMC (Co–N–Ni/NPCNSs) via a two-step procedure for CO2 electroreduction to CO. Firstly, porous carbon nanosheets (PCNSs) were obtained via the pyrolysis of cellulose. Then, a mixture of PCNSs, melamine and metal phthalocyanine was pyrolyzed at 1000 °C under an N2 atmosphere to generate Co–N–Ni/NPCNSs. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed numerous bright dots in the carbon substrate, among which ∼70% were pairs, suggesting the Co–Ni bimetallic sites. EXAFS showed that both Co and Ni were coordinated with four N atoms and connected through one shared N atom. The electrocatalytic results of Co–N–Ni/NPCNSs demonstrated that the FECO was 96.4% at −0.48 V (vs. RHE), which is higher than that of the corresponding Co (66.5% at −0.57 V vs. RHE) and Ni (90.7% at −0.76 V vs. RHE) MMCs. The in situ synchrotron radiation Fourier transform infrared (SR-FTIR) measurements together with DFT calculations revealed that the N-bridged Co–N–Ni bimetallic sites could promote COOH* formation and accelerate CO* desorption, thus accounting for its excellent catalytic performance.252
Wu et al. synthesized a DMC comprised of Co–Cu pairs via the pyrolysis of cobalt acetate, copper acetate, carbon black and urea under an Ar atmosphere. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images revealed many bright spot pairs on the support, suggesting the existence of Co–Cu pairs. The Co–Cu DMC was tested for electrocatalytic CO2RR. Impressively, this catalyst showed ultrahigh activity with a maximum FECO of 99.1% and CO partial current density of 483 mA cm−1 in a flow cell, which are much better than that of Co and Cu MMCs. The current density delivered by Co–Cu DMC is higher than the industrial-relevant level (>200 mA cm−2), demonstrating its potential for practical application. The excellent catalytic performance of this Co–Cu DMC is attributed to the synergistic effect between Co and Cu, which lowered the activation energy for the formation of the COOH* intermediate to promote CO production, as revealed by DFT calculations.253
Gong et al. reported the electronic effect between neighboring Co and Zn atoms in Co–Zn DMC (ZnCoNC) to facilitate electrocatalytic CO2RR. ZnCoNC was synthesized by pyrolyzing a mixture of zinc nitrate, cobalt nitrate, carbamide, and activated carbon black, followed by nitric acid treatment to remove nanoclusters. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM and DFT calculations confirmed many Co–Zn atomic pairs anchored on N-doped carbon with a distance of 0.28 nm. ZnCoNC showed an outstanding catalytic performance with an FECO of 93.2% at −0.5 V (vs. RHE), which is higher than that for Co (56.3%) and Zn (67.3%) MMCs. Theoretical calculations further demonstrated that the energy barrier for the formation of the COOH* intermediate was lowered because of the electronic effect between Zn and Co, thus accounting for the high catalytic activity.254
Ni-based DMCs for electrocatalytic CO2RR have also been developed. For instance, He et al. synthesized an Ni–Cu DMC via the one-step thermal activation of an Ni(acac)2@ZnCu-ZIF composite (Fig. 18a). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed atomically dispersed bright spot pairs, suggesting neighboring Ni and Cu atoms (Fig. 18b). EELS further confirmed the presence of Ni–Cu atomic pairs (Fig. 18c). The FT-EXAFS spectra revealed Ni–N and Cu–N coordination shells (Fig. 18d and e), and the coordination numbers of Ni–N and Cu–N were both 4. Moreover, the neighboring Ni–N4 and Cu–N4 were linked by two bridging N atoms. The Ni–Cu DMC presented a significantly increased catalytic performance for the CO2RR with respect to the corresponding Ni and Cu MMCs, with an FECO of >95% from −0.39 to −1.09 V (vs. RHE) and maximum FECO of 99.2% and CO partial current density of 29.9 mA cm−2 at −0.79 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 18f and g). DFT calculations revealed that the synergistic effect between Ni and Cu induced the charge redistribution of Ni to facilitate the formation of COOH* on Ni sites and to promote CO generation.255 Furthermore, Li et al. prepared an Ni–Cu DMC for the CO2RR via the pyrolysis of a mixture of carbon nanotubes, dicyandiamide, nickel chloride and copper chloride. The Ni–Cu DMC exhibited a high FECO of >90% over a wide potential range of −0.6 V to −0.9 V (vs. RHE), which was much more efficient than Ni and Cu MMCs. The enhanced catalytic efficiency of Ni–Cu DMC is ascribed to the synergy between Ni and Cu for promoting CO production.256
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ni–Cu DMC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Ni–Cu DMC. (c) EELS spectra extracted from atomic pairs. (d) Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Cu DMC, Ni MMC, NiPc and Ni foil. (e) Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Cu DMC, Cu MMC, CuPc and Ni foil. (f) FECO and (g) CO partial current density of Ni–Cu DMC, Ni MMC, Cu MMC and N–C. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
In addition to C1 products, Ni–Cu DMCs can also be used as electrocatalysts for the reduction of CO2 into multi-carbon products. For instance, Zhang et al. successfully decorated atomic Ni clusters on defect-rich Cu surface to form an Ni–Cu DMC for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction into C2 products. For the preparation of the Ni–Cu DMC, a defect-rich metallic copper was first synthesized by electrochemically reducing a copper sulfide layer, which was further immersed in an N2-saturated nickel nitrate aqueous solution by a coordination-enabled galvanic replacement method to produce the Ni–Cu DMC. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM revealed that Ni atoms were anchored on the surface of defect-rich Cu. The electrocatalytic results showed that the Ni–Cu DMC with an Ni/Cu ratio of 0.82% achieved a 7-fold improvement in selectivity for C2 products with respect to pristine Cu, and the maximum FE for C2 products was 62% at −0.88 V (vs. RHE). DFT calculations demonstrated that the Ni–Cu sites are preferable to adsorb and protonate CO2 to form the COOH* intermediate. Further protonation of COOH* would occur at the Ni–Cu sites to accumulate CO* for C–C coupling.257 Moreover, Hu et al. synthesized homogeneously alloyed Ni–Cu bimetallic nanoparticles (Cu0.9Ni0.1) via a non-equilibrium synthesis strategy for CO2 electroreduction into C2+ products. Firstly, the carbon nanofibers containing copper nitrate and nickel nitrate were treated with an ultrashort current pulse, which were rapidly heated to >1300 °C for only 0.2 s, and then quickly cooled to room temperature to induce the mixing of Ni and Cu atoms. The obtained Cu0.9Ni0.1 showed a high FE of ∼76% for C2+ products, which was ∼20% higher than that of pure Cu.258
Lu et al. constructed an Ni–Zn DMC by pyrolyzing a mixture of chitosan, zinc chloride and nickel chloride, which was used as an electrocatalyst for the CO2RR. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed that 76.2% of the atoms existed in the form of Ni–Zn atomic pairs with a distance of ∼0.24 nm. The XAFS profile for this Ni–Zn DMC showed that both Ni and Zn were coordinated with three N atoms, and also coordinated with each other to form an Ni–Zn–N6–C structure. The theoretical and experimental results further demonstrated that this heteronuclear coordination led to the modification of the d states of the metal atoms; hence, a pronounced synergistic effect between Ni and Zn, which induced a lower free energy barrier. Consequently, this Ni–Zn DMC showed a maximum FECO of 99% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE), which was higher than that of the corresponding Ni and Zn MMCs.259
Wei et al. prepared an Ni–Sn DMC via a two-step procedure, which displayed a synergistic effect to facilitate electrocatalytic CO2 reduction into formate (Fig. 19a). Firstly, an N-doped carbon nanosheet array attached to a flexible carbon cloth was obtained via the pyrolysis of ZIF-8 and carbon cloth. Subsequently, the modified carbon cloth was suspended in nickel nitrate and stannous chloride ethanol solution for anchoring Ni2+ and Sn2+ ions, respectively, followed by pyrolysis treatment to form the Ni–Sn DMC (Fig. 19b). The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM showed evenly dispersed bright spots, which were assigned to Ni and Sn atoms (Fig. 19c). The FT-EXAFS spectra displayed main peaks at 1.58 and 1.39 Å, corresponding to the Ni–N and Sn–N scattering paths, respectively (Fig. 19d and e). The EXAFS fitting further indicated that both Ni and Sn centers were coordinated with four N atoms to form Ni–N4 and Sn–N4 structures. The Ni-Sn DMC exhibited excellent activity with an FEformate of 86.1% at −0.82 V (vs. RHE) and TOF of 4752 h−1, surpassing the corresponding Ni and Sn MMCs (Fig. 19f and g). DFT calculations indicated that the electron redistribution of Sn caused by adjacent Ni lowered the energy barrier of the *OCHO intermediate, and thus enhanced the catalytic performance.260
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration showing the Ni–Sn DMC for synergistic electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to formate. (b) SEM image of Ni–Sn DMC nanoarray. (c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Ni–Sn DMC. (d) Sn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Sn DMC, Sn MMC and Sn foil. (e) Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Sn DMC, Ni MMC, NiO and Ni foil. (f) LSV curves and (g) formate FEs for Ni–Sn DMC, Ni MMC, Sn MMC and N–C. Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
Park et al. fabricated a Bi–In nanosphere DMC (In16Bi84 NS) via a modified polyol method assisted by top-down and bottom-up processes for electrocatalytic CO2RR. Firstly, indium metal was melted in the top-down process, and bismuth salt was reduced to generate metal bismuth. Then, the melted In droplets were fused with Bi with the assistance of polyvinylpyrrolidone to form In16Bi84 nanospheres (NSs). The mass loadings of In and Bi in In16Bi84 NS were determined via EDS analysis. The SEM and TEM images of In16Bi84 NS showed that the average size of the In–Bi nanospheres was ∼300 nm. The obtained In16Bi84 NSs exhibited excellent activity for electrocatalytic CO2RR with an FEformate of >90% over a wide potential window from −0.84 to −1.54 V (vs. RHE), with the maximum FEformate approaching 100% at −0.94 V. The superior catalytic performance of Bi–In DMC is attributed to the electronic synergistic effect between In and Bi to regulate the binding energy of intermediates, thus facilitating formate production.261
Chen et al. designed and synthesized a Bi–Sn DMC via the deposition of SnO2 nanosheets on a flexible carbon support with a hydrothermal method, followed by the electrodeposition of Bi nanoparticles on the surface of the SnO2 nanosheets. Benefiting from the active sites at the Bi–Sn interface, the Bi–Sn DMC exhibited high activity for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to formate with an FE of 96% at −1.1 V (vs. RHE), which is much higher than that for Bi and Sn MMCs. DFT calculations showed that the introduction of Bi nanoparticles upshifted both the p and d orbitals of the Sn electron states away from the Fermi level, which is conducive to stabilize the HCOO* intermediates and enhance the catalytic efficiency.262
Wang et al. prepared a series of Pd–Au DMCs for electrocatalytic CO2RR by decorating Au nanoparticles with different Pd doses. Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM, EELS and XAS characterization demonstrated that the Au nanoparticles were decorated with highly dispersed Pd atoms at low Pd doses (Pd2@Au98 and Pd5@Au95). With an increase in Pd dose, a semi-continuous Pd layer emerged (Pd10@Au90), and a Pd shell finally formed on the surface of the Au nanoparticle in the case of Pd20@Au80. The electrocatalytic results showed that all the Pd–Au DMCs could reduce CO2 to CO, among which Pd5@Au95 displayed the highest activity with an FECO of ∼80% and partial CO current density of 178 A g−1metal at −0.5 V (vs. RHE). Moreover, the catalytic performance of Pd5@Au95 was also higher than that for both pure Au and pure Pd. DFT calculations revealed that atomically dispersed Pd decorated on the Au nanoparticle surfaces lead to a lower energy barrier for CO2 activation and are less likely to be poisoned by the *CO intermediate than pure Au and pure Pd, thus achieving the highest catalytic activity.263

4.5 N2RR

4.5.1 Theoretical studies on DMCs for N2RR. 
Researchers have carried out many simulations on the activation and reduction of N2, particularly for the catalysts with dinuclear metal sites.277–291 For example, Du et al. investigated the random combination of two types of metal atoms including Fe, Co, Mo, W and Ru to form DMCs. The calculation results showed that the energy barriers of these DMCs for the N2RR are significantly decreased with respect to their mononuclear counterparts, indicating the much better activities of DMCs.277 Huang et al. surveyed over 900 candidates of homonuclear DMCs as well as their heteronuclear counterparts supported on 2D phthalocyanine (Pc), and investigated their catalytic activity for the N2RR. They found that three homonuclear DMCs and 28 heteronuclear DMCs can serve as highly active N2RR catalysts. Particularly, five systems, including Ti2–Pc, V2–Pc, TiV–Pc, VCr–Pc, and VTa–Pc, have a favourable limiting potential of −0.75, −0.39, −0.74, −0.85, and −0.47 V, surpassing most of the reported electrocatalysts under acidic conditions.278 Moreover, through first-principles high-throughput screening, Frauenheim et al. screened 23 metal centers via a “five-step” strategy (Fig. 20a), and picked Fe2/g-CN featuring a high theoretical FE of 100% and the lowest limiting potential of −0.13 V (Fig. 20b). The high activity originated from the synergistic effects of metal dimers and g-CN, providing a favourable local environment for catalyzing the N2RR. The thermodynamic results showed that the N2RR processes prefer to proceed along the mixed pathway, that is, *N2 → *NNH → *NNH2 → *NHNH2 → *NHNH3 → *NH2 → *NH3 (Fig. 20c).279
 Fig. 20  (a) Proposed “five-step” strategy for screening N2RR candidate catalysts. (b) Free energy diagrams of Fe2/g-CN, and the decomposition energy of the substrate g-CN. (c) Adsorption structures during the N2RR on Fe2/g-CN through the minimum energy pathway. Reproduced from ref. 279 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 


4.5.2 Photocatalysis. 
Inspired by nitrogenase, Jiang et al. designed a series of U(Zr–Hf)-X catalysts via the modularization of UiO-66-based MOFs containing Zr–Hf bimetallic nodes and organic ligands with different functional groups (X = –Cl, –OH or –SH) to implement visible-light-driven photocatalytic N2 fixation. The optimal photocatalyst U(Zr–Hf)-SH (Zr:Hf = 1:1) achieved the highest performance for N2 reduction into NH3, with the formation rate of 116.1 μmol g−1 h−1. The mechanism studies revealed that the high catalytic performance of U(Zr–Hf)-SH can be ascribed to the synergistic effect between Zr and Hf; specifically, Zr serves as the active site to adsorb N2, and Hf acts as an electron buffer tank to optimize the electron transfer and utilization. The –SH functional group in the organic ligand, which extended the absorption edge of the photocatalyst to the visible region, also contributed to the enhanced activity.283 Furthermore, Xiong et al. found that doping Mo species in defect-rich W18O49 ultrathin nanowires could result in an excellent photocatalyst for N2 reduction into ammonia. In Mo-doped W18O49, the Mo–W centers served as the active sites synergistically chemisorbing N2 molecules, thus facilitating N2 activation. The doped Mo species also improved the defect states in W18O49, which is beneficial for the photocatalytic N2RR. Consequently, 1 mol% Mo-doped W18O49 achieved an ammonia production rate of 195.5 μmol gcat−1 h−1, which is 7-fold higher than that of pristine W18O49.284
Jin et al. synthesized a zinc-based coordination polymer with bridging dinitrogen anionic ligands, {[Zn(L)(N2)0.5(TCNQ-TCNQ)0.5]·(TCNQ)0.5}n (NJUZ-1, L = tetra(isoquinolin-6-yl)-tetrathiafulvalene, TCNQ = tetracyanoquinodimethane), which can be used as an efficient photocatalyst for nitrogen fixation in an ambient environment without any external electron-sacrificial reagent. The secondary building units (SBUs) of NJUZ-1 consisted of two bilateral zinc centers and an end-on dinitrogen block, which were further linked by L to form a 3D framework with TCNQ guest molecules (Fig. 21a and b). DFT calculations demonstrated that the NN stretching vibration in the Zn–N2–Zn structure is at 1937 cm−1 (Fig. 21c). The Raman spectrum of 15N isotope-labelled NJUZ-1 showed a peak at 1920 cm−1, corresponding to the 15N15N stretching vibration (Fig. 21d). These results suggest the presence of a bridge-coordinated dinitrogen anion in NJUZ-1. The photocatalytic results showed that NJUZ-1 displayed an ammonia conversion rate of 140μmol g−1 h−1 in pure N2, and also achieved an ammonia yield rate of 102.40μmol g−1 h−1 in air in deionized water (Fig. 21e). O2 was the only by-product detected by gas chromatography. The control experiments and theoretical calculations showed that the active [Zn2+–(NN)–Zn2+] sites in NJUZ-1 can facilitate the formation of NH3, and the detachment of the yielded NH3 created an unsaturated reactive [Zn2+⋯Zn+] intermediate, which could be populated by N2 (Fig. 21f).285
 Fig. 21  (a) SBU of the [Zn2N2]-based NJUZ-1 coordination polymer. (b) 3D framework of NJUZ-1 1 with TCNQ guest molecules. (c) Simulated Raman spectrum of the Zn–N2–Zn structure by DFT. (d) Raman spectra of 14N-NJUZ-1 and 15N-NJUZ-1. (e) Ammonia yield rates of NJUZ-1 in deionized water saturated by pure N2, air, Ar or O2 flow. (f) Scheme of the cycling process of NJUZ-1 during the photocatalytic N2RR process. Reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2023. 


4.5.3 Electrocatalysis. 
In 2020, Liang et al. successfully confined multiple Fe and Cu atoms in the surface cavities of graphitic carbon nitride (CNT@C3N4–Fe&Cu) by annealing a mixture of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), dicyandiamide (DICY), FeCl2 and CuCl2. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed numerous compact bright spots with an average distance of 1.8–2.5 Å, suggesting the single-atom character of Fe and Cu. In the EELS spectra, two peaks appeared at ∼710 and 940 eV, which were attributed to Fe and Cu, respectively. The FT-EXAFS R-space spectra of Fe and Cu displayed metal–metal coordination, implying the existence of Fe–Fe or Fe–Cu bonds. The resultant CNT@C3N4-Fe&Cu could be used as an efficient electrocatalyst for the N2RR with an FE of 34.0% (vs. Ag/AgCl), which was higher than that of its Fe (15.3%) and Cu (22.0%) single-metallic counterparts. DFT calculations revealed that the synergistic effect between Fe and Cu could accelerate the N2 adsorption and lower the energy barrier, thereby promoting the N2RR.286 Moreover, Cheng et al. synthesized a diatomic Zn/Fe–N–C catalyst via the pyrolysis of chitosan, zinc chloride and ferrous acetate, followed by acidic etching to remove the Fe and Zn nanoparticles. Numerous bright dual dots were observed, which were assigned to Fe and Zn atomic pairs, as indicated by aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. The FT-EXAFS curves of the Fe and Zn K-edges showed Fe–N, Zn–N and Fe–Zn scattering paths. EXAFS fitting indicated a ZnFeN6 structure in the diatomic Zn/Fe–N–C catalyst. The synthesized Zn/Fe–N–C exhibited excellent activity for the N2RR with the NH3 yield rate of 30.5 μg h−1 mgcat−1 and FE of 26.5% at −0.3 V (vs. RHE), which are superior to that of Fe–N–C and Zn–N–C MMCs. DFT calculations demonstrated that the Fe atoms serve as the active centers, and the Zn atoms regulate the electronic structures of Fe to promote N2 activation and lower the reaction barrier of the RDS of *NNH formation.287
Cho et al. synthesized an FeMo-PC (PC, phosphorus-doped carbon) catalyst via one-step pyrolysis-phosphating of bimetallic FeMo-MOFs. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental mappings showed the uniform distribution of Fe and Mo in FeMo-PC. The FT-EXAFS spectrum of Fe K-edge demonstrated two main peaks centered at 1.29 and 1.71 Å, corresponding to the Fe–O and Fe–P bonds, respectively. In the Mo K-edge, three main peaks centered at 1.17, 1.57 and 2.27 Å were observed, which were assigned to Mo–O, Mo–P and Mo–Mo paths, respectively. The electrochemical N2RR tests showed that FeMo-PC achieved a high NH3 formation rate of 34.23 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 and FE of 16.83% at −0.5 V (vs. RHE), which is superior to that of the single-metal Fe-C (17.83 μg h−1 mgcat.−1; FE, 7.69%) and Mo-C (12.52 μg h−1 mgcat.−1; FE, 9.67%) catalysts.288 Furthermore, Luo et al. constructed an Fe–Mo DMC (MoFe@NG) via the pyrolysis of a mixture of glucose, dicyandiamide, FeCl3, FeCl2 and MoCl5. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images showed many bright dots anchored on the N-doped graphene support, corresponding to Fe and Mo single atoms, as further confirmed by XANES. Benefiting from the synergistic effect between Fe and Mo atoms, MoFe@NG exhibited outstanding electrocatalytic N2RR activity for the reduction of N2 into ammonia with a yield rate of 14.95 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at −0.4 V (vs. RHE) and FE of 41.7% at −0.2 V (vs. RHE). The catalytic activity of MoFe@NG was significantly better than that of Fe@NG and Mo@NG MMCs. DFT calculations demonstrated that the N-coordinated FeMo dimer in MoFe@NG is conducive to weaken the NN bond and lower the N2RR energy barrier to facilitate N2 reduction.289
Wang et al. demonstrated the theory-guided design of an MoSA-Mo2C/NCNT composite by combining Mo single atoms (MoSAs) and Mo carbide particles (Mo2C) on the same N-doped carbon nanotubes. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image showed that numerous isolated Mo single atoms were dispersed around Mo2C nanoparticles. The FT-EXAFS spectra of MoSAs-Mo2C/NCNTs and Mo2C/NCNTs displayed a dominant peak at 2.6 Å, which can be assigned to the Mo–Mo coordination. In the FT-EXAFS spectrum of MoSAs/NCNTs, a main peak at about 1.3 Å was observed, corresponding to the Mo–N/C scattering path. These results confirmed the successful formation of the desired materials. The MoSAs-Mo2C/NCNTs exhibited outstanding N2RR activity with an ammonia formation rate of 16.1 μg h−1 cmcat.−2 at −0.25 V (vs. RHE), which was 4- and 4.5-times higher than that of Mo2C/NCNTs and MoSAs/NCNTs, respectively. The corresponding FE of MoSAs-Mo2C/NCNTs (7.1%) was 2- and 7-times higher than that of Mo2C/NCNTs and MoSAs/NCNTs, respectively. The significantly enhanced catalytic efficiency of MoSAs-Mo2C/NCNTs can be attributed to the synergy of MoSAs and Mo2C, which can effectively mediate the complex multi-step N2RR processes.290 Furthermore, Chu et al. constructed a bimetallic MnMoO4/rGO N2RR catalyst via the facile microwave-assisted hydrothermal reaction of Na2MoO4·2H2O, Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O and graphene oxide (GO). The HRTEM image of MnMoO4/rGO showed an inter-planar spacing of 0.356 nm, corresponding to the (220) plane of MnMoO4. XPS analysis of MnMoO4/rGO revealed that the valence states of Mn and Mo were +2 and +6, respectively. MnMoO4/rGO presented excellent catalytic activity with the NH3 production rate of 60.3 μg h−1 mg−1 and FE of 14.7%, surpassing the corresponding Mn and Mo-based N2RR catalysts. DFT calculations revealed that the Mn and Mo atoms in MnMoO4/rGO serve as dual active centers to synergistically promote the N2RR.291
Xin et al. synthesized a Pd–Cu DMC (PdCu/NC) by pyrolyzing a mixture of Cl2H14N4OPd, CuCl2, NH2OH·HCl and glucose at 600 °C. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images showed numerous isolated bright dots anchored on a carbon support (Fig. 22a), among which some atomic pairs were observed, corresponding to diatomic Pd–Cu sites (Fig. 22b). The Pd K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum of PdCu/NC presented a main peak at 1.46 Å, which can be assigned to Pd–N coordination (Fig. 22c). In the Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum, a main peak at 1.47 Å was observed, which was attributed to Cu–N coordination (Fig. 22d). The resulting PdCu/NC could be used as an outstanding electrocatalyst for the reduction of N2 into NH3 with the high yield rate of 69.2 μg h−1 mgcat.−1, which is 4.2- and 3.0-times higher than that of Pd/NC and Cu/NC, respectively (Fig. 22e). Moreover, the FENH3 for PdCu/NC was 24.8% at −0.45 V (vs. RHE), which is 14.6- and 3.6-times that of Pd/NC and Cu/NC, respectively (Fig. 22f). DFT calculations revealed that the introduction of Cu shifted the partial density of states (pDOS) of Pd toward the Fermi level and facilitated the d–2π*coupling between Pd and adsorbed N2, thus enhancing the catalytic activity for the N2RR.292
 Fig. 22  (a) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of PdCu/NC. (b) Magnified aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of PdCu/NC, showing diatomic Pd–Cu sites highlighted by yellow circles. (c) Pd K-edge and (d) Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of PdCu/NC and reference samples. (e) NH3 yield rates and (f) FEs of PdCu/NC, Pd/NC, and Cu/NC in N2-saturated 0.05 M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 292 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
Employing DFT calculations, Zheng et al. first revealed that the adjacent Ti3+ diatomic pairs on anatase TiO2 can be used as active electrocatalytic centers for N2 chemisorption and activation. Subsequently, Zr4+ ions were doped in the TiO2 support by exchanging Ti4+ ions with Zr4+ on account of their similar d-electron configurations and oxide structures, as well as suitable sizes. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image revealed some individual Zr4+ ions, which occupied the original positions of Ti4+ ions. The Ti K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum of Zr-doped TiO2 showed two main peaks at 1.34 and 2.41 Å, corresponding to Ti–O and Ti–Ti bonds, respectively. The Zr K-edge FT-EXAFS spectrum showed only a Zr–O scattering path at 1.52 Å, suggesting the single-atomic distribution of Zr4+. The Zr4+-doped anatase TiO2 exhibited excellent activity for electrocatalytic N2RR with the ammonia production rate of 8.90 μg h−1 cm−2 and FE of 17.3% at −0.45 V (vs. RHE), surpassing that of the undoped TiO2 (1.48 μg h−1 cm−2 at −0.65 V vs. RHE). The significantly improved catalytic activity was attributed to the increased number of oxygen vacancies induced by introduction of Zr4+ ions.293 Moreover, Chu et al. constructed foordite SnNb2O6 nanosheets via the hydrothermal reaction of Nb2O5·nH2O and SnCl2·2H2O for electrocatalytic N2RR. The obtained SnNb2O6 exhibited high catalytic activity with the NH3 yield of 53.1 mg h−1 mg−1 and FE of 17.6% at −0.3 V (vs. RHE). DFT calculations revealed that the dual active centers of Nb3c and Sn4c–Nb5c dimer synergistically promoted N2 adsorption and activation and lowered the energy barrier for the RDS, thereby boosting the electrocatalytic activity.294

5. Conclusions and outlook
Herein, we reviewed the major achievements regarding dinuclear metal catalysts in five typical energy conversion reactions, that is, hydrogen evolution reaction, oxygen evolution reaction, oxygen reduction reaction, CO2 reduction reaction, and N2 reduction reaction. Particularly, we focused on the analysis of the relationship between the structures and the performances of dinuclear metal catalysts. Based on the above discussion, it can be seen that the dinuclear metal sites in catalysts with appropriate spatial separations and geometric configurations can synergistically bind with substrate molecules by coordination interactions and optimize the adsorption and stability of the reaction substrates/intermediates, thus greatly boosting the energy conversion reactions. We also delineated the synergistic catalytic mechanisms of dinuclear sites in elevating the catalytic performances.
However, it should be noted that simply bringing two metal atoms in proximity does not necessarily give rise to the dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis effect and a superior performance. In most cases, the two metal atoms need to be immobilized at an appropriate separation distance and oriented in a proper geometric configuration to exert synergistic interactions on the substrate molecules, intermediate species or products. For homogeneous catalysts, this requires the sophisticated and delicate design of the ligand structure, for which theoretical calculations such as DFT and molecular dynamics simulation can be beneficial. For heterogeneous catalysts, the relevant research is still in its infancy, and available synthesis techniques that can reliably lead to the formation of diatomic metal sites are still limited. In this regard, preparation methods based on reticular chemistry and atomic layer deposition can enable structural control at the atomic level with moderate to high precision, and thus may offer new opportunities for constructing diatomic metal sites in a predictable and controllable manner. Regarding the mechanisms of dinuclear metal synergistic catalysis in the five energy conversion reactions mentioned above, although theoretical calculations have proven to be powerful tools for deciphering the complicated catalytic pathways, experimental observations can provide more direct and convincing evidence. Therefore, the importance of in situ/operando characterization techniques is becoming prominent. Presently, these techniques include optical spectroscopy (such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy), electron spectroscopy (such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, and electron energy loss spectroscopy) and electron microscopy (such as aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy), offering new in-depth insights into the adsorption/desorption, bond cleavage/formation and proton/electron transfer during the catalytic process.
It was also concluded that although considerable progress on dinuclear metal catalysts for energy conversion reactions has been achieved, the related research is still in the early stage. Firstly, there is a lack of general methods for the synthesis of dinuclear metal catalysts with high precision, especially heterogeneous dinuclear metal catalysts. Loading dinuclear metal complex precursors on supports with a subsequent pyrolysis process is the most common method to prepare dinuclear metal catalysts; however, the pyrolysis process often leads the migration of the metal centers, and therefore the structural unit of the dinuclear metal center may be impaired and cannot be intactly inherited by the as-obtained catalyst. Consequently, besides dinuclear metal catalytic sites, mononuclear metal ones usually appear, and the metal centers may even aggregate to form metal clusters and nanoparticles. Thus, the pyrolysis conditions including the temperature and atmosphere need be finely tuned. Secondly, the precise structures of most heterogeneous dinuclear metal catalysts are difficult to be determined, given that most of them (particularly when obtained via pyrolysis) are of poor long-range order. Although the local coordination environment around the dinuclear metal centers can be inferred via X-ray absorption spectroscopy, the microenvironments around the dinuclear metal coordination structure that may directly affect the catalytic activity are unclear, hindering the identification of structure–performance relationship of catalysts at the atomic/molecular level. Thirdly, there is a lack of design principles for dinuclear metal catalysts with outstanding catalytic performance for energy conversion reactions. Limited by the unclear structures, the mechanisms of dinuclear metal catalysts for a specific energy conversion reaction are also obscure. In summary, there is still a long way to go to achieve the precise design and synthesis of dinuclear metal catalysts with high performances, well-defined structures and well-recognized catalysis mechanisms for energy conversion reactions. Nevertheless, the recent studies summarized in this review clearly evidenced that the dinuclear metal catalysts feature unique superiority for energy conversion reactions, and the development of dinuclear metal catalysts is becoming a hot research area, with more marvels to be expected.
Author contributions
The manuscript was discussed and written through contributions of all authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (2022YFA1502902), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21931007, 22071182, 22001043 and 22271218).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2158–2181 RSC .
W. Zhang, W. Lai and R. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3717–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Carrillo, J. González-Aguilar, M. Romero and J. M. Coronado, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 4777–4816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Ding, P. Cai, L. Yi, Y. Li, C. Tu, Y. Hou, Z. Wen and L. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4993–5061 RSC .
K. Matuszek, M. Kar, J. M. Pringle and D. R. MacFarlane, Chem. Rev., 2023, 123, 491–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414–1448 RSC .
X.-P. Zhang, A. Chandra, Y.-M. Lee, R. Cao, K. Ray and W. Nam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4804–4811 RSC .
X. Li, H. Lei, L. Xie, N. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 878–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, H. Liu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13174–13212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, S. Zaman, X. Tian, Z. Wang, W. Fang and B. Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 311–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Wang, W.-J. Liu, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 237–261 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3166–3180 RSC .
C. Kim, F. Dionigi, V. Beermann, X. Wang, T. Möller and P. Strasser, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805617 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, N. Wang, H. Lei, X. Li, H. Zheng, H. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 442, 213996 CrossRef CAS .
X.-P. Zhang, H.-Y. Wang, H. Zheng, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 1253–1268 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pritchard, G. A. Filonenko, R. Putten, E. J. M. Hensen and E. A. Pidko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3808–3833 RSC .
J. Li, M. F. Stephanopoulos and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11699–11702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, R. Xia and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 255–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Elgrishi, M. B. Chambers, X. Wang and M. Fontecave, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 761–796 RSC .
L. Chen, G. Chen, C.-F. Leung, C. Cometto, M. Robert and T.-C. Lau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7271–7283 RSC .
S.-T. Bai, G. D. Smet, Y. Liao, R. Sun, C. Zhou, M. Beller, B. U. W. Maes and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4259–4298 RSC .
D.-C. Liu, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, EneryChem, 2020, 2, 100034 CrossRef .
B. Zhang and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2216–2264 RSC .
K. Koshiba, K. Yamauchi and K. Sakai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4247–4251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, K. Yamauchi and K. Sakai, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 10436–10449 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cometto, R. Kuriki, L. Chen, K. Maeda, T.-C. Lau, O. Ishitani and M. Robert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7437–7440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, L. Chen, T.-C. Lau and M. Robert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7769–7773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rao, L. C. Schmidt, J. Bonin and M. Robert, Nature, 2017, 548, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, D. Joulié, D. A. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2019, 365, 367–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Pati, R. Wang, E. Boutin, S. Diring, S. Jobic, N. Barreau, F. Odobel and M. Robert, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Wang, K. Yamauchi, H.-H. Huang, J.-K. Sun, Z.-M. Luo, D.-C. Zhong, T.-B. Lu and K. Sakai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10923–10927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Wang, H.-H. Huang, J.-K. Sun, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7612–7620 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Duan, Y. Wang, M. Ahlquist and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12947–12950 RSC .
B. Zhang and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5565–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, Y. Gao, H. Chen, Z. Liu, L. Chen and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 5, 12683–12687 Search PubMed .
D.-C. Liu, H.-J. Wang, J.-W. Wang, D.-C. Zhong, L. Jiang and T.-B. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11308–11311 RSC .
W.-J. Liu, H.-H. Huang, T. Ouyang, L. Jiang, D.-C. Zhong, W. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4503–4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-C. Liu, H.-H. Huang, J.-W. Wang, L. Jiang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3435–3440 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Wang, H.-H. Huang, J.-K. Sun, T. Ouyang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1025–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ouyang, C. Hou, J.-W. Wang, W.-J. Liu, D.-C. Zhong, Z.-F. Ke and T.-B. Lu, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 7307–7311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ouyang, H.-H. Huang, J.-W. Wang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 738–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ouyang, H.-J. Wang, H.-H. Huang, J.-W. Wang, S. Guo, W.-J. Liu, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16480–16485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. M. Biesold, M. Zhang and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6914–6949 RSC .
A. Bavykina, N. Kolobov, S. Khan, J. A. Bau, A. Ramirez and J. Gascon, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8468–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Chen, T. Xiong, C. Zhou, X. Li, D. Huang, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4135–4165 RSC .
C. Tang, M. Cheng, C. Lai, L. Li, X. Yang, L. Du, G. Zhang, G. Wang and L. Yang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2023, 474, 214846 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Son, C. Pac and S. O. Kang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 4530–4544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y. Wang, H.-L. Jiang and Q. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703663 CrossRef PubMed .
R.-B. Lin, Y. He, P. Li, H. Wang, W. Zhou and B. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1362–1389 RSC .
Y. He, S. Liu, C. Priest, Q. Shi and G. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3484–3524 RSC .
W. Jing, H. Shen, R. Qin, Q. Wu, K. Liu and N. Zheng, Chem. Rev., 2022 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00569 .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
A. Arora, P. Oswal, A. Datta and A. Kumar, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 459, 214406 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. Zhou, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 683–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215–2264 RSC .
L. Tong, L. Duan, A. Zhou and R. P. Thummel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 402, 213079 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Liberto, L. A. Cipriano and G. Pacchioni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 20431–20441 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ji, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11900–11955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Wei, M. Zhang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12089–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, G. He and H. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 451, 214261 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Jin, T. Shi, M. Han, Q. Sun, Y. Lin, Z. Ding, L. R. Zheng, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13423–13429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, H. Wang, W. Luo, P. C. Sherrell, J. Chen and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rej, H. Tsurugi and K. Mashima, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 355, 223–239 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Wang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 377, 225–236 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, D. Zhu, X. Wang, Z. Su and M. R. Bryce, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 765–838 RSC .
Y. Hu, Z. Li, B. Li and C. Yu, Small, 2022, 18, 2203589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Matter, 2020, 2, 78–110 CrossRef .
K. Sonogashira, Y. Tohda and N. Hagihara, Tetrahedron Lett., 1975, 16, 4467–4470 CrossRef .
H. A. Dieck and F. R. Heak, J. Organomet. Chem., 1975, 93, 259–263 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Xue, G.-P. Yang, L.-L. Dang, L.-F. Ma, D.-S. Li and Y.-Y. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 463, 214521 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shima, Q. Zhuo and Z. Hou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 472, 214766 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, M. Li, L. Qiao and J. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8524–8536 RSC .
N. Qiu, J. Li, H. Wang and Z. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2022, 65, 3302–3323 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, A. R. P. Santiago, Y. Kong, M. A. Ahsan, R. Luque, A. Du and H. Pan, Small, 2022, 18, 2106091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y.-X. Zhang and Z. Niu, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 1908–1922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abednatanzi, P. G. Derakhshandeh, H. Depauw, F.-X. Coudert, H. Vrielinck, P. Van, D. Voort and K. Leus, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2535–2565 RSC .
S. Tian, Q. Fu, W. Chen, Q. Feng, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, W.-C. Cheong, R. Yu, L. Gu, J. Dong, J. Luo, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. Draxl, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2353 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Chen, R. Cao, Z. Pan, H. He and K. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118747 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Huang, T. Yao, J. Yang, S. Wei and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, H. Huang, W. Xue, K. Sun, X. Song, C. Wu, L. Nie, Y. Li, C. Liu, Y. Pan, H.-L. Jiang, D. Mei and C. Zhong, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, X. Liu, Z. Tao, T. Liu, T. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Shen, D. Liu, S. Wang, B. Pang, D. Wu, L. Cao, L. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Li, H. Sheng, M. Zhu and T. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 11317–11324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiao, R. Lin, S. Liu, W.-C. Cheong, C. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, J. Tang, K. Wu, S.-F. Hung, H. M. Chen, L. Zheng, Q. Lu, X. Yang, B. Xu, H. Xiao, J. Li, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 222–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fesseler, J.-H. Jeoung and H. Dobbek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8560–8564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shoji, H. Isobec, T. Nakajima and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 640, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Vincent, G. L. Olivier-Lilley and B. A. Averill, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 1447–1467 CrossRef CAS .
L. Que Jr and W. B. Tolman, Nature, 2008, 455, 333–340 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-J. Yuan, Z.-T. Yu, D.-Q. Chen and Z.-G. Zou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 603–631 RSC .
Y. Yuan, J. Yang and A. Lei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10058–10086 RSC .
N. K. Szymczak, L. A. Berben and J. C. Peters, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6729–6731 RSC .
J. Jökel, F. Schwer, M. Delius and U.-P. Apfel, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14179–14182 RSC .
T. Fang, L.-Z. Fu, L.-L. Zhou and S.-Z. Zhan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, H. Fang, H. Jing, H. Sun, H. Lei, W. Lai and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5457–5462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, N. Wang, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao, W. Ren, S. Ding, G. Xu, J. Li, U.-P. Apfel, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8941–8946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ogawa, G. Ajayakumar, S. Masaoka, H.-B. Kraatz and K. Sakai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1148–1162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ding, P. Ghosh, A. M. Lunsford, N. Wang, N. Bhuvanesh, M. B. Hall and M. Y. Darensbourg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12920–12927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Collin, A. Jouaiti and J.-P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem., 1988, 27, 1986–1990 CrossRef CAS .
N. Weder, N. S. Grundmann, B. Probst, O. Blacque, R. Ketkaew, F. Creazzo, S. Luber and R. Alberto, ChemSusChem, 2022, 15, e202201049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Zhou, L.-Z. Fu, L.-Z. Tang, Y.-X. Zhang and S.-Z. Zhan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5099–5105 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, F. Li and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2663–2695 RSC .
S. M. Barnett, K. I. Goldberg and J. M. Mayer, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 498–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Su, M. Gao, L. Jiao, R.-Z. Liao, P. E. M. Siegbahn, J.-P. Cheng and M.-T. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4909–4914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-F. Chen, Z.-Y. Cheng, R.-Z. Liao and M.-T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19761–19768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Koepke, K. M. Light, P. E. VanNatta, K. M. Wiley and M. T. Kieber-Emmons, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8586–8600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ruan, P. Ghosh, N. Fridman and G. Maayan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10614–10623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xie and M.-T. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. A. Arafa, M. D. Kärkäs, B.-L. Lee, T. Åkermark, R.-Z. Liao, H.-M. Berends, J. Messinger, P. E. M. Siegbahna and B. Åkermark, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11950–11964 RSC .
A. Dey, A. Guha, V. Kumar, S. Bawari, T. N. Narayanan and V. Chandrasekhar, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 14257–14263 RSC .
A. Petronilho, J. A. Woods, S. Bernhard and M. Albrecht, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 708–714 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Kafentzi, R. Papadakis, F. Gennarini, A. Kochem, O. Iranzo, Y. L. Mest, N. L. Poul, T. Tron, B. Faure, A. J. Simaan and M. Réglier, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 5213–5224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y.-Y. Li, J. Jiang, R. Zhang, R.-Z. Liao and M. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 5424–5432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Q. Hu, X.-J. Su and M.-T. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10481–10484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Su, C. Zheng, Q.-Q. Hu, H.-Y. Du, R.-Z. Liao and M.-T. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 8670–8675 RSC .
T. Ishizuka, A. Watanabe, H. Kotani, D. Hong, K. Satonaka, T. Wada, Y. Shiota, K. Yoshizawa, K. Ohara, K. Yamaguchi, S. Kato, S. Fukuzumi and T. Kojima, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1154–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Fan, B. Liu, M. Xue, J.-J. Wei, S.-R. Kang, H.-X. Tong and X.-Y. Yi, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 2018–2022 RSC .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jasinski, Nature, 1964, 201, 1212–1213 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. Gennari, F. G. C. Reinhard, J. Gutierrez, A. M. C. Philouze, S. Demeshko, V. Artero, F. Meyer, S. P. de Visser and C. Duboc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8244–8253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mihara, Y. Yamada, H. Takaya, Y. Kitagawa, S. Aoyama, K. Igawa, K. Tomooka and K. Tanaka, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 7508–7514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Nurdin, D. M. Spasyuk, L. Fairburn, W. E. Piers and L. Maron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16094–16105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, H. Lei, Z. Yao, J. Li, J. Lin and R. Cao, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 87–96 RSC .
A. M. J. Devoille and J. B. Love, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 65–72 RSC .
K. M. Kadish, L. Frémond, J. Shen, P. Chen, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, M. E. Ojaimi, C. P. Gros, J.-M. Barbe and R. Guilard, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2571–2582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Volpe, H. Hartnett, J. W. Leeland, K. Wills, M. Ogunshun, B. J. Duncombe, C. Wilson, A. J. Blake, J. McMaster and J. B. Love, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 5195–5207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Lei, Z. Zhang, F. Chen and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3189–3192 RSC .
S. Sinha and L. M. Mirica, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 5202–5211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oh and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2253–2261 RSC .
Z. Guo, G. Chen, C. Cometto, B. Ma, H. Zhao, T. Groizard, L. Chen, H. Fan, W.-L. Man, S.-M. Yiu, K.-C. Lau, T.-C. Lau and M. Robert, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 801–808 CrossRef CAS .
R. Giereth, P. Lang, E. McQueen, X. Meißner, B. Braun-Cula, C. Marchfelder, M. Obermeier, M. Schwalbe and S. Tschierlei, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 390–403 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Wang, J.-K. Sun, D.-C. Liu and L. Jiang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 4450–4453 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hong, T. Kawanishi, Y. Tsukakoshi, H. Kotani, T. Ishizuka and T. Kojima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20309–20317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuramochi, Y. Fujisawa and A. Satake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 705–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Matlachowski, B. Braun, S. Tschierlei and M. Schwalbe, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10351–10360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-M. Cao, H.-H. Huang, J.-W. Wang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 798–803 RSC .
D. E. Polyansky, D. C. Grills, M. Z. Ertem, K. T. Ngo and E. Fujita, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 1706–1717 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, S. S. Roy, W. C. Pitts, R. L. Nelson, F. R. Fronczek and J. W. Jurss, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 9564–9575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, Y. Yu, X. Zhou, Y. Luo and M. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 768–774 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wilting, T. Stolper, R. A. Mata and I. Siewert, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 4176–4185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, K. Zhang, Z. Liang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5658–5716 RSC .
P. L. Arnold, T. Ochiai, F. Y. T. Lam, R. P. Kelly, M. L. Seymour and L. Maron, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 654–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schendzielorz, M. Finger, J. Abbenseth, C. Wgrtele, V. Krewald and S. Schneider, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 830–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, G. Liu and L. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5192–5247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ding, F. Meng, C. R. English, M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. J. Shearer, D. Liang, A. S. Daniel, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8504–8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang, J. Liu, B. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Hua, C. Wang, Y. She, J. Yuan, H. Xu and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 895, 162290 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, J. Shen, Q. Liu, H. Tang, M. Zhang, S. Zulfiqar and C. Lei, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wei, P. Ding, T. Wang, L.-M. Liu, X. An and X. Yu, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 14669–14676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, Y. Wang, K. Wang, C. Ban, Y. Duan, J. Meng, X. Liu, J. Ma, J. Dai, D. Yu, C. Wang, L. Gan and X. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2022, 103, 107853 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Xu, D. Ding, G. Song, X. Gan, H. Li, W. Wei, J. Chen, Z. Li, Z. Gong, X. Dong, C. Zhu, N. Yang, J. Ma, R. Gao, D. Luo, S. Cong, L. Wang, Z. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Qian, H. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Mu, D. Do, B. Zhou, J. Dong, W. Yan, Y. Qin, L. Fang, R. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Zhang, J. Dong, G. Yu, Y. Liu, X. Zhang and X. Fan, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yao, P. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhao, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902449 CrossRef CAS .
B. Geng, F. Yan, X. Zhang, Y. He, C. Zhu, S.-L. Chou, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2106781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, X. Yan, C. Lang, X. Wang, D. Yang, K. Huang, S. Feng and X. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9404–9408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, J. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Guan, M. Zeng, J. Shen, J. Zou, Q. Chen, T. Wang and D. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 13727–13734 RSC .
T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, R. Si, H. Liu, N. Chen, Q. Wang, K. Adair, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Song, J. Li, M. N. Banis, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, M. Gu, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4936 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Xu, K. Chu, G. Yao, Y. Xu, P. Niu, Y. Yang and F. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 13741–13748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, Y. Diao, Q. Liu, L. Wei, X. Li, J. Chen and F. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 131084 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, C.-S. Hsu, D. T. L. Alexander, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14190–14199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, N. Li, S. Cao, X. Wang, X. Lu, L. Kong, Y. Xu and X.-H. Bu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2107421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Wei, L. Sun, M. Wang, J. Hong, L. Zou, H. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Li, S. Horike, K. Suenaga and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16013–16022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rui, G. Zhao, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Q. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Zhu, W. Sun, W. Huang and S. Xue Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801554 CrossRef .
D. Yu, Y. Ma, F. Hu, C.-C. Lin, L. Li, H.-Y. Chen, X. Han and S. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101242 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pan, T. Jin, W. Yang, H. Li, Y. Cao, J. Hu, X. Zhou, H. Liu and X. Duan, Chem. Catal., 2021, 1, 734–745 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cui, Y.-P. Wang, T. Ye, J. Wu, Z. Chen, J. Li, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202115219 CAS .
Y. Jin, S. Huang, X. Yue, H. Du and P. K. Shen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2359–2363 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pei, X. F. Lu, H. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Luan and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202207537 CAS .
D. D. Babu, Y. Huang, G. Anandhababu, X. Wang, R. Si, M. Wu, Q. Li, Y. Wang and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8376–8383 RSC .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, S. Li, G. Li, W. Liu, Y.-P. Deng, Z. Bai, L. Ma, M. Feng, T. Wu, D. Su, J. Lu, A. Yu and Z. Chen, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 8837–8846 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Chen, L. Sheng, Q. Luo, W. Zhang and J. Yang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 7994–8000 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, H. He, H. Cao, S. Sun, W. Diao, D. Gao, P. Lu, S. Zhang, Z. Guo, M. Li, R. Liu, D. Ren, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Jiang and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 112–121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, D. Zhang, C.-J. Chen, Q. Zhang, R.-S. Liu, Z. Xia, L. Dai, R. Amal and X. Lu, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 463–466 RSC .
J. Chen, H. Li, C. Fan, Q. Meng, Y. Tang, X. Qiu, G. Fu and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wei, Z. Fu, D. Legut, T. C. Germann, S. Du, H. Zhang, J. S. Francisco and R. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Yan, K. R. Yang, S. Cao, Q. Dong, J. E. Thorne, K. L. Materna, S. Zhu, X. Pan, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista and D. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 1166–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Z. Yan, C. Chen and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10121–10211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7628–7658 RSC .
W. Ye, S. Chen, Y. Lin, L. Yang, S. Chen, X. Zheng, Z. Qi, C. Wang, R. Long, M. Chen, J. Zhu, P. Gao, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Chem, 2019, 5, 2865–2878 CAS .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, J. Ge, Y. Lin, Z. Du, C. Zhong, W. Wang, Q. Jiao, R. Yuan, Y. Tian, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Matter, 2020, 3, 509–521 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, L. Gao, Z. Jin, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 396–403 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, L. Gao, X. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, S. Chen, C. Liu and W. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17763–17770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, Z. Liang, S. Gao, C. Yang, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, C. Qu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Wen, M. Jiang, Y. Yao, H. Zhou, Z. Huang, J. Li, S. Jiao, Y. Kuang and S. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, F. Wang, F. Yang, H. He, J. Yang, W. Zhang, J. Luo, J. Zhang and C. Fu, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106793 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, A. Kumar, D. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Jia, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, Z. Yan and X. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 274, 119091 CrossRef CAS .
C. Du, Y. Gao, H. Chen, P. Li, S. Zhu, J. Wang, Q. He and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16994–17001 RSC .
H. Sun, M. Wang, S. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Shen, T. Qian, X. Niu, J. Xiong and C. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006533 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, C. Wang, P. Jiang, L. Hu, H. Lei and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13254–13262 RSC .
B. Wang, J. Zou, X. Shen, Y. Yang, G. Hu, W. Li, Z. Peng, D. Banham, A. Dong and D. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103851 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, J. Zhu, P. Yuan, Y. Hu, G. Qu, B.-A. Lu, X. Xue, H. Yin, W. Cheng, J. Cheng, W. Xu, J. Li, J. Hu, S. Mu and J.-N. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Liao, C. Sun, K. Zhao, D. Ye, J. Li, G. Wu, J. Fang, H. Zhao and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 288, 120021 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhu, X. Xiong, X. Wang, C. Ye, J. Li, W. Sun, X. Sun, J. Jiang, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 9507–9515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, H. Zhu, Q. Yuan, T. Li, M. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Zhao, D. Qin, W. Guo, B. Liu, X. Yang, Y. Liu and Y. Pan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2210867 Search PubMed .
Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi, Z. Jiang, M. Li, S. Mu, S. Liao, J. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zang, F. Wang, Q. Cheng, G. Wang, L. Ma, C. Chen, L. Yang, Z. Zou, D. Xie and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3686–3691 RSC .
M. Tong, F. Sun, Y. Xie, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, C. Tian, L. Wang and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14005–14012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Shui, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, J. Shang, L. Zheng and R. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701345 CrossRef .
R. Gao, J. Wang, Z.-F. Huang, R. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Pan, J. Zhang, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, C. Shi, J. Lim and J.-J. Zou, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 614–623 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Melisande, T. A. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J.-Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Long, R. Li and X. Gou, Catal. Commun., 2017, 95, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, W. Yang, W. Utetiwabo, Y. Lian, X. Yin, L. Zhou, P. Yu, R. Chen and S. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1404–1410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, T. Yang, W. Zhao, T. Xu, L. Wei, J. Feng, X. Yang, H. Ren and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3937–3945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Gong, Q. Li, R. Shen, Y. Han, W.-C. Cheong, L. Gu and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4274–4277 RSC .
J. Wang, W. Liu, G. Luo, Z. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, Q. Xu, X. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, Z. Yang, T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .
G. Zhang, Y. Jia, C. Zhang, X. Xiong, K. Sun, R. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Kuang, L. Zheng, H. Tang, W. Liu, J. Liu, X. Sun, W.-F. Lin and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1317–1325 RSC .
X. Liu, L. Wang, P. Yu, C. Tian, F. Sun, J. Ma, W. Li and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16166–16170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Dong, W. Yang, X. Liu, L. Long, C. Liu, S. Dong and J. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4369–4375 RSC .
X. Fang, L. Jiao, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3019–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Wu, X.-H. Wu, T.-X. Tu, P.-F. Zhang, J.-T. Li, Y. Zhou, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119259 CrossRef CAS .
F. Luo, S. Wagner, I. Onishi, S. Selve, S. Li, W. Ju, H. Wang, J. Steinberg, A. Thomas, U. I. Kramm and P. Strasser, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 384–396 RSC .
D. Liu, B. Wang, H. Li, S. Huang, M. Liu, J. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, T. Zhou, J. Ge, Y. Lin, Z. Du, C. Zhong, W. Wang, Q. Jiao, R. Yuan, Y. Tian, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Matter, 2020, 3, 509–521 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, C. Ye, L. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Huang, J. Bi, L. Xue, J. Sun, J. Yang, W. Zhang, X. Wang, P. Xiong and J. Zhu, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 45, 805–813 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, Z. Guo, Z. Zhang, M. Dou and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12651–12658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, H.-J. Wang, R.-R. Liu, J.-W. Wang, C. Zhang, C. Li, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 409–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, E. Kim, D. P. Kumar, A. P. Rangappa, Y. Kim, Y. Zhang and T. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202113044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2202960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ou, S. Ning, P. Zhu, S. Chen, A. Han, Q. Kang, Z. Hu, J. Ye, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202206579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Li, P. Zhai, X. Li, G. G. Gurzadyan, J. Hou, H. Yang and X. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202208904 CAS .
G. Jia, M. Sun, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Zhang, X. Cui, B. Huang and J. C. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2206817 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Yan, M.-H. Du, J. Liu, S. Jin, C. Wang, G.-L. Zhuang, X.-J. Kong, L.-S. Long and L.-S. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3353 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda, K. Domen, K. Koike and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4596–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saito, Y. Yamazaki, Y. Tamaki and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19249–19258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Q. Bi, J.-W. Wang, J.-X. Lv, J. Wang, W. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11815–11821 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Li, Y.-B. Chang, M. Li, Y.-X. Feng and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 17951–17954 RSC .
H. Jiang, S. Gong, S. Xu, P. Shi, J. Fan, V. Cecen, Q. J. Xu and Y. L. Min, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 5074–5086 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, D. Zhong and T. Lu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 2065–2068 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Lee, J. Chen, M. Wu, D. Y. C. Leung, C. A. Grimes, Z. Lu, Z. Xu and S.-P. Feng, J. Power Sources, 2020, 466, 228306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lai, W. Xiao, Y. Wang, T. Song, B. Long, S. Yin, A. Ali and G.-J. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 129295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Song, C. Zuo, R. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and B. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 625, 722–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, B. J. Park, V. K. Paidi, R. Huang, Y. Lee, K.-J. Noh, K.-S. Lee and J. W. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 640–649 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, L. Zhao, B. Wulan, D. Tan, Q. Chen, J. N. Ma and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202113918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-N. Gong, C.-Y. Cao, W.-J. Shi, J.-H. Zhang, J.-H. Deng, T.-B. Lu and D.-C. Zhong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202215187 CAS .
L. Zhang, X.-X. Li, Z.-L. Lang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, L. Yuan, W.-Y. Lu, Y.-S. Xia, L.-Z. Dong, D.-Q. Yuan and Y.-Q. Lan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3808–3816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Zhuo, P. Chen, K. Zheng, X.-W. Zhang, J.-X. Wu, D.-Y. Lin, S.-Y. Liu, Z.-S. Wang, J.-Y. Liu, D.-D. Zhou and J.-P. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202204967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shao, W. Zhou, Q.-L. Hong, L. Yi, L. Zheng, W. Wang, H.-X. Zhang, H. Zhang and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 16687–16692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, J. Liu, Q. Huang, L.-Z. Dong, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19829–19835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Kang, C. Ye, R. Jin, H. Yan, R. Lin, J. Yang, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Liu, W. Song, J. Liu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13388–13393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, X. Tan, W. Yang, C. Jia, S. Xu, K. Wang, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6972–6976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Yang, S. Zhou, A. Li, C. Xie, X. Zheng, W. Zhou, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19417–19424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Shan, M. J. Zachman, M. Wang, S. Hwang, H. Tabassum, J. Yang, X. Yang, S. Karakalos, Z. Feng, G. Wang and G. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202205632 CAS .
Z. Zeng, L. Y. Gan, H. B. Yang, X. Su, J. Gao, W. Liu, H. Matsumoto, J. Gong, J. Zhang, W. Cai, Z. Zhang, Y. Yan, B. Liu and P. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, Y. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Yang, S. Chen, W. Yan, J. Dong, X.-M. Zhang and X. Fan, Small, 2022, 18, 2108034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Xie, T. Liu, Y. Wu and B. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2020, 269, 115029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Feng, X. Wu, H. Cheng, Z. Fan, X. Li, F. Cui, S. Fan, Y. Dai, G. Lei and G. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23817–23827 RSC .
J. Pei, T. Wang, R. Sui, X. Zhang, D. Zhou, F. Qin, X. Zhao, Q. Liu, W. Yan, J. Dong, L. Zheng, A. Li, J. Mao, W. Zhu, W. Chen and Z. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3019–3028 RSC .
J.-D. Yi, X. Gao, H. Zhou, W. Chen and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202212329 CAS .
W. Zhu, L. Zhang, S. Liu, A. Li, X. Yuan, C. Hu, G. Zhang, W. Deng, K. Zang, J. Luo, Y. Zhu, M. Gu, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12664–12668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, X. Wu, M. Feng, X. Li, G. Lei, Z. Fan, D. Pan, F. Cui and G. He, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 12673–12681 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ding, C. Feng, Y. Mei, F. Liu, H. Wang, M. Dupuis and C. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118391 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. Li, Y. Chen, F. Raziq, L. Qiao, S.-X. Guo, C. Wang, G. G. Wallace, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 291, 120030 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, B. H. Ko, S. Hwang, Z. Liu, Y. Yao, W. Luc, M. Cui, A. S. Malkani, T. Li, X. Wang, J. Dai, B. Xu, G. Wang, D. Su, F. Jiao and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz6844 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, B. Wei, M. Zhu, J. Chen, Q. Jiang, B. Yang, Y. Hou, L. Lei, Z. Li, R. Zhang and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xie, H. Li, G. Cui, J. Li, Y. Song, S. Li, X. Zhang, J. Y. Lee, M. Shao and M. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7382–7388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tan, W. Lee, Y. E. Kim, Y. N. Ko, M. H. Youn, Y. E. Jeon, J. Hong, J. E. Park, J. Seo, S. K. Jeong, Y. Choi, H. Choi, H. Y. Kim and K. T. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 28890–28899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wen, D. U. Lee, B. Ren, F. M. Hassan, G. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, J. Gostick, E. Croiset, Z. Bai, L. Yang and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802427 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Cao, N. J. Libretto, X. Li, C. Li, Y. Wan, C. He, J. Lee, J. Gregg, H. Zong, D. Su, J. T. Miller, T. Mueller and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16635–16642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-J. Sun, Z.-W. Gong, J.-D. Yi, T. Zhang, X. Chen and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8798–8801 RSC .
J. Hao, Z. Zhuang, J. Hao, C. Wang, S. Lu, F. Duan, F. Xu, M. Du and H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200579 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, R. K. Gautam, K. Malik and A. Verma, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, H. Li, C. Yan, H. Li, R. Si, M. Li, J. Xiao, G. Wang and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, L. Song, M. Sun, B. Huang and Y. Du, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabl4915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiong, J. Yang, L. Shuai, Y. Hou, M. Qiu, X. Li and M. K. H. Leung, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5951–5957 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balamurugan, H.-Y. Jeong, V. S. K. Choutipalli, J. S. Hong, H. Seo, N. Saravanan, J. H. Jang, K.-G. Lee, Y. H. Lee, S. W. Im, V. Subramanian, S. H. Kim and K. T. Nam, Small, 2020, 16, 2000955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ni, Z. Liu, X. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, Y. Deng and S. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 291, 120092 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. Tian, M. Wang, X. Jin, M. Shena and L. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 6096–6102 RSC .
Q. Gong, Y. Wang, X. Ren, C. He, J. Liu and Q. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4499–4506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, Y. Shen, W. Ma, D. Wei, B. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, S. Xie, C. Wang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e2022134 Search PubMed .
X.-F. Qiu, H.-L. Zhu, J.-R. Huang, P.-Q. Liao and X.-M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7242–7246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Zhu, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-X. Han, Z.-H. Zhao, P.-Q. Liao and X.-M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 13319–13326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, A. R. P. Santiago and A. Du, J. Catal., 2020, 388, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Gu, S. Lin, S. Zhang, Z. Chen and S. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5709–5721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, W. Wei, B. Huang, Y. Dai and T. Frauenheim, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1871–1878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Sun, Z. L. Wang, X.-Y. Lang, Z. Wen and Q. Jiang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 4593–4600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Arachchige, Y. Xu, Z. Dai, X. L. Zhang, F. Wang and C. Sun, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 77, 244–251 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qu, G. Qin, J. Fan, A. Du and Q. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 537, 148012 CrossRef CAS .
K. An, H. Ren, D. Yang, Z. Zhao, Y. Gao, Y. Chen, J. Tan, W. Wang and Z. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 292, 120167 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, B. Li, Y. Gu, T. Yan, Z. Ni, S. Li, J.-L. Zuo, J. Ma and Z. Jin, Nat. Chem., 2023, 15, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Qiu, J. Feng, Y. Tong, F. Zhou, Q. Li, L. Song, S. Chen, K.-H. Wu, P. Su, S. Ye, F. Hou, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu, G. Q. Lu, C. Sun, J. Liu and J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, G. Fan, W. Xu, M. Yu, L. Wang, Z. Yan and F. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 11957–11960 RSC .
S. Chen, H. Jang, J. Wang, Q. Qin, X. Liu and J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2099–2104 RSC .
Y. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Li, H.-N. Fan, W.-B. Luo, H.-K. Liu and S.-X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22242–22247 RSC .
Y. Ma, T. Yang, H. Zou, W. Zang, Z. Kou, L. Mao, Y. Feng, L. Shen, S. J. Pennycook, L. Duan, X. Li and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Luo, Q. Li, J. Wang and K. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 10227–10230 RSC .
L. Han, Z. Ren, P. Ou, H. Cheng, N. Rui, L. Lin, X. Liu, L. Zhuo, J. Song, J. Sun, J. Luo and H. L. Xin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 345–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cao, Z. Chen, K. Zang, J. Xu, J. Zhong, J. Luo, X. Xu and G. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2877 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Tian, X. Wang, Y. Guo and K. Chu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 4277–4283 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Di-Chang Zhong
	Di-Chang Zhong obtained his BS in 2003 from Gannan Normal University and his MS in 2006 from Guangxi Normal University and PhD in 2011 from the Sun Yat-Sen University. Then, he joined the faculty at Gannan Normal University and was promoted as Professor in 2017. He worked as a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellow at AIST, Japan for two years. In 2020, he moved to Tianjin University of Technology. His interests focus on the design and synthesis of molecular catalytic materials for energy storage and conversion.

Yun-Nan Gong
	Yun-Nan Gong obtained his BS in 2008 and MS in 2011 from Nanchang Hangkong University and received his PhD in 2014 from Sun Yat-Sen University. Then, he joined the faculty at Gannan Normal University. He worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2018–2020. In 2021, he moved to Tianjin University of Technology and worked as an Associate Professor. His interests focus on the design and synthesis of porous materials for energy storage and conversion.

Chao Zhang
	Chao Zhang obtained his BS in 2006 from Beijing Institute of Technology and his PhD in 2011 from Peking University. He worked sequentially as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Peking University. He joined the faculty of Tianjing University of Technology in 2020 and worked as a Professor. Currently, his research interest is focused on the transport mechanisms across the macro–micro–nano scales in energy-related catalytic reactions.

Tong-Bu Lu
	Tong-Bu Lu obtained his BS in 1988 and PhD in 1993 from Lanzhou University. After two years Post-Doctoral Fellowship at Sun Yat-Sen University, he joined the faculty at the same university, and became a Professor in 2000. He worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow in F. Albert Cotton's group at Texas A&M University in 1998 and 2002, respectively. In 2016, he moved to Tianjin University of Technology. His current research interests focus on the study of artificial photosynthesis, including the design of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts for water splitting and CO2 reduction.

 	Scheme 1  Scope of this review.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration showing the cooperative water oxidation process with high activity over a dinuclear copper complex. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Molecular structures of asymmetrical (left) and symmetrical (right) dinuclear cobalt complexes. (b) Rotating ring-disk electrode measurements for the ORR with asymmetrical (black) and symmetrical (red) dinuclear cobalt complexes, as well as mononuclear cobalt complex (blue) in O2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. (c) Proposed catalytic cycle for the ORR over asymmetrical dinuclear cobalt complexes. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the dinuclear Co complex for efficient CO2 photoreduction to CO in CH3CN/H2O solution. (b) Molecular structures of dinuclear and mononuclear Co complexes. (c) CO and H2 yields obtained over dinuclear Co complex (0.025 μM), mononuclear Co complex (0.05 μM) and blank. (d) Energy barriers of CO2 reduction and C–OH cleavage for dinuclear Co complex (top) and mononuclear Co complex (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the Mg, Ca or Zn-bound Ni complex for synergistic photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO. (b) CO and H2 yields in photocatalytic CO2RR over Ni complex in the presence of cationic Lewis acids at 1 h. (c) Optimized structure of CO2-coordinated Mg-bound Ni complex. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration showing the dinuclear Re complex with cis-conformer for synergistic electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO. UV-vis spectroelectrochemistry with 0.5 mM cis- (b) and trans- (c) Re2Cl2 at −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl in Ar-saturated DMF/0.1 M Bu4NPF6 solution. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration showing the construction of W1Mo1-NG DMC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of W1Mo1-NG DMC. (c) Intensity profile obtained on one individual W–Mo dimer. (d) Corresponding Mo K-edge and W L3-edge FT-EXAFS fitting curves for W1Mo1-NG in R-space. (e) Polarization curves of Mo2-NG, W1Mo1-NG, W2-NG, NG, and Pt/C in 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of Pt–Ru dimers on NCNTs by ALD process. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Pt–Ru dimers/NCNTs. Scale bars: 1 nm. (c) Intensity profile obtained on one individual Pt–Ru dimer. (d) HER curves and (e) normalized mass activity at 0.05 V (vs. RHE) of Pt–Ru dimers, Pt single atoms and Pt/C catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of FeNi SAs/NC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of FeNi SAs/NC. (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of the Fe K-edge of FeNi SAs/NC, FeNi NPs/NC, Fe foil, and Fe2O3. (d) OER LSV curves of FeNi SAs/NC, FeNi NPs/NC, NC, and Pt/C in 1.0 M KOH. (e) Free energy diagrams of different OER intermediates OH*, O*, and OOH* at 1.50 V. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of a-NiCo/NC by multi-step templating strategy. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of a-NiCo/NC. FT-EXAFS spectra of Co (c) and Ni (d) K-edges of a-NiCo/NC. (e) LSV plots of a-NiCo/NC, a-Ni/NC, a-Co/NC, NiCo and RuO2. (f) Free energy diagram of a-NiCo/NC, a-Ni/NC, and a-Co/NC for the OER. (g) Optimized OER catalytic pathways of a-NiCo/NC. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration showing the construction of FeCo-DACs/NC via the “pre-constrained metal twin” strategy. (b and c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of FeCo-DACs/NC. (d) Intensity profiles obtained for two metals. FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe (e) and Co (f) K-edges of FeCo-DACs/NC. (g) LSV plots and (h) comparison of E1/2 and Jk of FeCo-DACs/NC, Fe-MMC/NC, Co-MMC/NC, Pt/C and N–C. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of Fe,Mn/N–C. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Fe,Mn/N–C. (c) EELS data of Fe,Mn/N–C. (d) Fe K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe,Mn/N–C and reference samples. (e) Mn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe,Mn/N–C and reference samples. (f) LSV curves of Fe,Mn/N–C, Fe/N–C, Mn/N–C and Pt/C catalyst in 0.1 M HClO4 solution. (g) Optimized atomic structures for the main process of the ORR on Fe,Mn/N–C. Reproduced from ref. 195 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of Zn/CoN–C. (b and c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of Zn/CoN–C. FT-EXAFS spectra of Co (d) and Zn (e) K-edges of Zn/CoN–C. (f) LSV plots of Zn/CoN–C, CoN–C, ZnN–C and Pt/C. (g) Polarization and power density curves of assembled zinc-air battery over Zn/CoN–C and Pt/C as ORR catalyst in 6 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of bulky Ni-MOF, Ni-MOL-010, and Ni-MOL-100. (b) SAED pattern and (c) HRTEM image for Ni-MOL-010. (d) SAED pattern and (e) HRTEM image for Ni-MOL-100. (f) CO and H2 production rates over a bulky Ni-MOF, Ni-MOL-010, and Ni-MOL-100 photocatalysts. Reproduced from ref. 221 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the implantation and self-adaption of flexible Cu/Ni dual-metal-site pairs in MOF-808 for highly selective CO2 photoreduction to CH4. (b and c) Time-dependent CH4 and CO evolution curves over various photocatalysts. (d) Gibbs free energy diagram for the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 over MOF-808-CuNi. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication of Ni2 DMC catalysts via one-step pyrolysis strategy for CO2 electroreduction to CO. (b and c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Ni2–N3C4, showing Ni2 species highlighted by red circles. (d) Ni K-edge XANES spectra of Ni2–NxCy, Ni–N2C2, Ni foil and NiO. (e) FT-EXAFS spectra at R space of Ni2–NxCy, Ni–N2C2 and Ni foil. (f) LSV curves and (g) FEs for CO at different applied potentials for Ni2–NxCy and Ni–N2C2. Reproduced from ref. 239 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the different selectivities of Cu-PzX (where X = H, Cl, Br, I) for electrocatalytic CO2RR. (b) FEs for different products over Cu-PzX at different applied potentials. (c) Partial density of states (PDOS) of Cu 3d for Cu-PzX. (d) Important parameters and RDS of optimized Cu-PzX structure. Reproduced from ref. 243 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of Fe1–Ni1–N–C DMC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Fe1–Ni1–N–C DMC. (c) EELS spectra extracted from atomic pairs in (b). (d) Fe K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe1–Ni1–N–C and Fe1–N–C. (e) Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Fe1–Ni1–N–C and Ni1–N–C. (f) LSV curves and (g) FEs of CO for Fe1–Ni1–N–C, Fe1–N–C, Ni1–N–C, and N–C in 0.5 M KHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Ni–Cu DMC. (b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Ni–Cu DMC. (c) EELS spectra extracted from atomic pairs. (d) Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Cu DMC, Ni MMC, NiPc and Ni foil. (e) Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Cu DMC, Cu MMC, CuPc and Ni foil. (f) FECO and (g) CO partial current density of Ni–Cu DMC, Ni MMC, Cu MMC and N–C. Reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration showing the Ni–Sn DMC for synergistic electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to formate. (b) SEM image of Ni–Sn DMC nanoarray. (c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of Ni–Sn DMC. (d) Sn K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Sn DMC, Sn MMC and Sn foil. (e) Ni K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Ni–Sn DMC, Ni MMC, NiO and Ni foil. (f) LSV curves and (g) formate FEs for Ni–Sn DMC, Ni MMC, Sn MMC and N–C. Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Proposed “five-step” strategy for screening N2RR candidate catalysts. (b) Free energy diagrams of Fe2/g-CN, and the decomposition energy of the substrate g-CN. (c) Adsorption structures during the N2RR on Fe2/g-CN through the minimum energy pathway. Reproduced from ref. 279 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) SBU of the [Zn2N2]-based NJUZ-1 coordination polymer. (b) 3D framework of NJUZ-1 1 with TCNQ guest molecules. (c) Simulated Raman spectrum of the Zn–N2–Zn structure by DFT. (d) Raman spectra of 14N-NJUZ-1 and 15N-NJUZ-1. (e) Ammonia yield rates of NJUZ-1 in deionized water saturated by pure N2, air, Ar or O2 flow. (f) Scheme of the cycling process of NJUZ-1 during the photocatalytic N2RR process. Reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2023.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of PdCu/NC. (b) Magnified aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of PdCu/NC, showing diatomic Pd–Cu sites highlighted by yellow circles. (c) Pd K-edge and (d) Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of PdCu/NC and reference samples. (e) NH3 yield rates and (f) FEs of PdCu/NC, Pd/NC, and Cu/NC in N2-saturated 0.05 M H2SO4. Reproduced from ref. 292 with permission from Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
