Low temperature synthesis of silicon quantum dots with plasma chemistry control in dual frequency non-thermal plasmas   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP01856D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP01856D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15697-15710Low temperature synthesis of silicon quantum dots with plasma chemistry control in dual frequency non-thermal plasmas†

        
          
            Bibhuti Bhusan 
            Sahu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yongyi 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jeon Geon 
            Han
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Masaharu 
            Shiratani
          
        
      b
aCenter for Advanced Plasma Surface Technology (CAPST), NU-SKKU Joint Institute for Plasma Nano Materials, Department of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Korea. E-mail: sahu@skku.edu; hanjg@skku.edu
bGraduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
Received 
      19th March 2016
    , Accepted 16th May 2016First published on 26th May 2016AbstractThe advanced materials process by non-thermal plasmas with a high plasma density allows the synthesis of small-to-big sized Si quantum dots by combining low-temperature deposition with superior crystalline quality in the background of an amorphous hydrogenated silicon nitride matrix. Here, we make quantum dot thin films in a reactive mixture of ammonia/silane/hydrogen utilizing dual-frequency capacitively coupled plasmas with high atomic hydrogen and nitrogen radical densities. Systematic data analysis using different film and plasma characterization tools reveals that the quantum dots with different sizes exhibit size dependent film properties, which are sensitively dependent on plasma characteristics. These films exhibit intense photoluminescence in the visible range with violet to orange colors and with narrow to broad widths (∼0.3–0.9 eV). The observed luminescence behavior can come from the quantum confinement effect, quasi-direct band-to-band recombination, and variation of atomic hydrogen and nitrogen radicals in the film growth network. The high luminescence yields in the visible range of the spectrum and size-tunable low-temperature synthesis with plasma and radical control make these quantum dot films good candidates for light emitting applications.
Introduction
Nanocrystals (NCs) are usually defined as material particles with one of the dimensions smaller than 100 nm. NCs are composed of atoms either with a single- or poly-crystalline arrangement. Furthermore, if the dimensions of an NC are smaller than two times the Bohr radius of the material it is made of, quantum confinement (QC) can occur.1 A quantum dot (QD) is an NC or a crystalline nanoparticle that has a diameter small enough to induce the effect of QC.2 Recently, there has been growing interest in the study of semiconductor QDs. Some of the examples are CdSe, CdS, PbS, Si, and ZnO QDs as light emitting materials in optoelectronic, photovoltaic, and biomedical fields due to their numerous advantages like size-dependent photoluminescence (PL), broad spectral distribution throughout the visible and infrared spectral regimes, and inherent photophysical stability.3–10 Notably, nanocrystalline silicon (c-Si) QDs, named “Si QDs”, embedded in an amorphous silicon nitride (a:SiNx) matrix have shown their potential for use in efficient light-emitting devices (LEDs) and photovoltaics.11–17 Such devices are very much useful for the integration of electronic data-processing circuits and optical signals on the same chip. Furthermore, the fabrication process is compatible with modern large-scale integration technologies.17,18 Additionally, photoluminescence (PL) efficiency increases in Si QDs compared to bulk Si in various ways.19 In the case of bulk Si, both the electron and hole have a long radiative lifetime, which can diffuse over long distances, and there is a high probability of facing a defect acting as a non-radiative recombination center. However, in the case of c-Si, this diffusion is somewhat limited by the crystal boundary, enhancing the PL efficiency by decreasing the probability of an electron encountering a defect. Also, the spatial confinement of the charge carriers (electrons and holes) also increases the PL efficiency of c-Si.19,20 Note that Si's Bohr radius is about 5 nm; if a Si NC were ≤10 nm, it would be considered as a Si-QD. In a conventional way, NCs in the 1–20 nm range are similar to QDs.1,2,21–23 The band gap of bulk Si is 1.12 eV, but it can be much larger for Si QDs and relies on the size of the QDs.1,15 Due to the QD's enlarged band gap compared to the bulk Si an intense visible PL at room temperature can be possible. Consequently, it can be achievable by using appropriately sized Si QDs to cover the maximum visible length of the electromagnetic spectrum. Therefore, tailoring the QD size is also one of the key goals of the deposition process by controlling the operating parameters.
Additionally, a critical issue for the photovoltaic applications is the improvement in the photovoltaic conversion of solar energy. However, this conversion factor is limited by two major issues: the support material does not absorb photons with energy lower than the bandgap (Eg), and charge carriers excited by high-energy photons (photon energy > Eg) lose enough energy to phonons because of the thermalization process. Consequently, to control the bottleneck, most of the current research on photovoltaics configures purposefully new third generation solar cells. These types of studies involve tandem structures consisting of two or more cells with different energy gaps (Eg) of the absorbing layer that accommodates a considerable part of the solar spectrum. In this scenario, the Si QDs embedded in a different type of dielectric matrix are utilized in the manufacture of the third generation solar cells, wherein the c-Si or Si QD absorber layer, specifically, could afford a suitable material that has better stability against light-induced degradation.14,22–27 In particular, amorphous silicon nitride (a:SiNx:H) is being utilized as a material with high dielectric constant (greater than that of silicon oxide, silicon carbide, etc.), high strength over a broad temperature range, and low tunnelling barrier.27,28 Additionally, it has exceptional inherent antireflection and surface passivation properties that are very crucial for solar cell performance.29
Furthermore, one can envisage the growth or deposition of Si QD films. The structure of hydrogenated amorphous silicon nitride films (a-SiNx:H) can be treated qualitatively as an ensemble of nanometer size Si crystallites (c-Si) embedded in an a-SiNx:H matrix. The increase in the nitrogenation of the network would help to enhance the optical gap (Eg). However, there is a trade-off between electrical transport properties and bandgap widening. Furthermore, complexity in electrical conduction arises because of their inhomogeneous structure that consists of a mixture of various phases: nano (crystalline) grains and columns, a-SiNx:H, defects at the boundaries between various phases and voids.30,31 One can improve the electrical conductivity either by increasing the carrier concentration via doping or by increasing the carrier mobility via reduction of defect concentration. The latter can be achieved by the creation of a continuous and dense network in the films by using high-density plasma.31,32 However, for the plasma deposited silicon-based thin films the enhancement of carrier mobility is a challenging task owing to the occurrence of different kinds of defects such as unsaturated dangling bonds, voids, and dislocation in the materials.30,31,33
Different plasma-based deposition techniques have been developed for the synthesis of silicon-based thin films like c-Si and a-SiNx:H.33–39 Some of them may be listed as capacitively coupled plasma (CCP) enhanced chemical vapor deposition (CVD), hot-wire CVD, DC or rf magnetron sputtering, inductively coupled plasma (ICP) CVD, RF-UHF hybrid plasma CVD, etc. However, the plasma-based deposition process of Si QD films is fully different14,27,30,31,40,41 from that of c-Si and a-SiNx:H film synthesis. The formation of Si QDs that is commonly being undertaken through conventional CCP RF-PECVD requires a high content of hydrogen (as a gas precursor) compared to other gases such as SiH4 and NH3. Additionally, this process uses a high RF power and a high deposition temperature or post-annealing, due to the need to increase the atomic hydrogen (H) density and available thermal energy which help in crystallization. However, a high content of hydrogen incorporation results in a low growth rate (typically, a few nm min−1) that harshly retards the cost-effective production of Si QD-based devices, which is not desirable from the commercial point of view. Secondly, a high RF power can cause substrate/surface damage by high-energy ion bombardment, which can reduce the device performance. Thirdly, a high deposition temperature can reduce the device feasibility on inexpensive substrates. RF-UHF dual frequency (DF) CCP for plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD)35–38 is a new technique that produces high plasma densities even at high pressure and low power. In particular, DF CCPs generated at different power supplies have attracted considerable attention due to their capability of independently controlling the ion bombardment energy and ion flux on the electrodes.35–38,42–44 In this context, RF-UHF DF PECVD could produce a high-density plasma at a low pressure that would facilitate crystallization even at a low deposition temperature and simultaneously maintain a good deposition rate.
Additionally, effective passivation of dangling bonds of the deposited films by atomic hydrogen (H) is necessary for good conduction, which also gives important photosensitivity in the amorphous dominated network. On the other hand, excess H atoms would provide poor physical and electrical properties. Additionally, tuning of the bandgap (Eg) over a wide range is necessary for successful application of the materials in tandem structure solar cells. The former can be tuned either by controlling the stoichiometry of the a-SiNx:H matrix or by varying the dot size comparable to the Bohr radius of silicon, and the combination of these two would induce significant widening of the Eg. The film properties can be tailored by controlling the plasma parameters like plasma density, electron temperature, etc., by monitoring and controlling the deposition process using standard plasma diagnostic tools.
Here, we report a detailed study of low-temperature deposition and single-step development of thin films of Si QDs embedded in an a-SiNx:H dielectric matrix. To deposit the QD films, we have used RF-UHF dual frequency (DF) plasma processing at significantly low pressures in the milli-Torr range. QD thin films of very high crystallinity demonstrating a broad range (2–3.10 eV) of visible PL are grown using a reactive mixture of SiH4, NH3, and H2 using PECVD. Different characterizations have been used to establish a correlation between the structural, morphological, compositional and optical properties of the deposited films from the point of view of their device applications. The effect of plasma parameters on the film properties is also discussed using different plasma diagnostic tools to optimize and control the deposition process.
Experimental section
The experimental system (Fig. 1(a)) consists of a stainless steel cylindrical plasma chamber of an internal diameter of ≈27 cm and a height of ≈22 cm. There is an option of additional load lock chamber for putting the samples from outside. The system is equipped with a combination of two CCP sources: one is operated at 13.56 MHz radio frequency (RF) power and the other is operated at 320 MHz ultra high frequency (UHF) power. The RF source consists of two parallel circular plates (Fig. 1(a)) with diameters ∼20.0 cm and 11.5 cm, respectively, as the top (as the gas shower head) and bottom (as the substrate table that is grounded) electrodes with a spacing of 8 cm. For the plasma production, a commercial Dressler generator equipped with an L-type matching network is used. The UHF source, which is a combination of two parallel copper tubes (of a quarter inch diameter) with a spacing of ≈4 cm, placed in between the RF electrodes, with ceramic feed-thru, is inserted from the side port. A signal generator supplies a low power signal to the power amplifier to generate continuous-wave (CW) power (up to 300 W). The output of the power amplifier is connected to the quarter wavelength antenna (λ/4 transmission line,35,38 where λ ≈ 93.8 cm is the free space wavelength at the applied frequency of 320 MHz) through a coaxial cable of quarter-wavelength. A total of 400 W with equal input RF (200 W) and UHF (200 W) powers to plasma are monitored using the RF generator and the power meter, respectively. In a fixed background of silane (SiH4 ∼ 2 sccm) and ammonia (NH3 ∼ 0.7 sccm), the hydrogen (H2) flow rates are changed to vary the working pressure from 15 to 60 mTorr.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the advanced DF PECVD system and (b) VUVAS radical monitoring system for measuring atomic H and N radicals. 
For uniform comparison and systematic analysis, the thickness of all the deposited films is maintained at ∼1200 nm. The deposition temperature is 200 °C. No post-annealing process is employed after growing the Si QD films on the p-type Si(100) substrates, Corning® Eagle-XG glass, quartz, and SiO2 coated glasses. The Raman spectra of the Si QD films are measured using a Renishaw inVia Micro-Raman spectrophotometer with a 514 nm Ar+ Laser as the excitation source at a power density = 2 mW cm−2 at room temperature in a backscattering geometry. High-resolution transmission electron (HRTEM) micrographs are obtained using a JEOL-JSM2010 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 200 kV. XRD measurements are done using a Bruker-AXS Micro-diffractometer with a 2.2 kW sealed Cu X-ray. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurements are done using an ALPHA infrared spectrometer (Bruker Optics). Furthermore, room temperature PL spectra are measured using a He–Cd laser source with an excitation wavelength of 325 nm. The luminescence spectra are monitored using a TRIAX 320 monochromator in conjunction with a cooled Hamamatsu R928 photomultiplier (PMT) detector. The PL lifetime is measured using a pulsed Ti:Sapphire laser [with an excitation wavelength 360 nm (∼3.4 eV) with an average power ∼100 mW] in conjunction with a Hamamatsu Streak camera for the detection. The laser source can generate approximately 30 fs (femtosecond) pulse at a repetition rate of ∼80 MHz.
For the plasma analysis, Fig. 1(a) and (b) show various diagnostic tools used for different plasma diagnostics like a Langmuir probe (LP) and vacuum ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy (VUVAS). Due to the presence of RF power we have used an RF compensated LP35 for the measurements of plasma parameters like electron temperature (Te), plasma density (n0), plasma potential (Vp), etc. from the LP current–voltage (I–V) curve.38 For the data acquisition of the I–V curve, the commercial Hiden power supply system (M/S. Hiden Analytical Ltd, England) is utilized.
For monitoring the atomic N and H radicals we have used the VUVAS diagnostics. The VUVAS system shown in Fig. 1(b) is equipped with a combination of a vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) monochromator (ARC VM-502) and a light source, symmetrically positioned about the chamber. Fig. 1(b) shows that two magnesium fluoride (MgF2) plano-convex lenses are arranged on both sides through the chamber atmosphere. To generate VUV light from the light source an on–off modulated dc power of ∼10 Hz is supplied. VUV light from the MHCL is focused parallel to the MgF2 lens and is made to pass through the monochromator across the plasma chamber. The emitted radiation relevant to the resonant emission of 120.6 nm (VUV emission line) of N atoms (in the light source) is absorbed by the ground state N atoms in the plasma.43 The transmitted light through the plasma is then focused on the monochromator by another MgF2 lens. This UV light is converted to the visible light radiation by the sodium salicylate scintillator of the monochromator. This light is then detected using a photomultiplier tube (PMT), and its amplitude is recorded as a voltage signal using a digital oscilloscope. Similarly, for the atomic H measurement the relevant emission line used is 121.1 nm.
Results and discussion
This section focuses on the detailed investigation of the various film properties and plasma characteristics.
A. Microstructural and morphological studies
The crystallinity of the Si QDs is studied using Raman spectroscopy. Fig. 2 presents the Raman spectra of the samples deposited on SiO2 coated glass at different pressures at an interval of 5 mTorr. The dominant Raman peaks are present between the wavenumbers 510 and 520 cm−1. There is the signature of narrow and broad peaks with a gradual change in the peak positions [as represented by numbers 1 to 10] corresponding to the variation in pressure from 15 to 60 mTorr. This variation suggests that there is a modification in the network structure associated with a simultaneous change in the microstructure and hence, the size of the Si crystallites. The crystalline volume fraction of each sample has been determined by the deconvolution of each spectrum into three Gaussian sections to get qualitative information. These are considered at ∼520, ∼510, and 480 cm−1 corresponding to the c-Si, the intermediate ultra-nanocrystalline, and amorphous (a-Si) components, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The relevant fractions of the individual components are then calculated.37,45 The total crystalline volume fraction (XC) is obtained using XC = (I2 + I3)/(I1 + I2 + I3). Furthermore, the ultra-nanocrystalline volume fraction (XnC) is estimated from XnC = I2/(I1 + I2 + I3). Here, I1, I2 and I3 are the integrated intensities of the component peaks at wavenumbers 480, 510, and 520 cm−1, respectively. Usually, the component located in the range of 495–510 cm−1 is considered as the grain boundary,37,39 but here it is considered as the ultra-nanocrystalline component with the presence of tiny crystallites with sizes much lower than 3 nm surrounded by grain boundaries. Fig. 2(c) shows that the overall crystallinity decreases from ∼77 to 65% with increasing pressure from 15 to 35 mTorr, beyond which the network crystallinity again increases and attains a magnitude of ∼87% at a pressure of 45 mTorr. Furthermore, XC decreases with pressure up to 67% at 55 mTorr and then it slightly increases to 73% at 60 mTorr. Conversely, the trend of variation of XnC is exactly opposite to that of XC with an overall change from 23 to 37% over the entire span (in Fig. 2(c)), from 10 to 60 mTorr. The average dot size has been determined from the individual Raman spectrum using the relation:30 (1)
 Fig. 2  (a) First-order Raman spectra of Si QD films prepared at different pressures, (b) deconvolution of the measured Raman spectrum of the films prepared at 30 mTorr into various components, (c) variations of crystalline and ultra-nanocrystalline volume fractions with pressure, and (d) change in the size of Si QDs estimated from the Raman peak shift and measured from HRTEM images. 
In the above expression, ωD corresponds to the frequency of the crystalline-Si like mode for an NC of size D. The other parameters ω0 and Γ0, are respectively, 520 and 3.5 cm−1 for crystalline Si. Fig. 2(d) shows the trend in the variation of the Si-QD size as a function of working pressure. The figure also shows the QD size (represented by black squares) measured using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) for comparison with the data from the above equation. The Si-QD size calculated from the deconvolution of the line-shape of the nanocrystalline components (Fig. 2(b)) signals a Gaussian-like distribution with a maximum magnitude of ∼18 nm at pressures of 20 and 60 mTorr to a minimum of ∼4.0 nm at a pressure of 30–35 mTorr. Comparison between Fig. 2(c) and (d) indicates that the higher the value of XnC the smaller the QD size. Also, it is evident that the size of QD can be varied by controlling the plasma parameters by changing the plasma conditions.
Furthermore, Fig. 3(a) and (b) present the details of the internal microstructure of the deposited films, prepared at 30 mTorr using HRTEM. It is apparent from the Raman (Fig. 2) analysis that at low (15 mTorr), intermediate (40–45 mTorr) and high (60 mTorr) pressures the dot size of the films is big. Owing to our interest in Si QD structures, i.e., with a size ∼the Bohr radius of Si, the plain view micrographs of the samples at 30 mTorr is displayed in Fig. 3(a) and (b). In the figures, the Si-QDs are identified as the denser material with a dark appearance (black spots), randomly distributed within a less dense matrix (light background).30,31,46 Additionally, a magnified view of the microstructure of an arbitrarily selected region of the sample in Fig. 3(a) is presented in Fig. 3(b). Fig. 3(b) displays many distinct circular areas that demonstrate the spherical shape of the Si QDs. Furthermore, effortless detection by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the different crystal planes within the Si QDs provides the signature of a significant number of (220) oriented Si nanocrystallites within the a-SiNx:H matrix. Fig. 3(c) presents the XRD spectrum for the films relevant to the operating condition of Fig. 3(a). The broadband near 2θ ∼ 26–28° corresponds to the amorphous silicon component. The peaks at 2θ = 28.4°, 47.3° and 56.2° correspond to the crystallographic planes (111), (220) and (311) of Si, respectively. Besides the crystallites of Si, the network also shows the trace of tiny crystallites of silicon nitride (Si3N4), the signature of which is identified by the corresponding (201) and (211) crystallographic planes of α-Si3N4.47 Careful observation of Fig. 3(a) reveals that each Si QD is more dark and denser than the neighbouring or adjoining region of the amorphous (a-SiNx:H) matrix. Comparing our results with other studies in the literature14,26,48 on Si QDs, within a-SiO2 and a-SiNx:H matrices, this adjacent layer may be considered as a shell covering the Si QD core. Also, this layer isolates QDs from the a-SiNx:H matrix where they are embedded. These amorphous shells act as protective layers for confining nanocrystalline cores and can play vital roles in controlling their size and numbers. Furthermore, a Gaussian-like size distribution of the Si QDs in the sample (Fig. 3(b)) is observed (as shown by a Gaussian distribution of the Si QDs by the fitted line in red) as presented by the histograms in Fig. 3(d). The average size of the NCs has been determined as Dav = 3.8 nm from this peak of the distribution. It is interesting to note that the HRTEM estimated average QD size (Fig. 3(d)) for the sample prepared at 30 mTorr, is in proximity to the value of 4.0 nm obtained from the Raman analysis (Fig. 2(d)). Also, it is consistent with the XRD data that determines a dot size of ∼4.4 nm relevant to the peak of the (220) plane in Fig. 2(d). Similarly, Fig. 3(e) and (f), respectively, show the results of HRTEM analysis at low and high resolutions. It is also apparent that both the Raman (Fig. 2(d)) and HRTEM (Fig. 3(f)) data corresponding to the films prepared at 15 mTorr are also quite consistent.
 Fig. 3  (a–f) Microstructure studies of the films prepared at various pressures, (a and b) low and high magnification HRTEM images of the Si QD films prepared at a pressure of ∼30 mTorr, (c) X-ray diffraction spectra of films deposited at 30 mTorr, (d) the corresponding histogram, relevant to Fig. 3 (b), displaying the variations of the dot size with a Gaussian-like size distribution of Si QDs, and (e and f) HRTEM images of Si QD films prepared at 15 mTorr pressure. 
B. Compositional properties

Fig. 4 presents the information on the chemical properties of the QD films deposited at different pressures. Fig. 4(a) shows the measured FTIR spectra of films in the broad wave number (ω) range 600–3800 cm−1. The dominant peaks in the spectra are ascribed to the Si–H wagging mode (at ∼650 cm−1), Si–N stretching mode (at ∼870 cm−1), Si–H stretching mode at ∼2100 cm−1, and N–H stretching mode (located at ∼3350 cm−1).33,38 Some of the most crucial parameters of the SiNx:H films are the hydrogen (H) and N fractions in the films. For ease of reference, the insets in Fig. 4(a) also show the magnified versions of the Si–H stretching and N–H stretching modes. With the increase in the operating pressure, the intensities of the all the Si–N, N–H and Si–H absorption peaks change gradually, suggesting variation in the incorporation of nitrogen (N) and hydrogen (H) atoms into the a-SiNx:H matrix. The bonded nitrogen content, x in the a-SiNx:H matrix is estimated from the Si–N asymmetric stretching mode vibration (∼870 cm−1), as (2)where, Kω = 6.3 × 1018 cm−2 and NSi = 5 × 1022 cm−3 are, respectively, the oscillator strength and the atomic density of crystalline silicon.49 Similarly, the bonded hydrogen content, h (in at%) is determined from the absorption peaks of the Si–H wagging and N–H stretching modes using the following relation: (3)where, Kω = 1.6 × 1019 cm−2 and Kω = 2.8 × 1020 cm−2 are the oscillator strength corresponding to the Si–H wagging and N–H stretching modes, respectively.50,51Fig. 4(b) presents the relevant variations of atomic N and H contents in the films. The higher value of x and h at pressures 15 and 55 mTorr is due to the higher absorption coefficients relevant to the Si–N and Si–H stretching modes and Si–H wagging modes. Under these conditions, one would expect here the presence of high values of atomic N and H radicals in the plasmas, which is discussed later.
 Fig. 4  (a) FTIR spectra of Si QD films of Fig. 3 showing characteristic stretching and wagging modes of a-SiNx:H. Also, the insets are showing the Si–H and N–H stretching modes of a-SiNx:H, and (b) variation of bonded nitrogen in a-SiNx:H and hydrogen content (in at%), with pressures. 
As the pressure changes from 20 to 30 mTorr x varies slowly from ∼0.37 to 0.4; it acquires a value of ∼0.58 at 35 mTorr, and then it decreases further to 0.3 at 45 mTorr. Beyond 45 mTorr, it suddenly increases up to ∼0.8 at 55 mTorr and falls sharply at 60 mTorr (it is evident from the weak signals relevant to Si–H and N–H modes in Fig. 4(b) at a pressure of 60 mTorr). Except at 40 mTorr pressure, the overall variation of h is very much similar to that of x. This abnormal variation of the x and h is attributed to the change in the Si–N, N–H and Si–H bond concentrations in the a-SiNx:H network due to the change in the atomic N and H in the plasma process at different pressures. However, careful observation of Fig. 2(d) and 4(b) reveals that the a-SiNx:H matrix that contains a simultaneously higher or lower content (value) of N and H results in a relatively bigger dot size. This feature suggests that balance between N and H atoms in the film is also necessary to synthesize small sized QDs. This tendency indicates that N and H radical control in the plasma would be helpful to induce a change in the QD size. The lower value of atomic H in the film is attributed to higher H ionization in the plasma that is to be discussed later in light of plasma characteristics. Similar to the FTIR analysis (Fig. 4), the XPS results (not shown) also show that the N concentration of the sample notably reduces from ∼25.5 at% to ∼14.5 at% as the pressure changes from 15 mTorr to 30 mTorr.
C. Photoluminescence (PL) studies

Fig. 5(a) depicts the PL spectra of ten Si QD thin films deposited at different operating pressures, varying from 15 mTorr to 60 mTorr. All the samples show strong PL features with different colours in the visible range under excitation with ultra-violet (UV) light.
 Fig. 5  (a) Room temperature PL spectra of the deposited films under 325 nm UV excitation, (b) deconvolution of a typical PL spectrum into four components, (c) the variations in PL peak energy as a function of pressure, (d) variations of the integrated area of PL intensities of the measured spectra and the area of the total PL of the deconvoluted spectra along with the FWHM of the measured spectra with pressure, (e) normalized PL and absorbance with respect to the photon energy, and (f) a representative PL decay curve from the sample prepared at 30 mTorr. 
With the increase in the pressure from 15 mTorr to 60 mTorr, PL peak energy (Fig. 5(a)) is shifted from violet (3.05 eV) towards the orange (2.03 eV) end of the visible (violet to red) spectrum. Fig. 5(b) shows the representative decomposition of a measured PL spectrum into four components with their peak positions at various locations of the photon energy. It is apparent from Fig. 5(a) that except at a pressure ∼20 mTorr, the PL peak energy remains in a very narrow range of 3.05–2.8 eV (that corresponds to the wavelength range ∼410–450 nm) corresponding to a pressure variation from 15 to 40 mTorr. Note that the enhanced magnitude of the ultra-nanocrystalline (XnC) component (in Fig. 2(c)) indicates that at low pressures (≤35 mTorr), the network crystallinity is dominated by tiny Si nanocrystallites that can be associated with the repeated violet shift of the PL band. At high pressures (≥40 mTorr) XnC acquires a low value. At high pressures (except at 55 mTorr), the color of the spectrum changes to green and orange relevant to the shift in the PL peak energy positions from 2.31 to 2.03 eV. The anomalous shift of the PL peak energy is well calibrated with the pressure as shown in Fig. 5(c) while Fig. 5(d) demonstrates the change in the integrated areas of PL intensity (IPL) and the related full width at half maximum (FWHM). Fig. 5(d) also shows the sum of the total integrated area of the deconvoluted PL spectra to compare with that of measured ones. It is seen that these integrated areas are quite comparable. With the increase in the pressure from 15 to 60 mTorr, the integral area (Fig. 5(d)) initially increases up to a pressure of 25 mTorr, reaches its maximum at 30–35 mTorr and then decreases at higher pressures. The FWHM varies similarly to the profile of PL peak energy (Fig. 5(c)) with an overall variation from 0.28 to 0.92 eV. The broad size distribution [Fig. 3(b)] of the Si QDs in the sample prepared at 30 mTorr, as seen from the corresponding histogram shown in the TEM micrograph in Fig. 3(d), may be accounted for its broader PL band with enhanced PL intensity. The overall high intensity with a less broad or narrow FWHM is an essential PL characteristic that can be important for successful application of the QD materials to the light emitting devices (LEDs). One can recall here that there is the change in the microstructure of the films represented by the shift in the Raman peak positions (Fig. 2(a)) deposited at different pressures.
The physical evidence of the presence of Si QDs is obtained from HRTEM imaging (Fig. 3), Raman analysis (Fig. 2), XRD data (Fig. 3(c)). As for a bulk semiconductor material, an electron tends to undergo transitions near the edges of the bandgap (Eg). However, in the case of QDs, the size of the bandgap is controlled simply by adjusting the size of the dots. Because the emission frequency of a QD is dependent on the Eg, it is, therefore, feasible to control precisely the output wavelength of a dot. In effect, it is possible to tune the bandgap of a QD, and, therefore, specify its “color.” The addition and (or) subtraction of just a few atoms to the QDs have the effect of altering the boundaries of the bandgap and the surface/size (Fig. 2 and 3) of the dots. To envisage a qualitative explanation of the mechanisms of this visible PL along with the relationship with the electronic structure and the optical absorption of these QD films, the typical PL spectrum of the film deposited at 30 mTorr (Fig. 5(a)) is plotted together with the absorbance spectrum in an overlapping scheme with the variation in the photon energy. In Fig. 5(e), the PL is normalized to its maximum intensity because our intention in this figure is to study the absorbing-emitting regions. Fig. 6(e) shows that the absorption takes place at ∼3.25 eV and emission occurs at ∼2.9 eV. Furthermore, the widths of the absorption and emission spectra are ∼0.90 eV and 0.82 eV, respectively, which are close to each other.
 Fig. 6  (a) Variation of the optical gap and PL peak energy as a function of pressure, (b) a schematic representation of the quasi-direct recombination process in the case of a Si QD semiconductor, (c and d) deconvolution of PL spectra into probable contributing components arising from various defects and quasi-direct band-to-band recombination because of the quantum confinement (QC) effect, and (e) variations of peak energy of the measured PL spectra and the precise component of PL arise from band-to-band recombination as well as fitted PL energy according to effective mass theory with the estimated size of the QDs. 
Furthermore, it is well-known that the bandgap lies between the valence and conduction bands of a semiconductor. Energy introduced by photons can promote an electron to the conduction band. Also, the conduction band has many vacant energy levels. Thus, an excited electron can easily undergo a transition between these levels and can be delocalized. Later, the excited electron will relax into the ground state along with the release of energy in the form of photons. This relaxation is known as recombination. The promotion and the relaxation of electrons are mediated by photons that lead to the occurrence of the optical transitions. Thus, we consider optical excitation and recombination when an electron absorbs and emits light. The time between the excitation and the recombination is the optical recombination time, which is taken as the PL lifetime. Thus, for the recombination process to occur, an excited electron must interact with a hole in the valence band. In highly confined structures, like Si-QDs, this can happen quickly, and we expect a very small PL lifetime. Fig. 5(f) shows the results of PL lifetime measurement of the sample prepared at 30 mTorr. Fig. 5(f) shows various curves. One can see the comparison between the measurements done on our QD sample with the impulse response function of the instrument. It can be seen that the measured data (raw) are a convolution of the real PL decay with the impulse response function. The deconvolution estimations are performed using Origin with the representative peak from the measurement. The baseline counts are subtracted, from the data, to do the deconvolution. We carry out the Fourier transform, division of the impulse response function, and the inverse Fourier transform. The deconvoluted measurement is then plotted and fitted with an approximate exponential curve to determine the PL lifetime to be ∼0.72 ns.
Furthermore, the overall variation of the PL peaks (Fig. 5(c)) and the corresponding shift in the peak position of the Raman spectra (Fig. 2(a)) that indicate the gradual change in the size of Si QDs (Fig. 2(c)), which is supported by TEM studies (Fig. 3), altogether suggest the possibility of the PL from the QC effect within the material.1,2,23,31 The violet to orange color (Fig. 5(a)) in PL spectra upon changing the operating pressure, which leads to changes in the plasma parameters, is mostly attributed to the quantum size effect. However, in the plasma assisted deposition like PECVD (as in the present study), the importance of numerous radiative defect states, arising from the interface and matrix, in luminescence can also be possible. In this context, the study of the origin of the PL spectra of the material is also important. However, the importance of various radiative defect states that can occur from the interface and matrix in PL cannot be discarded without proper explanation.
Initially, we have estimated the optical (Tauc) band gap (Eg) from UV-vis spectroscopy of the films. The gap Eg of QD films is estimated by measuring the absorbance and reflectance in the UV-vis region using Tauc's equation:23 α·Energy (=hν) = B·(Energy − Eg)n(4)
In the above expression, B is a constant quantity. The parameters α, ν, and n are the absorption coefficient, the transmission frequency and the exponent that represents the nature of band transition, respectively. Typically, values of n = 1/2 and 3/2 represent the direct allowed and forbidden transitions, respectively. Additionally, n = 2 and 3 are, respectively, related to the indirect allowed and forbidden transitions. Since the QD thin film is a mixed-phase material, accurate estimation of its Eg is rather difficult, however, it may give an estimated Eg of the material. By setting n = 2, and considering an approximation of indirect transitions, the plot of (α·Energy)1/2 with hν estimates the value of Eg. The overall variation of Eg in the range 2.6–3.5 eV with pressure is shown in the Fig. 6(a). For comparison, the variation of PL peak energy is also shown together with the optical gap of the film in Fig. 6(a).
To investigate further the origin of such PL peaks (Fig. 5(a)–(c)), two types of luminescence mechanisms can be envisaged, e.g. by the QC effect and through radiative defects in the solid films. There can be numerous possibilities of having several defects that are responsible for the origin of the PL spectra. In the case of silicon nitride films, four types of defects could be possible. They may be listed as defects within Si–Si and N–N bonds, and defects arising from Si and N dangling bonds.52 Also, for a stoichiometric a-SiNx:H matrix, the Si–Si bond can form a bonding σ and an antibonding σ* orbital that are separated by ∼4.6 eV.53 The Si-dangling bond that generates a defect state between σ and σ* can be a dominant trap and recombination center in the a-SiNx:H matrix and can participate in the radiative transition to result in PL.54 The N-dangling bond (N center, N02) can also generate a level within the Si–Si gap. There can be the possibility of an another type of N defect state, named as N+4, which can also give rise to a level in addition to N02.52 The N4+ can arise due to the reaction between the positively charged Si-dangling bond and bulk N.52 There is also evidence of PL from nanocrystalline silicon nitride films due to radiative defect centers at the interface between the Si NCs and the amorphous a-SiNx:H matrix.55
Additionally, Si has an indirect band structure, making it a poor material for LEDs. It indicates that the least energetic electrons in the conduction band in Si are in motion about the most energetic valence band electron states. For Si to absorb or emit a photon at a visible frequency, an electron has to undergo a band-to-band transition between these states. This transition also requires the simultaneous emission or absorption of a phonon to accommodate the momentum mismatch that is much less likely to occur. To gain qualitative information, Fig. 6(b) depicts a schematic representation of the radiative recombination event between the conduction band and valence band inside Si QDs where there is no direct recombination rather it is quasi-direct, obeying the uncertainty principle of the position and momentum.
One may recall here the possibility of band-to-band transition and creation of excitons by direct transition within Si NCs as the likely origin of the PL from the Si nanoparticle powder product using the laser ablation method.56 Furthermore, for a defect-related PL spectrum, one would expect the corresponding PL peak position to appear near the defect energy level. Furthermore, it is evident from Fig. 5(a) that the PL spectra corresponding to pressures of 30 mTorr, 35 mTorr, 50 mTorr, and 60 mTorr are nearly symmetric, whereas other spectra relevant to the samples prepared at other pressures become asymmetric. This asymmetric broadening of the PL spectra possibly indicates the existence of some defect-related components with band-to-band quasi-direct recombination.
The authors wish to note that Mo et al.57 have reported the observation of six emission bands corresponding to energy gaps of ∼3.2, 2.8, 2.7, 2.4, 2.3, and 2.0 eV, generated from different radiative defect centers in the a-SiNx:H film. Deshpande et al.54 have reported two more radiative recombination centers correlated with the N defect state around 1.8 and 3.0 eV. In their work, the 1.8 eV peak is attributed to recombination between N02 and N4+ levels and the 3.0 eV peak arises due to recombination from the conduction band to the N4+ level. Furthermore, a PL peak at ∼2.5 eV appears due to the radiative Si-dangling bond (K0) center.58 For a clear understanding of the defect-related issues, only a few asymmetric PL spectra of these samples are deconvoluted into possible contributing components as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). In Fig. 6(c), the component (a1) at ∼2.33 eV can be attributed to the electronic transition Ec → Si0.57 Here, Ec and Si0 represent the edge of the conduction band and Si donor energy level, respectively. The 2.8 eV peak arises due to recombination from the conduction band to the N4+ level.57 The other two peaks at 3.0 eV and 3.20 eV of components c1 and d1 may be ascribed to the electronic transitions Si → N− and Si0 → Ev (Ev represents the edge of valence band), respectively, as shown by Robertson and Powell.59 The relevant peaks (a2) at ∼2.45 eV and ∼2.7 eV (at a pressure of ∼25 mTorr) may result from band-to-band recombination in Si QDs. In Fig. 7(d), the other component c2 (at ∼3.0 eV) corresponds to the electronic transitions Si → N−59 and the component d2 (at ∼3.25 eV) is attributed to the transition Ec → Si0.57
 Fig. 7  (a) Atomic H and N radical density in the plasmas operating at different pressures and (b) corresponding variations in different plasma parameters showing the correlation between radical and plasma parameters. 
Furthermore, we wish to note that H passivation of dangling bonds in nanoscale Si is commonly known to enhance PL intensity.60 Looking at the atomic H and N content data in Fig. 4(b) one would expect that proper surface passivation of the Si QDs could also be the reason for the high intensity of PL. Fig. 4(b) indicates that the samples deposited at pressures of 15 mTorr, 30 mTorr, 35 mTorr, 45 mTorr, and 55 mTorr have a high concentration of atomic H that is conducive for surface passivation. At other pressures (20 mTorr, 25 mTorr, 45 mTorr, and 60 mTorr), surface passivation may remain incomplete since the available atomic H in the plasma process is insufficient for satisfying the large number of available dangling bonds of the network. This aspect will be cleared using the plasma diagnostic data to be discussed later.

Fig. 6(e) presents the overall variation of PL peak energy of the measured PL spectrum and its definite component that identifies the contribution from band-to-band recombination in Si QDs, originating due to the QC effect, as a function of the QD size (relevant to Fig. 2(d)). Taking into account the QC phenomena occurring in the Si–N–H complex system, one can recall here the effective mass theory20,31,61 to explain the origin of PL. According to this theory, the energy gap, E (eV), for a 3-D confined Si NC can be expressed as: (5)where, 1.12 eV represents the bulk Si band gap, D is the QD size, and Q is the confinement parameter. The solid line in Fig. 6(e) represents a least square fit plot of the data in the form of the above equation with a value Q = 14.5 eV nm2. Note that, Q = 13.9 eV nm2 is earlier reported for Si-QDs embedded in the a-SiNx:H matrix using the (SiH4 + NH3) process62 and Q = 11.8 eV nm2 is obtained using the (SiH4 + N2) process using CCP plasmas.63 Also, Q = 13.5 eV nm2 is reported61 in (SiH4 + NH3) plasmas generated using ICP. Also, there is the report of Q with a relatively much lower magnitude of ∼2.4 eV nm2 in the case of amorphous Si QDs in an a-SiNx:H matrix.64 According to the above discussion, the overall change in the PL peak energy (∼2.0–3.1 eV) of Si QD thin films (Fig. 5(c) and 6(e)) apparently comes from various contributions. It is the combined effect of mostly the QC effect arising because of variation in the size of the QDs, band-to-band recombination, and the simultaneous variation due to bonded H and N content of the network.
D. Role of plasma chemistry
As discussed above, the plasma-assisted PECVD deposition of Si QDs within the a-SiNx:H matrix depends crucially on the optimization of operation parameters. In the present study, deposition is performed at low temperature and low pressure. Furthermore, the applied power = 400 W is relatively high even though the actual power delivered to the plasma is rather small. In the plasma, there will be the generation of high-density radicals, high-energy electrons and ions due to many chemical reactions from the precursor gasses. The film growth processes involve two separate phase reactions, gas-phase and solid-phase reactions. Some of the important reactions may be listed as follows:e− + H2 → H + H + e−H + SiH4 → SiH3 + H2H + NH3 → NH2 + H2NH2 + SiH3 → SiH2(NH2) + HSiH2(NH2) + NH2 → H + SiH(NH2)2SiH(NH2)2 + NH2 → H + Si(NH2)3Si(NH2)3 + NH2 → H + Si(NH2)4e− + SiH4 → SiH3 + H + e− → SiH2 + 2H + e− → SiH4* + e−SiH4* → SiH* + H2 + He− + NH3 → NH3+e− + NH3 → NH+ + H2 → NH+ + H + H−e− + NH+ → (NH)** → (NH+)* + e− → N+ + H + e−→ N + H+ + e−→ N2+ + H + 2e−SiHx + NHx → SiNx + H2SiHx + N → SiNx + H2where, the symbol ‘*’ represents the excited radicals. It is evident that there are many resources for the generation of H and N atomic radicals in the plasmas that can affect the film properties.
Better information of radical and plasma production can be obtained from the VUVAS and LP measurements, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7. As indicated earlier using FTIR analysis, the profiles of atomic H and N in the films (Fig. 4(b)) are very nearly similar to that of measured atomic density profiles (Fig. 7(a)) in plasmas operating at different pressures. It can be seen that of the profiles [Fig. 7(a)] for the atomic H density (nH) and N density (nN) are following the profile of electron temperature (Te) in Fig. 7(b) indicating the formation of these radicals by electron impact dissociation reactions. Corresponding to the overall variation of Te ∼ 1.5–2.8 eV, the plasma density (n0), in Fig. 7(b), varies between 3 × 1011 cm−3 and 9 × 1010 cm−3, relevant to the pressure variation of 15–60 mTorr. One can also see that the profiles of Te and n0 are quite complementary indicating the balance of plasma pressure (p = n0·Te). Also, the profile of plasma potential (Vp), with a variation of ∼(75 ± 5 V), is also similar to that of Te (∼2.2 ± 0.6 eV). Furthermore, the values of Te are much less compared to that of Vp at all pressures, which suggests that the electrons ate electrostatically confined in the plasmas. Also, looking at the profile of nH (Fig. 7(a)) one would expect a monotonically decreasing profile of the same except at pressures of 20 mTorr and 45 mTorr. However, under these pressure conditions, most of the atomic H atoms are expended for the plasma ionization (Fig. 7(b)), which is evident from their higher values of n0 at relatively lower Te. Due to the high value of nH, one would expect the role of H passivation of dangling bonds in nanoscale Si.60 One can also see that, except at a pressure of 50 mTorr, the profile of PL peak energy (Fig. 6(b)) is similar to the profile of nN (Fig. 7(a)). This correlation indicates that the band gap of the QD material can be tuned by controlling the atomic N (nH) in the films that is specified by the plasma parameters (Fig. 7).
Additionally, due to the presence of a very high atomic H, there is the possibility of many heterogeneous reactions of higher groups of silane and amino silane which are considered to be the feasible pathway for the growth of films. Furthermore, the structural network is largely created by the energy relaxation process of the adsorbed precursors on the film growth surface. In this context, one would expect the function of surface diffusion length that is associated with diffusion activation energy (Ediff).65 Furthermore, the surface diffusion rate varies exponentially as (−Ediff/kBT), where, kB and T, respectively, represent the Boltzmann constant and temperature. In the present study, the substrate temperature is kept constant. However, in the plasma processes the radicals can acquire additional thermal kinetic energy (≡Te) directly by the electron impact reactions. In this sense, the plasma parameters, in particular, the electron temperature (Te) would influence these surface diffusion reactions. The large diffusion length associated with low Te would further facilitate the adsorbed radicals in plasmas to arrive the energetically favorable positions on the film surface, which enables the formation of well-oriented crystalline QD structures of spherical shapes (Fig. 3(b)). Probably, due to the occurrence of these events on the film growth surface, all the deposited films show the presence of enough crystallinity (between 65% and 87%, see Fig. 2(c)). In particular, at pressures of 15 mTorr, 20 mTorr, 40 mTorr, 45 mTorr and 60 mTorr, the large surface diffusion length of the adsorbents induces the QDs to grow bigger in size. At other pressures, the smaller diffusion length confines the growth of the QDs to smaller sizes (Fig. 2(d)). Note that the wide size distribution (at a pressure of 30 mTorr, as shown in Fig. 3(e) and (g)) leads to a high value of XnC ∼ 35% volume fraction relevant to the ultra-nanocrystalline component (Fig. 2(c)). As explained above and from nH measurements (Fig. 7(a)), it is noticeable that a substantial atomic H flux is generated from the large-scale dissociation of all the molecular gasses (SiH4, NH3, and H2) in high-density RF/UHF DF plasmas. This higher flux ensures a very high surface coverage, which enables the enhancement of the surface diffusion length of atomic radicals due to the lower Ediff.66
In the present work, the QD thin films with strong PL from violet to orange color tunable over a broad visible range (∼2.0–3.1 eV) illustrate considerable attention towards the fabrication of LEDs. Additionally, there are numerous reports of wide-range visible PL from Si QDs within the a-SiNx:H matrix. In these cases, the films are deposited by PECVD with variations of pressure and NH3 flow rate,11,12,23 by magnetron sputtering13 with or without incorporation of high-temperature post-deposition annealing, by catalytic CVD,67 and by plasmon-induced enhancement.68 In connection with these reports, the novelty of the present study is to obtain intense visible PL with narrow to broad widths (Fig. 5(d)) using single-step or direct plasma-synthesized Si QD thin films at low temperatures by changing the H2 flow. By varying the pressure by changing the H2 flow rate one can control the plasma parameters that specify the atomic H and N radicals in the deposition process. These activated radicals and energetic electrons provide the amorphous nitrogenated dielectric matrix that is responsible for the confinement of QDs, which are exclusively preferred for their useful applications in device fabrication. It is also shown that the shift in PL energy (Fig. 5(c)) has a very similar profile to that of atomic nitrogen density (Fig. 7(a)) and electron temperature (Fig. 7(b)). This correlation indicates that the presence of higher nitrogen radicals in the plasma favours a higher band gap by inducing higher nitrogen to the a-SiNx:H matrix, which in turn, controls the shift in the PL peak energy. The measured plasma density (Fig. 7(b)) is also very high (with a very low electron temperature), which is in the same order as H and N atomic radical densities.
Additionally, the authors wish to note that additional work relevant to the study on quantum yield is beyond the scope of this manuscript.69 However, this work presents a detailed investigation of QD film processes using advanced type RF-UHF DF PECVD processes taking into account the integrated approach to process design, synthesis, characterization, and plasma diagnostics. Plasma assisted deposition using advance DF PECVD enables low-temperature deposition of QD films. The reduction of the thermal budget by utilizing a low-temperature process could enhance the device feasibility on inexpensive substrates that in turn can reduce the device cost with improved flexibility, lightness, and durability of devices.
Conclusions
Although the studies of Si QDs or Si NCs are initiated just a few decades ago, the progress is noteworthy concerning unique film properties and potential applications for devices. In this work, we have emphasized that the development and progress made in the film preparation and plasma processing techniques can bring about a deeper understanding of the Si QD film growth and control of the size of QDs. Almost spherical Si QDs with an average size of ∼3.8 nm are observed using HRTEM imaging, which is consistent with Raman and XRD analysis. Raman analysis reveals that the QD size can be controlled and changed from ∼3.0 nm to 17 nm by changing operating pressure, which influences the film’s crystallinity (in a wide-range from 65 to 87%) and microstructure. A broad visible range (2.0 eV to 3.1 eV) PL, with high enough intensity and narrow to broad widths (∼0.3–0.9 eV), has been observed from Si QDs embedded in the a-SiNx:H matrix. It is seen that quasi-direct band-to-band recombination because of the QC effect in the nanocrystalline Si QDs of suitable size seems to be the origin of the major component contributing to PL intensity. The analysis reveals that the obtained film properties are controllable by inducing a change in the plasma characteristics and radical parameters. The RF-UHF DF PECVD at low operating pressures has shown a very high molecular dissociation capability to produce a high atomic density of H and N radicals as well as a very high plasma density with low electron temperature, which is necessary and conducive to the control of film growth, microstructure, and other film properties. Overall, a detailed and integrated approach to the low-temperature PECVD deposition of Si QD films is proposed for the better understanding, optimization, and control of the advanced materials processes. It is believed that future developmental work in this area will further specify that Si QD nanostructures are prevailing functional nanomaterials, which can impact fundamental science and technological applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors sincerely thank the referees for their valuable comments that helped significantly in improving the overall outlook of the paper. This study was supported by the R&D Program of ‘Plasma Advanced Technology for Agriculture and Food (Plasma Farming)’ through the National Fusion Research Institute of Korea (NFRI) funded by Government funds, the Global Development Research Center GRDC, a program of the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP, Grant No. 2011-0031643, 2nd stage 3rd year). It was also supported by the Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology (KIAT), which is funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE, Grant No. N0000590).
References
L. M. Wheeler, N. R. Neale, T. Chen and U. R. Kortshagen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2197 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Littau, P. J. Szajowski, A. J. Muller, A. R. Kortan and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1224 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, J. J. Choi, D. Stachnik, A. C. Bartnik, B. R. Hyun, G. G. Malliaras, T. Hanrath and F. W. Wise, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Mastronardi, E. J. Henderson, D. P. Puzzo and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Mastronardi, F. Maier-Flaig, D. Faulkner, E. J. Henderson, C. Kubel, U. Lemmer and G. A. Ozin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, C.-F. Wang, L.-T. Ling and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4358 RSC .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 249 CrossRef CAS .
P. Felbier, J. Yang, J. Theis, R. W. Liptak, A. Wagner, A. Lorke, G. Bacher and U. Kortshagen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1988 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1551 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, C. H. Cho, T. W. Kim, N. M. Park, G. Y. Sung and S. J. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 091908 CrossRef .
T. Y. Kim, N. M. Park, K. H. Kim, G. Y. Sung, Y. W. Ok, T. Y. Seong and C. J. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5355 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ma, J. Y. Feng and Z. J. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Panchal, D. K. Rai, M. Mathew and C. S. Solanki, Nano: Brief Rep. Rev., 2009, 4, 265 CAS .
L. Yao, T. Yu, L. Ba, H. Meng, X. Fang, Y. Wang, L. Li, X. Rong, S. Wang, X. Wang, G. Ran, X. Pi and G. Qin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 673 RSC .
D. D. Tune, B. S. Flavel, R. Krupke and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1043 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Hirschman, L. T. Sybeskov, S. P. Duttagupta and P. M. Fauchet, Nature, 1996, 384, 338 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Fauchet, Mater. Today, 2005, 8, 26 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Canham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 57, 1046 CrossRef CAS .
D. Das and A. Samanta, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 055601 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Warner, A. Hoshino, K. Yamamoto and R. D. Tilley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-C. Cho, M. A. Green, G. Conibeer, D. Song, Y.-H. Cho, G. Scardera, S. Huang, S. Park, X. J. Hao, Y. Huang and L. V. Dao, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 69578, 1 CrossRef .
B. Sain and D. Das, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3881 RSC .
J. Baxter, Z. Bian, G. Chen, D. Danielson, M. S. Dresselhaus, A. G. Fedorov, T. S. Fisher, C. W. Jones, E. Maginn, U. Kortshagen, A. Manthiram, A. Nozik, D. R. Rolison, T. Sands, L. Shi, D. Sholl and Y. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6040–6046 Search PubMed .
D. Kar and D. Das, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14744 CAS .
K. Dohnalova, T. Gregorkiewicz and K. Kusova, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 173201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, S. Xu, J. W. Chai, J. D. Long and Y. C. Ee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 251904 CrossRef .
G. Y. Sung, N. M. Park, J. H. Shin, K. H. Kim, T. Y. Kim, K. S. Cho and C. Huh, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2006, 12, 1545 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Raut, V. A. Ganesh, A. S. Nairb and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3779 CAS .
D. Das and B. Sain, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 073708 CrossRef .
G. Conibeer, M. Green, E. C. Cho, D. Konig, Y. H. Cho, T. Fangsuwannarak, G. Scardera, E. Pink, Y. Huang, T. Puzzer, S. Huang, D. Song, C. Flynn, S. Park, X. Hao and D. Mansfield, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6748 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Sahu, J. G. Han, J. B. Kim, M. Kumar, S. B. Jin and M. Hori, Plasma Processes Polym., 2016, 13, 134 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Cheng, S. Xu and K. Ostrikov, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5853 RSC .
A. H. Mahan, A. C. Dillon, L. M. Gedvilas, D. L. Williamson and J. D. Perkins, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 2360 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Sahu, K. S. Shin, S. B. Jin, J. G. Han, K. Ishikawa and M. Hori, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 134903 CrossRef .
B. B. Sahu, J. G. Han, K. S. Shin, K. Ishikawa, M. Hori and Y. Miyawaki, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2015, 24, 025019 CrossRef .
K. S. Shin, B. B. Sahu, J. G. Han and M. Hori, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 076201 CrossRef .
B. B. Sahu, K. S. Shin and J. G. Han, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol., 2016, 25, 015017 CrossRef .
K. S. Shin, B. B. Sahu, M. Kumar, K. Leksakul and J. G. Han, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 475303 CrossRef .
G. Uchida, K. Yamamoto, M. Sato, Y. Kawashima, K. Nakahara, K. Kamataki, N. Itagaki, K. Koga and M. Shiratani, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 51, 01AD01 CrossRef .
S. Yamada, Y. Kurokawa, S. Miyajima and M. Konagai, Nano Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 246 CrossRef PubMed .
B. B. Sahu, Y. Y. Yin and J. G. Han, Phys. Plasmas, 2016, 23, 033512 CrossRef .
B. B. Sahu, J. G. Han, K. S. Shin and M. Hori, Plasma Processes Polym., 2016, 13, 447 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lafleur, R. W. Boswell and J. P. Booth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 194101 CrossRef .
B. Sain and D. Das, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 188 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jana, D. Das and A. K. Barua, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 74, 407 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Huang, S. Yi, Y. Liu, M. Fang and S. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3504 Search PubMed .
D. Das and A. Samanta, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 3625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hasegawa, H. Anbutsu and Y. Kurat, Philos. Mag. B, 1989, 59, 365 CAS .
C. J. Fang, K. J. Gruntz, L. Ley, M. Cardona, F. J. Demond, G. Muller and S. Kalbitzer, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1980, 35–36, 255 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Lanford and M. J. Rand, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 2473 CrossRef CAS .
J. Robertson, Philos. Mag. B, 1991, 63, 47 CAS .
P. A. Pundur, J. G. Shavalgin and V. A. Gritsenko, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1986, 94, K107 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Deshpande, E. Gulari, S. W. Brown and S. C. Rand, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 6534 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Wolkin, J. Jorne, P. M. Fauchet, G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, W. Li, B. Cao, H. Zeng and W. Cai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 21056 CAS .
C. Mo, L. Zhang, C. Xie and T. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 73, 5185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, D. Li, Z. Yuan, D. Yang and D. Que, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 131903 CrossRef .
J. Robertson and M. J. Powell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lannoo, C. Delerue and G. Allan, J. Lumin., 1996, 70, 170 CrossRef CAS .
D. Das and B. Sain, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 63572 RSC .
T. W. Kim, C. H. Cho, B. H. Kim and S. J. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 123102 CrossRef .
T. Y. Kim, N. M. Park, K. H. Kim, G. Y. Sung, Y. W. Ok, T. Y. Seong and C. J. Choi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5355 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rezgui, A. Sabai, T. Nychyporuk, M. Lemiti, G. Bremond, D. Maestre and O. Palais, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183105 CrossRef .
V. P. Zhdanov, Surf. Sci., 1985, 149, L13 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Cheng, E. Tam, S. Xu and K. Ostrikov, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 594 RSC .
K. M. Lee, T. H. Kim, J. D. Hwang, S. Jang, K. Jeong, M. Han, S. Won, J. Sok, K. Park and W. S. Hong, Scr. Mater., 2008, 59, 1190 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nychyporuk, Y. Zakharko, T. Serdiuk, O. Marty, M. Lemiti and V. Lysenko, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2472 RSC .
M. Behray, C. A. Webster, S. Pereira, P. Ghosh, S. Krishnamurthy, W. T. Al-Jamal and Y. Chao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8908 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01856dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the advanced DF PECVD system and (b) VUVAS radical monitoring system for measuring atomic H and N radicals.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) First-order Raman spectra of Si QD films prepared at different pressures, (b) deconvolution of the measured Raman spectrum of the films prepared at 30 mTorr into various components, (c) variations of crystalline and ultra-nanocrystalline volume fractions with pressure, and (d) change in the size of Si QDs estimated from the Raman peak shift and measured from HRTEM images.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–f) Microstructure studies of the films prepared at various pressures, (a and b) low and high magnification HRTEM images of the Si QD films prepared at a pressure of ∼30 mTorr, (c) X-ray diffraction spectra of films deposited at 30 mTorr, (d) the corresponding histogram, relevant to Fig. 3 (b), displaying the variations of the dot size with a Gaussian-like size distribution of Si QDs, and (e and f) HRTEM images of Si QD films prepared at 15 mTorr pressure.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  (a) FTIR spectra of Si QD films of Fig. 3 showing characteristic stretching and wagging modes of a-SiNx:H. Also, the insets are showing the Si–H and N–H stretching modes of a-SiNx:H, and (b) variation of bonded nitrogen in a-SiNx:H and hydrogen content (in at%), with pressures.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Room temperature PL spectra of the deposited films under 325 nm UV excitation, (b) deconvolution of a typical PL spectrum into four components, (c) the variations in PL peak energy as a function of pressure, (d) variations of the integrated area of PL intensities of the measured spectra and the area of the total PL of the deconvoluted spectra along with the FWHM of the measured spectra with pressure, (e) normalized PL and absorbance with respect to the photon energy, and (f) a representative PL decay curve from the sample prepared at 30 mTorr.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Variation of the optical gap and PL peak energy as a function of pressure, (b) a schematic representation of the quasi-direct recombination process in the case of a Si QD semiconductor, (c and d) deconvolution of PL spectra into probable contributing components arising from various defects and quasi-direct band-to-band recombination because of the quantum confinement (QC) effect, and (e) variations of peak energy of the measured PL spectra and the precise component of PL arise from band-to-band recombination as well as fitted PL energy according to effective mass theory with the estimated size of the QDs.	 
α·Energy (=hν) = B·(Energy − Eg)n	(4)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Atomic H and N radical density in the plasmas operating at different pressures and (b) corresponding variations in different plasma parameters showing the correlation between radical and plasma parameters.	 
	(5)
e− + H2 → H + H + e−
H + SiH4 → SiH3 + H2
H + NH3 → NH2 + H2
NH2 + SiH3 → SiH2(NH2) + H
SiH2(NH2) + NH2 → H + SiH(NH2)2
SiH(NH2)2 + NH2 → H + Si(NH2)3
Si(NH2)3 + NH2 → H + Si(NH2)4
e− + SiH4 → SiH3 + H + e− → SiH2 + 2H + e− → SiH4* + e−
SiH4* → SiH* + H2 + H
e− + NH3 → NH3+
e− + NH3 → NH+ + H2 → NH+ + H + H−
e− + NH+ → (NH)** → (NH+)* + e− → N+ + H + e−
→ N + H+ + e−
→ N2+ + H + 2e−
SiHx + NHx → SiNx + H2
SiHx + N → SiNx + H2
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp01856d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
