Solvent-assisted crystallization of two-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC03493F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC03493F
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 10552-10555Solvent-assisted crystallization of two-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite†

        
          
            Yingjie 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cai 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liguo 
            Gao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Guoying 
            Wei
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Tingli 
            Ma
          
        
      *bc
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116023, China. E-mail: liguo.gao@dlut.edu.cn
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, 310018, P. R. China
cGraduate School of Life Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka 808-0196, Japan
Received 
      2nd July 2021
    , Accepted 13th September 2021First published on 15th September 2021AbstractTwo dimensional (2D) perovskite materials, are more stable than 3D perovskite materials, which could solve the stability issue of perovskite solar cells (PSCs). However, the photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs based on 2D perovskite materials was low, due to the high dielectric and quantum confinement of 2D perovskite. In this work, we propose a solvent-assisted method to prepare 2D perovskite films, where the solvent was distributed in a gradient. Therefore, the top-down crystallization process of 2D perovskite can be accurately controlled. The PCE of PSCs fabricated by the solvent-assisted method was enhanced by 48%, compared with the control device. For the packaged devices, the stability test demonstrated that 94% of the initial PCE was still maintained after 1500 hours of storage (25 °C, RH 40%). After carefully analyzing the photophysical process of the carriers in the PSCs based on 2D perovskite, the enhanced carrier transfer mechanism of the solvent-assisted method has been proposed.
Two dimensional (2D) perovskite materials, are more stable than three dimensional (3D) perovskite materials.1 However, the existence of long-chain amine cations leads to higher dielectric and quantum confinement of the 2D perovskite, which will increase the exciton binding energy and widen the band gap.2 This is not conducive to the absorption of light and the separation of photogenerated carriers. In addition, compared to their 3D counterparts, the perpendicular charge transport in 2D perovskite materials is seriously affected due to the insulation of long-chain amine cations. This makes PSCs with 2D perovskite materials have lower photovoltaic conversion efficiency (PCE) than 3D perovskite solar cells (PSCs).3
In order to improve the charge transfer properties in perovskite, the current research is mostly focused on improving the crystallization of 2D perovskite,4 where the crystallization of 2D perovskite has three directions: perpendicular to the substrate, parallel to the substrate, and random.5 When the crystallization of 2D perovskite is perpendicular to the substrate, the adverse effect of long-chain amine cations on the charge transfer properties of perovskite will be avoided or weakened.1 Therefore, many methods have been developed to improve the orientation of 2D perovskite materials, such as component engineering,6,7 solvent engineering,8,9 additive engineering,10,11 preparation process,1,12etc.
Reports have shown that the crystallization of 2D perovskite started at the gas–liquid interface with the formation of 3D-like phase perovskite at the early stage of crystallization, and then the growth of the 2D perovskite was modeled by the 3D-like perovskite layer.13 If the nucleation of the 2D perovskite also occurs in the precursor at the same time, it would result in small grain size and low orientation of the perovskite.13 In order to enhance the crystallinity and orientation of perovskite by delaying the internal crystallization process in the precursor, lots of strategies have been carried out to delay the internal crystallization process. The utilization of additives such as NH4Cl,14 NH4SCN,15 and methylammonium chloride (MACl)16 could introduce Lewis basic Cl− and SCN−, which would react with Pb2+ to form intermediates, resulting in slowing down the crystallization process. The use of solvents with different polarity, boiling point, and Lewis basicity would also play great roles in the formation of intermediates, resulting in delay of the crystallization of 2D perovskite materials.8
The additives, added into the 2D perovskite precursor to slow down the crystallization process, were distributed in the whole bulk phase. This meant that the rate of crystallization at the gas–liquid interface was the same as that in the precursor. It could not accurately control the top-down crystallization process of 2D perovskite. In this work, we propose a solvent-assisted method to prepare 2D perovskite films, where the solvent, utilized to slow down the crystallization, was distributed in a gradient. Therefore, the top-down crystallization process of 2D perovskite can be accurately controlled.
In order to prove the influence, the solvent DMSO was selected to assist the formation of a 2D perovskite film. The DMSO-assisted method was carried out in a dynamic spin-coated procedure, as shown in Fig. 1a. The solvent was dropped on the substrates followed by a dynamic spin-coating procedure with the perovskite precursor. The dynamic spin-coating procedure was divided into two steps: one is at a low spin speed for the perovskite precursor dropping; the other is at the main spin speed for controlling the morphology of the 2D perovskite film. The detailed procedures are shown in the Experimental section, ESI.†
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the solvent-assisted perovskite preparation procedure. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves (reverse scan), (c) IPCE and (d) the stabilized power output of devices prepared by different methods under simulated AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Its effective area was 0.15 cm2. 
The architecture of the PSCs was ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/(BA)2(MA)3Pb4(I0.98Cl0.02)13 (300 nm)/PC61BM (80 nm)/BCP (1 nm)/Ag (80 nm). The corresponding schematic images are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). In order to illustrate the advantages of the DMSO-assisted method, for comparison, control devices using the normal method were executed. The detail fabricated procedure is shown in the Experimental section, ESI.† The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the champion devices prepared by the two methods are shown in Fig. 1b. Compared with control devices, the PCE of PSCs fabricated by the DMSO-assisted method was enhanced by 48% (from 8.37% to 12.42%), where the specific parameters are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The main difference in PCE is the substantial increase in Jsc, which enhanced from 11.81 to 17.17 mA cm−2. The corresponding incident monochromatic photon-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was consistent with the Jsc enhancement, as shown in Fig. 1c. To illustrate the device reliability, the time evolution of the maximum output power was executed under an AM 1.5G light source under the bias of 0.86 V. The results demonstrated that both devices, fabricated by DMSO-assisted and control methods, could maintain a stable maximum output power for 400 s.
To explore the improved photovoltaic performance of PSCs based on the DMSO-assisted method, the photophysical process has been tested, including electronic impedance spectroscopy (EIS), the space charge limited current (SCLC), transient photocurrent (TPC), transient photovoltage (TPV), intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS), and intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS). EIS showed the charge transfer and recombination information, where the embedded diagram was its equivalent circuit model, as shown in Fig. 2a. The devices based on the DMSO-assisted method had a larger carrier recombination resistance (∼9.8 kΩ), which was much larger than the resistance of the control device (∼2.3 kΩ). The higher carrier recombination resistance indicated the suppressed carrier recombination.17 The calculated SCLC results showed that the defect density of states (DOS) of the DMSO-assisted perovskite films was 0.91 × 1015 cm−3, which was much lower than that of the control perovskite (2.05 × 1015 cm−3). The calculated method is shown in the ESI.†18 In addition, the DMSO-assisted device showed a lower dark saturation current in the dark J–V characteristics, due to the lower DOS (Fig. S2, ESI†). These results demonstrated that the 2D perovskite film fabricated by the DMSO-assisted method had good quality with lower trap state density, resulting in less non-radiative carrier recombination loss.
 Fig. 2  (a) EIS measurements of devices prepared using different methods. (b) Dark J–V characteristics of electron-only devices. (c) Jscversus light intensity characteristics, (d) Vocversus light intensity characteristics, (e) normalized TPC curves and (f) normalized TPV curves of devices prepared using different methods. 
The carrier dynamics of PSCs based on the DMSO-assisted and control method have been measured. Fig. 2c shows the relationship between Jsc and light intensity in the double logarithmic scale, following the equation Jsc∝Iα (where I is the light intensity and α is the coefficient).19 When α was 1, it meant that the carriers have been transported away before recombination occurred. In DMSO-assisted devices, the α value was 0.96, larger than that of devices based on the control method (0.91). This indicated that the charge recombination of the devices based on the DMSO-assisted method was suppressed. Moreover, as the light intensity increased, the rising effect of the Jsc of the device was more obvious. This result was also consistent with the larger Jsc in the J–V curve. To further investigate the charge recombination, the relationship between Voc and light intensity was also investigated. Voc and the light intensity on a logarithmic scale showed a linear relationship,20 as shown in Fig. 2d. Compared with control devices, DMSO-assisted devices have a lower ideality factor (1.41 kBT/q), which meant that the DMSO-assisted method for preparing perovskites could effectively inhibit trap-assisted charge recombination in the device, which related to the lower trap state density. In order to explore the charge extraction performance of PSCs, the TPC and TPV results are shown in Fig. 2e and f, respectively. The DMSO-assisted devices showed a shorter photocurrent decay time (0.152 μs) and a longer photovoltage decay time (89 μs), indicating that the DMSO-assisted method could effectively decrease the charge extraction lifetime and increase the charge recombination lifetime. Therefore, the perovskites prepared by a DMSO-assisted method could effectively suppress charge recombination and promote charge extraction.17 This also explained the higher Jsc of the DMSO-assisted devices.
For the packaged DMSO-assisted devices, the stability test demonstrated that 94% of the initial PCE was still maintained after 1500 hours of storage (25 °C, RH 40%), while the control device maintained only 85% of the initial PCE, as shown in Fig. 3a. This was attributed to the improved crystallization of 2D perovskites, which gives a larger contact angle (Fig. 3b). The larger contact angle could resist water intrusion into the perovskite interior. In addition, the statistics of 30 devices prepared by different methods have been calculated. The histogram (Fig. 3c) of the DMSO-assisted devices had a narrower distribution, which indicated that they had higher reproducibility.
 Fig. 3  (a) PCE decay measurements based on packaged devices prepared by different methods measured in air. (b) Snapshots of surface contact angle measurements for perovskite films prepared using different methods. (c) Histogram of PCEs of devices prepared using different methods. 
To explore the reasons for the improvement of the device performance and photophysical properties, the characteristics of 2D perovskite films were analyzed. The morphology of 2D perovskite films prepared by different methods was studied, using scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) as shown in Fig. 4a and b. The 2D perovskite films prepared by the DMSO-assisted method have a smoother and more uniform surface than the control films. In the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Fig. 4c), both perovskite films, fabricated by the DMSO-assisted and control method, showed two main peaks at diffraction angles (2θ) of 14.28° and 28.58°, corresponding to (111) and (202) crystal planes of 2D perovskite.1 The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the diffraction peaks of 2D perovskite films has been compared, as shown in Fig. 4d. The peaks of 2D perovskite fabricated by the DMSO-assisted method have smaller FWHM and larger peak strength. According to the Scherrer formula, it indicated that 2D perovskite fabricated by the DMSO-assisted method has higher crystallinity. Reports have shown that the crystal plane (111) represented the inclined orientation, and the (202) crystal surface represents its vertical orientation.21 The calculated ratio of the (111) to (202) peak in the 2D perovskite films was 0.26 and 0.35, respectively. This showed that the inorganic lamellae of perovskite tended to grow in the direction vertical to the substrate for 2D perovskite fabricated by the DMSO-assisted method, which is more favorable for the charge transmission. In addition, the photophysical properties of perovskite films, prepared by different methods, were measured using photoluminescence spectra, as shown in Fig. 4e. These two perovskite films were deposited on glass, where DMSO-assisted perovskite films had higher PL intensity. This meant that 2D perovskite fabricated by the DMSO-assisted method could generate more carriers. This phenomenon could also be proved by the UV visible absorption spectra, as shown in Fig. 4f. Both 2D perovskite films, prepared by the DMSO-assisted and control method, have obvious absorption peaks at 567 nm, 598 nm, 634 nm and 750 nm, which represent the perovskite phase with n = 2, 3, 4 and ∞, respectively.21 By comparing the intensity of the absorption curve, it can be seen that 2D perovskite film prepared by the DMSO-assisted method has strong absorption in the whole wavelength range, which could result in more carriers and enhanced Jsc. What's more, compared with the control, the 2D perovskite film prepared by the DMSO-assisted method showed n = 5 absorption peak at 664 nm (the amplified part has been shown in Fig. S3, ESI†), which illustrated that the crystallization procedure was different for the DMSO-assisted and control method.
 Fig. 4  Top-view SEM images of the perovskite films prepared using different methods: (a) control, (b) DMSO-assisted. (c) XRD patterns, (d) the FWHM of the (111) and (202) diffraction peaks, (e) PL spectra and (f) UV-vis absorption of the perovskite films prepared using different methods. 
The different crystal characteristics and photophysical properties of the two perovskite films were mainly due to their growth mechanism. In order to explain the crystallization mechanism, the evolution model of the crystallization process has been established, as shown in Fig. 5. When a 2D perovskite precursor was deposited, 3D-like perovskite of a high n phase appeared at the gas–liquid interface.13 The nucleation of 2D perovskite also occurs in the precursor at the same time, as shown in Fig. 5a. With the evaporation of DMF, it would result in a small grain size and low orientation of the 2D perovskite, as shown in Fig. S4a and c (ESI†). However, in the DMSO-assisted method, DMSO existed at the bottom of a perovskite precursor, and the strong Lewis alkalinity makes it coordinate with Pb2+ to form a [PbI6]4− intermediate complex, as shown in Fig. 5b. The intermediate complex would lower the crystallization rate in the bulk phase, as shown in Fig. S4b (ESI†). With the progress of crystallization, the 3D-like perovskite (high n phase) at the top plays a role as the growth template of the perovskite. DMSO gradiently distributed in the perovskite phase could accurately control the crystallization of the bottom perovskite, as shown in Fig. S4d (ESI†). Due to the top-down growth, 2D perovskite with no low n phase was formed at the beginning. With the crystallization process, Pb2+ was gradually released from the intermediate complex to form a low n phase. The low nucleation density also led to large grains at a later crystallization stage, as shown in Fig. 4f. These indeed provides a means to further control the crystallization kinetics of 2D perovskite film, resulting in the vertical substrate direction growth, as demonstrated in Fig. 4c. Although the crystallization rate, with DMSO directly added to the bulk phase of the perovskite precursor, was significantly slower than that of the DMSO-assisted method (Fig. S5, ESI†), the same crystallization rate at the gas–liquid interface and in the precursor led to lower PCE of the devices (Fig. S6, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  The evolution model of crystallization kinetics of the perovskite prepared using different methods: (a) control, (b) DMSO-assisted. 
In this study, the solvent-assisted method has been carried out for fabricating 2D perovskite films. Compared with the control method, the 2D perovskite generated by this method exhibited more vertical growth, and the trap state density of the 2D perovskite film grown by this method is less, which is conducive to charge transmission and extraction. The possible mechanism has been proposed. The intermediate complex, solvent reacted with Pb2+, would lower the crystallization rate in the bulk phase. Then, the top-down crystallization process of 2D perovskite can be accurately controlled due to the gradient distribution of the solvent. Because of the vertical growth of the 2D perovskite, the PCE of PSCs fabricated by the solvent-assisted method was enhanced by 48%. The stability test demonstrated that 94% of the initial PCE was still maintained after 1500 hours of storage (25 °C, RH 40%).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. S. Toumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. M. Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Xu, M. Wang, Y. T. Lei, Z. P. Ci and Z. W. Jin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002558 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Tong, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1154–1186 RSC .
D. Li, Z. Xing, L. Huang, X. Meng, X. Hu, T. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2101823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yao, M. T. Hoang and H. Wang, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2001147 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Gao, F. Zhang, C. X. Xiao, X. H. Chen, B. W. Larson, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yao, X. Mao, X. Wang, Y. Yang, P. Ngoc Duy, A. Du, P. Chen, L. Wang, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6651–6661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, X. Wang, T. Hu, Q. Fu, X. Hu, Z. Huang, S. Xiao and Y. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1675–1683 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yao, C. Zhang, S. Zhang, Y. Yang, A. Du, E. Waclawik, X. Yu, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29753–29764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sidhik, W. Li, M. H. K. Samani, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Hoffman, A. K. Fehr, M. S. Wong, C. Katan, J. Even, A. B. Marciel, M. G. Kanatzidis, J.-C. Blancon and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Wang, S. Q. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. F. Chen, Y. H. Deng, Z. M. Li, K. Meng, G. Chen, T. T. Huang, S. Xiao, H. Huang, C. H. Zhou, L. M. Ding, J. He, J. S. Huang and Y. B. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Fu, J. Wang, L. J. Zuo, K. Gao, F. Liu, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2086–2093 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Zhang, G. Wu, S. D. Yang, W. F. Fu, Z. Q. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Q. Liu, J. L. Yan, W. T. Yang and H. Z. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1700611 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Huang, P. Siffalovic, B. Li, S. X. Yang, L. X. Zhang, P. Nadazdy, G. Z. Cao and J. J. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124959 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, Q. Chen, K. Zhang, L. Yuan, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6213–6219 RSC .
Y. Xie, H. Yu, J. Duan, L. Xu and B. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11190–11196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, Y. R. Yang, K. Gu, C. M. Liu, J. Zheng and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51744–51755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, Y. Zheng, Y. Xia, L. Chao, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806831 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, L. Yang and X. F. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 68 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc03493fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the solvent-assisted perovskite preparation procedure. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curves (reverse scan), (c) IPCE and (d) the stabilized power output of devices prepared by different methods under simulated AM 1.5G illumination of 100 mW cm−2. Its effective area was 0.15 cm2.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) EIS measurements of devices prepared using different methods. (b) Dark J–V characteristics of electron-only devices. (c) Jscversus light intensity characteristics, (d) Vocversus light intensity characteristics, (e) normalized TPC curves and (f) normalized TPV curves of devices prepared using different methods.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) PCE decay measurements based on packaged devices prepared by different methods measured in air. (b) Snapshots of surface contact angle measurements for perovskite films prepared using different methods. (c) Histogram of PCEs of devices prepared using different methods.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top-view SEM images of the perovskite films prepared using different methods: (a) control, (b) DMSO-assisted. (c) XRD patterns, (d) the FWHM of the (111) and (202) diffraction peaks, (e) PL spectra and (f) UV-vis absorption of the perovskite films prepared using different methods.	 

 	Fig. 5  The evolution model of crystallization kinetics of the perovskite prepared using different methods: (a) control, (b) DMSO-assisted.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cc03493f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
