Connecting quantum dots with enzymes: mediator-based approaches for the light-directed read-out of glucose and fructose oxidation   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR00091J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR00091J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2814-2823Connecting quantum dots with enzymes: mediator-based approaches for the light-directed read-out of glucose and fructose oxidation†

        
          
            M. 
            Riedel
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            N. 
            Sabir
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            F. W. 
            Scheller
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            W. J. 
            Parak
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            F. 
            Lisdat
          
        
      *a
aBiosystems Technology, Institute for Applied Life Sciences, Technical University Wildau, Hochschulring 1, D-15745 Wildau, Germany. E-mail: flisdat@th-wildau.de
bFachbereich Physik, Philips University Marburg, Renthof 5, D-35032 Marburg, Germany
cInstitute for Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 25-26, D-14476 Potsdam, Germany
Received 
      4th January 2017
    , Accepted 24th January 2017First published on 26th January 2017AbstractThe combination of the biocatalytic features of enzymes with the unique physical properties of nanoparticles in a biohybrid system provides a promising approach for the development of advanced bioelectrocatalytic devices. This study describes the construction of photoelectrochemical signal chains based on CdSe/ZnS quantum dot (QD) modified gold electrodes as light switchable elements, and low molecular weight redox molecules for the combination with different biocatalysts. Photoelectrochemical and photoluminescence experiments verify that electron transfer can be achieved between the redox molecules hexacyanoferrate and ferrocene, and the QDs under illumination. Since for both redox mediators a concentration dependent photocurrent change has been found, light switchable enzymatic signal chains are built up with fructose dehydrogenase (FDH) and pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent glucose dehydrogenase ((PQQ)GDH) for the detection of sugars. After immobilization of the enzymes at the QD electrode the biocatalytic oxidation of the substrates can be followed by conversion of the redox mediator in solution and subsequent detection at the QD electrode. Furthermore, (PQQ)GDH has been assembled together with ferrocenecarboxylic acid on top of the QD electrode for the construction of a funtional biohybrid architecture, showing that electron transfer can be realized from the enzyme over the redox mediator to the QDs and subsequently to the electrode in a completely immobilized fashion. The results obtained here do not only provide the basis for light-switchable biosensing and bioelectrocatalytic applications, but may also open the way for self-driven point-of-care systems by combination with solar cell approaches (power generation at the QD electrode by enzymatic substrate consumption).
Introduction
During the last decade semiconductor nanoparticles (quantum dots) have gained much attention due to their unique photophysical properties, such as size-tunable photoluminescence properties, high fluorescence quantum yield, and stability against degradation and photobleaching.1 These superior features of quantum dots (QDs) have initiated new light-driven research fields such as solar cells,2 optical assays,3 electrochemiluminescence-based detection schemes,4 and photoelectrochemical (PEC) sensors.5–9 All approaches rely on an excitation process of the semiconductor nanoparticle, e.g. by using light of sufficient energy, to transfer electrons from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) generating electron–hole pairs. While in solution often recombination processes of the electron–hole pairs inside the QDs are favored resulting in the emission of light, by fixation of the QDs to an electrode, electron transfer reactions can be enforced by applying a potential.5 In such a PEC approach anodic photocurrents can be observed by electron subtraction from the CB of the QDs towards the electrode and subsequent oxidation of a donor at the VB of the QDs. In the reverse case, electrons can be supplied from the electrode via the QDs to an acceptor in solution, generating a cathodic photocurrent. Here, the direction and magnitude of the photocurrent depend not only on the potential but also on the concentration of the redox couple in solution. The use of light as an additional tool to control redox reactions at the electrode interface makes PEC systems a promising analytical approach with high sensitivity.8 Light-triggered detection schemes also open a new way for multiplexing, when different biochemical recognition elements are immobilized spatially separated on a QD electrode.5 This enables the individual read-out of analytes by photoexcitation of the respective QD electrode area with a focused light beam. Furthermore, the feasibility to combine the detection features of QD electrodes with solar cell approaches may enable the construction of self-driven sensorial systems for point-of-care diagnostics.10
Many efforts have been dedicated to the construction of PEC systems where the photocurrent can be manipulated by the presence of redox active molecules,11–13 enzyme substrates,14–17 DNA,18 as well as binding partners of antibodies.19–21 They display the great interest of using semiconductor nanostructures for light-triggered detection schemes. Amongst others, the construction of enzyme/nanoparticle hybrid systems has been followed in order to combine the biocatalytic features of enzymes with the unique and advantageous physical properties of nanoparticles.22 Most enzymatic PEC systems are based on the reaction of enzymatic co-substrates or products such as oxygen,15,16 hydrogen peroxide,12 4-aminophenol,23 acethylthiocholine,17 and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH).14,24 Furthermore, by controlling the surface properties of the QDs, direct electron transfer (DET) with the redox protein cytochrome c as well as a few enzymes has been achieved, allowing for the detection of superoxide,25 sulfite,26 as well as the production of drugs by P450 enzymes in a light-triggered fashion.27 However, DET between enzymes and electrode materials with a high efficiency remains challenging due to the difficult directional orientation of enzymes. Hence, mediator-based enzymatic systems with redox mediators such as osmium,28 ferrocene complexes29,30 and hexacyanoferrate are still in the focus of research for biosensing,31 biofuel cells,32 enzyme kinetics,33 and inhibition analysis,34 since they have demonstrated the ability to electrically communicate with a great variety of redox enzymes. Besides using the optical properties of redox mediators in spectral enzymatic assays, different metal and carbon electrodes can be used for the construction of enzyme sensors.
Until now only little attention has been paid to the redox behavior of mediators at semiconductor surfaces for light-triggered applications. Previously, hexacyanoferrate has been evaluated for its performance as a redox electrolyte in QD sensitized solar cells for maximizing solar energy conversion.35 Most reports rely on mechanistic studies in solution to investigate complex energy and electron transfer processes between the redox species and the QDs by means of photoluminescence modulation.36–38 However, until now the construction of such multistep signal chains on electrodes, in combination with biocatalysts, has not been shown.
In this study we investigate the light-triggered reaction of the redox molecules, hexacyanoferrate and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, at CdSe/ZnS quantum dot modified gold electrodes for light-driven applications. Therefore, we have characterized the photocurrent response upon addition of the redox species in dependence on the applied potential and concentration. Here, electron transfer between QDs and redox mediators has been found to be feasible. Additionally, photoluminescence measurements in solution demonstrate the strong interaction between the QDs and the redox species by quenching of QD fluorescence. Subsequently, the established QD–mediator systems have been combined with the enzymes, PQQ-dependent glucose dehydrogenase and fructose dehydrogenase, to demonstrate the feasibility of electrically contacted enzyme/QD biohybrids. This photoelectrochemical principle displays applicability for sensing and for driving QD electrodes by biocatalytic sugar consumption.
Experimental
Materials
1,4-Benzeneditiol (BDT), poly(allylaminehydrochloride) (PAA, Mw = 17500 g mol−1), poly(styrenesulfonic acid) (PSS, Mw = 70000 g mol−1), N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC), [N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N-(2-ethansulfonic acid)] (99.5%; HEPES), ferrocenecarboxylic acid (Fc-COOH), hexacyanoferrate(II), hexacyanoferrate(III), D-fructose, D-glucose and fructose dehydrogenase (FDH) from Gluconobacter japonicus NBRCA3260 are purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany). (PQQ) glucose dehydrogenase ((PQQ)GDH) (Acinetobacter calcoaceticus) was kindly gifted by Roche Diagnostics GmbH.
CdSe/ZnS nanoparticles (QDs) with trioctylphosphine oxide as surface ligands were synthesized according to a modified protocol of Dabbousi et al.24,39
Electrode cleaning
Gold disk electrodes with an electrode surface area of 0.0314 cm2 were firstly mechanically cleaned with abrasive paper (P3000). Subsequently, the electrodes were electrochemically cleaned by cyclic voltammetry in 1 M NaOH (−0.8 V to +0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl, scan rate 0.3 V s−1) and 0.5 M H2SO4 (−0.2 V to +1.75 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl, scan rate 0.3 V s−1). Afterwards the cleaned electrodes were extensively rinsed with deionized water.
Electrode preparation
The freshly cleaned electrodes were incubated in ethanolic solution with 5 mM 1,4-benzenedithiol. After removing unbound BDT by rinsing with ethanol, the electrodes were immersed in 10 μM QD solution overnight on a shaker (650 rpm).
Enzyme immobilization
To assemble the fructose dehydrogenase on top of the prepared QD electrode, PAA was adsorbed onto the electrode by immersing the electrode in 0.2 mg ml−1 PAA dissolved in HEPES buffer (5 mM, pH 7) for 1 h. Subsequently, the electrode was incubated with 0.5 mg ml−1 FDH solution in HEPES buffer (5 mM, pH 7) for 2 h.
(PQQ)GDH immobilization was achieved by incubation of the QD electrodes within 0.2 mg ml−1 PSS in HEPES buffer (5 mM, pH 7) for 1 h. Afterwards, the modified QD electrodes were immersed in 1 mg ml−1 (PQQ)GDH solution in HEPES buffer (5 mM, pH 7) for 2 h.
For the simultaneous assembly of (PQQ)GDH and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, a solution of both the enzyme (0.5 mg ml−1) and the redox complex (2.5 mM) was mixed in the presence of 50 mM EDC and allowed to react for 20 min. Subsequently, the mediator-modified enzyme was incubated overnight at the QD electrodes.
Impedimetric measurements
Electrochemical impedance measurements were performed in the presence of 2 mM hexacyanoferrate(II/III) in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7) in the dark under the following conditions: 100 kHz–1 Hz frequency range, 5 mV AC amplitude, open circuit potential (OCP).
Photoelectrochemical measurements
Photoelectrochemical experiments were performed with a potentiostat from CHI (USA, Austin) and a halogen reflector lamp from Schott (Mainz, Germany) with a light intensity of about 13.9 mW cm−2. The measurements were carried out in a three-electrode arrangement consisting of the QD working electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and a platinum wire as the counter electrode. Photochronoamperometric experiments were performed at various potentials, while using an illumination time of 10 s. For wavelength-dependent measurements a monochromator (Polychrome V, Till Photonics) with a bandwidth of 15 nm was used. Chopped light voltammetry experiments were carried out in the bias range between −0.4 V and +0.4 V by applying a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and an illumination time of 5 s. All measurements were performed in 100 mM HEPES (pH 7).
Photoluminescence measurements
QDs were dissolved in 1 ml ethanol (1 μM QDs) and placed in a quartz cuvette. The photoluminescence measurements were performed with a Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrophotometer from Varian. QD–mediator interactions were recorded during a stepwise addition of redox mediator solution (10 mM) to the QD solution. For the excitation a wavelength of 420 nm and 380 nm was used in experiments with hexacyanoferrate(II) and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, respectively. The emission spectra were recorded between 450 nm and 650 nm.
Results and discussion
Characterization of QD–mediator interactions
For the experiments, CdSe QDs with a ZnS shell and tritoctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as a capping ligand have been synthesized.24 The ZnS shell improves the photophysical properties of the QDs and passivates surface defects at the CdSe cores.40 The purified CdSe/ZnS QDs possess an absorption maximum at 535 nm, a fluorescence maximum at 561 nm and a quantum yield of 1.8% (see Fig. S1†). According to the spectral properties the diameter of the QDs is estimated to be around 2.8 nm.41
The QDs can be easily linked to 1,4-benzenedithiol-modified gold electrodes via partial ligand exchange of the nonpolar surface ligand TOPO by the immobilized dithiol.12 Here, BDT acts as a linker molecule between the gold electrode and the QDs, which results in the formation of stable and functional QD layers. The QD electrode construction has been characterized by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements. A significant increase of the impedance signal can be followed after each modification step from the bare gold electrode to the BDT-modified electrode and finally to the QD electrode (see Fig. S3†). The results display the changing barrier for the interfacial charge transfer of the redox couple at the electrode, which can be explained by the enhanced blocking of the electrode due to BDT and subsequent QD assembly. This indicates the successful QD electrode construction. It has to be added here that the experiments have been performed in the dark; i.e. no charge carrier generation in the QDs.
Comparative SEM measurements have been performed on planar gold chips (as for the photoelectrochemical studies gold disk electrodes are used). As shown in Fig. 2 the deposition of QDs can also be verified.
 Fig. 1  (A) Energy level diagram of the used CdSe/ZnS QDs according to Jasieniak et al.44 and ferrocenecarboxylic acid as well as hexacyanoferrate(II). (B) Normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a 1 μM CdSe/ZnS QD solution in the absence and presence of hexacyanoferrate(II) or ferrocenecarboxylic acid with a ratio of 1:100. For hexacyanoferrate(II) and ferrocene carboxylic acid an excitation wavelength of 420 nm and 380 nm, respectively, has been used. 
 Fig. 2  SEM micrographs of a 1,4-benzenedithiol-modified gold chip electrode before (A) and after modification with QDs (B). Here, it has to be mentioned that in contrast to the photoelectrochemical measurements for the SEM experiments planar gold-vaporized electrodes have been used, which can differ in the surface structure from the gold disk electrodes. Increased surface roughness can be observed after QD-modification, which confirms the attachment of the nanoparticles to the gold electrode. SEM micrographs were obtained with a Zeiss DSM 982 GEMINI (Germany) scanning electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. 
To investigate the photoelectrochemical properties of the QD electrodes, chopped light voltammetry has been carried out under modulated white light. As depicted in Fig. 3A it has been found that the magnitude and direction of the photocurrent depend on the applied potential that the behaviour shifts at a potential of around +50 mV vs. Ag/AgCl from a cathodic to an anodic photocurrent, which is in good agreement with other QD-based studies on gold electrodes.25,42 In contrast, the BDT-modified gold electrodes without QDs show no photocurrent response. Consequently, the signal can be attributed to the electron transfer between the gold electrode and the photoexcited immobilized QDs, whereby oxidation and reduction of the nanoparticles are controlled by the electrode potential. Additionally, wavelength-dependent measurements verify that the photocurrent follows the absorbance features of the QDs, which indicates that the nanoparticles retain their characteristic photophysical properties upon immobilization onto the gold electrode and after the transfer from the nonpolar solvent into buffer (see Fig. S4†).
 Fig. 3  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a QD electrode in the absence (black curve) and presence of 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) (red curve). The inset illustrates the photocurrent density change after addition of 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) at different potentials (100 mM HEPES pH 7; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.3 V to +0.4 V). Photocurrent density response (B) and photocurrent density measurement (C) of a QD electrode in solutions with different hexacyanoferrate(II) concentrations (a = 0 μM, b = 5 μM, c = 20 μM, d = 50 μM, e = 100 μM, f = 200 μM, g = 3 mM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements. 
The QD electrodes have been found to provide good signal stability in the cathodic direction, which can be attributed to the presence of oxygen as an electron acceptor in solution.15,16,43 In comparison, anodic photocurrents show less stability due to the absence of electron donors, which may even result in a decomposition of the QDs. This however, can be avoided by changing the electrode polarization or by providing electron donors for the photoelectrochemical system.
Before we study the photoelectrochemical interaction of the QDs immobilized on gold electrodes with the redox molecules hexacyanoferrate(II) and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, we have initially evaluated the interaction by quenching studies via photoluminescence spectroscopy at room temperature. Therefore, we have followed the emission of the QDs upon addition of the redox mediator. For both redox mediators a decrease of the fluorescence emission can be observed with increasing concentrations of the respective compound (Fig. S5†). As depicted in Fig. 1B at a QD:mediator ratio of 1:100 for hexacyanoferrate(II) and ferrocenecarboxylic acid a similar photoluminescence decline of around 73% is achieved. This quenching behavior can be explained either by electron or energy transfer. However, energy transfer is energetically not favorable since: (1) the absorption wavelength range of the redox molecules does not overlap with the emission of the QDs (see Fig. S2†), and (2) the excitation wavelength was adapted to the absorption properties of the redox molecules (no absorption at the chosen excitation wavelength) to avoid joint excitation of the compounds. Consequently, the redox complexes should not get excited during the measurement and remain in their energetic ground state. Moreover, no formation of an additional fluorescence peak or changes of the peak shape have been observed. In contrast, a photoelectrochemical electron transfer from the QDs to a redox compound or the reverse can be explained by the calculated energetic levels (see Fig. 1A). For the used QDs the conduction band and the valence band have been determined to be at −2.055 V and 0.805 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl), respectively, according to Jasieniak et al.44 Thus, the energetic levels of ferrocenecarboxylic acid (0.244 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl) and hexacyanoferrate (0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl) lie between the CB and VB of the QDs. Accordingly, both the reduction and the oxidation of the redox complexes at the QDs could be feasible, depending on the redox state of the molecules.
For ferrocene molecules photoluminescence quenching has been described as an electron transfer from the ferrocene to the excited QDs, which results in the formation of a nonluminescent charged QD.37,45 A similar behavior can be expected for hexacyanoferrate(II), which could also act as an electron donor and inject charge carriers into the QDs. However, the quenching of hexacyanoferrate(II) at lower mediator concentrations (ratio 1:10) is less efficient than that of ferrocenecarboxylic acid (see Fig. S5†). Since a photoluminescence decrease by effects like displacement of the QD surface ligands is unlikely, (because of missing coordinating groups of the redox compounds) the differences of quenching efficiency may also be attributed to different electron transfer rates at the QDs. The photoluminescence experiments demonstrate that the electron transfer between the QDs and the redox compounds, hexacyanoferrate(II) and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, is feasible upon illumination and give the first hint for a feasible combination with QDs for the construction of enzymatic signal chains on electrodes.
Subsequently, the interaction between CdSe/ZnS QD modified gold electrodes and the redox molecules has been tested by chopped light voltammetric experiments. As shown in Fig. 3A, upon addition of 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) a strong increase of the photocurrent can be found over the entire investigated potential range. Here, the signal response increases with increasing anodic bias, but occurs even at potentials more negative than the redox potential of hexacyanoferrate(II). The results demonstrate that hexacyanoferrate(II) can be oxidized at the photoexcited QDs, and that this reaction is determined by the position of the energy states within the QDs, allowing reliable hexacyanoferrate(II) detection over a larger potential range compared to metal electrodes. Furthermore, wavelength dependent measurements verify that the photoelectrochemical oxidation of hexacyanoferrate(II) follows the absorbance features of the QDs (see Fig. S4†).
In contrast, the addition of hexacyanoferrate(III) (oxidized species) results only in negligible photocurrent changes over the whole potential range (see ESI Fig. S6†). Consequently, the light-induced electron transfer between hexacyanoferrate(III) and the QD electrode is restricted. Similar results have been found in an electrochemical study of the redox process at undoped nanodiamond, showing fast oxidation of hexacyanoferrate(II), but slow reduction of hexacyanoferrate(III).46 The study on hexacyanoferrate(II/III) demonstrates the necessity of investigating the individual behavior of redox molecules at semiconductor nanostructures since the behavior cannot simply be deduced from reactions at metal electrodes.
Subsequently, the photocurrent response of the QD electrode in dependence on the hexacyanoferrate(II) concentration has been analyzed (see Fig. 3B). Therefore, we have chosen a potential of +0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl), which provides a high signal out-put according to the voltammetric experiments. The anodic photocurrent is found to increase in the range between 1 μM and 1 mM hexacyanoferrate(II). The detection limit has been determined to be 1 μM, and the half maximal photocurrent is reached at 71 μM hexacyanoferrate(II). Consequently, the QD electrode enables the light-triggered detection of hexacyanoferrate(II) and is therefore promising for the combination with hexacyanoferrate reducing enzymes. It has to be emphasized here that a saturation-type of concentration dependence has been found, which is different from metal electrodes for the substance in this concentration range. This shows that the kinetics of electron transfer processes at the QD surface (QD – electrode and QD – mediator) are limiting the current flow. Such tendencies have also been found for other species.14,42
The interaction between QD electrodes and ferrocenecarboxylic acid has also been analyzed in dependence on the applied potential. The measurement in the absence and presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid is shown in Fig. 4A. Here, an enhancement of the cathodic photocurrent has been found up to potentials of +0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl), whereby higher potentials result in rising anodic photocurrents. The results indicate that ferrocenecarboxylic acid occurs in solution as reduced and oxidized species, and thus can be both reduced and oxidized at the illuminated QDs. Since the turning point from the anodic to the cathodic current lies close to the redox potential of ferrocenecarboxylic acid (0.244 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl), there is no gain in lowering the potential for the photoelectrochemical detection as has been observed for hexacyanoferrate(II). Wavelength-dependent measurements show that the photocurrent response still correlates with the optical properties of the nanoparticles (see ESI Fig. S7†).
 Fig. 4  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a QD electrode in the absence (black curve) and presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid (red curve). The inset illustrates the photocurrent density change after addition of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid at different potentials (100 mM HEPES pH 7; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.4 V to +0.4 V). Photocurrent density response (B) and photocurrent density measurement (C) of a QD electrode in solutions with different ferrocenecarboxylic acid concentrations (a = 0 μM, b = 5 μM, c = 20 μM, d = 110 μM, e = 510 μM, f = 1 mM, g = 1.5 mM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements. 
To further characterize the ferrocenecarboxylic acid detection by QD electrodes the effect of the mediator concentration has been investigated. Increasing photocurrents have been observed in the range between 1 μM and 1 mM ferrocenecarboxylic acid with a detection limit of 1 μM.
Although the redox potentials of ferrocenecarboxylic acid and hexacyanoferrate(II/III) are similar (see Fig. 1A), a different photoelectrochemical behavior at the QD electrode has been found for both mediators. The photocurrent experiments have been supported by photovoltage measurements in the absence of any applied driving force (see ESI Fig. S8†). By addition of increasing concentrations of ferrocenecarboxylic acid the photovoltage is enhanced compared to pure buffer pointing to a preferred cathodic reaction (from +25 mV to +47 mV (100 μM)). In comparison, the addition of hexacyanoferrate(II) results in a complete reversion of the photovoltage to −116 mV (100 μM). Consequently, for both redox mediators different charge transfer directions are preferred at the QD electrode. Furthermore, larger photovoltage changes have been found for hexacyanoferrate(II). This suggests different mechanisms of charge transfer between the excited QDs and ferrocenecarboxylic acid and hexacyanoferrate(II) in terms of electron transfer rates for the oxidation and reduction process. However, further work is needed to better understand the kinetic limitations of charge transfer reactions of redox molecules at QD electrodes.
Mediator-based photoelectrochemical signal chains with immobilized enzymes
To evaluate the concept of using small redox molecules in combination with enzymes for the construction of light switchable signal chains on QD electrodes, firstly fructose dehydrogenase (FDH) has been coupled with hexacyanoferrate to verify that the photocurrent can be manipulated by the presence of the substrate fructose. We have chosen FDH since this enzyme has already shown to react well with hexacyanoferrate.47 FDH is a hemoflavo-protein which consists of three subunits, containing one flavin-adenine-dinucleotide and 3 heme c as prosthetic groups, and catalyzes the oxidation of D-fructose to 5-keto-D-fructose.
The principle of the photoelectrochemical signal chain to be established is illustrated in Scheme 1. Upon substrate addition FDH catalyzes the oxidation of fructose and transfers electrons to hexacyanoferrate(III) to form hexacyanoferrate(II). The reduced mediator can be oxidized at the excited QDs and can result in a photocurrent change.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the sensing principle of the QD electrode in combination with the redox system hexacyanoferrate(II/III) and the enzyme fructose dehydrogenase. Upon addition of fructose hexacyanoferrate(III) is reduced to hexacyanoferrate(II) by FDH, which can be subsequently oxidized at the excited QDs and can result in a change of the photocurrent. 
For enzyme immobilization a polyelectrolyte interlayer on the QD electrode has been applied. Polyallylamine has been used, since FDH is an acidic enzyme with a pI of 5.0. Consequently, at pH 7 the electrostatic attraction between the positively charged PAA and the negatively charged enzyme facilitates the binding to the QD electrode according to the principle of the layer-by-layer deposition approach. Chopped light voltammetry experiments of the prepared QD electrode in the presence of 100 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) with 50 mM fructose show an enhancement of the anodic photocurrent over the whole potential range (see Fig. 5A). The signal increases with increasing anodic bias, similar to the experiments with hexacyanoferrate(II) alone. The measurement also indicates that after photooxidation of hexacyanoferrate(II) at the illuminated QDs the produced hexacyanoferrate(III) is reduced back to hexacyanoferrate(II) by enzymatic conversion, which results in an amplification of the anodic photocurrent with a factor of around 1.6 at 0 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Furthermore, this proves that the FDH enzyme retains its catalytic activity after immobilization at the PAA-modified QD electrode. In contrast, control experiments without enzymes or redox mediators show no photocurrent changes upon addition of fructose.
 Fig. 5  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a polyallylamine modified QD electrode with immobilized fructose dehydrogenase in the presence of 100 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) (black curve) and after addition of 50 mM fructose (red curve). The inset displays the potential dependence of the photocurrent density change in the presence of 100 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) and after addition of 50 mM fructose (100 mM HEPES; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.3 V to +0.4 V) Photocurrent density response (B) and measurement (C) of a polyallylamine modified QD electrode with immobilized fructose dehydrogenase in solutions with 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(III) and successive addition of fructose (a = 0 μM, b = 50 μM, c = 200 μM, d = 500 μM, e = 2 mM, f = 10 mM, g = 50 mM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements. 
To further investigate the sensitivity of the system towards fructose, amperometric measurements have been performed in the presence of 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(III) at a potential of +0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl) by successively increasing the substrate concentration. A first signal response is found after addition of 50 μM fructose and enhances up to a concentration of 20 mM. The apparent Michaelis–Menten constant, KM,app, is determined to be around 0.74 mM. It has to be mentioned here that these experiments have been performed at neutral pH in order to exclude pH effects and thus the apparent Michaelis–Menten constant, KM,app, is smaller than the reported KM values under acid conditions (Km = 10 mM).47 Furthermore the concentration dependent photocurrent of hexacyanoferrate(II) shows a saturation type behaviour, which also limits the detection range of fructose.
The photoelectrochemical signal chain possesses similar sensitivity to other electrochemical systems with FDH, which are based on mediated or direct electron transfer,48 but however enables fructose detection at much more negative potentials due to the properties of the QD electrode. Furthermore, the results demonstrate that the combination of a QD electrode with an enzymatic system can be beneficial to increase the power out-put (photocurrent) by biocatalytic consumption of substrates. In such a system substrate oxidation is realized by the enzyme and electrons are supplied by the enzyme via the mediator to the QDs (see Scheme 1). Subsequently, the QDs inject high energetic electrons into the electrode, resulting in an enhanced photoelectrochemical performance. Even if the photocurrents are currently modest this principle offers an alternative approach for the design of future photobiocatalytic solar cells, which are driven by fuels (enzymatic substrates) and may pass over the needs of environmentally dangerous electron donors.
Similar to the before described photoelectrochemical enzymatic signal chain, ferrocenecarboxylic acid has been combined with the enzyme (PQQ)GDH. This enzyme catalyzes the oxidation of glucose to gluconolactone and reduces ferrocenecarboxylic acid.
For enzyme immobilization firstly polystyrene sulfonic acid has been assembled on top of the QD electrode, since this negatively charged polyelectrolyte is well known to allow electrostatic immobilization of (PQQ)GDH (pI 9,5) at pH 7 applying again the layer-by-layer method.49 After enzyme attachment to the QD electrode the system is characterized by chopped light voltammetry. As illustrated in Fig. 6A, the photocurrent changes after addition of 1 mM glucose to a ferrocenecarboxylic acid containing solution. In detail, the cathodic photocurrent at negative potentials decreases in the presence of the substrate, and the potential of the turning point from a cathodic to an anodic photocurrent is shifted by about −0.1 V. Both effects can be attributed to the reduction of Fc-COOH+ by the enzyme, which changes the composition of the reduced/oxidized mediator in front of the electrode and thus influences the photocurrent behavior.
 Fig. 6  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a polystyrenesulfonic acid modified QD electrode with immobilized (PQQ) glucose dehydrogenase in the presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid (black curve) and after addition of 1 mM glucose (red curve). The inset displays the potential dependence of the photocurrent density change in the presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid before and after addition of 1 mM glucose (100 mM HEPES; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.4 V to +0.2 V). Photocurrent density response (B) and photocurrent density measurements (C) of a polystyrenesulfonic acid modified QD electrode with immobilized (PQQ) GDH with 500 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid in solution and successive addition of glucose (a = 0 μM, b = 5 μM, c = 10 μM, d = 20 μM, e = 30 μM, f = 50 μM, g = 100 μM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements. 
In the absence of the enzyme or the redox mediator no signal changes have been found after addition of glucose. This proves that the photocurrent response is attributed to the enzymatic conversion of ferrocenecarboxylic acid and subsequent detection at the QD electrode.
Concentration dependent measurements of the developed system with glucose in the presence of 500 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid at +0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl) have shown the first signal responses in 5 μM glucose solution (see Fig. 6B). Increasing anodic photocurrents are found up to substrate concentrations of 100 μM and the KM,app has been calculated to be around 28 μM. Since this value is smaller compared to experiments performed in solution50 or on electrodes,51,52 the whole charge transfer chain is probably limited by the rate of enzyme–mediator or mediator–QD electron transfer. A similar behavior has been observed by using cytochrome c as an electron shuttling molecule between (PQQ)GDH and a non-light-triggered electrode.53 However, even if only a small concentration dependent dynamic range can be provided, the construction of a light-controlled signal chain can be shown to be feasible with ferrocenecarboxylic acid and (PQQ)GDH.
Both enzyme-based approaches demonstrate the potential of using mediator-based signal chains for the light-triggered conversion of sugars at QD electrodes. The photocurrent is enhanced and can be used for detection or for power generation. On the basis of these experiments, the construction of functional photoelectrochemical biohybrid architectures is attempted by immobilization of both the enzyme and the redox mediator on top of the QDs.
Photoelectrochemical biohybrid architecture based on immobilized small redox molecules and enzymes
Based on the previous results we have tested whether the enzyme and the redox mediator can be immobilized together on top of the QD electrode for the construction of functional light-switchable biohybrid architectures. We have used (PQQ)GDH and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, since the carboxylic acid group of the mediator allows for simple coupling to functional groups via chemical reagents. Therefore, firstly (PQQ)GDH has been modified with ferrocenecarboxylic acid by EDC activation.54 This has been performed in order to fix many ferrocene molecules around the enzyme and near the catalytic center, to allow for multistep electron transfer also between the ferrocene moieties and finally between ferrocene and the QD electrode.55 The ferrocene-modified enzyme has been directly immobilized on the QD electrode. Here, we intend to exploit the nonpolar interaction between ferrocene moieties and the hydrophobic ligands at the QDs. The schematic electrode construction is depicted in Fig. 7A.
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic principle of the photoelectrochemical biohybrid architecture based on ferrocenecarboxylic acid modified (PQQ)GDH immobilized on QD electrodes. (B) Photocurrent density change of QD electrodes with immobilized (PQQ)GDH and ferrocenecarboxylic acid and successive addition of glucose (100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements. 
Subsequently, the signal response of the prepared QD electrode upon addition of glucose without adding a redox mediator into solution has been analyzed. As illustrated in Fig. 7B, changing photocurrents can be observed between 10 μM and 500 μM glucose. Since control experiments without the enzyme or Fc-COOH bound to the enzyme do not show a signal response, it can be confirmed that the assembly of both (PQQ)GDH and Fc-COOH results in a functional system showing glucose-dependent signals. In detail, electrons are transferred after substrate oxidation from the catalytic group of (PQQ)GDH to the bound Fc-COOH on the enzyme surface, and subsequently to the excited QDs. The results demonstrate that the enzyme remains stable even after chemical modification with Fc-COOH and immobilization to the nonpolar QD surface.
In order to address aspects of potential applications in sensing first investigations concerning the selectivity have been performed with dilute solutions of N-acetyl-4-aminophenol, urea, glycine and fructose (see ESI Fig. S9†). For all these molecules only a negligible signal response has been found.
In comparison to the experiments with bound (PQQ)GDH and ferrocenecarboxylic acid in solution, the photocurrent change is smaller with the immobilized system, but the dynamic range for the detection of glucose is a little larger. This can be probably attributed to the different enzyme immobilization procedures of both approaches. Furthermore, it cannot be excluded at this point that some enzymes are not connected to the electrode after modification with ferrocenecarboxylic acid.
However, light-controlled and glucose-dependent signal chains can be shown in a completely immobilized state of the enzyme and redox mediator on the QD electrodes, which passes over the need for the addition of redox molecules into solution. The fact that in this work mediated electron transfer chains with small redox molecules and enzymes could be established at QD electrodes can be considered as the first example of biohybrid QD systems where communication is not based anymore on the analysis of natural co-substrates of the enzyme. This may pave the way not only for the connection of QDs with a large number of enzymes by using redox mediators for light-controlled detection schemes, but also for potential light-induced production of biochemicals. In addition, a spatially resolved immobilization of different enzyme/mediator systems in combination with a localized read-out by means of a light beam seems to be feasible and would allow the detection of different analytes in parallel.
Conclusions
In summary, this work has shown a new concept to connect redox enzymes with quantum dots by means of small redox molecules for the development of photobioelectrocatalytic systems. Here, the photocurrent generation of a QD electrode has been efficiently combined with the redox mediators, hexacyanoferrate and ferrocenecarboxylic acid, enabling concentration dependent determination of both compounds. While for hexacyanoferrate only oxidation can be observed by enhancing photocurrents, for ferrocenecarboxylic acid both oxidation and reduction at the QD electrode are feasible. Furthermore, photoluminescence experiments in solution indicate a strong interaction between the QDs and the redox mediators.
Based on these findings light-triggered biocatalytic signal chains have been constructed on QD electrodes by immobilization of fructose dehydrogenase and (PQQ) glucose dehydrogenase. It can be shown that concentration-dependent photocurrents are detected in the presence of the redox mediator and by addition of the substrate. Consequently, due to enzymatic substrate conversion the redox mediator is reduced and can afterwards be oxidized at the light-excited QDs, resulting in an enhanced photocurrent out-put. Finally, it is also shown that by covalent coupling of ferrocenecarboxylic acid to (PQQ)GDH a procedure has been found to assemble the whole system on top of a QD electrode for driving the photoelectrochemical reaction via glucose consumption.
Consequently, the biohybrid approach introduced here allows for light-triggered sugar oxidations, which can be beneficial for sensing applications and power generation in a photobioelectrochemical solar cell format. This principle may also pave the way for the connection of other redox enzymes with semiconductor nanoparticles by the use of small redox molecules.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG grants Li 706/8-1, PA794/15-1). N. S. acknowledges a fellowship from HEC/DAAD. The authors want to thank Roche Diagnostics (Penzberg, Germany) and mainly Dr. Meier and Dr. von der Eltz for cooperation on supplying us with the GDH enzyme.
Notes and references
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman and I. Willner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4067–4085 RSC .
W.-W. Zhao, J. Wang, Y.-C. Zhu, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 9520–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lisdat, D. Schäfer and A. Kapp, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2013, 405, 3739–3752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yue, F. Lisdat, W. J. Parak, S. G. Hickey, L. Tu, N. Sabir, D. Dorfs and N. C. Bigall, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2800–2814 CAS .
A. Devadoss, P. Sudhagar, C. Terashima, K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C., 2015, 24, 43–63 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Zhao, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 729–741 RSC .
W.-W. Zhao, X.-D. Yu, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17407–17414 RSC .
K. Yan, Y. Yang, O. K. Okoth, L. Cheng and J. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 6140–6144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Long, C. Kong, D.-W. Li, Y. Li, S. Chowdhury and H. Tian, Small, 2011, 7, 1624–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Khalid, M. El Helou, T. Murböck, Z. Yue, J.-M. Montenegro, K. Schubert, G. Göbel, F. Lisdat, G. Witte and W. J. Parak, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9870–9876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Zhou, Q. Shen, L.-P. Jiang and J.-J. Zhu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 3697 RSC .
K. Schubert, W. Khalid, Z. Yue, W. J. Parak and F. Lisdat, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1395–1400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Riedel, G. Göbel, A. M. Abdelmonem, W. J. Parak and F. Lisdat, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2338–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tanne, D. Schäfer, W. Khalid, W. J. Parak and F. Lisdat, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 7778–7785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pardo-Yissar, E. Katz, J. Wasserman and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 622–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman, J. Girsh and I. Willner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2815–2834 CAS .
Y.-J. Li, M.-J. Ma and J.-J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10492–10499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-W. Zhao, Z.-Y. Ma, P.-P. Yu, X.-Y. Dong, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 917–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, W. Tu, J. Li, J. Bao and Z. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16197–16203 CAS .
I. Willner, B. Basnar and B. Willner, FEBS J., 2007, 274, 302–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Khalid, G. Göbel, D. Hühn, J.-M. Montenegro, P. Rivera-Gil, F. Lisdat and W. J. Parak, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2011, 9, 46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sabir, N. Khan, J. Völkner, F. Widdascheck, P. del Pino, G. Witte, M. Riedel, F. Lisdat, M. Konrad and W. J. Parak, Small, 2015, 11, 5844–5850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Stoll, C. Gehring, K. Schubert, M. Zanella, W. J. Parak and F. Lisdat, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2008, 24, 260–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zeng, S. Leimkühler, J. Koetz and U. Wollenberger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21487–21494 CAS .
B. I. Ipe and C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar and D. Leech, Bioelectrochemistry, 2015, 106(Part A), 41–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saleem, H. Yu, L. Wang, Zain-ul-Abdin, H. Khalid, M. Akram, N. M. Abbasi and J. Huang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 876, 9–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Godman, J. L. DeLuca, S. R. McCollum, D. W. Schmidtke and D. T. Glatzhofer, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 3541–3551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chaubey and B. D. Malhotra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2002, 17, 441–456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pinyou, A. Ruff, S. Pöller, S. Ma, R. Ludwig and W. Schuhmann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 5319–5326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Gallaway and S. A. Calabrese Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8527–8536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Ghica and C. M. A. Brett, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 163, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Evangelista, S. Makuta, S. Yonezu, J. Andrews and Y. Tachibana, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13957–13965 CAS .
M. Sykora, M. A. Petruska, J. Alstrum-Acevedo, I. Bezel, T. J. Meyer and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9984–9985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dorokhin, N. Tomczak, A. H. Velders, D. N. Reinhoudt and G. J. Vancso, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18676–18680 CAS .
M. H. Stewart, A. L. Huston, A. M. Scott, A. L. Efros, J. S. Melinger, K. B. Gemmill, S. A. Trammell, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5330–5347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .
C. Stoll, S. Kudera, W. J. Parak and F. Lisdat, Small, 2006, 2, 741–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Koberling, A. Mews and T. Basché, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 672–676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, M. Califano and S. E. Watkins, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5888–5902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Gooding, D. E. Gómez and P. Mulvaney, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 669–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Holt, C. Ziegler, J. Zang, J. Hu and J. S. Foord, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2761–2770 CAS .
M. Ameyama, E. Shinagawa, K. Matsushita and O. Adachi, J. Bacteriol., 1981, 145, 814–823 CAS .
C. Wettstein, K. Kano, D. Schäfer, U. Wollenberger and F. Lisdat, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 6382–6389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Loew, F. W. Scheller and U. Wollenberger, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 1149–1154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oubrie, H. J. Rozeboom and B. W. Dijkstra, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 11787–11791 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ivnitski, P. Atanassov and C. Apblett, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 1562–1568 CrossRef CAS .
V. Flexer, F. Durand, S. Tsujimura and N. Mano, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5721–5727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wettstein, H. Möhwald and F. Lisdat, Bioelectrochemistry, 2012, 88, 97–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. S. Wong, Chemistry of Protein Conjugation and Cross-Linking, CRC Press,  1991 Search PubMed .
I. Willner, A. Riklin, B. Shoham, D. Rivenzon and E. Katz, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 912–915 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization data, additional photoluminescence and photoelectrochemical data. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr00091jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Energy level diagram of the used CdSe/ZnS QDs according to Jasieniak et al.44 and ferrocenecarboxylic acid as well as hexacyanoferrate(II). (B) Normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a 1 μM CdSe/ZnS QD solution in the absence and presence of hexacyanoferrate(II) or ferrocenecarboxylic acid with a ratio of 1:100. For hexacyanoferrate(II) and ferrocene carboxylic acid an excitation wavelength of 420 nm and 380 nm, respectively, has been used.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM micrographs of a 1,4-benzenedithiol-modified gold chip electrode before (A) and after modification with QDs (B). Here, it has to be mentioned that in contrast to the photoelectrochemical measurements for the SEM experiments planar gold-vaporized electrodes have been used, which can differ in the surface structure from the gold disk electrodes. Increased surface roughness can be observed after QD-modification, which confirms the attachment of the nanoparticles to the gold electrode. SEM micrographs were obtained with a Zeiss DSM 982 GEMINI (Germany) scanning electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a QD electrode in the absence (black curve) and presence of 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) (red curve). The inset illustrates the photocurrent density change after addition of 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) at different potentials (100 mM HEPES pH 7; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.3 V to +0.4 V). Photocurrent density response (B) and photocurrent density measurement (C) of a QD electrode in solutions with different hexacyanoferrate(II) concentrations (a = 0 μM, b = 5 μM, c = 20 μM, d = 50 μM, e = 100 μM, f = 200 μM, g = 3 mM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a QD electrode in the absence (black curve) and presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid (red curve). The inset illustrates the photocurrent density change after addition of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid at different potentials (100 mM HEPES pH 7; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.4 V to +0.4 V). Photocurrent density response (B) and photocurrent density measurement (C) of a QD electrode in solutions with different ferrocenecarboxylic acid concentrations (a = 0 μM, b = 5 μM, c = 20 μM, d = 110 μM, e = 510 μM, f = 1 mM, g = 1.5 mM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; −0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the sensing principle of the QD electrode in combination with the redox system hexacyanoferrate(II/III) and the enzyme fructose dehydrogenase. Upon addition of fructose hexacyanoferrate(III) is reduced to hexacyanoferrate(II) by FDH, which can be subsequently oxidized at the excited QDs and can result in a change of the photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a polyallylamine modified QD electrode with immobilized fructose dehydrogenase in the presence of 100 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) (black curve) and after addition of 50 mM fructose (red curve). The inset displays the potential dependence of the photocurrent density change in the presence of 100 μM hexacyanoferrate(II) and after addition of 50 mM fructose (100 mM HEPES; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.3 V to +0.4 V) Photocurrent density response (B) and measurement (C) of a polyallylamine modified QD electrode with immobilized fructose dehydrogenase in solutions with 500 μM hexacyanoferrate(III) and successive addition of fructose (a = 0 μM, b = 50 μM, c = 200 μM, d = 500 μM, e = 2 mM, f = 10 mM, g = 50 mM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Chopped light voltammetry of a polystyrenesulfonic acid modified QD electrode with immobilized (PQQ) glucose dehydrogenase in the presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid (black curve) and after addition of 1 mM glucose (red curve). The inset displays the potential dependence of the photocurrent density change in the presence of 100 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid before and after addition of 1 mM glucose (100 mM HEPES; light pulses of 5 s, scan rate 5 mV s−1; potential vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl from −0.4 V to +0.2 V). Photocurrent density response (B) and photocurrent density measurements (C) of a polystyrenesulfonic acid modified QD electrode with immobilized (PQQ) GDH with 500 μM ferrocenecarboxylic acid in solution and successive addition of glucose (a = 0 μM, b = 5 μM, c = 10 μM, d = 20 μM, e = 30 μM, f = 50 μM, g = 100 μM; 100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic principle of the photoelectrochemical biohybrid architecture based on ferrocenecarboxylic acid modified (PQQ)GDH immobilized on QD electrodes. (B) Photocurrent density change of QD electrodes with immobilized (PQQ)GDH and ferrocenecarboxylic acid and successive addition of glucose (100 mM HEPES pH 7; +0.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl, 1 M KCl). Error bars result from 3 measurements.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Characterization data, additional photoluminescence and photoelectrochemical data. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr00091j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
