An overview of flow cell architecture design and optimization for electrochemical CO 2 reduction  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA06101A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06101A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 20897-20918An overview of flow cell architecture design and optimization for electrochemical CO2 reduction

        
          
            Dui 
            Ma
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ting 
            Jin
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Keyu 
            Xie
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Haitao 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *c
aResearch & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, P. R. China. E-mail: kyxie@nwpu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Center for Nano Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University and Shaanxi Joint Laboratory of Graphene (NPU), Xi'an, 710072, P. R. China. E-mail: tjin@nwpu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Applied Physics and Research Institute for Smart Energy, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. China. E-mail: aphhuang@polyu.edu.hk
Received 
      20th July 2021
    , Accepted 19th August 2021First published on 19th August 2021AbstractConverting CO2 into value-added fuels or chemical feedstocks through electrochemical reduction is one of the several promising avenues to reduce atmospheric carbon dioxide levels and alleviate global warming. This approach has mild operating conditions, adjusts product distribution, allows modular design, and offers opportunities for carbon-intensive manufacturing industries to utilize renewable energy power for CO2 reduction. In recent decades, various valid methods and strategies have been developed for high efficiency and high selectivity electrocatalysts to reduce CO2. Unfortunately, while intensive research focuses on the development of new electrocatalysts, little attention has been paid to the engineering design of low-cost and large-scale CO2 reduction electrolyzer architectures, which impairs the full realization of potential benefits of new electrocatalysts. This review summarizes the recent progress of reactor architectures and system engineering in the CO2 reduction reaction. We discuss how to improve the performance of the CO2 reduction reaction from four aspects: (i) flow cell architectures, (ii) management of reactant delivery, (iii) membranes, and (iv) electrolytes. We aim to introduce reactor architectures and system engineering strategies in detail to enable further development and provide inspiration for potential industrial applications of CO2 reduction.Dui MaDui Ma is a postdoctoral researcher jointly trained by the Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. She received her PhD in 2019 from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Her research interests include metal-based electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction and energy devices.Ting JinTing Jin is a professor at the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing and the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnic University, China. She received her PhD in 2020 from Nankai University (China) and her B.S. in materials chemistry from Northwest University (China) in 2015. Her research interests focus on the design and fabrication of advanced electrode materials for energy storage and conversion, such as rechargeable lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries.Keyu XieKeyu Xie is currently a full professor at the Center for Nano Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University. His research focuses on energy materials and battery electrochemistry (advanced secondary batteries such as lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and metal–air batteries).Haitao HuangHaitao Huang is a professor in the Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He received his PhD from Nanyang Technological University in 2000. His current research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion and ferroelectric materials for energy applications. He is currently a board committee member of the International Academy of Electrochemical Energy Science (IAOEES).
1. Introduction
Energy available from burning fossil fuels has, thus far, been the main means to meet our ever-growing global energy demands. However, from the perspective of sustainable development, the massive CO2 emission from the misuse of fossil fuels brings about the “greenhouse effect”, which has led to severe consequences on our environment in the form of global warming, climate changes, the disruption of the carbon cycle in nature, even extinction of species, etc.1–3 To protect our environment for a sustainable future, it is imperative to urgently decrease atmospheric CO2 levels to an appropriate level for minimizing damage to the environment. Since fossil fuels are non-renewable energy sources, continued and unchecked use will eventually lead to their depletion. Clean energy sources like solar energy, wind energy, and hydropower, which produce little or no carbon footprint, tackle the parallel challenges mentioned above.4 However, many challenges need to be addressed before these energy carriers, such as H2, methanol, ethanol, and methane, are widely used.
If CO2 becomes a renewable raw material for fuels, commodities, medicines, and laboratory chemicals that we need to maintain our society, then we can achieve an economy circle based on renewable energy and carbon dioxide. This solves both the energy crisis and the environmental issues, killing two birds with one stone. To date, a number of carbon capture, storage, and utilization strategies have been proposed to reduce anthropogenic CO2 emissions from exhaust gases generated during heavy industrial manufacturing processes.5–13 In recent years, the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) has become a more attractive strategy due to its intriguing merits (Fig. 1). Intermittent renewable energy can be used as electricity to reduce CO2 into a variety of fuels or valuable chemical products, including CO, formic acid, acetate, hydrocarbons, and alcohols, with net-zero CO2 emissions and simultaneous environmental remediation of CO2 greenhouse gas. It solves the electricity supply and demand mismatch problem caused by the geographical location and seasonality. Meanwhile, the reaction process can be environmentally friendly and pollution-free production. Besides, electrochemical cells operate under mild conditions, generally at normal pressure and temperature, and the whole process and direction are controlled by the reduction potential. What's more, electrochemical systems require relatively simple and small workshops, and can use modular design and scalable equipment. Electrocatalytic systems are expected to be incorporated with gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) and flow reactor configurations for industrial production.
 Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of electrochemical CO2 reduction by system engineering. 
The structure design of electrocatalytic reactors is a far-reaching subject, which affects the key factors during the CO2RR, such as current density, faradaic efficiency (FE), selectivity, catalytic stability, product separation, etc. Until now, the typical H-type electrolytic cell remains the most common lab-scale reactor for the CO2RR, on account of its facile assembly, easy operation, and low cost.14 As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the reactor is separated into independent cathode and anode compartments by an ion-exchange membrane. The reference and the working electrodes are located in a sealed cathodic chamber, while the counter electrode is placed in the anodic chamber, forming a three-electrode system. The low CO2 solubility in aqueous solution limits its mass transport, leading to CO2 reduction current densities below 100 mA cm−2.15–17 In addition, other inherent defects, including a limited electrode surface area and large interelectrode distance, can no longer meet the increasing research and potential industrial application requirements. Thus, H-type cell configurations are difficult to commercialize for large-scale implementation.18
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of a H-type cell. (b) A membrane-based flow cell for CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) LSV curves and (d) Nyquist plots of Bi2O3@C-800 based on a H-type cell and flow cell. (e) FE and partial current density of formate for Bi2O3@C-800 in a flow cell. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
To improve the CO2 conversion rate to a meaningful level, the electrochemical CO2RR must be carried out using a continuous flow equipment to conquer the limitation of mass transport. The thermodynamics and kinetics of the CO2RR in flow reactors are fundamentally different from those in an H-type cell, due to a higher CO2 concentration on the electrocatalyst surface, a shorter transmission path, and a suitable gas diffusion layer substrate.
At present, the CO2RR flow electrolyzers are still not mature in industry, but recent research studies have shown the prospect of industrialization. In this review, we will sum up the currently known types of flow reactors and their components, focusing on the general strategies for improving the core performance indicators of catalytic current density, selectivity, and energy conversion efficiency. We will focus on the influence and optimization of each component in flow cell systems, so that researchers can have a clearer understanding of the choice of flow reactors. We also hope to provide meaningful, timely, and valuable guidance to the design and commercialization of advanced flow electrolyzers for CO2 reduction in the near future.
2. Flow cell architectures
2.1 Membrane-based flow cells
Over the last few decades, membrane-based flow cells evolved from fuel cells or water electrolyzers have received extensive attention owing to their high mass transfer efficiency and large current density (more than 100 mA cm−2). Fig. 2b depicts the typical structure of a membrane-based flow cell, in which a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) serves as a separator sandwiched between the flowing anode and cathode electrolytes to facilitate ion flow and attenuate product crossover.19 Both a CO2-saturated cathode electrolyte and an anode electrolyte can be continuously circulated through the pump, while gaseous CO2 as the reactant is directly transported to the reverse side of the gas diffusion electrode covered by the cathodic catalyst. Compared with conventional H-type cells, the thermodynamic and kinetic characteristics of the CO2RR in flow reactors vary greatly because of the higher CO2 concentration on the electrode surface, the direct contact effect between the polymer membrane and the catalyst surface, and the available range of electrocatalyst substrates. Therefore, flow reactors have better efficiencies in electrochemical CO2 reduction and represent a more appropriate technology for large-scale commercial applications.20–22
Recently, Xia et al. found that the onset potential of the Bi2O3@C-800 catalyst based on a membrane-based flow cell was as low as −0.28 V vs. RHE, the formate FE was consistently above 93% in a very wide potential window between −0.3 V and −1.1 V vs. RHE, and the partial current density of formate can reach 208 mA cm−2.23 However, the onset potential and the partial current density of formate in a H-type cell were −0.55 V vs. RHE and ∼12 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 2c–e). The results revealed that the Bi2O3@C-800 catalyst can achieve high selectivity and high current density for formate production in a flow cell, which is ascribed to the decreasing ohmic resistance and the high concentration KOH electrolyte based on the flow cell configuration. Similar to the above conclusion, Cao et al. reported that the as-obtained atomically thin bismuthene showed a high activity (ultrahigh current densities ∼300 mA cm−2) and selectivity (faradaic efficiency nearly 100%) for formate over a record wide potential range from −0.83 to −1.18 V vs. RHE in a flow cell.21 The remarkable performance improvement of the flow cell can be attributed to the mass transfer characteristics of the GDE, reducing the reaction overpotential and suppressing the competing HER.
Generally speaking, similar to fuel cells, membrane-based flow cells are one of the most promising candidates for large-scale commercial applications due to their compact structures and high current densities. However, there are still many factors restricting their development. Further study on the influence of different factors such as reactant phases, electrode substrates, polymer electrolyte membranes, and catalysts, must be conducted, and the excessively high overpotential is also a big challenge.
2.2 Microfluidic flow cells
Kenis and co-workers pioneered and developed a microfluidic flow cell for electrochemical CO2 reduction.24–27 As depicted in Fig. 3a, two gas diffusion electrodes are coated with a cathode catalyst for CO2 reduction and an anode catalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction, respectively.25 A continuous flow of CO2 as a reactant is directly inputted and rapidly diffuses to the catalyst and electrolyte interface via a gas diffusion layer (GDL). Additionally, this structure relies on an ultrathin flowing electrolyte channel (<1 mm thickness) to separate the anode and cathode. Unlike membrane-based flow cells, under laminar flow conditions with this microfluidic flow configuration, the intersection of reactants and products is controllable due to the slow diffusion of products. Thus, microfluidic electrolytic reactors not only avoid the use of costly membranes, but also allow flexible management of operating conditions, including the electrolyte composition and pH. Also, they alleviate the anode drying and cathode flooding that are caused by the permeability resistances of water molecules and the proton transport through the membrane, respectively, when operating at high current densities.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagrams of (a) the microfluidic reactor and (b) a dual electrolyte microfluidic reactor for CO2 conversion. 
Xuan and colleagues developed and validated a numerical model for CO2 utilization and fuel production processes based on a microfluidic system.28 By analyzing the mass transfer and electrochemical performance of the cathode side of the microfluidic system, they pointed out that the low diffusion rate of CO2 in the GDE, the competitive HER, and the hydrogen dilution effect are the key factors limiting the performance of electrodes and resulting in low efficiency. HER kinetics and the CO2 feed rate can be further optimized to improve the performance. In particular, they systematically studied the benefits of CO2 utilization in a dual electrolyte microfluidic reactor (DEMR) system through a series of experiments and theoretical models.29–32 As shown in Fig. 3b, due to the inflow of two different electrolytes, a virtual separation interface dominated by acid–base interfacial heat is formed between the cathode and the anode. The ohmic Joule heat is much smaller than that of a single electrolyte system, thereby improving the electrochemical performance. They concluded that a pH 2 cathode electrolyte and a pH 14 anode electrolyte output the best formic acid production cell performance, which was also verified by model calculations. In addition, they also pointed out that identifying optimized microfluidic design dimensions and electrolyte recycling in a microfluidic pH-differential network would be feasible by proper adjustment of operating conditions. Moreover, Raman et al. used a mechanistic mathematical model to conduct a Monte Carlo simulation of CO2 to CO conversion in a microfluidic flow cell reactor.33 They have investigated the effects of a variety of parameters (geometric/design, physical, material, operating, and electrochemical parameters) on the performance, conversion efficiency, and selectivity of the microfluidic system. They proposed simplified regression models through supervised machine learning algorithms to forecast the overall performance of devices without solving the complete system. The results showed that the properties of the catalyst characterized by the charge transfer coefficient are the most significant parameters affecting the cell performance in the overall cell potential range. In addition, even if the random input parameters are normally distributed, the reactor output performance is not a normal distribution in the whole cell potential range, indicating that it is necessary to combine practical experiments to obtain the optimal reactor performance. In short, both experimental and numerical model research on the effects of microfluidic flow cells provides a new opportunity for fundamental studies about the CO2 reduction process, thereby providing new opportunities for technological improvement.
2.3 A cell with gapless electrodes
A cell with gapless electrodes is an emerging type of electrolyzer, which presses the cathode and anode electrodes together with an ion-exchange membrane in the middle to create a zero-gap cell (Fig. 4a). A continuously humidified CO2 stream is directly supplied to the cathode. CO2 reduction occurs at the boundary between the membrane and the cathode electrode. The main advantage of this device over a microfluidic flow cell is that it is relatively easy to significantly increase the local CO2 concentration by pressurizing and thus produces a higher current density and reaction rate.34–38 In addition, cells with gapless electrodes have a distinct advantage over membrane-based flow cells in that they have a lower ohmic loss and reduce the risk of catalyst poisoning caused by impurities in the cathode electrolyte. However, a potential drawback of zero-gap cells is that liquid products from CO2 reduction (such as alcohols) may backflow into GDE pores and block the catalytic active sites, thus impeding the entry of CO2 reactants. This means that the liquid products may penetrate the gas flow channel to prevent further reaction, which has a great relationship with the GDEs. We provide further discussion of GDEs in Section 3.3.
 Fig. 4  (a) Construction of a cell with gapless electrodes for CO2 electroreduction. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. Schematic illustrations of (b) a full BPM zero-gap cell setup and (c) a novel cell with a thin layer of catholyte buffer. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Most cells with gapless electrodes reported in the literature use a cation exchange membrane to transport protons for CO2 reduction.16 Park and co-workers proposed a gaseous CO2 supply to improve the electrolytic performances of CO2 reduction with the circumvention of the CO2 solubility limitation.39 They revealed that the formate formation was more stable in a CO2-fed electrolyzer than in a liquid electrolyte-supplied electrolyzer, which benefited from a shortened CO2 diffusion pathway to the tin nanoparticle catalyst. However, the accelerated ion exchange rate facilitates the acidification of the catholyte and promotes the competitive hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).40,41 To address this problem, Neyerlin and co-workers inserted a thin catholyte layer between the cathode and membrane to maintain appropriate pH near the cathode for the CO2 reduction reaction (Fig. 4b and c).42 In an alternative design, Mallouk and co-workers displayed a vapor-fed electrolyzer with a bipolar membrane that can achieve a more stable cell voltage than an electrolyzer with a cation exchange membrane during a 12 h CO2 reduction process on account of the better control of pH by the bipolar membrane.35 Recently, Sargent et al. operated an anion exchange membrane cell with gapless electrodes based on a Cu surface coated with a nitrogen-doped carbon layer catalyst, which delivered an ethanol FE of 52%, achieving a cathodic energy efficiency (EE) of 31% and a full-cell EE of 16% for ethanol.36 Moreover, considering the similarity between these devices and PEM fuel cells, it seems more straightforward to scale them up to an industrial scale and build large sized stacks.
3. Management of reactant delivery
3.1 Flow field design
The delivery and/or management of water and CO2 is affected by the mild chemical cell macro-geometry components, which control the hydrodynamics of the gas/liquid flow in the cell. Bipolar plates with flow fields can influence the distribution of CO2 and/or H2O across the flow electrolyzers by adjusting the flow field factors such as channel width, rib width, depth, and the ratio of channel width to landing width. A critical challenge for flow field design is improving the fluid management via a suitable flow field pattern. Most literature reports are based on computational fluid dynamics simulation, water gradient mapping, and tests on pressure/temperature sensing under different flow fields to better understand the effects of these geometric parameters on electrolysis performance.43,44 Although the effects of flow field architectures on PEM fuel cells45–47 and redox flow batteries48,49 have been extensively studied, but the study of the effects on the CO2 reduction is still insufficient. The flow field architecture techniques, which have been applied to commercial fuel cells and redox flow batteries, however, provide a blueprint for CO2 electroreduction.
Typical flow field designs are the parallel flow field (PFF), serpentine flow field (SFF), and interdigitated flow field (IFF) (Fig. 5a–c). The original design of the parallel flow channel is to reduce pressure drops and improve efficiency. However, in this kind of PPF, water tends to accumulate from small droplets to large droplets and block the flow channel. In addition, poor design could also cause inhomogeneous reactant gas-distribution or even bypass parts of the active area, which may also affect the performance of the device due to insufficient reaction gas on the electrode.
 Fig. 5  (a) PFF. (b) SFF. (c) IFF. Flow field designs investigated: (d) multiple serpentine, (e) segmented serpentine and (f) straight and parallel. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Polarization curves and (h) FEs at different gas flow rates of CO2. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (i) Syngas (H2:CO) ratio as a function of CO2 flow rate. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2011, Springer Netherlands. 
The SFF is the most common flow channel trend and has also been most widely studied.50,51 As shown in Fig. 5b, there is only one flow path from the inlet to the outlet on the entire plate. It can rapidly drain the cell products without the liquid blocking the runner that occurs in some other flow channels. However, for a large-area plate, the flow channel is too long, resulting in a large pressure drop between the inlet and the outlet and uneven current density distribution. These lead to large parasitic energy requirements. Especially in the case of small portable flow cell systems, the energy required to transport the fluids should be as small as possible.
As illustrated in Fig. 5c, the IFF can highly improve the cell power density. Its characteristic is that the fluid must mandatorily pass through the diffusion layer, while other forms of flow channels penetrate the diffusion layer mainly under their pressure. The significant advantage of the IFF is that the fluid can fully pass through the diffusion layer. However, due to the large resistance of the diffusion layer and the large pressure drop of the fluid, the catalytic layer of the reactor may be destroyed, leading to poor equipment performance. Besides, the interdigital flow channel is more prone to short circuit in the case of poor design, resulting in a decrease in the utilization rate of reactants and electrodes. In addition to the above-mentioned common flow fields, several new types of field designs such as the spiral flow field,45 fractal flow field,52 tubular flow field,53 circular flow field44 and corrugated flow field54 have also been proposed to improve the uniformity of flow distribution and enhance the localized mass transfer in the porous electrode.
Ibrahimoglu et al. showed that the velocity and pressure distributions of the gases in the spiral flow field are uniform using the computational fluid dynamics method, which can reduce the pressure drop per unit length of the flow field, but it has considerable ohmic losses and higher efficiency in auxiliary power consumption.46 Berlinguette and co-workers reported the use of 3D printing technology to electroplate nickel on plastic flow slots, which enables rapid prototyping and optimization of experimental flow plates with different geometric shapes for water electrolyzers.55 Recently, mixed-flow field designs (e.g., multiple serpentine, segmented serpentine, and straight and parallel flow fields) have been applied to study the influence on degradation behavior associated with potential cycling (Fig. 5d–f).56,57 These studies also emphasized the importance of proper flow field design for long-term operation under adverse conditions.
In brief, different flow field designs have both pros and cons. Therefore, in the employed device, the distribution of the reactant flow field must always be optimized to achieve targeted applications, thereby minimizing nonuniformity, reducing the dead zones and improving the utilization rate of reactants. The use of bipolar plates with flow patterns requires extensive research on flow electrolyzers, and the use of different flow fields may help scale up and industrialize this process.
3.2 Gas-phase CO2 feed
Generally speaking, in a typical CO2 reduction electrolytic reactor, CO2 can be transported to the cathode in two forms: dissolved in a mild alkaline solution (usually an aqueous bicarbonate solution) or directly in a gas phase. However, because of the inherent low diffusion and low solubility of CO2 in aqueous media, the current density of CO2 reduction in the bulk liquid phase is limited to around 30 mA cm−2, representing a significant mismatch between in-service catalytic oxygen evolution and catalytic CO2 reduction.19 Although the continuous flow of electrolytes can conquer the limitation of CO2 diffusion in the liquid phase to some extent, the CO2 concentration in aqueous solution is essentially limited by environmental conditions. Alternatively, pure CO2 gas can be directly sent to the cathode to increase the concentration of effective CO2 molecules on the surface of the cathode catalyst, thereby improving the reaction rate.
The earliest example of a standard PEM electrolyzer modified by directly feeding gaseous CO2 to the cathode can be traced back to 1995. At that time, Nishimura et al. reported that the current efficiency was increased to 90% for CO production on an Au electrode through the improved device.58 After decades of research, feeding gaseous CO2 to the cathode with a CO2-saturated aqueous electrolyte became popular to be assembled into a membrane-based flow cell to form a variety of products, such as CO,59 formate,60 alcohols,61 and hydrocarbons.62 Lately, fluorine-modified Cu-based gas diffusion electrodes exhibited a C2+ (mainly ethylene and ethanol) formation rate of over 4.0 mmol h−1 cm−2 with an ultra-high current density of 1.6 A cm−2 and a selectivity of 80% faradaic efficiency based on a flow cell fed directly by CO2, which is significantly superior to those reported up to now.63 In fact, a growing number of recently reported examples tend to combine CO2 gas reactants with gas diffusion electrodes that validate its effectiveness in achieving high reaction rates and efficiencies.
In order to convert a large amount of CO2, how does the flow rate of the gaseous supply affect the current density and FE of the conversion process? It is necessary to note that although the gas flow unit can be employed to describe the overall flow of gas well, it only provides the actual flow of CO2 reaching the electrolytic cell by the gas flow controller. Consequently, it is very difficult to study and compare electrolyzers with different sizes in different laboratories. Standardizing the gas flow rate by using the free volume of the cathodic chamber of the electrolytic cell and/or the electrochemical active surface area of the electrode seems to be a feasible approach in order to obtain the actual flow rate of CO2 gas. Surprisingly, there is currently no explicit definition of what the flow rate of CO2 in an electrolytic cell means.
Recently, some studies on the influence of the CO2 flow rate on the performance of the CO2RR have been reported successively.32,64 They demonstrated that when the reactant CO2 feed rate is lower than a certain level, the dynamic limitation is not dominant and the effect of the gas rate is not noticeable. As the CO2 flow rate increases, the enhancement of FE is consistent with the simultaneous increase of current density. When the flow rate reaches a certain threshold, the stable behavior achieved shows that most of the catalytically active sites participate in the reaction and reach a state controlled by kinetics (Fig. 5g and h). In addition to the achievable current density and FE, the flow rate can also adjust the product distribution of the CO2RR. McIlwain and co-workers showed that the H2:CO ratio in product syngas can be tailored between 1:4 and 9:1 by regulating the current density and the flow rate of CO2 gas (Fig. 5i).65 Unsurprisingly, increasing the concentration of CO2 on the electrode surface can increase the ratio of the mixed gas CO:H2. The proportion of the product could be maintained for 4 hours after a short induction period. The above data suggest that the optimization of the flow rate greatly affects the CO2RR performance, including the current density, FE, and product distribution.
3.3 Gas diffusion layers
Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs), which create an effective three-phase interface for gaseous reactants, electrodes, and electrolytes, provide a promising avenue to boost the mass transfer process and overall CO2RR rates. As early as 1990, Sammells et al. published the first report on the use of GDEs to reduce CO2.66 Subsequently, more and more research on GDEs for CO2 reduction has been performed and reported.67–70Fig. 6a shows the typical GDE architecture, where the gas diffusion layer (GDL) can quickly transfer gaseous CO2 to the catalyst layer (CL). The GDL is usually a porous matrix consisting of densely packed carbon fibers and more tightly arranged microporous carbon layers. More generally, the carbon fibers can be carbon paper or carbon cloth, and the microporous carbon layers can be carbon nanofibers or compressed carbon powder. The GDL could offer abundant gaseous CO2 with a much shorter diffusion pathway. At the same time, because of its low resistance, the GDL can also be used as a transport medium for protons, electrons, and products to enter the electrolytic liquid phase from the CL surface. Notable results have been achieved in prolonging the contact time between the reactant and catalytic sites to improve the mass transfer efficiency and current density for electrochemical reactions by the combined properties of the GDEs.
 Fig. 6  (a) A catalyst layer deposited onto a hydrophobic substrate. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Desired and flooded operations. (c) The mole fraction of CO versus time. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the gas–liquid–solid three-phase interfaces. (e) Diagrams and photographs of average water droplet contact angles on different Au/C electrodes. (f) Geometric jCO and FECO. (g) Cross-sectional fluorescence images scanned according to black lines. (h) Corresponding z axis fluorescence intensity line scans of yellow arrow regions in (g). Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic illustration of the graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE electrode. (j) Long-term performance test of the CO2RR. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
A key characteristic of the GDL is that it must be hydrophobic; otherwise, the liquid electrolyte will penetrate the gas flow channel to block further reaction. In other words, the GDL must be air-wet, not moistened by the electrolyte. It should be emphasized that the GDL requires suitable hydrophobic properties. Excessive hydrophobicity could result in inferior electronic conduction owing to the presence of an abundance of non-conductive hydrophobe, while insufficient hydrophobicity will restrict the diffusion of gas CO2 because of the tendency of flooding and accelerate undesired HER (Fig. 6b).50,71 Besides, during the electrochemical reaction process, the GDL surface may change from being hydrophobic to hydrophilic due to an oxidation reaction that occurs at elevated overpotentials and/or applied current density, resulting in flooding of the GDL and thereby obstructing the diffusion pathway of CO2.
In a recent publication, Brushett et al. investigated Ag-coated GDE flooding in a flowing electrolyte and gas-fed CO2 reduction electrolyzer.50 They showed that the molar fraction of CO in the product gas using the Ag-coated GDEs for more than 5 hours was near 95%, while the peak CO performance could only be maintained for less than 15 minutes at 196 mA cm−2. This means that the faradaic current accelerates the electrode flooding and failure (Fig. 6c). The authors also proposed that appropriate microstructures and wettability of GDEs can accelerate the removal of carbonate from the gas liquid interface, thereby alleviating precipitation/flooding events and promoting long-term high CO2 conversion rates. It is noted that Zhang et al. recently used a typical Au/C gas diffusion electrode as a model to investigate the wettability of gas–liquid–solid three-phase interfaces during CO2 electroreduction (Fig. 6d–h).71 In addition to the use of the water droplet contact angle method to evaluate the hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties of different electrodes, they used confocal laser scanning microscopy to intuitively watch the structure of gas–liquid–solid three-phase interfaces, showing that the depth of electrolyte penetration increased with the increase of the hydrophilicity of the electrode surface. They further proved that the transport of CO2 at the interface plays an essential role in defining the stability of CO2 equilibrium concentration during the CO2RR.
Furthermore, the stability of GDEs is also a vital problem to be considered and solved, because long-term stable operation is the key to the realization of the practical application of flow reactors. Although the flow cell system equipped with GDEs has achieved excellent CO2 reduction performance, due to the weak mechanical adhesion between CLs, GDLs, and binder layers, their stability is still poor and needs further development.72 With this in mind, Sargent and co-workers developed a viable strategy by integrating polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) hydrophobic scaffolds into GDEs, thus constructing a stable and excellent sandwich-like electrode, as shown in Fig. 6i. As a result, the graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE electrode reduced CO2 to ethylene with 70% FE at −0.55 V vs. RHE in 7 M KOH solution and can be operated for 150 hours, which was 300 times longer than the traditional GDEs (Fig. 6j).73 The improvement of long-term stability was mainly due to the significantly enhanced hydrophobicity and flood resistance of the modified GDEs. Hydrophobic polymers or ionomers integrated into GDEs may have an impact on the electrode performance.74–76 In general, the GDL is an important component of the electrolyzer, and it is necessary to further study the integration with the catalyst layer to improve the CO2 reduction performance.
4. Membranes
Polymer electrolyte membranes (PEMs) separate the cathode and anode of the electrolytic device and regulate the flow of half-reacted ions to the other compartment while diminishing product crossover. They also provide mechanical support to withstand pressure differences between the compartments. Three classes of membranes have been employed for CO2 reduction systems, including cation (or proton) exchange membranes (CEMs),77 anion exchange membranes (AEMs)62,78 and bipolar membranes (BPMs),79,80 similar to those in water splitting electrolyzers. As shown in Fig. 7a to c, the type of membrane directly determines the transmission path of ions between the anode and cathode of the electrolyzer. To better understand how membrane properties impact the efficiency and selectivity of the CO2RR, it is necessary to investigate the properties of the membrane, including chemical construction, the concentration of functional groups in the membrane, film thicknesses, water absorption capacity, ionic conductivity, etc.81
 Fig. 7  Overview of ion transport pathways for the three types of PEMs: (a) CEM, (b) AEM, and (c) BPM. (d) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical CO2RR using chemically modified PGG membranes. (e) FEs and (f) current density of different membranes. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Crossover of (g) formate, (h) CH3OH, and (i) C2H5OH vs. time in the AEM and BPM. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
4.1 Cation exchange membranes (CEMs)
As depicted in Fig. 7a, CEMs can promote cation flow from the anolyte to the catholyte. In 2008, Delacourt et al.82 first evaluated CO2 reduction activity based on a CEM-based flow cell using a Nafion membrane and a direct supply of gas-phase CO2. When 1 M KHCO3 solution as a mildly basic buffer layer was passed between the membrane and the cathode GDE, the FE of CO reached about 80% at 20 mA cm−2 and about 20% at 100 mA cm−2. Without adding the buffer layer, CO2 was hardly reduced and the FE of H2 was 100% at 20 mA cm−2. Nevertheless, stable electrolysis could not be maintained for more than an hour. The main reason was the electrode poisoning at the interface of the Nafion membrane and the change in the electrolyte properties. In addition, more protons diffuse from the anode electrolyte to the cathode electrolyte, which would facilitate H2 production and weaken the selectivity of CO2 reduction. The above results prove the significance of an aqueous electrolyte and ion management in gas flow cells, which are essentially related to the selection of membranes.
The choice of ion exchange membranes must be considered in conjunction with the selection of catalysts, electrolytes and target CO2RR products. CEMs are commonly used for CO2 reduction to form formic acid or formate because these cation exchange membranes can prevent the product of formate anions from passing through to the anode compartment, thereby preventing the loss of the formic acid product. In addition, the CO product distribution can also be adjusted with the cation exchange membrane during the CO2 electroreduction process.83–86 Considering that the CEM may be a proton exchange membrane, such as Nafion, the proton concentration must be managed by choosing an acidic anode electrolyte. Another consideration for CEMs is that an excess of protons will elevate the hydrogen production on the cathode.
Modeling and simulation have proven to be well-established tools for studying the performance-related issues of proton exchange membrane reactors.87,88 The most commonly used perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA)-based membranes, such as Nafion, where sulfonic acid groups are fixed to the polymer backbones, are typically used for CO2 reduction. These membranes have strong acidity and high ionic conductivity due to the presence of sulfonic groups.89 However, PFSA membranes have several known failure modes during cell operation, involving mechanical, thermal, and electrochemical processes. The most cited cause of membrane failure is chemical degradation.90,91 Xie et al. deduced a degradation model of PFSA films based on the decompression mechanism and the backbone fracture at side chain positions, leaving the COOH group adhered to the remaining fragments.92 However, this model does not describe the formation of peroxides and free radicals, the effects of operating conditions, and the transport phenomena in the membrane electrode assembly. Later, Walsh and colleagues simulated the degradation of perfluorinated ion-exchange membranes using conservation principles in a model containing a detailed description of the transport phenomena.93 The results showed that the degradation process takes place by unzipping of the main chains and splitting of the side chains, and the numerical code is very effective.
Hydrocarbon-based membranes have attracted intensive interest as an alternative design, because they may be easier to manufacture than fluorine-based membranes. By adding the sulfonyl group (–S(O)2–) into different positions of benzenesulfonic acid, Fukushima et al. constructed model molecules and evaluated the activation and stability energies of deprotonation reactions of these model molecules.94 It is revealed that the activation energy decreases and the stabilization energy increases when a sulfonyl group is introduced between the carbon and sulfur atoms of the sulfonyl group (–SO3H). The results indicated that the introduction of highly electronegative functional groups can improve the performance of the hydrocarbon-based film without fluorine atoms.
4.2 Anion exchange membranes (AEMs)
Unlike CEMs, anion exchange membranes (AEMs) regulate the flow of anions (e.g., hydroxide) from the catholyte to the anolyte. As shown in Fig. 7b, an AEM may be better suited for the CO2RR than a CEM because of the promotion of CO2 reduction and the prevention of H+ ion migration to the cathode to decrease the competitive HER. In fact, OH− ions can quickly react with existing CO2 to generate HCO3− and CO32−. It is inevitable that AEMs can facilitate the transport of all these anions from the catholyte to the anolyte. However, the ion flow rates of HCO3− and CO32− are much lower than that of OH−, and the aggregation of these large anions will prevent the further migration of OH− ions, thus reducing the CO2 reduction efficiency. Furthermore, aqueous bicarbonate is a commonly used catholyte. It can diffuse into the anolyte through the AEM, lower the pH for the oxidation process and thereby reduce the efficiency of the anode. What's more, the crossover rate of products from the catholyte to the anolyte is likely to be boosted especially for anionic products (like formate) and neutral products (like methanol).95 In addition, an AEM may be susceptible to excessive OH− degradation, especially when the membrane has insufficient moisture. An ideal AEM requires high ionic conductivity, high ion mobility and low permeability of products, thereby improving the kinetic transport of ions during CO2 electrolysis, inhibiting the H2 formation as a competitive reaction, and improving the overall performance of the device. Up to now, many of the best-known membranes for CO2 electroreduction electrolyzers use AEMs.34,73,96–100
Wang et al.101 synthesized a series of hydroxide-conductive polymers as AEM materials to evaluate the efficiency and selectivity of electrochemical CO2 reduction (Fig. 7d). They indicated that using an AEM containing thiophene groups delivers superior CO2RR catalytic performance with 71.5% formate FE at −1.64 V vs. the saturated calomel electrode, far exceeding that of dimethyloctanal and hydroxybenzyl based membranes and a commercial Nafion 212 membrane (Fig. 7e and f). The reason is that the membrane with thiophene functional groups exhibits an excellent high ionic conductivity, ion transport number and low formate permeability, which can improve the dynamics of ion transport during CO2 electrolysis, inhibit the H2 evolution, and weaken formate product crossover, contributing to cell performance improvement.
Recently, Sargent and co-workers presented a catalyst:ionomer bulk heterojunction architecture using an AEM-based flow cell that could achieve a partial ethylene current density of 1.3 A cm−2 with cathodic energy efficiency reaching 45%.97 The authors noted that the supplemental humidification gas CO2 in the reactor demonstrates the importance of sufficient hydration during the vapor phase reduction process. The excellent performance of using an AEM flow electrolyzer for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction paves the way for the realization of renewable electrochemistry for hydrocarbon production at large current densities required for industrial applications.
4.3 Bipolar membranes (BPMs)
In a bipolar membrane (BPM), the anion and the cation exchange layers are connected at the interfacial layer to catalyze the self-dissociation of water into H+ and OH−, which are selectively run to the cathode and the anode under reverse bias conditions (Fig. 7c). Compared with CEMs and AEMs, the obvious advantage of BMPs is that they can maintain a constant pH value in the cathodic compartment and anodic compartment of the electrolytic cell, so that ideal pH conditions can be independently selected for each half-reaction. At this point, this design may allow a wider choice of catalysts and the use of low-cost abundant metals instead of precious ones.102 BPM electrolyzers have been flexibly designed for use in flow batteries,103 fuel cells,104,105 water electrolysis,106–108 CO2 separation109 and CO2 electroreduction.110
In 2016, Mallouk and co-workers displayed the application of a BMP based on a gas-phase CO2 flow cell.35 They demonstrated that the BPM-based cell can enable high current densities and stable operation, comparable with equivalent CEM- or AEM-based devices. Later, they also reported a series of studies on the application of BPMs in electrochemical CO2 reduction.79,111,112 They reported a high stability of CO production for 24 h at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 and a cell voltage of 3.4 V, with a faradaic efficiency of approximately 65% in a CO2 flow electrolyzer containing a BPM. Nevertheless, the current density with a FECO of 50% is up to 200 mA cm−2, which is the highest current density reported to date using a BPM at room temperature/pressure.79 In addition, they found that the crossover rate of formate was approximately 17 times lower for 3D or commercial BMPs than that for commercial AEMs under the same conditions (Fig. 7g).111 The 3D and commercial BMPs have similar crossover rates of formate and methanol (Fig. 7h and i). They manifested that ion crossover rates are limited by the degree of molecular penetration of BMPs rather than the interfacial areas of BMPs, and CEMs (like Nafion) are poor choices for preventing ion crossover.112 Therefore, BMPs, especially 3D BMPs, are expected to become an integral part of CO2 reduction flow electrolyzers to manufacture fuels and chemicals.
In general, it is more pronounced from the above examples that there is still a lot of room for improvement in terms of designing and synthesizing PEM materials. At the same time, in order to improve the performance of gas phase CO2 flow electrolyzers, it is necessary to take catalysts, electrolytes, and target reduction products into whole consideration.
5. Electrolytes
The electrolyte is another crucial part for the electrocatalytic CO2RR, and its main function is to conduct ionic charges between electrodes. An ideal electrolyte should possess but not limited to high solubility for CO2, high ionic conductivity, high electrochemical stability, good chemical compatibility with electrode materials, low viscosity to ensure good CO2 mass transfer from the bulk electrolyte solution to the electrode surfaces, easy operation and storage, and safety.16,113–115 Thus, choosing the right electrolyte will be paramount for the performance of the electrochemical CO2RR system, which can selectively and efficiently convert CO2 into products.
5.1 Aqueous solutions
Liquid electrolytes are the most extensively employed electrolyte systems for CO2 reduction. Among them, aqueous electrolyte systems have the advantages of low cost, large scale, wide availability, relatively easy preparation, safe handling and storage, and stable ionic conductivity, making them the most frequently used liquid electrolyte systems in research and practical applications. Moreover, aqueous solutions can act as both proton donors and proton acceptors to promote the formation of different electroactive substances. The pH, cations, anions, and concentrations of the aqueous electrolyte can affect the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction performance.116–119

5.1.1 Cationic effects. 
Alkali metal cations in the electrolyte can affect the electrochemical CO2 reduction activity and selectivity.120,121 In 1991, Hori and Murata first demonstrated that the product selectivity of CO2 and CO reduction on polycrystalline copper largely depends on the cationic species.120 As shown in Fig. 8a, the selectivity of ethylene and alcohol products increases compared with that of CH4 and H2 with increasing cation radius (Li+ < Na+ < K+ < Cs+). They explained that the smaller the cations, the stronger the hydration capacities, and the more it can prevent the propensity to adsorb on the electrode surface. Cations with larger ionic radii are more likely to adsorb on the electrode surface due to their lower hydration ability, making the CO2 reduction potential move towards the positive direction of the outer Helmholtz layer. This reduced reduction potential leads to the decrease of proton concentration, resulting in a decrease of the selectivities towards CH4 and H2, which was consistent with the observed changes in hydrocarbon selectivity. Since then, several experimental reports and theoretical studies have confirmed and expanded the above observations.122–124 The cations adsorbed on the cathode surface can stabilize the negatively charged radical intermediate (*CO2−), thereby decreasing H2 evolution and facilitating CO2 reduction, which can explain the gradual increase in the overall efficiency of CO2 reduction with the ionic size from Li+ to Cs+.125 Notably, Koper et al. provided definitive evidence that partially desolvated metal cations from electrolytes stabilize the *CO2− intermediate via a short-range local electrostatic interaction.126
 Fig. 8  (a) Effect of cationic species on the FEs of various products. Reproduced from literature data.120 Copyright 1991, Chemical Society of Japan. (b) Effect of anionic species on the FEs of various products. Reproduced from the data in Hori et al. (1989).134 (c) Designed flow cell for performing in situ Raman measurements under continuous-flow CO2 reduction. (d) HCO3− and CO32− concentrations, and (e) pH profile with respect to the distance from the GDE surface. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. FE for (f) H2, (g) CO, and (h) CH4 in CO2-saturated electrolytes with different pH values. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
However, there remain some debates about the conclusion of cation adsorption on the electrode. Recent theoretical work indicated that specific alkaline cation adsorption conditions were not applicable to CO2 reduction. Part of the reason is that the calculated reduction potential of alkali cations on transition metal electrodes is more negative.127,128 Given the complex properties of the electrochemical interface, it is difficult to accurately determine the degree of interaction between the alkali ions and the electrode surface. The experimental investigation of the mechanism by which the specific cationic adsorption and/or non-specific interactions affect the surface electrochemical processes is challenging,129 but it can determine the effect of cations on or in the vicinity of the electrode surface on the CO2 reduction performance. The latest research results of Sargent et al. show that enriching K+ near the electrochemically active sites by using a cation-augmenting layer can accelerate CO2 activation, thereby effectively reducing CO2 in a strong acid.130 In addition, the cation-augmenting layer allows cations (such as H+ and K+) to migrate from the electrolyte to the catalyst surface, while slowing the outward diffusion of OH−, resulting in higher surface pH, which was favorable for C–C coupling.


5.1.2 Anionic effects. 
The anionic effects on CO2 reduction activity and selectivity have been proposed to be dependent on the pH value, buffer effect, and specific adsorption of anions on the surface of the cathode electrode.68,131–133 Hori and colleagues investigated the effect of pH and pointed out significant differences in the C2H4/CH4 production ratio among different anions in the electrolyte: the ratio of 4.16 in K2SO4 and 3.74 in KCl were higher than that of 1.02 in KHCO3 and 0.11 in K2HPO4 (Fig. 8b).134 In agreement with these studies, Mo and co-workers also confirmed that the enhanced selectivity for ethylene with a suppressed HER is partially attributed to the higher local pH for promoting OH− adsorption on the catalyst.135 Due to the release of OH− during the electroreduction process, the electrolyte with low buffer capacity (K2SO4/KCl < KHCO3 < K2HPO4) fails to neutralize the formed OH− and thus enhances the local pH value of the non-equilibrium local area near the electrode, which is beneficial to CO2 reduction over the HER and C2+ over C1 products. The maximum ethylene FE values in 0.1 M K2HPO4, KHCO3 and K2SO4 solutions are 31.2%, 68.5% and 83.2%, respectively, which is also the highest ethylene FE reported.135 In addition, other studies have also shown that the production of H2 and CH4 increases as the concentration of KHCO3 anions increases, again due to the local pH effects.136
There are several challenges in studying the pH effects on CO2 reduction. Considering the formation of CO32− and HCO3− when CO2 is purified in alkaline solutions, the electrolytes used for the CO2RR are usually limited to electrolytes with neutral or acidic pH values. Initial work by Tanaka et al. manifested the effect of pH on the formation of CO and HCOO− towards electrochemical CO2 reduction.137 To gain an insight into the further-reduced product pathway, the pioneering work by Hori and co-workers showed that the product selectivity of CH4 and C2H4 in the electrochemical CO reduction reaction was affected by pH.124,138,139 Weitzner et al. used a recently developed effective screening medium method and density functional theory to illustrate the effect of pH on the binding energy of CO.140 They found that the interdependent voltage and pH value would lead to a special change in adsorption sites favoring the CO binding on Cu (100) surfaces, making them multi-coordinated bridge or hollow positions. These findings also provide a physical basis for the recent in situ spectroscopic observation of the CO2RR process in alkaline media. Wang and co-workers developed an in situ Raman flow electrolytic cell for the experimental study on local pH changes near the GDE during the CO2 reduction process under working conditions (Fig. 8c).141 They proved that at the interface between the cathode electrode surface and the electrolyte, CO2 reacts with the alkaline KOH solution to form CO32− and HCO3−, thus making the local environment of the electrode surface close to neutral (Fig. 8d and e). In addition, due to the Nernst potential of the pH gradient layer at the cathodic electrode/electrolyte interface, the use of the alkaline electrolyte results in a nominal overpotential drop. With the increase of CO2 reduction current density, the neutralization reaction between CO2 and OH− still exists, but the pH gradient layer will be narrowed.
It is noted that the pH value is a significant factor in determining CO2 reduction products and is correlated with catalytic activity and selectivity. Bell et al. elucidated that the composition and concentration of electrolyte anions (such as perchlorates, sulfates, bicarbonates, borates, and phosphates) had negligible effects on the formation of CO, formic acid, ethylene, and ethanol, but notably affected the formation of CH4 and H2, which highly relied on the pH of the electrolytes.131 Recent studies have also improved the mechanistic understanding of pH effects for the CO2RR.116,142 As shown in Fig. 8f to h, the absolute molar formation rate and faradaic efficiency of products for CO2 reduction plotted versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale illustrate the pH effect.116 In view of the electrolysis experiments with high current density, the trend of the HER directly corresponds to the local interface pH value. Meanwhile, during the reaction, the proton consumption causes the local pH of the low concentration bicarbonate to rise sharply and suppress the HER. The exact pH of the interface also depends on the reduction current. They found that pH did not seem to be the only parameter controlling the CH4 formation. Unlike the generation of H2 or CH4, the CO formation is independent and has a decoupled electron transfer mechanism.
Electrolytes with higher pH values favor the activity and generation of C2+ products at a lower applied potential (especially for copper catalysts).73,143 Wang et al. compared the C2+ product formation rates on an F–Cu catalyst under different concentrations of KOH solution. As shown in Fig. 9a, the formation rate of C2+ was as high as 3050 μmol h−1 cm−2 at −0.62 V vs. RHE in 2.5 M KOH solution. However, the lower the concentration of KOH, the lower the formation rate of C2+ at the same potential.63 In this vein, further boosting the selectivity and FE of C2+ products by the KOH electrolyte is also a direction worthy of in-depth study. The specific adsorption of anions on the cathode can have a significant effect on the activity and selectivity of CO2 reduction as well.68,144 Especially, the halogen ions adsorbed on the cathode surface can change the electronic structure of the catalysts, thus affecting the interaction between the cathode surface and active intermediates to promote the CO2RR.63,145–148 There is evidence that when the KHCO3 electrolyte solution contains halide ions, with the increase of the halide ionic radius from Cl− to I−, the current density of CO2 reduction increases gradually, but the faradaic efficiency of C2+ products remains unchanged (Fig. 9b and c).147,148 Wang et al. also confirmed the above view that when KX (X = F, Cl, Br, and I) was added to the electrolyte, the current density and the formation rate of C2+ products increased with the decrease of the halogen electronegativity, while the C2+ FE only changed slightly.63 However, it remains unclear which anion factor has the dominating influence on the CO2RR and this represents another field of future research aiming at deeper understanding of the ion interactions in the CO2 reduction process.
 Fig. 9  (a) The formation rates of C2+ products in different concentrations of KOH. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (b) Current density and (c) total FE of C2+ products in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) The solubility of CO2 in various organic solvents. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A schematic of how the free energy of the system changes in water and ionic liquids. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Calculated reaction free energy profiles in ionic liquids/water mixed electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 

5.2 Organic solvents
The solubility of CO2 in DMF, propyl carbonate, CH3OH, DMSO, and acetonitrile is approximately 20, 8, 5, 4 and 4 times higher than that in water under ambient conditions, respectively (Fig. 9d).16 The main advantages of using non-aqueous electrolytes for the CO2RR are that they (1) have higher CO2 solubility than aqueous electrolytes, (2) suppress the unwanted HER through limited proton transfer and (3) allow selective reaction pathways conducive to the formation of the target products.3,7,149–151 Machan and co-workers reported that a nonaqueous acetonitrile flow cell had a CO selectivity of over 80% and achieved current densities higher than 50 mA cm−2. The flow configuration experiments in DMF solution showed greatly increased current activity relative to the H-type cell.152
Some studies have investigated CO2 reduction in mixed electrolytes that allow tuning proton concentrations and avoid the precipitation of carbonate.153–156 Hori et al. showed that with increasing water content in acetonitrile, CO2 reduction was more favorable for the generation of formic acid than oxalic acid.153 Kus and co-workers also indicated that due to the presence of protons in the acetonitrile–water electrolyte solution, the formation of CO dominated over formic acid. This implies that the selectivity of product formation can be tuned by the composition of the electrolyte solution.154
Unfortunately, although most organic solvents can significantly inhibit the HER, they usually exhibit inefficient FE during the CO2RR. Additionally, organic solvent electrolytes also have many intrinsic disadvantages, including their high cost, volatility, flammability, toxicity, and potential miscibility with reductive products.157,158 These disadvantages greatly limit the prospects of organic solvent electrolytes for CO2 reduction in large-scale practical applications.
5.3 Ionic liquids
Ionic liquids are a class of ionic compounds with specific structures, which usually present a liquid state at atmospheric temperature. They have been widely applied in the supporting systems of versatile electrochemical reactions, such as organic electrochemical synthesis159 and electrocatalytic reactions.160 Ionic liquids usually have appreciable electrical conductivity, good thermochemical stability, low vapor pressure, and a wide operating potential window, which make them superior to traditional aqueous electrolyte and organic electrolyte systems.161 In addition, due to the existence of ion exchange fields, ionic liquids are recognized to have high CO2 solubility under ambient pressure and temperature. Therefore, researchers continue to innovate and try to use ionic liquids to improve the performance of electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to produce high value-added products.
Some studies believe that certain ionic liquids are both electrolytes and promoters for CO2 activation. In 2011, Rosen et al. first reported that an ionic liquid ([EMIM][BF4]) can combine with *CO2 intermediates to form complexes and significantly decrease the energy barrier and the overpotential of CO2 activation in the reduction process (Fig. 9e).162 Then, Shi and co-workers reported that the highest CO faradaic efficiency reached 90.1% at −1.72 V vs. a Pt wire on an Ag cathode owing to the high solubility of CO2 in the [Bmim][CF3SO3]/PC non-aqueous electrolyte. No poisonous species were observed on the cathode during the 3 h electrolysis process.155 In addition, they also observed that [Bmim]+ was absorbed on the Au electrode to form an ionic liquid film. The generated CO2− radical interacted with [Bmim]+ to induce the formation of [Bmim–CO2]. Thus, the activation energy and overpotential of CO2 electrochemical reduction were reduced through this route.163 As shown in Fig. 9f, Lim and co-workers also further conducted systematic experimental studies to demonstrate that the cations and anions of ionic liquids can combine with and stabilize reaction intermediates, thereby forming a suitable microenvironment to reduce energy barriers and improve reaction kinetics.164
Miller and co-workers165 reported a series of new ruthenium complexes for kinetic comparison, which provided a platform for understanding how strong trans effect ligands and redox-active ligands work together to achieve rapid electrochemical reduction from CO2 to CO in an acetonitrile electrolyte containing tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) at a moderate potential. Etzold et al. used a [BMIm][NTf2] ionic liquid as the chemical trapping agent to react with one or more intermediates to explore the mechanism of CO2 reduction.166 They found that the presence of the ionic liquid can notably alter the product range by selectively inhibiting the production of C2H4, C2H5OH, and n-C3H7OH without interfering faradaic efficiency or partial current density of the products. Ethane is reconsidered to be formed through an independent pathway involving a CO dimerization process, rather than a reduction product that has long been considered to re-adsorb ethylene during the CO2RR. Considering the huge structural flexibility in ionic liquids, it is feasible to selectively interact with intermediates by elaborately designing task-specific ionic liquids to recognize the reaction paths of CO2 reduction products.
5.4 Solid-state electrolytes
In CO2RR systems, solid-state electrolytes have recently been developed as promising alternatives to conventional liquid electrolytes. Compared with dissolved solutes in a traditional liquid electrolyte (for example, the frequently used KHCO3 solution), these ion-conducting solid polymers can help electrogenerated cations or anions shuttle to form pure products and avoid mixing with conventional electrolytes. Wang and co-workers elucidated for the first time the use of a solid electrolyte device for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to continuously produce ultrahigh-purity liquid fuels.167 As illustrated by the schematic in Fig. 10a, porous solid-state electrolyte (SSE) conductors were placed between tightly coupled AEM and CEM membranes to effectively transmit the electrogenerated ions and notably reduce the ohmic loss of the whole equipment. It is worth noting that the cathode GDL is completely separated from the solution medium, which would not cause the flooding issue of the GDE, thus greatly guaranteeing operating stability even at a large negative overpotential for high catalytic currents. They successfully demonstrated the use of the device to generate pure formic acid solutions with a high concentration of 12.1 M and exhibited a continuous and stable preparation of ∼0.1 M HCOOH with a selectivity of more than 80% for 100 h. Moreover, other types of liquid product fuels such as CH3COOH, CH3CH2OH, and CH3CH2CH2OH were also obtained using a solid electrolyte-based flow cell by adjusting the catalyst. There is no doubt that this solid electrolyte electrolyzer provides the opportunity for effective separation of CO2 reduction products and diminish the cost of the product separation process. However, there are still several challenges that hinder its actual production: the limited concentration of the product, the low production rate for industrial applications, and the use of liquid electrolytes for the oxidation reaction.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the CO2 reduction reactor with a solid electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic illustration of the all-solid-state electrochemical CO2RR to formic acid reactor.168 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Wang et al. subsequently improved the anode inlet system based on such a solid electrolyte cell and proposed an all-solid-state reactor for electrochemical CO2 reduction.168 Notably, they used a humidified gaseous H2 stream for the hydrogen oxidation reaction rather than a liquid acid for the water oxidation reaction (Fig. 10b). They proved the generation of nearly 100 wt% high-purity formic acid solutions using a highly active, selective, and stable Bi catalyst through the all-solid-state electrochemical system, which provides the possibility for all-solid-state electrolyzers to be suitable for modular and high-pressure systems in future large-scale applications.
6. Conclusion
As a clean and sustainable technology for the future, electrochemical CO2 reduction technology is making strides in the search for catalyst design innovation and reactor system engineering. The efficiency and product selectivity of the CO2RR are not only determined by electrocatalysts but also affected by the electrolyzer configuration to a large extent. The continuous flow CO2 cell under development increases the likelihood of large-scale CO2 reduction processes because such a configuration allows the direct injection of exhaust CO2 into the cell. In this review, we have examined in detail the current impacts of non-catalyst units and feedstock properties on the overall CO2 reduction performance of flow cells, including reactor design, flow field, reactant supply, electrode structure, membranes, and electrolyte effects, summarizing the characteristics, superiorities, and obstacles of electrolyzers (Table 1) and providing valuable insights into real-world CO2 electrolysis for industrial applications. It is necessary to optimize multiple parameters and reaction systems simultaneously to effectively carry out continuous flow CO2 electroreduction. Several main aspects to focus in the near term include:
Table 1 Summarize of the superiorities and obstacles of different reactors and components for the CO2RR




Reactor types/components
Characteristics
Superiorities
Drawbacks




H-type cell
Conventional H-type cell
Batch reactor
Commercially available; screening of electrocatalysts; wide range of electrode selection; convenient operation
Limitation on the detection of trace liquid products; limitation of mass transport; difficulty in large-scale application


Flow cell
Membrane-based flow cell
Polymer electrolyte membrane configuration; circulating CO2-saturated electrolyte
Control of reactant delivery; fundamentals of commercial application design; lower cell resistance; higher mass transport; detection of low concentration products; accurate voltage measurement
Strong corrosion at high overpotentials


Microfluidic flow cell
Gas phase CO2; flow channel; a membrane-free cell
Higher mass transport; flexibility in operating conditions; minimization of the pH decrease; avoidance of high membrane cost; mitigation of water management; allows the use of a strongly alkaline electrolyte
Prone to product re-oxidation; lower liquid product concentration; the pressure sensitive resulting from different pressure across the membrane, which is a great challenge for scale-up application


A cell with gapless electrodes
Two electrodes pressed together with an ion-exchange membrane in between
Higher mass transport; lower ohmic losses; larger catalytic current density; ability to provide different types of surface ion environments; decrease of the risk of catalyst poisoning; ease of pressurizing the reactant flow and enhancing the local CO2 concentration
Blocking of active sites by the liquid products flooding back to the gas-diffusion electrode


Membranes
Cation exchange membrane (CEM)
Allows the passage of cations while preventing the anions
Widely used; prevention of the loss of the formic acid product
Facilitating H2 production and weakening the selectivity of CO2 reduction


Anion exchange membrane (AEM)
Allows the passage of anions while preventing the cations
Blocking of proton transfer, suppression of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and promotion of CO2 reduction; use of low-cost non-precious metals for the oxygen evolution reaction
Easy degradation by excessive OH−; preventing the further migration of OH− ions due to the aggregation of large anions (e.g., HCO3− and CO32−)


Bipolar membrane
Formed by lamination or close contact of an AEM and CEM; operated in either forward bias mode or reverse bias mode
Better control of pH; independent selection of the ideal pH conditions of each half-reaction; wide choice of catalysts; limitation of ion crossover rates; use of low-cost abundant metals instead of precious ones
Generating the large membrane potential and leading to an increase of the required voltage to drive the electrolysis, hence, lowering the overall energy efficiency under the reverse bias of the electrolyte at a similar pH level


Electrolytes
Aqueous solution
Water solvent
Low cost; large scale; wide availability; easy preparation; safe handling and storage; stable ionic conductivity
Low CO2 solubility and utilization rate; difficult and costly to recover products from the liquid electrolyte


Organic solvent
Organic solution
Higher CO2 solubility; suppression of the HER; allows selective reaction pathways conducive to the formation of the target products
High cost; volatility; flammability; toxicity; potential miscibility with reductive products; inefficient faradaic efficiency


Ionic liquid
Ionic compounds
Appreciable electrical conductivity; good thermochemical stability; low vapor pressure; wide operating potential window; higher CO2 solubility; structural flexibility
High viscosity that limits the CO2 diffusion rate; low current density


Solid-state electrolyte
Ion-conducting solid polymers
Helps electrosynthesize pure products without mixing with conventional electrolytes
Low production rate




(1) Simultaneous use of a continuous CO2-saturated electrolyte and vapor-phase CO2 flow to mitigate mass transfer limitations, and optimize humidity, the flow rate of the reaction gas flow, and the flow field related to the concentration of CO2 on the electrode surface.
(2) Further optimization of membrane reactors by utilizing the membrane technologies that have been developed and applied in commercial fuel cells and water electrolyzers to guide the optimal integration of ion exchange, conductivity and water transfer characteristics in CO2 reduction systems.
(3) Regulating the appropriate wetting properties of the GDE by loading hydrophobic components and further understanding of the influence of electrolyte interactions on the CO2 reduction process.
(4) Further development of all-solid-state electrochemical systems to facilitate the direct generation of pure liquid products from all-solid-state reactors for future large-scale applications.
(5) The establishment of a computation model for the rational design of the electrolytic cell structure. In this context, numerical simulations will be used to elucidate the effect of the flow rate and novel flow field on the CO2 conversion and consumption rate for the optimization of the reactor performance.
In summary, lab-scale continuous flow electrolyzers provide the opportunity to reduce CO2 and have received increasing attention in recent few decades. They will be one of the major development directions in the future for carbon neutralization. While many challenges remain for flow electrochemical CO2 reduction at the current stage, it is believed that with continued in-depth research and development to optimize and improve the electrolyzer configuration, industrial scale CO2 electrolysis for clean fuel and value-added chemicals will be realized in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of this work by the Science, Technology, and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality (Program No. JCYJ20180508151856806 and RCBS20200714114818140), the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. PDFS2122-5S02), The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project No. ZE2F, YWA1 and YW5B), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. G2020KY05129), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M663118).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Prabhu, V. Jose and J. M. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910768 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
K. Elouarzaki, V. Kannan, V. Jose, H. S. Sabharwal and J. M. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900090 CrossRef .
E. S. Sanz-Perez, C. R. Murdock, S. A. Didas and C. W. Jones, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11840–11876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Kuhn, H. Zhao, U. O. Nwabara, X. Lu, M. Liu, Y.-T. Pan, W. Zhu, P. J. A. Kenis and H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101668 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
L. Ye, H. Yue, Y. Wang, H. Sheng, B. Yuan, L. Lv, C. Li, B. Liang, J. Zhu and H. Xie, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 10557–10565 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Ding, P. Cai, L. Yi, Y. Li, C. Tu, Y. Hou, Z. Wen and L. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4993–5061 RSC .
C.-H. Yang, F. Nosheen and Z.-C. Zhang, Rare Met., 2021, 40, 1412–1430 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Qiu, S. Ren, Q. Dong, S. Zhang, F. Zhou, X. Liang, J. Wang, S. Li and M. Yu, Science, 2020, 367, 667–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Wang, X.-P. Li, B.-F. Cui, Z. Zhang, X.-F. Hu, J. Ding, Y.-D. Deng, X.-P. Han and W.-B. Hu, Rare Met., 2021, 40, 3019–3037 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jeon, J. Timoshenko, C. Rettenmaier, A. Herzog, A. Yoon, S. W. Chee, S. Oener, U. Hejral, F. T. Haase and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7578–7587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liang, N. Altaf, L. Huang, Y. Gao and Q. Wang, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 35, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Garg, M. Li, A. Z. Weber, L. Ge, L. Li, V. Rudolph, G. Wang and T. E. Rufford, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1511–1544 RSC .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
H. Shen, Z. Gu and G. Zheng, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1805–1816 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Li, S. Yu, S. Louisia, J. Jin, M. Li, M. B. Ross and P. Yang, Joule, 2020, 4, 1688–1699 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Zhuang, Z.-Q. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. De Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. Min, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, Y. Pang, M. Zhong, B. Zhang, J. Li, P.-N. Chen, X.-L. Zheng, H. Liang, W.-N. Ge, B.-J. Ye, D. Sinton, S.-H. Yu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cao, D.-D. Ma, J.-F. Gu, X. Xie, G. Zeng, X. Li, S.-G. Han, Q.-L. Zhu, X.-T. Wu and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15014–15020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Xu, X. Huang, J. Wang, M. Zhong, T. Cheng and Q. Shao, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1039–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Deng, F. Yang, Z. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Zaman and B. Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10807–10813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Jayashree, S. K. Yoon, F. R. Brushett, P. O. Lopez-Montesinos, D. Natarajan, L. J. Markoski and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3569–3578 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Whipple, E. C. Finke and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, B109–B111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, R. Luo, M. Heima, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. Ma, J. I. Gold, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3313–3321 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, D. Y. C. Leung and J. Xuan, Appl. Energy, 2013, 102, 1057–1062 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. Y. C. Leung, H. Wang and J. Xuan, Appl. Energy, 2018, 227, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. Y. C. Leung, H. Wang and J. Xuan, Renewable Energy, 2017, 102, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. Y. C. Leung, H. Wang, M. M. Maroto-Valer and J. Xuan, Renewable Energy, 2016, 95, 277–285 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. Y. C. Leung, H. Wang and J. Xuan, Appl. Energy, 2017, 194, 549–559 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kannan, K. A. Raman, A. Fisher and E. Birgersson, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 19361–19376 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ren, D. Joulié, D. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2019, 365, 367–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Yan, R. H. Gonçalves, D. A. Salvatore, C. P. Berlinguette and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Y. Wang, F. P. G. de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, A. Ozden, Y. G. C. Li, D. H. Nam, J. Li, Y. S. Liu, J. Wicks, Z. T. Chen, M. F. Chi, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tam, J. Y. Howe, A. Proppe, P. Todorović, F. W. Li, T. T. Zhuang, C. M. Gabardo, A. R. Kirmani, C. McCallum, S. F. Hung, Y. W. Lum, M. C. Luo, Y. M. Min, A. N. Xu, C. P. O'Brien, B. Stephen, B. Sun, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 478–486 CrossRef CAS .
B. Endrődi, G. Bencsik, F. Darvas, R. Jones, K. Rajeshwar and C. Janáky, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 133–154 CrossRef .
A. Reyes, R. P. Jansonius, B. A. W. Mowbray, Y. Cao, D. G. Wheeler, J. Chau, D. J. Dvorak and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1612–1618 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, Y. E. Kim, M. H. Youn, S. K. Jeong and K. T. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6883–6887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, F. G. Risalvato, P. P. Sharma, P. J. Pellechia, F.-S. Ke and X.-D. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F953–F957 CrossRef CAS .
I. Merino-Garcia, J. Albo and A. Irabien, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 014001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, A. Vise, W. E. Klein, F. C. Cetinbas, D. J. Myers, W. A. Smith, T. G. Deutsch and K. C. Neyerlin, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1825–1833 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mehrpooya, M. Kheir Rouz and A. Nikfarjam, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 3640–3647 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yao, Phys. Fluids, 2019, 31, 065107 CrossRef .
Y. Vazifeshenas, K. Sedighi and M. Shakeri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 15032–15039 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ibrahimoglu, M. Z. Yilmazoglu and S. Celenk, Fuel Cells, 2017, 17, 786–793 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Wen, L.-Z. Yin, Z.-Y. Piao, C.-D. Lu, G. Li and Q.-H. Leng, Int. J. Energy Res., 2017, 41, 2184–2193 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ke, J. M. Prahl, J. I. D. Alexander, J. S. Wainright, T. A. Zawodzinski and R. F. Savinell, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8721–8743 RSC .
C. R. Dennison, E. Agar, B. Akuzum and E. C. Kumbur, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163, A5163–A5169 CrossRef .
M. E. Leonard, L. E. Clarke, A. Forner-Cuenca, S. M. Brown and F. R. Brushett, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 400–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, J. Lim, C.-W. Roh, H. S. Whang and H. Lee, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 31, 244–250 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tüber, A. Oedegaard, M. Hermann and C. Hebling, J. Power Sources, 2004, 131, 175–181 CrossRef .
S. Ressel, A. Laube, S. Fischer, A. Chica, T. Flower and T. Struckmann, J. Power Sources, 2017, 355, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lisboa, J. Marschewski, N. Ebejer, P. Ruch, R. M. Cotta, B. Michel and D. Poulikakos, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 322–331 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Hudkins, D. G. Wheeler, B. Peña and C. P. Berlinguette, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3417–3423 RSC .
V. Bandlamudi, P. Bujlo, V. Linkov and S. Pasupathi, Fuel Cells, 2019, 19, 231–243 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L.-W. Feng, W. Huang, S. Mukherjee, Y. Chen, D. Shen, B. Wang, J. Strzalka, D. Zheng, F. S. Melkonyan, J. Yan, J. F. Stoddart, S. Fabiano, D. M. DeLongchamp, M. Zhu, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 17551–17557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nishimura, D. Yoshida, M. Mizuhata, K. Asaka, K. Oguro and H. Takenak, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 629–632 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Gu, M. Wang, Z. Zhang, W. Pan, Z. Jiang, H. Zheng, M. Lucero, H. Wang, G. E. Sterbinsky, Q. Ma, Y.-G. Wang, Z. Feng, J. Li, H. Dai and Y. Liang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 684–692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Li, J. Liu, C. Dong, C. Xiao, L. Cheng, H. Jiang, H. Jiang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7681–7685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. C. Li, Z. Wang, J. Li, D.-H. Nam, Y. Lum, M. Luo, X. Wang, A. Ozden, S.-F. Hung, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wicks, Y. Xu, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, C.-T. Dinh, Y. Wang, T.-T. Zhuang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 3, 75–82 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, T. Wang, B. Liu, D. Cheng, C. Hu, G. Zhang, W. Zhu, H. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6878–6883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, S. Xie, T. Liu, Q. Fan, J. Ye, F. Sun, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Cheng and Y. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 478–487 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kas, K. K. Hummadi, R. Kortlever, P. de Wit, A. Milbrat, M. W. Luiten-Olieman, N. E. Benes, M. T. M. Koper and G. Mul, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister and M. E. McIlwain, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 623–631 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Cook, R. C. MacDuff and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 607–608 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiang, S. Rasul, B. Hou, J. Portoles, P. Cumpson and E. H. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 601–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. A. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7075–7084 RSC .
Z. Bitar, A. Fecant, E. Trela-Baudot, S. Chardon-Noblat and D. Pasquier, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, H. Haspel, A. Pustovarenko, A. Dikhtiarenko, A. Russkikh, G. Shterk, D. Osadchii, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Ma and W. A. Smith, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2024–2031 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shi, J. Guo, X. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z. Han, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, C. Zhou, L. Jiang and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442–1453 RSC .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, H. Dong, H. Yu and H. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
K. Junge Puring, D. Siegmund, J. Timm, F. Möllenbruck, S. Schemme, R. Marschall and U. P. Apfel, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 5, 2000088 CrossRef .
N. Sikdar, J. R. C. Junqueira, S. Dieckhofer, T. Quast, M. Braun, Y. Song, H. B. Aiyappa, S. Seisel, J. Weidner, D. Ohl, C. Andronescu and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021 DOI:10.1002/anie.202108313 .
L. Jiao, W. Yang, G. Wan, R. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Zhou, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20589–20595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Luo, Z. Wang, Y. C. Li, J. Li, F. Li, Y. Lum, D.-H. Nam, B. Chen, J. Wicks, A. Xu, T. Zhuang, W. R. Leow, X. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Salvatore, D. M. Weekes, J. He, K. E. Dettelbach, Y. C. Li, T. E. Mallouk and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramdin, A. R. T. Morrison, M. de Groen, R. van Haperen, R. de Kler, L. J. P. van den Broeke, J. P. M. Trusler, W. de Jong and T. J. H. Vlugt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 1834–1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Aeshala, R. Uppaluri and A. Verma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17588–17594 RSC .
C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B42–B49 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, J. Pan, S. P. Jiang and H. Yang, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 23, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, D. Liu, J. H. Lee, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, S. Hwang, S. Kattel, L. Song and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3033–3037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Niu, Y. Zhu, D. He and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9841–9847 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Tian, A. N. Biswas, Z. Xie, S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, H. Meng and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11345–11348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4727–4765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Weber and J. Newman, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4679–4726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kusoglu and A. Z. Weber, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 987–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Collier, H. Wang, X. Yuan, J. Zhang and D. Wilkinson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1838–1854 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Schiraldi, Polym. Rev., 2006, 46, 315–327 CAS .
T. Xie and C. Hayden, Polymer, 2007, 48, 5497–5506 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Shah, T. R. Ralph and F. C. Walsh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B465–B484 CrossRef CAS .
F. Akinori, S. Hironori and T. Takashi, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2017, 1121, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Luo and A. Züttel, J. Catal., 2020, 385, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Kutz, Q. Chen, H. Yang, S. D. Sajjad, Z. Liu and I. R. Masel, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. G. de Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. McCallum, A. R. Kirmani, D.-H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, Y. C. Li, F. Li, J. Edwards, L. J. Richter, S. J. Thorpe, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 661–666 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, A. Ozden, M. Golam Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C.-S. Tan, C. M. Gabardo, M. Luo, H. Zhou, F. Li, Y. Lum, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, M. Liu, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, P. Todorovic, T.-T. Zhuang, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 3, 98–106 CrossRef .
C. Chen, X. Yan, S. Liu, Y. Wu, Q. Wan, X. Sun, Q. Zhu, H. Liu, J. Ma, L. Zheng, H. Wu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16459–16464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. O. Larrazábal, P. Strøm-Hansen, J. P. Heli, K. Zeiter, K. T. Therkildsen, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41281–41288 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Preston, N. Xu, Y. Wei, Y. Liu and J. Qiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6881–6889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Oener, M. J. Foster and S. W. Boettcher, Science, 2020, 369, 1099–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xie, Y. Liu, W. Lu, H. Zhang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1834–1839 RSC .
Z. Wang, J. Parrondo, C. He, S. Sankarasubramanian and V. Ramani, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manohar and D. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16493–16500 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, I. Amorim, Y. Li, J. Li, Z. Yu, B. Zhang, A. Araujo, N. Zhang and L. Liu, Carbon Energy, 2020, 2, 646–655 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, R. Liu, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600379 CrossRef .
B. Mayerhöfer, D. McLaughlin, T. Böhm, M. Hegelheimer, D. Seeberger and S. Thiele, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9635–9644 CrossRef .
M. D. Eisaman, L. Alvarado, D. Larner, P. Wang, B. Garg and K. A. Littau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1319–1328 RSC .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, I. Sullivan, D. M. Larson, C. Xiang, B. S. Brunschwig and H. A. Atwater, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Li, Z. Yan, J. Hitt, R. Wycisk, P. N. Pintauro and T. E. Mallouk, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700187 CrossRef .
D. A. Vermaas and W. A. Smith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Salazar-Villalpando, ECS Trans., 2011, 33, 77–88 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-B. Venneköetter, T. Scheuermann, R. Sengpiel and M. Wessling, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 202–213 CrossRef .
A. S. Varela, M. Kroschel, N. D. Leonard, W. Ju, J. Steinberg, A. Bagger, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 812–817 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Setterfield-Price and R. A. W. Dryfe, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 730, 48–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, A. Huang, N. J. J. Jobnson, K. E. Dettelbach, D. M. Weekes, Y. Cao and C. P. Berlinguette, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 14624–14631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jiwanti and Y. Einaga, Chem.–Asian J., 2020, 15, 910–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Murata and Y. Hori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yoshihara, M. Arita and M. Noda, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 125–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Resasco, L. D. Chen, E. Clark, C. Tsai, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, K. Chan and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11277–11287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pérez-Gallent, G. Marcandalli, M. C. Figueiredo, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16412–16419 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lum, B. Yue, P. Lobaccaro, A. T. Bell and J. W. Ager, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14191–14203 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Thorson, K. I. Siil and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F69–F74 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. O. Monteiro, F. Dattila, B. Hagedoorn, R. García-Muelas, N. López and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 654–662 CrossRef .
M. R. Singh, Y. Kwon, Y. Lum, J. W. Ager and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13006–13012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Mills, I. T. McCrum and M. J. Janik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13699–13707 RSC .
S. Sato, K. Saita, K. Sekizawa, S. Maeda and T. Morikawa, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4452–4458 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Huang, F. Li, A. Ozden, A. Sedighian Rasouli, F. P. García de Arquer, S. Liu, S. Zhang, M. Luo, X. Wang, Y. Lum, Y. Xu, K. Bertens, R. K. Miao, C.-T. Dinh, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2021, 372, 1074–1078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Resasco, Y. Lum, E. Clark, J. Z. Zeledon and A. T. Bell, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1064–1072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi and S. Suzuki, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 17–19 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Li and P. Yang, Joule, 2021, 5, 737–742 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309–2326 RSC .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, M. Hua, Q. Wan, Z. Su, X. Tan, L. Liu, F. Zhang, G. Chen, D. Tan, X. Cheng, B. Han, L. Zheng and G. Mo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 13606–13613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Varela, M. Kroschel, T. Reier and P. Strasser, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hitoshi, T. Koji and T. Toshio, Organometallics, 1987, 6, 181–186 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, A. Murata, R. Takahashi and S. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 5022–5023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, R. Takahashi, Y. Yoshinami and A. Murata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7075–7081 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Weitzner, S. A. Akhade, J. B. Varley, B. C. Wood, M. Otani, S. E. Baker and E. B. Duoss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4113–4118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, J. S. Francisco and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15438–15444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. A. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, M. Orazov, C. G. Morales-Guio, X. Liu, D. C. Higgins, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7445–7454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 748–755 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, R. Reske, A. S. Varela, P. Strasser and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1075–1080 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Varela, W. Ju, T. Reier and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2136–2144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, C. W. Ong and B. S. Yeo, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3299–3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, F. Scholten and B. Roldan Cuenya, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5112–5120 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, I. Sinev, F. Scholten, R. M. Arán-Ais, N. J. Divins, K. Kvashnina, J. Timoshenko and B. Roldan Cuenya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17047–17053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh, H. Vrubel, S. Guidoux and X. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3878–3881 RSC .
N. E. Mendieta-Reyes, W. Cheuquepán, A. Rodes and R. Gómez, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 103–113 CrossRef .
C. I. Shaughnessy, D. J. Sconyers, H.-J. Lee, B. Subramaniam, J. D. Blakemore and K. C. Leonard, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2434–2442 RSC .
C. Jiang, A. W. Nichols, J. F. Walzer and C. W. Machan, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1883–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tomita, S. Teruya, O. Koga and Y. Hori, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 4164–4167 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aljabour, H. Coskun, D. H. Apaydin, F. Ozel, A. W. Hassel, P. Stadler, N. S. Sariciftci and M. Kus, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 229, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, F. Shi, N. Song, J.-X. Liu, X.-K. Yang, Y.-J. Jia, Z.-W. Xiao and P. Du, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsubara, D. C. Grills and Y. Kuwahara, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6440–6452 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Zhang and Z. Liu, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2019, 16, 77–84 CrossRef .
M. M. de Salles Pupo and R. Kortlever, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2926–2935 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth, P. C. Howlett, M. Kar, S. Passerini, J. M. Pringle, H. Ohno, M. Watanabe, F. Yan, W. Zheng, S. Zhang and J. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, S. Li, H. Cheng, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3912–3920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Barrosse-Antle, C. Hardacre and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 2805–2809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-W. Yang, Q.-Y. Li, F.-X. Shen, Q. Wang, L. Li and N. Song, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 189, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
H.-K. Lim, Y. Kwon, H. S. Kim, J. Jeon, Y.-H. Kim, J.-A. Lim, B.-S. Kim, J. Choi and H. Kim, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2420–2427 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gonell, E. A. Assaf, K. Duffee, C. K. Schauer and A. J. M. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8980–8999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-R. Zhang, S.-D. Straub, L.-L. Shen, Y. Hermans, P. Schmatz, A. M. Reichert, J. P. Hofmann, I. Katsounaros and B. J. M. Etzold, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18095–18102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitsk, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, C. Xia, P. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Dui Ma	Dui Ma is a postdoctoral researcher jointly trained by the Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. She received her PhD in 2019 from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Her research interests include metal-based electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction and energy devices.
Ting Jin	Ting Jin is a professor at the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing and the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnic University, China. She received her PhD in 2020 from Nankai University (China) and her B.S. in materials chemistry from Northwest University (China) in 2015. Her research interests focus on the design and fabrication of advanced electrode materials for energy storage and conversion, such as rechargeable lithium-ion and sodium-ion batteries.
Keyu Xie	Keyu Xie is currently a full professor at the Center for Nano Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University. His research focuses on energy materials and battery electrochemistry (advanced secondary batteries such as lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries, sodium-ion batteries, and metal–air batteries).
Haitao Huang	Haitao Huang is a professor in the Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He received his PhD from Nanyang Technological University in 2000. His current research interests include electrochemical energy storage and conversion and ferroelectric materials for energy applications. He is currently a board committee member of the International Academy of Electrochemical Energy Science (IAOEES).

 	Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of electrochemical CO2 reduction by system engineering.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of a H-type cell. (b) A membrane-based flow cell for CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) LSV curves and (d) Nyquist plots of Bi2O3@C-800 based on a H-type cell and flow cell. (e) FE and partial current density of formate for Bi2O3@C-800 in a flow cell. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagrams of (a) the microfluidic reactor and (b) a dual electrolyte microfluidic reactor for CO2 conversion.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Construction of a cell with gapless electrodes for CO2 electroreduction. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. Schematic illustrations of (b) a full BPM zero-gap cell setup and (c) a novel cell with a thin layer of catholyte buffer. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) PFF. (b) SFF. (c) IFF. Flow field designs investigated: (d) multiple serpentine, (e) segmented serpentine and (f) straight and parallel. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) Polarization curves and (h) FEs at different gas flow rates of CO2. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (i) Syngas (H2:CO) ratio as a function of CO2 flow rate. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2011, Springer Netherlands.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A catalyst layer deposited onto a hydrophobic substrate. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Desired and flooded operations. (c) The mole fraction of CO versus time. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the gas–liquid–solid three-phase interfaces. (e) Diagrams and photographs of average water droplet contact angles on different Au/C electrodes. (f) Geometric jCO and FECO. (g) Cross-sectional fluorescence images scanned according to black lines. (h) Corresponding z axis fluorescence intensity line scans of yellow arrow regions in (g). Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (i) Schematic illustration of the graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE electrode. (j) Long-term performance test of the CO2RR. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  Overview of ion transport pathways for the three types of PEMs: (a) CEM, (b) AEM, and (c) BPM. (d) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical CO2RR using chemically modified PGG membranes. (e) FEs and (f) current density of different membranes. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Crossover of (g) formate, (h) CH3OH, and (i) C2H5OH vs. time in the AEM and BPM. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Effect of cationic species on the FEs of various products. Reproduced from literature data.120 Copyright 1991, Chemical Society of Japan. (b) Effect of anionic species on the FEs of various products. Reproduced from the data in Hori et al. (1989).134 (c) Designed flow cell for performing in situ Raman measurements under continuous-flow CO2 reduction. (d) HCO3− and CO32− concentrations, and (e) pH profile with respect to the distance from the GDE surface. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. FE for (f) H2, (g) CO, and (h) CH4 in CO2-saturated electrolytes with different pH values. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The formation rates of C2+ products in different concentrations of KOH. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (b) Current density and (c) total FE of C2+ products in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) The solubility of CO2 in various organic solvents. Reproduced with permission.16 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A schematic of how the free energy of the system changes in water and ionic liquids. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2011, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Calculated reaction free energy profiles in ionic liquids/water mixed electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the CO2 reduction reactor with a solid electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic illustration of the all-solid-state electrochemical CO2RR to formic acid reactor.168 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

H-type cell	Conventional H-type cell	Batch reactor	Commercially available; screening of electrocatalysts; wide range of electrode selection; convenient operation	Limitation on the detection of trace liquid products; limitation of mass transport; difficulty in large-scale application
Flow cell	Membrane-based flow cell	Polymer electrolyte membrane configuration; circulating CO2-saturated electrolyte	Control of reactant delivery; fundamentals of commercial application design; lower cell resistance; higher mass transport; detection of low concentration products; accurate voltage measurement	Strong corrosion at high overpotentials
Microfluidic flow cell	Gas phase CO2; flow channel; a membrane-free cell	Higher mass transport; flexibility in operating conditions; minimization of the pH decrease; avoidance of high membrane cost; mitigation of water management; allows the use of a strongly alkaline electrolyte	Prone to product re-oxidation; lower liquid product concentration; the pressure sensitive resulting from different pressure across the membrane, which is a great challenge for scale-up application
A cell with gapless electrodes	Two electrodes pressed together with an ion-exchange membrane in between	Higher mass transport; lower ohmic losses; larger catalytic current density; ability to provide different types of surface ion environments; decrease of the risk of catalyst poisoning; ease of pressurizing the reactant flow and enhancing the local CO2 concentration	Blocking of active sites by the liquid products flooding back to the gas-diffusion electrode
Membranes	Cation exchange membrane (CEM)	Allows the passage of cations while preventing the anions	Widely used; prevention of the loss of the formic acid product	Facilitating H2 production and weakening the selectivity of CO2 reduction
Anion exchange membrane (AEM)	Allows the passage of anions while preventing the cations	Blocking of proton transfer, suppression of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and promotion of CO2 reduction; use of low-cost non-precious metals for the oxygen evolution reaction	Easy degradation by excessive OH−; preventing the further migration of OH− ions due to the aggregation of large anions (e.g., HCO3− and CO32−)
Bipolar membrane	Formed by lamination or close contact of an AEM and CEM; operated in either forward bias mode or reverse bias mode	Better control of pH; independent selection of the ideal pH conditions of each half-reaction; wide choice of catalysts; limitation of ion crossover rates; use of low-cost abundant metals instead of precious ones	Generating the large membrane potential and leading to an increase of the required voltage to drive the electrolysis, hence, lowering the overall energy efficiency under the reverse bias of the electrolyte at a similar pH level
Electrolytes	Aqueous solution	Water solvent	Low cost; large scale; wide availability; easy preparation; safe handling and storage; stable ionic conductivity	Low CO2 solubility and utilization rate; difficult and costly to recover products from the liquid electrolyte
Organic solvent	Organic solution	Higher CO2 solubility; suppression of the HER; allows selective reaction pathways conducive to the formation of the target products	High cost; volatility; flammability; toxicity; potential miscibility with reductive products; inefficient faradaic efficiency
Ionic liquid	Ionic compounds	Appreciable electrical conductivity; good thermochemical stability; low vapor pressure; wide operating potential window; higher CO2 solubility; structural flexibility	High viscosity that limits the CO2 diffusion rate; low current density
Solid-state electrolyte	Ion-conducting solid polymers	Helps electrosynthesize pure products without mixing with conventional electrolytes	Low production rate

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
