Outlook for ammonia as a sustainable transportation fuel  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE00979F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00979F
(Perspective)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 4830-4841Outlook for ammonia as a sustainable transportation fuel

        
          
            Rachael H. 
            Dolan
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            James E. 
            Anderson
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Timothy J. 
            Wallington
          
        
      *
      Research & Advanced Engineering, Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan 48121-2053, USA. E-mail: rharr359@ford.com; twalling@ford.com
Received 
      28th June 2021
    , Accepted 29th July 2021First published on 10th August 2021AbstractRecognition of the adverse impacts of climate change has led to interest in a transition to renewable, carbon-neutral energy and fuels. Ammonia has been proposed as a renewable transportation fuel, a medium for local energy storage, and a means for long-distance renewable energy transportation. We provide a perspective on the future use of ammonia as a transportation fuel. Ammonia poses health and safety concerns and ensuring safety for widespread distribution and consumer use would be challenging. Ammonia has a low energy content and is difficult to ignite, making it a relatively poor fuel in internal combustion engines. Engine unburnt ammonia emissions reported in the literature are approximately two to three orders of magnitude greater than Euro IV tailpipe limits and point to severe challenges in meeting emission regulations. Ammonia can be used in solid oxide fuel cells, but these operate at high temperatures (700–800 °C) and are not well suited for road vehicles. Proton exchange membrane and direct ammonia alkaline membrane fuel cell systems operate near room temperature and can use ammonia directly or indirectly (after conversion to H2) however poisoning and durability is problematic. Therefore, the expected use of ammonia as fuel for road transportation is very limited. With its low energy content, ammonia is not a viable aviation fuel. Substantial use of ammonia in rail applications seems unlikely given the advanced state of electrification and challenges associated with ammonia noted for road transport, many of which would also apply to rail. In contrast, the future use of ammonia as fuel in ocean-going ships seems feasible. Many large ports are already equipped to handle ammonia, storage volume and weight are not pressing issues for large ships, safety issues would be addressed with trained crews, and emission standards are less stringent. Ammonia might also find use as an energy carrier for transport of renewable energy between regions which would be a synergy with its use as a marine fuel.
1. Introduction
(a) Why ammonia?
Awareness of the negative climate effects resulting from widespread combustion of fossil fuels has led to calls for limits on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and a transition to renewable sources of energy. Wind, solar, and hydro are the dominant sources of renewable energy but are inherently intermittent and/or geographically dependent. Chemical energy carriers such as hydrogen (H2), ammonia (NH3), or carbon-based e-fuels have been proposed as options to store energy and to transport energy generated from renewable sources in regions with more than enough to meet current local demands (e.g., areas with significant solar radiation, high winds, or water resources) to regions that cannot feasibly produce all of their energy renewably.1–3
There are widespread efforts from industry and academia to find ways to power transportation with clean and/or renewable energy (such as with batteries or fuel cells, FCs), but currently fossil-fueled internal combustion engines (ICEs) overwhelmingly dominate. NH3 has been proposed as a possible carbon-free transportation fuel. We provide a perspective on the potential for future NH3 use as a fuel for road, rail, air, and sea transportation. The potential use of ammonia for energy storage, energy transportation, or power generation is not within the scope of this perspective.
The ideal sustainable transportation fuel needs to have high specific energy and energy density (to reduce fuel weight and volume on vehicles), be easy to handle (i.e., not solid, but liquid or gas), have unreactive and nontoxic emissions, and be abundant or easy to produce from environmentally benign and sustainable sources.4 NH3 has an intermediate specific energy, lower than gasoline and diesel but greater than H2. The fuel and combustion products are relatively easy to handle, but the acute toxicity of NH3 vapor is a concern for both fuel and exhaust emissions. It is possible to produce NH3 sustainably using renewable electricity using materials which are abundant (water and N2) and it has been suggested that NH3 may find use as a sustainable transportation fuel.1–3,5–8 Several published assessments of the outlook for ammonia as a transportation fuel are very optimistic. Kang and Holbrook5 find that ammonia is a promising near-term alternative fuel for light-duty vehicles. Smith et al.1 concluded that “ammonia will reshape the current energy landscape by directly replacing fossil fuels in transportation”. Valera-Medina et al.8 envisage ammonia as a “direct transportation system fuel replacement for fossil fuels”. In the following we present our perspective on the benefits and challenges of using ammonia as a transportation fuel and argue that the previous assessments above substantially overstated the case for ammonia.
In the automotive sector, light-duty passenger vehicles (LDVs) currently rely almost exclusively on fossil fuels (primarily gasoline or diesel) and produce significant GHG emissions—estimated at roughly 58% of the US transportation GHG emissions in 2018.9 Combustion of NH3 in ICEs would avoid emissions of CO2, CO, and hydrocarbons (HCs), enabling lower overall tank-to-wheel (TTW) GHG emissions while utilizing powertrains that are similar to those in widespread use today.10,11 Use of NH3 for power generation could help reduce reliance on fossil fuels and facilitate the transition to a renewable energy economy.12 It has been estimated that carbon emissions could be reduced by at least an order of magnitude compared to current global levels with widespread introduction of dual-fuel ICE systems (i.e. NH3 plus gasoline) on the way to full development and implementation of carbon-free engines, fuel cells, and gas turbines.5,13
Currently >96% of NH3 production (approximately 180 million tons in 2020) uses fossil fuels through the Haber–Bosch process1,14 and is referred to as ‘brown’ or ‘gray’ ammonia.15 NH3 production generates about 290 Mt per year CO2 (1% of global CO2 emissions) and accounts for 2–3% of global energy consumption.1,2 The desire to produce NH3 more sustainably has led to the development of less CO2-intensive ‘blue’, ‘turquoise’, and ‘green’ NH3. ‘Blue’ NH3 is produced using hydrogen from fossil fuel feedstocks and the Haber–Bosch process but with sequestration of CO2 generated during production, making the process effectively carbon neutral.15 ‘Turquoise’ NH3 is produced in limited scale by extracting hydrogen from methane pyrolysis with carbon black as a byproduct.15 ‘Green’ NH3 is ammonia produced fully carbon-free using hydrogen from electrolysis powered by renewable sources (e.g., wind, solar) or from biomass gasification.11 Processes for producing green NH3 have been around since the 1920's, pioneered by Norsk Hydro, but make up only approximately 0.5% of the NH3 produced worldwide today.2,16 Green NH3 could be used for widespread chemical energy storage in a renewable energy economy, however, current estimates predict that green NH3 could cost between 2–4 times more than brown NH3.15
(b) NH3 as an energy carrier: comparison with hydrogen (H2) and hydrocarbon e-fuels
Liquid NH3 has approximately 50% greater volumetric hydrogen density than liquid H2 hence there would be a need for a significantly smaller infrastructure system for NH3 storage and transport than for H2.3 Storage of liquid NH3 requires lower pressure than gaseous hydrogen at ambient temperature (1030 kPa at 25 °C, roughly 10× ambient pressure, for liquid NH3versus 24821 kPa at 25 °C, roughly 245× ambient pressure, for gaseous H2). Liquid H2 can be stored at close to ambient pressure (102 kPa) but requires extreme cooling to −253 °C.17 It has been estimated that 6 month storage costs for ammonia are approximately 30-fold lower than for hydrogen ($0.50 per kg-H2 for ammonia, $15 per kg-H2 for hydrogen) and sea and land shipping costs for ammonia are about 3-fold lower than for hydrogen.18 NH3 decomposes endothermically without a catalyst at temperatures above 500 °C to supply hydrogen for fuel, requiring no complex systems or chemical processes but requiring a heat source.19 Under high temperature operating conditions (such as in an ICE engine), this could provide an advantage over other potential hydrogen carriers which require additional steps and energy to liberate hydrogen from ‘storage’.3 Nagaoka et al.20 have reported room temperature catalytic oxidative reforming of ammonia which avoids the need for an external energy source, but reduces the yield of hydrogen.
Compared to H2, downsides of NH3 as a fuel include its acute toxicity and, if NH3 is not used directly as a fuel, the efficiency penalty associated with decomposition of NH3 into H2 prior to use (approximately 12% of the higher heating value (HHV) of NH3).21 NH3 can cause fuel cell poisoning and degradation not observed with H2,2,22,23 and NH3 provides lower overall power than H2 in fuel cells reflecting the difficulty of NH3 oxidation.23
H2, NH3, and hydrocarbons are potential e-fuels, i.e., fuels that can be created using renewable energy with an overall carbon neutral footprint.24 NH3, while easier to store and transport than H2, is more difficult to handle than hydrocarbon e-fuels which have the same high energy density as their non-e-fuel counterparts (i.e. gasoline or diesel) and the same performance and storage requirements. Unlike NH3 or H2, e-gasoline and e-diesel could be used in the existing vehicle fleet and fuel infrastructure. The use of these hydrocarbon e-fuels could provide a significant GHG reduction benefit while requiring minimal updates to current vehicles or fueling infrastructure.
(c) NH3 as an energy carrier: comparison with conventional fuels
One of the biggest barriers to adoption of NH3 for fuel is its low energy density. When comparing the energy densities of different transportation fuels, it is important to account for the mass and volume added by the fuel storage system. Ammonia has a vapor pressure at ambient temperature (10 bar at 298 K) which is similar to that of propane (LPG) (9 bar at 298 K). Although ammonia is more corrosive than propane and direct use of existing LPG infrastructure is not possible, specifications for commercial LPG tanks can be used to estimate the weight and volume of ammonia tanks. Taking a 100 liter capacity LPG tank with a weight of 42 kg,25 assuming the tank can be filled 85% with liquid ammonia,26 and using the density of liquid ammonia of 0.60 kg L−1 and a LHV of 18.8 MJ kg−1 (ref. 17) we estimate the specific energy and energy density of ammonia and its fuel system to be 10.3 MJ kg−1 and 9.6 MJ L−1. These estimates are consistent with those by the Royal Society of approximately 3 kW h kg−1 and 3 kW h L−1 (10.8 MJ kg−1 and 10.8 MJ L−1).24Fig. 1 shows the energy density (MJ L−1) and specific energy (MJ kg−1) for ammonia and its storage system compared to other fuels and batteries.4
 Fig. 1  Energy density (MJ L−1) and specific energy (MJ kg−1) of ammonia and other fuels (lower heating values) and their storage containers plotted on linear (left) and log scales (right) adapted from Wallington et al.4 Circles are fuels which are liquids under ambient conditions, squares are gases (e.g. ammonia in red). Batteries are shown by triangles, and solid hydrogen storage systems are indicated by stars. Fuels in current use are indicated by solid symbols. Right: log scale. 
When considering both the energy density and specific energy of ammonia and its storage tank, it can be seen from Fig. 1 that liquid ammonia has significantly lower energy both by volume and mass compared to gasoline or diesel fuels. For equivalent energy storage, a vehicle fueled by NH3 would need a fuel tank approximately 2.5 times the volume of that in a gasoline vehicle or 3 times that in a diesel vehicle. Compared to existing battery technologies NH3 has a significantly greater energy density and specific energy.4
Beyond the lower energy density and specific energy, there are additional drawbacks to the use of NH3 compared to conventional ICE fuels. Ammonia is corrosive to materials including copper, brass, zinc alloys, and some plastics, and can therefore pose issues for standard engine systems.2,10 In the case of accidental fuel leaks, NH3 vapor is more acutely toxic than gasoline or diesel which presents significant health and safety concerns.27 NH3 has a lower reactivity than conventional hydrocarbon fuels. NH3 requires more energy to ignite and has a slower flame speed and lower combustion temperature than gasoline or diesel.28 Ammonia has a cetane number of approximately zero and does not auto-ignite under standard compression ignition (CI) conditions,29 so use of a dual-fuel in CI engines is necessary to avoid having to drastically increase operating compression ratios (i.e. 50:1 is required for NH3 only with standard CI operation, compared to approximately 20:1 for standard diesel CI).30 NH3 requires modified fuel injection systems or higher compression ratios when used in standard ICE designs, potentially incurring extra costs.2,6,7,10,11 This will be discussed in more detail in the NH3 for ICE section.
NH3 has some potential advantages as an alternative ICE fuel, including a higher octane number than gasoline (approximately 110–130 for NH3 compared to 87–94 for gasoline).31,32 On-board vehicles, NH3 has been proposed not only as a fuel but also as a tool for emissions reduction and even engine cooling or air conditioning functions, making it theoretically multi-purpose,7 however use of NH3 as a refrigerant in addition to a fuel would add significant vehicle engineering complexity and cost. The approximate overall efficiency of an NH3 fueled ICE engine has been estimated to be similar to a gasoline engine (about 24%).6 If a charge cooling benefit is also considered, a standard ICE engine fueled with pre-decomposed NH3 may be able to achieve an overall system efficiency in the range of 27–30%.6,7 Finally, NH3 fuel combustion in vehicle ICEs could enable a significant or complete reduction in CO2, CO, and HC emissions compared to gasoline or diesel (depending on the co-fuel used). This presents a significant advantage considering current legislation limits which regulate vehicle emissions on a tank-to-wheel basis.
(d) Safety and health implications

(i) General. 
The properties of NH3 introduce potential health and safety hazards for use, storage, and handling. The main reported concerns for NH3 include acute toxicity, chemical burn risk, and potential explosion risk.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Time Weighted Average (TWA) Permissible Exposure Level (PEL) for ammonia is 50 ppm.33 For comparison, the TWA PEL for gasoline is 300 ppm and for diesel is 100 mg m−3 as hydrocarbon vapor (approximately 14.6 ppm based on an average diesel chemical composition of C12H23).34,35 The human nose can identify NH3 as a strong odor at concentrations of 5 ppm or less.27 Exposure to NH3 concentrations as low as 100 ppm can cause respiratory irritation and burning eyes. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set the Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health (IDLH) level for NH3 to 300 ppm.36 Exposure at concentrations of 1700 ppm or above can result in blindness, burns, lung damage, and death in as little as 30 minutes (or 10–15 minutes at concentrations between 5000–10000 ppm or above).27 Contact with liquid (a.k.a. anhydrous) ammonia causes severe chemical burns on skin and eye damage.37 Anhydrous NH3 has a much higher vapor pressure at room temperature (843 kPa at 20 °C) than gasoline (37–63 kPa, 20 °C) or diesel (0.07 kPa, 21 °C) and would evaporate faster than conventional liquid transportation fuels—a negative feature considering the acute toxicity of even very low levels of NH3 in air.35,38,39 For reference, current Euro VI emissions regulations (for heavy-duty diesel vehicles) limit NH3 tailpipe emissions to 10 ppm.40
NH3 is less flammable than gasoline, diesel, natural gas, and hydrogen and is not classified as a flammable substance at concentrations less than 16%.7,33 However, at concentrations between 16–25% NH3 vapor poses a potential fire and explosion risk.33


(ii) Transportation and storage. 
Extensive transportation infrastructure, handling, and safety guidelines exist for commercial use of anhydrous NH3. Thousands of miles of pipelines are in place in the U.S. and Europe for transportation of anhydrous NH3 in addition to established transportation networks by rail, ship, and highway.2 Hundreds of anhydrous NH3 filling stations exist for fertilizer distribution in the midwestern U.S.5
While large-scale NH3 transportation from commercial production facilities to storage facilities is well-defined, using NH3 as a transportation fuel in personal vehicles for transportation introduces new risks and costs that would need to be addressed. Opinions on the safety of ammonia in personal transportation are mixed. The International Energy Agency (IEA) considers NH3 hazards too great for widespread use.41 In contrast, researchers at Risø National Lab concluded that use of NH3 as a transportation fuel could be feasible given appropriate safety measures.27 Their investigation identified three areas of risk for NH3-powered personal transportation: the safety of the vehicle itself (during regular driving and in collisions), safety at the refueling station, and safety of road transport of ammonia to refueling stations. It was concluded that using appropriate vehicle safety systems, implementing regulations for safe NH3 vehicle maintenance, transporting NH3 to fueling stations as a refrigerated liquid, and implementing safety zones between fueling stations and public and/or residential areas, the risk of using NH3 as a transportation fuel could be reduced to levels comparable to conventional fuels (gasoline or LPG).27 A recent review from Valera-Medina et al.8 agrees that the widespread history of NH3 use in industry makes it a known entity with many safety regulations already in place, however, additional complexities must first be addressed (including toxicity, corrosion, and fueling of tanks for personal transportation) for NH3 to become a viable future transportation fuel. It has been suggested that the hazards of NH3 fuel in storage might be reduced through the use of solid metal amines such as Ca(NH3)6Cl2 and Mg(NH3)6Cl2. Metal amines are compact and can be shaped into solid forms to maximize holding tank space. They can reversibly store an equivalent amount of ammonia (93%) by volume as liquid ammonia, but without pressurization, and are less toxic than both liquid NH3 and gasoline.12,42,43 NH3 can be freed from the amine structure only at 350 °C or higher, so the risk of accidental release of NH3 is much reduced.6 Drawbacks with metal amines include their additional weight and cost, energy and engineering complexity needed to desorb the ammonia, and practical difficulties of refueling vehicles with a solid fuel.6,7,43

2. Ammonia for internal combustion engine (ICE) applications
(a) Overview
One of the biggest obstacles for use of NH3 as a fuel is its low reactivity and flammability. For successful NH3 use in combustion engines there are two possible approaches. First, NH3 can be combined with a combustion promoter (a more flammable fuel under standard ICE operating conditions) to overcome the relatively low flammability. Adding a secondary fuel can help initiate NH3 combustion, avoid misfire, and allow the fuel blend to operate in the engine in a similar manner to a conventional hydrocarbon fuel.28 This is the approach most often used for NH3 in standard ICE engines. Second, NH3 can be combusted alone if it is subjected to extremely high engine compression ratios.
Standard ICE engines including both spark ignition (SI) and CI have three options for NH3 fuel use with a combustion promoter.6 First, NH3 can be co-fueled with a hydrocarbon-based promoter. Research has been performed on a wide variety of dual-fuel applications including NH3–gasoline, NH3–diesel, and others. Second, NH3 can be partially decomposed using a decomposition catalyst into H2 which aids combustion and avoids the necessity of including a secondary fuel. H2 is an effective combustion promoter even in small amounts (less than 5% with balance NH3) and creates the potential for leaner and more stable combustion at higher compression ratios than typical gasoline operation.2,44,45 Unlike other combustion promoters, H2 doesn't contain carbon, and doesn't result in CO2, CO, and HC emissions. Third, a NH3 decomposition and separation unit can be used. This is similar to the second option but with the additional potential benefit of using either N2 or unconverted NH3 as coolant for the engine and/or air conditioning. There has been less research in this area compared to dual-fueled systems, but it has been explored as an option for taking advantage of the refrigerant properties of NH3 and increasing the overall system efficiency of the NH3-fueled system by as much as 3%.6,7 To use NH3 as a fuel, standard ICE systems require modifications to storage and injection components. Options for NH3 fuel injection include port-injection into the engine intake valves or manifold, direct injection into the engine cylinders, or injection of pure liquid NH3.10 Injection of NH3 adds complexity as it requires a re-working of standard fuel injectors to achieve appropriate temperature and pressure conditions to inject NH3 in the desired state.10,28,46 Combustion of NH3 produces roughly 150% more water than diesel fuel, which may have implications for injector corrosion. System modifications may be needed to avoid potential engine corrosion by NH3. If either of the NH3 decomposition options are used, engine backfiring due to presence of H2 may occur and updates to the spark plug system may be necessary.10
Homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) engines can theoretically use NH3 directly as a fuel but would require compression ratios that are significantly larger than standard ICE engines (as high as 100:1).47 Published research is minimal (for examples see Pochet,48 Pochet et al.49). Due to power density limitations and structural constraints of the engine, we conclude that operating with only NH3 in an HCCI system is not technically feasible.
(b) Prototype examples
A diesel fuel shortage in Belgium during World War II led to the use of a dual-fuel NH3 vapor and compressed coal gas to power a fleet of nearly 100 buses, using the Gazamo process.44,45,50 More recently, several working prototype ICE vehicles have been introduced including the Korean AmVeh, a dual-fueled NH3 (70%) and gasoline (30%) conversion kit for existing ICE fossil-fueled fleet vehicles,51 and the Italian Marangoni Toyota GT86 Eco Explorer, a dual-fueled ammonia–gasoline sports car developed in 2013.52
(c) Emissions considerations
NH3 fuel has the advantage over gasoline and diesel of reducing or eliminating the emissions of CO2, CO, hydrocarbons, and soot.44 However, there is an increased potential for nitrogen-based emissions with NH3 use due to the increase in ‘fuel-bound’ nitrogen.11 It is important to note that many experimental NH3 combustion applications currently utilize a dual-fuel system (NH3 plus gasoline, diesel, or other carbon-based fuel), so emissions include those expected from standard hydrocarbon fuels and from NH3 combustion.
If NH3 isn't completely combusted in a vehicle engine there will be NH3 slip out of the tailpipe. It is possible for this NH3 to be utilized to reduce NOx in an SCR process (Selective Catalytic Reduction process) to form N2 and H2O.6,7 Current research into NH3 use as a transportation fuel has not yet fully explored the aftertreatment architecture that would be required for sufficient control of NH3, NOx, and other combustion products from NH3- or dual-fueled ICE applications.
There are currently no official NH3 emissions limits in Tier III or California LEV III regulations for cars and light-duty trucks.53,54 For heavy duty diesel trucks, NH3 emissions are not officially limited, but an unofficial EPA limit of a cycle average of less than 10 ppm throughout the required heavy-duty vehicle tests is generally followed.55 These test cycles include: heavy-duty Federal Test Procedure (FTP) test, heavy-duty supplemental emissions (SET) test, and Not-To-Exceed (NTE) testing.56
Current Euro 6 light-duty standards do not include NH3 emissions limits for gasoline or for light duty diesel vehicles. Euro VI standards for heavy duty vehicles set a limit of 10 ppm NH3 over the steady-state World Harmonized Stationary Cycle (WHSC) plus the Worldwide Harmonized Transient Cycle (WHTC).40Table 1 consolidates these current regulatory limits in the U.S. and Europe.
Table 1 Current NH3 emissions regulatory limits in the U.S. and Europe




Regulation
NH3 limit
Verification test cycle




U.S. Tier III/California LEV III
N/A (EPA unofficial limit for heavy duty vehicles is cycle average <10 ppm)
N/A (FTP, SET, NTE if following unofficial EPA limit)


Euro 6 (light duty)
N/A
N/A


Euro VI (heavy duty)
10 ppm
WHSC + WHTC




(d) ICE: NH3–gasoline, NH3–diesel, and NH3–H2
A number of approaches have been studied for using NH3 as an ICE fuel. Most of this work is still laboratory or prototype scale and would require extensive work to fully characterize, design, and implement on a large scale. Table 2 compares results from dual-fuel investigations using NH3–gasoline, NH3–diesel, and NH3–H2.17,28,44 Each investigation includes reference results from the same engine run on a single hydrocarbon fuel. Dual-fuel results are color coded based on comparison with the reference as indicated. NH3 was used by implementing modified direct injection strategies28,44 or by adding an NH3 fuel line to the intake manifold.17 NH3 content in the fuel and ignition timing of engine combustion are key factors for engine performance and exhaust emissions. When measured, the overall combustion efficiency and brake specific energy consumption (BSEC) or brake specific fuel consumption (BSFC) for the dual-fuel systems were equivalent to, or worse than, the hydrocarbon fuel references.
Table 2 Dual-fuel NH3 engine operation and emissions characteristics (from Ryu et al.,28 Reiter and Kong,17 and Westlye et al.44). Color coding compares results to the hydrocarbon reference fuel: red, worse; yellow, mixed; blue, equivalent; and green, improved. Dashed lines indicate where data were not reported











Ignition timing and extent of lean operation have significant impacts on NOx levels (and N2O when measured). Using NH3 as an ICE fuel introduces the potential for NOx formation especially at high engine temperatures and combustion pressures. This can be balanced in part by the generally lower combustion temperature with NH3 compared to gasoline or diesel, but the presence of fuel-bound nitrogen and increased NOx formation is unavoidable. As seen in Table 2, NOx formation was similar or worse with the dual-fuel blends than with a single fuel.
NH3 fuel has mixed implications for CO and HC formation. When used in a dual-fuel system, the lower combustion temperatures and cylinder pressures from NH3 addition can increase CO and HC emissions from incomplete combustion of the gasoline or diesel. For CO this can be potentially balanced by the overall fuel carbon reduction when NH3 is used. When only NH3 and H2 are used as fuel, CO and HC emissions are zero. CO results were mixed, with reduced CO emissions for NH3–gasoline and NH3–H2 but increased CO emissions for the NH3–diesel system as seen in Table 2. HC emissions were significantly increased with NH3–gasoline and NH3–diesel systems but zero for the NH3–H2 system.
Incomplete fuel combustion causes NH3 slip, which has been reported to be as much as 3 orders of magnitude greater than current Euro IV limits for tailpipe NH3.17,28,44 It may be possible to use unburned NH3 and/or additional fuel NH3 as a NOx reductant to achieve the SCR functionality required to meet current emissions standards without the need for added urea (also known as diesel exhaust fluid, DEF). Of the summarized studies only that for NH3–H2 fuel by Westlye et al.44 included an emissions aftertreatment analysis. Their modeling results indicate that the NH3 slip out of the engine was not enough to convert all of the NOx produced, and additional fuel NH3 would need to be injected into the SCR system for effective NOx mitigation. The exhaust temperature (largely between 300–500 °C) was in the desired range for good SCR functionality. The proposed aftertreatment system components included a fuel bypass (to inject additional NH3 into the SCR system as required), a pre-oxidizing catalyst for fast SCR reaction promotion during cold start, and an ammonia trap to catch ammonia slip during cold start.44
Further work would be needed to achieve acceptable NH3 slip, NOx mitigation, and reasonable engine performance, power, and operation. Kinetic modeling paired with engine and aftertreatment system modeling, testing, and calibration to optimize operating parameters including ignition timing, air-fuel ratio (lambda), and fuel ammonia content would be required.2,17,28,57 NH3 emissions pose a particularly severe challenge. As noted above, engine out NH3 emissions reported in the literature (see Table 2) are approximately 2 to 3 orders of magnitude greater than the Euro VI tailpipe limits. Current emission control systems for CO, NOx, and HCs developed and refined over several decades are very efficient and reduce pollutant levels by approximately 1–2 orders of magnitude (i.e., 90–99% reduction). Addressing NH3 emissions would require significant investments into aftertreatment system research, design, and modeling, and may not be technically realistic. It would be extremely challenging for an ammonia powered ICE to meet current Euro VI limits for tailpipe NH3.
(e) ICE: NH3 – other
Increased interest in the use of ammonia as a carbon-free fuel has resulted in attempts to combine ammonia with other types of fuels beyond conventional gasoline, diesel, or ammonia-only. These are generally less well-studied and include dual-fueled systems with ammonia-DME,58 and as noted by Valera-Medina et al.,2 ammonia–ethanol,59 ammonia–O2,60 ammonia–ammonium nitrate,61 and single-fuel blends of methanol or ethanol-emulsified ammonia in gasoline.62 For dual-fuel systems, engine operation has been shown to be feasible, but power outputs can vary significantly (better or worse depending on application) compared to single-fueled systems. Increased NOx using any of these types of dual fuels are typically the largest emissions concern. For some single-fuel blend systems, Haputhanthri et al.62 reported “better engine performances in terms of increased torque and power… without major modification to the existing infrastructure of the engine” when compared to gasoline-only. For both dual- and single-fuel systems, aftertreatment systems including SCR technology would be required to meet current and future emissions regulations.
3. Ammonia for fuel cells
(a) Overview
NH3 can supply H2 for FC power in three main ways: directly as NH3 (decomposed at the cell anode into H2 and N2), via a thermal reformer (decomposed in the reformer into H2 and N2), or via electrolysis.2,6 Research into the feasibility and performance of fuel cell systems powered by NH3 will be discussed in this section, including Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) systems, Direct Ammonia Fuel Cell (DAFC) alkaline membrane systems, and Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) systems.
Fuel cell systems are attractive from an emissions standpoint because water (and N2 when NH3 fuel is used) is typically the only emission.12 Hydrogen is currently the most common type of carbon-free fuel used for fuel cells. NH3 as a chemical hydrogen carrier could provide benefits compared to the use of hydrogen. NH3 can be used to boost total system efficiency when used dually to facilitate fuel cell stack cooling.63 It has been reported by Zhao et al.23 that “ammonia has the lowest source-to-tank energy cost for vehicle fuel cells when considering carbon-neutral pathways starting from sun, wind, air and water”. However, there are significant drawbacks to using NH3 as a FC fuel especially as a transportation power source. PEM systems are by far the most common fuel cell type for vehicle applications, in part due to a low temperature of operation which can minimize vehicle start-up time.64 Due to significant issues with efficiency and system poisoning when ammonia is used as a fuel, NH3 is not generally considered viable for use in PEM systems.2,6,22 Fuel cells using NH3 generate lower power than hydrogen fuel cells due to increased difficulty of NH3 oxidation.23 Additionally, there is an energetic cost associated with thermally cracking NH3 into H2 and N2 if NH3 cannot be used by the system directly, which effectively reduces the total energy content of the NH3 fuel.65 NH3 causes FC system poisoning and/or degradation in all types of FC (SOFC,66 DAFC,23,67 PEM22,68) and presents a barrier to successful long-term operation with NH3 fuel. Current reported FC energy densities using NH3 fuel do not meet DOE targets for FC transportation applications.69
(b) Solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) systems and direct ammonia fuel cell (DAFC) alkaline membrane systems
SOFC systems can operate using an NH3 feed directly to provide hydrogen for operation and are generally reported to be the most feasible fuel cell technology option for NH3 use.22 SOFCs have an operating temperature (between 500–1000 °C) that is sufficient to decompose NH3 into H2 and N2, so waste heat from the cells can be used to decompose NH3 directly at the anode. Use of waste heat in this way, paired with the endothermic NH3 decomposition, can also theoretically help maintain a cooler overall cell temperature and extend system lifetime.63 The high operating temperature requires a longer cell start-up time than low-temperature operation FCs, which makes this technology less feasible for use in vehicle and transportation applications where customers expect to be able to turn on their vehicles and drive immediately. For this reason, if SOFCs are considered for vehicle applications it is typically only to provide auxiliary power (not propulsion) on large trucks. In SOFCs, direct NH3 use has the advantage of eliminating the need for a CO2-producing gas reformer typically used to generate H2 from hydrocarbon-based fuels.3 It is also possible for complete NH3 decomposition to be achieved, so an afterburner to clean up excess fuel may not be required in this type of SOFC system when NH3 is used as fuel.7 In practice, drawbacks of SOFC technology include a high cell cost and possible reduced long-term durability when using NH3. Despite the potential cooling benefit of waste heat and endothermic reaction use, NH3 decomposition and nitridation on the anode has been shown to cause gradual performance loss of the cells that is greater than when equivalent H2/N2 fuel blends are used.66 Durability improvements when using NH3 as a fuel are needed.22
DAFC technologies use NH3 directly without the need for NH3 decomposition to generate H2.6 DAFCs can operate at both low or high temperatures, but low-temperature (<200 °C) operation is of most interest for vehicles due to a reduced start-up time for stack operation. Successful DAFC operation has been reported with several different alkaline electrolyte membrane technologies, but with NH3 fuels hydroxide exchange membranes (HEMs) are beneficial due to their resistance to ammonium salt precipitation in the cells (which can lead to system degradation).23 Reported drawbacks of DAFC technology use with NH3, summarized by Lan and Tao22 and Zhao et al.,23 include limited options for well-performing anode and cathode catalysts that are resistant to poisoning (by NH3 and NH3 oxidation intermediate species), decreased system efficiency due to inevitable ammonia cross-over through the membrane electrolyte, and potential for NOx emissions if NH3 reaches the cathode and becomes oxidized.

Table 3 compares results from SOFC and DAFC investigations using NH3 as fuel. SOFC investigations include reference results from the same fuel cell system run on H2. NH3 results are color coded based on comparison with the reference as indicated.
Table 3 Summary of SOFC and DAFC investigations using NH3 as fuel (from Cinti et al.,63 Wang et al.,70 and Zhao et al.23) NH3 results are color coded based on comparison with H2 or H2/N2 fuel reference from each investigation (SOFCs only; DAFCs are only used with NH3): yellow, mixed; blue, equivalent. Dashed lines indicate where data were not reported











As seen from Table 3, SOFC and DAFC operated with NH3 have maximum power densities and maximum system efficiencies that are similar to those from equivalent H2-fueled systems.23,63,70 However, the reported maximum power densities with NH3 fuel (less than 200 mW cm−2) fall far below the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) year 2020 target of 1000 mW cm−2 for membrane electrode assemblies for transportation applications.69 Low power densities mean that a large stack volume would likely be required to achieve reasonable power density leading to packaging issues on space-constrained vehicles. Unless power densities for NH3-fueled FC systems can be significantly increased, it is unlikely that even a low-temperature operation DAFC could be successfully used to supply primary power on a personal transportation vehicle.
(c) Proton exchange membrane (PEM) systems
PEM systems operate at low temperatures (<150 °C) and require pre-decomposition of NH3 into H2.22,68 Using a thermal reformer or electrolyzer on-board the vehicle adds system complexity and energy requirements. The low temperature operation necessitates that fuel H2 be free of CO to avoid poisoning of the anode (a common issue when precursor fuel is carbon based). Since NH3 is carbon-free, CO formation is not an issue in PEM systems.12 However, as summarized by Valera-Medina et al.,2 several investigations by Uribe et al.71 and Zhang et al.72 have demonstrated that anode poisoning by unconverted fuel NH3 is an issue for maintenance of PEM system performance, lowering overall system efficiency and causing irreversible system damage. Halseid et al.73 demonstrated that NH3 fuel residues at 1 ppm or even lower in the cell can damage the membranes. Further, in the acidic environment of the proton-exchange membrane, NH3 converts to NH4+ which has the potential to displace protons and reduce the membrane's protonic conductivity. The Pt catalyst in the PEM can also be poisoned if NH3 crosses over to the cathode and is oxidized to NOx, causing damage to the cell. PEM fuel cells using an NH3 electrolyzer have been reported to achieve a 20% total efficiency, even when including the cooling potential from endothermic NH3 decomposition on-board.6,74 NH3 is therefore generally considered not feasible for use in a PEM fuel cell system, and research has largely focused on SOFCs and DAFCs.6,22
4. Sustainability outlook
(a) Fuel production
NH3 can be produced as a low carbon fuel using carbon sequestration (‘blue’ ammonia) or fully carbon-free using renewable energy (‘green’ ammonia). Regardless of type, however, the NH3 production process is energy-intensive and requires several process steps. H2 must first be produced (either from carbon-based feedstock or electrolysis of water), electricity (from renewable sources in the case of ‘green’ NH3) is used to extract N2 from air, and then the H2 and N2 are combined to give ammonia in a chemical synthesis plant. The renewable electricity and H2 inputs for ammonia production can also be used directly in transportation. For ammonia to succeed as a viable fuel it needs to out-compete the direct use of electricity in battery electric vehicles and hydrogen in fuel cell vehicles, both of which have no tailpipe emissions (only H2O in the case of H2-FCs) and therefore do not have to manage the in-use emissions associated with NH3 use in ICE or FC applications.
(b) Life cycle assessment (LCA): ICE applications
Several groups have investigated the sustainability of NH3 powered vehicles using LCAs, both to determine how NH3-powered technologies can impact cradle-to-grave CO2 emissions compared to conventional gasoline or diesel ICEs, and to determine the best strategies for NH3 production and power (ICE or fuel cell) to optimize both carbon- and nitrogen-based emissions from NH3 powered vehicles.
Bicer and Dincer75 considered the CO2 impacts of manufacturing, 150000 km of city driving, maintenance, and disposal of a fully NH3-powered passenger vehicle ICE compared to a standard gasoline or diesel-powered vehicle. For NH3, fuel impact calculations were made based on an assumption of NH3 production using wind energy and water electrolysis. The investigation concluded that the total life cycle emissions of CO2 for an NH3-fueled ICE were reduced by half or more compared to other fuels, with an estimated 0.1 kg CO2 equivalent per km for NH3, 0.27 kg CO2 eq. per km for gasoline, and 0.23 kg CO2 eq. per km for diesel.
Angeles et al.11 considered both carbon (CO2)- and nitrogen (NOx, N2O, NH3)-based emissions when assessing the cradle-to-grave sustainability of NH3 fueled automotive transportation options. The investigation considered both dual-fueled ICE (NH3 plus diesel, gasoline, or DME) and fuel cell powered vehicle (FCV) systems, and a total of 4 types of upstream NH3 production methods (including both fossil-fuel based ‘brown’ and biomass based ‘green’). In general, NH3 production accounted for the majority of the lifecycle carbon footprints, while use of NH3 as fuel accounted for the majority of the lifecycle nitrogen footprints. In terms of the ICE-powered options, the study determined that the optimal fuel-power configuration was an NH3–gasoline dual-fueled system with NH3 generated from biomass. Considering both ICE and fuel cell powertrain options, however, fuel cell options had the lowest carbon- and nitrogen-based emissions overall. The authors concluded that a key next step was to optimize NH3 combustion in engines originally designed to burn carbon-based fuels.
(c) LCA: fuel cell applications
Angeles et al.11 found that for all vehicle applications and NH3 production methods considered, FCV had the lowest carbon and nitrogen footprints throughout the life cycle. For conventionally available NH3 production methods, a FCV fueled with brown NH3 produced using hydrogen from steam reforming of natural gas had the lowest carbon and nitrogen emissions with a nitrogen footprint estimated at 0.44 g reactive N km−1 driven and a carbon footprint of 36 g CO2 equivalent per km. Including alternative NH3 production methods, a FCV fueled with green NH3 produced from biomass was optimal, with a nitrogen footprint estimated at 0.33 g reactive N km−1 driven and a carbon footprint of 5 g CO2 eq. per km.
5. Ammonia for shipping, rail, and aviation
NH3 has been suggested as a sustainable fuel in maritime, rail, and aviation applications. As with road transport, key considerations are fuel energy density, fueling infrastructure, performance, and availability of competing technologies.
(a) Maritime
The maritime sector accounts for approximately 5% of global oil demand and 2.5% of global CO2 emissions.41 The European Commission is considering adding CO2 reduction targets for the maritime shipping sector as early as 2023.41 The International Maritime Organization (IMO) has proposed a greenhouse gas reduction strategy including standards for a reduction of GHG emissions from shipping by at least 50 percent by 2050, with the goal of reducing and eventually completely decarbonizing shipping emissions.76
Possible low-carbon or carbon-free fuel options are limited by the IMO standards, and NH3 is considered to be a relatively viable fuel in this area—especially because there is already a large precedent and established safety protocols for shipping NH3 as international cargo.41 A 2019 technical paper from the maritime engine company MAN Energy Solutions (MAN ES)77 reported that while some progress can be made towards the 50% CO2 reduction goal using ‘low-carbon’ fuels like LNG, LPG, or methanol (resulting in 5–18% CO2 reduction compared to heavy fuel oil, HFO), a carbon-free option will be required to successfully meet or exceed the standard. When modeling NH3, MAN ES reported that a 90% CO2 reduction could be achieved compared to HFO.
Although NH3 is significantly less energy dense (by volume) than conventional fossil fuels, among potential non-fossil fuel options NH3 has relatively high energy density. For example, the MAN ES technical paper reported that to replace a standard 1000 m3 maritime HFO fuel tank with the same energy storage would require 2755 m3 of NH3, 4117 m3 of liquid hydrogen, or 14000 m3 of Tesla model 3 lithium-ion batteries.77,78 In addition, the lower space constraints on large ships (compared to most automotive applications) make the necessary addition of SCR components for NOx emissions mitigation more viable.10 NH3 fuel is sulfur-free unlike conventional HFOs currently used in most maritime applications. Combustion of NH3 could lead to lower emissions of sulfates and reduced sulfur species poisoning of the SCR catalysts used for NOx emissions reduction. The downsides of using NH3 as a maritime fuel include reduced cargo space and potentially shorter range due to the large volume of NH3 fuel required.
Several European companies have begun investigating and testing potential technologies to power large shipping vessels with carbon-free NH3 as fuel, with plans for commercially available technologies to be ready by 2023 or 2024.79–82 Among these companies is Wärtsilä working on NH3-fueled four-stroke marine engines,79–81 MAN ES working on replacement of three dual-fuel diesel-LPG marine engines with NH3 based engines,80 and participating companies of a project called Ship FC working to implement an NH3 powered 2 MW SOFC (providing an estimated 3000 hours of fuel) onto a supply ship called Viking Energy by 2024.82 Considering the significant efforts and progress being made towards utilizing ammonia in shipping, it has been suggested that the first successful commercial ammonia-powered engines will operate in the marine sector.8
In a future carbon neutral world, it is likely that there will be a need to transport renewable energy from regions with excess solar and wind resources (e.g., deserts) to regions which do not have sufficient renewable resources (e.g., Europe, Japan, S. Korea). Conversion of renewable electricity into chemical fuels (H2, NH3, or hydrocarbons) will be needed for such long-distance transport. Synthesis and long-distance shipping of ammonia is a potentially attractive option and may facilitate the use of NH3 as a renewable fuel in shipping.
(b) Rail
Rail transportation has so far made the biggest advances towards overall emissions reduction with renewable and carbon-free power sources. The IEA reports that out of all transportation sectors, rail is currently the most electrified. For example, over 80% of rail traffic in Germany and France is already powered by electricity or dual-mode diesel-electric systems.41 While it may be possible to use NH3 as an alternative fuel for these types of applications, the IEA has reported that electricity, hydrogen fuel cells, and batteries are likely to remain the most prevalent power options due to current market precedent and available technology.41 In the U.S. where rail electrification is not so widespread, NH3 may have a future as a possible power source. Like maritime applications, NH3 is already transported as rail cargo throughout the country and the use of some of this transported NH3 for power is possible.
NH3 use in rail applications is still largely theoretical. Modeling studies have been carried out by Al-Hamed and Dincer83–86 on the feasibility of a passenger train powered by an integrated fuel cell (either SOFC or molten alkaline FC, both fueled directly by NH3) and gas turbine power system. All versions of this proposed technology use NH3 as the only fuel source, and CO2 emissions during operation are eliminated. It was concluded that using NH3 could provide power similar to that of a conventional methanol fueled SOFC system and enough to power the train. More work is needed to optimize system power production and components, minimize potential safety risks of NH3 storage and use on-board, and complete a full LCA.
(c) Aviation
Aviation requires fuels with a high energy density (MJ L−1) and specific energy (MJ kg−1), and ammonia does not meet these requirements. Biofuels, e-fuels, and continued used of fossil fuels offset by carbon capture are more viable potential options especially for long-haul aviation due to their significantly greater energy density and specific energy, providing the properties of current fuels while still enabling overall carbon emissions reduction.17,87
6. Conclusions
For most transportation sectors, we conclude that NH3 would not be a direct competitor with other future power options including battery electric, H2 fuel cell, and e-fuel powertrains.
To use NH3 in road applications, current ICE vehicles would require significant modifications of everything from fuel storage to engine operation to emissions aftertreatment systems. The need for new fueling infrastructure to make NH3 widely available and NH3 health and safety considerations are additional challenges for both ICE and FC applications. In FC applications, NH3 fuel may be easier to use than H2 in some respects (more reasonable storage conditions, greater volumetric H2 density, and a more developed commercial infrastructure). However, decomposition inefficiencies, oxidation issues, and cell poisoning with NH3 can lead to lower generated power and operating efficiencies than H2-FCs. High temperature SOFC operation with NH3 fuel is generally more viable than low-temperature DAFC or PEM operation, but is not likely feasible for passenger vehicle use due to long start-up times. Therefore, we consider the use of NH3 as not a likely competitor with battery electric, H2 fuel cell, and e-fuel systems.
In the maritime transportation sector, NH3 seems to be a viable future fuel option. Ammonia, as a carbon-free fuel, would meet IMO maritime 2050 GHG standards, and has a relatively high energy density compared to many alternative fuels. NH3 is already transported in shipping vessels worldwide. There are well-defined routes and a limited number of refueling locations would be needed. Safety and handling protocols for shipping NH3 are already established. NH3 is also sulfur-free, which would enable the avoidance of extreme poisoning and clogging of on-board SCR aftertreatment catalysts common with standard sulfur-heavy maritime fuels. Marine shipping may also implement NH3 synergistically as both a fuel and as cargo if NH3 finds use as an energy carrier for transport of renewable energy between regions. Several projects are already in progress to convert shipping vessels to NH3 (both ICE and FC), and the industry appears to be seriously considering this direction.
In the rail transportation sector, NH3 may be a viable future fuel in some regions, but its use is currently only theoretical. There are already precedents and established safety protocols for transporting NH3 as rail cargo, as well as specific routes and only a limited number of refueling stations that would be needed. NH3 use is unlikely in regions where electrification and other low- or zero-carbon technologies for powering trains are already prevalent (e.g., Europe).
In the aviation sector, NH3 is not a viable future fuel. Efforts in this sector do not include NH3, due to its low energy density and low specific energy. Instead, investments in reducing carbon emissions from aviation are primarily focused on liquid renewable fuels including biofuels and e-fuels.
It is technically possible to use NH3 as a transportation fuel for a range of automotive, maritime, and rail applications. NH3 fuel combustion in ICEs would result in reduction or elimination of tailpipe or ‘tank-to-wheel’ CO2, CO, and HC emissions. However, NH3 faces major barriers for widespread use as a transport fuel including reduced energy density, acute toxicity, reduced flammability, potentially greater emissions especially of NOx and NH3, and more difficult requirements for transportation and storage. Currently, maritime shipping seems to be the only viable transportation sector for NH3 use.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Christine Lambert, Douglas Dobson, Jim Waldecker, Eric Kurtz, and Werner Willems for helpful discussions and comments.
References
C. Smith, A. K. Hill and L. Torrente-Murciano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 331–334 RSC .
A. Valera-Medina, H. Xiao, M. Owen-Jones, W. I. F. David and P. J. Bowen, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 69, 63–102 CrossRef .

          Ammonia Energy Association, https://www.ammoniaenergy.org/articles/series-presents-japanese-perspective-on-ammonia-as-a-co2-free-fuel/, accessed December 2020.
T. J. Wallington, J. E. Anderson, D. J. Siegel, M. A. Tamor, S. A. Mueller, S. L. Winkler and O. J. Nielsen, J. Chem. Educ., 2013, 90, 440–445 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kang and J. H. Holbrook, Energy Rep., 2015, 1, 164–168 CrossRef .
C. Zamfirescu and I. Dincer, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 459–465 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zamfirescu and I. Dincer, Fuel Process. Technol., 2009, 90, 729–737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valera-Medina, F. Amer-Hatem, A. K. Azad, I. C. Dedoussi, M. de Joannon, R. X. Fernandes, P. Glarborg, H. Hashemi, X. He, S. Mashruk, J. McGowan, C. Mounaim-Rouselle, A. Ortiz-Prado, A. Ortiz-Valera, I. Rossetti, B. Shu, M. Yehia, H. Xiao and M. Costa, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 6964–7029 CrossRef CAS .

          U.S. EPA, Green Vehicle Guide, https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/fast-facts-transportation-greenhouse-gas-emissions, accessed February 2021 Search PubMed.
P. Dimitriou and R. Javaid, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 7098–7118 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Angeles, K. R. Angelo, G. Are, K. B. Aviso, R. R. Tan and L. F. Razon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8277–8283 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Christensen, T. Johannessen, R. Z. Sørensen and J. K. Nørskovc, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 140–144 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Ahlgren, Proc. IEEE, 2021, 100, 3001–3052 Search PubMed .

Producing ammonia and fertilizers: new opportunities from renewables, https://www.ee.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Producing-ammonia-and-fertilizers-new-opportunities-from-renewables.pdf, accessed June 2021 Search PubMed.

Chemical and Engineering News, https://cen.acs.org/business/petrochemicals/ammonia-fuel-future/99/i8?utm_source=mostread%26utm_medium=mostread%26utm_campaign=CEN, accessed May 2021 Search PubMed.

Clean Technica, https://nelhydrogen.com/blog/electrolysis-a-norwegian-success-story/, accessed February 2021 Search PubMed.
A. J. Reiter and S.-C. Kong, Fuel, 2011, 90, 87–97 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Bartels, A Feasibility Study of Implementing an Ammonia Economy, Iowa State University,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. F. Ezzat and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 4597–4608 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagaoka, T. Eboshi, Y. Takeishi, R. Tasaki, K. Honda, K. Imamura and K. Sato, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602747 CrossRef PubMed .
J. O. Jensen, A. P. Vestbø, Q. Li and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 446–447, 723–728 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lan and S. Tao, Front. Energy Res., 2014, 2, 1–4 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, B. P. Setzler, J. Wang, J. Nash, T. Wang, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Joule, 2019, 3, 2472–2484 CrossRef CAS .

Sustainable synthetic carbon-based fuels for transport: policy briefing, The Royal Society,  2019, https://royalsociety.org/-/media/policy/projects/synthetic-fuels/synthetic-fuels-briefing.pdf, accessed April 2021 Search PubMed.

          LPG Shop, https://www.lpgshop.co.uk/360-1090-100l-cylinder-lpg-tank-tms/, accessed April 2021.

          BEPeterson, https://www.bepeterson.com/capabilities/ammonia-tanks/, accessed April 2021.

          Risø National Laboratory, Safety assessment of ammonia as a transport fuel, https://www.ammoniaenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/riso-ammonia-transport-safety-report.pdf, accessed January 2021 Search PubMed.
K. Ryu, G. E. Zacharakis-Jutz and S.-C. Kong, Appl. Energy, 2014, 116, 206–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Cardoso, V. Silva, R. C. M. J. RochaHall, M. Costa and D. Eusébio, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 296, 126562 CrossRef CAS .

          Ammonia Energy Association, https://nh3fuelassociation.org/2017/09/27/development-of-new-combustion-strategy-for-internal-combustion-engine-fueled-by-pure-ammonia/, accessed December 2021.

          U.S. Energy Information Administration, https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/gasoline/octane-in-depth.php, accessed February 2021.

Comments on Potential Roles of Ammonia in a Hydrogen Economy – A Study of Issues Related to the Use of Ammonia for On-Board Vehicular Hydrogen Storage, https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/climate-change-adaptation/submissions/sub046-attachment7.pdf, accessed June 2021 Search PubMed.

          U.S. EPA, https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2013-11/documents/ammonia.pdf, accessed January 2021.

          Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/pel88/8006-61.html, accessed March 2021.

Material Safety Data Sheet: Diesel Fuel (All Types), https://www.southwest.tn.edu/ehs/msds/d/Diesel%20Fuel.pdf, accessed April 2021 Search PubMed.

          National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/idlh/7664417.html, accessed February 2021.

          National Ag Safety Database, https://nasdonline.org/1050/d000849/preventing-ammonia-burns-and-how-to-treat-them.html, accessed April 2021.

Safety Data Sheet: Ammonia, Anhydrous, https://www.nutrien.com/sites/default/files/2019-02/SDS%20302-Ammonia%2C%20Anhydrous-EN-v3%<?pdb_no 2C1a?>2C1a<?pdb END?>.PDF, accessed April 2021 Search PubMed.

Material Safety Data Sheet: Gasoline, all grades, https://www.conncoll.edu/media/website-media/offices/ehs/envhealthdocs/Gasoline_All_Types.pdf, accessed April 2021 Search PubMed.

DieselNet, https://dieselnet.com/standards/eu/hd.php, accessed April 2021 Search PubMed.

          International Energy Agency, https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen, accessed January 2021.
T. D. Elmøe, R. Z. Sørensen, U. Quaade, C. H. Christensen, J. K. Nørskov and T. Johannessen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2006, 61, 2618–2625 CrossRef .
A. Klerke, C. H. Christensen, J. K. Nørskov and T. Vegge, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2304–2310 RSC .
F. R. Westlye, A. Ivarsson and J. Schramm, Fuel, 2013, 111, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Frigo and R. Gentili, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 1607–1615 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, A. Hayakawa, K. D. Kunkuma, A. Somarathne and E. C. Okafor, Proc. Combust. Inst., 2019, 37, 109–133 CrossRef CAS .

          P. V. Blarigan, presented in Part at Proceedings of the DOE Hydrogen Program Review, San Ramon, California,  May, 2000 Search PubMed .

          M. Pochet, presented in Part at the 8th European Combustion Meeting, Dubrovnik, Croatia,  April, 2017 Search PubMed .
M. Pochet, H. Jeanmart and F. Contino, Front. Mech. Eng., 2020, 6, 1–16 CrossRef .
E. Kroch, J. Inst. Pet., 1945, 31, 214–223 Search PubMed .

          Ammonia Energy Association, https://nh3fuelassociation.org/2013/06/20/the-amveh-an-ammonia-fueled-car-from-south-korea/, accessed January 2021.

          Ammonia Energy Association, https://nh3fuelassociation.org/2013/04/25/ammonia-fuel-marangoni-eco-explorer/, accessed January 2021.

DieselNet, https://dieselnet.com/standards/us/ld_ca.php#leviii, accessed January 2021 Search PubMed.

DieselNet, https://dieselnet.com/standards/us/ld_t3.php#other, accessed January 2021 Search PubMed.

          U.S. EPA, Air Pollution Control Technology Fact Sheet, https://www3.epa.gov/ttncatc1/dir1/fscr.pdf, accessed January 2021 Search PubMed.

DieselNet, https://dieselnet.com/standards/us/hd.php, accessed January 2021 Search PubMed.
A. J. Reiter and S.-C. Kong, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 2963–2971 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Gross and S.-C. Kong, Fuel, 2013, 103, 1069–1079 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Leeladhar, S. Grannell, S. Bohac and D. Assanis, presented in Part at the Annual NH3 Fuel Conference, San Francisco, California,  October, 2007 Search PubMed .

          S. Grannell, C. Stack and D. Gillespie, presented in Part at the Annual NH3 Fuel Conference, Romulus, Michigan,  September, 2010 Search PubMed .

          J. Ganley and M. S. Bowery, presented in Part at the Annual NH3 Fuel Conference, Romulus, Michigan,  September, 2010 Search PubMed .
S. O. Haputhanthri, T. T. Maxwell, J. Fleming and C. Austin, J. Energy Resour. Technol., 2015, 137, 062201 CrossRef .
G. Cinti, G. Discepoli, E. Sisani and U. Desideri, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 13583–13590 CrossRef CAS .

          U.S. DOE Alternative Fuels Data Center, https://afdc.energy.gov/vehicles/fuel_cell.html, accessed April 2021.
J. O. Jensen, A. P. Vestbø, Q. Li and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 446–447, 723–728 CrossRef CAS .

Use of Alternative Fuels in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/servlets/purl/20903068, accessed June 2021 Search PubMed.
T. Matsui, S. Suzuki, Y. Katayama, K. Yamauchi, T. Okanishi, H. Muroyama and K. Eguchi, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 11717–11723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bi and T. F. Fuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B215–B221 CrossRef CAS .

          U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Fuel Cell Technologies Office, Multi-Year Research, Development, and Demonstration Plan, https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2017/05/f34/fcto_myrdd_fuel_cells.pdf, accessed March 2021 Search PubMed.
Y. Wang, Y. Gu, H. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Wang, W. Guan, J. Chen, B. Chi, L. Jia, H. Muroyama, T. Matsui, K. Eguchi and Z. Zhong, Appl. Energy, 2020, 270, 115185 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Uribe, S. Gottesfeld and T. A. Zawodzinski, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A293–A296 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, U. Pasaogullari and T. Molter, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 9188–9194 CrossRef CAS .
R. Halseid, P. J. S. Vie and R. Tunold, J. Power Sources, 2016, 154, 343–350 CrossRef .
F. Vitse, M. Cooper and G. G. Botte, J. Power Sources, 2005, 142, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bicer and I. Dincer, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 170, 1594–1601 CrossRef CAS .

          International Maritime Organization, https://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/PressBriefings/Pages/06GHGinitialstrategy.aspx, accessed June 2021.

          MAN Energy Solutions, https://www.ammoniaenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/engineeringthefuturetwostrokegreenammoniaengine1589339239488-1.pdf, accessed June 2021.

Electrek, https://electrek.co/2018/05/03/tesla-model-3-battery-cells-rare-data-energy-density-cobalt/, accessed June 2021 Search PubMed.

          Wärtsilä Corporation, https://www.wartsila.com/media/news/30-06-2020-world-s-first-full-scale-ammonia-engine-test---an-important-step-towards-carbon-free-shipping-2737809, accessed January 2021.

ShippingWatch, https://shippingwatch.com/suppliers/article12359286.ece, accessed February 2021 Search PubMed.

          Ammonia Energy Association, https://www.ammoniaenergy.org/articles/wartsila-tests-internal-combustion-of-ammonia/, accessed January 2021.

          Ammonia Energy Association, https://www.ammoniaenergy.org/articles/wartsila-repsol-and-knutsen-to-test-ammonia-four-stroke-engine/, accessed January 2021.
K. H. M. Al-Hamed and I. Dincer, eTransportation, 2019, 2, 100027 CrossRef .
K. H. M. Al-Hamed and I. Dincer, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 205, 112327 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. M. Al-Hamed and I. Dincer, Energy, 2021, 220, 119771 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. M. Al-Hamed and I. Dincer, Energy, 2020, 201, 117620 CrossRef CAS .

          International Air Transport Association, https://www.iata.org/contentassets/d13875e9ed784f75bac90f000760e998/safr-1-2015.pdf, accessed February 2021.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy density (MJ L−1) and specific energy (MJ kg−1) of ammonia and other fuels (lower heating values) and their storage containers plotted on linear (left) and log scales (right) adapted from Wallington et al.4 Circles are fuels which are liquids under ambient conditions, squares are gases (e.g. ammonia in red). Batteries are shown by triangles, and solid hydrogen storage systems are indicated by stars. Fuels in current use are indicated by solid symbols. Right: log scale.	 

U.S. Tier III/California LEV III	N/A (EPA unofficial limit for heavy duty vehicles is cycle average <10 ppm)	N/A (FTP, SET, NTE if following unofficial EPA limit)
Euro 6 (light duty)	N/A	N/A
Euro VI (heavy duty)	10 ppm	WHSC + WHTC







This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
