Power from nature: designing green battery materials from electroactive quinone derivatives and organic polymers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA03166H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03166H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12370-12386Power from nature: designing green battery materials from electroactive quinone derivatives and organic polymers

        
          
            Mikhail 
            Miroshnikov
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kizhmuri P. 
            Divya
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ganguli 
            Babu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ashokkumar 
            Meiyazhagan
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Leela Mohana 
            Reddy Arava
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Pulickel M. 
            Ajayan
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            George 
            John
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemistry and Center for Discovery and Innovation, The City College of New York, 85 St. Nicholas Terrace, New York, NY 10031, USA. E-mail: gjohn@ccny.cuny.edu
bPh.D. Program in Chemistry, The Graduate Center of the City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, USA
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Wayne State University, 5050 Wayne Dr., Detroit, MI 48202, USA
dDepartment of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA
Received 
      16th April 2016
    , Accepted 28th June 2016First published on 13th July 2016AbstractCurrent lithium ion battery technologies suffer from challenges derived from the eco-toxicity, costliness, and energetic inefficiency of contemporary inorganic materials used in these devices. Small organic molecules containing polycyclic aromatic moieties and polar functional groups have recently been presented as attractive electron donors that bind lithium and other small metal ions. This has endowed them with the potential to replace traditional inorganic electrodes consisting of metal composites. A family of naturally occurring carbonyl compounds, or quinones, have been of particular interest to the scientific community. However, they themselves have been plagued by issues of low voltages, poor conductivity, and capacity fading due to solubility in common polar electrolytes. Herein, we review a number of theoretical and experimental solutions to this problem, which include the use of heterocyclic derivatives, polymers, and conductive supramolecular carbon frameworks as electrochemical property enhancers, or stabilizers, of potential organic electrodes. This review focuses on the benign synthesis, current status, and future direction of organic battery materials with the aim of developing sustainable energy storage systems to meet the demands of a greener future.Mikhail MiroshnikovMikhail Miroshnikov was raised in New York City and received his bachelor's degree in chemistry from New York University in 2012. He is currently a graduate student at City College as part of the PhD Program in Chemistry at the CUNY Graduate Center. Mikhail's research interests include a combination of materials science, organic synthesis, and polymer chemistry for the development of green battery materials from nature-derived organic compounds. Under the mentorship of Professor George John, current research projects include the discovery and synthesis of anthraquinone appended polymer electrodes and novel polymer gel electrolytes.Kizhmuri P. DivyaKizhmuri P. Divya received her PhD in 2012 from the National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology-CSIR, Trivandrum, India, under Dr. A. Ajayaghosh. Her work was focused on the photophysical properties of fluorescent molecules. Subsequently, she moved to Georgetown University, Washington DC, to work as a postdoctoral researcher with Prof. Richard G. Weiss. Currently she is a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. George John's laboratory at the City College of New York. Her research interests include organic electrode materials for Li-ion battery, novel self-assembled fluorescent soft materials from renewable resources etc.Ganguli BabuGanguli Babu was born in Vepakunta, AP, India. He received both a bachelor's (2004) and a master's (2006) degree in Chemistry from Bangalore University, India. He obtained a PhD in 2013 under Prof. N. Kalaiselvi at CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute. From 2014 onwards, Babu was a post-doctoral fellow in Prof. Leela Arava's research group at Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. Babu's research interests are in the interdisciplinary field of materials science and electrochemistry, particularly in materials development for energy storage and conversion applications.Ashokkumar MeiyazhaganAshokkumar Meiyazhagan is a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, USA. Dr. Ashok carried out his research work in the CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute and he received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Madras University in 2014. He is a recipient of the prestigious Fulbright award. His research interests focus on the development of multifunctional nanocomposites, Bio composites, Energy generation and storage, Biomass Valorization and Environmental sustainability.Leela Mohana Reddy AravaLeela Mohana Reddy Arava received his PhD in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. He conducted his postdoctoral research at University of Pittsburgh and Rice University. In Fall 2013, he joined Wayne State University as an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering. Dr. Arava's Research Group is interested in the electrochemical principles of energy systems such as batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells. His group focuses on designing a variety of nanomaterials and understanding their transport phenomena, electrode kinetics, electrocatalytic activity, and stabilities under extreme thermal and electrochemical conditions. In terms of applications, his diverse activities include developing high energy and safe batteries for electric vehicles, micro-batteries to power micro-sensors, and flexible hybrid energy devices for wearable assistive technologies.Pulickel M. AjayanPulickel M. Ajayan is a pioneer in the area of nanotechnology and was involved in early work in the development of carbon nanotubes. He has published around 700 journal papers, earning nearly fifty five thousand citations with an h-index of 113. His work has covered diverse areas of nanomaterials including nanoparticles, nanotubes, 2D materials, nanocomposite and energy storage materials. Presently he is the Benjamin M. and Mary Greenwood Anderson professor of Engineering at Rice University in Houston, Texas and the founding chair of the department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering. He is the recipient of awards such as the Spiers memorial award from the Royal Society of Chemistry (UK), the MRS Medal, and the Alexander von Humboldt-Helmholtz senior award. He is a recipient of two Guinness World Records. He has also received the title of Docteur Honoris Causa from the Universite Catholique de of Louvain in 2014.George JohnGeorge John is recognized for his active research in the field of functional molecular materials from renewable resources and green nanotechnology. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 1993, and is currently a Professor of Chemistry at the City College of the City University of New York (CUNY). The interdisciplinary research of John's laboratory is focused on the molecular design of synthetic lipids, membrane mimics, soft nanomaterials, green energy technologies and organic materials chemistry. His group has successfully developed environmentally benign antibacterial paints, polymer-coatings, molecular gel technologies, oil spill recovery materials, battery components, vegetable oil thickening agents, and transfat alternatives. He is the recipient of the Tokyo University of Sciences (TUS) Award, a Pfizer Visiting Professorship at IISc. (Bangalore), and a Kerala Center Award. He is currently a Senior Fulbright Scholar in India.
1. Introduction
To combat global warming and climate change, a transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy is an immediate global necessity and challenge. Although the availability of renewable energy is plentiful in the form of solar and wind energy, these are often variable sources of power and largely depend on weather, location, and time of the day. Hence, energy storage reservoirs are vital in order to utilize such free energy and deliver reliable power to an ever-growing energy-hungry world. Lithium based devices have long been considered as promising energy storage candidates due to their high energy density and light weight. However, the dendritic growth of lithium metal in solution presented the threat of explosive hazards in Li metal/liquid electrolyte systems. It was not until the late 80 s and early 90 s that a “rocking chair” system was designed based on a graphitic anode (rather than metal), which accepts charge from Li-ions shuttled reversibly between a layered LiCoO2 cathode.1 Since the introduction of these lithium ion batteries (LIBs) by Sony in 1991, their universal impact has been undeniable.2–5 They are seemingly ubiquitous in portable electronics, and their use is rapidly expanding to electric vehicles, power grids, and beyond. LIBs are currently constructed from LiCoO2 or LiNiO2 based cathodes,6 graphite anodes, and organic liquid electrolytes, resulting in relatively long lifetimes and good cyclability.7 Additionally, LIBs can achieve high voltages (∼3.6 V per cell), and specific energies (∼150 W h kg−1).
Despite their advantages, these once ideal electrode materials have been met with recent criticisms regarding their safety, eco-sustainability and cost-efficiency. For instance, this has driven researchers towards the development of electrode materials from 3d metals such as titanium, iron, and manganese to replace these traditional cathode metals. In recent years, moderate success has been found in the inexpensive and eco-benign LiFePO4 compound, which has a comparable specific capacity (170 mA h g−1) and working voltage (3.4 V) to the LIB.8 However, expectations have been tempered by poor electric conductivity and sluggish Li+-ion diffusion due to a 1D channel for Li+ extraction.9 Moreover, LiFePO4 must be milled down to nanoparticles and coated with conductive carbon materials to improve conductivity, while the thermodynamic instability of Fe2+ necessitates the use of inert atmosphere during fabrication; these factors naturally lead to a high processing cost.7,9,10
It was estimated that 400 kW h of energy are necessary to produce a 1 kW h Li-ion battery, resulting in about 75 kg of CO2 emissions. Coupled with concerns about the abundance of cobalt or nickel, it is easy to see how Li-ion battery production is quickly becoming a monetary and energetically costly burden.11 Hence, it is progressively becoming mandatory to develop green electrode materials to decrease CO2 emissions and the depletion of non-renewable resources. Herein, we describe key aspects in the development of green electrodes or biomass derived electrode molecules for Li-ion battery applications. We will focus on the lithiation chemistry, electrochemical stability, and solubility issues in electrolytes, as well as important future directions for these materials.
2. Energy storage mechanisms in organic systems
2.1 Organic anode and cathode systems
In conventional inorganic electrodes, charge storage occurs via reversible metal ion intercalation mechanisms wherein a change in the oxidation state of host elements stabilizes the electrode structures during electrochemical cycling.12–14 However, in organic electrodes, insertion/extraction of Li+-ions occurs with net charge neutrality during the charge–discharge process.15,16 Herein, Li+ accepted by lone pair electrons from N, O and S moieties conjugated to an electroactive organic species, facilitating charge transfer to the electrode. These lone pair electrons are highly active in nature and usually result in comparatively high voltages during Li-ion insertion and extraction.17,18 The choice of the cathode and anode materials depends on their respective Li-ion insertion/extraction potential vs. Li/Li+. Organic materials with Li-ion transfer at or above 2.0 V vs. Li/Li+ are considered as cathodes, whereas the electrodes that exhibit below 2.0 V vs. Li/Li+ can be recognized as anode materials. Among three important types of organic electrodes, sulfur based compounds, such as disulfides and thioethers commonly result in low-voltages (∼2.0 V), while another type related to nitrogen and free-radical molecules generally have high voltages close to inorganic cathodes (∼3.0 V).19–21 The most important type, which is based on electrochemically active carbonyl group containing species, exhibit a wide-range of potentials leading to possible candidates for both cathodes and anodes.19,22–24
2.2 Low molecular weight carbonyl compounds
Tarascon and co-workers first demonstrated the use of dicarboxylate anodes and lithium salts of tetrahydroxybenzoquinone as alternatives to current inorganic based electrodes.25 Lithium-organic batteries utilizing dilithium muconate as an active cathode material were also investigated by the same group.26
Myo-inositol, a compound derived from phytic acid in plants, was electrochemically activated by lithiation to yield dilithium rhodizonate (Scheme 1).25,27 The charge storage capacity of dilithium rhodizonate can be attributed to the stable conjugation driven reversible activity of its lithium binding carbonyl sites. Positive charge accumulation from lithium ion binding induces the simultaneous attraction and transfer of electrons to a potential electrode of this compound, resulting in its reduction. The charge delivered by lithium can then be aromatically delocalized in the final lithiated product, endowing it with enhanced conductivity and charge transfer capability in the electrochemical charge/discharge process of a battery. These redox reactions hold equally well for other charge storage ions like Na+, Mg+etc.28–30
 Scheme 1  The synthesis and complete lithiation of dilithium rhodizonate from myo-inositol and constituent monosaccharides from nature. Adapted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In recent years, a number of hydroxyl and amino substituted members of the quinone and anthraquinone families have gained traction as candidates for nature-derived organic electrodes. These molecules can be found in the bark and roots of certain plants and have been widely utilized as natural dyes, and in other useful commercial applications.31–33 Akin to the previously discussed rhodozinate system, the appeal of these species as functional materials lies in their ability to bind lithium (among other metal ions) at active carbonyl or hydroxyl binding sites, and to aromatically delocalize electrons. Thus, they represent attractive binding centers for the electron shuttling metal ions necessary for cathode functionality. Recently our group reported the lithium binding capacity (and subsequent electrochemical activity) of 1,2,4-trihydroxyanthraquinone, or purpurin, a dye molecule extracted from the common lake madder plant (Fig. 1).34
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic depiction of the lithium binding capabilities and mechanism of purpurin. (b) The voltage vs. specific capacity charge–discharge curve of a purpurin electrode cycled at C/20 rate between 3.5 and 1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ in a 1 M solution of LiPF6 in 1:1 (v/v) mixture of dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylene carbonate (EC) as the electrolyte. (c) The voltage vs. specific capacity charge–discharge curve of a chemically lithiated purpurin (CLP) electrode cycled at C/20 rate between 3.5 and 1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ in a 1 M solution of LiPF6 in 1:1 (v/v) mixture of dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylene carbonate (EC) as the electrolyte. Inset shows the change in specific capacity of the CLP electrode over 50 charge–discharge cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
The lithiated purpurin electrode showed a comparable storage capacity (∼150 mA h g−1) to that of conventional LiCoO2 electrodes, and demonstrated reasonable capacity retention over 50 cycles. Similarly, the naturally occurring polyphenol, ellagic acid (extracted from pomegranate husks), was also used as an electrode material for rechargeable lithium batteries.35 High reversible capacities of ∼450 and 200 mA h g−1 were achieved at the discharge rates of C/10 and C/2.5 respectively.
3. Challenges of organic electrodes
As much potential as organic electrodes offer for next generation lithium batteries, they lack equally in viability due to their poor electrochemical cycling performance. The discharge curve of purpurin displays a minimum discharge voltage plateau at 1.5 V (Fig. 1b), and this value is far below the practical standard required for LIB implementation. In addition, the incompatible characteristics of organic molecules are inherent in nature since they tend to dissolve in most of electrolyte solvents, have poor electronic/ionic conductivities, and display low-packing densities. Herein, we will briefly discuss the significant issues that hinder their performance and the possible solutions.
3.1 Solubility
One of the major issues in directly utilizing organic molecules in battery chemistry is their solubility in most of the today's Li-ion battery electrolytes, which include ethylene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC) etc. Dissolution in polar organic electrolytes is a primary cause of the observed low capacities and poor cycling lifetimes of organic electrode species due to loss of active material; this eventually leads to a complete shut-down of the cell.17
To address the dissolution issues, various strategies have been approached. One of the most studied strategies has been the design of polymeric chains as highly stabilizing backbones for organic species in solution. Moreover, these long-chain polymers possess a number of electroactive species such as N, O and S, which are tactically tunable in high capacity electrodes. A detailed discussion of polymerization strategies for organic electrode stabilization is continued within subsequent sections of this review.
3.2 Conductivity
Theoretically, organic molecules have sufficiently fast reaction kinetics so that their rate capability is commendable for high power Li-ion battery applications. However, poor ionic and electronic conductivity of organic molecules (apart from conducting polymers) seriously impede their credibility as high performance power sources. In addition, insignificant utilization of electroactive moieties is also a concern that can be attributed to poor conductivity and electrolyte wettability. Similar to inorganic electrodes, ongoing attempts are aimed at to improving the conductivity of organic electrodes by coating them with conductive layer. Another approach is the synthesis of composites containing organic molecules and highly conductive matrices such as graphene, carbon nanotubes etc.36,37 It is important that final electrodes are comprised of a high percentage of electroactive species and a minimal amount of conductive matrix.
3.3 Packing density
Although organic electrodes have considerable advantages in gravimetric energy densities, the resulting volumetric energy densities are significantly low.38 This drawback originates inherently within the encompassed organic moieties, which are generally composed of lightweight atoms such as H, C, S, N and O. It is noteworthy to consider that volumetric energy density depends not only on the organic molecule, but also on the amount of binder and conductive carbon incorporated during electrode fabrication. In the preparation of robust electrodes, the design and synthesis of polymeric backbones also contributes to the low energy per footprint. Hence, developing efficient electrical conductivity to enhance overall volumetric energy density, albeit with minimal usage of conductive matrix, still remains a formidable challenge towards developing organic electrodes.
3.4 Binders and conductive additives for organic electrodes
Electrode formulation is an essential step to meet the high performance criteria of organic electrode based Li-ion battery applications. Although binders and conductive agents are not electroactive species (typically dead-weights), they are unavoidable components for maximizing the electrochemical properties of organic molecules. In this context, binders improve the interactions/adhesion between the particles and the current collector; they play a deciding role in the integrity of electrodes, and thereby, performance of the battery. Similarly, conductive additives are necessary to obtain the required electronic conductivity for electrochemical reactions. For example, super P carbon and multiwall carbon nanotubes are broadly used to improve overall organic electrode conductivity.39,40
State of the art lithium-ion battery electrodes use polyvinylidene fluoride (PVdF) as a binder due to its good chemical and electrochemical stability, adhesion between the particles, and adhesion to both current collectors. By the same token, PVdF (also known by the trade name Kynar) has been used widely to fabricate organic electrodes alongside conductive agents and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as a solvent.41,42 However, these binders require highly polar solvents to dissolve (example, NMP), and their electrical insulating nature degrades electrode performance, especially for organic molecules wherein conductivity is a massive issue.43,44 Moreover, polar solvents like NMP are volatile and toxic during processing, which diminishes the significance of eco-benignity for organic electrodes.16,40,41 Hence, identifying a material with the properties of a binder, and solubility in green solvents or water, gains paramount importance when adhering to the principles of green and/or natural material based electrodes. Towards this direction, poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) has been extensively used as a binder owing to its high melting point, as well as chemical and electrochemical stability in most of the organic electrolytes.17,45 Among others, Morita et al. used pellet-like disc electrodes with PTFE binder to avoid toxic solvents during electrode preparation.45–47 Similarly, plant-derived sugar polymers such as carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), β-cyclodextrin, and amylopectin have been experimented with as natural non-toxic binder alternatives in certain novel battery types.40,48,49 CMC has been a particularly feasible and water soluble binder for fabricating organic electrodes due to the presence of a high concentration of carboxylic acid functional groups.
Another vital factor in the assembly of effective electrodes for lithium batteries is the use of conductive agents with a minimal compromise in volumetric energy density. The main function of such additives is to build a conductive percolation network throughout the electrode structure and enhance charge–discharge rates. Also, conductive additives play a key role in maintaining electrode wetness (good contact between electrode and electrolyte) as they absorb and retain electrolytes effectively. Generally, carbon materials such as super P carbon,40,47 acetylene carbon black,16,41,43,44 and carbon nanotubes39 are used as conductive additives during electrode fabrication due to their low weight, high conductivity, and high surface area. On the contrary, conductive polymers are also effective electrical network providers.39,50,51 However, their surface area, and chemical/electrochemical stability issues over a wide temperature range, remain a significant concern. Herein, a large amount of conducting additives (>30%) have been used to combat electrically insulating organic electrodes, and has hence lead to a drastic decrease in the volumetric energy density of these electrode materials.47,52,53 Therefore, the improvement of conductive additive and binder efficiencies is still an ongoing topic of investigation.
4. Design principles for monomeric quinone-based electrodes
4.1 Influence of conjugation and carbonyl functional groups
It has already been demonstrated that the specific capacity of organic molecules consisting of aromatic carbonyl moieties has already reached a high-level (>150 mA h g−1).34,35 However, many of these compounds suffer from the severe challenge of low voltages, which result in limited energy densities. In spite of these discouraging findings, molecules that undergo significant changes in aromaticity during lithiation have been found to achieve high voltages.54 The selection of battery-applicable quinone derivatives with high voltage capabilities can be done with respect to Clar's theory, which extends Huckel's 4n + 2 rule to such polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). In accordance with Clar's theory, electrons transferred at the carbonyl groups of quinones, due to lithiation for example, are able to delocalize the aromatic carbon skeleton of the whole molecule. Consequently, the composition of this carbon skeleton will directly impact lithiation voltages. Wu et al. calculated the lithiation energies of several quinone derivatives, via DFT computation, to determine the effects of conjugation and carbonyl functional groups on the voltages and specific capacities of these compounds (Fig. 2a).55
 Fig. 2  Structures and electrochemical properties of (a) selected quinone derivatives with varying degrees of aromatic conjugation; (b) N-heterocycle derivatives of 9,10-anthraquinone and phenanthrenequinone; (c) other quinone heterocycles in comparison with their non-heterocyclic parent compounds. All graphical representations depict the potential (V vs. Li/Li+) vs. specific capacity (mA h g−1) discharge curves of the indicated compounds. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 66 and 67. Copyright 2013–2014 WILEY-VCH. 
Based on these results, the authors were able to draw the following conclusions regarding the strategic enhancement of voltage in the studied compounds: (i) The extension of conjugation through the addition of fused-aromatic rings (Clar PAHs) in the carbon skeleton of quinones increases the specific capacity of these molecules. (ii) Increasing the amount of carbonyl functional groups at optimal positions on the PAH infrastructures increases the aromaticity difference between the products and reactants of lithiation to yield high voltages. 9,10-Anthraquinone (2A) displayed the lowest voltage and specific capacity of the studied compounds. From the examination of the structural differences between 2A and 2C, it can be determined that the increased conjugation of the carbon backbone of 2C gives rise to the increased voltage of 2C compared to 2A despite the fact that the two compounds have an equal number of rings. Compound 2G displayed both the greatest maximum voltage and specific capacity of all the studied molecules due to a highly conjugated carbon skeleton with multiple rings and increased number of carbonyl groups present on this molecule. In addition, the maximum voltage and specific capacity of 2G was even greater than 2I, which had the same number of carbonyl groups as 2G, but a greater number of conjugated rings in series. This observation can be attributed to the fact that 2G has three pairs of close proximity carbonyl groups, which likely results in a greater delocalization of electrons from lithium ion binding compared to 2I. The distance and staggered arrangement of the carbonyl moieties of 2I might preclude them from this delocalizing effect. Finally, the relatively low specific capacity of 2F can be explained by the interruption of conjugation within this molecule.
4.2 Electrochemical activity of nitrogen heterocycles
Despite the attention directed at carbonyl-based molecules, polycyclic compounds integrated with heteroatoms such as nitrogen, are viable strategic targets for battery design due nitrogen's greater electronegativity and propensity to react with electropositive lithium. Aromatic nitrogen, which is sp2 hybridized embedded in any unsaturated system, is an excellent donor for the coordination of different metal ions.56,57 For this reason, N-heterocycles are commonly employed as ligands for coordination in organometallic chemistry and also as building blocks of various supramolecular structures.58,59 Moreover, nitrogen containing aromatic molecules can be envisioned as efficient alternatives to those containing solely carbonyl groups because nitrogen moieties are essential building blocks in many natural resources such as biomass, vegetation, and other organic materials.
Matsunaga et al., demonstrated the possibility of six electron migration within nitrogen based conjugated molecules by employing quinoxaline-derived cathode materials for which excellent discharge capacities of up to ∼420 mA h kg−1 were observed for the first cycle.60 Similar frameworks derived from triazene and naphthalene diimides were recently reported to exhibit significant coulombic efficiency, high capacity, energy density and appreciable cyclic stability (Fig. 3).61–65
 Fig. 3  Generalized structural formulas for selected nitrogen heterocycles derived from triazine (left), naphthalene diimide (center), and quinoxaline (right) with their associated potential (V vs. Li/Li+) vs. capacity (mA h g−1) charge–discharge curves tested over numerous cycles. R = alkyl or aryl. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; ref. 63. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
These properties were attributed to the electron-transporting capabilities of N-heterocyclic skeletons with extended π conjugation networks. DFT calculations have proven invaluable in further probing the electrochemical properties derived from integrating nitrogen heteroatoms into the aromatic backbone of carbonyl-based organic compounds. Shimizu et al. calculated the reduction energies and LUMO energies of several N-heterocycles of 9,10-anthraquinone (AQ), 2A, and 9,10-phenanthrenequinone, 2E, for the purpose of designing electrode materials with greater electrical potentials.66
Overall, a trend was derived that clearly indicates that the replacement of CH with N within phenyl rings of 2A and 2E deceases the LUMO energies, and increases the total reduction energy of Li+ coordination in the resulting heterocyclic derivatives. The greater electronegativity of nitrogen compared to carbon effectively lowers the LUMO energies of these aromatic molecules, facilitating reduction in a potential cathode. Additionally, Fig. 2b and c suggests that cells fabricated from 2J and 2L have higher discharge voltages (>3 V) than the “parent” compounds (2A and 2E), as well as their fellow N-heterocycles. This can be explained by the fact that 2J and 2L have nitrogen atoms at the β position to the carbonyl moieties. The β nitrogen atoms facilitate Li chelation in conjunction with the proximal carbonyl group; N–O chelation to Li increases the voltage of the battery by stabilizing the reduced form of these compounds.
4.3 Effects of other heteroatoms and functional group substituents
Further studies have found that the presence of heteroatoms with electronegativities greater than carbon and nitrogen further lower the LUMO energy levels of polycyclic aromatic species, thereby increasing their electrical potentials, specific capacities, and cycling lifetimes.45,67,68 Liang et al. synthesized quinone-based electrodes of benzofuro[5,6-b]furan-4,8-dione (BFFD), benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-4,8-dione (BDTD), and pyrido[3,4-g]isoquinoline-5,10-dione (PID), furthermore testing their voltages and capacities in comparison to AQ (Fig. 2d).67 According to the proposed trend in electronegativity and LUMO energy levels, the most electronegative heteroatoms should result in the highest achieved voltages and specific capacities. Indeed BFFD, which contains oxygen as the most electronegative ring substitution, displays the largest specific capacity retention over 100 cycles of all the studied compounds. Additionally, all three studied heterocycles containing O: (BFFD), S (BDTD), and N (PID) substitutions achieve higher voltages than the non-substituted AQ. However, one ostensible contradiction in this study stems from the fact that the more electronegative S, and O-substituted heterocycles (BFFD and BDTD) seem to display lower voltage plateaus than the less electronegative N-substituted PID. The comparably increased voltage of PID might result from the higher degree of π-conjugation, and likewise aromaticity difference upon lithiation, in the six membered pyridyl groups of this structure compared to the five membered rings of BFFD and BDTD.
A subsequent DFT-based computational study by Hernández-Burgos et al. indeed suggests that the LUMO energy levels in S and O-heterocycles of other aromatic carbonyl-containing compounds are lower than in N-heterocycles with the same PAH foundation (Fig. 4a).68 This shows that the effects of heteroatom electronegativity on the voltage and specific capacity of quinone-based electrodes might only be comparable in equivalent ring structures. The Hernández-Burgos study has also served to affirm two critical key points in the design and functionality of potential organic lithium-binding electrodes: (i) carbonyl groups that are appended to an aromatic carbon skeleton, and are positioned in ortho proximity to one another, serve to increase the lithium binding energy (strength) and electrochemical potential of candidate compounds; (ii) generally, electron withdrawing groups will extract charge from a π-conjugated system, lowering the LUMO energy levels, and positively enhancing formal potentials in electrodes constructed of quinone derivatives and related molecules. On the contrary, electron-donating groups will have the opposite effect on electrochemical potential based on similar logic (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  Data compiling general trends in (a) heteroatom and (b) functional group substituent effects on formal potential of carbonyl-based aromatic electrode candidates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. *For all structural formulas and motifs pertaining to source data, refer to ref. 68. 
5. Polymer-derived electrodes
5.1 Electrochemistry of quinone polymers
The polymerization of functionally substituted anthraquinones has proven to be a popular method to reduce the solubility of active material in electrolyte. Moreover, this strategy increases the number of metal ion binding sites and molecular weight of these compounds, which effectively increases their in situ stabilities and electrical storage capacities.69–72 For systems in which the electrochemical performance of the monomer was measured, the polymerized system showed marked improvement in at least one category amongst experimental storage capacity, capacity retention, and cycling lifetime. The data shows that polymers of fundamental anthraquinones, such as tetrahydro-hexaquinone T1 (Table 1),71 displayed drastically improved capacity retentions of 80–95% compared to electrodes composed of pure and mesoporous carbon-doped anthraquinone monomers, which respectively had retentions of only 24.2%, and 43.7% over 50 charge/discharge cycles.70,72 Similar trends were demonstrated in comparing 5-amino-1,4-dihydroxy anthraquinone and the corresponding polymer T5.69 This excellent capacity retention can be attributed to the insusceptibility of the polymer to dissolution in electrolytes due to increased molecular weight and non-polar nature of the backbone. In addition to improved capacity retention, some of the anthraquinone polymers show remarkable improvements in cycling lifetimes compared to their monomeric counterparts.
Table 1 Electrochemical properties of quinone polymers




Compound name
Ref.
Structural formula
Maximum capacity (mA h g−1)
Voltage plateausa (V)
Currentb (C-rate)
Lifetime (cycles)


Charge
Discharge





a A range of values indicates complex redox activity leading to a sloping plateau. Multiple values indicate more than one plateau stemming from multiple redox events.
b A rate of xC is defined as the current that will discharge a battery in 1/x hours. For electrode species for which multiple currents and/or charge–discharge cycles were tested, the current yielding the maximum specific capacity has been enumerated in the table above.





Tetrahydro-hexaquinone (THHQ)

T1 (ref. 71)



340
2.50–3.50
2.2, 1.50–1.00
1.7C
40


Pillar[5] quinone

T2 (ref. 73)



418
2.75–3.00
2.90–2.50
0.2C
50


Poly(2-vinylanthraquinone)

T3 (ref. 75)



217
0.75
0.50
15C
300


Anthraquinone-functionalized polystyrene

T4 (ref. 74)



62
−0.75
−1.00
3C
50


Poly(5-amino-1,4-dihydroxy anthraquinone) (PADAQ)

T5 (ref. 69)



143
2.50–3.50
2.50–2.00
4C
50


Poly(2-vinyl-11,11,12,12-tetracyano-9,10-anthraquinonedimethane) (PTCAQ)

T6 (ref. 79)



156
3.05
2.25
1C
500


Poly(2-vinylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-4,8-dione) (PVBDT)

T7 (ref. 80)



217
2.59
2.23
1C
100




Pillar[5] quinone T2 (ref. 73) represents a singular case in which the starting material, p-methoxybenzene, can be oxidized and cyclized to form repeating 1,4-benzoquinone units. The resulting compound is capable of binding up to 10 Li+ ions, allowing it to achieve a distinguishingly large specific capacity (418 mA h g−1) amongst all polymers compared in Table 1. The specific capacity, charging potential, and cycling lifetime is comparable to T1, which contains analogous linear repeats due to the polymerization of tetrahydroquinone. Remarkably, the capacity of T2 exceeds T1 despite the presumption that T1 can bind 12 Li+ ions to its 12 electron rich oxygen-based functional groups. This is a testament to the unique spacial arrangement in T2, which might prevent the “sharing” of Li atoms sites due to the misalignment, or distance between adjacent carbonyl sites. According to the authors, T1 exhibits a complex redox mechanism that is believed to result from the intramolecular reorganization and repulsion between vicinal Li+.71 This might impede the lithium binding efficiency of T1, whereas the binding sites of T2 might more closely achieve a 1:1 binding of lithium to carbonyl, leading to the enhanced specific capacity discussed. Of important note is the fact that the exceptional specific capacity of T2 is achieved at the expense of a poor rate capability, or performance with respect to the experimental current used. T2 maintains 94.7% of its initial capacity (396 mA h g−1) over 50 cycles at 0.2C, but drops to ∼200 mA h g−1 (50%) at 1C. Meanwhile, T1 maintains approximately 60% of its initial capacity at a superior rate of 1.7C. This might be attributed to the relatively enhanced conductivity of T1, which stems from the uninterrupted π conjugation in this molecule compared to T2, wherein methylene groups separate the benzoquinone units.
5.2 Pendant-type arrangements in polymers
A key structural motif exemplified by polymers T3 and T4 consists of repeating monomeric units hanging in a “pendant” type arrangement from an aliphatic backbone, which swells in solution. This is believed to accommodate the binding of electrolyte cations deep within the polymer layer, ultimately populating the redox sites, and facilitating charge transport at high current densities via a site-hopping mechanism.74,75 In addition, these pendant-type polymers are believed to store charge more efficiently than π-conjugated and main chain-type polymers, which exhibit rigid and crystalline structures that limit their electron transfer capability.76–78 This leads to reduced experimental capacities compared to theoretical capacities, and poor rate capabilities, which might serve to explain why polymers such as T1 and T5 indeed have lower experimental values despite their exceptionally large theoretical values.69,71 It is noteworthy to mention that, although T4 corresponds to the family of alkyl chain affixed pendant-type polymers, it does not show similarly high storage capacities and cycling lifetimes as the aforementioned compounds. Meanwhile, the low value of voltage plateaus in T3 and T4 are attributed to their suitability as anode materials. It is mentioned in the literature that polymers with a lower molecular weight per repeating unit tend to exhibit higher redox densities.74 The diminished performance of T4 in comparison to similar compounds might be due to the presence of bulky benzyl group in the polystyrene backbone, which can sterically hinder the pendant groups from achieving an ideal orientation for ion binding.
A high performance air battery, derived from poly(2-vinylanthraquinone) T3, was demonstrated by Oyaizu et al.81 Radical polymerization was utilized to afford high molecular weight anode-active polymer, which swells, yet is insoluble in electrolyte solutions. The cell exhibited the discharging capacity of 214 mA h g−1. Subsequent photocharging of this air battery was achieved by boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) dye adsorbed onto poly(2-vinylanthraquinone). BODIPY, a light absorbing fluorescent dye, was layered onto poly(2-vinylanthraquinone)/ITO composite to act as the photoanode. An MnO2/carbon composite acted as an O2 cathode, and a 30 wt% KOH electrolyte was utilized as a source of hydroxide ions as sacrificial reducing agents (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Depiction of the BODIPY (right) assisted charging of the poly(2-vinylanthraquinone) composite photoanode (left). OH− ions act as the reducing agent and are replenished from atmospheric O2 absorbed at the cathode. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 Springer Science + Business Media, LLC. 
The charging mechanism of the proposed air battery occurs via the BODIPY assisted photoreduction of the anthraquinone by hydroxide ions. Metal ions that are intercalated between the monomeric pendant species of poly(2-vinylanthraquinone) facilitate mass charge transfer within the anode. As electrons travel from the anode to the cathode during charging, the MnO2/carbon cathode eliminates O2 generated in the electrolyte solution (from the oxidation of OH−), as well as from the atmosphere, and catalyzes its reduction back to hydroxide. This replenishes the OH− ions in the electrolyte solution, and prevents the self-discharge of the battery by the reaction of the reduced anthraquinone (AQ2−) with oxygen. This scheme provides an important example of how these anthraquinones can be utilized to provide sustainable energy solutions.
5.3 Nitrogen-based polymers
Nitrogen moieties in polymers such as 5E have been widely exploited for their well-understood polymerization mechanism and exceptional conductivity of the resultant polyaniline-related backbones. Additionally, the Tarascon group polymerized N-heterocyclic structural analogues of their dilithium rhodizonate compound, via diene metathesis, to increase the molecular weight and prevent degradation (Scheme 3).82–84
 Scheme 3  Polymerization of N,N′-diallyl-2,3,5,6-tetraketopiperazine. Adapted with permission from ref. 83 and 84. Copyright 2010–2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Aside from practicality, nitrogen has played the role of an active lithium-coordinating redox-active species in polymer electrodes. Polymers containing nitroxyl radicals have been proposed as non-toxic organic batteries with high rate capabilities and good cyclabilities due to their fast electrochemical reaction kinetics.38,51,85–87
Häupler et al. performed a Knoevenagel condensation to convert the two carbonyl groups of 2-vinylanthraquinone into two dicyanomethane groups that were conjugated to the rest of the anthraquinone π-system (Fig. 5a).79 Free-radical polymerization with AIBN as the initiator, followed by coordination to lithium, yielded the highly delocalized pendant-type polymer poly(2-vinyl-11,11,12,12-tetracyano-9,10-anthraquinonedimethane) (PTCAQ).
 Fig. 5  The structural formulas and electrochemical performance data for (a) poly(2-vinyl-11,11,12,12-tetracyano-9,10-anthraquinonedimethane) (PTCAQ) and (b) poly(2-vinylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-4,8-dione) (PVBDT). (i) + (iii) The capacity vs. cycling lifetime of PCTAQ and PVBDT respectively. Inset of (i) shows conformations of the non-reduced (left) and reduced (right) form of PCTAQ upon 2 electron transfer from lithium. The potential (V) vs. capacity (mA h g−1) charge–discharge curves of PCTAQ (ii) and a 10% wt coin cell electrode of PVBDT in EC/DMC (1/1 m/v), 1 M LiClO4 electrolyte (iv). Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry; and ref. 80. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 

PCTAQ (T6) exhibited interesting redox properties due to the stabilization and re-aromatization of the compound upon binding two lithium ions simultaneously. The reductive transfer of one electron leaves this molecule in a twisted, anionic, and destabilized form, promoting the spontaneous binding of a second lithium ion. As a result, the two voltage plateaus that are usually observed for each electron transfer event coincide in to one plateau representing a single two-electron redox reaction. As demonstrated in Fig. 5(i) and (ii), a coin cell composed of this polymer electrode does not show diminished capacity or potential after 500 cycles. The average cell voltage was 3.05 V during charging, and 2.25 V during discharge. Additionally, a maximum theoretical capacity of 156 mA h g−1 was observed, and the electrode maintained 88% of its initial capacity (141 mA h g−1) over 500 cycles in propylene carbonate. This compound therefore displayed excellent coulombic efficiency (99%) and stability in polar electrolyte, demonstrating its capabilities as a novel electrode candidate for organic battery applications.
5.4 Polymers of S-heterocyclic anthraquinones
The combined advantages of heteroatom integration and polymerization in organic battery design can be exemplified in a thiophene based anthraquinone polymer synthesized by Haupler et al. This novel polymer containing pendants of 2-vinyl-4,8-dihydrobenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b]-dithiophene-4,8-dione is depicted in Fig. 5b.80 In accordance with expectations, this heterocycle appended polymer PVBDT (T7) achieved a specific capacity (217 mA h g−1) that greatly exceeded the other polymers hence detailed in this review. The authors found that the highest performing fabricated electrode of this polymer contained 10% wt of the active material combined with polyvinylidene difluoride (PVdF) and vapor grown carbon fibers (VGCF) as conductive additives. Still, the polymer showed the necessary insolubility in an ethylene carbonate (EC)/dimethyl carbonate (DMC (1/1 m/v), 1 M lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) electrolyte. The electrode showed an average charge–discharge voltage of 2.45 V and retained 54% of its capacity after 100 charge/discharge cycles. This drop in capacity is explained by side-reactions that occur at the unsubstituted two-position of the thiophene moiety.80 In comparison, the monomer of PVBDT underwent a 77.4% decrease in specific capacity from 217 mA h g−1 to approximately 49 mA h g−1. The stark contrast between monomer and polymer capacity retention further serves to underline invaluable nature of polymerization for increasing the molecular weight and decreasing the solubility of organic electrode compounds.
6. Supramolecular carbon frameworks as conductive electrode species
6.1 Graphene appended quinone electrodes
Organic species of interest have often times been appended to graphene sheets via covalent and non-covalent interactions (such as π–π stacking); this has increased the surface area of these potential electrode materials for ion intercalation, and has increased the aromatic conjugation of these molecules for improved electrical conductivity. An extensive amount of research has been devoted towards the electrochemical functionalization of anthraquinones by graphene and other related carbon materials.88–90 These aromatically conjugated frameworks serve as an electrically conductive variation of the previously discussed polymer backbones, while providing a high surface area for the intercalation of ions in potential electrode systems. More recently, quinone derivatives of phenanthrene and pyrene have been polymerized onto superconductive carbon black through a reactive radical process.42,91 Pyrenes, phenanthrenes, and their quinone derivatives are found widely in nature as organic minerals and components of oil.92
Conductive carbon appended quinone polymers have been synthesized in relatively benign reaction conditions that preclude the use of metallic catalysts. As an example, 2-amino derivatives of 9,10-phenanthrenequinone (PAQ) or pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone (PYT) were first synthesized via a reaction with nitric acid and, subsequently, with sodium dithionite to yield PAQ-NH2 or PYT-NH2. These compounds are then reacted in situ with nitrosonium hexafluorophosphate (NO)PF6 and Ketjenblack (at −30 °C) to yield a diazonium derivative that undergoes nucleophilic attack at the sp2 hybridized carbon surface to eliminate nitrogen gas.91
The diazonium species can continue to react with the aromatic rings on previously bound quinone monomers to form multilayered electroactive oligomers covalently linked to the carbon framework. The oligomerization is semi-randomized due to a lack of steric or electronic effects to dictate the attachment site (Fig. 6).91 The covalently linked PAQ-C (carbon bound PAQ) oligomers have been shown to have exceptional capacity retention compared to unattached PAQ at a current density of 74 mA g−1. It has generally been observed that most of the carbon-grafted quinone polymers have exhibited lower specific capacities compared to their monomeric and non-carbon linked counterparts.19 On the other hand, they have shown good capacity retention percentages at exceptionally high currents (greater than 1500 and up to 5000 mA g−1) that have generally not been reported in traditional polymers of the same constituents; this effect is attributed to the conductivity of the highly conjugated carbon surface. As expected, the redox potential voltage and charge storage capacity of PYT-KB (PYT attached to Ketjenblack) is increased in comparison to PAQ-KB due to the increased number of carbonyl redox sites (capable of storing up to 4 electrons per molecule).
 Fig. 6  (a) The semi-randomized sequence of phenanthrenequinone oligomers assembled onto graphene-like surfaces including the previously mentioned carbon black. (b) Schematic representation of quinones; 9,10-phenanthrenequinone (PAQ), 9,10-anthraquinone (AQ) and pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone (PYT) covalently bound to an sp2 carbon surface and linear relationship between peak current density (Jp) and scan rate for the oxidative peak of this redox couple. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Graphene sheet appended anthraquinone sulfide polymer, PAQS-GS, displayed the highest current density tolerant capacity retention out of the above studied compounds; it achieved an 85% capacity retention over 200 cycles at a consummate of 5000 mA g−1.93 This performance was credited to strong π–π interactions between the polymer and the graphene. Although the literature did not report a quantitative comparison of the strength of π-stacking interactions in PAQ-GS compared to other related compounds, theoretical calculations have supported that anthracene-derived quinones, such as 1,4,5,8-anthracenetetrone, might have stronger binding energies (and affinities) to graphene than phenanthrene-based quinones due to favorable adsorption geometries.94 Therefore, it is strongly believed that non-covalent interactions provide an additional contribution to the binding of these quinone polymers to conjugated carbon substrates in conjunction with the covalent interactions previously discussed. Effectively, this would increase the stability and charge transfer capabilities of these compounds.
Speculatively, the different polymerization methods used to synthesize these potential electrode materials might affect their charge binding ability. The ordered repeating structure of the anthraquinone sulfide might be more efficient at electron transfer and binding than the more randomized structure of the PAQ-KB oligomers. Le Comte et al. were able to accomplish an 18% increase in the capacity retention of AQ appended carbon black pearls over 1000 cycles by utilizing a novel electrochemical grafting method.95 This method induces the spontaneous diazotization and subsequent polymerization of carbon powder adsorbed 2-amino anthraquinone molecules in acetonitrile. It therefore precludes the classical washing of the adsorbed powder with organic solvent, and demonstrates how a novel green polymerization method can improve electrode performance.
6.2 Quinone-biopolymer composite electrodes
Graphene and carbon black species have not been in alone in their scientific interest and utilization as electroactive composites with quinones. The doping of conjugated polymers, such as polypyrrole (PPY), with quinones has been shown to be mutually beneficial to the two species, increasing the stability and conductivity of the quinone, while improving the charge storage capacity of the polymer.96–98 Sulfonated derivatives of anthraquinone and the important plant biopolymer lignin (Lig) have both played the role of a functional redox species doped within electrochemically polymerized pyrrole;99,100 a redox active anionic counter ion is also usually incorporated into this system. A scheme of the structure and redox activity of this biopolymer composite electrode is depicted below in Scheme 4.96
 Scheme 4  A generalized schematic of the redox functionality of lignin doped polypyrrole electrode composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Lignin doped polypyrroles (Ppy(Lig)) show notable difference in the redox potentials depending on the thickness of the electrode film. For example, electrode films of 0.5 and 1.9 μm thickness in 0.1 M HClO4 exhibited voltage plateaus between 0.35 and 0.55 V within their discharge curves corresponding to where the quinone group is reduced from Q to QH2.96 This indicates that the two different materials in the composite contribute to the redox potential and that the properties of the electrode can be tuned according to the percent composition of each. A 50/50 composite thin electrode was therefore calculated to have a theoretic storage capacity of 80 mA h g−1, and an experimental capacity of 70–75 mA h g−1. The introduction of an additional AQ sulfonate (AQ-SO) dopant was found to greatly increase the discharge capacity of Lig(Ppy) to 186 mA h g−1 in thin film electrodes, and 147 mA h g−1 in thick film electrodes. The Lig(Ppy/AQ-SO) electrode showed a good capacity retention of 88% over 200 cycles compared to 98% in the original Lig(Ppy).97 The increased performance demonstrates that the interspersed lignin-polypyrrole network can harbor smaller anions such as AQ sulfonates to increase charge density by increasing the number of phenolic binding sites. Due to differing fractions of phenolic groups in differently processed and sourced lignins, the Lig-Ppy electrodes were reported to undergo self-discharge. Still, despite this deficiency, these biopolymers provided lightweight, renewable, and non-toxic electrode materials that operated in a benign aqueous electrolyte and outperformed the charge densities of similar synthetic organic composites with polypyrrole.101
7. Future directions
Once merely an ideal, advances in the burgeoning field of green battery research have brought organic electrode materials to the forefront of scientific interest, and the precipice of reality. However, to fully realize the potential of this technology, traditional battery components must continue to be replaced by green materials, not only to achieve the goals of environmental sustainability and cost efficiency, but to ensure the functionality and practical implementation of these species as well. As an alternative method to combat the issues of toxicity, volatility, and leakage associated with traditional organic electrolytes, researchers have recently turned their focus towards the synthesis of solvent-free gel electrolytes.102 The quasi-solid state of these electrolytes allows them to maintain the high ionic conductivity of liquid electrolytes, while endowing them with the mechanical strength and processing flexibility of solids. Recently, efforts have been made to develop gel electrolytes derived from natural biopolymers such as cellulose, agarose, and even DNA.103–105 These compounds have displayed ionic conductivities comparable to liquid electrolytes, and improved thermal/cycling stabilities attributed to the resistance of the gel state to evaporation caused by side-reactions. However, abnormalities in reduction potentials were reported due to the localized hindrances of ionic transference resulting from the increased viscosity of the semi-solid gel state. Overall, nature-derived gel electrolytes have shown promise in improving the thermal and mechanical stabilities of battery materials outside of the cathode, while further curtailing the environmental pollution issues at center of this research field. The discovery and chemical modification of nature based compounds to improve the thermal performance, stability, and adaptability of gelators in a diverse array of existing ionic liquid systems remains an intriguing future focus of this research. However, there is still a shortage of literature exploring the co-functionality of gel electrolytes with a variety of proposed polyaromatic carbonyl-based electrodes. Therefore, it would be impactful to demonstrate the capability of these gel electrolyte systems towards the improvement of organic electrode efficiencies, which have thus far suffered from decays in charge–discharge cycling stabilities resulting from dissolution in prevalent liquid electrolytes.
Beyond the lithium ion battery, natural compounds continue to progress as electrode materials in novel systems such as the sodium ion battery (NIB or NAB). Sodium's natural abundance and lower cost compared to lithium make it an attractive potential charge shuttling ion for battery functionality.106 Graphite typically serves as the anode in LIBs due to its reversible capacity, ideal voltage compared to the cathode, and microporous structure capable of reversibly intercalating Li ions for superior cycling performance. Unfortunately, graphite is unsuitable for binding sodium ions due to larger ionic radius of Na compared to Li. Recent efforts have focused on the development of porous carbons derived from the pyrolysis of biopolymers, such as polysaccharides, in plant cell walls. Carbonaceous pseudo-graphitic structures synthesized from the pyrolytic break down of banana peels and melanin pigments have shown promise as intercalation matrices for NIB anodes.106,107 Carbonized mangosteen peels have served similar purposes in dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) electrodes.108 Plant-based molecules and recycled compounds from food waste have therefore demonstrated their immense potential to provide sustainable battery materials. As the evolution of the green battery continues, we aspire to manufacture a cell in which the cathode, anode, and electrolyte are each integrated with nature-based components that leave behind a positive environmental footprint long after that electrochemical storage device is longer in use.
8. Conclusions
It is difficult to compare the multitude of natural molecules and organic polymers to decide which of them will serve as the ideal green battery of the future. Many times, even the data for identical species will vary in the literature due to the diverging myriad of polymerization techniques, electrolyte conditions, counter electrode materials, and even the choice of analytical measurements presented by the researchers. We have therefore aimed to rationalize the maximization of reduction potentials and storage capacities within these compounds through theoretical calculations, experimental evidence, and fundamental synthetic design strategies. We have explored the effects of aromatic conjugation, heteroatom integration, and functional group substituent effects on the LUMO energies and subsequent voltages of nature-based quinones batteries. Polymers and carbonaceous macromolecules that incorporate the discussed quinones can be synthesized with various synthetic methods and yield configurations that offer their own set of distinct advantages for practical battery implementation.
The “pendant-type” aliphatic chain appended anthraquinones offer some tantalizing storage capacities and cycling lifetimes due to their insolubility in traditional electrolytes and efficient charge binding mechanisms; yet according to the literature, some of the most promising compounds of this type require rough metallic catalysts to synthesize efficiently. Compared to the former class of molecule, carbonaceous sheet grafted quinone polymers exhibited lower charge storage densities but compensated for this deficiency by displaying strong capacity retention at current densities that highly exceed that of conventional inorganic electrodes. Additionally, these materials were synthesized via a benign and facile in situ diazonium radical polymerization. This theme of non-toxic synthesis was echoed in the fabrication of lignin and anthraquinone sulfonate-doped polypyrroles, which consisted of completely renewable biopolymers assembled in mild aqueous media. The resulting composites were thin and lightweight electrode films with highly tunable properties that afforded the potential to optimize this chemistry.
In this ever-burgeoning field of scientific research, it is an ongoing challenge to engineer the right combination of materials to contend with the stability and efficiency of inorganic metal insertion systems such as the lithium ion battery. It has been effectively proven however, that the energy storage capabilities of the LIB can surpassed, if not at least equaled, on a modest scale by nature-based organic polymers. By understanding the factors that make certain natural molecules such effective acceptors and conductors of charge, candidates within biological and earthly systems can be discovered and modified to serve as novel electrode materials. Thereby, nature can be utilized to work for itself, remediating the negative environmental effects of predecessor batteries and advancing the world towards the future of green energy.
Acknowledgements
P.A, G.J, and L.M.R.A acknowledge the Hartley foundation's funding towards the green battery project through Rice University. MM, KPD, GB and AM also gratefully acknowledge the support of the Hartley Foundation. MM also acknowledges the graduate support of the GAAN Fellowship of City College in collaboration with the U.S Department of Education.
References
M. Mohri, J. Power Sources, 1989, 26, 545–551 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Breger, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Science, 2006, 311, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Van Schalkwijk and B. Scrosati, Advances in Lithium-ion Batteries, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
C. Lupi, M. Pasquali and A. Dell’Era, Waste Manage., 2005, 25, 215–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tao, Z. Feng, H. Liu, X. Kan and P. Chen, Open Mater. Sci. J., 2011, 5, 204–214 CrossRef .
R. Tian, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, J. Chen, X. Tan, G. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Gu, Y. Guo, H. Wang, L. Sun and W. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11377–11386 CAS .
D. Larcher and J. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Croguennec and M. R. Palacin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3140–3156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ohzuku and R. J. Brodd, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 449–456 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 CAS .
P. Sharma, D. Damien, K. Nagarajan, M. M. Shaijumon and M. Hariharan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3192–3197 CrossRef CAS .
T. Le Gall, K. H. Reiman, M. C. Grossel and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 316–320 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, C. Chang, L. Yuan, T. Sun and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1616–1621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742–769 CrossRef CAS .
P. Krishnan, S. G. Advani and A. K. Prasad, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7755–7759 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu, T. Sukegawa and H. Nishide, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 184–185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokoji, H. Matsubara and M. Satoh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19347–19354 CAS .
T. Sarukawa, S. Yamaguchi and N. Oyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, F196–F201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fanous, M. Wegner, J. Grimminger, A. Andresen and M. R. Buchmeiser, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5024–5028 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. Armand, M. Courty, M. Jiang, C. P. Grey, F. Dolhem, J. Tarascon and P. Poizot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8984–8988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribière, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. Armand, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 4, 348–355 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Pan, D. Zhou, J. Huang, L. Zhang, A. K. Burrell, J. T. Vaughey, Z. Zhang and C. Liao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A580–A583 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bitenc, K. Pirnat, T. Bancic, M. Gaberscek, B. Genorio, A. Randon-Vitanova and R. Dominko, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 4128–4132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, W. Luo, M. Carter, L. Zhou, J. Dai, K. Fu, S. Lacey, T. Li, J. Wan, X. Han, Y. Bao and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Burton and S. B. Mcloughlin, J. Chromatogr., 1988, 435, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Kulandainathan, K. Patil, A. Muthukumaran and R. B. Chavan, Color. Technol., 2007, 123, 143–151 CAS .
H. Dave and L. Ledwani, Indian J. Nat. Prod. Resour., 2012, 3, 291–319 CAS .
A. L. M. Reddy, S. Nagarajan, P. Chumyim, S. R. Gowda, P. Pradhan, S. R. Jadhav, M. Dubey, G. John and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–5 Search PubMed .
S. Goriparti, M. N. K. Harish and S. Sampath, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7234–7236 RSC .
Z. Zhu and J. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2393–A2405 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1298–1303 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot and F. Dolhem, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003 CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Liu, A. I. Minett, C. Lynam, J. Wang and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2007, 43, 3595–3597 CrossRef .
H. H. Lee, Y. Park, K. H. Shin, K. T. Lee and S. Y. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19118–19126 CAS .
S. Wang, L. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4404–4409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nokami, T. Matsuo, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo, T. Tsukagoshi, A. Shimizu, H. Kuramoto, K. Komae, H. Tsuyama and J. Yoshida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19694–19700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Bhosale and K. Krishnamoorthy, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2121–2126 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Vadehra, R. P. Maloney, M. A. Garcia-garibay, B. Dunn, G. S. Vadehra, R. P. Maloney, M. A. G. Garibay and B. Dunn, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7151–7157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Morita, S. Nishida, T. Murata, M. Moriguchi, A. Ueda, M. Satoh, K. Arifuku, K. Sato and T. Takui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 947–951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hanyu and I. Honma, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1–6 Search PubMed .
Z. Song, T. Xu, M. L. Gordin, Y. B. Jiang, I. T. Bae, Q. Xiao, H. Zhan, J. Liu and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2205–2211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Yao, C. W. Monroe, J. Yang and Y. Nuli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1194–1201 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, H. Chen, Y. Yu, D. Wang, Z. Cui, F. J. Disalvo, C. Biology, N. York and U. States, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8801–8808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi and G. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2466–2477 CrossRef CAS .
N. Casado, G. Hernández, A. Veloso, S. Devaraj, D. Mecerreyes and M. Armand, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Veerababu, U. V. Varadaraju and R. Kothandaraman, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 80–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiang, K. Sato, H. Tokue, K. Oyaizu, C. L. Ho, H. Nishide, W. Y. Wong and M. Wei, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2016, 2016, 1030–1035 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Shin, T. Yamada, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga and H. Shinokubo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3096–3101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, Z. Xie, Z. Zhou, P. Shen and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19137–19143 CAS .

          F. Vogtle, Supramolekulare Chemie, B. G. Teubner, Stuttgart,  1989 Search PubMed .

          S. R. Cooper, Crown Compounds: toward Future Applications., VCH Publishers, Inc., New York,  1992 Search PubMed .
H.-K. Liu and X. Tong, Chem. Commun., 2002, 56, 1316–1317 RSC .
M. Albrecht, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3457–3497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsunaga, T. Kubota, T. Sugimoto and M. Satoh, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 750–752 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. See, S. Hug, K. Schwinghammer, M. A. Lumley, Y. Zheng, J. M. Nolt, G. D. Stucky, F. Wudl, B. V. Lotsch and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3821–3829 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakaushi, G. Nickerl, F. M. Wisser, D. Nishio-Hamane, E. Hosono, H. Zhou, S. Kaskel and J. Eckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7850–7854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, X. Chen, Z. Tang, D. Wu, R. Fu and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4788–4790 RSC .
M. Chen, C. Yang, Z. Xu, Y. Tang, J. Jiang, P. Liu, Y. Su and D. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 13666–13669 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Zhou, R. Xu, S. Liu, Y. Wang, P. Li, W. Wu and M. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 287, 516–522 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shimizu, Y. Tsujii, H. Kuramoto, T. Nokami, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo and J. Yoshida, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 155–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, P. Zhang, S. Yang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hernández-Burgos, S. E. Burkhardt, G. G. Rodriguez-Calero, R. G. Hennig and H. D. Abruna, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6046–6051 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, W. Wang, A. Wang, K. Yuan, S. Chen and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 23–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawai, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2429–2434 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zou, W. Wang, A. Wang, Z. Yu and K. Yuan, Mater. Lett., 2013, 117, 290–293 CrossRef .
W. Xu, A. Read, P. K. Koech, D. Hu, C. Wang, J. Xiao, A. B. Padmaperuma, G. L. Graff, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 22, 4032–4039 RSC .
Z. Zhu, M. Hong, D. Guo, J. Shi, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16461–16464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oyaizu, W. Choi and H. Nishide, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 1242–1247 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, D. Harada, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19839–19843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hoang, S. Holdcroft and B. L. Funt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 2129–2133 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Gupta and W. P. Weber, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, S. Suematsu and A. Manago, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 420 CrossRef CAS .
B. Häupler, R. Burges, T. Janoschka, T. Jähnert, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8999–9001 Search PubMed .
B. Häupler, T. Hagemann, C. Friebe, A. Wild and U. S. Schubert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3473–3479 Search PubMed .
K. Oyaizu, Y. Niibori, A. Takahashi and H. Nishide, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2013, 23, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, J. Tarascon, M. Armand, C. Frayret, F. Pilard, F. Dolhem, C. Baudequin, S. Renault and J. Geng, Glob. Clim. Energy Proj. Standford Univ., 2010, 1–19 Search PubMed .
J. Geng, J.-P. Bonnet, S. Renault, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1929–1933 CAS .
S. Renault, J. Geng, F. Dolhem and P. Poizot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 47, 2414–2416 CAS .
M. Suguro, S. Iwasa, Y. Kusachi, Y. Morioka and K. Nakahara, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1929–1933 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, Y. J. Pu, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 2203–2204 CrossRef CAS .
T. Katsumata, M. Satoh, J. Wada, M. Shiotsuki, F. Sanda and T. Masuda, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1206–1211 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Campbell, M. D. Merrill, B. C. Wood, E. Montalvo, M. a. Worsley, T. F. Baumann and J. Biener, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17764–17770 CAS .
G. Zhang, Y. Zhou and F. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H357–H365 CrossRef CAS .
N. An, F. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Li, L. Li, Y. Yang, B. Guo and Z. Lei, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 23942–23951 RSC .
A. Jaffe, A. Saldivar Valdes and H. I. Karunadasa, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3568–3571 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nasdala and I. V. Pekov, Eur. J. Miner., 1993, 5, 699–705 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, S. Suzuki and M. Miyayama, Nanomaterials, 2014, 4, 599–611 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16267–16275 CAS .
A. Le Comte, T. Brousse and D. Bélanger, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 137, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
G. Milczarek and O. Inganas, Science, 2012, 335, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nagaraju, T. Rebis, R. Gabrielsson, A. Elfwing, G. Milczarek and O. Inganäs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. K. Song and G. T. R. Palmore, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1764–1768 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Liu, J. Liu, F. Yang and N. Ren, Desalination, 2014, 349, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Wang, J. Y. Yu and K. H. Li, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 130, 1346–1350 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nyholm, G. Nystrom, A. Mihranyan and M. Stromme, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3751–3769 CAS .
Y.-S. Kim, Y.-G. Cho, D. Odkhuu, N. Park and H.-K. Song, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1917 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Zhu, S. Y. Xiao, M. X. Li, Z. Chang, F. X. Wang, J. Gao and Y. P. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bidikoudi, D. Perganti, C. S. Karagianni and P. Falaras, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 228–236 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Nwanya, C. I. Amaechi, A. B. C. Ekwealor, R. U. Osuji, M. Maaza and F. I. Ezema, Philos. Mag., 2015, 95, 1490–1498 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Lotfabad, J. Ding, K. Cui, A. Kohandehghan, W. P. Kalisvaart, M. Hazelton and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7115–7129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, W. Wu, S.-E. Chun, J. F. Whitacre and C. J. Bettinger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 20912–20917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Maiaugree, S. Lowpa, M. Towannang, P. Rutphonsan, A. Tangtrakarn, S. Pimanpang, P. Maiaugree, N. Ratchapolthavisin, W. Sang-Aroon, W. Jarernboon and V. Amornkitbamrung, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Mikhail Miroshnikov	Mikhail Miroshnikov was raised in New York City and received his bachelor's degree in chemistry from New York University in 2012. He is currently a graduate student at City College as part of the PhD Program in Chemistry at the CUNY Graduate Center. Mikhail's research interests include a combination of materials science, organic synthesis, and polymer chemistry for the development of green battery materials from nature-derived organic compounds. Under the mentorship of Professor George John, current research projects include the discovery and synthesis of anthraquinone appended polymer electrodes and novel polymer gel electrolytes.
Kizhmuri P. Divya	Kizhmuri P. Divya received her PhD in 2012 from the National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology-CSIR, Trivandrum, India, under Dr. A. Ajayaghosh. Her work was focused on the photophysical properties of fluorescent molecules. Subsequently, she moved to Georgetown University, Washington DC, to work as a postdoctoral researcher with Prof. Richard G. Weiss. Currently she is a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. George John's laboratory at the City College of New York. Her research interests include organic electrode materials for Li-ion battery, novel self-assembled fluorescent soft materials from renewable resources etc.
Ganguli Babu	Ganguli Babu was born in Vepakunta, AP, India. He received both a bachelor's (2004) and a master's (2006) degree in Chemistry from Bangalore University, India. He obtained a PhD in 2013 under Prof. N. Kalaiselvi at CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute. From 2014 onwards, Babu was a post-doctoral fellow in Prof. Leela Arava's research group at Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. Babu's research interests are in the interdisciplinary field of materials science and electrochemistry, particularly in materials development for energy storage and conversion applications.
Ashokkumar Meiyazhagan	Ashokkumar Meiyazhagan is a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, USA. Dr. Ashok carried out his research work in the CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute and he received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Madras University in 2014. He is a recipient of the prestigious Fulbright award. His research interests focus on the development of multifunctional nanocomposites, Bio composites, Energy generation and storage, Biomass Valorization and Environmental sustainability.
Leela Mohana Reddy Arava	Leela Mohana Reddy Arava received his PhD in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. He conducted his postdoctoral research at University of Pittsburgh and Rice University. In Fall 2013, he joined Wayne State University as an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering. Dr. Arava's Research Group is interested in the electrochemical principles of energy systems such as batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells. His group focuses on designing a variety of nanomaterials and understanding their transport phenomena, electrode kinetics, electrocatalytic activity, and stabilities under extreme thermal and electrochemical conditions. In terms of applications, his diverse activities include developing high energy and safe batteries for electric vehicles, micro-batteries to power micro-sensors, and flexible hybrid energy devices for wearable assistive technologies.
Pulickel M. Ajayan	Pulickel M. Ajayan is a pioneer in the area of nanotechnology and was involved in early work in the development of carbon nanotubes. He has published around 700 journal papers, earning nearly fifty five thousand citations with an h-index of 113. His work has covered diverse areas of nanomaterials including nanoparticles, nanotubes, 2D materials, nanocomposite and energy storage materials. Presently he is the Benjamin M. and Mary Greenwood Anderson professor of Engineering at Rice University in Houston, Texas and the founding chair of the department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering. He is the recipient of awards such as the Spiers memorial award from the Royal Society of Chemistry (UK), the MRS Medal, and the Alexander von Humboldt-Helmholtz senior award. He is a recipient of two Guinness World Records. He has also received the title of Docteur Honoris Causa from the Universite Catholique de of Louvain in 2014.
George John	George John is recognized for his active research in the field of functional molecular materials from renewable resources and green nanotechnology. He obtained his PhD in Chemistry in 1993, and is currently a Professor of Chemistry at the City College of the City University of New York (CUNY). The interdisciplinary research of John's laboratory is focused on the molecular design of synthetic lipids, membrane mimics, soft nanomaterials, green energy technologies and organic materials chemistry. His group has successfully developed environmentally benign antibacterial paints, polymer-coatings, molecular gel technologies, oil spill recovery materials, battery components, vegetable oil thickening agents, and transfat alternatives. He is the recipient of the Tokyo University of Sciences (TUS) Award, a Pfizer Visiting Professorship at IISc. (Bangalore), and a Kerala Center Award. He is currently a Senior Fulbright Scholar in India.

 	Scheme 1  The synthesis and complete lithiation of dilithium rhodizonate from myo-inositol and constituent monosaccharides from nature. Adapted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic depiction of the lithium binding capabilities and mechanism of purpurin. (b) The voltage vs. specific capacity charge–discharge curve of a purpurin electrode cycled at C/20 rate between 3.5 and 1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ in a 1 M solution of LiPF6 in 1:1 (v/v) mixture of dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylene carbonate (EC) as the electrolyte. (c) The voltage vs. specific capacity charge–discharge curve of a chemically lithiated purpurin (CLP) electrode cycled at C/20 rate between 3.5 and 1.5 V vs. Li/Li+ in a 1 M solution of LiPF6 in 1:1 (v/v) mixture of dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylene carbonate (EC) as the electrolyte. Inset shows the change in specific capacity of the CLP electrode over 50 charge–discharge cycles. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures and electrochemical properties of (a) selected quinone derivatives with varying degrees of aromatic conjugation; (b) N-heterocycle derivatives of 9,10-anthraquinone and phenanthrenequinone; (c) other quinone heterocycles in comparison with their non-heterocyclic parent compounds. All graphical representations depict the potential (V vs. Li/Li+) vs. specific capacity (mA h g−1) discharge curves of the indicated compounds. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 66 and 67. Copyright 2013–2014 WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Generalized structural formulas for selected nitrogen heterocycles derived from triazine (left), naphthalene diimide (center), and quinoxaline (right) with their associated potential (V vs. Li/Li+) vs. capacity (mA h g−1) charge–discharge curves tested over numerous cycles. R = alkyl or aryl. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; ref. 63. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry; ref. 64. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Data compiling general trends in (a) heteroatom and (b) functional group substituent effects on formal potential of carbonyl-based aromatic electrode candidates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. *For all structural formulas and motifs pertaining to source data, refer to ref. 68.	 



Tetrahydro-hexaquinone (THHQ)	
T1 (ref. 71)	

	340	2.50–3.50	2.2, 1.50–1.00	1.7C	40
Pillar[5] quinone	
T2 (ref. 73)	

	418	2.75–3.00	2.90–2.50	0.2C	50
Poly(2-vinylanthraquinone)	
T3 (ref. 75)	

	217	0.75	0.50	15C	300
Anthraquinone-functionalized polystyrene	
T4 (ref. 74)	

	62	−0.75	−1.00	3C	50
Poly(5-amino-1,4-dihydroxy anthraquinone) (PADAQ)	
T5 (ref. 69)	

	143	2.50–3.50	2.50–2.00	4C	50
Poly(2-vinyl-11,11,12,12-tetracyano-9,10-anthraquinonedimethane) (PTCAQ)	
T6 (ref. 79)	

	156	3.05	2.25	1C	500
Poly(2-vinylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-4,8-dione) (PVBDT)	
T7 (ref. 80)	

	217	2.59	2.23	1C	100

 	Scheme 2  Depiction of the BODIPY (right) assisted charging of the poly(2-vinylanthraquinone) composite photoanode (left). OH− ions act as the reducing agent and are replenished from atmospheric O2 absorbed at the cathode. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 Springer Science + Business Media, LLC.	 

 	Scheme 3  Polymerization of N,N′-diallyl-2,3,5,6-tetraketopiperazine. Adapted with permission from ref. 83 and 84. Copyright 2010–2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  The structural formulas and electrochemical performance data for (a) poly(2-vinyl-11,11,12,12-tetracyano-9,10-anthraquinonedimethane) (PTCAQ) and (b) poly(2-vinylbenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]-dithiophene-4,8-dione) (PVBDT). (i) + (iii) The capacity vs. cycling lifetime of PCTAQ and PVBDT respectively. Inset of (i) shows conformations of the non-reduced (left) and reduced (right) form of PCTAQ upon 2 electron transfer from lithium. The potential (V) vs. capacity (mA h g−1) charge–discharge curves of PCTAQ (ii) and a 10% wt coin cell electrode of PVBDT in EC/DMC (1/1 m/v), 1 M LiClO4 electrolyte (iv). Adapted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry; and ref. 80. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The semi-randomized sequence of phenanthrenequinone oligomers assembled onto graphene-like surfaces including the previously mentioned carbon black. (b) Schematic representation of quinones; 9,10-phenanthrenequinone (PAQ), 9,10-anthraquinone (AQ) and pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone (PYT) covalently bound to an sp2 carbon surface and linear relationship between peak current density (Jp) and scan rate for the oxidative peak of this redox couple. Adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 4  A generalized schematic of the redox functionality of lignin doped polypyrrole electrode composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
