Hierarchical forest-like photoelectrodes with ZnO nanoleaves on a metal dendrite array   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA02764D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA02764D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9816-9821Hierarchical forest-like photoelectrodes with ZnO nanoleaves on a metal dendrite array†

        
          
            Li 
            Cheng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Chang‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Chang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nannan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Changyuan 
            Tao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaona 
            Wang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Xing 
            Fan
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, P. R. China. E-mail: foxcqdx@cqu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-159-2285-1133
bDepartment of Physics, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, P. R. China. E-mail: zhnwang@bnu.edu.cn
Received 
      4th April 2016
    , Accepted 24th May 2016First published on 24th May 2016AbstractHierarchical forest-like photoelectrodes were prepared by assembling nano-ZnO on an array of micro-metal dendrites, aiming to demonstrate the idea of highly efficient photon-harvesting inside a biomimetic dendrite structure. Via a facile aqueous electrochemical deposition process, the metal dendrites were deposited on both flat and wire substrates with different alignments, showing wide adaptability. A strong, broadband anti-reflection effect was observed, owing to the diffuse reflection inside the microdendrites. By increasing the dendrite height, the overall reflectivity of the metal electrode can be reduced from 75% to 45%, which could be further reduced to 12% after combining with acicular-leaf-like ZnO nanoarrays. Its applications in light-driven water splitting were successfully demonstrated. Taking advantage of the forest-like photoelectrode, we have artificially constructed an efficient photo-electrochemical system similar to plants in a forest, with photons harvested by the crown-like photoanodes in the sunshine, and synthetic reactions driven by the root-like electrode in the shadow.
Introduction
In recent years, the demand for highly efficient photo-electrochemical systems, including optical sensors,1–4 photovoltaic cells,5–9 and photoelectrolysis cells,10–14 has been explosively increasing, aiming at extensive utilization of clean and abundant light energy. In these systems, photons have been harvested and converted into electrons for the purpose of driving electrochemical reactions, powering electrical devices, or storing in energy-storage devices.15–18 An efficient, broadband photon-harvesting ability is a prerequisite for large overall output. Therefore, electrodes with different optical structures were designed to enhance the photon-harvesting ability, based on different optical principles, such as destructive interference, gradient refractive index, and so on.19–24 Unfortunately, most of them can only take effect in a certain range of wavelengths. To achieve a broadband anti-reflection effect, various nano-scale optical structures have been incorporated. Hierarchical nano-ZnO or TiO2 has been previously grown on two-dimensional flat electrodes to construct highly efficient photo-electrochemical cells, like dye-sensitized solar cells.25–32 It is a pity that a large part of the photons could still escape out of the oxide layer due to the limited thickness. However, it is difficult to further increase the thickness of the anti-reflective oxide layer on a flat substrate. Instead, it is worth trying to design some micro-scale optical electrode structures, which could be integrated with the nano-oxide layer, in search for an effective light-harvesting system with superimposable anti-reflection for which photons recycled due to the micro-optical structure of the substrate could be re-utilized by the oxide layer.
The most common light-harvesting system in nature is the forest, where solar light is utilized effectively every day to sustain photosynthesis and life on earth.33,34 Taking advantage of the hierarchal structure jointly constructed by branches and leaves of trees, light that is projected into the forest could hardly escape and is absorbed for photosynthesis by small leaves on trees and grass on the ground.
In this paper, well-aligned arrays of micro-metal dendrites were directly electrodeposited via a fractal growth mechanism. Hierarchical forest-like electrodes were then prepared by growing acicular-leaf-like nano-ZnO on the metal dendrites. The strong anti-reflection effect of the micro-dendrite arrays could be superimposed on that of the ZnO nanoarrays. As demonstrated in this work, nano-oxides with various complex optical structures could be integrated with the forest-like metal electrode to construct an efficient photo-electrochemical system. Furthermore, the micro-forest structure demonstrated here also shows potential in high-efficiency optoelectronic devices, like photovoltaic cells, given that it could be expanded to more suitable electrode materials.
Experimental section
Various dendrite electrodes with different dendrite alignments were deposited from reactors of different structures (see note S1 and Fig. S1 in the ESI† for more details on the setup of the reactors). After cleaning with water and drying in a vacuum, a seed layer for ZnO growth was deposited by the spraying method (note S1 in the ESI†),9 and the ZnO growth reaction was carried out in a Teflon lined stainless steel autoclave, with an optimized Zn2+ concentration of 0.03 M, and an optimized hexamethylenetetramine/zinc acetate molar ratio of 1:1. After cleaning with deionized water and drying in a vacuum, the as-prepared photoelectrode was sensitized in an ethanol solution of N719 (Solaronix, Switzerland) for 24 h. Using a Pt wire as the counter electrode and a solution of I−/I3− as the electrolyte, we conducted photo-electrochemical tests on an electrochemical working station (CHI660D, Shanghai Chenhua). The light source was an AM1.5 standard solar simulator (San-Ei Electric, XES40, Japan). The light intensity was 100 mW cm−2. The illuminated area employed in the current density calculation was the apparent area of the dendrite device (note S2 and Fig. S2 in the ESI†).
The morphology of the electrode was characterized by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (S570 and S4800, Hitachi, Japan). Fluorescence spectra were obtained by using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (RF-5301 PC, SHIMADZU, Japan). In fluorescence experiments, the excitation wavelength was 350 nm and the scanning range was 300–800 nm. The loading amount of the fluorescein (2-(6-hydroxy-3-oxo-(3H)-xanthen-9-yl)benzoicacid, bought from Aladdin) molecule is 25 mg cm−2 for different samples. UV-vis spectra were obtained using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (TU-1901, Pekin PERSEE, China; UV-3600, SHIMADZU, Japan).
Results and discussion
Tree-like micro-metal dendrites have been electro-deposited on different shapes of electrode substrates. They could be classified into three typical types of electrodes, based on the alignment of the metal dendrites (Fig. 1a). First, metal dendrites could align vertically along a one-dimensional metal wire (type I), just like a row of micro-trees planted along a straight street (Fig. 1b). Second, metal dendrites could align radically around a metal wire without any direction restriction (type II), just like the spike of plants (Fig. 1c). Third, metal dendrites could align as a square matrix over a flat metal sheet (type III), just like woods or forests over a wide flat ground (Fig. 1d). Tree-like metal dendrites of different alignments could find their applications for different illumination-distribution states. For each tree-like metal dendrite, its limb is about 100 μm in diameter or even thinner. Highly ordered and uniformly distributed acicular-leaf-like nano-ZnO with a length of several microns and a diameter of ∼100 nm was grown on the limb of the micro-metal dendrites (Fig. 1e and S3–S5 in the ESI†). The micro-metal dendrites and the nano-ZnO arrays jointly formed a hierarchical structure like a forest of flowering cherry trees (Fig. 1f), in which the nano-blossoms bloom on micro-branches. Owing to the strong diffusion-reflection effect, it is difficult for photons to escape out of the forest of micro-dendrites (Fig. 1g). A similar anti-reflection structure is historically selected by nature as the forest, aiming for efficient photosynthesis to sustain lives on earth.
 Fig. 1  Structural design of the electrode. (a) Three types of dendritic electrodes: street-tree structure (type I), spike structure (type II), and forest structure (type III); SEM images of the three types of metal electrodes: (b) type I, (c) type II, and (d) type III; (e) SEM image of the ZnO on the micro-metal dendrites; (f) a photograph of a forest of flowering cherry trees and cherry blossom; (g) the light reflection behavior inside the micro-forest. 
As previously reported,35–40 the electrochemical deposition of metal dendrites follows a fractal growth mechanism (see note S3 in the ESI† for more details on the fractal growth mechanism). During growth, new small branches will emerge on elder branches and then smaller branches will also emerge on these new small branches. This step will be repeated over and over, and then a dendritic fractal pattern will be formed. Furthermore, metal dendrites only occur in a certain voltage range, when the rate-determining step of the electro-deposition is the diffusion of the ions. When the electrochemical reaction step is fast enough, the fractal feature of deposits depends on the migration of metal ions in the solution. The ion diffusion mainly contains two parts. One is the electric-field-driven migration, in which the migration direction is along the electric field line. The other one is the random motion caused by micro-thermal disturbances inside the electrolyte, in which the direction is completely random. The formation of metal dendrites is a result of the self-organization during the random-directional ion diffusion, which could be described and mathematically simulated via the diffusion-limited aggregation model.39–45 According to the theoretical model, the morphology of the metal dendrite will largely depend on the relative speed between the random motion and the electric-field-driven migration. Without the random motion, there will be only a dense layer of metal. The electric-field-driven migration is related to the intensity and distribution of the electric field, and the random motion is related to factors such as temperature, concentration and ion species. Thus, the alignment and the morphology of the metal dendrites could be controlled by the structure of the reactor and its related reaction conditions.
Different electrochemical reactors were designed in order to deposit typical dendritic metal electrodes of various dendrites alignments (note S1 and Fig. S1 in the ESI†). Firstly, structure type I is grown from a thin-layer reactor (Fig. 2a), for which, two wire electrodes were placed side-by-side on a glass sheet. A thin layer (about 30 μm) of the electrolyte flowed smoothly from the cathode toward the anode because of the tilted angle. The diffusion of Ni2+ and the growth direction of Ni branches are both limited in a thin layer of electrolyte towards the bottom. Secondly, structure type II is grown from an all-round reactor (Fig. 2b). The anode is symmetrically circled around the cathode, thereby allowing Ni branches to grow symmetrically around the wire-shaped cathode. Thirdly, structure type III is grown from a socket reactor (Fig. 2c). The growth of metal branches is restricted only on one side of the slice substrate along the normal direction. Other new reactors with different distributions of the electric field and fluid field could also be designed in order to match the alignment of metal dendrites with the circumstances of various applications.
 Fig. 2  Optimization of the growth process of the dendrite electrodes. Schematics of the reactor: (a) the thin layer reactor, (b) the all-round reactor and (c) the socket reactor; (d) relationship between growth voltage and the surface area of the electrode; (e) fractal dimensions of the type I electrodes grown at different [Ni2+]; (f) height of the dendrites at different growth times. 
For morphology optimization of the dendrites, the influences of reaction conditions on the metal dendrites were systematically investigated. Firstly, the growth voltage for the three types of electrodes is optimized. As indicated in Fig. 2d, the dendrite was formed only within a certain range of growth potential. The area of the electrode surface would first increase and then decrease as the potential increases, indicating the dependence of the dendrite structure on the electro-field intensity (more information on the measurement of the surface area can be found in note S4 of the ESI†). At low voltage, the deposition of the metal is mainly determined by the electrochemical reaction step rather than the ion diffusion step. Thus, no metal dendrites emerged, which is commonly observed in electro-plating processes. As the voltage increases, the ion diffusion step begins to dominate the electro-deposition process. Metal dendrites begin to emerge at a certain voltage point. The dendrite structure would be more fractal as the voltage increases, leading to an increase in the specific surface area. However, at excessively high voltage, metal dendrites would be too fragile to support themselves or begin to cross and become connected with each other, leading to a decrease in the specific area. Moreover, the voltage ranges for dendrite growth differ for different reactors. A large over-potential is observed for all three situations, which indicates that the growth voltage of dendrites is far from the equilibrium potential. The over-potential is mainly attributed to two parts; one is the electrochemical over-potential, as expressed in the Tafel equation, and the other is the potential drop related to the ion diffusion from the electrolyte body to the electrode surface. The former part will vary with the shape of the electrode substrate, whereas the later part will vary with the structure of the reactors. The growth conditions for different types of dendrite electrodes should be optimized case by case in order to obtain a large electrode surface.
Secondly, the influence of [Ni2+] and growth time on the dendrite structure was also investigated. As indicated in Fig. 2e, the fractal dimension of the dendrites would first increase and then decrease with increasing [Ni2+] (more details on the calculation of fractal dimension can be found in note S5 and Fig. S6 in the ESI†). Electrochemical resistance would decrease as [Ni2+] increases, leading to a higher current and a more distinct fractal growth characteristic. However, at extremely high voltage, metal dendrites would be too fragile to support themselves or would begin to connect with each other.
Other factors, such as the growth time, pH value of the electrolyte and the size of the cathode, were also optimized. As indicated in Fig. 2f, the height of the dendrites would increase monotonously with the growth time. Besides, the dendrite would be more fractal at lower pH values (Fig. S7 in the ESI†). Therefore, the dendrite structure could be finely controlled by reaction conditions, including growth voltage, ion concentration, and growth time (see Fig. S7–S17 in the ESI† for detailed influence of various reaction conditions on the dendrite morphology).
To verify the anti-reflection effect of the dendrite structure, we analyzed the reflection spectra of the micro-forest type metal electrode with different dendrite heights (Fig. 3a). Compared with that of a smooth metal slice, the reflectivity of the micro-forest type Ni electrode markedly decreased from 75% to 47%, which means a 33% reduction of the reflectivity. As expected, photons are effectively locked inside the micro-forest structure because of the diffuse reflection inside the forest of micro-metal dendrites. Notably, the anti-reflection effect of metal dendrites is broadband. In a wavelength range of 200–900 nm, reflectivity could be reduced by almost the same factor. This result is superior to that of the widely used anti-reflection film technology, which is based on the interference effect and only effective within a certain range of wavelengths. Furthermore, the anti-reflection effect of the micro-scale dendrite structure could be superimposed on that of the nanostructures. As indicated in Fig. 3b, the reflectivity of different electrodes follows the order of Ni dendrite\ZnO < Ni dendrite < Ni slice\ZnO < Ni slice. Both the anti-reflection effects of the Ni dendrite and Ni slice could be further enhanced by coating a layer of ZnO nano-arrays. After ZnO nano-array structure optimization (see Fig. S18 and S19 in the ESI† for more details on the morphology and the impedance behaviour), the reflectivity of the Ni dendrite\ZnO nanoarray composite electrode can be further reduced to a lowest of 12%.
 Fig. 3  Optical properties of the as-grown dendrite electrodes. (a) Reflection spectra of the metal dendrite array with different dendrite heights; (b) a comparison of the four types of electrodes: Ni-slice, Ni-slice/nano-ZnO, Ni-dendrite, and Ni-dendrite/nano-ZnO; (c) fluorescence spectra of fluorescein adsorbed on the Ni dendrite\ZnO electrode with different dendrite heights. 
The anti-reflection effect of the micro-forest type electrode substrate is especially useful for enhancing the light-harvesting ability of the photo-electrochemical system, as it would help to recycle photons escaped out of the functional layer on the electrode substrate, as a photon cage. To verify the photon-cage effect on the photons escaped out of the functional layer, fluorescence analysis is employed. The fluorescent photons can be utilized to imitate the reflected photons, and they differ from the incident photons in the wavelength. The same amount of fluorescent dye molecules was loaded on different electrodes. Under the same illumination state, the overall fluorescence emission would be the same. As indicated in Fig. 3c, fluorescence intensity from the micro-forest will evidently drop as the dendrite height increases. Considering that even more photons would be harvested in the forest of higher dendrites (Fig. 3a), it definitely verified the fact that photons emitted from the surface of the metal substrate were also effectively locked inside the micro-forest.
Effective photon adsorption is a prerequisite for constructing a high-efficiency photo-electrochemical system. In nature, light energy harvested by plants could be used to drive life-related chemical reactions or stored inside biological tissues. As shown in Fig. 4a, a biomimetic light-driven water-splitting system was constructed based on dendrite electrodes with different dendrite heights. Photons harvested by the crown-like photoanodes in the sunshine could be converted into electrons (Fig. 4b and S20 in the ESI†). They could be stored in energy storage devices, such as commercialized capacitors (Fig. S21 in the ESI†), or be directly utilized to drive synthetic reactions on the root-like electrodes in the shadow.
 Fig. 4  The application of the micro-forest electrode in the light-driven electrochemical system. (a) A photograph of a light-driven water splitting system; (b) a sketch of the bionic electrochemical system for energy harvesting and electro-synthesis; (c) current density (J) of the type III photoanode with different dendrite heights; (d) performance comparison of different types of dendrite photoanodes; (e) influence of the light incidence angle on the two types of photoanodes: forest type and traditional flat type. (f) Influence of the bending angle. 
A highly effective solar-driven water splitting system has been previously reported by combining a flat-type perovskite-type solar cell with an electrochemical system.14 Herein, the idea that the photo-harvesting ability could be enhanced by learning from the nature was demonstrated with easily deposited Ni metal dendrites. Similar to what plants have been doing for millions of years on earth, oxygen and hydrogen could be produced in the shadow of the forest-like photoanode, within biomimetic photo-electrochemical systems. As indicated in Fig. 4c, the electrolytic current would first increase and then decrease with dendrite height. The reaction rate is directly proportional to the electrolytic current. After optimization, the reaction rate of the electrochemical system assembled on the dendritic Ni electrode was superior to that on the flat Ni electrode, with the same electrolyte and same counter electrode (Fig. 4d). Furthermore, the apparent current density on the type-III electrode is the highest. The increase in dendrite height would lead to two effects. One effect is the promotion of the electrode area and the photon-harvesting ability as the height of the dendrites increased, which would enhance the reaction rate. Another effect is the longer average charge-transfer path length from the semiconductive layer on the tip of dendrites to the current collector. As the dendrites grow higher, the carriers generated at the tip of the dendrites would spend a longer time to reach the current collector and so would the ion diffusion from the bottom of the anode to the counter electrode.
Compared with the literature values,8,14 the current output suffers from the mismatch of the energy level and redox potential due to the Ni metal.6 Meanwhile, the structural advantages of the dendrite electrode superior to the traditional flat electrode are undoubtedly verified through parallel comparison. Many types of metal dendrites have been reported, together with dendritic oxides.25–32,35–38 Given that the micro-forest structure is constructed via more suitable electrode materials, the current output is expected to be largely improved. Besides, from the theoretical point of view, this type of micro-electrode structure could be integrated with some other highly effective nano-oxide structures,46,47 which would be very promising for a broad range of applications, such as photo-catalysis and electro-catalysis.
Other advantages, including low directional dependence and mechanical properties, are also observed. As indicated in Fig. 4e, directional dependence of the dendrite electrode is evidently different from that on the traditional flat electrode. The reaction current of the traditional flat electrode largely decreased as the incident angle increased, whereas that of the dendrite electrode was almost unchanged. For practical outdoor application, the direction of the sunshine will change moment by moment. A lower directional dependence would bring about a larger overall production. Owing to the anti-reflection effect, photons running into the “forest” were effectively locked and uniformly distributed regardless of the incident angle. This property is particularly useful for larger area outdoor applications.
Furthermore, the micro-forest electrode is bendable. As indicated in Fig. 4f, the reaction current only slightly dropped by less than 10% upon a large bending angle of 90° of the dendrite electrode. The photon-electron conversion mainly occurs on the dendrites. Even at a large bending angle of the electrode substrate (Fig. 4e), the deformation of dendrites is small because of the gap between dendrites, which rarely affects the photon-electron conversion process. Besides, after the electrode was repeatedly bent 300 times, the performance of the electrode would still retain, as indicated in Fig. S22 of the ESI.† The flexibility and the mechanical stability would guarantee reliable potential applications in outdoor or even wearable applications.
Conclusions
In summary, a forest-like photoelectrode was assembled by growing ZnO nano-leaves on metal micro-dendrite arrays, which were directly electrodeposited on various shapes of substrates with different alignments via the fractal growth mechanism. We observed a strong anti-reflection effect, which could be attributed to the diffuse reflection inside the dendrite arrays. The anti-reflection effect that is attributed to metal dendrites could be enhanced further by growing a layer of ZnO nanoarrays. The technology is promising for applications in photo-electrochemical devices. An efficient photo-electrochemical system similar to plants in the forest could be artificially fabricated, with photons harvested by the crown-like photoanodes on the top and synthetic reactions driven by the root-like electrode at the bottom. Similar processes have been running for millions of years on earth, and this work may also provide a chemical way to understand the biological process.
Acknowledgements
This work was sponsored by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in the University of China (NCET-13-0631); the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11574033 and 11104016); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (106112016CDJZR225514).
Notes and references
R. A. Potyrailo, R. K. Bonam, J. G. Hartley, T. A. Starkey, P. Vukusic, M. Vasudev, T. Bunning, R. R. Naik, Z. Tang, M. A. Palacios, M. Larsen, L. A. Le Tarte, J. C. Grande, S. Zhong and T. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7959 CrossRef PubMed .
R. V. Sondergard, J. R. Henriksen and T. L. Andresen, Nat. Protoc., 2014, 9, 2841–2858 CrossRef PubMed .
F. St-Pierre, J. D. Marshall, Y. Yang, Y. Gong, M. J. Schnitzer and M. Z. Lin, Nat. Neurosci., 2014, 17, 884–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, R. Yu, C. Pan, Z. Li, J. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Feng, S. Tao, X. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Liu and X. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3509–3511 RSC .
N. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Guo, J. Yang, J. Du, X. Fan and C. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(2), 263–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, X. Zhang, N. Zhang, L. Cheng, J. Du and C. Tao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 358–363 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, B. Siritanaratkul, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12334–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, Y. Li, J. Hou, X. Zhao and C. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1608–1615 CAS .
J. S. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Yoon, K. Shin, M. K. Gupta, K. Y. Lee, J. Lee, Z. L. Wang and S. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 547–555 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kallel, G. Boukettaya and L. Krichen, Renewable Energy, 2015, 81, 123–135 CrossRef .
S. Niu, X. Wang, F. Yi, Y. S. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pu, L. Li, M. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Du, Z. Zhao, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 1, 98–105 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Q. Xi, M. F. Schubert, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert, M. Chen, S. Y. Lin, W. Liu and J. A. Smart, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 176–179 CAS .
I. Wendling, P. Munzert, U. Schulz, N. Kaiser and A. Tünnermann, Plasma Processes Polym., 2009, 6, S716–S721 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, H. Du, J. Yang and Z. Ma, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 325, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Narasimhan, T. M. Hymel, R. A. Lai and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10590–10597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y. J. Jen, C. Y. Peng, T. A. Liu, Y. K. Hsu, C. L. Pan, H. C. Lo, C. H. Hsu, Y. H. Chang, C. S. Lee, K. H. Chen and L. C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Dong, F. Jia, Z. Wang, Z. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Li, W. Xu and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4731–4734 CAS .
K. Ali, S. A. Khan and M. Z. M. Jafri, Sol. Energy, 2014, 101, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, D. J. Poxson, J. Cho, R. E. Welser, A. K. Sood, J. K. Kim and E. F. Schubert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 583–590 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kang, N. Ahn, J. W. Lee, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20017–20021 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. Sh Rao, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3968 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, H. L. Feng, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 644–649 CAS .
H. L. Feng, W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, L. B. Li, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14826–14832 CAS .
L. Gu, D. D. Baldocchi, S. C. Wofsy, J. W. Munger, J. J. Michalsky, S. P. Urbanski and T. A. Boden, Science, 2003, 299, 2035–2038 CrossRef PubMed .
P. D'Odorico, A. Gonsamo, C. M. Gough, G. Bohrer, J. Morison, M. Wilkinson, P. J. Hanson, D. Gianelle, J. D. Fuentes and N. Buchmann, Agr. Forest Meteorol., 2015, 214, 25–38 CrossRef .
Y. Sawada, A. Dougherty and J. P. Gollub, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 1260–1263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Fleury, Nature, 1997, 390, 145–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Fan, M. Peng, L. Cheng, J. Du, D. Zou and C. Tao, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1100–1105 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Eggersdorfer, D. Kadau, H. J. Herrmann and S. E. Pratsinis, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 6358–6367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Voss and M. Tomkiewicz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 371–375 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ben-Jacob and P. Garik, Nature, 1990, 343, 523–530 CrossRef .
K. Vasu, M. G. Krishna and K. A. Padmanabhan, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 1711–1720 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Witten and L. M. Sander, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 27, 5686–5697 CrossRef .
J. Lee, S. W. Kim, I. Kim, D. Seo and H. Choi, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 429 CrossRef PubMed .
F. L. Braga, O. A. Mattos, V. S. Amorin and A. B. Souza, Phys. A, 2015, 429, 28–34 CrossRef .
K. R. Kuijpers, L. d. Martín and J. R. V. Ommen, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2014, 185, 841–846 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. G. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9547–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Tu, J. Ye and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta02764d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structural design of the electrode. (a) Three types of dendritic electrodes: street-tree structure (type I), spike structure (type II), and forest structure (type III); SEM images of the three types of metal electrodes: (b) type I, (c) type II, and (d) type III; (e) SEM image of the ZnO on the micro-metal dendrites; (f) a photograph of a forest of flowering cherry trees and cherry blossom; (g) the light reflection behavior inside the micro-forest.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optimization of the growth process of the dendrite electrodes. Schematics of the reactor: (a) the thin layer reactor, (b) the all-round reactor and (c) the socket reactor; (d) relationship between growth voltage and the surface area of the electrode; (e) fractal dimensions of the type I electrodes grown at different [Ni2+]; (f) height of the dendrites at different growth times.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical properties of the as-grown dendrite electrodes. (a) Reflection spectra of the metal dendrite array with different dendrite heights; (b) a comparison of the four types of electrodes: Ni-slice, Ni-slice/nano-ZnO, Ni-dendrite, and Ni-dendrite/nano-ZnO; (c) fluorescence spectra of fluorescein adsorbed on the Ni dendrite\ZnO electrode with different dendrite heights.	 

 	Fig. 4  The application of the micro-forest electrode in the light-driven electrochemical system. (a) A photograph of a light-driven water splitting system; (b) a sketch of the bionic electrochemical system for energy harvesting and electro-synthesis; (c) current density (J) of the type III photoanode with different dendrite heights; (d) performance comparison of different types of dendrite photoanodes; (e) influence of the light incidence angle on the two types of photoanodes: forest type and traditional flat type. (f) Influence of the bending angle.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta02764d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
