Research progress of ABX 3 -type lead-free perovskites for optoelectronic applications: materials and devices  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP02451A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP02451A
(Review Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 27585-27605Research progress of ABX3-type lead-free perovskites for optoelectronic applications: materials and devices

        
          
            Hao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Chunqian 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Wenqi 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoping 
            Zou
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Zhenyu 
            Chen
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Shengliu 
            Sun
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Lixin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Junming 
            Li
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Cheng
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Shixian 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mingkai 
            Gu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinyao 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruoxia 
            Gui
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Weimin 
            Wang
          
        
      a
aBeijing Key Laboratory for Sensor, Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing 100101, China. E-mail: zhangcq@bistu.edu.cn
bBeijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering, Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing 100101, China
cSchool of Applied Science, Beijing Information Science and Technology University, Beijing 100101, China
Received 
      30th May 2022
    , Accepted 8th October 2022First published on 14th November 2022AbstractIn recent years, lead halide perovskite materials have attracted great interest and are widely used in solar cells and light-emitting devices due to their high photoelectronic quantum yield, high color purity, high defect tolerance, long diffusion length, high carrier mobility, and bandgap tunability. However, the application of lead halide perovskites is limited due to the presence of Pb, making lead-free perovskites an important substitute due to their same crystal structure and similar properties. Although some reports have been made on lead-free perovskite materials, there are still great challenges to realize their application due to their poor stability, easy phase transition, and low photoelectric conversion efficiency. Here, we mainly summarize the development and application of ABX3-type lead-free halide perovskite materials, especially in optoelectronic devices. The article first introduces the lattice and energy band structure, the optoelectronic properties of lead-free perovskites, including the research method of lead-free perovskites, and then analyzes the reasons for the low luminous efficiency and poor stability of lead-free perovskite materials. Second, the development history and current situation of lead-free perovskites in different optoelectronic device applications are summarized. Finally, we present the challenges and prospects for the future development of lead-free perovskites.
Hao Wang
Hao Wang received his bachelor's degree from Soochow University in 2020. He is currently studying for a master's degree in Electronics and Science at the Beijing Information Science and Technology University, under the tutelage of Huang Wenqi and Zhang Chunqian. His research direction is to develop efficient and stable lead-free perovskite materials and devices.
Chunqian Zhang
Chunqian Zhang obtained her PhD from Institute of Semiconductors, CAS in 2015. Subsequently, she worked at Peking University as a postdoctoral researcher. Currently, she works at Beijing Information Science and Technology University as a Full Professor. Her research interests include nano optoelectronic materials and their applications.
Wenqi Huang
Wenqi Huang received his PhD degree in Microelectronics and Solid state electronics from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. Since 2017, he has been an associate professor at Beijing Information Science & Technology University. His research interests include semiconductor photoelectric materials and devices, high-throughput computation and machine learning of semiconductor materials.
Zhenyu Chen
Chen Zhenyu received her bachelor's degree from Honghe University in 2020. She is currently studying for a master's degree at Beijing Information Science and Technology University, under the tutelage of Huang Wenqi. The research direction is silicon-based Group IV luminescent materials.
Shengliu Sun
Shengliu Sun graduated from Beijing Information Technology University, majoring in microelectronics and solid-state electronics, and is now a hardware engineer in Beijing Jiaotong University Sino Technology Co., Ltd.
Lixin Zhang
Lixin Zhang received his bachelor degree (2017) and master degree (2022) at the University of Jinan Quancheng college and Beijing information science technology University. His research focuses on the application of machine learning in the band prediction of semiconductor optoelectronic materials.
Introduction
Perovskites are a class of materials with a crystal structure similar to calcium titanate, and they have attracted the attention from many researchers due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, such as high color purity, bandgap tunability, high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), and high carrier mobility.1–7 Especially in the past two decades, the properties of perovskites and their applications in solar cells,8,9 light-emitting diodes,10,11 and other devices have been greatly developed, which can be seen from the global and continental research reports on perovskite materials (Fig. 1(a)) published in the past ten years.
 Fig. 1  (a) Perovskite SCI publications in the past decade. (b) Development diagram of the power conversion efficiency of first-generation (polysilicon), second-generation (organic), and third-generation (perovskite) solar cells. (c) SCI publications of lead-free perovskites in the past ten years. (d) Proportion of lead-free perovskites in perovskite research worldwide. 
Perovskite materials were used in solar cells for the first time in 2009 with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of only 3.8%,12 which has since exceeded 25% over ten years of development,13–16 higher than that of commercial silicon solar cells, as shown in Fig. 1(b). However, high-performance perovskites all contain Pb ions. During the entire life cycle of the product, Pb2+ will continuously dissociate into the environment, causing pollution to the ecological environment and endangering life and health.17 What's more, Pb is also strictly controlled by countries around the world, which seriously restricts the commercial application of lead perovskite materials. Therefore, research on lead-free perovskites with excellent properties has gradually attracted researchers’ attention, and scientists have made great efforts toward it in the last decade (Fig. 1(c) and (d)).
At present, the synthesis of lead-free perovskites is mainly to replace the B ions in ABX3 with other nontoxic metal ions with similar properties to Pb,18,19 such as germanium, tin, copper, silver, and bismuth, and a lot of progress has been made in theoretical calculations and experiments. However, there are still some problems in the research and development of lead-free perovskites, such as poor stability20 and unsatisfactory luminescence properties,5,20 which result in challenges to obtaining lead-free perovskite materials with excellent performance.
Preparation and important properties of perovskites
Preparation of perovskite crystals
There are generally four preparation methods for perovskites, which are solution-based methods, the high-temperature Bridgeman method, high-temperature vapor phase epitaxy method and space-limited crystallization strategy. Solution-based methods are preferred for their facile processability, and they make it possible to obtain a material with the desired properties.21 The solubility of perovskite precursors in the corresponding solvents can be modulated by changing the growth temperature and concentrations, resulting in a controllable growth of crystals. The reduction in precursor solubility plays a driving role throughout the solution-based approach, which makes precise control of precursor solubility important for the synthesis of high-quality single crystals.22 The high-temperature Bridgeman method is a classic melted crystal growth method which was developed in the last century. The crude materials sealed in a quartz ampoule in a vacuum are first melted at their melting temperature, followed by nucleation occurring at the tip of the quartz ampoule at a definite temperature, and gradually expanding to the entire molten materials. Because of the sequent nucleation of the molten materials, the obtained single crystals exhibit rodlike or columnar sharps with large sizes.22 The high-temperature vapor phase epitaxy method is a classic method used to prepare single crystals with kinetically controlled growth. A mismatch between substrates and epitaxial crystals plays an important role in the morphology and quality of single crystals, which make it sensitive to the lattice mismatch between the substrate and the perovskite crystal.22 As for the space-limited crystallization strategy, it is more appropriate for vertical structured optoelectronic devices.22
Crystal structure
ABX3 perovskites have a cubic crystal structure, their space group is Pmm, and they have a unit cell containing 5 atoms. The positions of A, B and X atoms in the unit cell are A (0.00, 0.00, 0.00), B (0.50, 0.50, 0.50), and X (0.50, 0.50, 0.00), respectively. B2+ and its coordinated X− form an octahedral space structure, with B2+ the center of the octahedral structure and X− the vertex of the octahedron. The unit cell structure is shown in Fig. 2(a).
 Fig. 2  (a) Unit cell structure of ABX3 (A = Cs; B = Pb, Sn, Ge; X = Cl, Br, I). (b) Elements that can be used to form perovskites. Rectangular labels of different colors specify the site occupied by the element, as shown in the legend for the top site in (c) Absorbance and steady-state PL of nanocrystals containing pure and mixed halides. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In the synthesis of lead-free perovskites, the Pb2+ at the B site is usually replaced by a nontoxic metal ion. However, due to the difference in ion radii, the stable lattice structure will be distorted when the element is replaced, or even the crystal structure will be destroyed, resulting in a phase transition. Therefore, to form the perovskite crystal structure, it is necessary to take into account both the tolerance factor t and the octahedral factor μ (rA, rB, and rX represent the ionic radius of elements A, B, and X, respectively). This indicates that a new type of perovskite structure can exist stably when t is between 0.8 and 1.0 and μ is between 0.414 and 0.732.18 A bulk perovskite structure cannot be formed with a small t, but a low-dimensional perovskite structure can be formed with a larger t. A simple strategy to ensure a stable perovskite structure is to select an element with a similar ionic radius and electronic structure to Pb. There are also some elements with quite different electronic structures and ionic radii with Pb2+ that can still satisfy the tolerance factor and octahedral factor by forming double perovskites. Fig. 2(b) summarizes the reported elements used to replace Pb2+.
Band structure, optical and electronic properties
Perovskites have a direct bandgap, with the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) located at the R (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) position of the k Brillouin zone.23,24 In perovskites, the B and X elements have a relatively larger influence on the bandgap structure,18,24 because most of the density of states near the VBM and CBM are generated by them, while A hardly contributes to the density of states. The dependence of the valence band and conduction band of ABX3 materials on the B–X bonding strength decreases according to the order of halogen electronegativity Cl < Br < I, which makes the emission and absorption characteristics of perovskite adjustable by changing the halogen ion, as shown in Fig. 2(c).25,26
Bandgaps of various ABX3-type perovskites have been systematically studied with first-principles calculations. In 2017, Jiang et al. obtained ten perovskite structures with non-zero band gaps using first-principles calculations (Fig. 3(b)),27 considering three crystalline phases and 27 divalent metal elements in the periodic table. Of these, five perovskites (MAXI3: X = Pb, Sn, Ge, Cd, Be) have suitable band gaps as light-absorbing materials for solar cells. Mao et al. performed first-principles calculations on the band gaps of 260 possible ABX3-type all-inorganic halide perovskites for potential photovoltaic applications.2 They selected five elements, Li, Na, K, Rb, and Cs, as A-site elements, three elements, Pb, Sn, and Ge, as B-site elements, and four elements, F, Cl, Br, and I, as X-site elements. The three most common crystalline phases were selected, including the cubic phase, tetragonal phase, and two orthogonal phases, and a trigonal phase was also selected for building the Ge-based chalcogenide model. The obtained band gap distribution is shown in Fig. 3(c). Considering the multiple factors of perovskite formation, they report three all-inorganic lead-free halide perovskites, including cubic KSnCl3, cubic RbSnCl3, and triangular NaGeBr3, as materials with desirable band gaps (1.24 to 1.44 eV) for photovoltaic applications.28
 Fig. 3  (a) Transition schematic diagram of the light absorption of Si and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Band gaps of ten perovskite materials with non-zero band gaps. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated bandgaps (eV) of perovskite structures in Mao's work. Reproduced with permission.2 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) The density of states map of CH3NH3PbI3, CsSnI3, and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Wiley-Blackwell. (e) Combined density of states of CH3NH3PbI3, CsSnI3, and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Wiley-Blackwell. 
The transmittance or absorption spectra of materials in a certain wavelength range are mostly determined by the band structure, which plays an important role in the optoelectronic application.21 As the visible light range accounts for the major usable portion of the full solar spectrum, high visible light absorption is critical for achieving high efficiency solar cells. The optical absorption of a semiconductor at photonic energy ℏω, according to the Fermi Golden rule, is directly correlated with eqn (1).29 (1)where ν|Ĥ|c is the transition matrix from states in the valence band (VB) to states in the conduction band (CB) and the integration is over the whole reciprocal space. For simplicity, the transition matrix can be considered independent of k and the absorption formula is approximately as in eqn (2). (2)where the second term is the joint density of states (JDOS) at energy ℏω. Therefore, the absorption ability of semiconductors to light is basically determined by the transition matrix and the JDOS, which is related to the density of states (DOS), and furthermore the atomic orbitals in the conduction and valence bands.30Fig. 3(a) shows a schematic of the transitions responsible for the optical absorptions of two representative conventional photovoltaic absorber materials, Si and GaAs, compared with Pb based perovskites.30 From the JDOS point of view, the CB and VB of Si are more preferred than that of GaAs because the s bands are more dispersive than the p bands. As can be seen from the computational work of Yin et al., the DOS in the lower CB of the halide perovskites is significantly higher than that of GaAs as shown in Fig. 3(d), leading to a higher JDOS (Fig. 3(e)), and therefore, stronger optical absorption for halide perovskites.31 However, from the energy band position, Si has an indirect bandgap, while GaAs is a direct bandgap material, which means the light absorption efficiency of GaAs is greatly improved. Lead halide perovskites have both a p–p transition and a direct bandgap. This can explain well the excellent absorption performance of lead halide as absorber layers for solar cells. The p–p transitions can only be possible for compound semiconductors containing cation elements that exhibit lone pairs of electrons, such as Ge2+, Sn2+, Pb2+, Sb3+, and Bi3+, which is also a major factor for us adopting these elements in the preparation of lead-free perovskites.
The numerical differences in the band gaps of ABX3 perovskites with a single type of halide ions will be obvious. Taking CsPbX3 as an example, the band gap values are 3.0 eV (X = Cl),32 2.39 eV (X = Br)33 and 1.73 eV (X = I).34 Different band gaps correspond to different wavelength absorption, and the absorption and emission can be adjusted with multiple halide ions. Cs3Bi2(ClxBryI1−x−y)9 (0 ≤ x ≤ y ≤ 1) has shown absorption and emission continuously adjustable in the full visible range.35
Halide perovskites have moderate refractive indices in the visible range compared to conventional semiconductor materials. The real part of the refractive index of perovskites is significantly larger than that for SiO2 or most polymers, making perovskites a good material for resonant nanostructures, due to a high enough optical contrast. On the other hand, it is much lower than those for Si and GaAs, providing high optical contrast with these materials in advanced hybrid structures.36–38 The refractive index is strongly dependent on the crystal morphology. For example, MAPbI3 has a refractive index of 2.45 at 800 nm as a single crystal, while the number is only 1.95 when as a thin film.39
Hybrid halide perovskites are strong candidates for applications in nonlinear optics. For instance, MAPbI3 shows a large third-order nonlinear response in the near-infrared transmission window of thin films and single crystals.40–43 Silicon is considered to be an important material for nonlinear optics, and MAPbI3 has shown Kerr optical nonlinearity several orders of magnitude larger than that of silicon, showing great potential. The source of third-order optical nonlinearity and the consequent refractive index changes in most materials is the Kerr effect,44 which is usually weak in thin films, where excitation of electrons through direct single- or multi-photon absorption processes can bring about much larger refractive index changes than the Kerr effect. Kalanoor et al. pointed out that the nonlinear change of refractive index in perovskites is realized by the generation of free carriers,40 and interband free carrier absorption by single-photon excitation is the main mechanism leading to nonlinearity for resonant excitation. In the non-resonant region, bound carriers dominate at lower pump intensities, while free carriers and two-photon absorption mechanisms dominate at higher pump intensities. The large carrier-induced refractive index change would suggest hybrid perovskites have significant consequences for optical switching and lasing applications, both based on optical pumping and eventual electrical excitation or modulation. However, many reports indicate that hybrid halide perovskites have low laser-induced damage thresholds, which may hinder their use in nonlinear applications that typically require high optical intensities. Second-order processes include the generation of second harmonics and are limited to materials with non-centrosymmetric crystal structures. Since most perovskite materials have a centrosymmetric structure, even if with an asymmetric organic molecule in the A site (such as MA = CH3NH3), it will not produce more second-order nonlinearity,39 which makes it not ideal in this regard.
Carrier transport properties
The performance of optoelectronic devices is highly correlated with the carrier dynamics of semiconductors, and the effective mass of a carrier has a great influence on its mobility. The mobility will decrease with the increase of effective mass, leading to the accumulation of electrons and holes on opposite sides, which will intensify Auger recombination.45 Conversely, a smaller carrier effective mass results in a higher carrier mobility, longer carrier diffusion lengths and less nonradiative recombination. Band edges derived from p orbitals generally exhibit larger effective masses than those derived from more delocalized s orbitals,46 fortunately, in perovskites, the p-orbital-derived CBM from B exhibits a very large splitting due to the strong SOC which reduces the effective mass of the carriers.46–48 Furthermore, the strong s–p coupling at the R point enhances the dispersion of the upper VB and results in a small effective mass for holes.31 The importance of the SOC effect in halide perovskites was first highlighted by Even et al.49 Considering the influence of the SOC effect, the Pb 6p-derived CBM exhibits a very large splitting and the band gap is reduced from 1.2 eV to 0.1 eV. The influence of SOC on te effective mass of carriers in the MAPbI3 was studied by Umari.50 The average me and mh are 0.73 and 0.36 m0 (me and mh are the effective masses of electrons and holes, respectively, and m0 is the free electron mass) with the standard generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional calculation, while the GGA + SOC calculations showed significantly decreased me and mh of 0.17 and 0.28 m0, which are close to the values (0.19 and 0.25 m0) calculated from the more advanced many-body perturbation (GW) theory with the inclusion of SOC.
Surface defects were found to be one of the main sources of trapped charge carriers. Therefore, surface treatment with ligands or passivators is considered an effective means to reduce the trap density in perovskite nanocrystals,51,52 and the corresponding means will be stated in the Defects section. These surface states may also lead to the formation of the trion which refers to the bound complex of two electrons (holes) and one hole (electron).53 The Auger recombination of trion is considered to be responsible for the decreased PL efficiency and PL blinking for single nanocrystal emission.54–56 Makarov et al. found that triple ion recombination can be effectively suppressed by stirring.56 Recently, it has also been found that the problem of triple ions can be solved by surface passivation.57
The carrier mobility in nanomaterials is also affected by nano-effects. Compared with polycrystalline films, the carrier mobility in perovskite nanocrystals is reduced by more than an order of magnitude, which has limited the progress of nanocrystal-based solar energy.58 The dynamics of charge carriers in nanocrystal films are susceptible to the nanocrystal size due to the carrier localization effect. As the nanocrystal size decreases, the carrier mobility decreases significantly and the carrier lifetime shortens significantly. The carrier transport in nanocrystals is mainly contributed by interdot hopping due to the coupled wavefunctions of electrons and holes between adjacent nanocrystals before recombination. Therefore, enhancing the coupling between nanocrystals by surface chemistry can lead to a higher mobility and longer lifetime. Sanehira et al. improved the carrier mobility and lifetime by treating perovskite nanocrystals with Pb(NO3)2 and A-site cationic halide salts.59
Defects
The defect properties of halide perovskites play important roles in the optoelectronic device performance, for their inevitable existence in the active layers. In optoelectronic devices, deep-level defects mainly play the role of recombination centers, and shorten the lifetime of minority carriers, while shallow level defects are basically donors or acceptors, which mainly provide carriers.60,61 The ideal lattice of a perovskite and three typical point defects are shown in Fig. 4(a)–(d). For lead halide perovskites, as shown in Fig. 4(e), most defects (Ii, MAPb, VMA, VPb, MAi, PbMA, VI and MAI) are shallow-level ones, and their formation energies are relatively low, while for a few deep-level defects (IMA, IPb, Pbi and PbI), the formation energy is relatively higher, which means most of the defects are in shallow energy levels, and brought them a good performance.31 Fortunately, Sn-based perovskites have similar defect properties (Fig. 4(f)),62 and it's believed that the excellent defect performance of halide perovskites is due to the strong s–p coupling at the VBM.
 Fig. 4  (a) An ideal perovskite lattice, (b) vacancy at the A-site, (c) an interstitial defect, (d) an antisite substitution (an A-ion occupying an X-site). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) Defect level in CH3NH3PbI3. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Wiley-Blackwell. (f) Defect level in CsSnI3. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of the proposed energy transfer processes in the Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Except for the point defects, interfacial defects are also critical in the device performance, which mainly appears at grain boundaries with a much larger density in the grains. With a larger grain size and fewer grain boundaries, a lower density of defect will be formed in the perovskite film, which can reduce carrier recombination and enhance the device's PCE. Studies have shown that the addition of dimethyl sulfoxide in the precursor solution is beneficial to the preparation of dense perovskite films with a large grain size, and the addition of C60 to the precursor solution can tune the perovskite crystallization and passivate grain boundaries, thereby reducing the trap density.63 There are also possibilities of defect migration at the interface between a perovskite and carrier transport layers affecting the efficiency of carrier extraction in turn.64,65
For the deep-energy-based defects and interfacial defects, some methods have been used to passivate them to improve the material properties. (1) Materials engineering. Composition engineering in forming mixed-cation (MA, FA and Cs) and mixed-anion (Cl, Br and I) perovskites has been reported to be an efficient method to improve the performance and stability of perovskite-based devices. The characteristics of high-efficiency solar cells containing such mixed perovskites have shown lower defect densities and also have a high defect tolerance.66,67 On the other hand, for uncoordinated B ions, this can be solved by introducing more halide ions in the preparation of materials. Zhang et al. reported the passivation of uncoordinated lead ions and iodine vacancies in an all-inorganic perovskite through additional anionic dopants like chloride, which reduced the defect density and also improved the morphology of perovskite crystals.68 Similarly, Wang et al. reported that antisolvent-washing treatment with excess iodine can be beneficial to enhance the PCE of solar cells, because this kind of treatment promotes better crystallization and defect passivation of undercoordinated Pb2+ defects and dangling bonds.69 (2) Extrinsic doping. Passivation of halide vacancies through immobilization or vacancy filling processes can prevent the migration of halide ions and reduce the current–voltage hysteresis of solar cell devices. K+ has been found to be the most suitable candidate, for it can easily accommodate itself in the interstitial position instead of substituting the lead ions. In addition, it can prevent iodine migration and reduce the hysteresis of the current–voltage characteristics of solar cell devices.70 (3) Lewis acid–base reaction passivation. The insufficiently coordinated B and X ions and dangling bonds on the perovskite surface reduce the stability of the material and the efficiency of perovskite-based devices, which can be passivated by derivatives of amines, carboxyl, hydroxyl, carbonyl, and phosphine oxides with a lone pair of electrons can. The lone pair of electrons on Lewis bases passivates the undercoordinated lead ions by forming coordination with them and thereby improving the optical and electronic properties of such passivated perovskites.71–73 (4) Interfacial passivation. Introducing a passivation layer between the perovskite absorber layer and the charge transport layer is a typical technique to reduce defect density. Most commonly, the introduction of MABr and FABr between the perovskite layer and the hole transport layer (HTL),74,75 or the introduction of fullerene between the perovskite layer and the electron transport layer (ETL), can be used as effective interfacial passivation layers.76 (5) Physical passivation methods. In addition to chemical modification of the perovskite structure, physical treatment of perovskite films can also reduce the defect density. The corresponding methods include: light-induced passivation,77 annealing at a suitable temperature,78 hot casting,79 vacuum and solvent-assisted annealing,80 and anti-solvent-assisted crystallization.81 (6) Passivation of 3D perovskites with 2D perovskites. 2D perovskites not only protect perovskite layers from thermal degradation, but also prevent ion migration,82 and the reaction of long-chain organic spacers with perovskites has been found to be effective.83 Wang et al. introduced BA into 3D perovskites to form (BA)x(FA0.83Cs0.17)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3, and observed that the 2D phase contributes to the enhancement of crystallinity by reducing crystal defects and suppressing nonradiative recombination pathways.83
Doping
Doping perovskite ABX3 with targeted ions could tune the crystalline structure, electronic structure, luminescence properties, radiative recombination dynamics, and electrical features, which play important roles in the improvement of materials and enhancement of device performances.
A-site doping indeed has revealed a feasible strategy for improving the stability of phase structure. The appropriate ion radius of doped A is an aspect to improve stability. Take FAPbI3 as an example, a too large FA cation causes a highly anisotropic strain of the cubic phase lattice, leading to the deviation from the equilibrium interplanar distances, whereas the lattice strain could be relaxed by alloying smaller MA cations.84 In a similar way, double or triple cations of (Cs, FA)PbI3 or (Cs, MA, FA)PbI3 show the same achievements in better stability.85–88 Generally, A-site doping will slightly increase or decrease the bandgaps depending on the size of the introduced cations. Taking CsPbX3 as the host, incorporation of larger impurities (such as FA or MA) will decrease the bandgap, whereas smaller (such as Rb or K) dopants will increase the bandgap,89 and further influence the PL spectrum.87,90–92 Changing the halogen can also expand the luminescence range of perovskites.93–96
In contrast to the A-site, B-site doping faces more challenges, which also play a big role in phase stability. These ions could be divided into two categories based on valence: divalent and trivalent. Divalent ions do not change the phase structure of perovskite, but may induce the lattice contraction/expansion or change the size of crystal particles,97,98 and furthermore a change of thermal stability. Stam et al. doped Sn2+, Cd2+ and Zn2+ into the CsPbBr3 system respectively.98 Compared with the Pb–Br bond, the newly generated B–Br bond has a shorter length, which enhances the interaction between the B and X orbitals, resulting in a wider band gap while causing lattice shrinkage and improved stability. Changes in the band gap also bring about a red or blue shift in the PL spectrum. Ions with similar effects are Sr2+ and Ni2+, which do not produce new radiation centers or trap states for the light emission of perovskites.99,100 While for trivalent ions, like Bi3+ and rare earth (RE) ions (Ce3+, Sm3+, Eu3+, Yb3+, Er3+, Dy3+, Tb3+, Tm3+), there are abundant energy levels in the band structure, which provide new transfer channels for the excited electrons and induce luminescence decay.1,101 In particular, although Mn is a divalent ion, it can also exhibit the same characteristics. Cai et al. prepared Mn2+/Yb3+ co-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals by altering the stoichiometry of the Mn2+, Yb3+ and Pb2+ precursors, and two emission peaks appear except for the intrinsic emission of CsPbCl3, and an optimized PLQY of 125.3% was obtained.101 The exciton energy transfer process is shown in Fig. 4(g).
Defect trapping is the main cause of nonradiative transitions and the low quantum yield, and appropriate doping or passivation can effectively reduce nonradiative transitions and tune photoluminescence, thereby improving the PLQY, prolonging PL lifetime and enhancing device properties.103 Surface defects account for the vast majority of overall defects in perovskites,104 and the use of A-site, B-site and X-site doping can effectively passivate surface defects and reduce nonradiative states.89 Shi et al. doped CsPbI3 quantum dots with Yb3+, which can replace Pb2+ while reducing the defect concentration of Cs+ vacancies and I− vacancies, reducing the recombination of electron–hole pairs and indirectly improving the carrier transport capability.105
Stability
Currently, stability is an important issue limiting lead-free perovskites. For instance, Sn2+ can be easily oxidized to Sn4+, resulting in Sn2+ vacancies.106 There are similar problems with Ge-based perovskites, which also cause the instability of Ge-based perovskites. On the other hand, as mentioned above, defects can also destabilize perovskites. There are different strategies to improve the stability of lead-free perovskites. Adding substances with reducing properties to the precursor solution during the synthesis can largely slow down the oxidation of Sn2+ and Ge2+,107 doping smaller A-site cations (e.g. Cs+) to narrow the lattice seems to slow down the oxidation reaction as well.106 The solution to the stability problem caused by defects has been introduced in the section on defects. Passivation of defects by various means can achieve this goal.
Development of lead-free perovskites and optoelectronic applications
Lead-free perovskite solar cells
Perovskite materials have attracted many researchers’ attention in the study of solar cell applications, for the excellent properties compared with the traditional materials.108,109 Excellent light absorption capacity is the most important characteristic of perovskite in solar cells. As mentioned above, Si has a p–p orbital which is favorable for electronic transitions in its energy band, but also has an indirect band gap. On the other hand, GaAs has the characteristics of a direct band gap but lacks p–p orbitals that are conducive to electronic transitions. Perovskite integrates the direct band gap and p–p orbitals, resulting in an unexpectedly excellent absorption ability. It can be observed from Fig. 5(a) and (b), that the JDOS of CH3NH3PbI3 is significantly higher than that of GaAs, and the absorption coefficient in the visible region also has the same trend. With an excellent light absorption ability, the energy conversion efficiency of Pb-based perovskite solar cells has exceeded 25%. Meanwhile, perovskites have a higher carrier mobility than typical traditional semiconductor materials. As mentioned above, in perovskites, the p-orbital-derived CBM from B exhibits very large splitting due to a strong SOC and the strong s–p coupling at the R point, which enhances the dispersion on the upper VB, and thus reduces the carrier effective mass. The lower effective carrier mass directly brings a higher carrier mobility. Besides, perovskites have high defect tolerance capabilities. The donors in some traditional semiconductor materials such as CIS and CZTS usually have much higher formation energies than the acceptors, which makes the acceptors dominate the electrical conductivity.110 In perovskites, however, the formation energies of major donor and acceptor defects are comparable,60 and there are few deep-level defects, which enables more balanced carrier transport and higher efficiency in perovskite solar cells. The lead-free perovskites usually have a similar crystal and band structure to Pb-based perovskites, especially ABX3-typed ones, which give them the same excellent characteristics of absorption, mobility and defect tolerance, and the advantages for solar cell applications compared to traditional materials.
 Fig. 5  Calculated (a) JDOS, (b) optical absorption of CH3NH3PbI3 and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In recent years, the PCE of lead-free perovskite solar cells has been steadily improved,9,112,113 however, poor stability is still a major reason hindering the development of lead-free perovskite solar cells. Compared with Pb-based perovskite solar cells whose lifetime has increased from the first few seconds114 to nearly one year,115 the lifetime of lead-free perovskite solar cells is far from this level.8 Therefore, at present, the main problems focus on PCE and stability for lead-free perovskite solar cells. To solve these two problems, researchers have made many attempts to produce lead-free perovskite solar cells. Using different B-site elements is a foremost method to improve the stability and properties, and tin-based,116 germanium-based,117 bismuth-based,118,119 and double perovskite120 structures have been prepared successfully. Low-dimensionality is another approach. Cao et al. first reported the synthesis of two-dimensional tin-based (BA)2(MA)n−1SnnI3n+1 perovskites and successfully fabricated solar cells with a PCE of 2.5% (n = 4).121 Using mixed halogen, X− site anion substitution is an effective means to tune lattice symmetry and optoelectronic properties.122 It can also improve the solar cell performance during device fabrication by employing different hole and electron transport layers.123,124 We have summarized some performance parameters of solar cells based on ABX3 lead-free perovskites in recent years and they are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Properties of lead-free perovskite solar cells




Absorber layer

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




MASnI3
16.8
0.88
42
6.4

125



MASnI2Br
14.38
0.77
50
5.48

126



MASnIBr2
12.30
0.82
57
5.73

126



MASnBr3
8.26
0.88
59
4.27

126



CsSnI3
23.2
0.86
65
12.96

127



CsSnBr3
21.23
0.85
58
10.46

127



CsSnCl3
19.82
0.87
56
9.66

127



FASnI2Br
6.82
0.47
54
1.72

128



MASnI3
17.36
0.27
39.1
1.86

129



CsSnI3
25.71
0.38
49.05
4.81

130



MASnI3
26
0.23
38.6
2.33

131



MASnI3
26.1
0.25
30
1.94

132



MASnCl3
12.89
0.576
55
3.41

133



MASnBr3
1.22
0.307
36.8
0.14

134



FASnI3
19.39
0.55
68.82
7.34

135



FASnI3
22.24
0.49
65.19
7.15

136



PEA0.15FA0.85SnI3
17.4
0.94
75
12.4

113



CsGeI3
5.7
0.074
27
0.11

137



MAGeI3
4.0
0.15
30
0.20

137



MAGeI2.7Br0.3
3.11
0.46
48
0.68

138





The effects of micro-strain and lattice mismatches between the layers cannot be ignored in the preparation of solar cells.139,140 Research shows that the resistivity of certain perovskite polycrystals will increase dramatically at low temperatures due to the large lattice mismatch and the strain relaxation. Meanwhile, higher lattice mismatch and strain relaxation will lead to higher paramagnetic–ferromagnetic phase transition temperatures and metal–insulator transition temperatures of perovskite films.141 The lattice strain increase from the lattice mismatch between the substrate and films has a great influence on film quality and carrier mobility. It has been reported that the mismatch and strain decreases with increasing film thickness on a quartz substrate,142 and the lattice strain can be almost relaxed for a 20 μm thick film. Unfortunately, this relaxation process could also produce some kinds of disorders, such as stacking faults, dislocations, etc., which induce the low value of Curie temperature and metal–insulator transition temperature in films.141,142
Crystallite size and grain size of perovskite will also have a greater impact on the device. As mentioned above, grain boundaries and the density of defects formed in perovskite films will decrease with larger grain size, which in turn reduces carrier recombination and improves the PCE of the device. If the grain size of the film is large, the longitudinal direction of the film will be composed of fewer grains. This superior structure can ensure that most of the photogenerated charges can encounter fewer grain boundaries in the process of reaching the electrodes, reducing the charge load at the grain boundaries, thus enabling solar cell devices with high photoelectric conversion efficiency.143 The grain size is especially important for perovskite thin films when used in magneto-resistive devices.144 The electrical conductivity and magnetic properties of these thin films demonstrate a grain size effect relatively at low temperatures, where the inter-particle conduction and magnetic properties become dependent on the grain size and the distance between the grains.145
There are three basic solar cell structures, which are mesoscopic, planar, and inverted architectures. More interest has been aroused toward planar and inverted architectures, because they do not require perovskite films to be deposited on mesoporous scaffolds. A nonporous homogenous perovskite film is important for the device's performance. Xiao et al. reported a one-step, solvent-induced, fast crystallization-deposition method and obtained flat, highly uniform CH3NH3PbI3 thin films. This simple approach involves the spincoating of a DMF(N,N-dimethylformamide, 153 °C) solution of CH3NH3PbI3 on a substrate, followed immediately by exposure of the wet film to a second solvent, such as chlorobenzene, to induce crystallization, which can fulfill the film formation within 1 min, and easily control the thickness of the perovskite film by changing the concentration of the solution.146 In the spin-coating process, antisolvent can be used to ensure good perovskite morphology.146 By contrast, in a two-step method, a PbI2 film is prepared on the substrate and subsequently reacts with CH3NH3I, followed by an annealing treatment.14,147,148 The two-step method may require more preparation time, however, both of them can produce high-quality films.
The annealing temperature during the preparation also plays an important role in the film quality and material properties. The results of Goktas et al. showed that as the annealing temperature increases, the lattice constant decreases and the grain size increases.145 In 2018, Gao et al. adopted the anti-solvent dropping technology to deposit high quality Cs2AgBiBr6 films with ultra-smooth morphology.149 The grain size of Cs2AgBiBr6 gradually increases as the post-annealing temperature increases, and a device with a PCE of 2.23% was prepared when taking an annealing temperature of 300 °C. Zhu et al. replaced 10 mol% of Pb in perovskite films with Sn to construct an inverted PSC based on MASn0.1Pb0.9I3, and found that the DMSO vapor-assisted annealing treatment was beneficial to the preparation of dense Sn–Pb hybrid perovskite films with large and smooth grains, and the PCE of the device reached 10.25%.150

Sn-based perovskite solar cells. 
Sn is considered to be the most promising element to replace Pb since Sn and Pb are in the same main group and have very similar ionic radii,151 which makes the tolerance factor and octahedral factor of Sn-based perovskites well fulfilled. Research work on Sn-based solar cells has also been carried out relatively early. In 2014, Hao et al. fabricated the first solar cell device using CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx material as the photoabsorption layer.126 Devices with CH3NH3SnI3 perovskite showed a notable absorption onset up to 950 nm due to the ideal optical bandgap of 1.3 eV, which is significantly redshifted compared with its benchmark CH3NH3PbI3 counterpart (1.55 eV). Modulation of the bandgap can be achieved by adjusting the ratio of I− to Br− in CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx materials to achieve absorption at wavelengths from 954 nm to 577 nm. On this basis, Hao et al. investigated solvent effects on the crystallization of the lead-free CH3NH3SnI3 perovskite films in a solution growth process and obtained highly uniform, pinhole-free perovskite films from a DMSO solution via a transitional SnI2·3DMSO intermediate phase. This high-quality perovskite film enables the realization of heterojunction depleted solar cells based on a mesoporous TiO2 layer with an unprecedented photocurrent up to 21 mA cm−2 in the absence of any hole-transporting material (Fig. 6(a)).152 Meanwhile, the CH3NH3SnI3 device can operate continuously for 300 s (Fig. 6(b)), possessing a lifetime comparable to that of the CH3NH3PbI3 device.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photocurrent–voltage graph of the device. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Photocurrent density versus time for both devices when forward biased at the maximum output power point. Before starting the measurement, leave the battery in the dark. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Device structure design of MASnI3-based solar cells. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2021, Elsevier Ltd. (d) The relative positions of the energy bands of the electron transport layer, the absorber layer, and the hole transport layer. 
The current–voltage and efficiency of Sn-based perovskite solar cells are still largely lower than those of Pb-based perovskite solar cells,113 and the Sn2+ in the bulk material are easily oxidized to Sn4+, which can lead to severe p-type self-doping, resulting in some Sn vacancies and forming defects in the perovskite film.153–156 Considering the instability caused by the oxidation from Sn2+ to Sn4+, it can be significantly improved by adding a reducing agent to inhibit the oxidation of Sn2+ in the process of preparing the material.107 SnF2 is a strong reducing agent, which can improve the photovoltaic performance of Sn-based perovskite solar cells to a certain extent. As early as 2015, Koh's team tried to add SnF2 to the precursor to synthesize FASnI3 crystals. The final devices exhibited a PCE of 2.10%, significantly improved compared to the performance of FASnI3 without SnF2 on photovoltaic devices in photocurrent density, photoelectric voltage and PCE (less than 0.02% to 2.10%).157 A year later, Liao et al. further explored the effect of SnF2 doping in the precursor when synthesizing FASnI3 crystals.158 They found that the degree of surface coverage of FASnI3 films on poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) was significantly dependent on the amount of SnF2 added in the precursor. Flower-like structures and many pinholes are observed on the surface of pure FASnI3 films grown on PEDOT:PSS. With a 5 mol% SnF2 additive, the flower-like structures disappear and the FASnI3 films become more uniform in appearance. However, pinhole formation within the film still occurs, albeit at a lower density. When the SnF2 concentration is increased to 10, 15 and 20 mol% (Fig. 7(c)–(e)), highly uniform and compact FASnI3 films are obtained without any pinholes. However, rod-like bright regions on the surface of FASnI3 films start to appear for 15 mol% SnF2 additives (Fig. 7(d)), and become prominent for the films with 20 mol% SnF2 additives (Fig. 7(e)), which were found to be SnF2 residues. FASnI3 crystals synthesized by adding 10 mol% SnF2 were adopted as the absorbing layer, and the corresponding devices obtained a breakthrough PCE of 6.22%. In addition, using low-dimensional materials is an effective way to improve the stability of chalcogenide films.159–162 Wang's team prepared a 2D-quasi-2D–3D Sn perovskite film using removable pseudohalogen NH4SCN as a structure regulator,9 which remarkably enhances its air stability resulting from the parallel growth of 2D PEA2SnI4 as the surface layer. Together with the increase of carrier mobility and reduced background carrier density, the photocurrent and fill factor (FF) of the device are much improved, and a record efficiency of 9.41% is achieved for lead-free perovskite solar cells. Its stability was also significantly enhanced, maintaining 90% of the initial energy conversion efficiency for 600 hours. Mitzi et al. demonstrated that the metallic conductivity of conventional 3D organotin halide perovskites can be suppressed by reducing the crystal dimensions, and when increasing the 2D features of the perovskite structure, the material can be transformed from a metal to a semiconductor.163 Therefore, 2D Sn-based perovskites provide a direction to overcome the p-type self-doping in bulk materials.
 Fig. 7  SnF2 with different concentrations: (a) 0 mol%, (b) 5 mol%, (c) 10 mol%, (d) 15 mol%, (e) 20 mol%, and (f) 30 mol% SEM image of FASnI3 perovskite film on PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2016, Wiley-Blackwell. 
The choice of electron transport material has a great influence on the performance of solar cells. The good electron-selective contact between the ETL and the perovskite material can reduce the potential barrier for electron transfer while blocking hole transport to minimize the recombination of carriers at the interface.15 Recently, Jayan et al. systematically studied the PCE of solar cells based on MASnI3 perovskites under different electron transport layers and hole transport materials with the SCAPS 1D software package. The device structure is shown in Fig. 6(c).112 According to their simulation results, the solar cell using the Glass/FTO/PCBM/MASnI3/CuI/Au structure achieved the highest PCE of 25.05%. This is because taking such a structure makes the CBM of the electron transport layer lower than that of the perovskite layer, and the electrons in the perovskite CBM can easily transfer to the ETL. Likewise, the VBM of the HTL is slightly higher than that of the perovskite, so the holes can be easily transferred, as shown in Fig. 6(d).
In a study by Jiang's team, indene-C60 bisadduct with a higher energy level was utilized as an electron transporting material for tin perovskite solar cells in 2020.113 It suppresses the increase of carrier concentration caused by remote doping, which significantly reduces interface carrier recombination and increases the device output voltage. Zhu et al. fabricated solar cells with about 20 nm SnO2 thin films as the ETL for the good electron transport properties of SnO2 nanocrystals, and achieved a PCE of 18.8% at 70% environment humidity, and about 17% after exposure in the environment for 30 days.164
In addition to the ETL, the HTL also has a great influence on the device's performance. It's good for the HTL to lower the transport barrier of the hole while preventing electron transport between the perovskite and the electrode, to reduce the carrier recombination and improve device efficiency.15 A 10–20 nm thick PEDOT:PSS layer is the most popular HTL in such a device structure. Self-assembled PEDOT:PSS monolayers were prepared on an indium tin oxide (ITO) surface through a facile water rinsing process, and an improved PCE from 13.4% to 18.0% was obtained.123 This is mainly because the ultrathin layer of PEDOT:PSS after water rinsing can be firmly attached to ITO through the In–O–S chemical bonds between PSS chains and ITO, resulting in a bilayer structure between PEDOT and PSS due to Coulomb interaction, which induced a directional electric field from the positively charged PEDOT to the negatively charged PSS accelerating the hole extraction process.


Ge-based perovskite solar cells. 
Germanium is also a suitable substitute for Pb. Ge has a similar outer electronic structure with Pb as they are both in the main group IV in the periodic table of elements.
There are also many studies on Ge-based perovskites. Qian et al. gained insight into the relationship between the structure of Ge-based halide perovskites and their photovoltaic performance with the first-principles calculations method.165 Ge-based perovskites have similar absorption spectra to Pb-based perovskites (Fig. 8(a)), and the effective masses for electrons and holes of CsGeI3 (0.14 and 0.19) are approximate with those of Pb-based ones, which makes them good absorption layers in solar cells. Kanoun et al. also studied the device performance of germanium methylammonium halide (CH3NH3GeI3) perovskite with the method of simulation calculation.117 With various organic and inorganic hole transport materials, the VBMs of the selected hole transport layers are all slightly smaller than those of the perovskite layer, ensuring the effective hole transport (Fig. 8(b)). They also studied the thicknesses of the perovskite, hole transport layer, defect density, hole mobility, and metal electrode work function on the charge collection. With an optimal thickness of around 600 nm, a defect density of about 1015 cm−3, and HTL of Cu2O and DPTTT-14, a PCE of 21% was obtained.
 Fig. 8  (a) Absorption spectra of several perovskite materials. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Partial energy levels of the device. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. 
The band structure of Ge-based perovskites is significantly different from that of Pb-based perovskites. CsGeI3 has a bandgap of about 1.6 eV, and those of MAGeI3 and FAGeI3 are larger (approximately 1.9 and 2.2 eV, respectively),116 which makes them a more promising absorber layer for solar cells. In 2015, Krishnamoorthy et al. screened 360 ABX3 (A+ = K+, Rb+, and Cs+, X− = Cl−, Br− and I−) chemical compositions perovskites by first-principles calculations, with 40 candidate divalent B-site cations,137 and RbSnBr3, CsSnBr3, and CsGeI3 were considered to be more suitable absorber materials based on the band structure and thermodynamic analysis. They further prepared CsGeI3, MAGeI3 and FAGeI3 crystals and corresponding devices. With PEDOT:PSS as the HTL and PC70BM as the ETL, a planar p–i–n solar cell based on MAGeI2.7Br0.3 obtained a PCE of 0.57%.138,166

Lead-free perovskite light emitting diodes
Perovskites also have great advantages in light-emitting devices for their high photoluminescence efficiency and narrow emission bandwidth.167,168 Efficient exciton recombination is necessary for light-emitting devices, which results in nano-perovskites with larger quantum confinement show a higher PLQY than expected.19 The working process of the light-emitting diode is shown in Fig. 9(a).169 The emission of lead-free perovskites can achieve a full visible spectrum and even the near-infrared region by adjusting the composition and doping with rare-earth ions. With the development of lead-free perovskite materials, the efficiency of LEDs based on lead-free perovskites has also been continuously improved by adjusting the types of B-site elements, ion doping, and optimizing the device structure.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of electroluminescence. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2018, Wiley-Blackwell. (b) Energy level diagram of the device using hole transport layers with different HOMO levels. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
The ETL and HTL also significantly affect the charge transport and surface morphology. Most current HTLs with a shallow HOMO level cause a large hole-injection barrier and thus high turn-on voltage,168 and therefore, HTLs with deeper HOMO levels provide a way to improve the device performance. Jang et al. used the conjugated polyelectrolyte HTLs containing bulky TBA+ counterions (MPS2-TBA), with a HOMO level of about 5.83 eV (Fig. 9(b)), to ensure the hole injection.170 This material improved the wettability, compatibility, and nucleation at the interface of perovskite crystals, and thus luminescence properties. Some lead-free perovskite light-emitting devices are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary table of lead-free perovskite LEDs




Perovskites
Device structure
EL (nm)
EQE (%)
Ref.




CsSnI3
ITO/PEDOT/CsSnI3/PBD/LiF/Al
950
3.8

171



CsSnI3
ITO/PEDOT/CsSnI3/B3PyMPM/LiF/Al
932
5.4

172



MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3/F8/Ca/Ag
780
0.019

173



MASnI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASnI3/F8/Ca/Ag
945
0.72

173



MASn(Br0.5I0.5)3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.5I0.5)3/F8/Ca/Ag
667
0.007

173



MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3/F8/Ca/Ag
780
0.019

173



MASn(Br0.3I0.7)3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.3I0.7)3/F8/Ca/Ag
825
0.046

173



MASn(Br0.2I0.8)3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.2I0.8)3/F8/Ca/Ag
868
0.058

173



MASn(Br0.1I0.9)3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.1I0.9)3/F8/Ca/Ag
896
0.11

173



PEA2SnI4
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEA2SnI4/F8/LiF/Al
618



174



(OAm)2SnBr4
ITO/PEI-ZnO/(OAm)2SnBr4/TCTA/MoO3/Au
625
0.1

175



(PEA)2SnI4
Glass/PEDOT:PSS/(PEA)2SnI4/TPBI/LiF/Al
632
5

11



TEA2SnI4
ITO/TPBi/LiF/TEA2SnI4/TPBi/LiF/Al
638
0.62

176



CsCu2I3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsCu2I3/TPBi/LiF/Al
550
0.17

177



Cs3Cu2I5
Al/LiF/TPBi/Cs3Cu2I5/NiO/ITO
445
1.12

178



(ABI)4MnBr6
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polyTDP/(ABI)4MnBr6/TPBi/LiF
627
9.8

179






Sn-based perovskite luminescence and light emitting diodes. 
In 2016, Jellicoe et al. of Cavendish Laboratory successfully synthesized CsSnX3 (X = Cl, Cl0.5Br0.5, Br, Br0.5I0.5, I) quantum dots by mixing SnX2 with a precursor and using the same thermal injection method as the lead halide perovskite, taking the first step toward the luminescence of lead-free perovskite quantum dots. The obtained perovskite nanocrystals have good optical properties, and their optical bandgap can be tuned from the visible region to the near-infrared region with different halides in the perovskite crystal.25 They believed that the fast-decaying luminescence of the synthesized Sn-based perovskite nanocrystals originates from the band-edge states, while the slower decay is due to recombination from states just below the band edge. Such shallow states within the bandgap are likely to arise from the intrinsic defect.180,181 SnC2O4, SnCO3, and NH4X (X = Cl, Br, I) were added into precursors to control the reaction rate and kinetics.107 The material stability was effectively improved with SnC2O4 in precursors, because of the strong antioxidant capacity and coordination ability of oxalate ion, which can inhibit the surface oxidation of Sn2+ ligands when forming nanocrystals and passivate the non-coordinated Sn on the surface. It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the stability of the CsSnI3 nanocrystals synthesized with SnC2O4 as precursors has been significantly improved.182
 Fig. 10  Photographs of SnI2–CsSnI3 NC dispersions stored in (a) air and (b) N2. (c) Photographs of SnC2O4–CsSnI3 NCs stored in N2. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 
Since 2016, there have been many reports on Sn-based perovskite LEDs.183,184 Lai's group reported a series of electroluminescent LEDs based on CH3NH3Sn(Br1−xIx)3 (x = 0.5–1) thin films with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3Sn(Br1−xIx)3/F8/Ca/Ag. The EL peak ranged from 667 to 945 nm with different Br/I ratios, and a maximum EQE of 0.72% was obtained with CH3NH3SnI3 thin films.173 In the same year, Hong et al. reported a glass/ITO/PEDOT/CsSnI3/PBD/LiF/Al structured light-emitting diode, with a CsSnI3 thin film displaying compact micron-scale grains with only a few pinholes and cracks at the grain boundaries.171 The device showed an external quantum efficiency of 3.8% at the center of about 930 nm. It is worth noting that the EQE of Sn-based perovskite LEDs has increased from almost zero to over five percent in recent years.11,172,173 In 2020, Yuan et al. slowed down the crystallization rate of the perovskite and improved the perovskite film morphology by adding valeric acid. The valeric acid can be strongly coordinated to Sn2+, which can also protect Sn from undesired oxidation during the film-forming process. The improved films and the reduced Sn4+ content enable an EQE of 5% and an operating half-life exceeding 15 hours at an initial brightness of 20 cd m−2.11 In CsSnI3-based LEDs, hole injection is significantly higher than electrons, leading to charge injection imbalance, exciton dissipation, and poor device performance.172 To solve this problem, Lu proposed a strategy to manage charge injection and recombination behavior by tuning the interface area of the perovskite and charge-transporter in 2021.172 In a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CsSnI3/B3PYMPM/LiF/Al, a dendritic CsSnI3 is prepared on the hole-transporter, only making a bottom contact with the HTL and exposing all other available crystal surfaces to the ETL. In other words, the interface area of a perovskite/ETL is significantly higher than that of a perovskite/HTL, which increased the NIR EQE to 5.4%. Not only that, the dendritic structure is almost unchanged after bending 2000 times, and the LED maintains more than 90% of the initial EQE after 50 times, which shows great advantages in flexible devices.
For full-color display, Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage coordinates of (0.708, 0.292) are required for red emitters, away from the coordinate (0.71, 0.28) of present-day perovskite devices.185,186 To improve the chromatographic purity of light-emitting diodes, Liang et al. reported PEA2SnI4 based red PeLEDs with color coordinates of (0.706, 0.294), achieving the highest reported purity of red PeLEDs in 2020.185 They employed a device architecture based on ITO/(PEDOT:PSS)/Perovskite/TPBi/LiF/Al. The inherent easy oxidation problem of Sn-based perovskites is suppressed to a certain extent by adding H3PO2 with appropriate reducing properties. Meanwhile, the H3PO2 additionally seeds crystal growth during film formation, improving the film quality.


Ge-based perovskite luminescence and light emitting diodes. 
Jong et al. explored the structure and optical properties of the inorganic germanium-based halide perovskite AGeX3 (A = Cs, Rb; X = I, Br, Cl) with density functional theory calculations in 2019.23 The energy band structure of AGeX3 was studied with the PBEsol functional and the HSE06 hybrid functional, respectively, and it can be seen from Table 3 that the bandgap was obviously underestimated with the PBEsol functional calculation method while it was closer to the experimental value with the HSE06 hybrid functional. The six calculated perovskites are all direct bandgap semiconductor materials, and the direct bandgap k-point is at the (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) position of the Brillouin zone. They also studied 2D materials with different terminations, which provides an important reference value for the research on lead-free perovskite nanomaterials. Recently, Dias et al. found that the X atomic radius plays an important role in the relative stability of inorganic CsGeX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskites.187 They combined hybrid density functional theory calculations, spin–orbit coupling for the valence states, maximally localized Wannier function tight-binding framework and a solution of the Bethe–Salpeter equation for first-principles calculations, and found that hexagonal phases yield the lowest energy for CsGeI3, in contrast to CsGeCl3 and CsGeBr3, which have an energetic preference for distorted cubic structures. In terms of the experiment, Wu et al. synthesized CsGeI3 nanocrystals using a hot injection method for the first time in 2018, with a photoluminescence efficiency of 3.7%. Under continuous electron irradiation, a gradual transition of nanocrystals from single-crystal CsGeI3 to single-crystal CsI and then polycrystalline CsI, was observed, providing new insights into the understanding of electron-induced instability in lead-free perovskites.20
Table 3 The bandgaps of the inorganic halide perovskite AGeX3 (A = Cs, Rb; X = I, Br, Cl) calculated by the PBEsol and HSE06 functions. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society




Materials
PBEsol
HSE06
Experiment
Calculation




CsGeI3
1.19
1.64
1.63188
1.41189


CsGeBr3
1.46
2.34
2.39190
1.66189


CsGeCl3
2.13
3.24
3.40190
2.22189


RbGeI3
1.31
1.78






RbGeBr3
1.57
2.40






RbGeCl3
2.16
3.28








At present, there are few reports of lead-free perovskite light-emitting diodes prepared entirely by Ge instead of Pb, largely due to the inherent defects of Ge-based perovskites, such as high-density deep-level defects and poor stability. Partial substitution of Pb with Ge is an approach to reduce the toxicity of perovskite LEDs, for the poor stability of current Ge-based perovskites. In 2021, Yang et al. synthesized Ge–Pb perovskite thin films with 10% Ge substitution, and a photoluminescence quantum efficiency of about 71% was achieved, an increase of nearly 34% compared with similarly pure Pb-based perovskite films. They prepared Ge–Pb PeLED devices with a simple device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly(9-vinylcarbazole)/perovskite/2,2′,2′′(1,3,5-benzinetriyl)-tris(1-phenyl-1-H-benzimidazole)/LiF/Al, and achieved an EQE as high as 13.1%, which is an attempt to reduce the toxicity of perovskite LEDs.10


Other lead-free perovskite light emitting diodes. 
Green and blue lead-free perovskite light-emitting diodes have also been developed. A LED with an EL emission peak at 527 nm was observed via integrating CsCuBr2 micro-crosses in the device configuration Ag/CsCuBr2/p-Si/In&Ga.191 CsCuBr2 has excellent stability and will not undergo phase transition even in air for more than five months. Jun's group showed a LED based on Cs3Cu2I5 thin films, and the maximum luminance was approximately 10 cd m−2 at around 450 nm.192 Sb-based perovskite thin films were first introduced in the electroluminescent LEDs by Chu's group, with a device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Cs3Sb2I9 thin film/TPBi/LiF/Al193 and have received more attention in the field of light-emitting diodes.

Lead-free perovskite detectors
The optoelectronic properties of perovskite single crystals, especially their high absorption coefficients, enable their successful application in photodetectors. The research on perovskite detectors is not limited to the ultraviolet-visible spectrum, and there are a lot of reports on X-ray detectors. In 2015, Yakunin et al. fabricated an X-ray detector based on organic–inorganic hybrid MAPbX3 (X = Br or I) and brought the detection spectrum of the perovskite detector from the visible-UV to the X-ray for the first time.194 Lead-free perovskite photodetectors have also made some progress with the development of materials.

Sn-based perovskites photodetectors. 
In 2017, Xu et al. fabricated a photodetector with MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3 material by replacing part of Pb with Sn, expanding the detection range from visible and X-ray to the near-infrared region.195 Ascorbic acid was added to retard the formation of an Sn vacancy caused by the Sn oxidation and also facilitate the film formation by modulating the perovskite crystallization kinetics. The photodetector demonstrated high responsivity with a detection of over 1012 Jones between 800 and 970 nm, rivaling the performance of the conventional inorganic photodetectors. In 2020, Cao et al. prepared a relatively stable CsSnI3 perovskite without serious p-type self-doping using a spin coating method with ascorbic acid as a reducing agent. A stable environmentally-friendly self-powered UV-Vis-NIR photodetector was fabricated with the CsSnI3 film, and a broad spectral response range (from 350 to 1000 nm), fast response speed (0.35/1.6 ms), high responsivity (0.257 A W−1), and good stability were achieved.196 Zhu et al. prepared high-quality MA0.7FA0.3SnBr3 perovskite films using a simple solution process with graphite in the precursor. The surface topography of the perovskite film was improved and the pin-holes that existed in the film were reduced greatly with graphite due to the large amount of graphite play as the growth center of perovskite, and the photodetectors have a detectivity of 6.7 × 1010 Jones.197


Development of double perovskite X-ray detectors. 
ABX3 lead-free perovskites are not a good candidate for X-ray detectors, because they cannot meet the needs of high-energy X-ray detection due to their inherent instability, defects and halide migration.198 Double perovskites, however, are more stable and can easily be prepared thicker, which makes them a better choice for high radiation energy detection. Pan et al. first applied Cs2AgBiBr6 single crystals to fabricate low detection limit X-ray detectors in 2015.199 The optimized device exhibited a sensitivity of 105 μC Gyair−1 cm−2 and a low detection limit of 59.7 n Gyair s−1 at an external bias of 5 V and shows long-term operational stability. In 2019, Zhang et al. also applied Cs2AgBiBr6 to prepare an X-ray detector, and the device achieved a detection sensitivity of up to 316 μC Gyair−1 cm−2 at a bias voltage of 18 V.200 Zhang et al. fabricated a Cs2AgBiBr6 thin-film X-ray detector with a photoconductive planar structure for the first time in 2020, achieving a minimum detectable dose of 145.2 nGyair s−1.201 The sensitivity of the detector they fabricated was as high as 1.8 × 104 μC Gyair−1 cm−2, which is about a thousand times higher than the sensitivity of commercial a-Se X-ray detectors. In 2021, Guo et al. fabricated a flexible X-ray detector using the Cs2TeI6 film synthesized on polyimide substrate.202 The stability of the flexible detector remained for up to 100 bending cycles at a bending radius of 10 mm, and furthermore the detector was preserved in the air for 6 months, exhibiting better stability than detectors based on rigid SnO2:F glass substrates. In addition, the detector achieved an X-ray sensitivity of 76.27 μC Gyair−1 cm−2 and a detection limit of 0.17 μ Gyair s−1.

Other optoelectronic applications based on lead-free perovskites

Sensors based on lead-free perovskites. 
Perovskites are good candidates for micro-nano sensors. In 2016, Gu et al. fabricated humidity sensors with monoclinic NaNbO3 piezoelectric nanofibers synthesized using a far-field electrospinning method. The sensor exhibits an excellent piezoelectric capture performance with an output voltage of up to 2 V during vibration and a negative correlation with ambient humidity in the range of 5% to 80%, and flexible active humidity sensors can be obtained by peeling off the polydimethylsiloxane substrate layer and electrode deposition coated on the nanofibers.203


Lasers based on lead-free perovskite. 
Since the invention of semiconductor solid-state lasers in the mid-20th century, lasers have become a ubiquitous part of our daily lives. Solution-processed gain media, such as organic polymers and colloidal quantum dots, have the advantages of low cost, sustainable production, and suitability for flexible and wearable optoelectronic devices,204 among which halide perovskites have emerged as an important part in this field. Xing et al. reported their research on Sn-based perovskite (CsSnX3, X = Br, I) and near-infrared lasers in 2016.205 Gains of 200 ± 10 for 20% SnF2-treated CsSnI3 films were achieved, comparable with the leaded CH3NH3PbI3 film (40 ± 10 cm−1)206 and CsPbI3 nanocrystal film (450 ± 10 cm−1),207 and the threshold pump fluence (6 ± 1 μJ cm−2) was also comparable to that of CH3NH3PbI3 (about 12 μJ cm−2),206 which is one of the lowest reported in solution-processed organic or inorganic thin films over the same period. Due to the constraint from the band structure, the gain bandwidth of lead perovskite is limited to about 800 nm, which can be expanded to 1 μm by Sn-based perovskites. These results suggested that SnF2-treated CsSnI3 lead-free perovskite is a promising near-infrared gain medium.

Conclusion and outlook
In recent years, great progress has been made in developing lead-free perovskites. In this paper, we summarized the development and application of ABX3-type lead-free halide perovskite materials, especially in optoelectronic devices. Because of the similar crystal structure and band structure, lead-free perovskites have the same excellent characteristics as lead perovskite, such as high absorption efficiency, high photoelectronic quantum yield, high color purity, high defect tolerance, long diffusion length, high carrier mobility, and bandgap tunability, which create all the advantages of lead-free perovskites as optoelectronic materials. Different low-toxic or nontoxic elements (Sn, Ge, Cu, and Ag) are considered to be B-site substitutes due to their similar electronic structures and comparable ionic radius, among which, Sn2+ is the most popular and has achieved the best results. Materials like FASnI2Br and PEA0.15FA0.85SnI3 are prepared by using solution-based methods, and the Sn-based solar cell prepared by a one-step method has obtained an energy conversion efficiency of 13%.113,127 In terms of LEDs, the ITO/PEDOT/CsSnI3B3PyMPM/LiF/Al structure prepared by the one step method can obtain an external quantum efficiency of 5.4%, in which CsSnI3 is prepared by solution-based methods. For applications in other fields, such as lasers and detectors, more research results are needed. As for some other materials, like Ge-based perovskites, there have not been available devices due to the defect property and instability. The grain size, surface morphology, preparation method, annealing temperature, lattice mismatch, and transport layer selection are all important factors for device performance, and are discussed in the paper.
Despite the great progress, lead-free perovskite materials still face some challenges. First, the preparation routes should be improved based on the many existing synthesis methods. The preparation method plays a crucial role in the quality, size, and optoelectronic properties of the material and device. The solution method is favoured when preparing single crystals due to its simple operation process and reproducibility, however, the size and growth direction of the synthesized single crystals are difficult to control. In addition, the use of large amounts of solvents may cause serious environmental problems. Some other methods, such as the Bridgeman and high-temperature vapor phase epitaxy methods, can provide better materials, but the required high temperature, high vacuum and complex technology greatly increase the complexity and cost. Therefore, further research is needed to focus on exploring more controllable and efficient growth methods, and to obtain large-scale, high-quality lead-free perovskite materials.
Second, a clearer understanding of the structure and properties of a possible family of lead-free perovskite materials should be established. Studies have shown that A, B and X ions all contribute to the crystal structure, band structure, carrier mobility, and stability of the material, so a systematic investigation on the composition is indispensable. However, the existing database is far from enough, not only because of an insufficient workload, but also because many materials are difficult to prepare and exist stably until the preparation conditions and methods are more mature, and preparation with random A, B and X ions and testing the property is not a wise idea in terms of research. Compared to the traditional approach, advanced algorithms such as deep learning may be able to replace some of the experimental studies and predict material properties, providing new methods for research.
Third, the stability of lead-free perovskite materials and devices is still an urgent problem to be solved, especially in high temperature, high humidity, and oxygen-rich environments. Despite the different radii, an unstable valence state is the factor most affecting stability, which may cause self-doping or even metallic properties. In the fabrication process, precursors or surface ligands with reducing properties can be used to avoid rapid oxidation and failure of the material, or a shell structure can be adapted to encapsulate the perovskite nanocrystals in the shell structure, which can also enhance the material stability.
Finally, the kinetics of dopants in the crystal structure is still a difficult problem. The optoelectronic property, defect property and carrier mobility can be tuned by doping ions. However, the process and state of the doping in the crystal are not fully understood, and unexpected results usually occur. To solve this problem, it is necessary to deeply study the kinetics of the material doping process, and to control the amount of dopant, preparation temperature and other conditions to achieve controllable doping and crystal structure through theoretical guidance in practice.
In addition to preparing stable and excellent materials, improving the device structure is also an important aspect. For example, an ETL and HTL with good electron/hole selective contacts with the perovskite material can reduce the potential barriers for electron/hole transfer while blocking the hole/electron transport accordingly.
Nevertheless, lead-free perovskites are still one of the most promising materials for high performance optoelectronic devices, and undoubtedly, materials with better stability and properties will be available shortly with the efforts of scientists.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, Chunqian Zhang and Wenqi Huang; investigation, Hao Wang and Chunqian Zhang; writing-original draft preparation, Hao Wang, Chunqian Zhang and Wenqi Huang; writing-review and editing, Hao Wang; supervision, Chunqian Zhang, Wenqi Huang, Xiaoping Zou, Zhenyu Chen, Shengliu Sun, Lixin Zhang, Junming Li, Jin Cheng, Shixian Huang, Mingkai Gu, Xinyao Chen, Xin Guo, Ruoxia Gui and Weimin Wang; all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61901009 and No. 61875186), the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems Networks of China (No. 2021GZKF002), the Beijing Key Laboratory for Sensors of BISTU (No. 2019CGKF007) and the Key Training Program of the Research Level Improvement Plan of Beijing Information Science and Technology University (No. 2020KYNH222).
Notes and references
T. J. Milstein, D. M. Kroupa and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3792–3799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mao, L. Sun, T. Wu, T. S. Chu, W. Q. Deng and K. L. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7670–7675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Islam and A. Hossain, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 7817–7827 RSC .
B. Kshirsagar, N. Jaykhedkar, K. Jain, S. Kishor, V. Shah, L. M. Ramaniah and S. Tiwari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 2592–2606 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, J. Chen, F. Hong, X. Mao, K. Zheng, S. Yang, Y. Li, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12471–12475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ali, M. Ahmad, M. Shafiq, T. Zeb, R. Ahmad, M. Maqbool, I. Ahmad, S. Jalali-Asadabadi and B. Amin, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 25, 101517 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ha, C. M. Mauck and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2486–2496 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bai, Y. H. Hu, Y. Q. Hu, T. Qiu, X. L. Miao and S. F. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Y. Jiang, H. Chen, Y. Q. Shang, H. F. Liu, J. L. Wei, W. J. Zhou, H. L. He, W. M. Liu and Z. J. Ning, Joule, 2018, 2, 2732–2743 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, G. Zhang, R. Lai, Y. Cheng, Y. Lian, M. Rao, D. Huo, D. Lan, B. Zhao and D. Di, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 4295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Yuan, X. P. Zheng, A. Johnston, Y. K. Wang, C. Zhou, Y. T. Dong, B. Chen, H. J. Chen, J. Z. Fan, G. Sharma, P. C. Li, Y. Gao, O. Voznyy, H. T. Kung, Z. H. Lu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb0253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z. K. Wang, J. J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress and M. T. Sirtl, Sol. RRL, 2021, 6, 2100770 CrossRef .
J. Li, H. L. Cao, W. B. Jiao, Q. Wang, M. Wei, I. Cantone, L. Jian and A. Abate, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Weixi, H. Xiaowen, M. Liyi, J. Xiaofang, X. Xiaobo, S. Lingling, P. Shashank, W. Kai and Z. Guofu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100261 CrossRef .
F. Yang, A. C. Wang, S. Yue, W. N. Du, S. L. Wang, X. T. Zhang and X. F. Liu, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 2889–2914 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, W. Song, Q. Li, X. Zhao, D. He and Z. Quan, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 1654–1659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Aslan, F. Arslan, A. Tumbul and A. Goktas, Opt. Mater., 2022, 127, 112270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Zhao, W. S. Cai, H. X. Wang, Z. G. Zang and J. Z. Chen, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2001308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Un-Gi, Y. Chol-Jun, K. Yun-Hyok, C. Yong-Guk, H. Wei and L. Shuzhou, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 4134–4140 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Liu, H. Peng, Q. H. Li and R. J. Sa, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2022, 161, 110413 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Jellicoe, J. M. Richter, H. Glass, M. Tabachnyk, R. Brady, S. E. Dutton, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, C. Dan and N. C. Greenham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2941–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Maughan, A. M. Ganose, M. M. Bordelon, E. M. Miller, D. O. Scanlon and J. R. Neilson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8453–8464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, T. Wu, L. Sun, Y. J. Li, A. L. Li, R. F. Lu, K. Zou and W. Q. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24359–24364 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Castelli, J. García-Lastra, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 235214 Search PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(27), 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5253–5264 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Heidrich, W. Schäfer, M. Schreiber, J. Söchtig, G. Trendel, J. Treusch, T. Grandke and H. J. Stolz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 24, 5642–5649 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ng, T. S. Ripolles, K. Hamada, S. H. Teo, H. N. Lim, J. Bisquert and S. Hayase, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2482 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ahmad, J. Khan, G. Niu and J. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700048 CrossRef .
Z. Z. Ma, Z. F. Shi, L. T. Wang, F. Zhang, D. Wu, D. W. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. X. Shan and X. J. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3637–3645 RSC .
L. V. Rodríguez-de Marcos, J. I. Larruquert, J. A. Méndez and J. A. Aznárez, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 3622–3637 CrossRef .
C. Schinke, P. C. Peest, J. Schmidt, R. Brendel, K. Bothe, M. R. Vogt, I. Kröger, S. Winter, A. Schirmacher, S. Lim, H. T. Nguyen and D. MacDonald, AIP Adv., 2015, 5, 067168 CrossRef .
S. Ozaki and S. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 3380–3386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Makarov, A. Furasova, E. Tiguntseva, A. Hemmetter, A. Berestennikov, A. Pushkarev, A. Zakhidov and Y. Kivshar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800784 CrossRef .
B. S. Kalanoor, L. Gouda, R. Gottesman, S. Tirosh, E. Haltzi, A. Zaban and Y. R. Tischler, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 361–370 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, J. Fan, X. Zhang, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Mai, T. Xu, J. Wang and H. J. Snaith, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yi, L. Miao, L. Jie, H. Wei and S. Wen, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 3894 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Ganeev, K. S. Rao, Z. Yu, W. Yu, C. Yao, Y. Fu, K. Zhang and C. Guo, Opt. Mater. Express, 2018, 8, 1472–1483 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sheikbahae, D. J. Hagan and E. W. Vanstryland, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 65, 96–99 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. P. Gao, X. T. Zhang, X. Y. Shen, M. Lu, J. L. Wu, Z. F. Shi, V. L. Colvin, J. H. Hu, X. Bai, W. L. W. Yu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619–623 CrossRef CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4213–4216 CrossRef CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4467 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. H. Zhang, T. Karnisaka, Q. Zhao, J. M. Luther, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, B. Zhang, S. Dai, J. K. Jiang, S. X. Tao and Q. Shen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 798–807 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Koscher, J. K. Swabeck, N. D. Bronstein and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6566–6569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, J. H. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Hu, B. H. Lv, C. Y. Yin, C. F. Zhang, X. Y. Wang, B. Lounis and M. Xiao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 106404 CrossRef PubMed .
F. R. Hu, C. Y. Yin, H. C. Zhang, C. Sun, W. W. Yu, C. F. Zhang, X. Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and M. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6425–6430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Galland, Y. Ghosh, A. Steinbruck, M. Sykora, J. A. Hollingsworth, V. I. Klimov and H. Htoon, Nature, 2011, 479, U203–U275 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Makarov, S. J. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Y. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349–2362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Yu, C. F. Zhang, L. Chen, Z. Y. Qin, X. Y. Huang, X. Y. Wang and M. Xiao, Nanophotonics, 2021, 10, 1943–1965 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey and J. M. Luther, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
C. G. Van de Walle and J. Neugebauer, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 3851–3879 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, S. Y. Chen, H. J. Xiang, X. G. Gong and S. H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6068–6072 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, W. Z. Li, H. L. Li, C. L. Zhang, J. D. Fan and Y. H. Mai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13967–13975 RSC .
G. Xing, B. Wu, S. Chen, J. Chua, N. Yantara, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Small, 2015, 11, 3606–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
H. Cho, S.-H. Jeong, M.-H. Park, Y.-H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.-L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T.-W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Sun and J. Luo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 517–539 RSC .
F. Wang, M. Yang, S. Yang, X. Qu, L. Yang, L. Fan, J. Yang and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104224 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, S.-G. Kim, J.-Y. Seo, S.-H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Stewart, C. Grieco, A. V. Larsen, J. J. Maier and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1148–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Han, T. M. Koh, S. S. Lim, T. W. Goh, X. Guo, S. W. Leow, R. Begum, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. Mhaisalkar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21292–21297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 RSC .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maiti, S. Chatterjee, L. Peedikakkandy and A. J. Pal, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000505 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Hu, X. Meng, L. Huang, J. Xiong, L. Tan and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1909–1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, R. Yang, L. Que, Y. Wang, F. Wang, J. Wu and S. Li, J. Mater. Res., 2019, 34, 2416–2424 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Tang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 654–658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, S. Kumar, J. Bär, F. Bertolotti, N. Masciocchi, A. Guagliardi, M. Grotevent, I. Shorubalko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, C.-J. Shih and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3119–3134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, P. Péchy, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10055–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Liu, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, K. L. Karen, Y. Zheng, S. Liu, S. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606405 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Kim, J. Kim, B. S. Kim, H.-M. Kim, J. Kim, A. R. B. M. Yusoff, J. Jang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600920 CrossRef .
L. Xu, S. Yuan, H. Zeng and J. Song, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 6, 100036 CrossRef .
D. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Wan and G. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20671–20678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, B. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Li, A. Shan and L. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701106 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, J. Xi, T. Lei, F. Yuan, J. Dai, C. Ran, H. Dong, B. Jiao, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9849–9857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Levchuk, A. Osvet, X. Tang, M. Brandl, J. D. Perea, F. Hoegl, G. J. Matt, R. Hock, M. Batentschuk and C. J. Brabec, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2765–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D’Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276–10281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Imran, V. Caligiuri, M. Wang, L. Goldoni, M. Prato, R. Krahne, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2656–2664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Chen, X.-G. Wu, X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Han, B. Zou and Y. Dong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Mir, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 537–543 CrossRef CAS .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. W. van den Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087–4097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-J. Yong, S.-Q. Guo, J.-P. Ma, J.-Y. Zhang, Z.-Y. Li, Y.-M. Chen, B.-B. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Shu, J.-L. Gu, L.-R. Zheng, O. M. Bakr and H.-T. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9942–9951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Shen, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804691 CrossRef .
T. Cai, J. Y. Wang, W. H. Li, K. Hills-Kimball, H. J. Yang, Y. Nagaoka, Y. C. Yuan, R. Zia and O. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, T. Fang, J. Li, L. Xu, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805409 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, F. W. R. Rivarola, N. J. L. K. Davis, S. Bai, T. C. Jellicoe, F. de la Peña, S. Hou, C. Ducati, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, N. C. Greenham and Z.-K. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Shi, F. C. Li, J. Y. Yuan, X. F. Ling, S. J. Zhou, Y. L. Qian and W. L. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20936–20944 RSC .
T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, A. Gold-Parker, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2159–2165 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kang, H. Rao, Y. Fang, J. Zeng, Z. Pan and X. Zhong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 660–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Ju, J. Dai, L. Ma and X. C. Zeng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700216 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. H. Li, B. Wang, S. Ming and J. Su, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 862, 158442 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Zhang, S.-H. Wei, A. Zunger and H. Katayama-Yoshida, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 9642–9656 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Jayan and V. Sebastian, Sol. Energy, 2021, 217, 40–48 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, F. Wang, Q. Wei, H. Li, Y. Shang, W. Zhou, C. Wang, P. Cheng, Q. Chen, L. Chen and Z. Ning, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Frazer, D. J. Clark, Y. S. Kim, S. H. Rhim, A. J. Freeman, J. B. Ketterson, J. I. Jang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6804–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Kanoun, M. B. Kanoun, A. E. Merad and S. Goumri-Said, Sol. Energy, 2019, 182, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Park, B. Philippe, X. L. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Lyu, J. H. Yun, M. L. Cai, Y. L. Jiao, P. V. Bernhardt, M. Zhang, Q. Wang, A. J. Du, H. X. Wang, G. Liu and L. Z. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 692–702 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Mukhtar, M. Ramzan, M. Rashid, G. Naz, M. Imran, F. Fahim, A. A. AlObaid, T. I. Al-Muhimeed and Q. Mahmood, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2021, 273, 115420 CrossRef .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. Yokoyama, J. L. Logsdon, T. B. Song, O. K. Farha, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 982–990 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao and R. P. H. Chan, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 4, 4467 Search PubMed .
L. J. Hu, M. Li, K. Yang, Z. Xiong, B. Yang, M. Wang, X. S. Tang, Z. G. Zang, X. X. Liu, B. C. Li, Z. Y. Xiao, S. R. Lu, H. Gong, J. Y. Ouyang and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16583–16589 RSC .
J. H. H. S.-K. Jung, D. W. Lee, S.-C. Lee, S.-H. Lee, W. Yoon, H. Yun, S. H. Im, J. H. Kim and O. P. Kwon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1870132 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak, M. B. Johnston, A. Petrozza, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489–494 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Chen, C. R. Lee, Y. J. Chuang, Z. H. Wu and C. Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5028–5035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Q. Lyu, J. H. Yun, M. Noori, X. J. Zhou, N. A. Cooling, Q. Wang, H. Yu, P. C. Dastoor and L. Z. Wang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1570–1577 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yokoyama, D. Y. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. B. Song, Y. Sato, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 776–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Song, T. Yokoyama, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
H. Do Kim, Y. Miyamoto, H. Kubota, T. Yamanari and H. Ohkita, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 253–256 CrossRef .
T. Handa, T. Yamada, H. Kubota, S. Ise, Y. Miyamoto and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 16158–16165 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. A. Moyez and S. Roy, J. Nanopart. Res., 2017, 20, 5 CrossRef .
T. Yokoyama, T. B. Song, D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Cao, Q. D. Tai, P. You, G. Q. Tang, T. Y. Wang, N. X. Wang and F. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26580–26585 RSC .
Z. J. Lin, C. Liu, G. L. Liu, J. Yang, X. P. Duan, L. C. Tan and Y. W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 4007–4010 RSC .
T. Krishnamoorthy, H. Ding, C. Yan, W. L. Leong, T. Baikie, Z. Y. Zhang, M. Sherburne, S. Li, M. Asta, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23829–23832 RSC .
I. Kopacic, B. Friesenbichler, S. F. Hoefler, B. Kunert, H. Plank, T. Rath and G. Trimmel, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 343–347 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Hebig, I. Kühn, J. Flohre and T. Kirchartz, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 309–314 CrossRef CAS .
T. Singh, A. Kulkarni, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14542–14547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goktas, I. H. Mutlu and A. Kawashi, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6138–6144 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gencer, M. Gunes, A. Goktas, Y. Babur, H. I. Mutlu and S. Atalay, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 465, 20–23 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Z. Jiao, K. Nakamura, T. Hatano and Y. Zeng, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 2431–2436 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goktas, F. Aslan and İ. H. Mutlu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2012, 23, 605–611 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Xiao, F. Z. Huang, W. C. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898–9903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. P. Zhou, Z. R. Hong, S. Luo, H. S. Duan, H. H. Wang, Y. S. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. C. Shao, Q. F. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. B. Yuan, C. G. Wang, Y. L. Gao and J. S. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 RSC .
W. Y. Gao, C. X. Ran, J. Xi, B. Jiao, W. W. Zhang, M. C. Wu, X. Hou and Z. X. Wu, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 1696–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Zhu, B. Yuh, S. Schoen, X. P. Li, M. Aldighaithir, B. J. Richardson, A. Alamer and Q. M. Yu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7621–7630 RSC .
C. P. Duan, Z. C. Zhao and L. J. Yuan, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2021, 11, 1126–1135 Search PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, P. Guo, N. Zhou, T. J. Marks, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11445–11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, F. Igbari, Y. Lou, Z. U. Wang and L. H. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902584 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, H. Hasegawa, Y. Takahashi and T. Inabe, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 205, 39–43 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahashi, R. Obara, Z. Z. Lin, Y. Takahashi, T. Naito, T. Inabe, S. Ishibashi and K. Terakura, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5563–5568 RSC .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh, M. Asta, M. Graetzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Koh, T. Krishnamoorthy, N. Yantara, C. Shi, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, A. C. Grimsdale, S. G. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14996–15000 RSC .
W. Q. Liao, D. W. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. R. Grice, C. L. Wang, A. J. Cimaroli, P. Schulz, W. W. Meng, K. Zhu, R. G. Xiong and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9333–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Kholil and M. Bhuiyan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 43660–43669 RSC .
M. I. Kholil, M. Bhuiyan, M. A. Rahman, M. S. Ali and M. Aftabuzzaman, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 2405–2414 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Tu, T. Li, C. Tao, X. Deng and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7683–7690 RSC .
L. J. Chen, C. R. Lee, Y. J. Chuang, Z. H. Wu and C. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5028–5035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, C. A. Feild, W. T. A. Harrison and A. M. Guloy, Nature, 1994, 369, 467–469 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, Y. Bai, X. Liu, C. C. Chueh, S. Yang and K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, B. Xu and W. Tian, Org. Electron., 2016, 37, 61–73 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Thornton, G. Abdelmageed, R. F. Kahwagi and G. I. Koleilat, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2022, 97, 810–829 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, B. P. Rand, R. H. Friend, S. G. Mhaisalkar, T. W. Lee and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7444–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Ren, K. Wang, X. W. Sun and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100516 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, F. P. García de Arquer, R. P. Sabatini and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801996 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Jang, A. K. Harit, S. Lee, S. H. Kim, J.-E. Jeong, J. H. Park, E. D. Jung, J. M. Ha, S. K. Kwak, H. Y. Woo and M. H. Song, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13246–13255 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-L. Hong, Y.-C. Huang, C.-Y. Chang, Z.-C. Zhang, H.-R. Tsai, N.-Y. Chang and Y.-C. Chao, Adv. Mater, 2016, 28, 8029–8036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Lu, X. Guan, Y. Q. Li, K. B. Lin, W. J. Feng, Y. P. Zhao, C. A. Z. Yan, M. L. Li, Y. Y. Shen, X. Q. Qin and Z. H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2104414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Lai, T. Y. S. Tay, A. Sadhanala, S. E. Dutton, G. R. Li, R. H. Friend and Z. K. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2653–2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lanzetta, J. M. Marin-Beloqui, I. Sanchez-Molina, D. Ding and S. A. Haque, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1662–1668 CrossRef CAS .
X. T. Zhang, C. C. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Y. Zhang, S. X. Wang, M. Lu, H. N. Cui, S. V. Kershaw, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Wang, F. Z. Wang, B. Zhao, S. N. Qu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, L. Z. Sui, K. J. Yuan, J. Q. Zhang, Z. X. Wei and Z. A. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1120–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Ma, Z. F. Shi, C. C. Qin, M. H. Cui, D. W. Yang, X. J. Wang, L. T. Wang, X. Z. Ji, X. Chen, J. L. Sun, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. J. Li, L. J. Zhang and C. X. Shan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4475–4486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Wang, Z. F. Shi, Z. Z. Ma, D. W. Yang, F. Zhang, X. Z. Ji, M. Wang, X. Chen, G. R. Na, S. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. J. Li, L. J. Zhang and C. X. Shan, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3568–3576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yan, W. L. Tian, H. Chen, K. X. Tang, T. T. Lin, G. Y. Zhong, L. Z. Qiu, X. Y. Pan and W. Z. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100855 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A. A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak and M. B. Johnston, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, H. Hosono and T. Kamiya, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18900–18903 RSC .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. Zhang, T. S. Ripolles, T. Kamisaka, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Dai, M. Yanagida, H. Noguchi and Q. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16708–16719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Hong, Y. C. Huang, C. Y. Chang, Z. C. Zhang, H. R. Tsai, N. Y. Chang and Y. C. Chao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8029–8036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Zhang, W. Y. Cao, W. G. Wang, B. Xu, S. Liu, H. T. Dai, S. M. Chen, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Liang, F. L. Yuan, A. Johnston, C. C. Gao, H. Choubisa, Y. Gao, Y. K. Wang, L. K. Sagar, B. Sun, P. C. Li, G. Bappi, B. Chen, J. Li, Y. K. Wang, Y. T. Dong, D. X. Ma, Y. N. Gao, Y. C. Liu, M. J. Yuan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Hoogland, Z. H. Lu and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chiba, Y. Hayashi, H. Ebe, K. Hoshi, J. Sato, S. Sato, Y. J. Pu, S. Ohisa and J. Kido, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 681–687 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dias, M. P. Lima and J. L. F. Da Silva, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 19142–19155 CrossRef .
K. Thirumal, D. Hong, Y. Chen, L. L. Wei and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23829–23832 RSC .
G. Walters and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1018–1027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Lin, L. C. Tang and C. P. Chou, Opt. Mater., 2009, 31, 28–34 CrossRef .
T. Li, X. M. Mo, C. Y. Peng, Q. C. Lu, C. J. Qi, X. M. Tao, Y. F. Ouyang and Y. L. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4554–4557 RSC .
T. Jun, K. Sim, S. Iimura, M. Sasase, H. Kamioka, J. Kim and H. Hosono, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804547 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Singh, N. C. Chiu, K. M. Boopathi, Y. J. Lu, A. Mohapatra, G. Li, Y. F. Chen, T. F. Guo and C. W. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35088–35094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, M. Sytnyk, D. Kriegner, S. Shrestha, M. Richter, G. J. Matt, H. Azimi, C. J. Brabec, J. Stangl and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 444–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Xu, C. C. Chueh, P. F. Jing, Z. B. Yang, X. L. Shi, T. Zhao, L. Y. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701053 CrossRef .
F. R. Cao, W. Tian, M. Wang, M. Wang and L. Li, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 577–584 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Zhu, G. H. Lai, J. Q. Yi, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. G. Wen and H. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 866, 158990 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. M. Xian, Y. L. Zhang, W. Z. Li and J. D. Fan, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900148 CrossRef .
W. C. Pan, H. D. Wu, J. J. Luo, Z. Z. Deng, C. Ge, C. Chen, X. W. Jiang, W. J. Yin, G. D. Niu, L. J. Zhu, L. X. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. G. Xie, X. X. Ke, M. L. Sui and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 726–732 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Zhang, Z. Y. Gao, R. R. Liang, X. R. Zheng, X. S. Geng, Y. F. Zhao, D. Xie, J. W. Hong, H. Tian, Y. Yang, X. Y. Wang and T. L. Ren, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2019, 66, 2224–2229 CAS .
H. N. Zhang, G. H. Dun, Q. X. Feng, R. Zhao, R. R. Liang, Z. Y. Gao, T. Hirtz, M. Chen, X. S. Geng, M. Y. Liu, Y. Huang, X. R. Zheng, K. Qin, X. C. Tan, X. F. Wang, D. Xie, Y. Yang, H. Tian, Y. Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, X. Y. Wang, J. W. Hong and T. L. Ren, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2020, 67, 3191–3198 CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Xu, W. Yang, B. Xiao, Q. Sun, X. Zhang, B. Zhang, M. Zhu and W. Jie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23928–23935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, D. Zhou and J. C. Cao, Sensors, 2016, 16, 833 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara and M. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, M. H. Kumar, W. K. Chong, X. F. Liu, Y. Cai, H. Ding, M. Asta, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8191–8196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. F. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, L. Protesescu, F. Krieg, M. I. Bodnarchuk, G. Nedelcu, M. Humer, G. De Luca, M. Fiebig, W. Heiss and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

Hao Wang
	Hao Wang received his bachelor's degree from Soochow University in 2020. He is currently studying for a master's degree in Electronics and Science at the Beijing Information Science and Technology University, under the tutelage of Huang Wenqi and Zhang Chunqian. His research direction is to develop efficient and stable lead-free perovskite materials and devices.

Chunqian Zhang
	Chunqian Zhang obtained her PhD from Institute of Semiconductors, CAS in 2015. Subsequently, she worked at Peking University as a postdoctoral researcher. Currently, she works at Beijing Information Science and Technology University as a Full Professor. Her research interests include nano optoelectronic materials and their applications.

Wenqi Huang
	Wenqi Huang received his PhD degree in Microelectronics and Solid state electronics from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. Since 2017, he has been an associate professor at Beijing Information Science & Technology University. His research interests include semiconductor photoelectric materials and devices, high-throughput computation and machine learning of semiconductor materials.

Zhenyu Chen
	Chen Zhenyu received her bachelor's degree from Honghe University in 2020. She is currently studying for a master's degree at Beijing Information Science and Technology University, under the tutelage of Huang Wenqi. The research direction is silicon-based Group IV luminescent materials.

Shengliu Sun
	Shengliu Sun graduated from Beijing Information Technology University, majoring in microelectronics and solid-state electronics, and is now a hardware engineer in Beijing Jiaotong University Sino Technology Co., Ltd.

Lixin Zhang
	Lixin Zhang received his bachelor degree (2017) and master degree (2022) at the University of Jinan Quancheng college and Beijing information science technology University. His research focuses on the application of machine learning in the band prediction of semiconductor optoelectronic materials.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Perovskite SCI publications in the past decade. (b) Development diagram of the power conversion efficiency of first-generation (polysilicon), second-generation (organic), and third-generation (perovskite) solar cells. (c) SCI publications of lead-free perovskites in the past ten years. (d) Proportion of lead-free perovskites in perovskite research worldwide.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Unit cell structure of ABX3 (A = Cs; B = Pb, Sn, Ge; X = Cl, Br, I). (b) Elements that can be used to form perovskites. Rectangular labels of different colors specify the site occupied by the element, as shown in the legend for the top site in (c) Absorbance and steady-state PL of nanocrystals containing pure and mixed halides. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Transition schematic diagram of the light absorption of Si and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Band gaps of ten perovskite materials with non-zero band gaps. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Calculated bandgaps (eV) of perovskite structures in Mao's work. Reproduced with permission.2 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) The density of states map of CH3NH3PbI3, CsSnI3, and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Wiley-Blackwell. (e) Combined density of states of CH3NH3PbI3, CsSnI3, and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Wiley-Blackwell.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) An ideal perovskite lattice, (b) vacancy at the A-site, (c) an interstitial defect, (d) an antisite substitution (an A-ion occupying an X-site). Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) Defect level in CH3NH3PbI3. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Wiley-Blackwell. (f) Defect level in CsSnI3. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of the proposed energy transfer processes in the Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 perovskite NCs. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  Calculated (a) JDOS, (b) optical absorption of CH3NH3PbI3 and GaAs. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

MASnI3	16.8	0.88	42	6.4	
125

MASnI2Br	14.38	0.77	50	5.48	
126

MASnIBr2	12.30	0.82	57	5.73	
126

MASnBr3	8.26	0.88	59	4.27	
126

CsSnI3	23.2	0.86	65	12.96	
127

CsSnBr3	21.23	0.85	58	10.46	
127

CsSnCl3	19.82	0.87	56	9.66	
127

FASnI2Br	6.82	0.47	54	1.72	
128

MASnI3	17.36	0.27	39.1	1.86	
129

CsSnI3	25.71	0.38	49.05	4.81	
130

MASnI3	26	0.23	38.6	2.33	
131

MASnI3	26.1	0.25	30	1.94	
132

MASnCl3	12.89	0.576	55	3.41	
133

MASnBr3	1.22	0.307	36.8	0.14	
134

FASnI3	19.39	0.55	68.82	7.34	
135

FASnI3	22.24	0.49	65.19	7.15	
136

PEA0.15FA0.85SnI3	17.4	0.94	75	12.4	
113

CsGeI3	5.7	0.074	27	0.11	
137

MAGeI3	4.0	0.15	30	0.20	
137

MAGeI2.7Br0.3	3.11	0.46	48	0.68	
138


 	Fig. 6  (a) Photocurrent–voltage graph of the device. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Photocurrent density versus time for both devices when forward biased at the maximum output power point. Before starting the measurement, leave the battery in the dark. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Device structure design of MASnI3-based solar cells. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2021, Elsevier Ltd. (d) The relative positions of the energy bands of the electron transport layer, the absorber layer, and the hole transport layer.	 

 	Fig. 7  SnF2 with different concentrations: (a) 0 mol%, (b) 5 mol%, (c) 10 mol%, (d) 15 mol%, (e) 20 mol%, and (f) 30 mol% SEM image of FASnI3 perovskite film on PEDOT:PSS. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2016, Wiley-Blackwell.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Absorption spectra of several perovskite materials. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (b) Partial energy levels of the device. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of electroluminescence. Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2018, Wiley-Blackwell. (b) Energy level diagram of the device using hole transport layers with different HOMO levels. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

CsSnI3	ITO/PEDOT/CsSnI3/PBD/LiF/Al	950	3.8	
171

CsSnI3	ITO/PEDOT/CsSnI3/B3PyMPM/LiF/Al	932	5.4	
172

MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3/F8/Ca/Ag	780	0.019	
173

MASnI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASnI3/F8/Ca/Ag	945	0.72	
173

MASn(Br0.5I0.5)3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.5I0.5)3/F8/Ca/Ag	667	0.007	
173

MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.4I0.6)3/F8/Ca/Ag	780	0.019	
173

MASn(Br0.3I0.7)3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.3I0.7)3/F8/Ca/Ag	825	0.046	
173

MASn(Br0.2I0.8)3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.2I0.8)3/F8/Ca/Ag	868	0.058	
173

MASn(Br0.1I0.9)3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn(Br0.1I0.9)3/F8/Ca/Ag	896	0.11	
173

PEA2SnI4	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PEA2SnI4/F8/LiF/Al	618	
	
174

(OAm)2SnBr4	ITO/PEI-ZnO/(OAm)2SnBr4/TCTA/MoO3/Au	625	0.1	
175

(PEA)2SnI4	Glass/PEDOT:PSS/(PEA)2SnI4/TPBI/LiF/Al	632	5	
11

TEA2SnI4	ITO/TPBi/LiF/TEA2SnI4/TPBi/LiF/Al	638	0.62	
176

CsCu2I3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CsCu2I3/TPBi/LiF/Al	550	0.17	
177

Cs3Cu2I5	Al/LiF/TPBi/Cs3Cu2I5/NiO/ITO	445	1.12	
178

(ABI)4MnBr6	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polyTDP/(ABI)4MnBr6/TPBi/LiF	627	9.8	
179


 	Fig. 10  Photographs of SnI2–CsSnI3 NC dispersions stored in (a) air and (b) N2. (c) Photographs of SnC2O4–CsSnI3 NCs stored in N2. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.	 

CsGeI3	1.19	1.64	1.63188	1.41189
CsGeBr3	1.46	2.34	2.39190	1.66189
CsGeCl3	2.13	3.24	3.40190	2.22189
RbGeI3	1.31	1.78	
	

RbGeBr3	1.57	2.40	
	

RbGeCl3	2.16	3.28	
	


This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
