Jute stick derived self-regenerating sustainable solar evaporators with different salt mitigation mechanisms for highly efficient solar desalination   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA08237C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA08237C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 3961-3974Jute stick derived self-regenerating sustainable solar evaporators with different salt mitigation mechanisms for highly efficient solar desalination†

        
          
            Md. Nahian Al Subri 
            Ivan
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ahmed Mortuza 
            Saleque
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Safayet 
            Ahmed
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Zong Liang 
            Guo
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Zu
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Linli 
            Xu
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Tawsif Ibne 
            Alam
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Sumaiya Umme 
            Hani
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Yuen Hong 
            Tsang
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Applied Physics, Photonic Research Institute, Materials Research Center, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: yuen.tsang@polyu.edu.hk
bDepartment of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, Research Institute for Smart Energy, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
cShenzhen Research Institute, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 518057 Shenzhen, Guangdong, People's Republic of China
Received 
      21st October 2022
    , Accepted 1st January 2023First published on 4th January 2023AbstractThe accumulation of salt crystals on the solar-absorbing surface of the evaporator is one of the main challenges associated with solar desalination. To solve this problem, sustainable evaporators with diverse salt mitigation mechanisms were fabricated using alkali-treated jute stick (PJS), an agricultural waste. The influence of solar irradiation on salt accumulation on the solar-absorbing surface is investigated. JS features a center natural hole surrounded by several microchannels with pits on the microchannel walls, which make it exceptional for constructing solar evaporators with natural hole induced salt ion diffusion backflow mechanism by simply carbonizing the top surface. This mechanism works well under 1 sun illumination for sea water desalination (no salt growth after 8.5 h) with maximum evaporation rate and efficiency of 1.52 kg m−2 h−1 and 87.01%, respectively. A solar evaporator with direct salt blocking and salt ion diffusion backflow mechanism is also fabricated by coating the top surface of PJS with hydrophobic MWCNTs to impart Janus characteristics to the evaporator. Under 1 sun, it evaporates sea water at a rate of 1.46 kg m−2 h−1 with 84.39% efficiency and demonstrates excellent regeneration performance while evaporating highly concentrated NaCl water under varying solar irradiance with efficiency above 70%.
Introduction
Water scarcity is considered as one of the most impactful global challenges for human society as nearly 3.8 to 4 billion people around the world experience some form of water crisis annually.1,2 Seawater desalination is one of the solutions to this problem as about 97% of Earth's water is in oceans. However, desalinating seawater requires a large amount of energy, which leads to the burning of fossil fuels and causing harm to the environment.3 Interfacial solar steam generation (ISSG) technique can be an excellent way of desalinating sea water due to its energy-independent nature. ISSG technique utilizes photothermal materials to generate heat from solar energy and concentrate it at the site of evaporation to produce steam. Hence, the evaporator used for ISSG must be capable of absorbing broad spectrum of light to convert it to heat and must have interconnected microchannels as well as a hydrophilic surface to absorb and transport water quickly to the evaporation surface.4 Carbonized natural biomass, from wood,5 bamboo,6 corncob,7 mushroom,8 sunflower,9 daikon,10 platanus fruit,11etc.,12–14 is becoming popular as a solar evaporator as it has these characteristics. However, one of the major concerns of utilizing solar evaporator for desalinating sea water is the accumulation of salt crystals on the evaporating surface. Because of the continuous evaporation of water, salt concentration at the evaporating surface rises, resulting in the formation of salt crystals, which eventually limits solar absorption as well as water transportation by reflecting light and clogging water transport channels.15 Y. Kuang et al. demonstrated a facile solution to this problem by simply drilling holes on the basswood blocks before carbonization and the prepared evaporator showed long term stability (100 hours continuous) in a highly concentrated salt solution (brine of 20 wt% NaCl) under 1 sun irradiation with an efficiency of 75%.16 This mechanical modification facilitates salt ion diffusion back flow mechanism even in day time17 by creating some drilled channels of large diameter (1 mm) beside the natural wood channels (diameter of ≈50 μm and ≈12 μm) interconnected by natural pits (diameter of 1–2 μm).16 As a result, water flux in the drilled channels becomes higher than the natural channels as the hydraulic conductivity depends on the diameter of the xylem conduits and flow rate in the capillaries is proportional to the fourth power of the capillary radius.18 Under the same solar irradiance, this will cause a salt concentration differential between drilled channels (low salt concentration owing to high water flow) and natural channels (high salt concentration). The salt gradient between the channels leads to lateral salt exchange between the drilled channels and natural channels via the pits. Horizontal salt exchange will eventually increase the salt concentration of the drilled channel, which will return to the bulk water. X. Zhang et al. demonstrate Chinese ink-coated wood-based solar evaporator, which utilizes the advantage of these drilled channel (2 mm diameter) for sea water desalination.19 A. Ebrahimi et al. demonstrated that drilling holes (1.5 mm diameter) on the evaporator improves the sea water desalination performance under 3 sun.20 However, the regeneration performance of evaporators with natural holes of larger diameter is yet to be investigated thoroughly for a higher intensity of light, together with highly salt concentrated brine. Another possible solution for avoiding the growth of salt on the solar-absorbing surface is creating a “Janus” evaporator that facilitates direct salt blocking mechanism.17 The term “Janus” is used in ISSG for a double-sided material of two different properties. Generally, the Janus evaporators have a hydrophobic solar-absorbing surface and a hydrophilic water absorbing surface, where evaporation occurs at the hydrophobic and hydrophilic interface.21 The hydrophilic surface is faced toward water and responsible for pumping water to the solar-absorbing surface, whereas the hydrophobic surface is responsible for absorbing sunlight, evaporating water, and releasing steam. Due to the higher hydrophilicity of the water absorbing surface, the salt remains dissolved and later goes back to the bulk water, keeping the hydrophobic top layer safe from salt accumulation;17 hence, the “Janus” evaporators are considered to be excellent in salt rejection. B. Lv et al. prepared a 3D Janus radish-based evaporator, which shows excellent salt resistance while evaporating 20 wt% NaCl solution for 10 consecutive days (8 h per day) under 1 sun illumination.21 H. Guan et al. prepared a Janus evaporator from Pomelo peel using MXene as a photothermal material that shows water evaporation rate of 1.48 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun.22 Z. Liu et al. demonstrated a monolithic Janus evaporator that shows excellent salt rejection performance by removing 3 g salt crystal from its top surface within 3 hours while keeping on 20% NaCl solution under 1 sun illumination.23 Q. Wang et al. fabricated a flexible Janus evaporator and showed that its water evaporation performance increases from 1.2 to 3.1 kg m−2 h−1 with increasing solar irradiation from 1 to 2.5 kW m−2 and no salt accumulated on the top surface of the evaporators after 7 days of desalination performance.24 Though the salt rejection performance of the Janus evaporators is excellent, very few research has been done on the salt rejection performance of the biomass-based Janus evaporator for different salt concentrations under different solar irradiation.
In this research, the xylem of the jute plant, also known as jute stick (JS), an agricultural waste produced nearly 4 million tonnes every year,25 is used for the first time to fabricate two separate solar evaporators with different salt mitigation mechanisms, and the regeneration performance of both evaporators is compared for various salt solutions under varying solar irradiance. Jute is a seasonal crop sown mostly in March–April and harvested in August–September, while the plant height generally becomes 8–12 feet.26 The jute fiber extracted from jute plants by the retting process has significant economic value. However, after the extraction of fiber almost 2.5 times more JS can be obtained from the jute plant, which is considered as a solid waste or agricultural waste due its poor commercial value and generally used for household purpose.27 Recent research shows that JS-derived carbon can be used in supercapacitor and battery applications. S. S. Shah et al. developed highly effective porous activated hierarchical carbon nanosheet from JS for symmetric supercapacitor application.27 K. Nanaji et al. derived graphitic porous carbon nanosheet from JS for Li-ion battery (anode material) application.28 The derivatives of JS have many applications in the field of wastewater treatment, ion detection in water, and preventing water from aerial contamination. Research shows that the JS-activated carbon can be a solution to remove textile dyes (acid red-1, reactive orange-16, and methylene blue) from water by the adsorption process.29 M. A. Aziz et al. demonstrated that the carboxylated activated carbon from JS can be used to remove Pb2+ ion from the aqueous solution.30 G. C. Panda et al. demonstrated that JS powder is a promising material for the adsorptive removal of Congo red and Rhodamine B from aqueous solutions.31N-Nitrosodiphenylamine (NDPhA) a toxic water soluble nitrosamines can also be removed from water using JS-derived activated carbon.32 Activated jute carbon paste (derived from JS) screen-printed FTO electrode has been proposed for determining nitride in tap water.33 R. Rai et al. utilized copper-coated JS pieces at an air water interface to prevent aerial contamination in potable water.34 In this work, carbonized JS pieces are used in the array for desalinating sea water and purifying dye wastewater utilizing the ISSG technique.
Experimental section
Materials
Fiber-free JS were collected directly from Bangladesh. Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs, >95%) were obtained from US Research Nanomaterials, INC. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) pellets, methylene blue, Congo red, and Eriochrome Black T were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and obtained through Tin Hang Technology Limited.
Preparation of treated JS
The fiber-free JS were cut horizontally to the growth direction at different vertical positions of the JS to get JS pieces of different diameters and thicknesses. The outer surface of the JS pieces was rubbed with sandpaper to remove the remaining fibers and other impurities. The central natural holes of the JS pieces were cleaned with a metallic rod (diameter of 1 mm) to remove dirt and open paths for salt exchange. The cleaned JS pieces were washed with water. 10% (w/v) NaOH solution was prepared by dissolving 50 g NaOH pellets in 500 mL deionized (DI) water. The washed JS pieces were treated with the prepared NaOH solution by keeping them inside the solution for 2 hours at 80 °C. The JS pieces became light yellow. The treated JS pieces were washed several times in an ultrasonic bath and kept in a drying oven at 55 °C overnight to dry up the treated JS pieces.
Preparation of carbonized JS (CJS) pieces
The CJS pieces were prepared by simple hot-plate carbonization process. The treated and dried JS pieces were kept on top of the pre-heated (400 °C) hot plate for 14 min and within that time, a solar-absorbing carbonized layer of ≈2 mm thickness was formed.
Preparation of MWCNT-coated JS (MJS) pieces
The MJS pieces were prepared by the drop-casting method. 5 mg MWCNT was put into 30 mL isopropyl alcohol and ultrasonicated for 8 h to prepare a very dark solution. The prepared solution was transferred on the top surface of the treated JS by the drop-casting method and kept in normal atmospheric temperature for drying. The drop-casting of MWCNT solution was done very slowly with small intervals so that most of the MWCNT remains on the top surface of the JS and creates a dark and thin solar-absorbing surface.
Preparation of brine water and model dye wastewater
The salt (NaCl) crystal of 3.5 g, 10 g, and 20 g were mixed with 100 mL DI water to prepare 3.5 wt% (B3.5), 10 wt% (B10), and 20 wt% (B20) brine water. To prepare simulated dye-based wastewater, 30 mg methylene blue (MB), Congo red (CR), and Eriochrome Black T (EBT) powder were mixed with tap water.
Characterization
The surface morphology of MJS and CJS were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images using TESCAN VEGA3 (a tungsten thermionic emission SEM system). The image of MWCNT was taken using a transmission electron microscope (JEOL Model JEM-2100F). The Raman Spectra of the solar-absorbing surface of both MJS and CJS were obtained using Raman spectroscopy (WITec Confocal Raman system, 532 nm laser). AFM (Asylum MFP-3D Infinity) was employed to take the AFM image of MWCNT and to measure the length and thickness of MWCNT after 8 h ultrasonication. The FTIR-ATR absorption spectra for CJS and JS were obtained using a Thermo Scientific Nicolet IS50 FT-IR and wavenumber in the range from 4000 cm−1 to 650 cm−1 was selected for finding the absorption peaks. The UV-Vis-NIR absorbance spectra of PJS, CJS, and MJS were observed in the range from 250 nm to 2000 nm using a PerkinElmer UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer.
Solar evaporation experiment
Each solar evaporation or steam generation experiment was conducted at least for 1 h using a computer controlled electronic balanced system, a Xenon lamp, and with some beakers of appropriate size in an uncontrolled laboratory environment (temperature ≈ 26 ± 2 °C). The computer-controlled electronic balanced system was used to measure and record the mass change data of water, sea water, NaCl concentrated brine water (B3.5, B10, and B20), and different wastewater solutions after every 20 s. The Xenon lamp (PLS-XSE300, Beijing Perfect Light Technology Co., Ltd) was used as a simulated solar source. The intensity of light was measured by a power meter (THORLABS, S314C) before starting each experiment. Thermal images of the evaporators were captured before starting each experiment and after 1 hour of continuous solar irradiation by a thermal camera (FLIR-E64501, Tallinn. Estonia, with an error range of ±2 °C). During the cycling light on–off test, the top surface temperature of the evaporators was measured using a thermocouple meter (CENTER 306). The change in the salinity after 8.5 h long run test was measured using a water quality tester EZ-9909SP. As the evaporators have self-floating capability, during each experiment, the evaporators were placed directly on top of the water. The gap between the evaporators and inner wall of the beakers were covered by a thin polyethylene foam to keep the evaporator stable on one place. To collect the evaporated water by condensing the vapor, a self-made glass box with a sloped glass cover was utilized. The TDS, conductivity, pH, and salinity of purified water and sea water were measured using EZ-9909SP. The purification of wastewater was verified by observing the UV-Vis absorbance spectra (range from 300 nm to 800 nm) of purified water, distilled water, and model wastewater (MB, CR, EBT) by a Shimadzu UV-vis spectrometer.
Results and discussion
JS is the woody part (xylem) of the jute plant. The composition of the JS is close to hardwood (α-cellulose 40%, hemicellulose 35%, and lignin 23%)25 but has a natural hole inside it surrounded by many microchannels. The diameter of the hole and the stick depends on the vertical position of the JS. Normally, the diameter of the JS is large near the root. In this work, JS are cut horizontally to the growth direction at different vertical positions of the JS (as shown in Fig. 1a) to make evaporators of different thicknesses and diameters.
 Fig. 1  Preparation process of the evaporators and mechanism of salt exchange during solar evaporation. (a) Collection of JS pieces. (b) Preparation of carbonized JS (CJS). (c) Preparation of MJS. (d) Schematics of ISSG, salt exchange (through pit), and multidirectional mass transfer mechanism of the proposed evaporator. 
After collecting the JS pieces, the outer surface and central natural hole were cleaned to remove the dirt and clear the path of the pits to ensure salt exchange during evaporation. The cleaned JS pieces were put into NaOH solution for removing lignin. Delignification makes the wood-like substrate (here, JS) hydrophilic due to the presence and exposure of the hydroxyl group.35 After delignification, the JS pieces becomes light yellow, which was washed a few times using an ultrasonic bath to remove the remaining dirt. The treated JS were kept inside the drying oven at a very low temperature (40 °C) overnight. The dry hydrophilic PJS pieces were carbonized at 400 °C for 14 min using a hot plate to prepare CJS, as shown in Fig. 1b. CJS of different thicknesses and diameters were prepared for further investigation. For making a Janus biomass-based evaporator, the top surface of the PJS pieces of optimum thickness and diameter were coated with multiwalled-carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) solution (prepared by mixing MWCNTs with isopropyl alcohol (IPA)) by the drop-casting method, as shown in Fig. 1c. MWCNTs was selected due to its hydrophobic nature36 and capability of absorbing broad spectrum of light. Due to its good light-to-heat conversion capability, MWCNTs is widely used in many solar evaporators for steam generation.37–40 The MWCNTs-coated JS (MJS) shows different wettability at solar-absorbing surface and water absorbing surface, which gives it the characteristics of the “Janus” evaporator. The surface wettability of dry untreated JS, PJS, CJS, and MJS are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). From Fig. S1a and b (ESI†), it is certain that the surface wettability increases after the delignification of JS. The water contact angle of the untreated JS became ∠79.5° from ∠94.24° within 4 seconds, whereas for treated JS, the contact angle became ∠34.97° from ∠76.18° within the same time. After carbonization the wettability of the carbonized surface increased (from ∠82.16° to nearly ∠0° within 4 seconds). The wettability of the MWCNTs-coated surface decreased greatly (even after 4 seconds, the water contact angle remains ∠98.21°, as shown in Fig. S1d (ESI†)), and a surface can be considered hydrophobic if its static water contact angle is greater than ∠90°.41 It should be noted that both CJS and MJS have central natural hole of large diameter surrounded by several microchannels, which helps to create different water flux inside the natural hole and surrounding channels and can create lateral salt gradient during solar evaporation. This phenomenon facilitates lateral interchannel salt exchange through the natural pits of the channels wall, as shown in Fig. 1d. Hence, both CJS and MJS can facilitate salt ion diffusion back flow mechanism for regeneration during sea water desalination in daytime. However, MJS can also employ direct salt blocking mechanism due to its thin hydrophobic solar-absorbing layer.
The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken for morphology characterization of the JS (Xylem of Jute plant), CJS, and MJS and are presented in Fig. 2. Comparing Fig. 2a with 2b, it is quite noticeable that some large pores ranges from about 61.17 μm to 126.93 μm (average ≈ 84.36 μm) together with some microcracks (length ranging from ≈131.06 μm to ≈271.3 μm) are created after carbonization. This may occur due to the uneven heating of JS (more details in Fig. S2a and b, and ESI Note 1, ESI†) and the degradation of oxygen-containing groups during the hot-plate carbonization process. The top surface of the MJS (as shown in Fig. 2c) shows the clustered MWCNTs (caused by the drop-casting of MWCNTs solution) on the top of the treated JS. However, the presence of some uncluttered MWCNTs is observed along the boundary of some micro-channels and on the upper surface area of the channel walls (Fig. 2d). Most of the natural microchannels of the JS are slightly hexagonal or slightly oval in shape with circular pits on its wall, as shown in Fig. 2e. The average diameter of these channels can be ranged from approximately 13.176 μm to 38.142 μm. The arrangement of the pits can be further observed from the cross-section of the JS (Fig. 2f and g).
 Fig. 2  Morphology characterization of the JS. SEM images of the top surface of (a) PJS. (b) CJS. (c) MJS with the TEM image of the used MWCNT (inset). (d) SEM image showing the presence of MWCNTs inside the channels. (e) Image of the top surface of the evaporator showing the presence of pits in the walls of the channels. (f) Image of the cross section of JS. (g) Image of the natural pits found in the wall of the microchannels. 
The diameter of these pits can range from about 1.77 μm to 4.75 μm. These pits facilitate exchange mass between two adjacent cells and play an important role in horizontal salt exchange when salt gradient is created between two adjacent channels during evaporation. The surface of the JS and CJS were further investigated using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The surface survey XPS of JS and CJS (Fig. 3a) shows that the C 1s to O 1s ratio for CJS (atomic% of C 1s = 77.62% and O 1s = 22.38) is higher than JS (atomic% of C 1s = 75.68 and O 1s = 24.32), which indicates the pyrolysis of oxygen-containing groups of the PJS during carbonization. The high resolution XPS spectra of C 1s for both JS and CJS (Fig. 3b and c) show the presence of C–C, C–O–C, and O–CO. Fig. 3d shows the FTIR-ATR spectra (from 4000 cm−1 to 650 cm−1) of JS and CJS. The presence of the O–H stretching vibration peak (3000–3700 cm−1) is prominent for JS, which is significantly reduced in CJS, indicating that oxygen-containing hydroxyl group has been degraded due to carbonization. However, it is worth mentioning that only one side of the evaporator was carbonized so the other side will still have these O–H groups, which help to absorb water. The peak at 2900 cm−1 in JS comes from C–H stretching. The presence of CO is confirmed from the peaks at 1650 cm−1 to 1800 cm−1 in both JS and CJS, which further validates the result of XPS.16 The presence of cellulose in JS is confirmed by the peaks from 895 cm−1 to 1160 cm−1. The peak at 1160 cm−1 comes from the stretching of C–O–C in cellulose and hemicellulose, 1030 cm−1 comes from aromatic C–H in plane deformation and C–O stretching in cellulose and hemicellulose, and 895 cm−1 is from the out-of-phase ring stretching due to β linkage in cellulose and hemicellulose.42 Cellulose can create hydrogen bonds with water, which facilitate water absorption.43 For CJS the peak in the range from 1450 cm−1 to 1650 cm−1 increased greatly, which can be attributed to the formation of more unsaturated carbon–carbon bonding that can facilitate light absorption. Interestingly, a similar increase in the peak and formation of the carbon–carbon bond was observed by Y. kuang et al. for carbonized basswood.16
 Fig. 3  Characterization. (a) Survey XPS spectra for JS and CJS. (b and c) High resolution XPS spectra of C 1s in JS and CJS. (d) FTIR-ATR spectra of JS and CJS. (e and f) Raman spectra of the solar-absorbing surface of CJS and MJS. (g) AFM image of the MWCNTs. (h) Height profile of the marked MWCNTs and its average length. (i) Absorbance of PJS, CJS, and MJS on the left and solar spectral irradiance (AM 1.5 G) in the right. 
The Raman spectra of the solar-absorbing surface of CJS and MJS are shown in Fig. 3e and f. The Raman peak intensity near 1348 cm−1 and 1582 cm−1 (attributed to the D band and G band, respectively) becomes very high for CJS (Fig. 3e). The D band near 1350 cm−1 is attributed to disordered carbon or defective graphitic structure and the G band near 1580 cm−1 is considered to be a characteristic feature of graphitic layers; hence, it can be said that the treated JS was carbonized properly.9 As depicted in Fig. 3f, a very sharp increase in the Raman peak near 1348 cm−1, 1582 cm−1, and 2684 cm−1 (attributed to the D, G, and 2D band of MWCNTs) for MJS was observed, confirming that the surface is properly coated with the MWCNTs. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images are shown in Fig. 3g to demonstrate the morphological characteristics of MWCNTs after 8 hours of ultrasonication. The thickness of three randomly selected MWCNTs are shown in Fig. 3h. From the statistical distribution, the thickness of 86 particles out of 131 (65.65%) was found to be ≥25 nm (Fig. S3, ESI†) and the length of 98 particles (74.81%) was found to be ≥3 μm (Fig. 3h). For such low thickness of MWCNT, the MJS has a very thin layer of hydrophobic solar-absorbing surface. For evaporators with Janus characteristics, the thin layer of hydrophobic solar-absorbing surface is desired for increasing the water evaporation rate by shortening the vapor escape route and heat conduction path.44 The UV-Vis-NIR (from 250 nm to 2000 nm) absorbance spectra of PJS, CJS, and MJS were observed and presented in Fig. 3i. The overall solar absorption by the PJS was found to be ≈36.02% (weighted under AM 1.5 G). After carbonization, the overall solar absorbance increased to ≈97.97%. The absorption of CGS in the UV-VIS region (200–700 nm) increased to ≈96.66% from 36.13% (PJS). The MWCNT-coated surface of MJS shows ≈84.1% overall solar absorption with ≈83.86% absorption in the UV-VIS region. The better absorption of CJS over MJS may be caused due to the thickness of the solar-absorbing surface. The thickness of the carbonized layer of CJS is nearly 2 mm, which is higher than the thickness of the solar-absorbing surface of MJS.
For the solar evaporation experiment, 7 CJS pieces of equal diameter and thickness were grouped together in a hexagonal arrangement to create a CJS array. 4 CJS arrays of 3 different diameters and thicknesses were prepared and named as CJS_D1.4H1, CJS_D1.4H1.5, CJS_D1.9H1.5, and CJS_D1.66H2. The diameter and thickness of each JS pieces of an array were considered for naming (details in ESI Note 2, Fig. S4a and c, ESI†) the CJS evaporators. For making MJS array, JS pieces with a diameter of 1.4 cm and thickness of 1 cm were used (Fig. S4b and c ESI†). The salt mitigation mechanism of the prepared CJS and MJS are illustrated in Fig. S4f (ESI†). The average diameter of the central natural hole of each JS pieces of CJS_D1.4H1, CJS_D1.4H1.5, and MJS was 2.5 mm. On the other hand, the average diameter of the central natural hole of each JS pieces of CJS_D1.9H1.5 and CJS_D1.66H2 was 4 mm as the diameter of the central hole of the JS is not same throughout the vertical direction of the jute plant. The solar evaporation experiments for all evaporators were conducted in the laboratory using a computer-controlled electronic balance system (for measuring and recording the mass loss data after every 20 s), some beakers of appropriate sizes, and a Xenon lamp as a simulated solar source (schematic illustration shown in Fig. S4d, ESI†). The temperature distribution of the CJS evaporator (CJS_D1.4H1) together with a beaker full of water is presented in Fig. 4a after 1 hour of evaporation experiment. The image shows that after one hour of evaporation, the temperature of the water near the bottom of the beaker is 26.4 °C, whereas the maximum temperature (39.2 °C) is found at the top surface of the evaporator, which indicates good thermal management of the whole system and low conduction heat loss from the evaporator to water.
 Fig. 4  Thermal image of CJS and MJS. (a) Image showing the temperature distribution of overall system under 1 sun. (b–e) Thermal image of CJS under dark and different solar irradiation. (f) Change in the temperature of the solar-absorbing surface of CJS during the on–off cycle. (g–i) Thermal image of MJS under different solar irradiation. (j) Change in the temperature of solar-absorbing surface of MJS during the on/off cycle. 

Fig. 4b shows the maximum temperature of the evaporator under dark condition and Fig. 4c–e show the points where the maximum top surface temperature of CJS evaporator were observed. After one hour of evaporation experiment under 1 sun (1 kW m−2), 2 sun (2 kW m−2), and 3 sun (3 kW m−2) illumination, the maximum temperature of the top surface of the evaporator was found to be 39.2 °C, 47 °C, and 55.3 °C, respectively. A cyclic on–off test was conducted to demonstrate the capability of CJS to reach such a temperature repeatedly. A thermocouple probe was connected on the top surface of the evaporator to measure the change in the temperature during the cyclic on–off test. Initially, the xenon lamp was kept on for 15 min, after that it was turned off for 5 min, and then on–off cycles of 5 min interval were introduced. The temperature change was monitored by a digital thermocouple. During this test, the initial temperature of the evaporator was 24.2 °C and after 15 min (under 1 sun), the temperature reaches 35.1 °C. Then, the lamp was kept off for 5 min and the temperature reached 26 °C. During 5 min on–off cycle, the top surface temperature varies between 34.8 °C (maximum) and 25.9 °C (minimum) repeatedly. The temperature distributions of the solar-absorbing surface of the MJS under different solar illumination are shown in Fig. 4g–i. The maximum top surface temperatures were 37.4 °C, 44.8 °C, and 52.3 °C after 1 hour of evaporation experiment under 1 sun, 2 sun, and 3 sun, respectively. The cyclic on–off test for MJS shows a very interesting trend. The top surface temperature of MJS was 23.6 °C at the beginning and reached 37.4 °C (under 1 sun) within 13 min and remain the same even after 15 min. While the lamp was turned off for 5 min, the temperature falls to 25 °C. During the 5 min on–off cycle, the surface temperature varies between 37.3 °C (maximum) and 25.2 °C (minimum). From the experimental results (as shown in Fig. 4f and j), it can be concluded that the MJS reaches its maximum temperature faster than CJS for different solar illumination. However, after one hour of evaporation experiment, the maximum top surface temperature of the CJS was always slightly higher than MJS. This may occur due to the thickness of the carbonized layer (≈2 mm) that enables CJS to trap light and store heat more effectively.
Initially, the CJS_D1.66H2 with central natural hole of 4 mm diameter was prepared for sea water desalination. Under 1 sun illumination, the evaporation rate of sea water was 1.09 kg m−2 h−1 and under 3 sun illumination, the evaporation rate reaches 2.87 kg m−2 h−1. However, under 3 sun illumination, a thin layer of salt started to grow on the top surface of the evaporator after 1 hour of evaporation experiment, as shown in Fig. S5a (ESI†), and the accumulated salt dissolved within ∼140 min under dark condition. At higher solar intensity, the evaporation rate becomes higher; hence, if sufficient water does not reach the top, the chances of forming salt crystals increase. An experiment to check the water uptake rate was conducted by taking JS segments from treated and untreated JS (shown in Fig. S6, ESI†). Food color was mixed with water to make the water uptake rate visible. The experiment reveals that the water uptake rate of the NaOH-treated JS segment is high and it takes 120 s to reach more than 1.9 cm, although the water uptake was uneven. Hence, the thickness of CJS was reduced to 1.5 cm to facilitate faster water transport and a larger diameter (1.9 cm) was selected to provide more surface area for evaporation. The CJS_D1.9H1.5 has a natural central hole of 4 mm diameter. It shows slightly higher evaporation rate (1.18 kg m−2 h−1) under 1 sun illumination. However, under 3 sun illumination, the evaporation rate becomes only 2.53 kg m−2 h−1 due to the growth of a thin layer of salt (Fig. S5b, ESI†), which dissolves in ∼111 min under dark condition (comparatively faster due to reduced thickness). The diameter of the CJS was changed to 1.4 cm to make CJS_D1.4H1.5 with a central natural hole of 2 mm. For CJS_D1.4H15, the evaporation rate increases significantly (16.10%) to 1.37 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination and under 3 sun illumination, the evaporation rate becomes 3.1 kg m−2 h−1, and no salt was accumulated on the top surface of the evaporator. Hence, CJS_D1.4H1.5 was used to evaporate highly NaCl concentrated (20 wt%) brine water. Under 1 sun illumination, no visible salt was observed on the top surface after 1 hour of evaporation. But when the solar intensity was increased to 2 sun, the salt crystal starts to form on the top surface. The accumulated salt on CJS_D1.4H1.5 (after 1 hour of brine water (20 wt% NaCl) evaporation) required nearly 82 min to dissolve under dark condition, as shown in Fig. S5e (ESI†). The salt accumulation became very high under 3 sun and while kept in the dark, the salt did not dissolve even after 150 min (Fig. S5c, ESI†). CJS_D1.4H1.5 was further investigated with brine water of 10 wt% NaCl concentration. A very small amount of salt was observed after 1 hour of evaporation under 3 sun, which required nearly 10 min to dissolve (while kept under dark condition), as shown in Fig. S5g (ESI†).
Hence, the thickness of the CJS was further reduced to 1 cm to make CJS_D1.4H1 with a natural hole diameter of 2 mm. The sea water evaporation rate increases to 1.52 kg m−2 h−1 and no salt was observed during sea water and brine water (10 wt% NaCl) evaporation under different solar illumination. However, during the evaporation of brine water of 20 wt% NaCl concentration, salt crystals started to form under 3 sun and 2 sun illumination. The accumulated salt dissolves within 93 min and 38 min, respectively, while kept under dark, as shown in Fig. S5d and f (ESI†). Hence, it can be said that salt ion diffusion backflow mechanism for regeneration works very well in daytime under 1 sun irradiation as no salt was observed during sea water evaporation by all CJS and brine water evaporation by CJSF_D1.4H1.5 and CJSF_D1.4H1. Salts starts to grow when the intensity of light increases. The formation of salt crystal on the top of CJS evaporators depends on the thickness of the evaporator and the distance between the natural holes and the microchannels. Decreasing the thickness makes water uptake faster and decreasing the diameter decreases the distance between the hole and microchannels situated along the boundary of each CJS piece, hence shortening the lateral path of salt exchange between the hole and furthest microchannels. Hence, under 1 sun illumination, no salt was accumulated on the top of both CJS_D1.4H1.5 and CJS_D1.4H1 even while evaporating concentrated brine water (20 wt% NaCl) for 1 hour. CJS_D1.4H1 shows better performance (high evaporation rate and high salt rejection capability) among all CJS as no salt was accumulated on it while evaporating brine water (10 wt% NaCl concentration) even under 3 sun illumination for 1 hour and it was capable of evaporating brine water of 20 wt% NaCl concentration under 1 sun illumination without any growth of salt crystal on the top surface. The mass change rate as well as evaporation rate of sea water and brine water (with different concentrations of NaCl) in the presence of all CJS evaporators under different solar illumination (1–3 sun) are presented in Fig. S7(a–e) and (g–h) (ESI†). To represent seawater and brine water of 10 wt% and 20 wt% NaCl concentration, SW, B10, and B20 are used, respectively. Among all CJS evaporators, CJS_D1.4H1 shows better performance under every condition (as shown in Fig. 5a, S7g, and h, ESI†); hence, it was used for further investigation. For the later part of this work, it will be denoted as only CJSF. To understand the effectiveness of carbonization, PJS pieces of same size of CJSF were grouped together and used for water evaporation. Under 1 sun illumination, the evaporation rate of water was only 0.53 kg m−2 h−1 and in the presence of PJS, the evaporation rate of water was increased to 1.06 kg m−2 h−1. However, in the presence of CJSF, the evaporation rate of water becomes 1.52 kg m−2 h−1 (43.4% increment) under 1 sun illumination. The mass change rate of water in the presence of CJSF and PJS under 1 sun illumination are shown in Fig. 5b (inset). Hence, it can be said that the carbonized surface of the JS has photothermal characteristics, which can harvest energy from sun and can evaporate water faster. The mass change rate of seawater, B3.5 (3.5 wt% NaCl concentrated brine water), B10, and B20 under 1 sun irradiation in the presence of CJSF are shown in Fig. 5b. The mass change rate as well as evaporation rate of CJSF (CJS_D1.4H1) decreases with the increase in the salt concentration of water (as shown in Fig. 5b and S7h, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  Experimental result. (a) Evaporation rate of different CJS evaporators. (b) Mass change rate of Sea water (SW) and brine water of different NaCl concentration in the presence of CJS under 1 sun illumination; brine water with 3.5 wt%, 10 wt% and 20 wt% NaCl concentration are denoted as B3.5, B10 and B20 respectively. The mass change rate of water and the mass change rate of water in the presence of PJS and CJSF under 1 sun (inset). (c) Mass change rate of water, sea water and brine water of different NaCl concentrations in the presence of MJS. Direct salt blocking mechanism of MJS (inset). (d) Schematic illustration of salt exchange through the pits and multi directional mass transfer. (e) Experimental result of salt exchange through pits. (f) Evaporation rate and efficiency of CJS and MJS for Tap water (TW), SW, B10 and B20. (g) Evaporation rate and mass change rate of sea water in the presence of CJS under 1 sun illumination for 8.5 hours and the change in salinity of sea water after 8.5 hours of evaporation experiment. (h) Evaporation rate and mass change rate of sea water in the presence of MJS under 1 sun illumination for 8.5 hours. (i) Salt rejection performance of CJS and MJS. 
Hence, it can be said that the salt ion diffusion backflow mechanism works very well even in daytime due to the presence of a central large natural hole; this mechanism can protect the evaporator from the growth of salt on the top surface under 1 sun irradiation. However, with increasing solar intensity and concentration of salt in water, the performance of this mechanism reduces. Providing a Janus characteristics to the biomass-based evaporator can solve this issue. 7 PJS pieces of same diameter and thickness of CJSF are grouped together, and one side of the PJS is coated with MWCNT to make a thin layer of hydrophobic solar-absorbing surface. It will be denoted as MJS for further explanation. The prepared MJS has central natural hole of 2 mm diameter (average), such as CJSF. The mass change rate of tap water (TW), SW, B10, and B20 in the presence of MJS are presented in Fig. 5c. The prepared MJS shows little bit less evaporation rate than CJSF under 1 sun illumination for TW and SW (1.46 kg m−2 h−1 for both); however, the evaporation rate remained almost constant for B10 (1.44 kg m−2 h−1) and B20 (1.43 kg m−2 h−1), and no salt was accumulated after 1 hour of evaporation. The direct salt blocking mechanism due to the Janus characteristics of solar evaporator as well as the lateral salt exchange between the channels, as shown in Fig. 5c (inset), makes MJS superior to CJSF in regeneration as well as in evaporating highly salt concentrated brine water.
The lateral salt exchange mechanism as well as multidirectional mass flow are illustrated in Fig. 5d. A 4 days long experiment was conducted to check the effectiveness of the pits (present in the xylem of jute plant) in lateral salt exchange and are presented in Fig. 5e and S7 (ESI†). A thin (thickness of ≈2 mm) segment was sliced from the PJS and placed horizontally inside an 8 cm × 6 cm plastic box to divide the box into 2 parts (as shown in Fig. S8, ESI†). Silicon glue was used to attach the JS segment with the box in such a way that no water can pass from one side to another side by side and below the JS segment. Both ends of the natural microchannels were blocked by the silicon glue; hence, water can pass from one side to another side only through the pits of the JS segment. One side of the box was filled with tap water and kept in a stable place for 20 min to check the leakage. No water passed from one side to another side (as shown in Fig. S8b and c, ESI†) by the side or below the JS segment. The other side of the box was then filled with NaCl concentrated brine water. The water quality tester EZ-9909SP was employed to monitor the salinity of the tap water and brine water. In Fig. 5e and S8 (ESI†), the tap water and brine water are denoted as W and B, respectively. Before taking every measurement, the electrode of EZ-9909SP was washed with DI water and rubbed with dry tissue to avoid salt transfer from one side to another side by the monitoring device. Initially, the salinity of tap water and brine water was 0.01% and 10.7%, respectively. After measuring the salinity, the box was sealed carefully by a sealing film (Parafilm M) and kept in a dark stable place to avoid water loss by natural evaporation. On the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th day, the salinity of the tap water increased to 3.29%, 4.5%, and 5%, whereas the salinity of brine water decreased to 7.5%, 6.6%, and 5.9%, respectively, which ensures that the pits are effective to transfer salt from one side to another side. However, the salt exchange rate becomes slow as the salt gradient becomes lower. It is worth mentioning that this salt exchange rate will get more faster in case of solar evaporators as both ends of the water transport channels remain open during the evaporation of water, which facilitates the faster filling of the water transport channels and makes the path of salt exchange shorter.
The solar evaporation performance of the MJS was checked for sea water (SW) and brine water (B10 and B20) of different salt concentrations under different solar illumination. The mass change rate remained nearly constant for SW, B10, and B20 for 2 sun and 3 sun, as shown in Fig. S7(f), (ESI†), and no salt was visible at the solar evaporating surface after one hour of evaporation. The evaporation rate of SW, B10, and B20 for MJS was 2.76 kg m−2 h−1, 2.68 kg m−2 h−1, and 2.57 kg m−2 h−1 after 1 h of evaporation under 2 sun illumination, whereas for CJSF, it was 2.38 kg m−2 h−1, 2.35 kg m−2 h−1, and 2.26 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. Under 3 sun illumination, the evaporation rate of SW and B20 in the presence of CJSF were 3.52 kg m−2 h−1 and 3.08 kg m−2 h−1 (12.5% reduction), respectively, after 1 h of evaporation, whereas for the same condition, the evaporation rate of SW and B20 in the presence of MJS was 3.55 kg m−2 h−1 and 3.35 kg m−2 h−1 (5.63% reduction), respectively. However, while evaporating B20, the growth of the salt crystal was visible for 2 sun and 3 sun on the top surface of CJSF within 1 h of evaporation experiment, while no salt crystal was visible for MJS under the same condition. Hence, it can be said that with time, the evaporation rate of B20 will decrease for CJSF under 2 and 3 sun due to the growth of the salt crystal.
The efficiency of evaporating tap water (TW), SW, B10, and B20 were calculated using following the equations.43,45 (1) (2) Q = c × (Ta − Ti)(3)Here, ml is the net evaporation rate in kg m−2 (considering dark evaporation rate), Hlv is the required latent heat for water vaporization (J kg−1), Q is the required heat to increase the temperature of water, c is the specific heat of water (4.2 J g−1 K−1), and Ei is the energy input by the incident light kJ m−2 h−1. Ta and Ti is the average temperature (K) of the solar evaporating surface during the evaporation experiment and the average initial temperature of the solar evaporating surface, respectively (detailed calculations are provided in ESI Note 3, ESI†).
The maximum evaporation rate and efficiency of evaporating TW, SW, B10, and B20 of CJSF and MJS under 1 sun illumination are provided in Fig. 5f. The evaporation efficiency is influenced by the dark evaporation rate of TW, SW, B10, and B20 in the presence of CJSF and MJS. The dark evaporation rate of TW, SW, B10, and B20 in the presence of CJSF are 0.24 kg m−2 h−1, 0.22 kg m−2 h−1, 0.21 kg m−2 h−1, and 0.2 kg m−2 h−1 and in the presence of MJS are 0.24 kg m−2 h−1, 0.2 kg m−2 h−1, 0.19 kg m−2 h−1, and 0.18 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. Hence, though CJSF evaporates TW and SW at almost the same rate (1.522 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.516 kg m−2 h−1) under 1 sun, the efficiency of evaporating SW (87.01%) becomes slightly higher than TW (86.19%). A similar phenomenon was observed for MJS while evaporating TW and SW. The maximum evaporation rate of TW and SW in the presence of MJS was 1.4699 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.457 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun, respectively, but the efficiency of evaporating sea water (84.39%) was higher than that of tap water (81.94%). Under 1 sun, CJSF shows superiority over MJS while evaporating TW and SW; however, the superiority of MJS over CJSF became visible while evaporating highly NaCl concentrated brine water (B10 and B20). Under 1 sun, in the presence of MJS, the evaporation rate of B10 and B20 was 1.44 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.427 kg m−2 h−1 with 84.13% and 84.07% efficiency, respectively, while in the presence of CJSF, they were only 1.17 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.03 kg m−2 h−1 with 64.4% and 56.1% efficiency, respectively. Not only for 1 sun illumination, MJS shows better efficiency and evaporation rate for SW, B10, and B20 than CJSF for higher solar intensity as well (Fig. S7(h–k), ESI†). The efficiency of MJS was never below 70% and no salt growth was visible after 1 hour of evaporation experiment.
For the further investigation of SW evaporation performance of the CJSF and MJS, an 8.5 h long experiment was conducted under 1 sun illumination. Dry CJSF and MJS was put on the top of SW (collected from Stanley Main Beach, Hong Kong). The evaporation rate of SW varies with time for the CJS, whereas for MJS, it remains almost constant. The highest SW evaporation rate for CJS was 1.49 kg m−2 h−1 (2nd hour) and it began to decrease with time and reached 1.34 kg m−2 h−1 at the 8th hour (10.07% decrease). This may occur due to the increase in the salt concentration with time during evaporation. The salinity of SW before starting the experiment was 2.98% and after 8.5 hours of evaporation, the salinity increased to 3.74%, as shown in Fig. 5g. Interestingly, the evaporation rate of 3.5% NaCl concentrated brine water in the presence of CJSF under 1 sun illumination was 1.31 kg m−2 h−1, which matches closely with the 8.5 hours SW evaporation experiment. In the case of MJS, the evaporation rate was almost constant; the highest evaporation rate was found at the 5th hour (1.4 kg m−2 h−1) and the lowest was found at the 8th hour (1.35 kg m−2 h−1, decreased by only 3.6%), as shown in Fig. 5h. The salt rejection performance was conducted for both CJSF and MJS under 1 sun illumination, as shown in Fig. 5i. For conducting this experiment, both CJSF and MJS were placed on the top of B10 (brine water with 10 wt% NaCl concentration). Here, B10 was selected for fare comparison between CJSF and MJS as no salt crystal was grown on the top of CJSF and MJS while evaporating B10 under 3 sun illumination. 1 g dry NaCl crystal was placed on the top of both evaporators under one sun illumination. No salt crystal was visible on the top of CJSF and MJS after ∼93 min and ∼71 min, respectively.
For sea water desalination and wastewater purification, a glass box as illustrated in Fig. 6a (shown in Fig. S7l, ESI†) was taken. The box was cleaned with isopropanol, followed by DI water. Several times and dried carefully to avoid the contamination of purified water. A clean beaker filled with SW was placed inside the box and the evaporator was placed on the top of SW carefully so that the water does not spill. The whole system including xenon lamp was placed on the top of a stable table. The evaporated water was condensed and started to accumulate in the glass box. The water was collected carefully for further analysis. A water quality tester (EZ-9909SP) was used to measure the total dissolved solid, conductivity, pH, and salinity of the purified water collected from the desalination of SW and presented in Fig. 6b and c. The same parameters were measured for deionized water and tap water (Hong Kong) for reference. The TDS, conductivity, pH, and salinity of SW were 29900 ppm, 48.9 mS cm−1, 6.93, and 2.98%, which are consistent with our previous study43 (as the same sea water was used for the experiment); after desalination, the TDS and conductivity of purified water became 24 ppm and 48 μS cm−1, respectively, which is lower than the parameters of tap water found in Hong Kong. The pH and salinity of the purified water were 6.78 and 0%, respectively. According to the WHO standard, the pH of drinking water should be kept in between 6.5 to 8.5 and TDS below 300 ppm provides excellent palatability;43 hence, the purified water meets the requirement of WHO standards. According to our measurement, the tap water found in Hong Kong has pH of 8.01 and salinity of 0.01% with TDS and conductivity of 136 ppm and 272 μS cm−1, respectively.43 Hence, it can be said that the purified water is safe for daily external use. The hardness (amount of calcium and magnesium) of the desalinated water was checked by Varify 16-parameter water test strips. The strips can measure the hardness of water from 0 ppm to 425 ppm (maximum) based on the change in the color of the strips while wetted with water.
 Fig. 6  Sea water desalination and wastewater purification. (a) Schematic illustration of the water collection system. (b) TDS and conductivity of purified water. (c) pH and salinity of purified water. (d) Absorbance of purified water (PW) and methylene blue (MB) solution. (e) Absorbance of PW and Congo Red (CR) solution. (f) Absorbance of PW and Eriochrome Black T (EBT) solution. (g) Evaporation rate and efficiency of CJSF in evaporating different waste-water solution under 1 sun illumination. Mass change rate of different wastewaters in the presence of CJSF (inset). (h) Performance of CJSF during the cycling test. Self-floating characteristics of the evaporator and secondary contamination test (inset). (i) Performance of MJS during the cycling test. Condition of the CJS and MJS after 2 months of experimentation (inset). 
According to the coloring of the strips, the hardness of desalinated water was found to be in between 0 and 25 ppm range, whereas for SW, it was 425 ppm or more (as 425 ppm was the maximum measurable quantity).
As model wastewater, 30 mg MB, CR, and EBT were mixed with 250 mL tap water to make 3 solutions. The same glass box and CJSF were utilized to purify the model wastewater. The fabrication process of CJSF is comparatively easier and cheaper than MJS and, on the other hand, CJSF provides better evaporation rate for tap water and sea water under 1 sun illumination. Hence, CJSF was selected for wastewater purification application. The absorbance of the purified and simulated dye contaminated water was measured. The absorbance of distilled water was also measured as a reference. From the UV-VIS absorbance spectra (as shown in Fig. 6d–f), it can be said that the purified water is almost free from all the dyes (MB, CR, and EBT). Furthermore, the absorbance spectra of purified water matched closely with that of pure distilled water, which ensures that the purified water is almost safe for normal usage. The mass change rate, evaporation rate, and efficiency of evaporating of MB, CR, and EBT solutions were measured and presented in Fig. 6g. In the presence of CJSF, the spontaneous evaporation rate of MB, CR, and EBT were ≈0.239 kg m−2 h−1, ≈0.263 kg m−2 h−1, and ≈0.205 kg m−2 h−1, respectively, under dark condition. Under 1 sun illumination, the CJSF evaporates MB, CR, and EBT solutions at the evaporation rate of 1.497 kg m−2 h−1,1.498 kg m−2 h−1, and 1.439 kg m−2 h−1 with 84.57%, 82.99%, and 82.91% efficiency of evaporation, respectively. As the evaporation rate can be influenced by the humidity and the temperature of the surroundings, a cycle test for both CJSF and MJS were conducted. The cycle test was also very important as it can provide some idea about the aging of the evaporator. The SW evaporation rate in the presence of wet CJSF and MJS under 1 sun irradiation were measured for 15 consecutive days (run time > 1 h per day) and presented in Fig. 6h and i. The mass loss data (for 1 hour) of SW in the presence of both CJSF and MJS (for 15 consecutive days) are presented in Fig. S9a and b (ESI†). The highest SW evaporation rate for CJSF and MJS were 1.52 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.46 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. The cycle test does not show any specific degrading pattern rather than showing variation in the evaporation in each day, which may be caused by the meteorological condition of the laboratory. For CJSF and MJS, the recorded lowest evaporation rates were 1.47 kg m−2 h−1 and 1.38 kg m−2 h−1, respectively. The standard deviation in SW evaporation rate for CJSF and MJS were 1.74% and 2.99%, respectively (details in ESI Note 4, ESI†). Hence, it can be said that under 1 sun illumination, CJSF shows slightly more stable performance than MJS for SW evaporation under different meteorological conditions. Both CJSF and MJS are self-floatable. After fabrication, both evaporators were submerged in water using a metallic rod, as shown in Fig. 6h (inset) and no visual secondary contamination (from evaporators to water) was observed. The mass water absorbing capacity of CJSF (after being merged in water for 20 min) was 200.39% (details in ESI Note 5, and Fig. S10, ESI†) and shows almost no visual impact on its floatability. Fig. 6i (inset) shows the condition of solar-absorbing surface after 2 months of vigorous experimentation under different solar illumination with different salt concentrated water. MJS looked almost the same as before; however, some very small cracks were observed for CJSF. Due to carbonization, the solar-absorbing surface of the wet CJSF is little bit softer than wet MJS. Hence, these small cracks may occur due to improper handling or due to the growth of the salt crystal during B20 evaporation under 2 sun and 3 sun illumination. It is worth mentioning that no noticeable change in evaporating SW was observed for CJSF due to these small cracks, which was further proven by the cycling test. The evaporation rate and efficiency of different biomass-based evaporators are presented in Table ST (ESI†). In this work, the evaporation rate and efficiency of both CJSF and MJS were calculated for SW, B10, and B20 under different solar irradiance (1–3 sun). The results of CJSF (for SW evaporation) and MJS (for SW, B10, and B20 evaporation) under 1 sun irradiance are presented in Table ST (ESI†) for comparison. From the table, it can be said that in terms of efficiency and regeneration performance, both evaporators are superior to many recent biomass-based evaporators. CJSF with hydrophilic solar-absorbing surface provides higher evaporation rate and efficiency while evaporating sea water under 1 sun, whereas MJS with hydrophobic solar-absorbing surface provides superior regeneration performance and better efficiency than CJSF while evaporating highly NaCl Concentrated water (B10 and B20) under varying solar illumination.
Conclusion
In this work, for the first time, two solar evaporators (CJSF and MJS) with two distinct self-regeneration mechanisms were fabricated utilizing JS (a sustainable and biodegradable agricultural by-product). Compared to MJS, the solar-absorbing surface of CJSF was much more hydrophilic. The prepared MJS features a hydrophilic surface for water absorption and a hydrophobic surface for solar absorption, giving it the properties of a Janus evaporator. Under varied solar illumination, the regeneration performance of both evaporators was evaluated for seawater and various salt-concentrated brine waters. For CJSF, the regeneration process relied entirely on the salt ion diffusion backflow mechanism, which is dependent on the salt exchange between the core natural hole and surrounding microchannel via the pits in the microchannels' walls, whereas ISSG established the lateral salt gradient. For JS, the success of this mechanism is determined by the thickness and diameter of the evaporators as the thickness controls the rate of water transport during evaporation and diameter dictates the distance between the central natural hole and the furthest microchannels of the JS. CJSF performs effectively while evaporating seawater and NaCl concentrated brine water under one sun. However, the regeneration performance started to decrease with increasing solar irradiation for different salt concentrated brine water. On the other hand, for MJS, regeneration not only depends on the inter-channel and channel hole salt exchange but also on the hydrophobic solar-absorbing surface. The thin hydrophobic solar-absorbing layer keeps most of the water in the hydrophilic water pumping area and steam is generated in the hydrophilic–hydrophobic interface. Hence, it blocks the salt growth on the top of the solar-absorbing surface. Due to the presence of these 2 mechanisms, MJS was capable of evaporating SW and brine water of different salt concentrations at almost the same rate under 1 sun illumination and no salt was observed within 1 hour while evaporating B20 under 3 sun irradiations. Moreover, the evaporation efficiency of MJS was never below 70% for different NaCl concentrated water under different solar illumination. Due to the thickness of the solar-absorbing surface, CJSF shows higher solar absorbance than MJS. Not only that, CJSF provides slightly higher evaporation rate (1.52 kg m−2 h−1 (maximum)) as well as efficiency (87.01%) than MJS (evaporation rate of 1.46 kg m−2 h−1 and efficiency of 84.39%) only for sea water evaporation under 1 sun illumination. However, MJS provides better evaporation performance for highly NaCl concentrated brine water (B10 and B20) at 1 sun irradiation. Except that, MJS shows higher efficiency and evaporation rate than CJSF for SW, B10, and B20 under 2 sun and 3 sun irradiations. Considering the difficulties of fabrication, CJSF was selected for wastewater purification. It was capable of purifying MB, CR, and EBT solution by evaporating them with 84.57%, 82.99%, and 82.91% efficiency, respectively, under 1 sun illumination. This work has showed the effectiveness of JS in interfacial solar steam generation for the first time and explores different salt mitigation mechanisms for sea water evaporation, which may help the future researchers in selecting a proper mechanism while designing biomass-derived solar evaporators for sea water desalination.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by the Innovation and Technology Fund, Hong Kong, China (GHP/040/19SZ), the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project number: 1-ZE14), Photonic Research Institute, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (Project number: 1-CD6V), and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China (Grant Code: the science and technology innovation commission of Shenzhen (JCYJ20210324141206017)).
References
J. Liu, H. Yang, S. N. Gosling, M. Kummu, M. Flörke, S. Pfister, N. Hanasaki, Y. Wada, X. Zhang, C. Zheng, J. Alcamo and T. Oki, Earth's Future, 2017, 5, 545–559 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hussain, Z. Wang, J. Wang, H. Yang, M. Arfan, D. Hassan, W. Wang, M. I. Azam and M. Faisal, Water Resour. Manag., 2022, 36, 931–950 CrossRef .
S. A. Kalogirou, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2005, 31, 242–281 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
C. Jia, Y. Li, Z. Yang, G. Chen, Y. Yao, F. Jiang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel, H. Xie, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Joule, 2017, 1, 588–599 CrossRef .
Z. Li, C. Wang, T. Lei, H. Ma, J. Su, S. Ling and W. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800144 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, G. Zhao, L. Wang, D. Jia, Y. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2021, 179, 337–347 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sun, W. Zhang, I. Zada, Y. Zhang, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su, D. Pantelić, B. Jelenković and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2171–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, J. Yu, C. Ma, C. Zhang, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuan, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, L. Yang, H. Yang, L. Bai, D. Wei, W. Wang, Q. Wang and H. Chen, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 5, 2000245 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Saleque, N. Nowshin, M. N. A. S. Ivan, S. Ahmed and Y. H. Tsang, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2100986 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Saleque, S. Ma, S. Ahmed, M. I. Hossain, W. Qarony and Y. H. Tsang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 5, 2170009 CrossRef .

          A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, M. N. A. S. Ivan, M. I. Hossain, W. Qarony and Y. H. Tsang, in 2D Photonic Materials and Devices V, ed. A. Majumdar, C. M. Torres and H. Deng, SPIE,  2022, p. 39 Search PubMed .
S. Cao, P. Rathi, X. Wu, D. Ghim, Y. S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–22 Search PubMed .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, C. Wang, Z. Li, S. Wu and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007855 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. McElrone, W. T. Pockman, J. Martínez-Vilalta and R. B. Jackson, New Phytol., 2004, 163, 507–517 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Song, Y. Feng and J. Yao, Desalination, 2020, 496, 114727 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ebrahimi, E. K. Goharshadi and M. Mohammadi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2022, 275, 125258 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lv, C. Gao, Y. Xu, X. Fan, J. Xiao, Y. Liu and C. Song, Desalination, 2021, 510, 115093 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Guan, T.-T. Fan, H.-Y. Bai, Y. Su, Z. Liu, X. Ning, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y.-Z. Long, Carbon, 2022, 188, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, R. K. Qing, A. Q. Xie, H. Liu, L. Zhu and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 18829–18837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, L. Wang, S. Song, Y. Li, F. Jia, T. Feng and N. Hu, Desalination, 2022, 525, 115483 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Banerjee and M. D. Mathew, Agric. Wastes, 1985, 13, 217–227 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Saleem, S. Ali, M. Rehman, M. Hasanuzzaman, M. Rizwan, S. Irshad, F. Shafiq, M. Iqbal, B. M. Alharbi, T. S. Alnusaire and S. H. Qari, Plants, 2020, 9, 1–14 Search PubMed .
S. S. Shah, E. Cevik, M. A. Aziz, T. F. Qahtan, A. Bozkurt and Z. H. Yamani, Synth. Met., 2021, 277, 116765 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nanaji, T. N. Rao, U. Varadaraju and S. Anandan, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 2289–2297 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Ghosh, D. P. Ray, A. Tewari and I. Das, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2021, 18, 2747–2764 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Aziz, I. R. Chowdhury, M. A. J. Mazumder and S. Chowdhury, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2019, 26, 22656–22669 CrossRef PubMed .
G. C. Panda, S. K. Das and A. K. Guha, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 164, 374–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Amayreh, M. K. Nazal, M. A. Aziz and D. R. Gijjapu, Biomass Convers. Biorefin., 2022, 6–10 Search PubMed .
A. J. S. Ahammad, P. R. Pal, S. S. Shah, T. Islam, M. Mahedi Hasan, M. A. A. Qasem, N. Odhikari, S. Sarker, D. M. Kim and M. Abdul Aziz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 832, 368–379 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rai, S. N. Gummadi and D. K. Chand, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 22514–22520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, T. Jyske and M. Petrič, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2021, 5(5), 2000251 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Nair, K. Bicy, S. C. George and S. Thomas, Macromol. Symp., 2021, 398, 1–10 CrossRef .
H. Huang, L. Zhao, Q. Yu, P. Lin, J. Xu, X. Yin, S. Chen, H. Wang and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11204–11213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, S. K. Megarajan and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 963–971 RSC .
K.-Y. Law, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 686–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, M. N. A. S. Ivan, M. I. Hossain, W. Qarony, P. K. Cheng, J. Qiao, Z. L. Guo, L. Zeng and Y. H. Tsang, Nano Energy, 2022, 94, 106916 CrossRef CAS .
K. Law, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(4), 686–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Roy, S. K. Sen, S. C. Bag and S. N. Pandey, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1991, 42, 2943–2950 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. A. S. Ivan, A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, P. K. Cheng, J. Qiao, T. I. Alam and Y. H. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14(6), 7936–7948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, M. E. Robson, J. L. Phelps, J. S. Tan, B. Shao, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 708–715 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta08237cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Preparation process of the evaporators and mechanism of salt exchange during solar evaporation. (a) Collection of JS pieces. (b) Preparation of carbonized JS (CJS). (c) Preparation of MJS. (d) Schematics of ISSG, salt exchange (through pit), and multidirectional mass transfer mechanism of the proposed evaporator.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphology characterization of the JS. SEM images of the top surface of (a) PJS. (b) CJS. (c) MJS with the TEM image of the used MWCNT (inset). (d) SEM image showing the presence of MWCNTs inside the channels. (e) Image of the top surface of the evaporator showing the presence of pits in the walls of the channels. (f) Image of the cross section of JS. (g) Image of the natural pits found in the wall of the microchannels.	 

 	Fig. 3  Characterization. (a) Survey XPS spectra for JS and CJS. (b and c) High resolution XPS spectra of C 1s in JS and CJS. (d) FTIR-ATR spectra of JS and CJS. (e and f) Raman spectra of the solar-absorbing surface of CJS and MJS. (g) AFM image of the MWCNTs. (h) Height profile of the marked MWCNTs and its average length. (i) Absorbance of PJS, CJS, and MJS on the left and solar spectral irradiance (AM 1.5 G) in the right.	 

 	Fig. 4  Thermal image of CJS and MJS. (a) Image showing the temperature distribution of overall system under 1 sun. (b–e) Thermal image of CJS under dark and different solar irradiation. (f) Change in the temperature of the solar-absorbing surface of CJS during the on–off cycle. (g–i) Thermal image of MJS under different solar irradiation. (j) Change in the temperature of solar-absorbing surface of MJS during the on/off cycle.	 

 	Fig. 5  Experimental result. (a) Evaporation rate of different CJS evaporators. (b) Mass change rate of Sea water (SW) and brine water of different NaCl concentration in the presence of CJS under 1 sun illumination; brine water with 3.5 wt%, 10 wt% and 20 wt% NaCl concentration are denoted as B3.5, B10 and B20 respectively. The mass change rate of water and the mass change rate of water in the presence of PJS and CJSF under 1 sun (inset). (c) Mass change rate of water, sea water and brine water of different NaCl concentrations in the presence of MJS. Direct salt blocking mechanism of MJS (inset). (d) Schematic illustration of salt exchange through the pits and multi directional mass transfer. (e) Experimental result of salt exchange through pits. (f) Evaporation rate and efficiency of CJS and MJS for Tap water (TW), SW, B10 and B20. (g) Evaporation rate and mass change rate of sea water in the presence of CJS under 1 sun illumination for 8.5 hours and the change in salinity of sea water after 8.5 hours of evaporation experiment. (h) Evaporation rate and mass change rate of sea water in the presence of MJS under 1 sun illumination for 8.5 hours. (i) Salt rejection performance of CJS and MJS.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Q = c × (Ta − Ti)	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Sea water desalination and wastewater purification. (a) Schematic illustration of the water collection system. (b) TDS and conductivity of purified water. (c) pH and salinity of purified water. (d) Absorbance of purified water (PW) and methylene blue (MB) solution. (e) Absorbance of PW and Congo Red (CR) solution. (f) Absorbance of PW and Eriochrome Black T (EBT) solution. (g) Evaporation rate and efficiency of CJSF in evaporating different waste-water solution under 1 sun illumination. Mass change rate of different wastewaters in the presence of CJSF (inset). (h) Performance of CJSF during the cycling test. Self-floating characteristics of the evaporator and secondary contamination test (inset). (i) Performance of MJS during the cycling test. Condition of the CJS and MJS after 2 months of experimentation (inset).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta08237c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
