Multifunctional 3D K 2 Ti 6 O 13 nanobelt-built architectures towards wastewater remediation: selective adsorption, photodegradation, mechanism insigh ...  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CY01684D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CY01684D
(Paper)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 6180-6195Multifunctional 3D K2Ti6O13 nanobelt-built architectures towards wastewater remediation: selective adsorption, photodegradation, mechanism insight and photoelectrochemical investigation†

        
          
            Qiang 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bei 
            Zhang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xinyuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hongmin 
            Zhu
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bing 
            Li
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Mechanical and Power Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: bingli@ecust.edu.cn; drlibing@163.com
bGraduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University, 6-6-02 Aramaki-Aza-Aoba, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8579, Japan. E-mail: hzhu@material.tohoku.ac.jp
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai, 200237, China
Received 
      14th August 2018
    , Accepted 25th October 2018First published on 26th October 2018AbstractUnique 3D cocoon-like architectures comprising numerous 1D single-crystalline hexatitanate nanobelts with abundant interconnected and open porous structures were successfully grown from chloride flux. In particular, the K2Ti6O13 nanobelt-built architectures (NAs) showed superior selective adsorption of cationic dyes (MB and RhB) and the adsorption capacity of MB was much higher than that of RhB, which was highly related to their porous structures, surface charges and the intrinsic characteristics of dye molecules. The residual contaminants after initial selective adsorption were removed efficiently by the subsequent photodegradation, mainly attributed to the 3D porous NAs with a large surface area quickening the diffusion and mass transport of dyes and reactive species, enhancing the light-harvesting ability and promoting the spatial separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Accordingly, possible mechanisms responsible for crystal growth, construction of 3D NAs, selective adsorption and photodegradation were proposed and fully discussed. More importantly, the K2Ti6O13 photoelectrode exhibited higher photoelectrochemical responses for water splitting than the Na2Ti6O13 electrode, supported by the open-circuit potential measurements, current–potential curves, transient photocurrent responses and EIS analysis, which was consistent with their photocatalytic activities and further highlighted the distinct advantages of 3D porous NAs. Furthermore, the regenerated 3D K2Ti6O13 NAs by photodegradation also showed good recyclability and stability. Overall, our work provided valuable insights into nanoarchitectured design of novel hierarchically porous nanomaterials with multifunctional roles for environmental remediation and solar energy conversion.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, water pollution induced by large varieties of toxic and harmful chemicals from the textile, paper, leather, printing, food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries has posed great threats to human health and aquatic-terrestrial ecosystems.1,2 In particular, synthetic organic dyes are one of the most common organic contaminants in industrial effluents and most of them exhibit high biotoxicity, as well as carcinogenic and mutagenic effects.3 In this context, separation and removal of organic pollutants before discharging into water bodies and onto terrestrial lands are becoming a crucial issue. To date, significant research efforts have been devoted to developing economic and effective techniques to remove hazardous organic pollutants from wastewater and industrial effluents, such as biological treatment,4 precipitation,5 adsorption,2,3,6 chemical oxidation,7 photocatalytic degradation,8 electrochemical process,9 and many others.
Among these physical, chemical and biological methods, adsorption is considered as a fairly cost-effective and reliable technique for wastewater remediation due to its high efficiency, easy operation and the availability of various kinds of adsorbents, including activated carbon (AC),10 mesoporous silica,6 zeolites,11 coordination polymers,12 clay minerals13 and metal–organic frameworks.14 However, most of the current absorbents can hardly satisfy the requirements of practical application in water purification because of their low adsorption capacity, poor selectivity or high cost. Thus, it is of great significance to design novel and cost-effective absorbents with large capacity and high selectivity for efficient organic wastewater purification. Considering the complex and stable aromatic structures of dye molecules, conventional physical or chemical methods can't directly and completely eliminate such kinds of organic pollutants, only transferring them from the liquid phase to the solid phase or another liquid phase, which still needs further treatment. Moreover, the applicability of the biodegradation technique for textile effluent treatment can be also limited by the toxicity of organic contaminants. In recent decades, semiconductor photocatalysis has been gaining attention both in fundamental studies and industrial applications, due to its overwhelming advantages that include the complete decomposition of organic pollutants into biodegradable or less toxic organic compounds, eco-friendly carbon dioxide, water and inorganic ions via the light-induced redox reaction, low-energy-consumption process (using abundant sunlight as a source of energy) and availability of numerous semiconductor photocatalysts.8,15–17
To this regard, the combination of physical and chemical methods (i.e., adsorption and photocatalysis) for highly efficient removal of hazardous organic pollutants from wastewater was proposed, which has attracted extensive research interest in the field of environmental remediation and solar energy utilization. For the sake of successful integration of adsorption separation with photocatalytic degradation towards water purification, the exploration and design of effective nanomaterials with adsorption–photocatalysis bifunctional roles were crucial. Recently, a series of composite materials have been developed with the synergy of adsorption and photodegradation, such as g-C3N4/biochar,18 TiO2/biochar,19 SiO2/TiO2/montmorillonite,20 Cu2O/Cu2(OH)3NO3,21 mesoporous TiO2/carbon fiber,22 MgO/TiO2,23 graphene/Bi2Fe4O9,24 TiO2/AC (ref. 25) and ZnO/AC.26 Actually, the excellent performance of these double-function composites for wastewater remediation was mainly dependent on the synergistic effects between the adsorption ability of adsorptive components (such as biochar, AC, etc.) and the photocatalytic activity of semiconductors (such as TiO2, g-C3N4, etc.). To be honest, the adsorbents were usually not photoactive; meanwhile the semiconductors exhibited weak or no adsorption performance towards organic pollutants. Therefore, it is still essential to fabricate multifunctional nanostructured materials with adsorption and photocatalytic activities, which is significant for the advancement of wastewater treatment techniques.
One-dimensional (1D) alkali metal hexatitanate materials (such as K2Ti6O13 and Na2Ti6O13, hereinafter KTO and NTO, respectively) with unique tunnel crystal structures have recently attracted considerable attention due to their excellent thermal insulating ability, chemical stability, mechanical performance, and especially their good photocatalytic properties for the degradation of organic pollutants, reduction of carbon dioxide and water splitting.27–30 Moreover, 1D nanostructures possess apparent advantages, such as (i) ensuring efficient adsorption of incident light based on sufficient lengths (i.e., high length-to-diameter ratio), (ii) facilitating the migration of photogenerated charge carriers to the solid–liquid interface by determining directional electron transfer along the long axial channels and reducing the hole transport distances (due to small radial size), thus improving charge separation and inhibiting bulk recombination, (iii) enlarged surface areas providing abundant surface reaction sites, which is beneficial for greatly enhancing the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) performance.30,31 However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no previous studies regarding the selective adsorption ability or particularly the integration of initial physically selective adsorption with subsequent chemical photodegradation over flux-grown KTO nanomaterials for efficient organic wastewater treatment and PEC solar energy conversion.
In this work, we found for the first time that multifunctional three-dimensional (3D) KTO nanobelt-built architectures (hereinafter NAs) grown from chloride flux possessed not only superior adsorption selectivity towards cationic dyes, but also good photocatalytic activity for dye degradation under simulated sunlight irradiation. Moreover, the selective adsorption activity of KTO NAs was more sensitive to MB than RhB and meanwhile stronger than that of Na-doped K2Ti6O13 (hereinafter NKTO) and NTO samples prepared by the molten salt flux method. The residual dyes after adsorption could be efficiently degraded by the subsequent photocatalytic process in the presence of KTO NAs, mainly attributable to the distinct advantages of 3D porous NAs in adsorption and photocatalytic reactions. Furthermore, the regenerated KTO samples by photodegradation also exhibited high stability. Additionally, possible mechanisms responsible for crystal growth and construction of 3D NAs, selective adsorption and photocatalytic degradation were proposed. More importantly, the good PEC response of the KTO electrode was suggestive of its promising applications in photoelectrocatalytic pollutant degradation and PEC water splitting, which could also promote the understanding of the photocatalytic mechanism for dye degradation over the 3D KTO NAs.
2 Experimental
All the experimental details are described in the ESI.†
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Structural and morphological properties
The composition and crystalline phase of the flux-grown samples were determined by XRD patterns, as shown in Fig. 1. It is evident that all the diffraction peaks for the NTO sample are perfectly indexed to the monoclinic phase of NTO with the space group C2/m (12) and lattice parameters a = 15.131 Å, b = 3.745 Å, c = 9.159 Å and β = 99.3° (ICDD PDF No.73-1398), manifesting a high phase purity of the flux-grown NTO crystals. As for the KTO sample, the pronounced diffraction peaks can be assigned to the monoclinic KTO phase (ICDD PDF No.74-0275) with the space group C2/m (12) and lattice parameters a = 15.582 Å, b = 3.82 Å, c = 9.112 Å and β = 99.764°. Herein, note that the diffraction peak centered at around 2θ = 47.850° should be indexed to the (020) plane (2θ = 47.887°) of another monoclinic-phase KTO (ICDD PDF No. 40-0403, instead of ICDD PDF No.74-0275 with the (020) plane at 2θ = 47.568°), probably associated with the highly oriented growth of KTO nanocrystals (as confirmed by TEM measurements, vide infra). Compared to KTO and NTO, NKTO shows similar diffraction peaks that are located between those of KTO and NTO, which can be attributable to the lattice shrinkage caused by the replacement of K+ ions by smaller Na+ ions during the crystal growth of KTO particles and simultaneously suggest the formation of a NaxK2−xTi6O13 solid solution. Actually, the successful construction of the NKTO phase due to the Na+-ion substitution in the tunnel structure consisting of adjacent TiO6 octahedra was strongly related to similar crystal structure characteristics between NTO and KTO (including their crystal systems, space groups, lattice parameters and chemical compositions), as shown in Fig. S1.† In addition, the sharp and symmetric XRD peaks of all these samples indicated the highly crystalline characteristics of the flux-grown titanate crystals, in line with our previous studies,27,30,32,33 further emphasizing the advantages of the molten slat method in fabricating high-quality inorganic crystalline materials.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the flux-grown samples and the standard XRD patterns of KTO and NTO. 
The morphologies and sizes of the flux-grown products were characterized by means of the SEM technique combined with dimensional measuring software. Fig. 2a is a typical low-magnification SEM image of KTO, showing a unique cocoon-like structure composed of a large number of KTO nanobelts (NBs). As can be seen from Fig. 2 panels b and c, KTO NBs show a relatively uniform size distribution with an average width of ca. 110 nm and a length ranging from several to more than tens of microns, resulting in a relatively high length–diameter ratio. Evidently, such a nanobelt-assembled cocoon-like architecture is full of numerous open and interconnected pores and to some extent the exceptionally long and interlaced NBs can ensure a considerable firm framework of 3D KTO NAs. As shown in Fig. 2d, the NTO resultants exhibit smaller cocoon-like spheres consisting of NTO NBs in comparison with KTO products. Meanwhile, the flux-grown NTO NBs have a remarkably larger average width of ca. 290 nm (maximum size up to 500 nm) and a lower length–diameter ratio (see in Fig. 2 panels e and f) than KTO NBs, suggesting the obvious difference in the crystallization habit of KTO and NTO in the specific molten salts. Moreover, panels g and h in Fig. 2 can demonstrate that the flux-grown NKTO products have a similar nanobelt-assembled cocoon-like architecture to KTO materials. Nevertheless, from Fig. 2i and the inset, a slightly larger average width of NKTO NBs (160 nm) than that of KTO NBs (110 nm) can be observed, which is inevitably ascribed to the effects of the chloride flux type on the crystal growth of KTO NBs, i.e., the introduction of Na+ ions into the KTO phase. In other words, the different growth environments (KCl–NaCl flux vs. KCl flux) altered the crystallization and growth behaviors of KTO nanocrystals. Apart from the effect on crystal sizes of NBs, it was also worthwhile to point out that the KTO sample seemed to possess bigger and more compact 3D cocoon-like NAs than both NTO and NKTO products. Consequently, it can be inferred that such a unique nanobelt-built network will endow KTO with more abundant porous structures, a larger surface area and higher architectural stability in comparison with those of NTO and NKTO, which leads to better adsorption properties of the KTO sample since the 3D NAs with abundant interconnected porous structures are capable of accelerating the diffusion and mass transport of the adsorbed species in aqueous solutions and simultaneously enhancing the interaction between KTO NAs and adsorbed species. To be honest, synthesis of inorganic nanocrystals with good dispersity and crystallinity by the molten salt route is relatively feasible because the excessive amounts of molten salt flux can not only provide a desired environment for anisotropic growth and diffusion of the crystals but also restrain further particle aggregation.27,32–35 However, it is difficult to obtain monodisperse nanocrystals (especially 1D NBs with high aspect ratios) owing to the strong polarity in molten salts,36 which can be responsible for the construction of well-developed cocoon-like architectures assembled from a great number of highly crystalline NBs. In addition, the formation of such 3D NAs is also associated with the amounts and kinds of salts used as the reaction media, synthetic conditions (such as reaction temperature and duration) and physicochemical characteristics of the grown titanate NBs (including their small particle sizes, high aspect ratios and specific crystallization habits).32,35,37,38
 Fig. 2  SEM images of KTO (a–c), NTO (d–f) and NKTO (g–i). The scale bars in ×1.0k images (a, d and g), ×5.0k images (b, e and h) and ×30.0k images (c, f and i) are 10 μm, 2 μm and 200 nm, respectively. The insets show the size distributions of the corresponding samples. 
To get more insights into the microstructure and crystallization characteristics of the flux-grown alkali metal hexatitanate NBs, further investigation was performed by TEM (including SAED and HRTEM) measurements. Fig. 3a shows a high-magnification TEM image of an individual belt-like KTO nanocrystal with a width of around 75 nm, and the corresponding SAED pattern (inset) recorded along the [001] zone axis suggests the single-crystalline nature of KTO NBs with preferential growth along the [010] crystallographic direction, which accords with previous studies.27,29 A two-dimensional HRTEM image taken on the edge of the KTO nanobelt, as displayed in Fig. 3b, shows that two sets of lattice fringes with spacings of 0.370 and 0.768 nm match well with the (110) and (200) crystal planes of the monoclinic KTO phase, respectively. Notably, the interfacial angle between the (110) and (200) planes was measured to be approximately 76°, which can be quite consistent with the theoretical value, once again suggesting the highly crystalline characteristics of the flux-grown KTO NBs. Typical low-magnification TEM images of KTO products, as shown in Fig. S2,† further highlight the well-defined 1D structure with a uniform size distribution and a high aspect ratio of KTO NBs. Fig. S3a† displays a representative TEM image and SAED pattern (inset) of an individual NKTO nanobelt with a width of 100 nm, revealing that the single-crystalline NKTO nanocrystal grows preferentially along the [010] crystallographic orientation. Fig. S3b† shows the corresponding HRTEM image of the NKTO nanobelt with a fringe spacing of 0.368 nm, slightly smaller than the (110) interplanar distance of monoclinic KTO, which can be explained by the Na+-ion substitution during the crystal growth of KTO NBs in NaCl–KCl flux. As shown in Fig. 3c, the diameter of NTO NBs (ranging from 130 to 300 nm) is obviously wider than that of KTO and NKTO NBs, in line with the SEM results. From Fig. 3d, it can be identified that the flux-grown NTO nanobelt exhibits a highly defined noodle-like shape with flat and smooth surfaces and the thickness is estimated to be about 30 nm. Correspondingly, the SAED pattern (inset of Fig. 3d) indicates that the NTO nanobelt is a single-crystalline nanoparticle with a specific growth direction along [010] that is the same as that of KTO and NKTO NBs. Furthermore, the clear lattice fringes in the HRTEM images and highly ordered and sharp diffraction spots in the SAED patterns can also imply the highly crystalline nature of the titanate nanomaterials grown from molten salt flux, which is in good agreement with the XRD results.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image, SAED pattern (inset) and corresponding HRTEM image (b) of a single flux-grown KTO nanobelt. (c) TEM image of the flux-grown NTO NBs. (d) A high-magnification TEM image of an individual NTO nanobelt and its SAED pattern (inset). 
3.2 Crystal growth and formation mechanism of 3D NAs
Firstly, the main chemical reactions occurring in molten salts for the as-synthesized hexatitanate samples are summarized as follows: K2CO3 + 6TiO2 → K2Ti6O13 + CO2↑(1) xNa+ + K2Ti6O13 → NaxK2−xTi6O13 + xK+(2) Na2CO3 + 6TiO2 → Na2Ti6O13 + CO2↑(3)
According to the dissolution–precipitation mechanism,27,34 the concentration of the titanate phase (taking KTO for an example), formed by reaction (1) at the solid–liquid interface between TiO2 nanoparticles and molten salt flux, has a significant influence on the crystal growth of 1D KTO NBs and the formation of 3D cocoon-like KTO NAs. When an appropriate KTO concentration is established, the nanocrystalline nuclei emerge in situ around the solid–liquid interface. In general, to minimize the surface energy, the specific crystal growth induced by the crystallographic facet selective anisotropy of KTO nuclei will occur along the [010] direction through a thermodynamically controlled process. As the reaction continues, the formed 1D KTO nanocrystals grow accordingly with further increasing concentration of the KTO phase. Owing to the fast [010]-oriented epitaxial growth of KTO crystals in a molten salt environment, the initial zero-dimensional TiO2 nanoparticles are transformed into 1D high-aspect-ratio KTO NBs, which causes the crystallized nanobelts to interweave closely together with each other so as to construct the well-developed 3D cocoon-like NAs. Moreover, from the view of thermodynamics, the adjacent nanocrystals tend to assemble together and reduce the interfacial area for decreasing the total surface energy of the system, which can also contribute to the construction of 3D KTO NAs.
In the case of NKTO, there is an additional ion-exchange reaction (2) in the NaCl–KCl flux, that is, the K+ ions in the tunnel structure of KTO are replaced by the smaller Na+ ions from the flux. As compared to KTO, although the replacement of K+ by Na+ ions can't change the [010]-oriented growth of NKTO NBs, the different molten salt system has exerted certain obvious effects on the formation of NKTO NAs, as estimated from their fluffy surface morphology and seemingly loose architectures shown in Fig. 2. When it comes to NTO formed by reaction (3), owing to the different crystallization habits of NTO and KTO grown in the corresponding molten salts, NTO NBs show a larger width and a lower aspect ratio in comparison with KTO NBs. From these observations, it can be inferred that, except for the overwhelmingly preferential [010] orientation, NTO NBs also exhibit appreciable growth along the direction vertical to [010], resulting in a larger size in width (and thickness), as illustrated in Scheme 1. In other words, the [010]-oriented growth of KTO is more predominant than that of NTO, which can be further supported by the XRD results (see in Fig. 1). More specifically, for both standard and measured XRD patterns, the relative intensities of (020) peaks for KTO are obviously stronger than those for NTO. Apparently, such a growth mechanism of NTO is not favorable for the rapid growth of 1D crystals with a superior aspect ratio and then the construction of 3D architectures featured with numerous interlaced 1D NBs. Therefore, the above results and discussion about crystal growth characteristics can account for the formation of smaller flux-grown NTO NAs than KTO NAs (as can be seen in Fig. 2).
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the anisotropic crystal growth of KTO and NTO NBs in KCl and NaCl molten salts, respectively. 
3.3 Textural properties
As we all know, the adsorption capacity and photocatalytic activity of materials are closely related to their textural properties. Generally speaking, adsorption and photocatalytic properties are proportional to the surface area of a sample since a larger surface area can provide more surface active sites and allow the materials to capture more reactants for photocatalytic reactions. In this regard, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller specific surface area (SBET) and pore characteristics of the flux-grown samples were analyzed using nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms. As plotted in Fig. 4, the SBET of KTO, NKTO and NTO are determined to be ca. 22.86, 12.64 and 6.47 m2 g−1, respectively, highlighting the much larger SBET of KTO than that of NKTO and NTO, which can be attributed to the smaller size of KTO NBs and especially the bigger and firmer porous NAs, inherently arising from the different crystal growth of NBs and the formation mechanism of NAs in various molten salt media. This is also consistent with the inferential results by the SEM observations. Note that the isotherm of KTO can be classified as a Brunauer–Deming–Deming–Teller (BDDT) type IV pattern with a pronounced H3 hysteresis loop in the relative pressure range of ca. 0.4–1.0 according to the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) classification, which is typically associated with the presence of capillary condensation in the mesoporous structure with slit shaped pores (2–50 nm in diameter).39 Specifically, the hysteresis loop at low relative pressures (0.4 < P/P0 < 0.9) can be assigned to the intra-aggregated pores constructed from the NBs in the cocoon-like NAs and the high-pressure hysteresis loop (0.9 < P/P0 < 1) is related to the larger pores formed between secondary particles.27,40 The porous inner networks of the cocoon-like KTO NAs were further proved via the pore-size distribution curve (inset of Fig. 4) calculated with the desorption data using the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) method, showing the existence of mesopores and macropores with diameters mainly ranging from 10 to 90 nm. Thus, it can be expected that the abundant porous structures and larger SBET of 3D cocoon-like KTO architectures consisting of intersecting and interconnected NBs will offer a great number of active sites and effective mass transfer channels for efficient physical adsorption and chemical catalytic processes. Furthermore, thanks to the unique hierarchical porous frameworks and high physicochemical stability of titanates, the flux-grown 3D KTO NAs can also serve as catalyst supports for extensive potential applications.
 Fig. 4  N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the flux-grown samples and the pore-size distribution (inset) of the KTO sample. 
3.4 Optical properties
Fig. S4a† shows the UV-vis DRS results of the flux-grown samples that offer information about their optical properties and electronic band structures. Clearly, all of the samples exhibit an obvious light absorbance below 400 nm in wavelength with a steep edge in the ultraviolet region that can be ascribed to the band-gap excitation, indicating the possibility of the three titanate samples used as semiconductor photocatalysts. Besides, similar spectral plots of these samples can in turn reveal their analogous crystal structures built from adjacent TiO6 octahedral units with alkali-metal K+ or Na+ ions filling in. The band gap energy (Eg) of the as-synthesized samples was calculated by the following formula: αhν = A(hν − Eg)1/n(4)in which α, h, ν and A are the absorption coefficient, Planck constant, light frequency and absorption constant relative to the material, respectively. The value of n is 2 for hexatitanate materials (direct band-gap semiconductors).30,41 For the UV-vis DRS, α can be replaced by the Kubelka–Munk function F(R∞) to determine the Eg of the measured materials, according to the Kubelka–Munk equation: F(R∞) = (1 − R∞)2/2R∞ = α/S(5) R∞ = Rsample/Rstandard(6)where R is the reflection intensity, BaSO4 is commonly used as a standard material, and S is the scattering coefficient. Thus, the plots of the modified Kubelka–Munk function (F(R∞)hν)2versus incident photon energy (hν) were obtained, as displayed in Fig. S4b.† In the case of NTO, an absorption edge at around 360 nm corresponds to the estimated Eg of 3.49 eV, very close to that of NTO nanomaterials in previous reports.27,42 Compared with NTO, KTO and NKTO have a smaller Eg of around 3.44 eV, which can be assigned to their different chemical compositions and the quantum size effect (which is induced by the fact that the cocoon-like spherical architectures of KTO and NKTO are larger than that of NTO). Therefore, the band gap and electronic structure of flux-grown hexatitanate materials can be tailored by controlling the chemical compositions (i.e., the alkali metal ions in Ti–O based networks), molten salt media and morphological characteristics (such as the particle size, anisotropic feature of crystals, and hierarchical nanomaterial-assembled architectures), which is significant for fabricating other crystalline semiconductor photocatalysts with tunable band structures and optimized catalytic properties.
3.5 Selective adsorption of cationic dyes
The adsorption abilities of the flux-grown samples toward anionic (MO) and cationic (MB and RhB) dyes in aqueous solutions were investigated and the results are shown in Fig. 5. Interestingly, KTO could hardly capture MO under the current conditions, while the removal percentage of MB on KTO increased to ca. 65.8% within 1 min and an equilibrium state was almost established in the first 120 min with a high removal percent of 82.1%, suggesting the excellent selective adsorption ability of KTO for cationic dye MB. Interestingly, the adsorption efficiency of MB was nearly four times higher than that of RhB in the presence of KTO, although MB and RhB were both cationic dyes. Moreover, NKTO and NTO also exhibited a similar dye selective adsorption performance, whereas their selective activity for MB was about two times weaker than that of KTO. The preferential adsorption ability of these samples for MB followed a sequence of KTO > NKTO > NTO, which could be further evidenced by the corresponding time-dependent UV-vis spectra and photographs of MB solutions in Fig. 5d and S5.† Such a sequence was also applicable for the adsorption of another cationic dye RhB.
 Fig. 5  Removal percentages of organic dyes as a function of time over the KTO (a), NKTO (b) and NTO (c) samples. (d) Time dependent UV-vis spectra of MB solutions in the presence of the KTO sample and the insets are the corresponding optical photographs of MB solutions before and after absorption treatment. 
Taking into account their similar crystal structure and chemical compositions, the distinct difference in adsorption abilities of the three samples for cationic dyes should be attributed to their different SBET and porous structures. Besides, it was worth pointing out that the characteristic adsorption peaks in the UV-vis spectra of MB (λmax= 664 nm) and RhB (λmax= 554 nm) (in Fig. S6†) only decreased without any obvious shifts or appearance of new peaks with prolonged contact time, suggesting the stable molecular structure of dye pollutants during the adsorption process. In other words, the selective separation of cationic dyes from aqueous solutions over the flux-grown samples could mainly follow a physical adsorption mechanism.
To further determine the excellent selective ability of KTO towards MB, more adsorption experiments were carried out using two mixed dye solutions of MB/MO (cationic/anionic dye mixture) and MB/RhB (cationic/cationic dye mixture) (10 mg L−1, 1:1 volume ratio). The conspicuous color changes of dye solutions before and after adsorption can be clearly observed from Fig. S7† and insets of Fig. 6, showing that the initial color of MB/MO and MB/RhB solutions finally transformed into orange and rose, coinciding nearly with the initial color of single-component MO and RhB solutions, which indicated that most of MB had been selectively adsorbed and removed from the mixed solutions. Note that the color of the resultant MB/RhB solution seemed to be lighter than that of the initial single RhB solution, suggesting that a certain amount of RhB was also captured along with the preferential adsorption of MB in the mixed solution. Moreover, the above results can be clearly proved by the UV-vis spectra of dye solutions before and after adsorption treatment. In the case of the MB/MO solution (in Fig. 6a), the characteristic adsorption peak of MB at around 664 nm almost disappeared after the adsorption treatment with the KTO sample, whereas there was no significant change in that of anionic MO (464 nm), indicating that cationic MB was selectively absorbed and removed by the 3D KTO NAs from the MB/MO mixture. At the same time, the preferential separation of MB from the MB/RhB cationic dye mixed solution was also achieved in the presence of KTO NAs, as shown in Fig. 6b. Herein, the significantly decreased RhB peak at 554 nm and nearly disappeared MB peak at 664 nm could exactly correspond to the higher adsorption capacity of KTO NAs for MB than that for RhB, as proved in Fig. 5. Therefore, the outstanding selective adsorption ability towards cationic dyes (especially MB) can make the flux-grown KTO NAs a promising and novel adsorbent.
 Fig. 6  UV-vis spectra and the corresponding optical photographs (insets) of MB/MO (a) and MB/RhB (b) mixed dye solutions before and after adsorption in the presence of 3D KTO NAs. 
In addition to the removal efficiency, the adsorption capacity (qe and qt, adsorption capacity at equilibrium and at a certain time t), as another important characteristic of adsorbent materials, was also calculated to definitely evaluate the dye adsorption properties of the as-synthesized samples. Fig. S8a† shows that KTO has the largest adsorption capacity toward MB (14.29 mg g−1), which is about 1.5 and 2.1 times higher than that of NKTO (9.25 mg g−1) and NTO (6.70 mg g−1), respectively. Noticeably, the adsorption capacity of KTO towards MB at a contact time of 120 min was very close to the value of qe (11.58 vs. 14.29 mg g−1), as displayed in Fig. 7a, emphasizing the rapid adsorption of MB over the KTO NAs with a short equilibrium time. A similar phenomenon also happened on NKTO and NTO. Therefore, a saturated adsorption for MB can be nearly achieved within 2 hours for the flux-grown titanate nanomaterials in the dye aqueous solution (10 mg L−1). To understand the adsorption kinetics, the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models were applied to further analyze the experimental results. The two kinetic models can be expressed by the following equations: ln(qe − qt) = lnqe − k1t(7) (8)where k1 (min−1) and k2 (g mg−1 min−1) are the rate constants of the pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models, which can be determined using the linear plots of ln(qe − qt) versus t and t/qtversus t, respectively.43,44 In general, the better fitting model can be selected based on the linear regression correlation coefficient R2. By comparing the values of R2, as shown in Fig. 7b and S8b,† it was found that the pseudo-second-order kinetic model was more suitable to describe the selective MB adsorption process due to its higher R2 values (>0.99) than those of pseudo-first-order model (<0.90).
 Fig. 7  (a) MB adsorption capacities as a function of contact time in the presence of KTO, NKTO and NTO samples. (b) Pseudo-second-order kinetic model for selective MB adsorption over the three samples. 
Considering that the concentration of dye solutions is one of the most important parameters in determining the adsorption performance of adsorbents, the time-dependent removal of MB with various initial concentrations (5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 60 mg L−1) was also investigated. It can be seen in Fig. 8a that KTO can capture almost 100% MB dye from the aqueous solution (5 mg L−1) within 10 minutes and more than 70% MB dye is absorbed from its aqueous solution with a higher initial concentration of 10 mg L−1 after 10 minutes, underlining the existence of abundant available vacant surface sites in the porous KTO NAs during the initial adsorption stage. Overall, the removal rate of MB gradually decreased with augmenting the dye concentration, suggesting that the 3D KTO NAs should be more suitable for rapid selective removal of MB with lower concentrations. On the other hand, Fig. 8b shows that the adsorption capacity (at 120 minutes) exhibits a stepwise increment from 6.25 to 19.46 mg g−1 when the initial concentration of MB aqueous solution increases from 5 to 30 mg L−1, indicative of a remarkably enhanced interaction between MB dyes and KTO NAs in the aqueous solution with higher initial concentrations, which can be ascribed to the fact that the higher initial concentration provides the necessary driving force to overcome the mass transfer resistance of MB molecules between the solution and the surface of KTO NBs.45 However, an appreciable decrease in adsorption capacity occurred as the initial concentration of MB increased from 30 to 60 mg L−1, evidencing that a suitable dye concentration could be essential to obtain a higher adsorption capacity for the specific adsorbents.
 Fig. 8  Effects of initial concentration and contact time on the removal rate (a) and adsorption capacity (b) of KTO towards MB. 
According to the aforementioned discussion, the adsorption performance of KTO NAs could be closely dependent on their large SBET and porous structures. However, as for the selective dye adsorption of the porous materials, their surface areas and interior structures wouldn't be the predominant factors in determining the level of selective activity. Herein, the surface electrostatic properties of materials as another vital factor to drive the adsorption behaviors, especially the selective dye adsorption, were also evaluated by measuring the zeta potentials of the samples in deionized water. As expected, Fig. 9a evidences that the three samples are all negatively charged, and so they tend to preferentially capture the positively charged cationic dyes (MB and RhB) in aqueous solutions. In contrast, anionic dye MO was barely adsorbed onto the surface of flux-grown NBs owing to the existence of electrostatic repulsion. Moreover, the zeta potential of KTO (−31.5 mV) is more negative than that of NKTO (−24.7 mV) and NTO (−21.4 mV), which means that KTO possesses a stronger electrostatic attraction towards cationic dyes in aqueous solution, and thus a higher adsorption capability. In other words, the more negative the zeta potentials, the stronger the adsorption performance of the samples, which is also coincident with the above experimental results. In addition, it is well known that the pH value of a solution can significantly affect the surface charge, binding-sites of adsorbents and the degree of ionization of dye molecules, thereby determining the adsorption ability.44 To obtain more information about the surface charge of KTO, zeta potential measurements were also performed at different pH values. As shown in Fig. 9b, the zeta potential of KTO increases remarkably with the decrease of pH value, indicating the less negative charges at the adsorbent surface due to the effect of protonation under acidic conditions (pH <7.0), which results in a lower dye adsorption capacity of the KTO adsorbent for cationic MB.46 Moreover, the decreased adsorption ability was also associated with the competition between H+ ions and the positively charged MB ions owing to the existence of excess H+ ions. On the other hand, the deprotonation in a weak alkaline environment (such as pH = 8.0) could endow the KTO NAs with more negative zeta potentials since the surface of KTO might occupy more negatively charged OH− ions, leading to a larger adsorption capacity for cationic dyes due to the enhanced electrostatic force.47,48 However, the adsorption amount decreased gradually with further increasing pH value, probably caused by the excessive negatively charged OH− ions exerting a restricting effect on the electrostatic interactions between negatively charged KTO and cationic dyes. Overall, KTO possessed a predominant negative charge in a wide pH range from about 3.0 to 11.0, suggesting that 3D KTO NAs could serve as a promising candidate adsorbent for practical applications in industrial wastewater remediation.
 Fig. 9  (a) Zeta potentials of the as-synthesized samples with DI water as the dispersant. (b) Zeta potentials and equilibrium adsorption capacities for MB of the KTO sample at different pH values. 
3.6 Possible mechanism for superior selective dye adsorption
Based on the above comparative studies, the superior selective adsorption ability of KTO towards cationic dye MB could be mainly attributed to the following factors, and correspondingly the possible adsorption mechanism is illustrated in Scheme 2. Firstly, the larger SBET of cocoon-like KTO NAs with abundant interconnected porous structures could significantly increase the contact opportunity of dye molecules on the surface of KTO NBs, resulting in a stronger adsorbent–adsorbate interaction, that is, a higher adsorption capacity. Moreover, the 3D porous NAs possessed overwhelming advantages in diffusion and mass transfer of dye molecules, greatly accelerating the adsorption process. Secondly, it was well-known that cationic dye molecules could be readily captured on the surface of negatively charged materials by their mutual electrostatic attraction in aqueous solutions, which was considered as a crucial contributor to the selective activity for dye adsorption and separation. In other words, the strong electrostatic interaction between cationic dyes and the negatively charged KTO NAs dominated the preferential adsorption of cationic dyes and also boosted the adsorption capacity of KTO NAs. In contrast, the electrostatic repulsion between the anion dye MO and negatively charged KTO adsorbents could be responsible for the relatively low removal percentage of MO over the KTO NAs. Although RhB was also a cationic dye, the adsorption capacity and selectivity of KTO for MB were much higher than that for RhB, which was largely attributable to the intrinsic difference in molecular structure of dyes. According to the data shown in Table 1,49 the larger adsorption capacity toward MB could be explained by its more linear shape and smaller size (meaning a weaker steric hindrance during the adsorption process) in comparison with those of RhB. Aside from the apparent factors, it should be noticed that the difference in chemical composition of the dyes could also affect the corresponding adsorption performance. More specifically, the electronegativity of S (2.58) and N (3.04) in MB cations is weaker than that of O (3.44) in RhB cations, suggesting a stronger electron-donating ability of MB toward the empty 3d orbital of Ti4+ ions, thus resulting in a more intense interaction between KTO NBs and MB molecules, which can be a non-negligible factor responsible for the higher adsorption capacity of MB, as illustrated in Scheme 2b. Additionally, the excellent adsorption ability of KTO NAs could be also associated with the formation of hydrogen-bonding interactions between MB dye molecules and the –OH groups at the outer surface of KTO NBs (as proved in FT-IR results, vide infra).50 Therefore, the superior selective dye adsorption performance of KTO NAs was strongly dependent on the surface and architectural features of materials and the intrinsic characteristics of target pollutants.
 Scheme 2  (a) Proposed adsorption model for cationic dyes on the surface of 3D KTO NAs. (b) The tunnel crystal structure of the KTO phase consisting of adjacent TiO6 octahedral units that enclose the K+ ions and possible interactions between KTO NBs and dyes originating from the difference in the electronegativity of N, S and O atoms. 
Table 1 Molecular characteristics of the investigated organic dyes




Dyes
M. w.a

λ
max (nm)
Size (nm3)
Chemical structure
Ionicity (charge)





a Molecular weight (g mol−1).





MO
327.33
464
1.54 × 0.48 × 0.28



Anionic (−1)


MB
319.86
664
1.38 × 0.64 × 0.21



Cationic (+1)


RhB
479.02
554
1.56 × 1.35 × 0.42



Cationic (+1)




3.7 Photocatalytic activity, mechanism and degradation pathway of dye pollutants
After the initial adsorption treatment using the flux-grown samples as adsorbents, the removal percentages of cationic dyes with higher concentrations and especially the anionic dye MO were still not satisfactory. On the other hand, the excellent surface adsorption performance of 3D KTO NAs with abundant porous structures could offer abundant surface active sites and reaction centers as well as strong dye-capturing ability, which was very beneficial to the subsequent photocatalytic process for dye degradation since the photodegradation reactions occurred mainly around the surface of the catalyst. Although pure hexatitanates usually exhibited a lower photocatalytic activity than commercial P25 catalysts (due to their wider Eg and smaller surface areas),15,27 the unique selective adsorption ability of 3D KTO NAs can improve the overall efficiency for pollutant removal from wastewater. Consequently, the residual dyes were further subjected to the photocatalytic treatment under simulated sunlight irradiation. As shown in Fig. 10a, the decrease in concentration of dye solutions as a function of irradiation time was plotted to evaluate the degradation efficiency. In the absence of KTO NAs catalyst (blank tests), nearly 26% of MB was removed owing to its photolysis, whereas the decrease of RhB and MO could be almost negligible, due to their different molecular structures with distinct light-response characteristics and photolysis mechanism. Under light illumination, the MB dye solutions with initial concentrations of 20 and 30 mg L−1 were completely decomposed at 30 and 90 min, much faster than the degradation of MB solutions with higher initial concentrations (40 and 60 mg L−1), indicating that the flux-grown 3D KTO NAs could be suitable for practical treatment of diluted dye wastewater. The RhB dye solution (10 mg L−1) after the saturated adsorption was totally degraded within 2 h. Obviously, compared with MB and RhB, the degradation rate of MO was much slower, probably due to its lower adsorption capacity, which in turn emphasized the extremely crucial influence of initial dye adsorption on the subsequent photocatalytic degradation. According to the aforementioned adsorption mechanism, it was believable that the high photocatalytic activity of 3D KTO NAs for dye degradation was strongly dependent on their advantages of unique interconnected porous architectures with large SBET: (i) offering abundant adsorption and reaction sites along with efficient diffusion and mass transfer of dyes and reactive species, (ii) improving the light-harvesting ability by more light reflections and multiple-scattering within the porous nanobelt-assembled networks, (iii) shortening the diffusion length of charge migration and promoting the spatial relocalization of light-induced electrons and holes on surface terminal sites.45,51,52 Furthermore, taking into account the excellent adsorption and photocatalytic performance, more efficient removal of cationic dyes from aqueous solutions over the bifunctional 3D KTO NAs can be achieved through the synergistic adsorption–photodegradation process.
On the other hand, it was noteworthy that the UV-vis spectra of RhB solutions in the presence of KTO NAs monitored at different times (in Fig. 10b) showed that the characteristic absorption peak of RhB (at λmax) exhibited a distinct blue shift (from 554 nm to 508 nm) under light irradiation within 90 min, while no peak shifts appeared during the adsorption process (that was also found in Fig. S6†). Similarly, such a phenomenon could be also observed for NTO (Fig. 10c) and NKTO (Fig. S9a†). Moreover, the hypsochromic shifts in λmax of RhB coincided with the photocatalytic performance, that is, the higher the photocatalytic activity the larger the peak shift. In the case of MB, its typical absorption peak remained at λmax = 664 nm at the initial adsorption stage but showed a slight blue-shift at the subsequent photodegradation stage in the presence of NKTO (Fig. 10d) and NTO (Fig. S9b†). In general, the obvious hypsochromic shifts in λmax of RhB and MB during the photodegradation process can be explained by the deethylation and demethylation of RhB and MB dyes, respectively, accompanied by the formation of other new organic molecules.53 These facts strongly suggested that the molecular structure of dyes was stable during the initial adsorption stage (probably a physical process) and was gradually destroyed in the subsequent photodegradation process (including a series of chemical reactions).
 Fig. 10  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of dye pollutants by 3D KTO NAs under simulated sunlight irradiation. a: MO blank, b: RhB blank, c: MB blank, d: MO (10 mg L−1), e: MB (60 mg L−1), f: MB (40 mg L−1), g: RhB (10 mg L−1), h: MB (30 mg L−1), i: MB (20 mg L−1). Time dependent UV-vis spectra of RhB aqueous solution (10 mg L−1) over the KTO (b) and NTO (c) samples. (d) Time dependent UV-vis spectra of MB aqueous solutions (10 mg L−1) in the presence of the NKTO sample. 
Actually, photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes is primarily driven by the reactive species (such as ˙O2−, ˙OH, h+ and other oxidizing intermediates) that originate from the photogenerated electrons (e−) and holes (h+) in the semiconductor photocatalyst under light irradiation. Accordingly, a plausible photocatalytic mechanism responsible for dye degradation over the flux-grown 3D KTO NAs was proposed, as illustrated in Scheme 3. Firstly, the positions of the energy band edge for 3D KTO NAs were estimated by the following equations: EVB = χKTO − E0 + 1/2Eg(9) ECB = EVB − Eg(10) χKTO = (χK2 × χTi6 × χO13)1/(2+6+13)(11)where χKTO is the absolute electronegativity of KTO, which is defined as the geometric mean of the absolute electronegativity of constituent atoms (including χK, χTi and χO); E0 is the energy of the free electrons on the hydrogen scale (ca. 4.5 eV); EVB and ECB are the valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) edge potential, respectively. The value of χKTO was calculated to be about 5.41 eV, and thus ECB and EVB were −0.81 eV and 2.63 eV, respectively.
 Scheme 3  Photocatalytic mechanism for dye degradation over the 3D KTO NAs under simulated sunlight irradiation. 
Briefly, the photocatalytic reactions were initiated by the absorption of light photons with energy equal to or higher than the Eg of KTO NAs, leading to the generation of holes in the VB (hVB+) and electrons in the CB (eCB−). Benefiting from the unique 3D porous architectures assembled with high-aspect-ratio KTO NBs, the photogenerated charge carriers could efficiently migrate to the catalyst surface with a reduced recombination rate and then a series of redox reactions occurred at the solid–liquid interface. On the one hand, the ECB of KTO NAs is more negative than the standard redox potential of O2/˙O2− (−0.33 V vs. NHE),30 which allows the formation of ˙O2−via the reduction of O2 by eCB−. Herein, it was important to point out that the self-sensitization of dye molecules under simulated sunlight irradiation could also contribute to the photocatalytic process by injecting light-induced electrons to the CB of KTO NAs,54 and hence promoted the generation of ˙O2− radical species. In other words, the dye photosensitization extended the light adsorption of KTO NAs to visible light regions (because RhB, MB and MO had strong adsorption at ca. 450–600 nm, 550–700 nm and 350–550 nm, respectively), which was significant for increasing the utilization efficiency of solar energy and enhancing the photocatalytic performance of KTO NAs under simulated sunlight or visible light irradiation.54–56 On the other hand, the photogenerated hVB+ can oxidize water (i.e., OH− or H2O) to produce ˙OH radicals because of the more positive EVB than the redox potentials of ˙OH/OH− (1.99 V vs. NHE) and ˙OH/H2O (2.27 V vs. NHE).57 Besides, a small number of ˙OH radicals were also probably formed by the multi-step reactions of ˙O2− with eCB− (˙O2− + 2H+ + eCB− → H2O2, H2O2 + eCB− → ˙OH + OH−).30 In this way, the captured dye molecules on the KTO surface, owing to its excellent adsorption ability, were decomposed continuously with the consumption of active species (including ˙O2−, ˙OH and h+). Based on the above discussion, the main reactions involved in the photocatalytic degradation of dyes could be concluded as follows: KTO NAs + hν → KTO NAs(eCB−) + KTO NAs(hVB+)(12) Dyes + hv → Dyes*(13) Dyes* + KTO NAs → ˙Dyes+ + KTO NAs(eCB−)(14) O2 + eCB− → ˙O2−(15) ˙O2− + 2H+ + eCB− → H2O2(16) H2O2 + eCB− → ˙OH + OH−(17) H2O2 + hv → 2˙OH(18) OH− + hVB+ → ˙OH(19) H2O + hVB+ → H+ + ˙OH(20) ˙O2−, h+, ˙OH + ˙Dyes+ → degradation products (DPs)(21)
To support the above proposed photocatalytic mechanism, the reactive species involved in photocatalytic reactions were detected by control radical scavenging experiments combined with ERS and ˙OH trapping PL spectroscopy.30,53,57 The radical trapping tests were performed using different scavengers including KI and IPA as the quenchers of hVB+ and ˙OH radicals, respectively. Considering that ˙O2− radicals were derived from the direct reduction of dissolved O2 by eCB−, the contribution of ˙O2− radicals was hence determined via creating an anaerobic atmosphere maintained by continuous Ar purging during the photocatalytic tests. The results shown in Fig. 11a clearly revealed that the photodegradation performance of KTO NAs was greatly reduced by the introduced scavengers and Ar purging, suggesting the important roles of these reactive species in the photocatalytic process and their contribution following the order of ˙OH > hVB+ > ˙O2−. As shown in Fig. 11b, the strong PL emission peaks observed at around 375–525 nm indicated the generation of ˙OH radicals over the light-excited KTO catalysts. Notably, the PL peaks exhibited a gradual enhancement with prolonged irradiation time, indicating that more and more ˙OH radicals were generated since the PL intensity corresponded to the concentration of ˙OH radicals in the current system. Moreover, the evident ESR signals of DMPO-˙O2− and DMPO-˙OH were also detected under illumination (Fig. S10†), while no obvious signals could be seen in the dark, further confirming the formation of ˙O2− and ˙OH radicals over the light-induced KTO catalysts via the reduction reaction of eCB− with dissolved O2 in water (eqn (15)) and water oxidation by hVB+ (eqn (19) and (20)), respectively. Thus, the above results could strongly support the proposed photocatalytic mechanism for dye degradation over the 3D KTO NAs under simulated sunlight irradiation.
 Fig. 11  (a) Photodegradation efficiency of RhB by the KTO NAs under light irradiation in the presence of various scavengers. (b) PL spectral changes of KTO in TA solution upon light irradiation for different times. 
Furthermore, the intermediate products formed during the degradation of MB were also determined by HPLC-MS analysis, as shown in Fig. S11.† Correspondingly, the photodegradation pathway of MB in the presence of 3D KTO NAs under simulated sunlight irradiation was proposed and displayed in Fig. 12, demonstrating that the dye pollutants were decomposed into smaller organic species and ultimately mineralized to inorganic products including CO2, NO3−, SO42−, etc.
 Fig. 12  Possible photocatalytic degradation pathway of MB over the 3D KTO NAs. 
In addition to the photodegradation of organic dyes, it is noteworthy that the energy band structure (positions of CB minimum and VB maximum) of KTO NAs straddles the water redox potentials of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE) and O2/H2O (1.23 V vs. NHE), indicative of the exploitable applications of 3D KTO NAs in water splitting through either photocatalytic or PEC ways. Furthermore, such a 3D nanobelt-assembled architecture with abundant open and interconnected porous channels can not only be beneficial for improving the photo-activity, but also suitable for the deposition and incorporation of other co-catalysts and narrow-band-gap semiconductors, which is vital to the design of high-performance composite photoelectrodes for PEC water splitting under simulated sunlight irradiation.
3.8 PEC investigation
Taking into consideration that the unique 3D cocoon-like porous NAs endowed the KTO sample with excellent adsorption and photocatalytic performance for dye removal, it can be speculated that the 3D KTO NAs will be able to serve as a novel photoelectrode for photoelectrocatalytic and PEC applications. Consequently, to further confirm the exploitable advantages of 3D porous NAs and obtain more information about the generation, transfer and separation of photoexcited charge carriers within the nanobelt-constructed networks, a comparative study of the PEC performance for the flux-grown KTO and NTO samples was carried out, which could also deepen the understanding of the photocatalytic mechanism for dye degradation.

Fig. 13a shows the time-dependent open-circuit potential (Voc) responses of the as-fabricated film photoelectrodes under chopped xenon lamp illumination. Evidently, the Voc of the KTO electrode in the PEC cell was relatively stable under dark conditions, whereas once it was exposed to light irradiation, the Voc shifted dramatically to more negative values giving rise to a pronounced photovoltage of 0.479 V for 30 s, due to the accumulation of photogenerated electrons within the 3D KTO NAs.58,59 When the light source was switched off, the Voc decayed rapidly since the accumulated electrons in the KTO film were scavenged by photogenerated holes as well as the electron acceptor species in the electrolyte. Similarly, the Voc of the NTO photoelectrode also exhibited a negative shift of 0.366 V for 30 s, which was obviously smaller than that of the KTO electrode. It suggested that the larger 3D NAs of KTO with more abundant pores and higher SBET were more favorable for light adsorption (producing more light-induced electron–hole pairs) and the spatial separation of photogenerated charge carriers, thus reserving more photogenerated electrons and leading to a larger negative charging. This was commonly believed to be significant for a highly efficient PEC water-splitting performance. Fig. 13b presents the current–potential characteristics of KTO and NTO film electrodes, showing that the designed photoelectrodes exhibit evident PEC responses. The current densities under light irradiation were much higher than those in the dark over the entire potential range especially at higher applied potentials and also immediately decreased to the dark values as soon as the light source was turned off, convincingly suggesting the generation of photocurrent in the circuit (corresponding to PEC water oxidation over the photoanode surface), as a result of band gap transition in the light-excited semiconductor photocatalysts. Notably, the zero-current potential of the KTO electrode showed an obvious negative shift from −0.257 V (in the dark) to −0.479 V (under illumination), further revealing the good photoactivity of 3D KTO NAs under light irradiation (see the inset of Fig. 13b).60,61 Moreover, the anodic photocurrent generated on the KTO electrode was obviously higher than that on the NTO electrode, consistent with the photocatalytic activities for dye degradation, which directly suggested the more efficient charge transfer and separation in KTO NAs than that in NTO materials. The transient photocurrent response of the KTO electrode under intermittent illumination is shown in Fig. 13c. In general, the photocurrent of a photocatalyst film coated on a transparent conductive glass (ITO or FTO) was usually relatively weak, due to the large charge-transfer resistance that was caused by the unsatisfactory interfacial connections between the semiconductor film and the underlying conductive substrate fabricated by conventional coating methods.62 Thus, our further work focused on improving the adherence between photoactive films and conductive substrates is underway. Even so, the measured photocurrent densities of the KTO electrode could be comparable to and even higher than those of other visible-light-driven photoelectrodes (such as g-C3N4,57,60 Bi2MoO6,63 CdS,64etc.) fabricated by similar methods (dip-coating or spin-coating), indicating the great potential of 3D KTO NAs in PEC water splitting. Besides, it was also observed that the photocurrent response generated in the current system exhibited a stepwise increase when the applied potential was raised from Voc to 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl, attributable to the electrical bias promoting the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs within the KTO film (leading to a reduced bulk recombination) and importantly facilitating charge transport across the semiconductor film/substrate interface.65,66 As a result, the synergy of light irradiation and electricity can be employed to further enhance the degradation efficiency of organic pollutants via a photoelectrocatalytic route. Compared with the KTO photoanode, the NTO electrode showed weaker transient photocurrent responses under the same conditions (Fig. 13d), which was in good agreement with the Voc and current–potential results. This could be explained by the synergistic effects of stronger light-harvesting ability and more efficient charge separation of the KTO sample (due to bigger cocoon-like architectures with larger SBET and more abundant porous structures) as compared to those of the NTO sample, once again highlighting the outstanding advantages of such a 3D nanobelt-built architectural design in photocatalytic and PEC applications.
 Fig. 13  (a) Open-circuit potential responses of the as-fabricated photoelectrodes in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution under chopped light irradiation. (b) Current–potential curves of the electrodes in the dark and under illumination with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 from negative to positive. Transient photocurrent responses of KTO (c) and NTO (d) electrodes under intermittent light irradiation at different applied potentials (vs. Ag/AgCl). 
Apart from the charge transfer across the semiconductor/substrate interface, the charge migration at the interface between the semiconductor film and the electrolyte was also elucidated by EIS measurements. Generally speaking, a semicircle in the Nyquist plot in the high frequency region reflects the charge-transfer behavior across the electrode–electrolyte interface, and correspondingly the diameter of the semicircle is suggestive of the charge-transfer resistance. As shown in Fig. 14a, a large impedance was observed for the photoelectrodes in the dark, indicative of the poor conductivity along the electron pathways, which was an intrinsic property of inorganic semiconductor materials. Meanwhile, once exposed to light irradiation, the semicircles became smaller than those in the dark, suggesting the enhancement of charge-transfer efficiency across the semiconductor–electrolyte interface induced by light irradiation. Moreover, the arc radius of KTO was obviously smaller than that of NTO, implying the reduced recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and more efficient charge transport across the KTO film–electrolyte interface, which could be also due to the more abundant porous structures of KTO NAs greatly enhancing their interaction with the electrolyte (i.e., promoting the injection of photogenerated holes into the electrolyte), and in good agreement with photocurrent results. Correspondingly, the PEC water-splitting process using the flux-grown 3D KTO NAs as a film photoanode is also schematically illustrated in Fig. 14b. Therefore, the conspicuous PEC responses of the porous KTO architecture electrode under illumination can not only explain its good photocatalytic activity for dye degradation, but also largely increase the probability of its promising applications in photoelectrocatalysis and PEC solar cells.
 Fig. 14  (a) EIS plots of as-fabricated photoelectrodes in the dark and under light irradiation. (b) Schematic illustration of the PEC water-splitting process using the 3D KTO NAs coated on ITO as an integrated photoanode. 
3.9 Recovery and reusability of the multifunctional 3D KTO NAs
From the viewpoint of practical application, cycling stability and long-term durability as the crucial factors in designing an advanced and efficient adsorbent and photocatalyst were also investigated. Like many other dye adsorbents, the flux-grown 3D KTO NAs could be also regenerated by ethanol and acidic methanol,67,68 but the release efficiency of the captured MB dye on the surface of KTO NAs was not satisfactory (detailed data was not provided). Thus, we selected a photocatalytic route to completely eliminate the absorbed dye pollutants and then durability tests were performed to evaluate the stability of multifunctional KTO NAs. As shown in Fig. 15a, no significant decrease in the removal efficiency of MB can be observed after three sequential adsorption–photodegradation cycles. A slight reduction in the adsorption efficiency after the third run was probably due to the negative effect of vigorous magnetic stirring on the 3D nanobelt-assembled networks (resulting in a partial peeling of NBs from the cocoon-like architectures), while the photodegradation performance was still well retained, indicating the good photostability of 3D KTO NAs.
 Fig. 15  (a) Cycling runs for adsorption and photodegradation of MB solution (20 mg L−1) in the presence of KTO NAs. (b) XRD patterns, (c) UV-vis DRS and (d) FT-IR spectra of the KTO sample during the adsorption and photodegradation treatments. (e) XPS survey spectra of the KTO sample before and after dye adsorption. (f) SEM image of the regenerated KTO products. 
Meanwhile, the changes in structure and composition of the as-synthesized KTO sample during the adsorption–photodegradation process were also characterized by XRD, SEM, UV-vis DRS, FT-IR and XPS. As shown in Fig. 15b, there are no obvious changes in the XRD patterns of KTO materials before and after the photocatalytic regeneration, demonstrating a stable crystalline phase of the flux-grown KTO NAs. As for the UV-vis DRS (Fig. 15c), the presence of a new adsorption peak at around 450–700 nm could be assigned to the adsorbed MB dyes on the KTO surface that were then cleaned by photodegradation under illumination, and correspondingly the color of the sample changed from bluish violet to original white (see the inset). The FT-IR spectra of the KTO samples (Fig. 15d) revealed that the peaks located at around 3430 and 1630 cm−1 corresponded to the stretching and bending vibrations of –OH groups on the KTO surface,30 which could favour the formation of hydrogen-bonding interactions between MB and KTO. Moreover, some weak peaks belonging to MB species were also found for the KTO sample after dye adsorption, underlining the adsorption of MB dyes onto KTO NAs, which could be further confirmed by XPS analysis that showed the presence of S and N signals (derived from MB contaminants) for the dye-adsorbing KTO sample. Besides, the presence of MB pollutants on KTO NAs was also affirmed by SEM images (Fig. S12†), and importantly the recovered KTO still maintained the well-developed 3D cocoon-like architectures although some NBs were peeled off from the assemblies after the successive cycles (Fig. 15f), which implied that the structure of KTO NAs was stable and firm enough to support the recycling use. Therefore, the multifunctional and stable 3D KTO nanobelt-assembled architectures could act as a promising absorbent and photocatalyst for efficient organic wastewater remediation through the successive adsorption–photodegradation treatments and photoelectrocatalytic process.
4 Conclusions
In summary, the present work reported the novel multifunctional 3D KTO NAs grown from chloride flux used for efficient organic wastewater purification via the initial physically selective adsorption and subsequent chemical photodegradation. The excellent selective dye adsorption and photocatalytic performance of KTO were highly related to the outstanding advantages of 3D porous NAs with a large SBET in offering sufficient adsorption and reaction sites along with efficient diffusion and mass transfer of dyes and reactive species, enhancing the light-harvesting ability via light reflections and multiple-scattering within the porous nanobelt-assembled networks, and promoting the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Accordingly, the mechanisms responsible for the formation of 3D NAs, selective adsorption and photodegradation were proposed. More importantly, benefiting from the 3D architectural advantages, the KTO photoelectrode exhibited a higher PEC activity than the NTO electrode, consistent with its photocatalytic activities and suggesting its potential applications in photoelectrocatalytic pollutant degradation and PEC water splitting. Furthermore, the regenerated KTO samples by photodegradation also showed good stability. Besides, such unique 3D NAs could be potentially used in energy storage devices (such as sodium ion batteries) due to the small size, short ion and electron pathway, large capacity, good cycling stability and excellent rate performance of the 1D tunnel-type hexatitanate nanostructures.69,70 Overall, this work provided valuable insights not only into highly efficient water purification but also the nanoarchitectured design of more multifunctional 3D porous materials for environmental remediation and solar energy conversion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51774145). The first author also thanks the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for financial support.
Notes and references
C. J. Vörösmarty, P. B. McIntyre, M. O. Gessner, D. Dudgeon, A. Prusevich, P. Green, S. Glidden, S. E. Bunn, C. A. Sullivan, C. Reidy Liermann and P. M. Davies, Nature, 2010, 467, 555–561 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Massey, R. Gusain, S. Kumari and O. P. Khatri, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 7124–7131 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Ai, C. Y. Zhang and L. Y. Meng, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2011, 56, 4217–4225 CrossRef CAS .
P. Falås, A. Wick, S. Castronovo, J. Habermacher, T. A. Ternes and A. Joss, Water Res., 2016, 95, 240–249 CrossRef PubMed .
M. X. Zhu, L. Lee, H. H. Wang and Z. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2007, 149, 735–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Gibson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5173–5182 RSC .
K. Dutta, S. Mukhopadhyay, S. Bhattacharjee and B. Chaudhuri, J. Hazard. Mater., 2001, 84, 57–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Y. Zhuang, S. Y. Guan and B. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 362, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Cui, D. Cui, L. Gao, A.-J. Wang and H.-Y. Cheng, Chemosphere, 2017, 169, 18–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. M. Vargas, A. L. Cazetta, A. C. Martins, J. C. G. Moraes, E. E. Garcia, G. F. Gauze, W. F. Costa and V. C. Almeida, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 181–182, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Z. L. Hua, W. Wu, Z. C. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen and J. L. Shi, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 12667–12669 RSC .
J. Zhang, C.-C. Wang, P. Wang and Y.-L. Cao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 73595–73599 RSC .
T. Ngulube, J. R. Gumbo, V. Masindi and A. Maity, J. Environ. Manage., 2017, 191, 35–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Li, C.-C. Wang, H.-F. Fu, J.-R. Cui, P. Xu, J. Guo and J.-R. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 10197–10201 RSC .
Y. Wang, T. Sun, D. J. J. Yang, H. W. Liu, H. M. Zhang, X. D. Yao and H. J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2333–2338 RSC .
M. M. Gao, L. L. Zhu, W. L. Ong, J. Wang and G. W. Ho, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 4703–4726 RSC .
L. Zhou, H. Y. Zhang, H. Q. Sun, S. M. Liu, M. O. Tade, S. B. Wang and W. Q. Jin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7002–7023 RSC .
L. Pi, R. Jiang, W. C. Zhou, H. Zhu, W. Xiao, D. H. Wang and X. H. Mao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 231–239 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhang, Z. W. Wang, R. N. Li, J. L. Guo, Y. Li, J. M. Zhu and X. Y. Xie, Chemosphere, 2017, 185, 351–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, X. L. Liu, G. Y. Li, X. Nie, T. C. An, S. Q. Zhang and H. J. Zhao, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 364–369 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Wang, X. W. Zhang, L. Pan, F.-M. Zhao, J.-J. Zou, T. R. Zhang and L. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 164, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Li, C. Liu, P. Xu, M. Li, M. X. Zen and S. H. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 243, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, X.-Y. Yu, T. Luo, Z. Jin, B. Sun, J.-H. Liu and X.-J. Huang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 2348–2351 RSC .
Z.-T. Hu, J. C. Liu, X. L. Yan, W.-D. Oh and T.-T. Lim, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 262, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Gao, P. S. Yap, T. M. Lim and T.-T. Lim, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171, 1098–1107 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sobana and M. Swaminathan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 727–734 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. J. Guo and B. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66086–66095 RSC .
H. Yoshida, M. Sato, N. Fukuo, L. Zhang, T. Yoshida, Y. Yamamoto, T. Morikawa, T. Kajino, M. Sakano, T. Sekito, S. Matsumoto and H. Hirata, Catal. Today, 2018, 303, 296–304 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, M. Takeuchi, M. Sato, L. Zhang, T. Teshima and M. G. Chaskar, Catal. Today, 2014, 232, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Y. Guan and B. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4064–4078 RSC .
P. Zhang, T. Wang, J. J. Zhang, X. X. Chang and J. L. Gong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13153–13158 RSC .
Q. Wang, Q. J. Guo, L. P. Wang and B. Li, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 17748–17758 RSC .
Q. Wang, Q. J. Guo, Y. H. Hu and B. Li, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 6926–6933 RSC .
P. Y. Zhang, J. C. Liu, H. Y. Du, S. Li and R. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3988–3990 RSC .
J. Boltersdorf, N. King and P. A. Maggard, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 2225–2241 RSC .
Y. Tian, X. L. Jiao, J. Zhang, N. Sui, D. R. Chen and G. Y. Hong, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Mao, T.-J. Park, F. Zhang, H. J. Zhou and S. S. Wong, Small, 2017, 3, 1122–1139 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Liu, N. Fechler and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8237–8265 RSC .
J. L. Gunjakar, I. Y. Kim, J. M. Lee, N.-S. Lee and S.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1008–1017 RSC .
S. Z. Hu, F. Y. Li, Z. P. Fan, F. Wang, Y. F. Zhao and Z. B. Lv, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1084–1092 RSC .
G. H. Du, Q. Chen, P. D. Han, Y. Yu and L.-M. Peng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 035323 CrossRef .
X. K. Zhang, J. J. Yuan, H. J. Yu, X. R. Zhu, Z. Yin, H. Shen and Y. M. Xie, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 631, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Natarajan, H. C. Bajaj and R. J. Tayade, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 433, 104–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Li, Z. B. Sun, Y. X. Tian, G. J. Cui and S. Q. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 79765–79773 RSC .
D. H. K. Reddy and S.-M. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 15789–15800 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Wang, W. J. Luo, H. Xia, Q. Gao and C. G. Zhou, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2015, 90, 1124–1134 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Liang, Z. W. Zhao, T. Y. Sun, W. X. Shi and F. Y. Cui, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 485, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Y. Liu, J. Zhang, X. X. Liu, H. Luo, Y. H. Ma, X. W. Xu, Y. Lu, J. Lin, J. Zou and C. C. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8185–8193 RSC .
Y.-Q. Zhang, C.-C. Wang, T. Zhu, P. Wang and S.-J. Gao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45688–45692 RSC .
X.-D. Du, C.-C. Wang, J.-G. Liu, X.-D. Zhao, J. Zhong, Y.-X. Li, J. Li and P. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 506, 437–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. G. Hou, C. Yang, S. Q. Jiao and H. M. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1731–1734 RSC .
J. G. Hou, H. J. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. M. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1348–1357 RSC .
S. Chu, C. C. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang and Z. G. Zou, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57153–57158 RSC .
C. C. Chen, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
W. J. Ren, Z. H. Ai, F. L. Jia, L. Z. Zhang, X. X. Fan and Z. G. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 69, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Liu, C. Li, J. G. Yu and Q. J. Xiang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2533–2541 RSC .
Y. J. Cui, J. H. Huang, X. Z. Fu and X. C. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1396–1402 RSC .
Q. H. Chen, S. N. Wu and Y. J. Xin, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 302, 377–387 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Fu and P. Y. Zhang, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 3480–3486 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Zhang, M. Grzelczak, Y. D. Hou, K. Maeda, K. Domen, X. Z. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. C. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 443–446 RSC .
J. Seo, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Hisatomi, N. Shibata, T. Minegishi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12780–12783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Xu, S. W. Cao, T. Brenner, X. F. Yang, J. G. Yu, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6265–6271 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, C. Li, A. J. Wang, C. C. Lv, W. H. Zhu, S. P. Dou, Q. Wang and Q. Zhong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 28696–28709 RSC .
D. A. Reddy, J. Choi, S. Lee, Y. Kim, S. Hong, D. P. Kumar and T. K. Kim, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 6197–6206 RSC .
S. J. Chang, Q. B. Wang, B. S. Liu, Y. H. Sang and H. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 524–532 RSC .
M. J. Liao, J. Y. Feng, W. J. Luo, Z. Q. Wang, J. Y. Zhang, Z. S. Li, T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3066–3074 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Paul, G. Madras and S. Natarajan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11285–11296 RSC .
X. L. Zhang, T. Zeng, S. H. Wang, H. Y. Niu, X. K. Wang and Y. Q. Cai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 189–196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. P. Guo, K. Guo, T. Y. Zhai and H. Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6229–6232 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Y. Sun, Y. L. Xie, P. Kaur, J. Hernandez, Y. Z. Ni, Y. Yu, O. K. Varghese, Y. H. Huang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018 10.1039/C8TA02523A .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cy01684dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns of the flux-grown samples and the standard XRD patterns of KTO and NTO.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of KTO (a–c), NTO (d–f) and NKTO (g–i). The scale bars in ×1.0k images (a, d and g), ×5.0k images (b, e and h) and ×30.0k images (c, f and i) are 10 μm, 2 μm and 200 nm, respectively. The insets show the size distributions of the corresponding samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image, SAED pattern (inset) and corresponding HRTEM image (b) of a single flux-grown KTO nanobelt. (c) TEM image of the flux-grown NTO NBs. (d) A high-magnification TEM image of an individual NTO nanobelt and its SAED pattern (inset).	 
K2CO3 + 6TiO2 → K2Ti6O13 + CO2↑	(1)
xNa+ + K2Ti6O13 → NaxK2−xTi6O13 + xK+	(2)
Na2CO3 + 6TiO2 → Na2Ti6O13 + CO2↑	(3)

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the anisotropic crystal growth of KTO and NTO NBs in KCl and NaCl molten salts, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the flux-grown samples and the pore-size distribution (inset) of the KTO sample.	 
αhν = A(hν − Eg)1/n	(4)
F(R∞) = (1 − R∞)2/2R∞ = α/S	(5)
R∞ = Rsample/Rstandard	(6)

 	Fig. 5  Removal percentages of organic dyes as a function of time over the KTO (a), NKTO (b) and NTO (c) samples. (d) Time dependent UV-vis spectra of MB solutions in the presence of the KTO sample and the insets are the corresponding optical photographs of MB solutions before and after absorption treatment.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV-vis spectra and the corresponding optical photographs (insets) of MB/MO (a) and MB/RhB (b) mixed dye solutions before and after adsorption in the presence of 3D KTO NAs.	 
ln(qe − qt) = lnqe − k1t	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 7  (a) MB adsorption capacities as a function of contact time in the presence of KTO, NKTO and NTO samples. (b) Pseudo-second-order kinetic model for selective MB adsorption over the three samples.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effects of initial concentration and contact time on the removal rate (a) and adsorption capacity (b) of KTO towards MB.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Zeta potentials of the as-synthesized samples with DI water as the dispersant. (b) Zeta potentials and equilibrium adsorption capacities for MB of the KTO sample at different pH values.	 

 	Scheme 2  (a) Proposed adsorption model for cationic dyes on the surface of 3D KTO NAs. (b) The tunnel crystal structure of the KTO phase consisting of adjacent TiO6 octahedral units that enclose the K+ ions and possible interactions between KTO NBs and dyes originating from the difference in the electronegativity of N, S and O atoms.	 


MO	327.33	464	1.54 × 0.48 × 0.28	

	Anionic (−1)
MB	319.86	664	1.38 × 0.64 × 0.21	

	Cationic (+1)
RhB	479.02	554	1.56 × 1.35 × 0.42	

	Cationic (+1)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of dye pollutants by 3D KTO NAs under simulated sunlight irradiation. a: MO blank, b: RhB blank, c: MB blank, d: MO (10 mg L−1), e: MB (60 mg L−1), f: MB (40 mg L−1), g: RhB (10 mg L−1), h: MB (30 mg L−1), i: MB (20 mg L−1). Time dependent UV-vis spectra of RhB aqueous solution (10 mg L−1) over the KTO (b) and NTO (c) samples. (d) Time dependent UV-vis spectra of MB aqueous solutions (10 mg L−1) in the presence of the NKTO sample.	 
EVB = χKTO − E0 + 1/2Eg	(9)
ECB = EVB − Eg	(10)
χKTO = (χK2 × χTi6 × χO13)1/(2+6+13)	(11)

 	Scheme 3  Photocatalytic mechanism for dye degradation over the 3D KTO NAs under simulated sunlight irradiation.	 
KTO NAs + hν → KTO NAs(eCB−) + KTO NAs(hVB+)	(12)
Dyes + hv → Dyes*	(13)
Dyes* + KTO NAs → ˙Dyes+ + KTO NAs(eCB−)	(14)
O2 + eCB− → ˙O2−	(15)
˙O2− + 2H+ + eCB− → H2O2	(16)
H2O2 + eCB− → ˙OH + OH−	(17)
H2O2 + hv → 2˙OH	(18)
OH− + hVB+ → ˙OH	(19)
H2O + hVB+ → H+ + ˙OH	(20)
˙O2−, h+, ˙OH + ˙Dyes+ → degradation products (DPs)	(21)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photodegradation efficiency of RhB by the KTO NAs under light irradiation in the presence of various scavengers. (b) PL spectral changes of KTO in TA solution upon light irradiation for different times.	 

 	Fig. 12  Possible photocatalytic degradation pathway of MB over the 3D KTO NAs.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Open-circuit potential responses of the as-fabricated photoelectrodes in 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution under chopped light irradiation. (b) Current–potential curves of the electrodes in the dark and under illumination with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 from negative to positive. Transient photocurrent responses of KTO (c) and NTO (d) electrodes under intermittent light irradiation at different applied potentials (vs. Ag/AgCl).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) EIS plots of as-fabricated photoelectrodes in the dark and under light irradiation. (b) Schematic illustration of the PEC water-splitting process using the 3D KTO NAs coated on ITO as an integrated photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Cycling runs for adsorption and photodegradation of MB solution (20 mg L−1) in the presence of KTO NAs. (b) XRD patterns, (c) UV-vis DRS and (d) FT-IR spectra of the KTO sample during the adsorption and photodegradation treatments. (e) XPS survey spectra of the KTO sample before and after dye adsorption. (f) SEM image of the regenerated KTO products.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cy01684d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
