Nanoconfinement and mass transport in metal–organic frameworks  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00558H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00558H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 11530-11558Nanoconfinement and mass transport in metal–organic frameworks

        
          
            Conor H. 
            Sharp
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Brandon C. 
            Bukowski
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hongyu 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Eric M. 
            Johnson
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Stefan 
            Ilic
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Amanda J. 
            Morris
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Dilip 
            Gersappe
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Randall Q. 
            Snurr
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            John R. 
            Morris
          
          
        
      *d
aNational Research Council Associateship Program and Electronic Science and Technology Division, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA
bDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA
dDepartment of Chemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA. E-mail: jrmorris@vt.edu
Received 
      14th June 2021
    First published on 25th August 2021AbstractThe ubiquity of metal–organic frameworks in recent scientific literature underscores their highly versatile nature. MOFs have been developed for use in a wide array of applications, including: sensors, catalysis, separations, drug delivery, and electrochemical processes. Often overlooked in the discussion of MOF-based materials is the mass transport of guest molecules within the pores and channels. Given the wide distribution of pore sizes, linker functionalization, and crystal sizes, molecular diffusion within MOFs can be highly dependent on the MOF-guest system. In this review, we discuss the major factors that govern the mass transport of molecules through MOFs at both the intracrystalline and intercrystalline scale; provide an overview of the experimental and computational methods used to measure guest diffusivity within MOFs; and highlight the relevance of mass transfer in the applications of MOFs in electrochemical systems, separations, and heterogeneous catalysis.
Conor H. Sharp
Conor Sharp obtained his PhD in Chemistry from Virginia Tech in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. John R. Morris. He is currently a National Research Council's Postdoctoral Research Fellow within the Electronic Sciences and Technology Division at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. His research interests include investigating the interfacial interactions between small molecules and metal–organic frameworks and 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides.
Brandon C. Bukowski
Brandon Bukowski was born in Connecticut and received his PhD from Purdue University. He did postdoctoral research with Prof. Randall Q. Snurr at Northwestern University. Prof. Bukowski is currently an Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Johns Hopkins University. His research interests include discovering new catalysts by using computational modeling to develop new technologies to meet the energy needs of the future. The Bukowski research group is interested in nanoporous catalysts (such as zeolites and metal–organic frameworks) as well as supported metal/metal-oxide nanoparticles for highly selective chemical transformations.
Amanda J. Morris
Amanda Morris is a Professor of Inorganic and Energy Chemistry at Virginia Tech. Her research education conducted at Penn State University (BS), Johns Hopkins University (PhD), and Princeton University (Postdoctoral) focused on addressing critical environmental issues with fundamental science in the areas of water remediation, solar energy harvesting and storage, and carbon dioxide conversion. Her research group's current focus is on electrochemical and photochemical investigations of metal–organic frameworks. She has received numerous awards for her research pursuits, including the Dreyfus Teacher–Scholar award, Sloan Fellowship, and NSF Career award. She currently serves as an Associate Editor of Chemical Physics Reviews.
Dilip Gersappe
Dilip Gersappe is Professor and Chair of the Materials Science and Chemical Engineering Department at Stony Brook University. He received his BTech in Metallurgical Engineering at IIT Bombay and his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University. His research is focused on using computational modeling tools to study dynamic processes in complex fluids and soft matter, with a special emphasis on understanding non-equilibrium behavior. His group is currently working on heterogeneous reaction kinetics and transport in catalysts including metal–organic frameworks, modeling ion transport through solid electrolytes and understanding the rheology of biopolymer-based fluids for soil remediation.
Randall Q. Snurr
Randall Snurr is the John G. Searle Professor and Department Chair of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Northwestern University. His research interests include development of new nanoporous materials for energy and sustainability applications, molecular simulation, machine learning, adsorption separations, diffusion in nanoporous materials, and catalysis. His research has been recognized by a CAREER award from the National Science Foundation, the Institute Award for Excellence in Industrial Gases Technology from the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, and election as a corresponding member of the Saxon Academy of Sciences.
John R. Morris
John Morris has served for 22 years as a professor in the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Tech. The Morris Group's research focuses on gas-surface reaction dynamics, interfacial uptake, and catalysis relevant to environmental, industrial, and national security applications. Currently, Professor Morris leads a multi-disciplinary research team focused on the development of new materials for the uptake and catalytic decomposition of chemical warfare agents. His contributions to surface science have been recognized by an NSF CAREER award, a visiting scientist position at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, and an appointment as the Dr A. C. Lilly, Jr. Faculty Fellow in nanoscience at Virginia Tech.
1. Introduction
Over the last two decades, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have emerged as a set of materials that demonstrate exceptional promise in a wide variety of applications. MOFs are comprised of metal-oxo or metal-based inorganic clusters and organic linkers/secondary building units (SBUs) that assemble into extended porous 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional networks.1 The pore sizes of MOFs can vary significantly based on linker and node, typically ranging from the microporous (<2 nm) to mesoporous (2 to 50 nm) regimes. Unlike other porous materials such as activated carbons, the porosity of MOFs is typically well-defined and uniform throughout the crystal structure. Due to the wide variety of oxide SBUs and bridging ligands, thousands of different MOF structures have been described, with more synthesized each year.2 The synthetic control over MOF pore structure and chemical functionality has made MOFs highly promising materials in a wide variety of fields, including gas storage, catalysis, separations, electrochemical applications, and many more.3 Relevant to virtually every application of MOFs is the diffusion of guest molecules.
Molecular diffusion, characterized by the diffusion coefficient, is a fundamental measure of the ability of molecules to pass through a specific medium.4 Diffusion can be characterized by a number of different diffusion coefficients or diffusivities. Two of the most common are the transport diffusivity (also known as the Fickian diffusivity) and the self-diffusivity. The transport diffusivity characterizes mass transfer due to a concentration or chemical potential gradient, whereas the self-diffusivity characterizes the random Brownian motion of a system at equilibrium with no chemical potential gradient.5 In mesoporous media, the mechanism of diffusion is typically characterized by the Knudsen number, which is defined as the ratio of the mean free path length of the diffusing molecule to the pore size of the medium.6 In mesoporous media such as some MOFs, the mean free path is affected by two factors: the collisions between diffusing molecules (gas–gas/fluid–fluid collisions) and the collisions between molecules and structures (gas (fluid)–wall collisions). Collisions between the gas and the wall affect the diffusion in two possible ways: one, by simply affecting the mean free path, and two, by possible adsorption/desorption events. When adsorption and desorption events limit molecular transport, the process can be described as activated diffusion. In the absence of rate-limiting molecule–support interactions, diffusion is referred to as non-activated. For activated diffusion, the diffusion constant, D, has been empirically shown to follow an Arrhenius-type dependence where D = D0 exp(−EA/kT), with EA representing the activation energy, k the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, and D0 the pre-exponential factor. Studies have shown that this activation energy can be related to several factors such as hydrogen bonding, desorption and re-adsorption process, and the tortuosity of the structure.7
In MOFs, the nanoporous structure results in reduced diffusion coefficients that can be several orders of magnitude lower than diffusion through air.8 Hindered diffusion of molecules within nanoporous materials, which significantly decreases the diffusion coefficient, is an important effect of nanoconfinement.9 Previous reviews that have discussed guest diffusion through MOFs have focused either more broadly on diffusion through porous crystalline materials,10–12 or discuss diffusion as it specifically relates to one specific application of MOFs, such as in operando methods for analyzing diffusion during MOF-based catalysis.13 In the following review, we summarize the key factors that govern the mass transport of molecules through MOFs, provide a background on the experimental and computational methods used to effectively measure/calculate diffusivity of gases and liquids through MOFs, and discuss the relevance of mass transfer in the applications of separations, electrochemical processes, and heterogeneous catalysis.
2. Factors that influence diffusion in MOFs
Molecular transport into, out of, and through MOF materials is governed by a complex dynamic of structural and chemical factors that are often interdependent. These factors affect diffusion at the atomic scale in ways that, due to the tremendous internal surface area associated with MOFs, often lead to large effects on bulk transport as measured in macroscopic systems. In this section, we discuss how the intrinsic and dynamic structures of a MOF affect the ability of guest molecules to enter and diffuse through its pores, how defects can either increase or hinder guest diffusion, the effect that intercrystalline diffusion can have on the physically observed mass transport, and how chemical interactions between diffusing molecules and either the MOF or other diffusants can restrict transport.
2.1 Pore size effects
The size of the MOF pores has critical implications for guest diffusion in MOFs.14 Narrow channels lead to increased guest–host interactions, and narrow window regions can result in high activation barriers for diffusion. For example, changes to the size of the MOF pore aperture as small as 0.2 Å resulted in pronounced changes in the diffusivities of propane and propylene in several zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) MOFs.15 A number of recent studies have systematically examined how MOF pore and aperture size affect diffusion by employing isoreticular MOFs, systematically synthesized by modulating the organic linker length.16 Forse et al. measured the self-diffusion of CO2 within two isoreticular MOFs, Zn2(dobdc) and Zn2(dobpdc).17 The longer dobpdc(4,4′-dioxidobiphenyl-3,3′-dicarboxylate) linkers of Zn2(dobpdc) expand the diameter of the hexagonal channels from 15 Å to 22 Å, as compared to Zn2(dobdc) (Fig. 1).17 For diffusion along the hexagonal channels of each MOF, CO2 was shown to diffuse at least a factor of 4 faster in the larger-pore Zn2(dobpdc). The increase in diffusivity with increasing pore size was attributed to a combination of the decrease in the energetic barrier to diffusion through the center of the channel (i.e. reduced dispersion interactions) and a decrease in adsorption strength at the Zn binding sites. Changes in linker functionality can also have an effect on the diameter of the pore aperture, and subsequently, guest diffusion. The self-diffusion of a series of polar and non-polar solvent molecules were measured in two isoreticular Zn-based MOFs, MOF-5 (Zn4O(BDC)3) and IRMOF-3.18 For every solvent studied, the molecules diffused more slowly through IRMOF-3. It was hypothesized that the presence of the amine groups on the linker of IRMOF-3 minimized the size of the pore aperture, restricting transport into the MOF.
 Fig. 1  Single pore of Zn2(dobdc) and Zn2(dobpdc) alongside illustrations of their respective ligands. Pale blue, grey, red, and white spheres represent Zn, C, O, and H atoms, respectively. Figure adapted with permission from Forse et al., Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3570–3576. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Pore topology
The topology of a given MOF governs the spatial positioning and connectivity of nodes and linkers that define the shape and distribution of pores. Not only can topology affect the mass transport kinetics, but it can also affect the mechanism by which guest molecules move through the pores. There have been very few systematic studies of the role of topology on diffusion in MOFs to date. In one of the few examples, Bukowski and Snurr performed molecular dynamics simulations for MOFs from over 20 different topologies that share similar linkers and have Zr6 nodes and examined the role of connectivity and topology on alkane diffusion.19 They found that Zr MOFs with higher node connectivity have slower average alkane diffusion, but the linker connectivity had a minimal effect on the diffusivity. Diffusion coefficients did not correlate well with pore size descriptors, which further suggested that topology-focused descriptors could be developed to identify MOFs with rapid adsorbate diffusion using high-throughput simulations. This may be an interesting area for future work.
2.3 Linker dynamics and framework flexibility
While nominal MOF pore and aperture diameters can be determined from crystallographic data, the size and structure of MOF pores can vary due to their linker dynamics, which can be a function of temperature and chemical environment. Molecular dynamics simulations of CH4 self-diffusion in UiO-66 highlight the importance of the effect of lattice dynamics on diffusion.20 The CH4 self-diffusion coefficients simulated incorporating MOF framework flexibility had better agreement with experimental values than diffusion coefficients simulated while holding the framework rigid. The incorporation of flexibility in the force field also allowed for a better understanding of the intercage guest hopping between the tetrahedral and octahedral cages of UiO-66, which is significantly influenced by the rotation of the 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) linkers.20,21 In general, the use of force fields that account for framework flexibility is required when the MOF undergoes structural transformations or when the size of the guest molecule is similar to the pore size of the MOF.22 Devautour-Vinot et al. probed the structural dynamics of several UiO-66 MOFs with functionalized BDC linkers and observed that the activation barrier to linker rotation was as high as 12.4 kcal mol−1 due to intraframework interactions.23 For ZIF-8, the rotations of the 2-methylimidazolate linkers upon exposure to high gas pressures (>1.47 GPa) result in an increase in the pore diameter from 3.0 Å to 3.6 Å,24 which could significantly affect diffusion. Gonzalez-Nelson et al. provide a detailed review of the effects of rotational dynamics on guest adsorption and diffusion in MOFs.25
In addition to the effect of linker rotation on MOF pore size and accessibility, certain “flexible” MOFs can undergo structural rearrangements in the presence of external stimuli, affecting their pore size and transport properties. Agrawal and Sholl found that when modeling gas adsorption and diffusion, framework flexibility was most important when investigating the uptake of molecules with kinetic diameters that are close to those of the MOF pores.26 For the flexible MOF MIL-53(Cr), which transitions from a large-pore (LP) phase to a narrow-pore (NP) phase (Fig. 2) at low CO2 loadings and then to LP at high CO2 loadings, CO2 diffuses approximately two orders of magnitude faster through the LP form.27 While the CO2 diffusion proceeds through a similar site-hopping mechanism through both phases of MOF, the activation energy of diffusion was lower in the LP form of MIL-53(Cr) due to a decrease in pore-wall interactions. STAM-1, a MOF containing both hydrophobic and hydrophilic pores, undergoes a “gate-opening” transition upon exposure to polar molecules, increasing the diameter of the hydrophobic pore from 5.4 A to 6.3 A, resulting in an increase in the diffusivity of adsorbed methanol.28 In addition to chemically-induced phase changes, Knebel et al. demonstrated that the application of an external electric field on ZIF-8 can be used to induce a phase change and tune the separation efficiency for light alkanes.29 A 500 V mm−1 electric field was applied perpendicular to a 20 μm-thick MOF layer, inducing a phase change from the standard cubic phase to a monoclinic phase. This resulted in a stiffening of the lattice, restricting linker rotations and reducing guest diffusion.
 Fig. 2  Structural transitions between large-pore (left) and narrow-pore (right) phases of MIL-53(Cr) upon CO2 adsorption. 
2.4 Defects and surface barriers
Point defects in MOFs, introduced via synthesis or exposure to humidity and other reactive conditions, can affect the energy barriers and tortuosity of guest diffusion within MOFs. In MOFs, defects typically exist as either missing linkers, dangling linkers, missing inorganic nodes, or nodes capped by modulators used in synthesis. Han, Verploegh, and Sholl assessed the role of defects on mass transport in ZIF-8 using molecular simulations and found that an increase in linker vacancies and dangling linker defects resulted in faster hopping rates for several light alkanes.30 However, if the missing linker molecules remained confined within the ZIF-8, there was a significant decrease in diffusivity due to pore-blocking effects. When located near the external surface of a crystal or film, these defects can also act as surface barriers.
Heinke et al. demonstrated that while pristine films of HKUST-1 showed no evidence of surface barriers, once films were exposed to either water vapor or an ambient atmosphere, the formation of defects led to reduced surface permeability and decreased uptake of cyclohexane.31 They speculated that the defects resulted in pore blockage and an increase in strong binding sites for cyclohexane, both of which result in a decrease in the diffusivity. Recently, Müller et al. demonstrated that surface defects in HKUST-1 films caused by water vapor exposure could be removed by exposing the MOF to an ethanolic solution.32 Quartz crystal microbalance measurements showed that the removal of these defects result in a restoration of the uptake and permeability rates of the MOF films to their pre-defected behaviors.
Some MOFs are intentionally synthesized with defects to increase pore size, increase the number of active sites, or tune the chemical functionality of the MOF. Defect-engineering MOFs can create mesoporous domains that facilitate faster guest diffusion.33 Yuan et al. synthesized PCN-160 with a fraction of 4-carboxybenzylidine-4-aminobenzate (CBAB) linkers.34 Upon the introduction of acetic acid, the CBAB linkers were split into monotopic 4-aminobenzoic acid and 4-formylbenzoic acid linkers and then removed from the MOF by acid etching (Fig. 3). This process created a hierarchical pore structure through the introduction of missing linkers and missing nodes defects, which enabled the uptake of large guest molecules. A further discussion of defect-engineering and MOF diffusion is provided by Xiang et al.35
 Fig. 3  Labilization of CBAB linker to create hierarchically porous MOF. Figure adapted with permission from Yuan et al., Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15356. 
Not all surface barriers are the result of defects; intentional surface barriers can be synthesized onto MOFs to act as capping agents to improve separation efficiency, hindering diffusion and desorption of guest molecules within a given MOF. Under UV excitation, β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) strongly adsorbs to the surface of UiO-68 with azobenzene-functionalized linkers (UiO-68-azo), acting as a capping ligand that reduces the effective pore aperture size.36 The β-CD surface barrier reduced the permeability of CO2 more significantly than H2, resulting in an improved separation selectivity of H2/CO2. Homan et al. functionalized the surface of MOF-5 with capping groups and found that biphenyl- and triphenylacetic acid capping ligands effectively prevented the diffusion and desorption of crystal violet from the MOF pores.37
Whether through incomplete synthesis, intentional design, or reactive chemical environments, the presence of defects within MOFs can greatly affect guest diffusion. Missing linker defects may increase effective pore sizes and facilitate faster intercage diffusion rates, but may also result in stronger adsorption sites for guest molecules on the inorganic SBUs. Defect-induced or synthesized surface barriers may have little effect on the diffusion of guest molecules within the interior of the MOF crystals, but may limit the mass transfer between adjacent MOF crystals by decreasing the surface permeability.
2.5 Effects of intercrystalline pores and crystal size
While most factors discussed above pertain to the diffusion of molecules through the interior pores of a given MOF crystal (intracrystalline diffusion), it is often necessary to consider transport between crystals (intercrystalline diffusion) to gain a comprehensive view of mass transport at the macroscopic scale. For MOF powders and pelletized samples, grain boundary diffusion and intercrystalline diffusion significantly contribute to the overall mass transport. It is therefore important to understand how these factors affect overall diffusion in MOF materials.
In pelletized MOF-5 samples, Xu et al. found that increasing pellet density correlates with a decrease in H2 diffusivity.38 The densities of the measured MOF-5 samples were found to be lower than the theoretical density for a single MOF-5 crystal,39 suggesting that void spaces between crystallites exist in the pelletized powder samples and create small macropore regions where intercrystalline diffusion occurs faster than the intracrystalline diffusion. Intercrystalline diffusion can sometimes be the rate-limiting process for diffusion in pelletized samples or through a bed of MOF crystals. Krishnamurthy studied the diffusion of CO2 in pelletized beads of CPO-27-Ni and determined that diffusion through the macropores was the rate-limiting step. Similar results have been reported for CO2 and water diffusion in HKUST-1 and Ni/DOBDC.40,41 As described below, determining the effect that intercrystalline and intracrystalline diffusion have on overall mass transport requires the use of specialized experimental techniques.
Zhang et al. employed a combination of experimental and computational techniques to study the effect of crystallite size on adsorbate-induced structural transitions for nitrogen (N2) adsorption within ZIF-8. Interestingly, the crystal size of ZIF-8 affected the propensity of the MOF to undergo structural transitions. Specifically, the gate-opening mechanism for the MOF, which results in an increase in mass transport, was found to occur at lower N2 pressures for larger-sized crystals.42 In addition, Tanaka et al. studied the effect of crystal size on the transport of n-butanol through ZIF-8 and determined that a decrease in crystal size led to an increase in the effect that surface barriers had on diffusion measured through the sample.43
2.6 Guest-MOF interactions
The energetic interactions between guest molecules and the internal pore environments of MOFs have a significant impact on diffusion. For molecules that diffuse via a site-hopping mechanism, strong binding energies at adsorption sites result in high activation barriers for diffusion, reducing mass transport.44 Hydroxyl groups found on the inorganic nodes of several MOFs can act as Brønsted-acid, hydrogen-bond donors where guest molecules can adsorb.45,46 Wardzala et al. calculated the diffusivity of acetone through UiO-66 using molecular dynamics simulations and observed that hydrogen bonding between acetone and the μ3O–H groups at the zirconium nodes resulted in up to an order of magnitude decrease in diffusivity compared to UiO-66 MOFs with the hydroxyls removed.47 The confined nature of guest molecules within the pores and channels of a MOF, coupled with a tremendously high number of potential adsorption sites, render energetic contributions from dispersion interactions particularly significant for diffusivities relative to other, non-porous surfaces. Liu et al. performed molecular simulations of benzene diffusion through Mg-MOF-74 and determined that benzene-pore wall interactions were dominated by van der Waals interactions, which result in very low diffusivities.48 A variety of experimental techniques exist to identify and quantify guest-MOF interactions, including single-crystal X-ray diffraction,49–52 infrared spectroscopy,53–56 and temperature-programmed desorption.57,58
Guest-MOF interactions have also been shown to induce structural changes within flexible MOFs, which can be exploited for improved molecular transport and adsorption capacity. Zhao et al. observed that for the adsorption of CO2 within ZIF-7 at low pressures, adsorption is limited within only one of the six-member-ring pores (pore B) (Fig. 4).59 The other six-member-ring pore (pore A) has a pore aperture of 3 Å, which is too small for CO2 (kinetic diameter = 3.3 Å) to pass through. However, at increased CO2 pressures, hydrogen bond formation between adsorbed CO2 and a benzimidazolate linker shared between pore A and pore B induces a linker rotation that enables CO2 adsorption and diffusion into pore A.
 Fig. 4  ZIF-7 structure and CO2 adsorption behavior. (a) The building unit, a sodalite cage, of ZIF-7 with two types of six-member-ring pores (A and B) and one type of four-member ring pores on its walls. (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms of ZIF-7 at 195 and 298 K, pCO2 = 1–100 kPA, illustrated by the structural behaviors of ZIF-7. Figure adapted with permission from Zhao et al., Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1.59 
2.7 Loading and guest–guest interactions
In addition to the interactions between guest molecules and the pore walls and nodes of a MOF, the interactions between guest molecules themselves (either in single-component or multi-component mixtures) can have a significant effect on their diffusivities. The loading dependence of self-diffusion coefficients can vary depending on the guest molecule and MOF, but typically exhibit a monotonic decrease with increasing guest concentration.21 At high guest concentrations, increased guest–guest collisions and a decrease in free pore volume causes self-diffusivities to decrease. The loading can also have a significant effect on diffusion coefficients in flexible MOFs that undergo “gate-opening” and other structural rearrangements.60 For example, Salles et al. observed that, for water diffusion through the flexible MOF MIL-53(Cr), the self-diffusion coefficients decreased with increasing water loading from 0 to 8 water molecules per unit cell for both the narrow-pore and large-pore phases.61 This was attributed to a combination of a decrease in free pore volume as well as the attractive interactions with other confined water molecules. The calculated self-diffusivity of water through UiO-66 increased with loadings up to 100 H2O molecules per unit cell, then decreased at higher concentrations due to hydrogen bonding between water molecules accompanied by a pore volume decrease.62 Importantly, we note that while self-diffusivities often decrease at high guest concentrations, transport diffusivities typically increase with loading due to the increasing thermodynamic factor,63–65 which is discussed in Section 3.2.2.
Multicomponent mixture diffusion, or the transport of multiple guest species simultaneously, has not been extensively studied in MOFs, but is of high importance for understanding transport in operando for separations, catalysis, and other practical applications of MOFs. In some instances, the presence of polar or electronegative guest molecules can hinder the diffusion of non-polar diffusants. For example, CO2 diffuses more slowly through Mg-MOF-74 when water is the predominant guest species, because adsorbed water forms clusters that act as binding sites for the CO2.66 Tan et al. also observed that for the diffusion of CO2 through Ni-MOF-74, the presence of ammonia adsorbed at coordinatively unsaturated Ni sites increased the energetic barrier for CO2 transport by a factor of 7, due to the presence of hydrogen-bonding interactions between the CO2 and adsorbed ammonia.67 In some cases, the presence of other guest molecules has been shown to have a minor effect or even improve guest diffusivity. The presence of long-chain alkanes has a minimal effect on the diffusion of methane through MOFs PCN-14, NU-1225, NU-1100, and DUT-49,68 but hydrogen was found to cause an increase in methane diffusivity through ZIF-68 and ZIF-70 due to momentum transfer.69
3. Techniques for measuring and calculating guest diffusion in MOFs
Developing a comprehensive understanding of the kinetics, energetics, and mechanisms of mass transport within MOFs poses a scientific challenge that demands the implementation of precision experimental and computational techniques capable of discerning small differences between similar systems. Many of the techniques utilized to measure guest diffusion with MOFs have also been implemented to investigate the transport of molecules in zeolites and other porous materials.70–78 A current issue facing the discussion of mass transport in MOFs is the large variation of reported diffusion coefficients in the literature for similar MOF-guest systems.79 These differences are often attributed to a combination of factors that include varying experimental methods that measure diffusion at different length- and time-scales; inconsistencies in nominally identical MOF samples due to subtle differences in syntheses; and varying sample form (powder, single-crystal, film, pellet, etc.), which can introduce additional mass transfer effects. Computational methods can also yield different predictions for diffusion coefficients on nominally identical MOFs due to differing force fields. Robust studies of guest diffusion through MOFs therefore require an ensemble of complementary techniques, often leveraging both computational and experimental approaches.
3.1 Experimental methods
An array of experimental techniques exists for quantifying mass transport in MOFs, and they can be classified into several overarching categories: gravimetric and mass balance techniques, spectroscopic techniques (both equilibrium and non-equilibrium), and microscopy. Diffusion coefficients are typically measured over a range of guest concentrations and temperatures to determine how both factors affect molecular transport. The temperature dependence of the diffusivity can be evaluated by fitting the measured diffusion coefficients with an Arrhenius-like expression: (1)In eqn (1), D(T) is the diffusion coefficient at a given temperature, D0 is the diffusion coefficient at infinite temperature, ΔEdiff is the activation energy of diffusion, and R is the gas constant. Assuming a site-hopping diffusion mechanism, the D0 term can be used to further determine both hopping distance (a) and attempt frequency (ν0).80,81 (2)Below, we introduce several common methods employed to measure guest diffusion in MOFs and highlight their strengths and limitations.

3.1.1 Gravimetric and mass balance techniques. 
In gravimetric approaches for studying transport within MOFs, the MOF samples (typically loose powders or pelletized MOF crystals) are placed on a balance that is sensitive to μg-level changes in mass (microbalance).11,72 Upon gas exposure, the change in sample mass is attributed to gas adsorption and recorded as a function of time. Zhao et al. measured the transient adsorption for CO2 within loose crystals of MOF-5 and fit the uptake curve with an equation used to describe diffusion within a sphere:82 (3)In eqn (3), qt is the mass loading at time t, qe is mass loading at equilibrium, rc is the radius of the crystal, and D is the intracrystalline diffusion coefficient. Note that eqn (3) is an approximation that holds at short times.11 Uptake kinetics can be similarly measured using the volumetric method, in which two cells, one containing a known pressure of dosing gas and another containing the MOF sample are connected by a closed valve.83 After the valve is opened, the change in pressure is measured until the system equilibrates. At equilibrium, the measured mass loadings provide the adsorption isotherm and can be used to determine isosteric heats of adsorption if isotherms are obtained at several temperature.82 Like several of the other techniques, the method requires fairly large crystals of uniform crystallite sizes for the accurate extraction of diffusion coefficients. Wang et al. recently reviewed best practices and discuss common pitfalls to avoid.72
A quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), which measures the frequency of a piezoelectric quartz crystal, has been used to study the diffusion of both vapors and liquids in very thin MOF films deposited on the quartz crystal.84 In QCM-based methods, an alternating current is applied to a quartz crystal that induces oscillations and generates a standing shear wave.80 The frequency of this oscillation is perturbed upon guest adsorption and the mass loading of adsorbed molecules is determined through the Sauerbrey equation:80 (4)where Δfn represents the change in frequency at the nth overtone order, fF is the frequency of the fundamental standing wave, Mf is mass loading, and C is a constant that accounts for the velocity of sound and the density of the crystalline quartz. Heinke et al. employed QCM to measure the diffusion coefficients of cyclohexane within HKUST-1 films of varying film thickness to determine the extent to which surface barriers affect the overall uptake process.31 QCM requires the growth of uniform MOF films, and because films must remain thin enough for the Sauerbrey equation to remain valid, QCM is limited to measuring slow diffusivities on the order of 6 × 10−19 m2 s−1 to 6 × 10−13 m2 s−1.84
The zero-length column (ZLC) technique has primarily been used to study adsorption kinetics in zeolites but has recently been used to study MOFs.40,85 In ZLC, a thin layer of MOF crystals or pellets is exposed to an adsorbate under carrier gas flow conditions. The in-MOF concentration of the adsorbate is measured by tracking both flow rate and mass spectrometric signal. After the guest uptake has reached equilibrium, the gas flow is then switched to the carrier-gas only and the decrease in adsorbate concentration is recorded over time. Assuming that only one diffusion process acts as the rate-limiting diffusion process, the Fickian diffusion coefficient from spherical particles is determined by fitting the data to the following equation:85 (5)where Ct is the concentration at time t, C0 is the concentration at equilibrium, L is the ratio of the diffusional time constant and convective desorption time, γz is the ratio of the hold up in the fluid phase to the accumulation in the solid phase, and βn is determined from the equation βncotβn + L − 1 + γzβn2 = 0(6)Due to the minimal sample thickness in ZLC, the system can be assumed to be well-mixed and external mass transfer can be neglected.85 For pelletized MOF samples, comparing ZLC concentration curves with varying flow rate can determine whether mass transfer is limited by diffusion within the MOF crystals (intracrystalline or micropore diffusion) or diffusion in void spaces between the crystals (macropore diffusion).85
Concentration swing frequency response (CSFR) is another flow technique that has been used to measure the diffusion of both gases86 and condensable vapors in MOFs.86,87 In CSFR, the concentration of analyte gas/vapor undergoes a sinusoidal perturbation with a constant amplitude (Δyi,in) and frequency (ω) while flow rate and pressure in the MOF sample bed are kept constant. The amplitude at the output of the sample bed (Δyi,out) is measured via mass spectrometry. The amplitude ratio of Δyi,out/Δyi,in is plotted as a function of ω and the data is then fit with diffusion models describing micropore or macropore diffusion. The micropore diffusion model for CSFR is (7) C = C0(P, T) at r = rc(8) (9)where C is the adsorbed phase concentration, C0 is the adsorbed phase concentration at equilibrium, r is the radial coordinate, rc is the radius of the crystallites, D is the micropore diffusivity, and t is time.87 Macropore diffusion is modeled by:87 (10)where ρp is particle density, K is the local slope of the isotherm, and εp is the macroporosity. Additional modeling of the CSFR response curves has been used to account for surface barrier resistance.88 Evaluation of the model fits at a range of feed pressures can help determine whether macropore or micropore diffusion is the rate-limiting step for the mass transfer. While CSFR has typically been used on MOF powders or pelletized samples, Tovar et al. used CSFR to measure the diffusivity of CO2 within millimeter-scale single crystals of Cu-BTC.79 CSFR has also been used to evaluate mixture diffusion in nanoporous materials,88 but has yet to be employed for mixtures in MOFs.


3.1.2 Spectroscopic methods. 
Unlike gravimetric and mass balance methods, spectroscopic techniques provide molecular-level insight into the dynamics of guest molecules within the MOF pores, help identify diffusion mechanisms, and often measure diffusion at shorter length and time scales. The insights gained from spectroscopic methods can be used to further develop computational methods for investigating diffusion (vide infra). Spectroscopic methods can be characterized as either equilibrium or non-equilibrium techniques. Equilibrium techniques, such as NMR and incoherent quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS), measure the self-diffusion of molecules, while non-equilibrium techniques, such as coherent QENS and infrared (IR) spectroscopy, are used to determine transport diffusivity.
Quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS) is a powerful tool that yields quantitative information on the rotational, vibrational, and translational motions of guest molecules within MOFs.89 QENS experiments require high intensity neutron sources, such as those found at large neutron accelerator facilities, of which only a few exist in the world.90 In a QENS experiment, the broadening of the elastic neutron line is caused by small energy transfers (±2 meV) between the incident neutrons and the atoms in the sample.90 Due to the large incoherent scattering cross section of hydrogen, the scattering intensity in QENS is primarily attributed to the motions of hydrogen. Deuterated MOF samples are often used to minimize scattering attributed to the MOF framework. The contributions to the incoherent scattering intensity due to the self-diffusion of guest molecules can be described by the Lorentzian function:90,91 (11)In eqn (11), Stransincoherent is the incoherent translational scattering intensity, Q is the scattering vector, and ℏω is the neutron energy transfer. The half width at half maximum (HWHM) in the Fickian diffusion regime is described by Δω(Q) = DselfQ2, where Dself is the self-diffusion coefficient. By plotting the HWHM as a function of Q2, it is possible to determine the self-diffusion coefficient. For deuterated- and non-hydrogen-containing guest molecules, coherent QENS can measure transport diffusion.92 The coherent scattering intensity can be described by the equation: (12)where S(Q) is a structure factor. To measure translational diffusion with QENS, the probed length scale  must be greater than the length of the MOF cavities.91 At high Q values, QENS is used to extract mechanistic information about the diffusion process. The scattering intensity for random-jump diffusion can be described with a Lorentzian function with HWHM:89 (13)where τ is the residence time at a given site and d is the jump length. Given the short length-scale that is probed by incident neutrons, QENS can measure diffusion phenomena that are inaccessible by other techniques. Jobic used QENS to observe and quantify the first reported instance of single-file diffusion in a MOF, where guest molecules cannot pass one another while diffusing, for the transport of neopentane in MIL-47(V).93
NMR was the first experimental technique used to examine self-diffusion within MOFs and has remained a valuable tool for measuring molecular transport within MOFs.94 The most common NMR technique for studying diffusion is pulsed field gradient NMR (PFG NMR).11,74,75 In PFG NMR, MOF samples are typically exposed to known concentrations of a gas or vapor and sealed in NMR tubes. Magnetic gradient pulses are applied to label and read spin states to determine signal loss that occurs to molecular diffusion during some observation time. A 90° radiofrequency (rf) pulse aligns spins in the transverse (xy) plane, then a pulsed magnetic gradient is applied along the length of the sample, which labels the spins. Next, a 180° rf pulse induces a spin-echo in the xy-plane, followed by another magnetic pulse, and the spin-echo is read. The self-diffusion coefficient can be determined by fitting the spin-echo signal attenuation with the equation:95 (14)where M0 is the net equilibrium magnetization in the z-direction, M(b) is the magnetization in the z-direction as a function of b, where , G represents the amplitude of the field gradient pulses, δ is the pulse width, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the selected nucleus, Δ is the time period between gradient pulses, and Dself is the self-diffusion coefficient.
One significant benefit of the PFG NMR technique is that because diffusion is only measured in the direction of the magnetic field gradient, PFG NMR can be used to measure anisotropic diffusion in MOFs.95 This has typically been accomplished by performing PFG NMR experiments with samples aligned in different crystal orientations96 or fitting the data from powder samples with analytical solutions for self-diffusion tensors.97 Forse et al. recently demonstrated that for nuclear spins that exhibit chemical shift anisotropy, the chemical shifts are dependent on crystallite orientation and anisotropic diffusion can be directly determined from the powder data.98,99
Advances in the PFG NMR techniques, pulse sequences, and data analysis have improved the ability of PFG NMR to study transport in non-uniform systems. Diffusion-relaxation correlation spectroscopy DRCOSY experiments, which involve a PFG NMR spin-echo pulse sequence followed by a Carr–Purcell–Meiboon–Gill sequence,100 make it possible to simultaneously measure diffusion and T2 relaxations and create correlational maps to determine whether a guest molecule's translational diffusion rate corresponds to its local mobility within the MOF pores. Hertel et al. performed DRCOSY measurements of benzene diffusion within MOF-5 and identified two distinct diffusion processes as transport through pristine pores and pores blocked by residual solvent.100 Thoma developed a method for assessing guest diffusion through MOF powders with a wide distribution of crystal agglomerate sizes.101
In addition to PFG NMR, several other NMR techniques have been employed to evaluate molecular transport within MOFs. Li et al. performed a series of solid-state NMR experiments of light alkane diffusion in UiO-66. The diffusion of light alkanes in UiO-66 was examined by performing 2D 1H–1H spin diffusion homonuclear correlation NMR experiments and tracking the increase in correlation intensity with time.102 Deuterium solid state NMR (2H NMR) measurements of deuterated benzene confined in a perdeuterated UiO-66 MOF revealed the presence of anisotropic and isotropic powder patterns at low temperatures (Fig. 5). The anisotropic feature was attributed to benzene located within the smaller, tetrahedral pores of UiO-66, while the isotropic feature was attributed to benzene molecules in a mobile state in the octahedral pores. The anisotropic feature decreased with temperature and disappeared at T > 193 K, suggesting that benzene molecules can readily diffuse through the pores. The mechanism for benzene diffusion through UiO-66 was speculated to be a jump sequence involving benzene jumps between tetrahedral and neighboring octahedral pores. A diffusion coefficient based on the Einstein equation was in agreement with QENS data.103
 Fig. 5  Experimental 2H NMR spectra of C6D6 in UiO-66 as a function of temperature (A) and simulation of 2H NMR spectrum of C6D6 in UiO-66 at 143 K as a sum of two signals with an anisotropic (population p1, red) and isotropic (population p2, blue) patterns (B). Figure reproduced with permission from Kolokolov et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2844, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b12001. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. Notice: further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. 
Infrared (IR) spectroscopy provides insight into the nature of the interactions between adsorbates and the surface by providing in situ information on the vibrational modes in the chemical environment of the sample. Infrared spectroscopy has been implemented as a technique to determine adsorption sites,54,104 quantify binding strengths,53 and understand molecular orientations of guest molecules within MOFs.55 From Beer's law, the measured absorbance at a given frequency directly correlates to the concentration of the absorbed molecule. Each IR spectrum, therefore, provides a snapshot of the relative concentration of adsorbed molecules within a given MOF sample. Sharp et al. employed transmission IR to track the adsorption and diffusion of n-butane through a pelletized UiO-66 sample.46 The decrease in intensity of the ν(O–H) vibrational mode at 3675 cm−1, attributed to the μ3-OH groups on the zirconium nodes of UiO-66, corresponded to the formation of a broad band at 3641 cm−1, indicating that n-butane adsorbed through weak hydrogen-bond formation with the zirconium node. To measure the diffusion, the decrease in vibrational modes assigned to adsorbed n-butane was used to track the relative concentration of butane over time (Fig. 6). The IR data were then fitted with a function derived from Fick's 2nd law of diffusion: (15)In eqn (15), It represents the total integrated IR absorbance at time t, I0 represents the total integrated IR absorbance at saturation coverage, θ represents the initial coverage at a given temperature, l represents the sample thickness, and D represents the diffusion coefficient. Grissom et al. utilized the same IR methods to investigate the diffusion of xylene isomers through UiO-66 and observed that despite an order of magnitude difference in measured diffusion coefficients at the same temperature, the activation energies of diffusion for each xylene isomer were approximately the same.45 While quantitative IR diffusion experiments require a uniform sample thickness, transmission IR has also been utilized as a qualitative tool to compare diffusion. Tan et al. measured the change in intensity of the ν(CO) band attributed to adsorbed CO in Ni-MOF-74 over time and demonstrated that CO diffused more slowly when ammonia and water were co-adsorbed within the MOF.67
 Fig. 6  Loss of IR intensity over time for n-butane through UiO-66 under ultrahigh vacuum conditions: (A) decrease in IR intensity for the C–H stretching region over time at 213 K; (B) change in IR intensity as a function of time at each temperature. The black dots are the experimental data, while the solid lines represent the Fickian diffusion model. Reprinted with permission from Sharp et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8902–8906. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3 Microscopy. 
Microscopic techniques, such as interference microscopy, IR microscopy, and fluorescence microscopy, allow for the measurement of transient guest-concentration profiles throughout a single MOF crystal with high spatial and temporal resolution.105 The data gathered can be used to track the two-dimensional concentration profiles (Fig. 7) and resolve the contributions of surface permeability and intracrystalline transport diffusion to the overall mass transport of guest molecules.106 The transport diffusion coefficient can be determined by fitting the concentration profiles along the length of a single crystal with an analytical solution for Fick's 2nd law of diffusion:105 (16)where t is time, DT is the transport diffusion coefficient, C is concentration, and y is the position along the length of the crystal. An alternative approach is to consider the center of the crystal, where , and obtain the transport diffusivity from: (17)
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of a microscopy setup for monitoring guest diffusion within MOFs. (b) Time-resolved guest concentration map for guest diffusion through MOFs. Figure adapted with permission from Wang et al., Langmuir, 2020, 36, 10853–10859. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
In interference microscopy, the concentration of guest molecules diffusing through a MOF crystal is determined by measuring changes to its optical density. The incident light is split into two beams, one that passes through the crystal sample, and a reference beam that passes through the surrounding atmosphere. The patterns of each beam are superimposed on one another to generate interference patterns.105 IR microscopy (IRM) combines the temporal and spatial data of microscopy techniques and the molecular-level insight of infrared spectroscopy. Because IRM tracks changes to vibrational modes assigned to individual molecules, IRM has been employed to investigate mixture diffusion of small molecules in ZIF-8.63 Similarly, the use of deuterated compounds can be used to perform tracer diffusion measurements to extract self-diffusion coefficients.63 In addition to interference microscopy and IRM, fluorescence microscopy techniques, such as confocal fluorescence microscopy (CFM) and confocal laser scanning microscopy, have been employed to measure the transport diffusivity of fluorescent molecules in MOFs in the presence of a solvent.107,108 Microscopy techniques require the synthesis of large single crystal MOF samples, typically on the micron to millimeter size scale.


3.1.4 Perspectives. 
In the experimental measurement of guest diffusion through MOFs, each technique has its own inherent strengths and limitations. Spectroscopic methods allow for the measure of mass transport at small time- and length-scales, which is necessary for gaining mechanistic insight into the diffusion of molecules through MOFs, but some techniques such as QENS have stringent sample requirements (MOFs must be deuterated) and require access to specialized facilities or equipment. The development of microscopy-based techniques for measuring diffusion in MOFs provides temporally-resolved guest concentration maps that allow for the simultaneous quantification of guest diffusivity and surface permeability, but require large single MOF crystals. It is therefore important to employ multiple techniques or pair experimental methods with computational calculations to validate results.
An important caveat to keep in mind when comparing reported diffusivity values, however, is that variations in MOF sample and experimental conditions can lead to drastically different diffusion coefficients. In the case of CO2 diffusion through MOF-5 at room temperature, Zhao et al. reported a diffusion coefficient of 7.9 × 10−9 cm2 s−1 while Saha et al. reported a diffusion coefficient of 1.17 × 10−5 cm2 s−1,82,109 a four order-of-magnitude difference. Disagreements in measured diffusivities between different samples of the same guest-MOF system may be explained by a combination of differences in MOF samples (defect density, surface area, crystal size, activation procedure), experimental conditions (guest concentrations, gas flow rates, pressures), or the choice of kinetic model for data fitting.
If possible, it is best to compare diffusion through MOF samples synthesized in the same batch under similar experimental conditions. In Kolokolov et al., the experimentally determined diffusivities for benzene in UiO-66 at 400 K using QENS and 2H NMR were 3.3 × 10−11 m2 s−1 and 3.1 × 10−11 m2 s−1, respectively, demonstrating that strong experimental agreement between different techniques is possible when using the same MOF sample.103 While it is not practical to only compare guest diffusivities using the same MOF samples, careful characterization of MOF samples and precise reporting of experimental conditions can help contextualize measured diffusivities and provide vital information to guide computational studies of mass transport in MOFs.
Similarly, when assessing molecular transport of different guest species within the same MOF, even subtle differences in the guest–guest and guest–MOF interactions due to chemical functionality and guest molecule size can have a profound effect on the diffusion rate. Fundamental research on chain-length, isomer and chemical substituent effects on mass transport in MOFs can help establish trends within a given MOF, but given the large number of possible guest molecules and MOF to investigate, these studies have been largely carried out using computational methods.

3.2 Techniques for simulating mass transfer in nanoporous materials
The high crystallinity of many MOFs along with their modular design make them excellent model materials for improving our understanding of diffusion in nanoporous materials. In addition, with the proper choice of model, simulated diffusivities in MOFs can be accurately predicted in agreement with experimental measurements.110 In this section we describe the common techniques used to generate MOF crystal structures and describe the most popular force field choices for simulating diffusion. We then examine how equilibrium and non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations can be used to predict self-diffusion coefficients as well as transport diffusion coefficients in MOFs. The application of kinetic Monte Carlo in conjunction with transition state theory to predict diffusion is also considered, as well as lattice Boltzmann methods. Along the way, we discuss the state of the art for these techniques and briefly cover some applications described in the literature. Finally, we provide our perspectives on new methods for diffusion simulations and future directions that could be explored.

3.2.1 Models for MOF frameworks and adsorbates. 
Simulating diffusion processes in MOFs requires a model of the MOF structure and equations that describe the interactions between adsorbates and the MOF atoms and among adsorbate molecules. Often the MOF crystal structure is known from X-ray crystallography. For proposed or hypothetical materials, a crystal structure can often be generated computationally as described below. The equations that describe the energetic interactions, known as a force field, should include the dominant types of interactions, such as dispersion, repulsion, electrostatics, and chemisorption for the system of interest. There have been many different types of models used to simulate diffusion in MOFs, and we summarize some of these models and provide criteria for selecting different models. Finally, we discuss new developments in MOF force fields.
Experimental MOF structures are typically deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database.111 Sometimes, the atomic coordinates can be used directly in a molecular simulation. In many cases, however, there may be partial occupancies of some atomic positions, missing hydrogen atoms, included solvent molecules, or other disorder that requires further processing to make the structure suitable as a simulation input. For an individual structure, this “clean up” can be done manually using various visualization tools. Recently, Chung et al. automated these procedures and provided over 14000 MOFs structures in their Computation-Ready, Experimental MOF (CoRE MOF) Database.112Fig. 8 shows some of the processing steps the CoRE MOF Database uses to clean experimental structures. It should be noted that these automated cleaning steps are not perfect, and researchers should carefully analyze structures of particular interest.113
If the crystal structure for a given MOF is not available, there are now multiple algorithms for generating MOFs. By combining modular building blocks of metal clusters and organic linkers, Wilmer et al. were able to construct 137953 MOFs, which they compiled in their hypothetical MOF (hMOF) database.114 The construction method used to create the hMOFs can also generate experimentally synthesized MOFs like HKUST-1 and MIL-47. Colón et al. used an alternative approach to MOF structure generation by using a top-down construction based on different underlying topologies.115 Using this approach, 13512 MOFs were created, spanning 41 topologies. This Topologically Based Crystal Constructor (ToBaCCo) algorithm can be used to create MOFs when the nodes, linkers, and topologies are known. This algorithm has been extended to a larger space of possible topologies with ToBaCCo 3.0 developed by Anderson and Gómez-Gualdrón.116 Other construction algorithms have been developed, such as the graph theoretical approach from Boyd and Woo that extend the space of possible MOFs for different types of underlying topologies.117
 Fig. 8  Schematic of how the Computation-Ready Experimental Metal–Organic Framework Database (CoRE MOF Database) processes MOF structures. (a) Removing solvent molecules, (b) fixing structural disorders. (c) Collating structures from the literature. Figure reproduced with permission from Chung et al., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 64, 5985–5998, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jced.9b00835. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. Notice: further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. 
Once a suitable MOF structure has been obtained either through experimental crystallography or from a computational construction algorithm, it is necessary to determine the interatomic potentials or force field, including whether the framework is to be kept rigid or allowed to move. If framework motion can be neglected, the Universal Force Field (UFF) and DREIDING Force Field (DFF) are often used to model dispersion and repulsion interactions for framework atoms.118,119 For example, such a model has been shown to predict self-diffusivities for C1 to C16 n-alkanes in IRMOF-1 in good agreement with results from PFG NMR spectroscopy, with diffusivities spanning two orders of magnitude.94,120,121 If MOF flexibility is important (for example in MIL-53(Cr), which exhibits breathing modes that affect pore sizes), bond stretching, bending, and torsion terms must also be included in the MOF force field in addition to dispersion and repulsion terms.122 The development of accurate force fields that include framework flexibility is an active area of current research, and the review by Heinen and Dubbeldam provides a good overview of their construction.123 In many cases, these force fields are parameterized using quantum chemistry techniques to reproduce physical properties such as binding energies, vibrational frequencies, unit cell size, and elastic properties like the bulk modulus. One of the force fields incorporating framework flexibility that has been used for diffusion simulations is QuickFF developed by Vanduyfhuys et al.124,125 An advantage of Quick FF is that it can be used to generate force field parameters from quantum chemical calculations of the nodes and linkers to efficiently generate force fields for different MOFs. Addicoat et al.126 and Coupry et al.127 have extended parameters from UFF to many of the metal nodes prevalent in MOFs to create the UFF4MOF force field. An advantage of UFF4MOF is that it can be immediately applied to many MOFs.
Electrostatic interactions between the MOF and adsorbates may be significant, for example for polar adsorbates. Atomic partial charges for a given MOF can be calculated using quantum chemistry calculations, and this is the preferred method when it is feasible. The quantum calculations can be performed on nodes and linkers separately or using the full periodic system. If quantum chemical calculations are prohibitively expensive, for example large unit cells or a very large number of MOFs to be considered, more approximate methods are sometimes used, especially variants on the charge equilibration method.128–131 Recently, to speed up the assignment of partial charges to MOFs, machine learning methods have been developed that quantify the local chemical environment around each atom and predict its partial charge. Kancharlapalli et al. have developed a fast and accurate machine learning algorithm, trained on results from quantum chemical calculations, for calculating MOF partial charges using only the crystal structure.132 Korolev et al.133 and Raza et al.134 have also used data science approaches to accelerate the calculation of MOF partial charges. These methods may be amendable for situations where numerous MOFs are being studied for diffusion. The Quick FF and UFF4MOF force fields described previously also include partial charges in their formulation.
Accurate force fields for the adsorbates are also important for simulations, and depending on the type of adsorbate there are many force fields that have been used for diffusion simulations. For alkanes, the Transferable Potentials for Phase Equilibria (TraPPE) force field uses explicit atom types and also united-atom variants with CHx pseudoatoms to model adsorbates.135 This force field has been extended to alcohols,136 aromatics,137 fluoroalkanes,138 and even organophosphate nerve agents and simulants,139 among others. The Optimized Potentials for Liquid Simulations (OPLS) force field by Jorgensen is another commonly used force field for simulating organic adsorbates.140
If the MOF structure is not prohibitively large, it may be possible to eschew a force field entirely and calculate diffusivities using ab initio MD, where the energies and forces are calculated using quantum chemical methods at each time step of the simulation. This may be preferable in situations where strong chemisorption, dynamic polarizability, or complex framework flexibility effects are important. In all cases, a quantum chemical approach will be slower than a force field due to the additional electronic degrees of freedom that must be calculated using a quantum Hamiltonian. The difference in CPU time for using a quantum chemistry approach will depend on the precise implementation used, but typically a quantum calculation will be orders of magnitude slower than using a force field. We can compare the limitations of these methods by their typical time and length scales. Force field MD simulations can reach tens of thousands of atoms and span up to multiple microseconds. Ab initio MD simulations are typically a few hundred atoms at a duration of tens to hundreds of picoseconds. Both techniques can be parallelized to efficiently utilize multiple CPUs, and many codes can now use graphical processing units (GPUs). Even when using a quantum chemical approach, certain choices and approximations are still required, and we refer the interested reader to reviews on choosing quantum chemical methods in nanoporous materials.141,142
Most simulations of diffusion in MOFs consider “ideal” structures from X-ray diffraction or crystal structures generated on the computer and consider only diffusion in the interior of the crystals. However, defects and surface terminations may have a significant effect on the diffusivities. For example, Han et al. showed how simulated point defects in ZIF-8 increase hopping rates leading to higher adsorbate diffusivities.30 Heinke et al.31 and Wang et al. have shown experimentally that surface barriers to diffusion are present in many MOFs and may be due to the MOF surface structure.108 In situations where defects or surface terminations are important, the crystal structure must be modified. In these cases, comparisons with experimental structures or additional stability calculations may be required to determine reasonable models.


3.2.2 Diffusivities obtained from molecular dynamics simulations. 
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations provide a direct approach for studying diffusion in nanoporous materials and calculating diffusion coefficients, as MD is similar in spirit to how an experiment would be carried out. In an MD simulation, adsorbates may be placed within a MOF and allowed to move according to the forces that they feel over time. If the system is at equilibrium, one can track the positions of individual adsorbates and obtain the self-diffusivity from the particle mean-squared displacements. The first molecular dynamics simulations were performed by Adler and Wainwright in 1957,143 and this technique has been used extensively in the diffusion literature. In a molecular dynamics simulation, the forces acting on each atom are calculated from the potential energy (obtained from the force field), and Newton's equations of motion are integrated numerically over many small time steps to obtain the molecular trajectories.144
At sufficiently long times, molecules may exhibit a random walk, where the mean-squared displacement (MSD) is proportional to time (t). For a molecule diffusing without an external concentration gradient, we can obtain the self-diffusivity of component i using the Einstein relationship: (18)where the position of molecule l is represented by the 3-dimensional vector x. The self-diffusion coefficient can be computed by taking the slope at long times (when the mean-squared displacement is linear) of the mean-squared displacement versus time. We can average over each molecule of the system to reduce statistical fluctuations: (19)where Nl is the total number of molecules of species i. To obtain a reliable self-diffusion coefficient, the simulation time must be sufficiently long to ensure that molecules are diffusing and not simply vibrating near their initial positions. It is strongly recommended to inspect MSD plots to investigate the slopes in different regions of the plot. Molecules may exhibit a ballistic region free from collisions, a subdiffusive regime characterized by collisions with walls, and finally a true diffusive regime as shown in Fig. 9. If the MSD is plotted on a log scale, it is straightforward to evaluate the diffusion mechanism at different times from the slopes of the plot. Vargas and Snurr developed an algorithm using Markov chain Monte Carlo to automatically fit each segment of the MSD and determine when the true diffusive regime begins.145 Bukowski and Snurr used this algorithm to efficiently calculate self-diffusivities for 40 different MOFs without manual selection of the diffusive part of the MSD plots.19
 Fig. 9  Illustration of different slopes in the MSD plot that represent different transport mechanisms that may occur in MOFs. Reprinted with permission from Vargas L. and Snurr, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10056–10065. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
Statistical errors in the MSD plot can be large if the number of adsorbates is small. One solution is to perform multiple simulations using different initial positions or velocities, but it is also possible to look at different parts of the trajectory at different time origins to calculate the MSD. If we track a single molecule for a period of 10 ns, we would normally obtain a single MSD for that molecule. However, we could take the molecule's position at, say, 1 ns as a new time origin to calculate a second MSD with a duration 9 ns in addition to the original MSD. In this way, we can perform a single longer MD simulation and average the MSD over multiple reference time origins to reduce statistical fluctuations. One must be careful that the different time origins are spaced significantly far enough apart that the trajectories are uncorrelated. For a detailed derivation of this algorithm, we recommend the work of Savin and Doyle.146
So far, we have focused on modeling the self-diffusion of adsorbates using equilibrium MD simulations, i.e., in the absence of a concentration gradient. The self-diffusivities from such simulations can be compared with experimental techniques that measure self-diffusion, such as PFG NMR and QENS. Many experimental diffusion studies occur in the presence of a concentration gradient and focus on the transport or Fickian diffusivities. There are two general approaches for calculating transport diffusivities from simulation: using either non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) or equilibrium molecular dynamics (EMD). Each technique has its advantages and drawbacks, and we describe each of them briefly.
The NEMD approach to calculating transport diffusivities (DT) is conceptually similar to what is done in an experimental diffusion measurement that includes a concentration gradient. As an example, we can construct a simulation box divided into two halves: one with adsorbates and the other without. Maginn et al. developed a technique where the concentration gradient in one dimension is monitored as the adsorbates diffuse from their non-equilibrium starting positions.147 NEMD can also be used to look at diffusion through the surfaces of a MOF. In these simulations, one half of the simulation box initially contains a bulk fluid of adsorbates at equilibrium, and the other half of the box initially contains the empty MOF. At time 0 the divider is removed, and the bulk fluid diffuses into the MOF to reach a new equilibrium. One can directly calculate the flux of gas into the MOF by counting the number of molecules crossing a slice of the MOF per unit time, (20)where the flux J is determined from the number of molecules N crossing a plane from the left to right (LR) or right to left (RL) of the MOF with area A during the time t. If we know the flux across a slice of the MOF, and we know the applied concentration gradient, the transport diffusivity can be calculated from Fick's first law. Velioglu and Keskin simulated H2/CH4 mixture permeation using this approach.148
One drawback to the NEMD approach to calculating transport diffusion is that large simulation boxes and specialized algorithms are required to effectively extract a diffusion coefficient. This approach is prone to statistical fluctuations if the simulation box and number of molecules are small, requiring a larger system size or multiple simulations. In the case of simulating diffusion into a crystal, this also requires a model for the MOF surface, and the most stable surface termination and surface structure of the MOF may not be known.
Transport diffusivities DT can also be derived from EMD simulations using the following equation, written in terms of the so-called corrected diffusivity DC and the adsorption isotherm: (21)Here f is the fugacity, C is the adsorbate concentration, and T is the temperature. The second factor is the log-derivative of the inverse adsorption isotherm. The adsorption isotherm can be obtained using simulation techniques such as grand canonical Monte Carlo. The corrected diffusivity can be obtained from the EMD simulation using the following expression: (22)The sum in eqn (22) in comparison to eqn (19) indicates that we are now measuring a collective diffusion of all adsorbate molecules as opposed to individual adsorbate motion. In the limit of low adsorbate loading, the log-derivative term in eqn (21) goes to 1, and the transport and corrected diffusivities coincide. In fact, at low loadings the self-diffusivity also coincides with the corrected diffusivity, and all three diffusion coefficients are equal. In general, all three diffusion coefficients may depend on the adsorbate concentration. In the EMD approach, since one must average over all adsorbates to obtain a collective diffusivity, there can be considerable statistical noise in the MSDs, requiring long simulation times and/or multiple independent simulations that are averaged together. Both EMD and NEMD methods for obtaining transport diffusivities require more care and more computational resources than MD simulations for calculating self-diffusivities, which may be one reason that most simulation studies report self-diffusion coefficients.


3.2.3 Calculating diffusion coefficients from transition-state theory. 
As noted above, MD simulations must be run long enough that the molecules have a measurable displacement on the time scale of the simulation. In general, it is recommended that the root-mean square displacement be larger than the unit cell length. With today's computing power, as a general heuristic, it is difficult to accurately calculate self-diffusion coefficients smaller than ∼10−11 m2 s−1. For molecules that diffuse slowly due to their size, a low system temperature, or strong adsorption, MD simulations may not be able to access long enough simulation times to observe diffusive motion. Often in such systems, molecules move by a series of infrequent jumps between low energy adsorption sites. In this case, transition-state theory (TST) provides a way to estimate the rate for hopping between the adsorption sites. Given these rate constants, the self-diffusion coefficient can be estimated, as we briefly describe below. For example, alkanes in the MOF UiO-66 diffuse by hopping from one cavity to another by traversing the narrow windows that connect the cavities. If the potential energy surface (x) is known (for example, from the same sorts of force fields used in MD simulations), the rate constant to move from state i (initial) to state j (final) can be written as: (23)where β = (kT)−1, C(x) is the dividing surface that separates states i and j, and δ[C(x)] selects for the dividing surface for the integral in the numerator.12 The TST rate constant assumes that all trajectories that reach the transition state thermalize in the final state j. To account for the possibility that some attempted transition events will recross back to the initial state or thermalize in another state, we can express the true hopping rate constant as: ki→j = κ × kTSTi→j.(24)where κ is a dynamical correction factor that accounts for barrier re-crossings.149
Calculating the rate constants for hopping between sites from TST requires that the Boltzmann factor be evaluated over the original state (to obtain the denominator) and over the dividing surface (to obtain the numerator). There are a variety of ways to do this. For example, Monte Carlo methods can be used to sample the potential energy surface. The Widom method randomly inserts test particles throughout the MOF and evaluates their energy, allowing one to sample the potential energy surface. The number of test particles inserted near the transition state will be small, so we need to bias the insertions to better sample this region of the potential energy surface. This may be performed using umbrella sampling, or other nonequilibrium free energy methods.144 For example, Verploegh et al. used umbrella sampling to determine transition state rate constants for alkanes in ZIF-8.65 Once kTSTi→j is obtained, it is necessary to evaluate the dynamical correction factor κ that accounts for barrier re-crossing. This can be evaluated by starting MD simulations on the dividing surface and counting what fraction decay to the initial versus final state.149
While we have briefly covered how to sample the potential energy surface and estimate the TST rate constants from eqn (23), sometimes it is advantageous to determine the diffusion path for adsorbates. In some cases, this may be straightforward from examining the crystal structure, for example diffusion across the windows of UiO-66 or ZIF-8 are likely candidates for an activated hopping process The potential energies of the initial and final states are straightforward to find due to their stability but obtaining the dividing surfaces is more difficult. Many of the techniques to find the minimum energy path require some form of biasing potential that will assist in selectively sampling the less stable configurations. One popular technique for identifying a minimum energy path is the nudged elastic band (NEB) method from Mills et al.150 and Henkelman et al.151–153 that generates a hypothetical path between the initial and final states and evaluates the force tangent to images along the path using spring constants to converge on the transition state. In other situations, it may require numerous attempts at finding plausible diffusion paths to find the most favorable diffusion path. To accelerate the identification of diffusion paths, Mace et al. have developed an algorithm that identifies basins and tunnels in a nanoporous solid from the potential energy surface of the unit cell.154 This enables automated high-throughput TST simulations for porous materials.
Once the hopping rate constants have been obtained using TST, the diffusion coefficient must be calculated. As an example, if the hopping rate constant and distance between the initial and final states (L) are known, and we assume a 1-D hop, the diffusivity can be calculated as: (25)In general, ki→j ≠ kj→i because the potential energies of the initial and final states are different. Braun and Sholl developed a general theory to evaluate tensorial diffusion for any elementary periodic cell,155 while Dubbeldam et al. have used sequential hops in different cage-type zeolites to calculate diffusion coefficients that agree with those calculated with molecular dynamics simulations as shown in Fig. 10.156 For more complicated systems with multiple types of sites and different diffusion pathways, kinetic Monte Carlo can be used to predict the self-diffusion coefficient, given the connectivity of the sites, the relative probabilities of adsorbing in the sites, and the rate constants for hopping between each pair of connected sites. Kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) stochastically propagates adsorbates among the sites according to their hopping rates in a coarse-grained model.157,158 This allows the MSD to be computed without having to run an atomistic molecular dynamics simulation. In fact, self-diffusion coefficients obtained from TST + kMC and molecular dynamics can be directly compared and are equivalent if the MD is well-equilibrated, all relevant hopping coefficients have been included, and the approximations in TST are satisfied. The TST + kMC approach is especially useful for materials having cavities connected by narrow windows. In this case, the diffusivity obtained from a single hopping event may not capture the stochastic lateral motion between cages perpendicular to the diffusion axis. For such materials, we can consider the well-established n-fold algorithm by Bortz et al.158 which allows molecules to hop between states for kMC. As an example of how kMC can be used with TST, Verploegh et al. compared TST + kMC, MD, and PFG NMR experiments to study water diffusion in ZIFs with mixed linker identities and found each technique agreed to within an order of magnitude as shown in Fig. 11.159 In the Verploegh et al. model, there are 8 possible cages accessible from the current cage, and the probability of hoping to a given cage is proportional to the TST rate constant.
 Fig. 10  Comparison between diffusion coefficients calculated using MD simulations and dynamically corrected transition state theory (dcTST) at two temperatures as a function of ethane loading in the cage-type zeolite CHA. Reprinted with permission from Dubbeldam et al., J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3164–3172. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 11  Comparison between water self-diffusion coefficients calculated with molecular dynamics (NPT-MD), transition state theory (TST-infinite dilution), and experimentally measured PFG NMR. The MOF studied is a binary mixed-linker ZIF-8/ZIF-90. Reprinted with permission from Verploegh et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5627–5638. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
Molecular dynamics simulations can be used with a biasing potential that appears in the Lagrangian such as Metadynamics as an alternative to locating transition states.160–162 In Metadynamics, small biasing potentials are added to the Lagrangian of the system that slowly raises the energy of the initial state to move the adsorbate toward the transition state. This technique is especially useful for quantum chemical calculations where Monte Carlo methods are computationally infeasible. These techniques have been used in microporous zeolites with quantum chemical simulations.163–165 The Monte Carlo derived methods such as Widom insertion are not usually feasible with a quantum chemistry calculation, and it may be prohibitively time consuming to examine high molecular loadings. If the rate determining hopping event is known (for example, from a faster calculation using a force field) it may be possible to re-calculate the hopping barrier using quantum chemistry. This may be useful in situations where MOF flexibility is critical to providing an accurate prediction.


3.2.4 Lattice-Boltzmann modeling. 
Lattice-Boltzmann Modeling (LBM) was introduced three decades ago and has now been developed into a powerful tool for Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD).166,167 This method is particularly successful in fluid flow applications involving interfacial dynamics and complex boundaries.168 In the LBM, space is discretized into regularly distributed nodes on a lattice, and time is divided into evenly spaced intervals. Particle positions are confined to the nodes, and each node contains a particle population distribution in different directions that connects neighboring nodes.169 Instead of directly solving the Boltzmann distribution, a nonlinear integral differential equation, the population distribution can be approximately solved by the discrete Lattice Boltzmann equation consisting of two steps at each time: (1) streaming, and (2) collision of the particles via the distribution function.
LBM has significant computational advantages since it is a mesoscopic lattice based model that is ideally suited for current parallel computers. As a result, it can access much larger time scales than molecular dynamics methods and can be used to determine bulk properties, such as flow, diffusion, and permeability, properties that are critical to the design of MOFs. However, while the MOF structure can be represented exactly in the simulation, molecular details of the diffusing (or flowing) component cannot be included in this model. Rather, the LBM can model the transport properties of the center of mass motion of the molecule. Thus, it is better suited for smaller molecules rather than larger macromolecules. The inputs to the model include the structure of the MOF, the diffusion constant of the molecule in air/vacuum and if studying activated diffusion, the binding energies of the molecule to the MOF structure.
LBM has been adapted to study flow in nanoporous systems and studies have shown that LBM can be used to simulate a range of Knudsen numbers by incorporating the appropriate boundary conditions at the pore wall surface.170 A study by Jiang et al.171 applied LBM to study gas flow through an anisotropic MOF, for which they calculated permeability values in different flow directions. This method was applied to the NU-1000 MOF, but the basic approach was shown to work for a large class of MOFs as long as the spatial coordinates and sizes of MOF nodes and linkers are known. An example of the streamlines of gas flow through the UiO-66 MOF is shown in Fig. 12. As can be seen in the figure, regions of low and high flow velocity can be identified, the flux under different pressure gradients can be determined, and then by using Darcy's Law, the permeability can be calculated.
 Fig. 12  A 10 × 10 × 10 nm3 cubic view: streamlines of gas flow going through UiO-66 from direction [0,0,1] (arrow direction). Left: Streamlines shown with structure, with black spheres for MOF nodes and linkers. Right: The same streamlines shown without MOF structure. In both cases, the local velocity was scaled by the inlet velocity to better visualize the disturbance of flow. 
LBM can also be used to determine the influence of the MOF structure on the diffusion coefficient by fitting diffusion profiles. As shown in Fig. 13, the same MOF in Fig. 12 is initialized with a high concentration pulse (width 2h, concentration C0) at the center of the MOF. The pulse will then diffuse towards boundaries, and each timestep gives a diffusion profile, which can be fitted to the analytical solution of Fick's second law with infinite domain and extended initial condition, using diffusion coefficient D as fitting parameter to determine the time dependent diffusion coefficient. In these studies, the structure of the MOF only acts as a topological hindrance to diffusion, as there are no energetic interactions between the diffusing component and the MOF. These studies allow us to determine the role of the structure (topology) on the diffusion. Studies like this can then be used to estimate the extent of energetic interactions with the MOF structure by comparing it to experimental data.
 Fig. 13  Diffusion within a UiO-66 structure. (A) Initialization of a high concentration region at the center of the MOF. (B) Evolving concentration profiles as a function of time (C). Fit of the concentration profiles to the diffusion equation. 


3.2.5 Perspective. 
With increasingly robust structure generation and database efforts becoming more common, the design space of MOFs accessible to simulations continues to grow. Due to their crystallinity, there are many techniques available to researchers interested in adsorbate diffusion in MOFs. We have focused on techniques that integrate Newton's equations of motion (molecular dynamics) and those that sample the potential energy surface for diffusion (transition state theory). We have shown how these methods can be implemented, and depending on the system of interest, one may be easier than the other. While both techniques can be used to probe self-diffusion, MD can be used to simulate transport diffusivities due to an external concentration gradient using both EMD and NEMD. Recently, Chmelik and Kärger have shown how TST can be used with eqn (21) and additional approximations to predict the loading-dependent behavior of the transport diffusivity in ZIF-8.172
The enormous number of hypothetical MOFs far exceeds the current capabilities of experimental synthesis. Chemical intuition about MOFs with favorable diffusion properties can be bolstered by high-throughput simulations that can test hypotheses about which MOFs produce the fastest adsorbate diffusion. While high-throughput gas storage calculations have become common, high-throughput diffusion studies are less common. MD simulations require long simulation times, and identifying the diffusive regime in the MSD plots is often done manually. Bukowski and Snurr have shown that by using automatic fitting of the MSD plot, it is possible to perform automated and high-throughput MD simulations.19 The algorithm developed by Mace et al. improves the usability of TST for high-throughput screening by automatically determining the diffusion paths and rate-limiting transition states. The rate constants can then be used to perform kMC to calculate the diffusivity.154 An example nanoporous solid considered by Mace et al. is shown in Fig. 14. Coupling these techniques with some of the available MOF databases, one could rapidly generate numerous adsorbate diffusivities. Rapidly obtaining transport diffusivities is more difficult, as both the equilibrium and non-equilibrium MD simulations to obtain transport diffusivities are significantly more time-consuming than those used to obtain self-diffusivities.
 Fig. 14  Diffusion paths in the zeolite PSI automatically determined. (A) PSI structure, (B) potential energy isosurface, (C) potential energies colored from lowest energy (blue) to highest energy (red). (D) dividing surfaces colored uniquely, kMC grid points are black dots. Reproduced with permission from Mace et al., J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 2127–2141, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01255. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. Notice: further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. 
Most diffusion studies have focused on pristine MOF crystals, but surface terminations can also produce mass transport resistances that can dominate overall mass transport versus intracrystalline diffusion.31 In these cases, intracrystalline diffusivities may not be useful for predicting membrane or catalyst performance. These situations require close collaborations with experimental groups to first identify the rate-limiting mass transfer resistances and characterize the types of defects that may be present. In conjunction with experimental characterization, quantum chemistry calculations can be used to determine the relative stability of defects within MOF unit cells.
For some MOFs, the motion of the framework may significantly affect diffusion, either by changing the pore shape or window sizes.173 Accurate force fields are required to accurately capture these effects, and the large MOF design space makes it difficult to develop highly accurate force fields that are transferable to the multitude of different MOF structures. Quantum chemical calculations are too computationally expensive to be performed on every MOF, but some level of QM may be required to fit interactions between nodes and linkers or to evaluate energies directly without a force field. QuickFF by Vanduyfhuys et al.124,125 uses quantum chemistry to rapidly develop a MOF force field by performing efficient calculations on the nodes and linkers to then generalize an overall MOF force field. This method allows a force field to be generated even for exotic linkers and nodes that may have no existing force field. A significant advance would be the ability to determine whether a force field that includes framework flexibility is necessary for a given MOF, or whether a rigid model can be used without loss of accuracy. A way of answering this question quickly for a given structure could dramatically increase the accuracy of diffusivity databases by making sure that each MOF is screened at the right level of force field accuracy.

4. Relevance of mass transport in practical applications of MOFs
4.1 Mass transport in electrochemically active MOFs
MOFs have shown great promise in electrochemical systems due to what is considered a combination of homogeneous (e.g. high tunability, well-defined active sites) and heterogeneous (e.g. surface confined, high stability) properties.174–179 Electrochemical applications such as electrocatalysts, batteries, and electronics have all been proposed and explored with MOFs with much success.174–178,180–186 To effectively perform electrochemical transformations in any system, it is necessary for electrons (from the electrode) and substrate (from the bulk solution) to all have sufficiently high diffusion rates in order to reach the active sites and perform the desired reactions. Optimization of electron and substrate diffusion rates is frequently considered for electrochemically active MOFs, but an often ignored aspect is the diffusion of counterions or electrolyte through the MOF pores.
The performance of electrochemical processes results in a large number of electrons moving throughout the MOF, resulting in multiple oxidation states. Therefore, diffusion of counterions is necessary to maintain electroneutrality.187–189 The slower of the diffusion rates between ions and electrons will be rate-limiting, as an uncompensated electrical field will be generated due to fast movement of electrons or ions.188 The electrical field will slow charge carriers of the same charge and accelerate those of the opposite charge, helping to maintain the electroneutrality. The Scholz model can be used to visualize the movement of electrons and ions through an electrode-confined surface such as a MOF (Fig. 15a).188 In this model, a three-phase boundary is proposed where the MOF surface, electrode, and bulk solution are all in contact. The electrons move between the electrode and MOF while ions diffuse between the MOF and bulk solution. As this boundary represents the shortest distance required for electrons, ions, and dissolved substrate to meet at an active site, electrochemical reactions are suggested to be largely surface confined at the start of electrochemical processes. Longer electrochemical experiments cause continued movement of electrons and counter-ions, which allow for propagation further into the MOF structure. Typical techniques for quantifying ion transport (i.e. electrochemical pulse-field-gradient spin-echo NMR)190–197 typically require much faster diffusion than is achievable in MOFs, but an electrochemical approach may not suffer the same limitation. The electroneutrality requirement presents a unique opportunity as electrons can be quantified electrochemically, and ion and electron movement are directly related in these systems.
 Fig. 15  Mass transport in electrochemically active MOFs: (a) Scholz model for visualization of electron and ion movement through MOFs under applied bias, (b) chronoamperometric curve with different time stages, (c) size comparison between counter ion and studied MOF-808, NU-1000, and NU-1003, (d) illustration of NU-1000 MOFs prepared solvothermally and using electrophoretic deposition and corresponding SEM images. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 189 (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society), ref. 198 (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society), and ref. 200 (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society). 
Work from the Morris group shows one such effort to use electrochemistry to monitor ion diffusion in MOFs.189 A zirconium-based MOF, NU-1000, was doped with three different metallocene species (Fe, Ru, or Os) to make use of the reversible redox features these metallocenes display. In conjunction with two different electrolyte species, tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) and tetrabutylammonium tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)borate (TBATFAB), this work aimed to quantify electron diffusion (De) and ion diffusion (Di) coefficients. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) in dichloromethane (DCM) provided electrochemical potentials for the one electron M2+/M3+ redox event for each metallocene species. These potentials were then used as guides for chronoamperometry experiments, where a constant electrochemical bias both lower (E1) and higher (E2) than the M2+/M3+ couple is applied to observe the resultant current. Converting the current (I) vs. time (t) data to I√t vs. √t, the plotted curves showed three regimes that were correlated to behavior proposed by the Scholz model (Fig. 15b). The first regime (A) showed an increase in the I√t vs. √t curve that can be interpreted as unimpeded electron and ion transport, suggestive of oxidation of the MOF surface. Regime B begins as the curve reaches a maximum and starts to decrease, where the surface of the MOF is completely oxidized and transport of electrons and ions into the bulk of the MOF takes over. Diffusion is limited by the slower of the two processes. The region where the curve approaches zero current represents the final regime (C), where nearly all of the metallocene species have been oxidized. Equations derived from the Scholz model were then used to quantify De and Di. Comparison of the six metallocene–electrolyte combinations revealed that: (1) the De dependence on metallocene identity follows Fe < Ru < Os, behaving as would be expected based on self-exchange rates of the metallocenes; (2) Di of TFAB− was faster than PF6− despite TFAB− being roughly 4 times the size of PF6− (TFAB−Vol = 0.405 nm3, PF6−Vol = 0.109 nm3) due to TFAB− having lessened ion pairing with the metallocenes, and; (3) ion diffusion was limiting in all cases as Di was orders of magnitude lower than De. While a larger number of electrolyte and metallocene combinations may provide a more complete picture of the relationships between Di, De, and electrochemical system, this work represents one of the first examples of quantifying Di and De electrochemically within a MOF.
In a recent report, Morris et al. further explored the effect of different MOF structures on electron and ion diffusions (Fig. 15c).198 Three zirconium-based MOFs (MOF-808, NU-1000 and NU-1003) with distinct pore sizes (15 Å, 33 Å, and 47 Å, respectively), were post-synthetically decorated with ferrocene and studied using cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry in the presence of TBAPF6 and TBATFAB electrolytes. Generally, the charge transport rates increased by a factor of 10–100 when the MOF pore size increased from 15 Å to 47 Å. Deeper understanding of events that take place on a microscopic level was achieved using the Scholz model that revealed opposite trends for ion and electron diffusions. Ion diffusion occurred at a faster rate when diffusing through larger MOF pore sizes (from 10−14 to 10−12 cm2 s−1). For the largest pore MOF, Fc-NU-1003, the diffusion values for both electrolytes were almost equal (2.49 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 for PF6−vs. 2.17 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 for TFAB−), which suggests that the pore size was no longer a limiting variable for diffusion. Diffusion of electrons, however, exhibited a decrease by a factor of three with larger pore sizes as a direct consequence of electroactive species being further apart and, therefore, requiring greater hopping distances.199 It should be noted that even for Fc-NU-1003, De values are still at least two orders of magnitude higher than ion diffusion, indicating that ion diffusion limits the overall charge transfer even when the pore size is >10 times bigger.
Another example of ion diffusion-limited charge transport was observed in a Hupp–Farha collaboration, where they studied the role of crystal orientation on charge propagation through MOFs.200 In their work, NU-1000 films were deposited onto an FTO-substrate using solvothermal synthesis and electrophoretic deposition. The two preparation methods yield different orientations in the films (Fig. 15d): solvothermal synthesis produces a film that grows along the c-axis (perpendicular to the electrode), whereas electrophoretic deposition generates a film with the crystallites parallel to the electrode (along the ab-plane). Electrochemical measurements on the two thin films with TBAPF6 as the electrolyte revealed a stark difference between them; the overall charge transport rate was 300-fold faster in solvothermally prepared NU-1000 films. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy showed that the electrical conductivity (related to De) was improved by 100 times in c-oriented films due to the shorter hopping distances, indicating that an additional factor played a role in the improved charge-hopping rate. For solvothermal films, the electrolyte moves through the MOF channels in the same direction as redox hopping due to the directional growth of the MOF film. In electrophoretic-deposited films, the channels are orthogonal to the electron transport direction, which most likely slows down the overall charge hopping. The importance of the counterion was further highlighted by the sizable decrease (two to fourfold) in charge-hopping diffusion when sodium tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]borate was used as an electrolyte.
Electrochemical characterization of MOFs unveiled a unique dependence of charge transport on counter ion diffusion that is often inaccessible using other analytical methods. Results of cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry showed that the ion diffusion constants are often several orders of magnitude lower than electron diffusion and, thus, limit the overall charge transport even when MOF pore sizes are sufficiently large. Such observations invoke the necessity for a deeper understanding of processes that take place within the pores under applied external bias. With the latest advances in in operando techniques, such as small-angle neutron scattering,201 we anticipate that the molecular-level understandings of electrochemical processes within MOFs will help develop more efficient electroactive systems.
4.2 Separations
The separations of chemical mixtures into pure components are a significant focus of the chemical industry and are energy and cost-intensive processes. It is estimated that 10–15% of the world's energy consumption is attributed to chemical separations, approximately half of which is due to distillation techniques.202,203 New methods to efficiently separate molecules, especially under ambient temperatures, can provide a cost-effective and more environmentally-friendly alternative. The development of MOFs for use as separation platforms has been extensively discussed and reviewed in several publications.204–208 The separation of mixtures with MOFs can be accomplished by several techniques, including: (1) molecular sieving, where guest molecules of a certain size are physically prevented from entering and diffusing through the pores of the MOF, (2) kinetic separations, where each mixture component diffuses through a MOF at a different rate, and (3) selective equilibrium adsorption, where the MOF is designed to selectively adsorb one or several components of the mixture. Below, we highlight how the control over guest diffusion into and through MOFs can be utilized to perform separations of several industrially-relevant mixtures.

4.2.1 BTX separations. 
Recent work has demonstrated that MOFs can be utilized to separate benzene/toluene/xylene (BTX) mixtures at room temperature by tuning MOF pore diameter and aperture size. Polyukhov et al. studied the separation of xylene isomers through ZIF-8 under pseudo-ambient temperatures and observed that the sample temperature had a profound effect on the separation efficiency.209 A ZIF-8 sample synthesized with (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO) radicals (TEMPO@ZIF-8) allowed for the use of electron paramagnetic resonance measurements to investigate the penetration of BTX molecules into the ZIF-8 pores. At 298 K, the effective aperture of ZIF-8 (d298K) was determined to be 6.96 Å < d298K ≤ 7.26 Å, which allows p-xylene (critical diameter = 6.62 Å) to readily penetrate into the pores of the MOF, but severely restricts the uptake of m-xylene (critical diameter = 7.26 Å) and inhibits o-xylene adsorption (critical diameter = 7.27 Å). As temperature was increased to 333 K, the effective diameter (d333K) increased to 7.26 Å < d333K ≤ 7.27 Å, allowing for m-xylene to be separated from o-xylene with a 92% separation efficiency.
Grissom et al. employed infrared spectroscopy to investigate the adsorption and diffusion of perdeuterated BTX molecules in UiO-66 and found that BTX molecules adsorb within the tetrahedral pores of the MOF through weak hydrogen-bond-like interactions with the μ3-OH groups on the zirconium oxoclusters.45 By tracking the decrease of ν(C–D) vibrational modes attributed to adsorbed BTX molecules over time, diffusion coefficients were calculated by fitting the data with a Fickian diffusion model. While the activation energies for diffusion of the xylene isomers were similar (43–44 kJ mol−1), p-xylene diffused approximately 20 times faster than o-xylene and 2–3 times faster than m-xylene at similar temperatures. Benzene and toluene, which both have kinetic diameters smaller than the 6.5 Å triangular pore apertures of UiO-66, diffused at the same rate, suggesting that the rate-limiting step for BTX diffusion was the passage of molecules through the pore windows and not the rupture of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds. This hypothesis was further supported by comparing the diffusivity of p-xylene through UiO-66 before and after dehydroxylation of UiO-66. Despite a significant increase in p-xylene diffusivity with the absence of hydrogen bonding, the activation energy of diffusion for p-xylene showed little change (Fig. 16). This work demonstrated that BTX diffusivities through MOFs can vary greatly when the pore size of the MOF is similar to the size of kinetic diameters of the guest molecules, which can be exploited for separation purposes.
 Fig. 16  
p-Xylene-d10 diffusion through hydroxylated (solid blue) and dehydroxylated (outlined blue) UiO-66 at 273 K. The isothermal diffusion experiments were performed tracking the decrease in the ν(C–D) vibrational modes attributed to p-xylene-d10 adsorbed within the UiO-66 sample. (a) Loss of relative IR peak area as a function of time (273 K). (b) Arrhenius plot based on a Fickian diffusion model. The activation energy of diffusion for p-xylene-d10 in dehydroxylated UiO-66 was determined to be 46.9 ± 3.5 kJ mol−1, similar to p-xylene-d10 in hydroxylated UiO-66 (42.7 ± 2.2 kJ mol−1). Figure reproduced with permission from Grissom et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16060. 
Li et al. found that changing the metal center of MOF MFM-300(M) resulted in sub-angstrom changes to the diameter of the MOF's 1-dimensional zigzag channels and could tune the separation efficiency of xylene isomers at room temperature.210 The synthesis of MFM-300(M) with M = In, V, Fe, and Al yielded MOFs with pore dimensions of 7.4, 7.0, 6.8, and 6.5 Å, respectively. With the exception of MFM-300(Al), ternary breakthrough measurements and chromatographic separations of xylene isomers revealed that p-xylene eluted first, followed by o-xylene then m-xylene. Synchrotron-based X-ray diffraction measurements and terahertz spectroscopic studies of xylene isomer adsorption within the MFM-300(M) indicated that m-xylene bound most strongly within MFM-300(In), MFM-300(V), and MFM-300(Fe) through a combination π⋯π and van der Waals interactions with the linkers of the MOF.


4.2.2 Alkane separations. 
The use of MOFs for the separation of alkanes and olefins has relied on a variety of techniques to accomplish high separation efficiency at room temperature.211 Yu et al. demonstrated that MOF Al-bttotb can be used to separate C6 isomers at room temperature by combining size-exclusion and kinetic separation methods.212 The 1D channels of Al-bttotb have a diameter of 5.6 Å that prevents the uptake of 2,2-dimethyl butane (kinetic diameter = 6.2 Å), separating it from the C6 mixture through molecular sieving. Column breakthrough measurements revealed that 3-methyl pentane diffuses through Al-bttotb before n-hexane. DFT calculations determined that n-hexane adsorbs more strongly than 3-methyl pentane in the pores of Al-bttotb, resulting in a decreased diffusivity and increased retention times.
Wang et al. probed the effect of how pore topology affected the separation of C6 alkane isomers within Zr-MOFs. Tetratopic linkers of similar length but different aspect ratios (the ratio between linker length and width) were used to create three Zr-MOFs with different node connectivities and pore topologies (Fig. 17).213 The ftw (12-connected) and scu (8-connected) topologies, named compound 1 and 2, respectively, both showed promise for the separation for C6 isomers, with the scu topology outperforming the benchmark material zeolite 5A in column breakthrough experiments (the third MOF with an lvt structure (4-connected) was not thermally stable and therefore not tested).213 For compound 1, ab initio molecular dynamics calculations indicated that the narrow, 4.5 Å pore windows resulted in high diffusion barriers for 3-methylpentane and 2,3-dimethylbutane that significantly hinder diffusion into the pores of the MOF, resulting in a molecular sieving effect. For compound 2, which has 1D channels ∼7 Å in diameter, the separations were determined to be thermodynamically driven.
 Fig. 17  Structural comparison of compounds 1 and 2. Compounds 1 and 2 are built on 12- and 8-connected Zr6 clusters, linked by tetratopic organic ligands bptc and abtc, forming ftw and scu type structures, respectively. Figure adapted with permission from Wang et al., et al., Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1745. 
Suh and Kim investigated the separation of hexane isomers in a ligand-inserted Mg-MOF-74 using MD simulations and observed that the insertion of 2,4-di(4-pyridinyl)-1,3,5-triazine (dpt) ligands into the hexagonal channels of the MOF resulted in a reverse-shape selectivity.214 Calculated diffusivities for 2,3-dimethylbutane and 2,2-dimethylbutane were approximately an order of magnitude faster than n-hexane. While n-hexane has the smallest kinetic diameter of the hexane isomers (4.3 Å), it has the largest maximum diameter (10.3 Å). It was speculated that the distance between the dpt ligands (8.3 Å) within the channels of Mg-MOF-74 sterically restricted n-hexane due to its length, hindering diffusion within the channel. Conversely, computed diffusivities of pentane isomers within the dpt-inserted Mg-MOF-74 decreased with increasing kinetic diameters.


4.2.3 Enantioselective separations. 
Recently, MOFs have emerged as a promising platform for the separation of racemic mixtures, which have significant importance in the biomedical and pharmaceutical industries. The synthesis of MOFs with homochiral ligands creates interior pore environments that preferentially adsorb certain enantiomers more strongly, resulting in stereoselective diffusivities.215 The homochiral MOF TAMOF-1, containing L-histidine-based linkers, outperformed commercial columns for the separation of a racemic mixture of trans-2,3-diphenyloxirane.216 Molecular dynamic simulations of ibuprofen and thalidomide enantiomer diffusion through TAMOF-1 revealed that the activation energies of diffusion vary for each enantiomer based on their adsorption geometry within the MOF. Moghadam and Düren performed GCMC simulations of the adsorption of racemic diol mixtures in Ni2(L-aspartic acid)2(4,4′-bipyridine) (Ni2(L-asp)(bpy)) and observed R-enantioselectivity due to favorable guest-MOF interactions that allow for more efficient packing at higher loadings, which could result in slower diffusivity of R enaniomers.217 In ZIF-8, the incorporation of chiral L- and D-histidine linkers enabled the MOF to separate racemic mixtures of tryptophan.218


4.2.4 Perspectives. 
The separation efficiency of MOFs can be controlled by a wide variety of parameters, including precise tuning of pore size and pore topology. Even sub-angstrom changes to the MOF structure can result in pronounced differences in guest diffusion of mixture components. Given the vast number of MOF structures that currently exist and more that are synthesized each year, experimentally-led investigations of guest diffusion through MOFs can act as a potential bottleneck for the development of MOF-based separation platforms. As mentioned in the section on computational methods, the use of computational structural libraries has provided a facile method for the high-throughput screening of MOF materials for separations. As of 2019, the Computation-Ready, Experimental Metal–Organic Framework Database (CoRE MOF Database) contains the structures of over 14000 3-dimensional MOFs.112 Chung et al. utilized the CoRE MOF database to screen 5109 MOFs for the separation of hexane and heptane isomers.219 Li et al. used the CoRE MOF database to identify 15 MOFs out of over 5000 structures that trap CO2 in the presence of water.220 It should be noted that these computational screening efforts focused on differences in equilibrium adsorption, not differences in diffusion. Screening for materials that display kinetic selectivity is more difficult, as discussed above, but there are a growing number of examples in the literature.14,148,221–223 The continued development of these computational tools will enable faster identification of MOFs to be investigated for separation processes.

4.3 Heterogeneous catalysis
Metal–organic frameworks have garnered significant attention for their use in heterogeneous catalysis.224,225 The ability to tune the pore environment through linker and metal cluster choice can allow for the design of catalytic active sites that are tailored for the desired reaction. As Johnson et al. discuss,226 there is a fundamental need to understand the role of mass transport in kinetic studies of MOF-based catalysis to resolve the role of diffusion in the overall chemical reactivity, which besides a few studies,227 have been largely ignored. From Ernest Thiele's “reaction–diffusion” theory, catalysis within porous media can be either classified as diffusion-limited or reaction-limited.228 In the case of diffusion-limited reactions, where the diffusion rate is slower than the turnover rate for a given active site, catalysis is limited to the boundary layer of material. To realize the full potential of MOF-based catalysis, reactant diffusion rates must occur more rapidly than the catalytic turnover rate so that substrate molecules react at all available catalytic sites. It is therefore important to develop quantitative methods for analyzing the role of diffusion in catalysis. Several methods exist, such as kinetic modeling,229 isoreticular catalysis,230 kinetic isotope effects,13 and film-thickness/crystal size studies,231 and are discussed more in-depth by Gao et al.13
A good example of the importance of active site accessibility and diffusion limitations in MOF-based catalysis is the hydrolysis of chemical warfare agents with Zr-based MOFs. UiO-66 was initially shown as a promising catalyst for the decomposition of nerve agent simulants (structural mimics) in buffered solutions, but reactions were limited to the surface of the crystallites due to the narrow triangular pore apertures (6 Å) of UiO-66.232 Agrawal et al. performed molecular dynamics simulations to calculate the diffusion of the nerve agent sarin through UiO-66 and calculated a diffusion coefficient of 4.3 × 10−13 cm2 s−1 at 300 K, meaning it would take approximately 3 hours for a sarin molecule to diffuse through a 1 μm UiO-66 crystal.233 The use of UiO-67, which is isoreticular to UiO-66 but possesses longer linkers in the form of 4,4′-biphenyldicarboxylate, resulted in a decrease in the reaction half-life time by approximately an order of magnitude because internal active sites were more readily accessible.234 Further research into Zr6-based MOFs has focused on changing the pore topology to both increase the number of coordinatively unsaturated Zr-sites and to facilitate faster molecular transport to catalyst sites within the MOF crystals to improve observed reaction rates.235
One way that scientists have mitigated mass transfer limitations in microporous MOF catalysts is through the use of hierarchically porous MOFs (HP-MOFs), which contain mesoporous (between 2 and 50 nm) channels that allow for enhanced diffusion of reactants to catalytic active sites. HP-MOFs can be generated through a myriad of different approaches, such as isoreticular expansion, defect-engineering, mixed-linker synthesis, surfactant-assisted synthesis, and hydrogel templating.236,237 The synthesis of a hierarchically porous Cu-BTC MOF with the use of the anionic surfactant template sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate created a HP-Cu-BTC with mesopores up to 24 nm, which showed improved conversion rates for the catalysis of the Henry reaction for 4-nitrobenzaldehyde.238 Qin et al. created a HP-MIL-101 MOF with a macroporous (larger than 50 nm) core and a mesoporous shell through selective etching which displayed an almost 4-fold increase in the conversion of 4-chlorostyrene to 4-chlorostyrene oxide compared to MIL-101.239

4.3.1 MOFs as catalyst supports. 
MOFs have been successfully used for the encapsulation of catalysts, such as polyoxometalates (POMs),240–242 metal nanoparticles,243 and enzymes,244 and other nanocatalysts.245 Given the breadth of literature on this subject, this section will only highlight a small portion of the literature on supported catalysts within MOFs. Encapsulation can offer protection from harsh chemical and thermal environments, limit catalyst sintering/leaching, and create well-dispersed catalytic sites. Nanocatalysts can be encapsulated in MOFs by a variety of methods,244,246,247 including synthesizing the MOF around the catalyst (de novo synthesis), post-synthetic infiltration of the synthesized catalyst, or synthesis of the catalyst within a pre-synthesized MOF. For encapsulated catalysts within MOFs, it is important to simultaneously restrict the transport of the catalyst material without drastically reducing the diffusivity of substrate molecules. This can be accomplished with the use of hierarchically porous MOFs, where the encapsulated catalysts are confined within smaller pores while the mesoporous regions enable rapid diffusion of reactants. In some instances, the catalysts can be confined within the mesopores of a MOF even when the pore diameter of the MOF exceeds the size of the catalyst, provided that strong intermolecular interactions between encapsulated catalysts and the pore walls of MOFs prevent leaching.248 For example, the Keggin POM H5PV2Mo10O40, which has a diameter of approximately 13 Å, was encapsulated within the mesopores of MIL-101(Cr) (diameter = 29–34 Å),240 Cu-BTC (diameter = 29.5 Å),249 and NU-1000 (31 Å).241 The minimal changes in catalytic activity recyclability tests indicated that the POM successfully remained encapsulated in the MOFs.
In some instances, limiting active site accessibility and hindering reactant diffusion in MOF-based catalysis can be advantageous for controlling the selectivity of the catalytic reaction.250 Guo et al. observed that for Pt clusters confined within the pores of UiO-66-NH2 (Pt@UiO-66-NH2), the hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde is selective for the aldehyde group as opposed to the alkene.251 Given the small pore apertures of the UiO-66-NH2, only the aldehyde can access the Pt inside the pores, enabling the selectivity. For Pt nanoparticles encapsulated within MOFs ZIF-8 (Pt@ZIF-8), ZIF-67 (Pt@ZIF-67), and UiO-66 (Pt@UiO-66), citronellal is selectively hydrogenated to citronellol in Pt@ZIF-8 and Pt@ZIF-67 (Fig. 18).252 The pore sizes for Pt@ZIF-8 and Pt@ZIF-67 are 3.4 Å and 3.3 Å, respectively, much smaller than the pores of Pt@UiO-66 (6 Å). Molecular dynamics simulations revealed that CO group of citronellal preferentially penetrates the channels of ZIF-67 and ZIF-8 due to decreased steric interactions compared to the two methyl groups connected to the alkenyl group. Furthermore, the free rotation of the citronellal was hindered while diffusing through the ZIFs, limiting the ability for the alkenyl group to contact the Pt nanoparticles. While the restrictive diffusion through Pt@ZIF-8 and Pt@ZIF-67 resulted in a significantly lower turnover frequency as compared to the Pt@UiO-66 catalyst, they demonstrate that diffusion control through MOFs can allow for highly selective catalysis.
 Fig. 18  Schematic of selective hydrogenation of citronellal to citronellol catalyzed by platinum nanoparticles encapsulated within MOFs with different channel environments. Figure reproduced with permission from Zhang et al., ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5805–5813. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 


4.3.2 Perspectives. 
Developing an understanding of how guest transport through MOFs affects both the kinetics and mechanisms of a catalytic process is critical for optimizing catalytic turnover rates and reaction selectivities. With the continued development of reported MOF structures with different pore domains, nanosized catalysts can be successfully encapsulated without blocking access to internal pores. The increase in synthetic approaches to develop MOFs with hierarchical pore structures has enabled traditionally microporous MOFs, such UiO-66,253 to be developed as shape-selective catalysts while still ensuring rapid enough substrate diffusion to enable catalysis at sites deep within the crystals. Before we can realize the full capabilities of these catalysts, it is necessary to perform fundamental measurements of substrate and product diffusion through MOFs to develop kinetic reaction models. The development of in operando methods for assessing mass transport in MOFs will be especially important, as current techniques for quantitatively assessing multicomponent mixtures are limited.

5. Conclusions
The mass transport of molecules through the pores and channels of metal–organic frameworks is highly complex and dependent on several factors. The pore aperture and interior pore diameter of a MOF, which can vary depending on the linker dynamics and framework flexibility, limit which guest molecules can diffuse inside the MOF and can affect the guest-pore wall interactions. Binding sites, such as coordinatively unsaturated metal sites and Brønsted acid sites, can hinder diffusion by creating high activation energy barriers for site-hopping diffusion. The presence of defects and surface barriers, either intentionally synthesized or caused due to exposure to reactive conditions, can block channels and increase the tortuosity of diffusion.
Several experimental methods exist to measure guest diffusion within MOFs, but given the constraints and limitations of each technique, it is often useful to employ multiple techniques to assess diffusion at different length and time scales. Significant progress has been made in the development of computational methods to effectively calculate guest diffusivities in MOF structures, and with the advent of computational screening libraries, the ability to computationally study diffusion now significantly outpaces experimental measurements. Further research combining computational techniques and experiments will provide a clearer understanding of the role of defects and the importance of framework flexibility.
Understanding the complex nature of guest diffusion within metal–organic frameworks offers exciting potential for the continued development of MOFs for electrochemical applications, separations, and heterogeneous catalysis. In MOF-based catalysis, reducing MOF crystal sizes, synthesizing MOFs with hierarchical pore structures, and intentionally introducing defects can enable rapid substrate diffusion to allow reactions to occur at interior sites. In some instances, the restricted diffusion of reactants can allow for improved reaction selectivity and prevent unwanted side reactions. For catalysts encapsulated within MOFs, there must exist a balance between facilitating substrate diffusion while preventing catalyst leaching. Understanding the intermolecular guest-MOF interactions can allow scientists and engineers to tune experimental conditions, such as temperature and gas pressure, to optimize pore size for highly efficient separations.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the U.S. Army Research Office under grant no. W911NF-20-2-0058. The views and conclusions herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of the ARO, DOE, or the U.S. Government. This publication was written while Conor Sharp held an NRC Research Associateship award at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. Stefan Ilic was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under award DE-SC0012445. Eric Johnson was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1551964. Brandon Bukowski and Randall Snurr acknowledge financial support from the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (HDTRA1-19-1-0007).
References
S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276–288 RSC .
C. Altintas, G. Avci, H. Daglar, A. Nemati Vesali Azar, I. Erucar, S. Velioglu and S. Keskin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9593–9608 RSC .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 974–987 CrossRef CAS .
P. Saffman, J. Fluid Mech., 1959, 6, 321–349 CrossRef .

          J. Karger, D. M. Ruthven and D. N. Theodorou, Diffusion in Nanoporous Materials, Wiley,  2012, ch. 1, pp. 1–24 Search PubMed .

          E. L. Cussler and E. L. Cussler, Diffusion: mass transfer in fluid systems, Cambridge University Press,  2009 Search PubMed .
Y. Mo, J. Kleiner, M. Webb and M. Lagally, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 1998 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Lin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 10015–10020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. Cheng, K. Katsov, S. W. Sides, J. Wang, J. Tang, G. H. Fredrickson, M. Moskovits and G. D. Stucky, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 816–822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Krishna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3099–3118 RSC .

          J. Karger, D. M. Ruthven and D. N. Theodorou, Diffusion in Nanoporous Materials, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2012 Search PubMed .

          D. N. Theodorou, R. Q. Snurr and A. T. Bell, Comprehensive Supramolecular Chemistry, ed. G. Alberti and T. Bein, Pergamon, Oxford,  1996, vol. 7, pp. 507–548 Search PubMed .
W. Y. Gao, A. D. Cardenal, C. H. Wang and D. C. Powers, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 3465–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Haldoupis, S. Nair and D. S. Sholl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7528–7539 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, D. H. Olson, J. Seidel, T. J. Emge, H. Gong, H. Zeng and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10368–10369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amirjalayer and R. Schmid, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 27319–27327 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Forse, K. A. Colwell, M. I. Gonzalez, S. Benders, R. M. Torres-Gavosto, B. Blümich, J. A. Reimer, J. R. Long, A. C. Forse, K. A. Colwell, M. I. Gonzalez, S. Benders, R. M. Torres-Gavosto, B. Blümich, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3570–3576 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Osborn Popp, A. Z. Plantz, O. M. Yaghi and J. A. Reimer, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2020, 21, 32–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Bukowski and R. Q. Snurr, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 56049–56059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, H. Jobic, F. Salles, D. Kolokolov, V. Guillerm, C. Serre and G. Maurin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8882–8889 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Ramsahye, J. Gao, H. Jobic, P. L. Llewellyn, Q. Yang, A. D. Wiersum, M. M. Koza, V. Guillerm, C. Serre, C. L. Zhong and G. Maurin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27470–27482 CrossRef CAS .

          D. C. Ford, D. Dubbeldam and R. Q. Snurr, in Diffusion Fundamentals III, ed. C. Chmelik, N. Kanellopoulos, J. Kärger and D. Theodorou, Leipziger Universitätsverlag,  2009, pp. 459–466 Search PubMed .
S. Devautour-Vinot, G. Maurin, C. Serre, P. Horcajada, D. Paula da Cunha, V. Guillerm, E. de Souza Costa, F. Taulelle and C. Martineau, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2168–2177 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Moggach, T. D. Bennett and A. K. Cheetham, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7087–7089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gonzalez-Nelson, F. X. Coudert and M. A. van der Veen, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 330–365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal and D. S. Sholl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31060–31068 CrossRef CAS .
F. Salles, H. Jobic, A. Ghoufi, P. L. Llewellyn, C. Serre, S. Bourrelly, G. Férey and G. Maurin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8335–8339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sławek, J. M. Vicent-Luna, B. Marszałek, B. Gil, R. E. Morris, W. Makowski and S. Calero, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5116–5127 CrossRef .
A. Knebel, B. Geppert, K. Volgmann, D. I. Kolokolov, A. G. Stepanov, J. Twiefel, P. Heitjans, D. Volkmer and J. Caro, Science, 2017, 358, 347–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Han, R. J. Verploegh and D. S. Sholl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4037–4044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Heinke, Z. Gu and C. Wöll, Nat. Commun., 2014, 4562,  DOI:10.1038/ncomms5562 .
K. Müller, N. Vankova, L. Schöttner, T. Heine and L. Heinke, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 153–160 RSC .
Z. Fang, B. Bueken, D. E. De Vos and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7234–7254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, L. Zou, J.-S. Qin, J. Li, L. Huang, L. Feng, X. Wang, M. Bosch, A. Alsalme, T. Cagin and H.-C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, C.-J. Liu and X. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21526–21546 RSC .
S. Zhang, B. Gui, T. Ben and S. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19984–19990 RSC .
R. A. Homan, D. S. Hendricks, T. M. Rayder, U. S. Thein, K. J. Fossum, A. P. Claudio Vázquez, J. Yan, R. L. Grimm, S. C. Burdette and J. C. MacDonald, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19, 6331–6338 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, J. Yang, M. Veenstra, A. Sudik, J. J. Purewal, Y. Ming, B. J. Hardy, J. Warner, S. Maurer, U. Müeller and D. J. Siegel, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3268–3274 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Purewal, D. Liu, J. Yang, A. Sudik, D. J. Siegel, S. Maurer and U. Müller, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 2723–2727 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krishnamurthy, R. Blom, M. C. Ferrari and S. Brandani, Adsorption, 2020, 26, 711–721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Wang, A. I. Benin, P. Jakubczak, R. R. Willis and M. Douglas Levan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14301–14307 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. A. Gee, D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20727–20733 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, K. Fujita, Y. Miyake, M. Miyamoto, Y. Hasegawa, T. Makino, S. Van Der Perre, J. Cousin Saint Remi, T. Van Assche, G. V. Baron and J. F. M. Denayer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28430–28439 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, J. Liu, Y. Machain, B. Bonnett, S. Lin, M. Cai, M. C. Kessinger, P. M. Usov, W. Xu, S. D. Senanayake, D. Troya, A. R. Esker and A. J. Morris, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22195–22203 RSC .
T. G. Grissom, C. Sharp, P. Usov, D. Troya, A. Morris, J. Morris, C. H. Sharp, P. M. Usov, D. Troya, A. J. Morris and J. R. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16060–16069 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Sharp, J. Abelard, A. M. Plonka, W. Guo, C. L. Hill and J. R. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8902–8906 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wardzala, J. P. Ruffley, I. Goodenough, A. M. Schmidt, P. B. Shukla, X. Wei, A. Bagusetty, M. De Souza, P. Das, D. J. Thompson, C. J. Karwacki, C. E. Wilmer, E. Borguet, N. L. Rosi and J. K. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 28469–28478 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, X. Peng, Q. Jin, S. K. Jain, J. M. Vicent-Luna, S. Calero and D. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4686–4700 CrossRef CAS .
A. Burgun, C. J. Coghlan, D. M. Huang, W. Chen, S. Horike, S. Kitagawa, J. F. Alvino, G. F. Metha, C. J. Sumby and C. J. Doonan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8412–8416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Inokuma, S. Yoshioka, J. Ariyoshi, T. Arai, Y. Hitora, K. Takada, S. Matsunaga, K. Rissanen and M. Fujita, Nature, 2013, 495, 461–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Viciano-Chumillas, M. Mon, J. Ferrando-Soria, A. Corma, A. Leyva-Pérez, D. Armentano and E. Pardo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 520–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Young, M. T. Huxley, E. Pardo, N. R. Champness, C. J. Sumby and C. J. Doonan, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 4031–4050 RSC .
T. G. Grissom, D. M. Driscoll, D. Troya, N. S. Sapienza, P. M. Usov, A. J. Morris and J. R. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 13731–13738 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Driscoll, D. Troya, P. M. Usov, A. J. Maynes, A. J. Morris and J. R. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14582–14589 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Driscoll, D. Troya, P. M. Usov, A. J. Maynes, A. J. Morris and J. R. Morris, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 5078–5085 RSC .
K. I. Hadjiivanov, D. A. Panayotov, M. Y. Mihaylov, E. Z. Ivanova, K. K. Chakarova, S. M. Andonova and N. L. Drenchev, Chem. Rev., 2020, 121, 1286–1424 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-P. Xu, Z.-Q. Wang, H.-Z. Tan, K.-Q. Jing, Z.-N. Xu and G.-C. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 1699–1707 RSC .
J. P. P. Ruffley, I. Goodenough, T.-Y. Y. Luo, M. Richard, E. Borguet, N. L. Rosi, J. Karl Johnson, N. L. Rosi and J. K. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 19748–19758 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, H. Fang, S. Mukhopadhyay, A. Li, S. Rudić, I. J. McPherson, C. C. Tang, D. Fairen-Jimenez, S. C. E. Tsang and S. A. T. Redfern, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Walenszus, V. Bon, J. D. Evans, S. Kaskel and M. Dvoyashkin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 9696–9701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Salles, S. Bourrelly, H. Jobic, T. Devic, V. Guillerm, P. Llewellyn, C. Serre, G. Ferey and G. Maurin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10764–10776 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, G. Zhou, Y. Sun and L. Huang, AIChE J., 2020, 67, e17035 Search PubMed .
C. Chmelik, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 216, 138–145 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Skoulidas and D. S. Sholl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15760–15768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Verploegh, S. Nair and D. S. Sholl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15760–15771 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bendt, Y. Dong and F. J. Keil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 8212–8220 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tan, S. Jensen, S. Zuluaga, E. K. Chapman, H. Wang, R. Rahman, J. Cure, T. H. Kim, J. Li, T. Thonhauser and Y. J. Chabal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 856–859 CrossRef CAS .
B. Borah, H. Zhang and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2015, 124, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Keskin, D. S. Sholl and J. K. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12560–12566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 369–395 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brandani, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 353–368 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Wang, E. Mangano, S. Brandani and D. M. Ruthven, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 295–318 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta, T. Stait-Gardner and W. S. Price, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 503–533 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baniani, S. J. Berens, M. P. Rivera, R. P. Lively and S. Vasenkov, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 485–501 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kärger, M. Avramovska, D. Freude, J. Haase, S. Hwang and R. Valiullin, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 453–484 CrossRef .
J. J. E. Maris, D. Fu, F. Meirer and B. M. Weckhuysen, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 423–452 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Wilkins, A. Rajendran and S. Farooq, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 397–422 CrossRef CAS .
J. Caro, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 283–293 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Tovar, J. Zhao, W. T. Nunn, H. F. Barton, G. W. Peterson, G. N. Parsons and M. D. LeVan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11449–11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zybaylo, O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Tafipolsky, R. Schmid, D. Johannsmann and C. Wöll, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 8092–8097 RSC .
B. Smit, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 4125–4184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. S. Lin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 10015–10020 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brandani, E. Mangano, F. Brandani and P. Pullumbi, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 245, 116862 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, C. Wöll and L. Heinke, Materials, 2015, 8, 3767–3775 CrossRef CAS .
S. Brandani and E. Mangano, Adsorption, 2020, 1, 3 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Wang, A. I. Benin, P. Jakubczak, R. R. Willis and M. D. LeVan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14301–14307 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Hossain and T. G. Glover, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 10550–10558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and M. D. LeVan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 2141–2154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jobic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 525–530 RSC .
H. Jobic and D. N. Theodorou, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 102, 21–50 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jobic, D. I. Kolokolov, A. G. Stepanov, M. M. Koza and J. Ollivier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16115–16120 CrossRef CAS .
F. Salles, H. Jobic, A. Ghoufl, P. L. Llewellyn, C. Serre, S. Bourrelly, G. Férey and G. Maurin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8335–8339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jobic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17190–17195 RSC .
F. Stallmach, S. Gröger, V. Künzel, J. Kärger, O. M. Yaghi, M. Hesse and U. Müller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2123–2126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peksa, J. Lang and F. Stallmach, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 205, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
U. Hong, J. Kärger, R. Kramer, H. Pfeifer, G. Seiffert, U. Müller, K. K. Unger, H. B. Lück and T. Ito, Zeolites, 1991, 11, 816–821 CrossRef CAS .
B.-T. L. Bleken, K. P. Lillerud, T. Splith, A.-K. Pusch and F. Stallmach, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 182, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Forse, S. A. Altobelli, S. Benders, M. S. Conradi and J. A. Reimer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 15344–15351 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Forse, M. I. Gonzalez, R. L. Siegelman, V. J. Witherspoon, S. Jawahery, R. Mercado, P. J. Milner, J. D. Martell, B. Smit, B. Blümich, J. R. Long and J. A. Reimer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1663–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hertel, M. Wehring, S. Amirjalayer, M. Gratz, J. Lincke, H. Krautscheid, R. Schmid and F. Stallmach, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2011, 55, 20702 CrossRef .
R. Thoma, J. Kärger, N. de Sousa Amadeu, S. Nießing and C. Janiak, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 13000–13005 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Li, A. Zheng, X. Liu, N. Yu and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14261–14268 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Kolokolov, A. G. Maryasov, J. Ollivier, D. Freude, J. Haase, A. G. Stepanov and H. Jobic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2844–2857 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chakarova, I. Strauss, M. Mihaylov, N. Drenchev and K. Hadjiivanov, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 281, 110–122 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chmelik and J. Kärger, Adsorption, 2010, 16, 515–523 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kortunov, L. Heinke, M. Arnold, Y. Nedellec, D. J. Jones, J. Caro and J. Kärger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8041–8047 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, T. M. Hermans, P. E. Fuller, Y. Wei and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2662–2666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, B. C. Bukowski, J. Duan, T. R. Sheridan, A. Atilgan, K. Zhang, R. Q. Snurr and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 10853–10859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saha, Z. Bao, F. Jia and S. Deng, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1820–1826 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Bukowski, F. J. Keil, P. I. Ravikovitch, G. Sastre, R. Q. Snurr and M.-O. Coppens, Adsorption, 2021, 27, 683–760 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Groom, I. J. Bruno, M. P. Lightfoot and S. C. Ward, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2016, 72, 171–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Chung, E. Haldoupis, B. J. Bucior, M. Haranczyk, S. Lee, H. Zhang, K. D. Vogiatzis, M. Milisavljevic, S. Ling, J. S. Camp, B. Slater, J. I. Siepmann, D. S. Sholl and R. Q. Snurr, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 64, 5985–5998 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velioglu and S. Keskin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1, 341–353 RSC .
C. E. Wilmer, M. Leaf, C. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, J. T. Hupp and R. Q. Snurr, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Colón, D. A. Gómez-Gualdrón and R. Q. Snurr, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 5801–5810 CrossRef .
R. Anderson and D. A. Gómez-Gualdrón, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 1653–1665 RSC .
P. G. Boyd and T. K. Woo, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3777–3792 RSC .
A. K. Rappe, C. J. Casewit, K. S. Colwell, W. A. Goddard and W. M. Skiff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10024–10035 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Mayo, B. D. Olafson and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8897–8909 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Ford, D. Dubbeldam, R. Q. Snurr, V. Künzel, M. Wehring, F. Stallmach, J. Kärger and U. Müller, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 930–933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sarkisov, T. Düren and R. Q. Snurr, Mol. Phys., 2004, 102, 211–221 CrossRef CAS .
C. Serre, S. Bourrelly, A. Vimont, N. A. Ramsahye, G. Maurin, P. L. Llewellyn, M. Daturi, Y. Filinchuk, O. Leynaud, P. Barnes and G. Férey, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2246–2251 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heinen and D. Dubbeldam, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2018, 8, e1363 Search PubMed .
L. Vanduyfhuys, S. Vandenbrande, T. Verstraelen, R. Schmid, M. Waroquier and V. Van Speybroeck, J. Comput. Chem., 2015, 36, 1015–1027 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vanduyfhuys, S. Vandenbrande, J. Wieme, M. Waroquier, T. Verstraelen and V. Van Speybroeck, J. Comput. Chem., 2018, 39, 999–1011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Addicoat, N. Vankova, I. F. Akter and T. Heine, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 880–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Coupry, M. A. Addicoat and T. Heine, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2016, 12, 5215–5225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Rappe and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 3358–3363 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Wilmer, K. C. Kim and R. Q. Snurr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2506–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kadantsev, P. G. Boyd, T. D. Daff and T. K. Woo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3056–3061 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Wells, C. De Bruin-Dickason and A. L. Chaffee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 456–466 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kancharlapalli, A. Gopalan, M. Haranczyk and R. Q. Snurr, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2021, 17, 3052–3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Korolev, A. Mitrofanov, E. I. Marchenko, N. N. Eremin, V. Tkachenko and S. N. Kalmykov, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 7822–7831 CrossRef CAS .
A. Raza, A. Sturluson, C. M. Simon and X. Fern, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 19070–19082 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Martin and J. I. Siepmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 2569–2577 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, J. J. Potoff and J. I. Siepmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3093–3104 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Wick, M. G. Martin and J. I. Siepmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8008–8016 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and J. I. Siepmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2911–2919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sokkalingam, G. Kamath, M. Coscione and J. J. Potoff, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 10292–10297 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Jorgensen, J. D. Madura and C. J. Swenson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 6638–6646 CrossRef CAS .
V. Van Speybroeck, K. Hemelsoet, L. Joos, M. Waroquier, R. G. Bell and C. R. A. Catlow, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7044–7111 RSC .
J. W. Harris, J. S. Bates, B. C. Bukowski, J. Greeley and R. Gounder, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9476–9495 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Alder and T. E. Wainwright, J. Chem. Phys., 1957, 27, 1208–1209 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Frenkel and B. Smit, in Understanding Molecular Simulation, Academic Press, San Diego, 2nd edn,  2002, pp. 63–107 Search PubMed .
E. Vargas L and R. Q. Snurr, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10056–10065 CrossRef CAS .
T. Savin and P. S. Doyle, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2007, 76, 021501 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Maginn, A. T. Bell and D. N. Theodorou, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 4173–4181 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velioglu and S. Keskin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2301–2314 RSC .
A. F. Voter and J. D. Doll, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 80–92 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mills, H. Jónsson and G. K. Schenter, Surf. Sci., 1995, 324, 305–337 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 7010–7022 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9978–9985 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901–9904 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mace, S. Barthel and B. Smit, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 2127–2141 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Braun and C. A. Sholl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 14870–14879 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dubbeldam, E. Beerdsen, S. Calero and B. Smit, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3164–3172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Voter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 6819–6829 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Bortz, M. H. Kalos and J. L. Lebowitz, J. Comput. Phys., 1975, 17, 10–18 CrossRef .
R. J. Verploegh, Y. Wu, S. E. Boulfelfel and D. S. Sholl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5627–5638 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laio, A. Rodriguez-Fortea, F. L. Gervasio, M. Ceccarelli and M. Parrinello, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6714–6721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Iannuzzi, A. Laio and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 238302 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Laio and M. Parrinello, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 12562–12566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Paolucci, I. Khurana, A. A. Parekh, S. Li, A. J. Shih, H. Li, J. R. Di Iorio, J. D. Albarracin-Caballero, A. Yezerets, J. T. Miller, W. N. Delgass, F. H. Ribeiro, W. F. Schneider and R. Gounder, Science, 2017, 357, 898–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. C. Moors, K. De Wispelaere, J. Van der Mynsbrugge, M. Waroquier and V. Van Speybroeck, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2556–2567 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Bukowski, W. N. Delgass and J. Greeley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 4519–4531 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Mcnamara and G. Zanetti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 61, 2332–2335 CrossRef .
F. J. Higuera and J. Jimenez, Europhys. Lett., 1989, 9, 663–668 CrossRef .
S. Chen and G. D. Doolen, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 1998, 30, 329–364 CrossRef .

          D. T. Thorne, Lattice Boltzmann modeling: An introduction for geoscientists and engineers, Springer,  2006 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, J. Yao, M. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Sun, S. An and A. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Jiang, A. M. Plonka, A. I. Frenkel and D. Gersappe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1092–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chmelik and J. Kärger, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 225, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
E. Haldoupis, T. Watanabe, S. Nair and D. S. Sholl, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 3449–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Downes and S. C. Marinescu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4374–4392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Stassen, N. Burtch, A. Talin, P. Falcaro, M. Allendorf and R. Ameloot, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3185–3241 RSC .
V. Stavila, A. A. Talin and M. D. Allendorf, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5994–6010 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, A. Schwartzberg, V. Stavila and A. A. Talin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11372–11388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 249–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Johnson, S. Ilic and A. J. Morris, ACS Cent. Sci., 2021, 7, 445–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Chem. Commun., 2019, 2, 86 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 292–318 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Al-Rowaili, A. Jamal, M. S. Ba Shammakh and A. Rana, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15895–15914 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, E. Pervaiz, T. Noor, O. Rabi, R. Zahra and M. Yang, Int. J. Energy Res., 2021, 45, 1190–1226 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCarthy, A. M. Beiler, B. A. Johnson, T. Liseev, A. T. Castner and S. Ott, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 406, 213137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Johnson, A. M. Beiler, B. D. McCarthy and S. Ott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11941–11956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dincă, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536–8580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Surridge, C. S. Sosnoff, R. Schmehl, J. S. Facci and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 917–923 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lovrić and F. Scholz, J. Solid State Electrochem., 1997, 1, 108–113 CrossRef .
P. J. Celis-Salazar, M. Cai, C. A. Cucinell, S. R. Ahrenholtz, C. C. Epley, P. M. Usov and A. J. Morris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 11947–11953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Timachova, H. Watanabe and N. P. Balsara, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 7882–7888 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gorecki, M. Jeannin, E. Belorizky, C. Roux and M. Armand, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1995, 7, 6823–6832 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hayamizu, K. Sugimoto, E. Akiba, Y. Aihara, T. Bando and W. S. Price, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 547–554 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharja, S. W. Smoot and D. H. Whitmore, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 306–314 CrossRef CAS .
K. Timachova, I. Villaluenga, L. Cirrincione, M. Gobet, R. Bhattacharya, X. Jiang, J. Newman, L. A. Madsen, S. G. Greenbaum and N. P. Balsara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 1537–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tambio, M. Deschamps, V. Sarou-Kanian, A. Etiemble, T. Douillard, E. Maire and B. Lestriez, J. Power Sources, 2017, 362, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kellenbach, M. Burgering and F. Kaspersen, Org. Process Res. Dev., 1999, 3, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. Corain, A. A. D'Archivio, L. Galantini, S. Lora, A. A. Isse and F. Maran, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 2392–2401 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cai, Q. Loague and A. J. Morris, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 702–709 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Powers, D. J. Salmon, R. W. Callahan and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 6731–6733 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goswami, I. Hod, J. D. Duan, C.-W. Kung, M. Rimoldi, C. D. Malliakas, R. H. Palmer, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17696–17702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, L. Yang, M. Dincă, R. Zhang and J. Li, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 9860–9866 CrossRef .
D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, Nature, 2016, 532, 435–437 CrossRef PubMed .
Materials for Separation Technologies: Energy and Emission Reduction Opportunities, Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Y. Wang and D. Zhao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 2291–2308 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
J. R. Li, J. Sculley and H. C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Adatoz, A. K. Avci and S. Keskin, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2015, 152, 207–237 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Denny, J. C. Moreton, L. Benz and S. M. Cohen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16078 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Polyukhov, A. S. Poryvaev, S. A. Gromilov and M. V. Fedin, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6506–6510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Wang, N. Bai, X. Zhang, X. Han, I. da Silva, C. G. Morris, S. Xu, D. M. Wilary, Y. Sun, Y. Cheng, C. A. Murray, C. C. Tang, M. D. Frogley, G. Cinque, T. Lowe, H. Zhang, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, K. M. Thomas, L. W. Bolton, S. Yang and M. Schröder, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Qian, X. Wang, X. Cui, B. Chen and H. Xing, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 5359–5406 RSC .
L. Yu, X. Dong, Q. Gong, S. R. Acharya, Y. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Han, T. Thonhauser and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6925–6929 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Dong, J. Lin, S. J. Teat, S. Jensen, J. Cure, E. V. Alexandrov, Q. Xia, K. Tan, Q. Wang, D. H. Olson, D. M. Proserpio, Y. J. Chabal, T. Thonhauser, J. Sun, Y. Han and J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
B. L. Suh and J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 22601–22605 RSC .
B. Slater, Z. Wang, S. Jiang, M. R. Hill and B. P. Ladewig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18322–18327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Corella-Ochoa, J. B. Tapia, H. N. Rubin, V. Lillo, J. González-Cobos, J. L. Núñez-Rico, S. R. G. Balestra, N. Almora-Barrios, M. Lledós, A. Guëll-Bara, J. Cabezas-Giménez, E. C. Escudero-Adán, A. Vidal-Ferran, S. Calero, M. Reynolds, C. Martí-Gastaldo and J. R. Galán-Mascarós, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14306–14316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Z. Moghadam and T. Düren, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20874–20881 CrossRef CAS .
D. Suttipat, S. Butcha, S. Assavapanumat, T. Maihom, B. Gupta, A. Perro, N. Sojic, A. Kuhn and C. Wattanakit, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 36548–36557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Chung, P. Bai, M. Haranczyk, K. T. Leperi, P. Li, H. Zhang, T. C. Wang, T. Duerinck, F. You, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha, J. I. Siepmann and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6315–6328 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. G. Chung and R. Q. Snurr, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 10368–10376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Daglar and S. Keskin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17347–17357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pramudya, S. Bonakala, D. Antypov, P. M. Bhatt, A. Shkurenko, M. Eddaoudi, M. J. Rosseinsky and M. S. Dyer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 23073–23082 RSC .
T. Watanabe and D. S. Sholl, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 14114–14128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bavykina, N. Kolobov, I. S. Khan, J. A. Bau, A. Ramirez and J. Gascon, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8468–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gascon, A. Corma, F. Kapteijn and F. X. Llabrés I Xamena, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 361–378 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Johnson, A. M. Beiler, B. D. McCarthy and S. Ott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11941–11956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, C. A. Gaggioli, D. Ray, M. Babucci, L. Gagliardi and B. C. Gates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8044–8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. W. Thiele, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1939, 31, 916–920 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Johnson and S. Ott, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 7468–7478 RSC .
B. Tahmouresilerd, M. Moody, L. Agogo and A. F. Cozzolino, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 6445–6454 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro, Y. K. Hwang, Y. K. Seo, A. Corma and H. Garcia, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10719–10724 RSC .
M. J. Katz, J. E. Mondloch, R. K. Totten, J. K. Park, S. T. Nguyen, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 497–501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Agrawal, S. E. Boulfelfel, D. F. Sava Gallis, J. A. Greathouse and D. S. Sholl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 7823–7830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Peterson, S.-Y. Moon, G. W. Wagner, M. G. Hall, J. B. DeCoste, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 9684–9686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, K. O. Kirlikovali, Z. Chen, K. Ma, K. B. Idrees, R. Cao, X. Zhang, T. Islamoglu, Y. Liu and O. K. Farha, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 1444–1454 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kabtamu, Y. n. Wu and F. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 397, 122765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. G. Cirujano, N. Martin and L. H. Wee, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 10268–10295 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Huo, J. Li, F. Li, C. Duan and H. Xi, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 5754–5759 RSC .
Y. Qin, X. Han, Y. Li, A. Han, W. Liu, H. Xu and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5973–5978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Gao, L. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhong, Y. Ying, M. Zhang, C. Huang and Y. A. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 6394–6403 RSC .
C. T. Buru, M. C. Wasson and O. K. Farha, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 658–664 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stuckart and K. Y. Monakhov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17849–17853 RSC .
T. Guo, K. Mo, N. Zhang, L. Xiao, W. Liu and L. Wen, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 1774–1779 RSC .
M. B. Majewski, A. J. Howarth, P. Li, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4082–4091 RSC .
H. Huang, K. Shen, F. Chen and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6579–6586 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zaarour, J. Cazemier and J. Ruiz-Martínez, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 8140–8172 RSC .
J. Yu, C. Mu, B. Yan, X. Qin, C. Shen, H. Xue and H. Pang, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 557–569 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. Han, X. Li, Z. Zhang and S. Ma, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 10006–10008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yue, Y. Lu, Z. Zhang, H. Tian, H. Wang, X. Li and S. Liu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 16913–16920 RSC .
A. Zanon and F. Verpoort, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 353, 201–222 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, C. Xiao, R. V. Maligal-Ganesh, L. Zhou, T. W. Goh, X. Li, D. Tesfagaber, A. Thiel and W. Huang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1340–1348 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Shi, W. Ji, H. Wu, Z. Gu, P. Wang, X. Li, P. Qin, J. Zhang, Y. Fan, T. Wu, Y. Fu, W. Zhang and F. Huo, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5805–5813 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hao, X. Li, M. J. Hurlock, X. Tu and Q. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11817–11820 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Conor H. Sharp
	Conor Sharp obtained his PhD in Chemistry from Virginia Tech in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. John R. Morris. He is currently a National Research Council's Postdoctoral Research Fellow within the Electronic Sciences and Technology Division at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. His research interests include investigating the interfacial interactions between small molecules and metal–organic frameworks and 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides.

Brandon C. Bukowski
	Brandon Bukowski was born in Connecticut and received his PhD from Purdue University. He did postdoctoral research with Prof. Randall Q. Snurr at Northwestern University. Prof. Bukowski is currently an Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at Johns Hopkins University. His research interests include discovering new catalysts by using computational modeling to develop new technologies to meet the energy needs of the future. The Bukowski research group is interested in nanoporous catalysts (such as zeolites and metal–organic frameworks) as well as supported metal/metal-oxide nanoparticles for highly selective chemical transformations.

Amanda J. Morris
	Amanda Morris is a Professor of Inorganic and Energy Chemistry at Virginia Tech. Her research education conducted at Penn State University (BS), Johns Hopkins University (PhD), and Princeton University (Postdoctoral) focused on addressing critical environmental issues with fundamental science in the areas of water remediation, solar energy harvesting and storage, and carbon dioxide conversion. Her research group's current focus is on electrochemical and photochemical investigations of metal–organic frameworks. She has received numerous awards for her research pursuits, including the Dreyfus Teacher–Scholar award, Sloan Fellowship, and NSF Career award. She currently serves as an Associate Editor of Chemical Physics Reviews.

Dilip Gersappe
	Dilip Gersappe is Professor and Chair of the Materials Science and Chemical Engineering Department at Stony Brook University. He received his BTech in Metallurgical Engineering at IIT Bombay and his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University. His research is focused on using computational modeling tools to study dynamic processes in complex fluids and soft matter, with a special emphasis on understanding non-equilibrium behavior. His group is currently working on heterogeneous reaction kinetics and transport in catalysts including metal–organic frameworks, modeling ion transport through solid electrolytes and understanding the rheology of biopolymer-based fluids for soil remediation.

Randall Q. Snurr
	Randall Snurr is the John G. Searle Professor and Department Chair of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Northwestern University. His research interests include development of new nanoporous materials for energy and sustainability applications, molecular simulation, machine learning, adsorption separations, diffusion in nanoporous materials, and catalysis. His research has been recognized by a CAREER award from the National Science Foundation, the Institute Award for Excellence in Industrial Gases Technology from the American Institute of Chemical Engineers, and election as a corresponding member of the Saxon Academy of Sciences.

John R. Morris
	John Morris has served for 22 years as a professor in the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Tech. The Morris Group's research focuses on gas-surface reaction dynamics, interfacial uptake, and catalysis relevant to environmental, industrial, and national security applications. Currently, Professor Morris leads a multi-disciplinary research team focused on the development of new materials for the uptake and catalytic decomposition of chemical warfare agents. His contributions to surface science have been recognized by an NSF CAREER award, a visiting scientist position at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, and an appointment as the Dr A. C. Lilly, Jr. Faculty Fellow in nanoscience at Virginia Tech.

 	Fig. 1  Single pore of Zn2(dobdc) and Zn2(dobpdc) alongside illustrations of their respective ligands. Pale blue, grey, red, and white spheres represent Zn, C, O, and H atoms, respectively. Figure adapted with permission from Forse et al., Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3570–3576. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural transitions between large-pore (left) and narrow-pore (right) phases of MIL-53(Cr) upon CO2 adsorption.	 

 	Fig. 3  Labilization of CBAB linker to create hierarchically porous MOF. Figure adapted with permission from Yuan et al., Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15356.	 

 	Fig. 4  ZIF-7 structure and CO2 adsorption behavior. (a) The building unit, a sodalite cage, of ZIF-7 with two types of six-member-ring pores (A and B) and one type of four-member ring pores on its walls. (b) CO2 adsorption isotherms of ZIF-7 at 195 and 298 K, pCO2 = 1–100 kPA, illustrated by the structural behaviors of ZIF-7. Figure adapted with permission from Zhao et al., Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1.59	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
βncotβn + L − 1 + γzβn2 = 0	(6)
	(7)
C = C0(P, T) at r = rc	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 5  Experimental 2H NMR spectra of C6D6 in UiO-66 as a function of temperature (A) and simulation of 2H NMR spectrum of C6D6 in UiO-66 at 143 K as a sum of two signals with an anisotropic (population p1, red) and isotropic (population p2, blue) patterns (B). Figure reproduced with permission from Kolokolov et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2844, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b12001. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. Notice: further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.	 
	(15)

 	Fig. 6  Loss of IR intensity over time for n-butane through UiO-66 under ultrahigh vacuum conditions: (A) decrease in IR intensity for the C–H stretching region over time at 213 K; (B) change in IR intensity as a function of time at each temperature. The black dots are the experimental data, while the solid lines represent the Fickian diffusion model. Reprinted with permission from Sharp et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 8902–8906. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 
	(16)
	(17)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of a microscopy setup for monitoring guest diffusion within MOFs. (b) Time-resolved guest concentration map for guest diffusion through MOFs. Figure adapted with permission from Wang et al., Langmuir, 2020, 36, 10853–10859. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of how the Computation-Ready Experimental Metal–Organic Framework Database (CoRE MOF Database) processes MOF structures. (a) Removing solvent molecules, (b) fixing structural disorders. (c) Collating structures from the literature. Figure reproduced with permission from Chung et al., J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 64, 5985–5998, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jced.9b00835. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. Notice: further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.	 
	(18)
	(19)

 	Fig. 9  Illustration of different slopes in the MSD plot that represent different transport mechanisms that may occur in MOFs. Reprinted with permission from Vargas L. and Snurr, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 10056–10065. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
ki→j = κ × kTSTi→j.	(24)
	(25)

 	Fig. 10  Comparison between diffusion coefficients calculated using MD simulations and dynamically corrected transition state theory (dcTST) at two temperatures as a function of ethane loading in the cage-type zeolite CHA. Reprinted with permission from Dubbeldam et al., J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3164–3172. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison between water self-diffusion coefficients calculated with molecular dynamics (NPT-MD), transition state theory (TST-infinite dilution), and experimentally measured PFG NMR. The MOF studied is a binary mixed-linker ZIF-8/ZIF-90. Reprinted with permission from Verploegh et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5627–5638. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  A 10 × 10 × 10 nm3 cubic view: streamlines of gas flow going through UiO-66 from direction [0,0,1] (arrow direction). Left: Streamlines shown with structure, with black spheres for MOF nodes and linkers. Right: The same streamlines shown without MOF structure. In both cases, the local velocity was scaled by the inlet velocity to better visualize the disturbance of flow.	 

 	Fig. 13  Diffusion within a UiO-66 structure. (A) Initialization of a high concentration region at the center of the MOF. (B) Evolving concentration profiles as a function of time (C). Fit of the concentration profiles to the diffusion equation.	 

 	Fig. 14  Diffusion paths in the zeolite PSI automatically determined. (A) PSI structure, (B) potential energy isosurface, (C) potential energies colored from lowest energy (blue) to highest energy (red). (D) dividing surfaces colored uniquely, kMC grid points are black dots. Reproduced with permission from Mace et al., J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 2127–2141, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01255. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. Notice: further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS.	 

 	Fig. 15  Mass transport in electrochemically active MOFs: (a) Scholz model for visualization of electron and ion movement through MOFs under applied bias, (b) chronoamperometric curve with different time stages, (c) size comparison between counter ion and studied MOF-808, NU-1000, and NU-1003, (d) illustration of NU-1000 MOFs prepared solvothermally and using electrophoretic deposition and corresponding SEM images. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 189 (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society), ref. 198 (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society), and ref. 200 (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  
p-Xylene-d10 diffusion through hydroxylated (solid blue) and dehydroxylated (outlined blue) UiO-66 at 273 K. The isothermal diffusion experiments were performed tracking the decrease in the ν(C–D) vibrational modes attributed to p-xylene-d10 adsorbed within the UiO-66 sample. (a) Loss of relative IR peak area as a function of time (273 K). (b) Arrhenius plot based on a Fickian diffusion model. The activation energy of diffusion for p-xylene-d10 in dehydroxylated UiO-66 was determined to be 46.9 ± 3.5 kJ mol−1, similar to p-xylene-d10 in hydroxylated UiO-66 (42.7 ± 2.2 kJ mol−1). Figure reproduced with permission from Grissom et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16060.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structural comparison of compounds 1 and 2. Compounds 1 and 2 are built on 12- and 8-connected Zr6 clusters, linked by tetratopic organic ligands bptc and abtc, forming ftw and scu type structures, respectively. Figure adapted with permission from Wang et al., et al., Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1745.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic of selective hydrogenation of citronellal to citronellol catalyzed by platinum nanoparticles encapsulated within MOFs with different channel environments. Figure reproduced with permission from Zhang et al., ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5805–5813. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
