A review on infiltration techniques for energy conversion and storage devices: from fundamentals to applications  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE00878A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00878A
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5024-5037A review on infiltration techniques for energy conversion and storage devices: from fundamentals to applications

        
          
            Seona 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guntae 
            Kim
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Arumugam 
            Manthiram
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science and Engineering Program, Texas Materials Institute, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA. E-mail: manth@austin.utexas.edu
bDepartment of Energy Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: gtkim@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      10th June 2021
    , Accepted 18th August 2021First published on 18th August 2021AbstractInfiltration is a facile, effective, and intuitive fabrication technique that provides nanostructured surfaces for electrodes and catalysts. This review article systematically summarizes the principles, detailed parameters, and synthesis strategies of the penetration techniques. Detailed parameters of scaffold preparation, precursor penetration, and heat treatment are covered, and strategies for a precise control of materials design are provided. Subsequently, recent reports demonstrating the versatile applications of infiltration techniques to energy conversion and storage devices, including solid oxide fuel cells, solid oxide electrolysis cells, and rechargeable battery cells are provided. Finally, the review concludes with our perspective on the future outlook of the infiltration technique. We expect that this comprehensive review will be a guide to designing a variety of materials with careful control of the infiltration methods and simultaneously applying these materials to various energy devices, paving new directions in a broad area of research.
1. Introduction
With the continuous surge in the world population and rapid industrialization, we are caught in a vicious cycle of resource consumption: as more and more resources and energy are consumed, the environmental pollution worsens.1,2 Recently, the society has been becoming increasingly aware of the seriousness of environmental problems since they directly face the harmful consequences of environmental pollution, such as fine dust, extreme weather, plastic accumulation in the ocean, and seawater pollution from nuclear spills. In this regard, clean energy conversion and storage devices have received tremendous attention to resolve these environmental problems and to enable more efficient use of the generated energy.1
Among the various energy conversion systems, the hydrogen system has been envisioned as the next-generation energy system because hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe and an efficient resource with the highest energy density. Furthermore, the hydrogen energy system can provide eco-friendly and renewable circulation of resources with no emissions because its operation is based on electrochemical reactions among hydrogen (H2), oxygen (O2), and water (H2O). Nevertheless, the hydrogen system is still in the pre-commercialization stage and requires improved performance and reduced cost.
For energy storage devices, rechargeable batteries have a positive impact on the environment as they can be reused multiple times, unlike primary batteries.3 Also, they have a high theoretical capacity and are suitable for a wide range of applications, ranging from portable/wearable devices to electric vehicles (EVs) to large-scale energy storage systems (ESS). Intensive research has been conducted on rechargeable batteries to increase the energy density and lower the cost.
Nanosizing is a simple, intuitive, effective, and well-known approach to improve the electrochemical performances of materials and consequently enhance the efficiency of the systems.4 The primary benefits of nanosizing are higher surface area and a shorter ion-/charge-transport path in the material.4–6 Also, nanosizing can impart unique properties to the material by inducing structural and electronic changes.
A representative technique for nanosizing is the infiltration technique (also known as impregnation), which has been used for catalyst synthesis since the 1920s.7–14 In particular, the infiltration technique is widely used for catalyst addition, surface modification, and composite electrode fabrication. The advantages of the technique include the following: (i) precisely controlled stoichiometric ratios due to precursor mixing at the molecular level—which effectively provides homogeneous multicomponent materials and composites; (ii) low sintering temperature—which contributes to the formation of nanoparticles and a reduction in the processing cost of the infiltrated precursors (infiltrates) due to rapid evaporation of the solvent and decomposition of the solute; (iii) realization of optimized conditions for each component by separating the sintering temperatures of the components to ensure maximum performance; (iv) versatile surface modification through controllable parameters at each step; and (v) simplicity of the process and equipment compared to other nanosizing techniques, such as chemical vapor deposition, pyrolysis, electro-spinning, and hydrothermal synthesis. The advantages of infiltration will be discussed in detail in Section 2.3.
Several articles in the past covering the advances in the synthetic process of various materials (e.g., metals, alloys, and solid oxides) have helped in understanding the parameters and advantages of the infiltration technique.15–17 For example, in 2009, Vohs and Gorte18 discussed the microstructural parameters that control the performance and stability of a cathode for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) by extending the reactive site called triple-phase boundary (TPB). Their review also emphasized the advantages of infiltration by comparing the infiltrated electrode with a more general composite electrode. Ding et al.19 introduced the infiltration strategies for SOFC cathodes with different kinds of scaffolds and infiltrates, e.g., infiltration of a mixed ionic/electronic conductor (MIEC), infiltration of an electrolyte, ionic conducting infiltrates, metal infiltrates, and film coating on an electrode. Moreover, they reviewed the modeling and simulation studies of mechanisms, surface interactions, and kinetics of SOFC cathodes. However, the review articles were generally limited to the field of SOFCs even though infiltration has recently been used as a versatile technique for various devices. Moreover, the theoretical principle and experimental parameters of infiltration were not sufficiently addressed to effectively utilize the infiltration technique.
This review article systematically summarizes the principles, detailed parameters, and synthetic strategies of the infiltration technique, and the applications in solid oxide cells and rechargeable batteries. The infiltration technique is briefly introduced with the definition, operating steps, theoretical principles, and controllable parameters in each step. This comprehensive review would serve as a useful guide for designing materials with precise and detailed microstructural control. Also, we provide research progress and major achievements in the application of the infiltration technique in terms of materials, devices, and utilization. The application section includes the information not only on SOFCs but also on solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) and rechargeable batteries. Furthermore, new challenges, potential uses, and our perspectives on the infiltration technique are discussed.
2. Infiltration
2.1. What is infiltration?
The meaning of the word “infiltration” is exactly the process of moving slowly into a scaffold. The necessary materials to perform the infiltration are simply a scaffold, a precursor solution, a syringe, and furnaces. The infiltration process is schematically presented in Fig. 1 as (i) preparation of the porous scaffold, (ii) penetration of the infiltrates (precursor solution), and (iii) synthesis of the crystalline phases via sintering. In the penetration step, the infiltrates slowly move into a robust porous scaffold, and in the heat treatment step, the infiltrates form a phase on the material surface.
 Fig. 1  Infiltration process for the scaffold structure: (a) between scaffold particles and (b) within scaffold particles. 
2.2. The principle of infiltration: the capillary phenomenon
Infiltration simply indicates that the droplets of a precursor solution are percolated into a porous scaffold. The driving force is the capillary force caused by the cohesion of the infiltrates and the adhesion between the infiltrates and the scaffold surface.20–22 Generally, capillary action is a phenomenon in which a liquid rises along a thin tube against gravity, and the height can be calculated using Jurin's law. h = 2γcosθ/rρg(1)where r is the radius of the tube, ρ is the density of the liquid, g is the gravitational acceleration, γ is the liquid-air interfacial tension (surface tension), and θ is the contact angle (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  The capillary phenomenon in a (a) tube and (b) pore. 
For the infiltration technique, the capillary forces promote an even penetration to the entire surface by allowing the liquid (1) to enter the pores of the scaffold and (2) to spread out to the small pores near the mainstream. Moreover, the capillary force can also be represented as wettability, which refers to the tendency of a liquid to spread on or adhere to a solid surface. Due to these characteristics, penetration is carried out rather quickly and easily. However, depending on the wettability, gravity can make the infiltrates just pass by without penetrating into the pores if the scaffold has a very high porosity or the solution has too low surface tension. On the other hand, weak wettability (high surface tension) can be a bottleneck for the infiltration method by blocking the pores without penetration. In this regard, wettability, which is the most important parameter, should be controlled to conduct the infiltration technique.
2.3. Advantages of infiltration
First of all, the important advantage of the infiltration technique is simplicity. Compared to other techniques, infiltration requires only a few necessary materials, such as chemicals, syringes, and furnaces. Also, the infiltration technique is a facile method for making composite materials. Composites in which two or more materials are physically mixed or chemically bonded are used to provide expanded reaction sites, additional conduction paths, and/or a positive change in electronic states. However, the composite materials pose a dilemma of choosing a sintering temperature for optimal electrochemical properties or microstructural properties. A high sintering temperature is often required to satisfy the requirement of the scaffold, such as a reasonable density of the supporting nanoparticles, good connectivity between the particles, and corresponding high ionic and electronic conductivity. But a high sintering temperature leads to particle agglomeration with a correspondingly low surface area, indicating a low reactive surface area and poor electrochemical performances. A low sintering temperature is useful for synthesizing nano-sized particles that possess a high surface area, but it is insufficient to promote good connectivity between particles and form the desired phase.
The infiltration technique can resolve this dilemma by separating the sintering process of the scaffold and the infiltrates by infiltrating the precursors into a pre-sintered scaffold. A scaffold sintered at a high temperature possesses high density, good connectivity, good crystallinity, and in some cases, excellent ionic conductivity. On the other hand, the infiltrates can be sintered at a lower temperature than that in the conventional one-step sintering process so that nano-sized particles can be formed and the chemical reaction between the infiltrate and the scaffold can be avoided. Furthermore, the infiltration technique can be applied to any material and scaffold if there is enough wettability between the infiltrate and scaffold.
2.4. Limitations of infiltration
However, there are some limitations of the infiltration technique and infiltrated electrode. The degradation problem has been discussed in various studies due to the agglomeration of nanoparticles at a high operating temperature under the general SOFC operating conditions. Especially, these problems have been observed seriously when the metal phase is infiltrated.23–27
In aspects of the manufacturing technique, the infiltration has the disadvantage that the process should repeat the steps of precursor penetration and calcination until the desired loading amount is reached. The conventional infiltration technique includes the repetition of these steps hundreds or thousands of times.
To resolve these problems, an understanding of the infiltration technique and its controllable parameters is required. In this regard, the following sections discuss the controllable parameters and the detailed steps of infiltration.
2.5. Detailed steps and controllable parameters
In this section, the parameters, strategies, and related articles will be discussed for each step, which includes the preparation of the scaffold, penetration of infiltrates, and sintering of the infiltrates.

2.5.1. Step 1: preparation of the scaffold. 
This section covers the controllable parameters that affect the microstructural and electrochemical properties of a composite material in the scaffold preparation step.
Nature of the scaffold. 
Fundamentally, the intrinsic properties of the materials are important parameters because the driving force, i.e., capillary force, is based on the adhesion between the infiltrate and the scaffold surface. Hence, the scaffold must have appropriate adhesion strength with the infiltrate. This requirement can be checked by measuring the contact angle (θ), which represents the relationship between the strengths of cohesion and adhesion, by placing a droplet of the precursor solution on the dense scaffold. The contact angle between the droplet of the precursor solution and the scaffold should fall in the range of 0° < θ < 90° to effectively perform infiltration (Fig. 3). Every porous and robust scaffold, therefore, can be used as a scaffold for infiltration, where the cohesion of the infiltrate is weaker than the adhesion between infiltrates and scaffold surfaces.
 Fig. 3  Dependence of the surface wettability on the contact angle (θ). 
As confirmed by Lou et al.,28 the contact angle changes depending on the nature of the scaffold, and that determines the surface microstructure of the final product. In their work, the contact angle between a precursor solution droplet and the following widely used ionic conductors or MIEC materials as a scaffold was measured and compared (Fig. 4): La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ (LSCF), LaxSr1−xMnO3−δ (LSM), yttrium-stabilized-zirconia (YSZ), and Gd0.1Ce0.9O1.95 (GDC). Depending on the scaffold material, the contact angle showed a completely different value with a tendency to increase in the order of GDC < YSZ < LSCF < LSM when using an aqueous precursor solution. Choi et al.29 tried to improve the infiltration technique to enhance the electrochemical performance and the operating stability by treating the scaffold surface through a layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of polyelectrolytes. This LbL-assisted infiltration reduced the process steps about 6.5 times and ensured a uniform distribution of nanoparticles, as well as an improved electrochemical performance via an increased number of reactive sites.
 Fig. 4  Wetting angles of different SSC precursor solutions on LSCF(La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3), LSM(LaxSr1−xMnO3), YSZ (yttria-doped zirconia) and GDC (gadolinium-doped ceria) substrates (note: mixture 1 has a water-to-ethanol volume ratio of 1:0.3 and mixture 2 has a water-to-ethanol volume ratio of 1:0.6). Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. 
Structure of the scaffold. 
The infiltrates are deposited on the surface of the scaffold, and thus the pore structure of the scaffold determines the approximate microstructure of the composite. In this regard, the infiltration technique has been used to synthesize various structures of materials, such as irregular porous structures, particles, core-shells, and fibers that commonly have pores within a unit or in between the units (inter-unit) (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Scaffold structures having pores (a) within a unit and (b) between units (inter-unit). 
The irregular porous structure is a representative scaffold having pores within a unit and is widely used in the field of SOFCs. For these structures, the pore structure is an important parameter related to the factor r in eqn (1). Many researchers have demonstrated the effect of the pore structure on the structural and electrochemical properties of a product.30–37 They have modelled the electrochemical properties of electrodes fabricated with infiltration into the porous scaffold. First, the structure of the scaffold was standardized and the structural factors, such as radius, length, width, and height, were categorized. With a comparison of the experimental results, they have concluded the effects of structural factors on the electrochemical properties of the electrodes. In this process, the adsorption and diffusion steps of oxygen/hydrogen and the rate-determining steps have been studied and discussed.
Küngas et al.38 and Sarikaya et al.39,40 realized several pore structures by using various pore formers (e.g. graphite, polymethyl methacrylate, sucrose, and polystyrene) and hydrofluoric acid (HF). They concluded that the uniformly distributed pores and penetration of the constituent phases are advantageous for increasing the number of reactive sites, while a large pore size acts as a major pathway for gas transport. The effect of the microstructure of a scaffold on the electrochemical properties of SOFC cathodes was also systematically studied with three dimensional (3D) electrochemical simulation via the lattice-Boltzmann method and experiments.41 Shimura et al.42 used the porous Ni–YSZ composite with a pillar-structured pore as an electrode and demonstrated that the area-specific-resistance (ASR) reduced with increased width, height, or the number of the pillars through simulations and experiments. This result is in good agreement with previous studies, which emphasize that a large pore size is advantageous to enhance the electrochemical performance. Kishimoto et al.43 reviewed the infiltration technique for the improved control to fabricate SOFC anodes. They studied the electrochemical impedances for the various microstructural parameters such as porosity and pore size of the scaffold. Recently, there was an effort to use the infiltration technique on a honeycomb-structured scaffold for the anode of an SOEC. As expected, the nanoparticles of La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ were deposited on the surface of a honeycomb YSZ scaffold, exhibiting a remarkably low polarization resistance of 0.0094 Ω cm−2 at 800 °C and considerable stability at a current density of 2.0 A cm−2.44
As for the structures having inter-unit pores, there are particle and fiber structures. These are composed of carbon, metals, or oxides. In these structures, the spaces between the particles and fibers, so-called inter-unit pores, act as a tube in the capillary phenomenon. For example, infiltration was conducted on the particles of a perovskite oxide to synthesize a core–shell structure with Co3O4 nanoparticles deposited on the NSC particle core.21 Also, carbon fiber scaffolds were used to fabricate binder-free electrodes for seawater batteries by depositing electrocatalysts on the carbon fiber via infiltration.45
Sintering conditions for the scaffold. 
The sintering step in the scaffold preparation is performed to fabricate a robust structure and to improve the electrochemical properties of a material by controlling these parameters: temperature, time, ramping rate, atmosphere, and pressure. As the scaffold has to undergo sintering process of the infiltrates, it should be pre-sintered at a higher temperature than the infiltrates to maintain the structure and avoid chemical reactions. In other words, if the precursor solution includes some polymers such as polyethylene glycol, the scaffold must be constructed from a material that can withstand temperatures above 450 °C, which could remove the precipitated polymer from the infiltrates.
A carbon-based material as a scaffold is attractive due to its high electrical conductivity, superior usability, and ability to form into various shapes, such as fibers, spheres, hollow tubes, and layers (e.g., graphene). The sintering step of carbon-based materials is generally called as the annealing step. It is conducted to activate the surfaces, improve the electrochemical properties, and remove impurities such as polymer residues with the rearrangement of the bonding.46–51 Considering that decarbonization occurs at a temperature above 700 °C, the carbon-based materials are usually annealed at a low temperature for a long time under a specific atmosphere (N2, Ar, He, etc.). Sometimes, annealing steps were conducted to generate reactive functional groups (e.g., graphitic N, pyridinic N, pyrrolic N, nitric oxide, CO, etc.) by doping an element between the C–C bonds.
For solid oxide materials, the sintering step is performed at a high temperature (∼70% of its melting temperature52) to ensure that the powders consist of a continuously connected structure and have high enough density. Fig. 6 shows the mechanism of the sintering steps and a heating diagram of the conventional, two-stage, and multi-stage sintering step. During sintering, atomic diffusion takes place and the adjacent particles form a welded area (i.e., a neck-like junction). Then, recrystallization and grain growth may follow leading to the shrinkage of the scaffold and reduction in its pore volume. In general, the grain size of solid oxide particles grows with increasing sintering temperatures and increasing holding times.53 Depending on the resistances of the grains and grain boundaries, the physical or chemical characteristics of the scaffold can be controlled.52,54–58
 Fig. 6  A schematic diagram of the conventional, two-stage and multi-stage sintering step. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Based on this knowledge, Tavangarian et al.52 and Wang et al.59 performed the two-step and multi-step sintering processes considering the parameters to demonstrate that forsterite can be successfully synthesized with reduced heat resources and improved mechanical/physical properties. Jeon et al.54 studied the effects of sintering on the phase transition, grain size, and surface roughness to finally realize a flexible YSZ electrolyte for SOFCs. This study confirmed the potential of using solid oxides in the field of flexible devices.


2.5.2. Step 2: penetration of the precursor solution. 
A precursor solution indicates a mixture of precursors in a stoichiometric ratio, a solvent, and a complexing agent. Since the stoichiometry of the precursors is a fixed parameter according to the crystal structure, only the complexing agent and solvent can be modified.
Wettability of the solvent. 
From the perspective of capillary forces, the intrinsic properties of a precursor solution are the key parameter for the adhesion between the infiltrate and the scaffold surface, as well as the cohesion of the infiltrates. As mentioned in Section 2.2, the capillary forces can be represented as the contact angle between the precursor solution droplet and the scaffold. Many researchers have studied the microstructural and electrochemical changes depending on the contact angle, the so-called wettability effect.21,28,60,61 The simplest way to control the wettability is to change the solvent that occupies most of the solution. In general, distilled water having high surface tension (72.8 mN m−1 at 20 °C) is used as the solvent because most precursors and complexing agents can dissolve in distilled water due to its high polarity.62,63
Ethanol is often used as a co-solvent to control the wettability of the precursor solution due to its acceptable surface tension (22.3 mN m−1 at 20 °C), miscibility with water, and low boiling point.21,63,64 Based on previous studies, poor wettability (i.e., high contact angle) results in a tortuous surface with spherical nanoparticles, while good wettability (i.e., low contact angle) results in a smooth surface like that obtained by a film-coating method (Fig. 7). These different microstructures, derived by controlling the wettability, have been applied to various energy devices such as SOFCs, SOECs, and rechargeable batteries. While poor wetting solvents have been used to increase the surface area and reaction sites, good wetting solvents have been applied to form a protective layer against undesired reactions and to provide a conductive path for ions or electrons.
 Fig. 7  Preparation processes of W-NSC@Co3O4 and E-NSC@Co3O4 by infiltration. NSC indicates perovskite oxide Nd0.5Sr0.5CoO3. Contact angle images and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images are included. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Chelating agent. 
The chelating agent is an essential solute in the precursor solution to form a stable and soluble complex of metal cations. It can be omitted for a precursor solution using only one precursor chemical. Control of the chelating agent facilitates the infiltration technique to become a simple and cost-effective method by realizing a highly concentrated solution. Hence, the use of a chelating agent obviates the only disadvantage of infiltration, which is that the penetration and calcination steps may need to be repeated to achieve the desired loading amount. Also, the enhanced interaction between molecules with the increased concentration of the complexing agent leads to the formation of a rough surface consisting of nanoparticles. This method is effective when the precursor has a low solubility in the solvent, e.g., barium nitrate.
The high concentration of the precursor solution can be achieved by using ammonium citrate as a chelating agent. This strategy can be divided into two methods, either forming ammonium citrate during dissolution or using neutral ammonium citrate directly for dissolution. The former method requires the use of citric acid and ammonium hydroxide separately.65–68 First, stoichiometric amounts of the precursors are thoroughly dissolved in water with excess citric acid. Then the homogeneous solution is heated at 80 °C to remove the water and then cooled to room temperature. The precipitated salts are then dissolved again upon adding ammonium hydroxide by forming the ammonium cerate chelating agent. Since citric acid and ammonium hydroxide are, respectively, the acidic and basic chelating agents, this method has an advantage of adjusting the pH of the precursor solution which plays an important role in the purity of the precursor and the success of synthesis.
The other method uses neutral ammonium citrate as a chelating agent for the precursor solution.69 The precursors are dissolved in a solvent with a stoichiometric amount of neutral ammonium citrate. This method enables simple and cost-effective one-step infiltration of a precursor solution with extremely high concentration.


2.5.3. Step 3: heat treatment. 
As mentioned above, the infiltration technique is composed of 3 steps: preparation, penetration, and heat treatment. The heat treatment process can be distinguished into either “calcination” or “sintering” depending on its purpose. Calcination is for removing volatile components, inducing thermal decomposition, and/or encouraging phase transition. Sintering is carried out at a temperature higher than that for calcination to obtain the desired crystalline phase with sufficient density. For the infiltrates, the concept of calcination and sintering is based on the liquid-phase sintering principle because their starting phases are either a liquid or solid amorphous phase, which are of very low crystallinity. These starting phases provide higher atomic mobility so that a crystalline phase can be obtained at a lower sintering temperature during synthesis via the infiltration technique than in the conventional composite fabrication techniques using solid phases. Thus, controlling the sintering parameters will determine whether the infiltrates will have a rough surface with nano-sized particles or a smooth surface with particle growth and agglomeration.53,66
Kim et al.66 demonstrated the possible microstructures synthesized by the infiltration technique depending on the sintering temperature to show the effect of insufficient, sufficient, and excess heat treatment. GdBa0.5Sr0.5CoFeO5+δ (GBSCF) was infiltrated into a YSZ scaffold and was sintered at temperatures of 600, 700, and 800 °C. The results showed that the sintering temperature of 700 °C shows the appropriate microstructure with a high surface area and the best electrochemical performances, illustrating the positive effect of sufficient heat. On the other hand, an insufficient heat treatment at 600 °C resulted in not-fully formed particles, while at 800 °C, the heat treatment was excessive, causing the agglomeration of the particles. The optimized GBSCF–YSZ electrode exhibited a remarkably low area-specific-resistance of 0.006 Ω cm2 in a SOFC at an operating temperature of 700 °C.

3. Recent progress in the application of the infiltration technique
3.1. Materials
Since the infiltration technique includes the heat treatment steps, various types of oxides have been used generally as both scaffolds and infiltrates. Also, metal and its alloys have been used as catalysts (infiltrates) for conducting the heat treatment step under a reducing atmosphere. In this section, the representative materials will be introduced.

3.1.1. Spinel oxide. 
The spinel oxide structure (AB2O4) is characterized by divalent (A2+) and trivalent (B3+) cations, respectively, residing in the tetrahedral and octahedral interstices. A multivalent cation can occupy both the tetrahedral and octahedral sites at the same time, and the other combinations with divalent, trivalent, or tetravalent cations are also possible (Fig. 8a). This manifold composition is beneficial for the spinel structure to control the electrochemical properties. Also, the alterable chemical valence allows the spinel oxide to have a redox capacity, which is an advantageous property of an electrocatalyst in various reactions. In this regard, spinel oxides have been widely used as electrode materials in SOFCs70 and metal-ion batteries (e.g. Li-,71,72 Na-, Mg-, Al-,73 and Zn-ion batteries), and for various reactions such as NOx reduction, CO oxidation, CO2 reduction, the hydrogen evolution reaction, oxygen reduction/evolution reaction,74–76 NH3 oxidation, methane combustion, alcohol oxidation, methane steam reforming,77etc. Furthermore, spinel oxides have been used as a starting material for reduction to obtain metal/metal alloys due to their simple structure.78
 Fig. 8  Schematic crystal structures of a (a) spinel, (b) single perovskite, (c) layered perovskite, and (d) Ruddlesden–Popper series. 


3.1.2. Perovskite oxide. 
Perovskite oxides have been considered as the most promising materials for entire energy systems. They can be classified into a simple perovskite (Fig. 8b), a layered perovskite (Fig. 8c), or a Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) structure (Fig. 8d). The simple perovskite structure is a typical perovskite with a chemical formula of ABO3 (A = rare-earth or alkaline-earth cations, B = transition metal cations) consisting of corner-shared BO6 octahedra and unit-centered A-site cations. The layered perovskite structure is denoted by AA′B2O5 and is commonly referred to as a double perovskite oxide because its unit cell is like a stack of two single perovskites. But the layered perovskite is a cation-ordered structure induced by the size difference between A and A′ cations, forming alternating layers of …|AOδ|BO2|A′O|BO2|…. Oxygen vacancies (interstitial oxygens) are mainly formed in the AO layer, and as a result, the layered perovskite structure possesses an oxide-ion transport channel capable of rapidly moving oxide ions. The RP structure has a general chemical formula of An+1BnO3n+1, with alternating layers of the stacked perovskite layers (nABO3) and the rock salt layers (AO) along the crystallographic c direction. The value of n indicates the number of consecutive perovskite layers, and the higher the n, the larger the oxygen content, which consequently increases the oxidation state of B cations. Since the B–O–B bonds are responsible for the electronic conduction, the delocalization of the electron charge carriers and the vacancies that contribute to oxide-ion diffusion, the ion and electron transport properties are improved as the n value increases (i.e., the concentration of B–O–B bonds increases).
These perovskite structures are beneficial for materials design since various combinations and a variety of point defects can be achieved. They are commonly MIECs because they include the transition metals and corresponding oxygen vacancies (interstitial oxygen) in the lattice. Also, an exsolution phenomenon has been observed in the perovskite-type oxides, referring to cation segregation from the lattice to the surface and phase transition between the perovskite oxides. The exsolved particles are socketed on the parent materials, so the agglomeration of metal particles is prevented and their high surface area is retained. Furthermore, the exsolved particles behave as electrocatalysts and improve the electrochemical performances since they are generally composed of metals having d-orbitals. The exsolution phenomenon has been studied by many researchers to investigate the mechanism,79–82 discover new candidates,83,84 induce alloy exsolution,85,86 and apply to various devices.78,87


3.1.3. Metals & alloys. 
Metals and alloys having incompletely filled d-orbitals are a superior class of catalysts for electrochemical reactions, such as hydrogenation, dehydrogenation, hydrogenation cracking reactions, disproportionation, debenzylation, and oxidation reactions.
Precious metal catalysts, otherwise known as noble metal catalysts (e.g. Pt, Pd, Rh, Ru, Au, Pd, etc.),88–94 always exhibit high catalytic activity and selectivity in catalysis by accepting/donating electrons from/to the reagent. Other advantages are their good structural stability against oxidation, high thermal stability, and morphological versatility (single metal atoms to clusters). Despite these advantages, precious metal catalysts have the disadvantages of being expensive and easily agglomerating.
Transition-metal catalysts are another kind of metal catalyst having electrons in the d-orbitals, which is important for allowing the exchange of electrons. In this regard, many researchers have developed transition-metal catalysts to replace the precious metal catalysts and reduce the catalyst cost.85,95–100 However, precious metals are still superior electrocatalysts due to their intrinsic properties related to the electronic configuration. Thus, the use of metal alloys was suggested to reduce the concentration of precious metal and/or to improve the catalytic activity of transition metals. Interestingly, metal alloy catalysts generally show synergistic improvements in their electrochemical properties as well as structural properties.

3.2. Devices & purpose
This section introduces the application of the infiltration technique for fabricating various energy devices according to their purpose.

3.2.1. Solid oxide cells: SOFCs and SOECs. 
SOFCs are energy conversion devices having the simplest mechanism of converting the chemical energy of a fuel to electrical energy. The operating principle of SOFCs is based on the electrochemical reactions that combine hydrogen and oxygen and produce water. Thus, it has less noise and little emissions of pollutants during operation. Also, various fuels can be used directly without additional reforming equipment due to the high operating temperature of SOFCs.
As presented in Fig. 9, the three main components of SOFCs are solid oxides, an electrolyte and two electrodes exposed to fuel and air. During operation, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) occurs at the air electrode (cathode) to provide oxide ions that are carried through the oxide ion-conducting electrolyte to the fuel electrode (anode). The carried oxide ions participate in the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) that generates water and electricity. The mechanisms of SOFC operation can be described using the following equations: O2 + 4e− → 2O2− (ORR)(2) 2O2− + 2H2 → 2H2O + 4e− (HOR)(3) O2 + 2H2 → 2H2O (overall reaction)(4)
 Fig. 9  The design of solid oxide cells. 
For the reaction to take place, the reactants must reach the reaction point and participate in the reaction, and the product must be removed directly from the reaction point. In other words, the electrochemical reaction is valid at the reaction site (three-phase boundary, TPB) at which the electronic phase (e−), ionic phase (O2−), and gas phase (H2/O2) coexist.
Recently, SOECs have been attracting interest as a reverse operating device of SOFCs as demand for eco-friendly hydrogen production technology increases.101–106 The configuration of SOECs is identical to that of SOFCs, but the operating principle is completely the opposite. In this regard, the solid oxide systems which can be used as both SOFCs and SOECs are called solid oxide cells (SOCs).
At the fuel electrode of SOECs, H2O dissociates into hydrogen gas and oxygen ions by the supplied electricity and electrocatalysis. The generated oxide ions are transported to the air electrode through the oxide-ion-conducting electrolyte and participate in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). 2H2O + 4e− → 2H2 + 2O2− (HER)(5) 2O2− → O2 + 4e− (OER)(6) 2H2O → 2H2 + O2 (overall reaction)(7)
For the water-splitting reaction (eqn (7)), the change of electric, thermal, and total energy demands (Fig. 10) can be illustrated as a function of temperature based on the following thermodynamic equation: ΔH = ΔG + TΔS(8)in which ΔH is the total energy demand, ΔG is the electrical energy demand, and TΔS is the heat energy demand. Due to the water phase transition from liquid to vapor at 100 °C, total energy demands for SOECs drop off and remain nearly constant. Thus, SOECs operating at a temperature above 500 °C have advantages such as lower cost and less electricity for electrolysis compared to conventional electrolysis cells.101
 Fig. 10  Electric, thermal, and total energy demands for water electrolysis as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Electrode fabrication. 
The infiltration technique has been usually applied to the fabrication of a composite electrode chemically bonded to the ionic conductor (scaffold) and the electronic conductor (infiltrate). Compared to the conventional composite electrode made by physical mixing, the infiltrated electrode provides better electrochemical properties for SOCs due to the increase in TPBs (Fig. 11). In detail, the formation of numerous contacts between the ionic conductors and electronic conductors is guaranteed for the infiltrated electrode, while the formation of such contacts is random in the conventional composite electrode. Furthermore, the use of MIEC materials can provide higher reactive sites since the 2 phase (Gas-MIEC) boundaries are effective to allow electrochemical reactions.
 Fig. 11  Comparison of the triple-phase boundary for the composite fabricated by the (a) conventional process (physically mixing) and (b) infiltration technique. Electronic conductor (red), ionic conductor (gray), and TPBs (cyan). 
Gorte et al.107 experimentally verified that the infiltrated electrodes achieve higher conductivity at the same volume fraction of the electronic conductor. The infiltration technique also lowers the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) mismatch by providing TEC values closer to that of the electrolyte. The TEC mismatch is a critical issue for SOCs because it causes delamination at the interfaces and cracking of the electrolyte due to the stress developed by the thermal cycles. Furthermore, the nano-sized particles fabricated during infiltration increase the surface area of reaction sites, reducing the polarization resistance and activation energy for the electrochemical reactions.
Surface modification. 
Many researchers have attempted to apply infiltration to increase the surface area, improve the electrode cycle life, accelerate the desired surface reactions, and/or enhance resistance to undesirable surface reactions108–111 (Fig. 12). The main advantage of infiltration is the formation of nanoparticles and the corresponding increase in the surface area, providing many reaction sites and electrochemical enhancements. Thus, repeated infiltration of the same material into the electrode is sometimes used to exploit the superior performance of the material. For example, the maximum power density of a single cell increased from 0.57 W cm−2 to 1.57 and 1.77 W cm−2, respectively, after the infiltration of PrBaMn2O5+δ (PBMO) and Co–Fe into PBMO.112 Considering that Co–Fe is one of the effective catalysts for SOFCs, the results demonstrate the potential of PBMO as an alternative catalyst.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the proposed poisoning and stability mechanisms: (a) normal fuel oxidation reactions at the TPB. (b) Adsorbed sulfur blocks TPB sites and carbon deposition begins. (c) Fully deactivated anode with adsorbed sulfur and carbon growths. (d) High density of TPB sites and improved oxygen transport from nanoparticles prevents sulfur poisoning. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Although fuel flexibility is one of the advantages of using SOCs, changes in the fuel may cause undesirable reactions that lead to various problems, such as phase decomposition, delamination, reaction site obstruction, and system fragmentation. These undesirable reactions are mainly observed in metal electrodes with good electrochemical performance. Therefore, non-metallic electrodes resistant to carbon coking/sulfur poisoning are being developed. The electrochemical performance of non-metallic electrodes has improved significantly over the years, but is still lower than that of conventional metal electrodes. Therefore, the use of non-metallic electrodes as a protective layer has been suggested to take advantage of both the superior performance of the metal electrode and the excellent chemical tolerance of non-metallic electrodes.108–111,113 As reported by Hua et al.,113 the infiltrated PBMO layer was effective in protecting the Ni–YSZ electrode from sulfur poisoning and carbon coking, as well as providing highly conductive and active anodic properties for SOFCs. Ceria-based materials such as BaCe0.9Yb0.1O3−δ,109 GDC,111 and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1O3−δ,108,110 have been reported as promising protection layers, enhancing the carbon/sulfur tolerances for the SOFCs.
Boosting exsolution and alloying. 
Recently, Joo et al.78 reported a novel application of the infiltration technique for boosting the exsolution phenomenon with the cation-swapped phenomenon between the infiltrate and the parent material. The parent material Pr0.5Ba0.5Mn0.85Co0.15O3−δ is a representative perovskite oxide from which we can observe the cobalt exsolution phenomenon with concomitant phase transition to PrBaMn1.7Co0.3−xO5+δ (x is the amount of exsolved cobalt) under a hydrogen atmosphere. In this study, iron oxide (Fe2O3) was deposited on the parent oxide by the infiltration technique and then the infiltrated sample was exposed to a hydrogen atmosphere. As a result, a topotactic cation exchange between Co in the parent oxide and Fe in the infiltrate occurred spontaneously, forming Co–Fe alloys and PrBaMn1.7Fe0.3O5+δ, respectively, on the surface and in the bulk of the sample. According to the density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the favorable incorporation energy (−0.41 eV) and exchange energy (−0.34 eV) drive the topotactic cation exchange of Fe cations in the infiltrate by Co cations in the parent oxide. The derived material exhibits excellent electrochemical performance for SOFCs and improved catalytic activity in a dry reforming gas of methane compared to PrBaMn2O5+δ and PrBaMn1.7Co0.3O5+δ.
Lowering the sintering temperature of the electrolyte. 
As mentioned above, the main purpose of sintering is the consolidation of the particles into an irregular porous scaffold with sufficient density. Since the infiltration technique is useful to create a connected structure based on the liquid phase sintering of infiltrates, Sındıraç et al.53 applied the infiltration technique to lower the sintering temperature of the electrolyte. In this study, a GDC precursor solution was infiltrated into a GDC pellet pre-sintered at 1000 °C and sintered at various temperatures. Comparison of the grain size and relative density of the infiltrated and pristine GDC pellets at different temperatures indicated that the sintering temperature can be lowered by about 200 °C to fabricate a completely dense electrolyte by adopting the infiltration technique.


3.2.2. Rechargeable metal-ion batteries. 
Rechargeable batteries are the most prominent commercially available energy storage devices in the modern world. Rechargeable batteries rely on utilizing electrode materials that can withstand structural changes during the charge and discharge of a battery (Fig. 13), allowing us to use the stored electricity at our disposal. There are many kinds of rechargeable battery chemistries, such as Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, Li–S batteries, Li–air batteries, seawater batteries, etc. These rechargeable batteries possess excellent theoretical capacity, and high energy and power densities. However, the rechargeable batteries need promising candidate materials to replace the commercial electrodes to meet the rapidly increasing energy capacity demand.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of a rechargeable battery. 
Cathode fabrication. 
In general, the cathodes of all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries are a composite, formed by physically mixing the active materials, solid electrolytes, and carbon additives under dry conditions.114,115 As a new approach, the infiltration technique was applied to promote intimate ionic contact and favorable ionic percolation, by infiltrating Li6PS5Cl into porous LiCoO2 (Fig. 14)116. Also, the use of the infiltration technique to load sulfur on the porous Fe3C/C electrode with S/CS2 solution was demonstrated for a Li–S battery. The fabricated electrode exhibited good performance for reversibility and rate capability, indicating the potential of infiltration as a self-supporting electrode fabrication method.117
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram illustrating the infiltration of conventional LIB composite electrodes with solution-processable SEs. The photographs in the panels show the LiCoO2 electrodes before and after the infiltration of EtOH-solution processed Li6PS5Cl (LPSCl). A photograph of LPSCl-dissolved EtOH solution is also shown. Polymeric binders (PVDF) are not shown in the diagram for simplicity. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Binder free electrodes. 
Most electrodes of rechargeable batteries studied so far use polymer binders (e.g., poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC)), and solvents (N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)) to fix the active materials or electrocatalysts on the electrode scaffolds (e.g., carbon felt, carbon fiber, carbon paper, Ni foam, etc.).21,118–121 These polymer binders have relatively high electrical resistance, resulting in an inevitable loss of the electrochemically active surface area.122–124 Moreover, their hydrophobic properties limit the access of reactants to the reaction sites in rechargeable batteries using aqueous electrolytes. In this regard, many researchers have developed binder-free electrodes to retain the physical stability under operating conditions and reduce the losses at the reaction sites.45,123,125,126
Recently, the infiltration technique was adopted to fabricate a binder-free electrode for seawater batteries.45 The catalytic materials of Co3O4 and polypyrrole doped carbon (PPy/C) were deposited on carbon fiber by the infiltration technique without any polymer binders. This binder-free electrode showed competitive performances and excellent bifunctional stability for the seawater battery operation. This demonstrates that the infiltration technique is an efficient and simple fabrication method for binder-free electrodes.
Hybrid catalyst synthesis. 
Hybrid catalysts (A@B) contain two or more materials (A and B) with bifunctional activity for the electrochemical charge/recharge reactions. Some examples include Co3O4 nanocrystals grown on graphene, Co3O4–graphene composites, flowerlike Co3O4 microspheres loaded with Cu nanoparticles, and a core-corona structure catalyst consisting of LaNiO3 and Pt/C.119,127–132 Most of the hybrid catalysts exhibit a synergistic effect through which it improves the bifunctional activity compared to the respective materials (A or B) and/or their mixtures (A + B) for both the charge and discharge reactions.76,127,128 An example of utilizing the infiltration technique is Co3O4 infiltrated Nd0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ exhibiting excellent catalytic activities for both the OER and ORR, and stable performances for the Li–air battery. This also demonstrated that the synergistic effect originated from the ligand effect91,133–135 and strain effect136–138 at the interfaces accompanied by electronic and structural reconstruction.

4. Conclusions
In this review, we have explained the facile, effective, and intuitive nature of the infiltration technique for fabricating composite materials and reviewed its recent application in solid oxide cells and rechargeable batteries. The infiltration technique has the advantages of simplicity, controllability, flexibility of the material selection, and versatility. Briefly, the definition, principles, and advantages of infiltration were introduced in Sections 2.1 to 2.3.
As presented in Fig. 15, the three steps of the infiltration process—preparation of the scaffold, penetration of the precursor solution, and heat treatment—were discussed in detail. Furthermore, the controllable parameters were addressed thoroughly for each step. In the first step, the parameters for scaffold preparation were as follows: the nature of the scaffold (intrinsic properties), the structure of the scaffold (determined by the pore former and acidic treatment), and the sintering conditions. For the precursor solution, there are two controllable parameters, namely the solvent and the chelating agent. Since the precursor cation is fixed for a specific structure, it cannot be varied. Heat treatment is the sintering step for infiltrates, which is based on the liquid phase sintering principle. The application of the infiltration technique was discussed in terms of materials, devices, and purpose. We covered widely used materials such as spinel oxides, perovskite oxides, metals, and alloys. The application section explained how the electrodes fabricated by infiltration were used in SOCs and rechargeable batteries.
 Fig. 15  The controllable parameters and their effectiveness. 
As reviewed in this article, the infiltration technique has many advantages in synthesizing the composite electrode, catalyst, and/or layers for SOCs and rechargeable batteries. Due to the simplicity, a wide range of materials selection, and versatility, the infiltration technique can be applied to any electrochemical device which requires the fabrication of composite solid materials, such as alkaline water splitting systems, solar cells, photocatalysts, etc. Also, the scaffold preparation steps of infiltration can make use of other synthetic methods (e.g., electrospinning, electrospray, pyrolysis, hydrothermal, etc.) for making a unique structured composite material.
Author contributions
S. K. (Seona Kim): conceptualization, visualization, investigation, writing. G. K. (Guntae Kim): supervision, reviewing and editing, funding acquisition. A. M. (Arumugam Manthiram): supervision, reviewing and editing, funding acquisition. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Welch Foundation grant F-1254, and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2020M1A2A2080877).
References
B. Obama, Science, 2017, 355, 126–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chung and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901125 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, J. Lang, Y. Liu, Z. Lin and X. Yan, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e183 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 RSC .
P. Balaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 645–654 RSC .
E. W. Washburn, Phys. Rev., 1921, 17, 273–283 CrossRef .
C. L. Burdick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1922, 44, 244–251 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Clark, P. C. MacGrath and M. C. Johnson, Chemistry, 1925, 11, 646–651 CAS .
A. W. Waldo and S. T. Yuster, Bull. Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol., 1937, 21, 259–267 CAS .
S. Kim, S. Choi, A. Jun, J. Shin and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F1468–F1473 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Eischens and P. W. Selwood, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1947, 69, 2698–2702 CrossRef CAS .
F. N. Hill and P. W. Selwood, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1949, 71, 2522–2529 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Maatman and C. D. Prater, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1957, 49, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2006, 418, 199–210 CrossRef .
T. Z. Sholklapper, C. P. Jacobson, S. J. Visco and L. C. Dejonghe, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 303–312 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 943–956 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ding, X. Li, S. Y. Lai, K. Gerdes and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 552 RSC .
B. Markicevic and H. K. Navaz, Transp. Porous Media, 2010, 85, 953–974 CrossRef .
S. Kim, O. Kwon, C. Kim, O. Gwon, H. young Jeong, K.-H. Kim, J. Shin and G. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800123 CrossRef .
S. Kim, S. Choi, a. Jun, J. Shin and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F1468–F1473 CrossRef CAS .
T. Klemensø, K. Thydén, M. Chen and H. J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7295–7301 CrossRef .
B. Song, E. Ruiz-Trejo, A. Bertei and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2018, 374, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bertei, E. Ruiz-Trejo, K. Kareh, V. Yufit, X. Wang, F. Tariq and N. P. Brandon, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 526–536 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Hertz, T. Heiredal-Clausen and R. Küngas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F38–F43 CrossRef CAS .
B. Song, A. Bertei, X. Wang, S. J. Cooper, E. Ruiz-Trejo, R. Chowdhury, R. Podor and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2019, 420, 124–133 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lou, Z. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Xiu, C. P. Wong and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, S. Choi, H. Y. Jeong, M. Liu, B.-S. Kim and G. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17352–17357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bidrawn, R. Küngas, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Sun, C. Xia and M. Ni, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F278–F289 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Synodis, C. L. Porter, N. M. Vo, A. J. L. Reszka, M. D. Gross and R. C. Snyder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F1216–F1224 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Shekhar, A. Bertei and D. S. Monder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 084523 CrossRef CAS .
A. Enrico and P. Costamagna, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 1106–1121 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, C. Yang, X. Dong and F. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 10039–10044 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kishimoto, M. Lomberg, E. Ruiz-Trejo and N. P. Brandon, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Samson, M. Søgaard and P. V. Hendriksen, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 229, 73–95 CrossRef CAS .
R. Küngas, J. S. Kim, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 2220–2224 CrossRef .
A. Sarikaya and F. Dogan, Ceram. Int., 2013, 39, 403–413 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarikaya, V. Petrovsky and F. Dogan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 11370–11377 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimura, K. Nagato and N. Shikazono, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 12043–12056 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimura, Z. Jiao, S. Hara and N. Shikazono, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 58–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kishimoto, Y. Kawakami, Y. Otani, H. Iwai and H. Yoshida, Scr. Mater., 2017, 140, 5–8 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Zheng, B. Yu, J. Chen and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–7 CrossRef .
C. Kim, S. Kim, O. Kwon, J. Kim and G. Kim, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 136–140 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sheng, L. Shao, J. Chen, W. Bao, F. Wang and X. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, W. Da Oh, Z. T. Hu, Y. M. Sun, R. D. Webster, S. Z. Li and T. T. Lim, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 243–257 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Murry, D. L. Strout, G. K. Odom and G. E. Scuseria, Nature, 1993, 366, 665–667 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yamamoto, K. Shirasu, Y. Nozaka, Y. Sato, T. Takagi and T. Hashida, Carbon, 2014, 66, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Y. Shan, T. Tsukada, F. Munekane, A. Kuno, M. Matsuo, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim and M. Endo, Carbon, 2007, 45, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, X. Duan, H. Sun, J. Kang, H. Zhang, M. O. Tade and S. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 115, 649–658 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tavangarian, A. Fahami, G. Li, M. Kazemi and A. Forghani, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2018, 34, 2263–2270 CrossRef .
C. Sındıraç, S. Çakırlar, A. Büyükaksoy and S. Akkurt, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 39, 409–417 CrossRef .
O. S. Jeon, H. J. Hwang, O. Chan Kwon, J. G. Lee and Y. G. Shul, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18018–18024 RSC .
S. Hui, J. Roller, S. Yick, X. Zhang, C. Decès-Petit, Y. Xie, R. Maric and D. Ghosh, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 493–502 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, P. L. Chen and I. W. Chen, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, M. Feng and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1996, 79, 1100–1104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Zhang, Q. Xue, H. Xu, L. Wang and Z. Feng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 39153–39159 RSC .
G. Kim, S. Wang, a J. Jacobson, Z. Yuan, W. Donner, C. L. Chen, L. Reimus, P. Brodersen and C. a Mims, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 24103 CrossRef .
A. Tsoga, A. Naoumidis and P. Nikolopoulos, Acta Mater., 1996, 44, 3679–3692 CrossRef CAS .
P. Keyvanfar and V. Birss, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F660–F667 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lou, S. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Yang and M. Liu, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1285–1289 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Kota, G. Kwon and A. Tuteja, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e109–e116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Il Lee, J. Kim, J. W. Son, J. H. Lee, B. K. Kim, H. J. Je, H. W. Lee, H. Song and K. J. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2014, 250, 15–20 CrossRef .
J. D. Nicholas and S. A. Barnett, ECS Trans., 2010, 28, 39–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, A. Jun, O. Kwon, J. Kim, S. Yoo, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin and G. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3153–3158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Shin and G. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Kim, S. Choi, J. Shin and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F805–F809 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Namgung, J. Hong, A. Kumar, D. K. Lim and S. J. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118374 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Stokes and M. S. Islam, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6258 RSC .
C. Lai, J. Chen, J. C. Knight, A. Manthiram and A. Navrotsky, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 4, 1973–1978 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, D. M. Cupid, P. Gotcu, K. Chang, D. Li, Y. Du and H. J. Seifert, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2287–2298 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, S. Gu, Q. Zhang, Y. Bai, M. Li, Y. Yuan, H. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Yuan, N. Zhu, F. Wu, H. Li, L. Gu and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sönmez, S. J. Thompson, S. W. T. Price, D. Pletcher and A. E. Russell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H884–H890 CrossRef .
D. Pletcher, X. Li, S. W. T. Price, A. E. Russell, T. Sönmez and S. J. Thompson, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Qiao, H.-Y. Wang, N. Zhou, J. Chen, Y.-G. Tang, J. Li and C. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10235–10242 RSC .
J. L. Rogers, M. C. Mangarella, A. D. D'Amico, J. R. Gallagher, M. R. Dutzer, E. Stavitski, J. T. Miller and C. Sievers, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5873–5886 CrossRef CAS .
S. Joo, O. Kwon, K. Kim, S. Kim, H. Kim, J. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, S. Sengodan, J. W. Han and G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Kwon, S. Sengodan, K. Kim, G. G. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, Y.-W. W. Ju, J. W. Han and G. G. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-F. F. Sun, Y.-Q. Q. Zhang, J. Chen, J.-H. H. Li, Y.-T. T. Zhu, Y.-M. M. Zeng, B. S. Amirkhiz, J.-H. H. Li, B. Hua and J.-L. L. Luo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5303–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Neagu, T. S. Oh, D. N. Miller, H. Menard, S. M. Bukhari, S. R. Gamble, R. J. Gorte, J. M. Vohs and J. T. Irvine, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8120 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sengodan, Y.-W. W. Ju, O. Kwon, A. Jun, H. Y. Jeong, T. Ishihara, J. Shin and G. Kim, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9207–9213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, H. Zhao, S. Yi, Q. Xia, Y. Gong, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Gu and K. Świerczek, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8660–8669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, J. Li, Y. Lin, J. Liu, F. Chen and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kwon, K. Kim, S. Joo, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, J. W. Han, S. Sengodan and G. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15947–15953 RSC .
Y.-F. Sun, Y.-L. Yang, J. Chen, M. Li, Y.-Q. Zhang, J.-H. Li, B. Hua and J.-L. Luo, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1505–1508 RSC .
L. Xiong, A. M. Kannan and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 898–903 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Fan, Y.-J. Fan, R.-X. Wang, S. Xiang, H.-G. Tang and S.-G. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19467–19475 RSC .
J. Kim, C. W. Roh, S. K. Sahoo, S. Yang, J. Bae, J. W. Han and H. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1701476, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S.-A. Park, E.-K. Lee, H. Song and Y.-T. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, S. Choi, N. Lu, L. T. Roling, A. Herron, L. Zhang, J. Park, J. Wang, M. J. Kim, Z. Xie, M. Mavrikakis and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3570–3576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Adijanto, A. Sampath, A. S. Yu, M. Cargnello, P. Fornasiero, R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1801–1809 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kiyani, S. Rowshanzamir and M. J. Parnian, Energy, 2016, 113, 1162–1173 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, C. Kim, J. H. J. H. Lee, J. Shin, T.-H. T.-H. Lim and G. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 399–406 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley and M. Mavrikakis, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 810–815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Lu, J. H. Zhu, Z. H. Bi and X. C. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, T. Han, H. Wang, L. Zhang and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 187, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, L. Yu, D. Deng, X. Chen, F. Yang and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14868 RSC .
L. Bi, S. Boulfrad and E. Traversa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8255–8270 RSC .
X. Yue and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7081–7090 RSC .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .
M. Torrell, S. Garcia-Rodriguez, A. Morata, G. Penelas and A. Tarancon, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 241–255 RSC .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 4–16 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jun, Y.-W. Ju and G. Kim, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 519–528 RSC .
H. He, Y. Huang, J. Regal, M. Boaro, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengodan, M. Liu, T.-H. Lim, J. Shin, M. Liu and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F668–F673 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, B. Hua, J. L. Luo, S. P. Jiang, J. Pu, B. Chi and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10293–10301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, C. Jiang, P. A. Connor, M. Cassidy and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19068–19076 RSC .
T. Hays, A. M. Hussain, Y. L. Huang, D. W. McOwen and E. D. Wachsman, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1559–1566 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sengodan, S. Choi, A. Jun, T. H. Shin, Y.-W. Ju, H. Y. Jeong, J. Shin, J. T. S. Irvine and G. Kim, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 205–209 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hua, M. Li, Y. F. Sun, Y. Q. Zhang, N. Yan, J. Li, T. Etsell, P. Sarkar and J. L. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 174–181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, S. Hori, T. Saito, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama, A. Mitsui, M. Yonemura, H. Iba and R. Kanno, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Oh, Y. E. Choi, D. H. Kim, Y. G. Lee, B. S. Kim, J. Park, H. Sohn and Y. S. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10329–10335 RSC .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Oh, K. H. Park, Y. E. Choi, Y. J. Nam, H. A. Lee, S. M. Lee and Y. S. Jung, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3013–3020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kou, G. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Guan, X. Li, N. Zhang and G. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20614–20623 RSC .
V. Barsykov and V. Khomenko, Scientific Journal of Riga Technical University, 2010, 21, 67–71 CAS .
W. Yang, J. Salim, C. Ma, Z. Ma, C. Sun, J. Li, L. Chen and Y. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 28, 13–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bu, O. Gwon, G. Nam, H. Jang, S. Kim, Q. Zhong, J. Cho and G. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11594–11601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Gwon, C. Kim, O. Kwon, H. Y. Jeong, H.-K. Park, J. Shin, Y.-W. Ju and G. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1893–A1897 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhang, C. Feng, Y. C. Zhai, K. L. Jiang, Q. Q. Li and S. S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2299–2304 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, K. Wang, J. Wang, K. Jiang, Q. Li and S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, M. Yu, Y. Huang, C. Li, P. Fang, Y. Liu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, W. Luo, X. Hu, C. Chen, L. Qie, D. Hou and Y. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 4–9 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. N. Chen, X. G. Wang, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2018, 377, 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, F. Li, C. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Ren, W. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Kim and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7188 RSC .
W. F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. U. Lee, H. W. Park, M. G. Park, V. Ismayilov and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 902–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Gong, Y. Liang, J. Feng, J. E. Kim, H. Wang, G. Hong, B. Zhang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1805 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, F. Li, R. Wang, J. M. Seo, H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. Mahmood, I. Y. Jeon and J. B. Baek, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–9 Search PubMed .
P. Strasser, S. Koh, T. Anniyev, J. Greeley, K. More, C. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Kaya, D. Nordlund, H. Ogasawara, M. F. Toney and A. Nilsson, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, small, 2017, 1603793, 1–25 Search PubMed .
W. Tang and G. Henkelman, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 194504 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wen, W. He, W. Lv and W. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20031–20050 RSC .
J. Lu, S. Cheng, M. Liu and C. Jia, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8038–8043 RSC .
D. Pesquera, G. Herranz, A. Barla, E. Pellegrin, F. Bondino, E. Magnano, F. Sánchez and J. Fontcuberta, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Infiltration process for the scaffold structure: (a) between scaffold particles and (b) within scaffold particles.	 
h = 2γcosθ/rρg	(1)

 	Fig. 2  The capillary phenomenon in a (a) tube and (b) pore.	 

 	Fig. 3  Dependence of the surface wettability on the contact angle (θ).	 

 	Fig. 4  Wetting angles of different SSC precursor solutions on LSCF(La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3), LSM(LaxSr1−xMnO3), YSZ (yttria-doped zirconia) and GDC (gadolinium-doped ceria) substrates (note: mixture 1 has a water-to-ethanol volume ratio of 1:0.3 and mixture 2 has a water-to-ethanol volume ratio of 1:0.6). Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scaffold structures having pores (a) within a unit and (b) between units (inter-unit).	 

 	Fig. 6  A schematic diagram of the conventional, two-stage and multi-stage sintering step. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Preparation processes of W-NSC@Co3O4 and E-NSC@Co3O4 by infiltration. NSC indicates perovskite oxide Nd0.5Sr0.5CoO3. Contact angle images and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images are included. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic crystal structures of a (a) spinel, (b) single perovskite, (c) layered perovskite, and (d) Ruddlesden–Popper series.	 
O2 + 4e− → 2O2− (ORR)	(2)
2O2− + 2H2 → 2H2O + 4e− (HOR)	(3)
O2 + 2H2 → 2H2O (overall reaction)	(4)

 	Fig. 9  The design of solid oxide cells.	 
2H2O + 4e− → 2H2 + 2O2− (HER)	(5)
2O2− → O2 + 4e− (OER)	(6)
2H2O → 2H2 + O2 (overall reaction)	(7)
ΔH = ΔG + TΔS	(8)

 	Fig. 10  Electric, thermal, and total energy demands for water electrolysis as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison of the triple-phase boundary for the composite fabricated by the (a) conventional process (physically mixing) and (b) infiltration technique. Electronic conductor (red), ionic conductor (gray), and TPBs (cyan).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the proposed poisoning and stability mechanisms: (a) normal fuel oxidation reactions at the TPB. (b) Adsorbed sulfur blocks TPB sites and carbon deposition begins. (c) Fully deactivated anode with adsorbed sulfur and carbon growths. (d) High density of TPB sites and improved oxygen transport from nanoparticles prevents sulfur poisoning. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of a rechargeable battery.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram illustrating the infiltration of conventional LIB composite electrodes with solution-processable SEs. The photographs in the panels show the LiCoO2 electrodes before and after the infiltration of EtOH-solution processed Li6PS5Cl (LPSCl). A photograph of LPSCl-dissolved EtOH solution is also shown. Polymeric binders (PVDF) are not shown in the diagram for simplicity. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  The controllable parameters and their effectiveness.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
