Recent advances in hierarchical macroporous composite structures for photoelectric conversion  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE02213K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02213K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3887-3901Recent advances in hierarchical macroporous composite structures for photoelectric conversion

        
          
            Hong-Yan 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yang-Fan 
            Xu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dai-Bin 
            Kuang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Cheng-Yong 
            Su
          
          
        
      *
      MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, Lehn Institute of Functional Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; cesscy@mail.sysu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-20-8411-3015;   Tel: +86-20-8411-3015
Received 
      15th July 2014
    , Accepted 3rd September 2014First published on 4th September 2014AbstractMacroporous structures have attracted great interest for a wide range of applications due to their unique structure-determined physical and chemical properties. In regard to the inherent low surface area, decoration of macroporous structures with small building blocks (including nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanosheets, etc.) to form macroporous composite materials therefore have been highly pursued very recently. In this review, we summarize the recent advances in synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite materials and their potential applications as photoelectrode materials for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells.Hong-Yan ChenHong-Yan Chen is an associate professor at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her Bachelor's degree in 2005 from Northeast Normal University and her PhD in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2010. Her current research interest lies in functional micro/nanomaterials, electrolyte materials for quasi-solid/solid state dye-sensitized solar cells, organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells.Yang-Fan XuYang-Fan Xu received his Bachelor's degree in Sun Yat-sen University in 2013 and now is a Masters degree candidate in Prof. Dai-Bin Kuang's group at School of chemistry and chemical engineering of Sun Yat-sen University. His current research interest focuses on the synthesis of hierarchical nanomaterials and their applications in photoelectrochemical cells.Dai-Bin KuangDai-Bin Kuang is a professor in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU). Dr Kuang received his PhD degree from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2003. He worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany) from 2003–2004 and also at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (Switzerland) from 2004–2008 as a postdoctoral researcher. In 2008, he became a professor in SYSU. He has authored over 100 peer reviewed publications. His current research interest is in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical cells.Cheng-Yong SuCheng-Yong Su is the Cheung Kong Professor of Chemistry at Sun Yat-Sen University (SYSU). He obtained his PhD from Lanzhou University in 1996, joined Prof. Wolfgang Kaim's group at Stuttgart University in 2001 as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow, continued postdoctoral work with Prof. Hans-Conrad zur Loye at the University of South Carolina in 2002, and got promoted to full professor in SYSU in 2004. He is the author of over 200 peer reviewed publications and 6 book chapters. His current research interest is in the field of supramolecular coordination chemistry and materials, focusing on metal–organic materials, catalysis and nanoscience relevant to clean environment and energy.

Broader context
Photoelectric and photochemical conversions of solar energy are of great potential to meet the stringent energy demand in our modern life and society. Nanostructured photoelectrode materials are the key components of the promising photoelectricity and photochemistry devices such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells. Multifunctional macroporous materials have attracted significant interest due to the fast mass transport, efficient electrolyte permeation, fast electron transport and strong light scattering effect. However, the inherent disadvantage of low specific surface area limits the further enhancement of photovoltaic performance. Hence, the design and synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite structures by growing nano-building blocks onto the inner and/or outer surfaces of macropore hosts have been the recent research hot topics. This review highlights recent advances in the synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite materials composed of zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, 1D nanorods or nanowires, and 2D nanosheet guests grown on the macropore hosts and their applications in DSSCs, QDSSCs and PECs.

1. Introduction
Recently, porous semiconductor metal oxide materials have attracted much attention due to their potential applications in catalysis, sensors, energy conversion and storage, drug delivery and optoelectronics. Among the various porous structures, macroporous structured materials exhibit some unique physical and chemical properties. For example, their large pore size (>50 nm) comparable to the visible wavelength can reinforce the light harvesting efficiency of materials through the strong light scattering effect. In the case of an ordered macroporous structure, that is an inverse opal (IO) nanostructure, the photonic crystal light localization effect also contributes a lot to the utilization of the incident light.1–3 In addition, the high porosity, large pore volume and the interconnected pore structure of macroporous materials can facilitate the interfacial- and transport-related process, e.g., providing fast mass transport, efficient electrolyte permeation and fast electron transport as electrode materials for energy conversion and storage applications. These features make macroporous structures promising materials for many photoelectrical applications, including dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs),4–6 photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells,7–9 photocatalysis,10–13 lithium-ion batteries (LIBs),14,15 and so on. Many efforts concerning the synthesis method, structure engineering and applications of hollow macroporous materials have been done to pursue excellent photoelectrical performances, and several related reviews have been published.16–18
Although the macroporous structures can bring about excellent optical and electrical properties, the large inner voids induced inherent disadvantages of low volume specific surface area limit their performance in some cases. For example, as photoanode materials for DSSCs, their low surface area would result in low dye loading thus lower photoelectrical conversion efficiency than those of mesoporous nanoparticle films.19–21 Therefore, how to improve the specific surface area of macroporous structured materials while maintaining the strong light-scattering ability is of great importance for energy applications. An effective solution to this problem is to construct hierarchical macroporous composite structures.
The design idea of hierarchical macroporous composite structures is to improve the specific surface area of the macroporous structure by growing nano-building blocks onto the inner and/or outer surfaces of host macropores. These building blocks can be zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles,22 1D/quasi-1D nanostructures such as nanorods, nanowires, etc.,23,24 and 2D nanosheets.25 The composition of secondary structures can be the same or different from the macroporous matrix while forming hierarchical assembly of homogeneous or heterogeneous composite structures, respectively.23 This designing concept makes it possible to engineer the function of macroporous composite materials in which not only the excellent properties of the macroporous host matrix are preserved, but also the function of the extra decorations in the nanoscale, such as enhanced surface area, fast electron transport and efficient charge collection, and so on, are integrated, forming multi-functional materials. Therefore, research concerning hierarchical macroporous composite materials has been a hot topic in recent years.
The construction strategies for hierarchical macroporous materials can be divided roughly into two categories (Fig. 1): (i) a two-step secondary growth procedure, macroporous host matrixes are prepared first and then secondary structures are grown on them, which provides a variety of homogeneous or heterogeneous structures;23 (ii) an one-step assembly growth procedure, the macropore and hierarchical branches are formed directly through the self-assembly of small building blocks, Ostwald ripening or the self-template process, which can only produce the homogeneous structure. In this review, the recent advances in synthesis of hierarchical homogeneous or heterogeneous macroporous composite materials and their potential applications in DSSCs, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) and PEC cells are summarized. The challenges and perspectives of the hierarchical macroporous composite materials are also discussed in the last part.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the two strategies for synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite materials. (i) Two-step secondary growth procedure and (ii) one-step assembly growth procedure. 
2. Photoanode materials for sensitized solar cells
In sensitized solar cells including DSSCs and QDSSCs, the photoanode materials serve as supporters for sensitizers and transport paths for photo-generated electrons. Therefore, an ideal photoanode material should supply with a large surface area for efficient dye adsorption, a matched energy band structure for electron injection, fast electron mobility for effective photo-induced electron transport, a suitable porosity for electrolyte permeation, and also a strong light scattering ability to confine the incident light within the photoanode.26–28 Compared with commonly used nanoparticle photoanodes, the macroporous structure usually exhibits a strong light scattering effect since its void size is comparable with the wavelength of the visible light, thus can effectively enhance the light harvesting efficiency via Mie scattering; moreover, the large pore volume in the macroporous structure is also beneficial to electrolyte permeation.29,30 However, the photovoltaic performance of macroporous structure photoanodes is usually limited by lower dye loading due to their low specific surface area.31–33 Many efforts have been done to resolve this problem recently, and some satisfied results have been achieved so far.
2.1 Macroporous composite photoanode for DSSCs
TiO2 is the most extensively studied wide band gap semiconductor photoanode material due to its matched energy band structure, low cost, non-toxic, chemical stability and excellent photoelectric performances. Various morphological TiO2 nanomaterials are prepared to achieve high photovoltaic performance. Among them, one-dimensional nanorods or nanowires are of great interest since they provide a direct electron transport path.34–37 To combine the advantages of macroporous structures and 1D nanorods/nanowires, we reported a rambutan-like TiO2 macroporous material–nanowire hybrid structure (MP-TiO2-TNW), that is, the hierarchical composite photoanode of the TiO2 macroporous structure coated with TiO2 nanowire.23 This homogeneous composite material was prepared via a two-step process: TiO2 macroporous host scaffolds were firstly prepared by using monodisperse polystyrene (PS) spheres as the sacrificial templates; then a hydrothermal treatment was conducted to grow anatase TiO2 nanowires to fill the inner macropores and the interfacial voids between TiO2 spheres by using titanium potassium oxalate as the precursor. The hollow macroporous TiO2 structures obtained by the template-assisted refluxing method were size-tunable, determined by the size of PS colloidal spheres. As shown in Fig. 2, the hollow spheres show an open hole on their wall, which can make the inner surface of hollow spheres accessible for both dyes and electrolytes, and also for the post-treatment precursor solution. After hydrothermal treatment, both inner and outer walls of macroporous TiO2 were covered with interlaced and interconnected anatase TiO2 nanowires. These densely grown nanowires are of ∼3–5 nm in diameter and 150–200 nm in length, which effectively make the macropores film much denser. In addition, the morphology and structure of the TiO2 nano-branches can be controlled conveniently by either the water/diethylene glycol (DEG) volume ratio or the hydrothermal reaction time. For example, with decrease in the concentration of DEG, the capping agent hinders the hydrolysis of titanium potassium oxalate and the structure-directing agent for directional growth of TiO2, the nanowire, nanorod, nanosheet, and nanoparticle based TiO2 branches can be obtained, respectively; with prolonged reaction time, the nano-branches evolved from thorn-like amorphous TiO2 to crystallized nanowires whose diameter and length also change over time. Anyway, these extra anatase nano-branches will greatly enhance the specific surface area of macroporous structures. When used as the photoanode for DSSCs, the MP-TiO2-TNW structure showed a high dye-loading amount of 140.7 nmol cm−2, which was almost two times higher than the parent MP-TiO2 structure and similar to the value of the P25 nanoparticle based photoanode. This high dye-loading amount would ensure a high photocurrent. Moreover, the MP-TiO2-TNW structure also exhibited an enhanced light scattering ability, with the nanowire-branched macropores, randomly oriented TiO2 nanowires and the interior cavities induced by interlaced nanowires all contributing to the strong diffuse scattering ability. Therefore, the MP-TiO2-TNW structure based cell showed a Jsc of 16.23 mA cm−2, much higher than the MP-TiO2 cell of 8.82 mA cm−2 and the P25 cell of 13.78 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2g). In addition, the MP-TiO2-TNW structure also showed a reduced interfacial electron combination than the nanoparticle photoanode (Fig. 2h). As a result, a conversion efficiency of as high as 9.51% was obtained, nearly 1.7 times higher than the MP-TiO2 cell (5.53%).
 Fig. 2  Branched nanowire coated macroporous metal oxide photoanodes.23 (a–c) SEM and TEM images of MP-TiO2; (d–f) SEM and TEM images of MP-TiO2-TNW; (g) J–V curves and (h) EIS spectra of MP-TiO2, MP-TiO2-TNW, and P25 based cells; (i–k) schematic illumination of (i) rambutan-like TiO2–TiO2, (j) sunflower-like SnO2–TiO2, and (k) nest-like Zn2SnO4–TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
In addition to the homogeneous macroporous TiO2–TiO2 nanowire composite structure, heterogeneous macroporous SnO2–TiO2 nanowire and macroporous Zn2SnO4–TiO2 nanowire hybrid electrodes were also prepared via the similar secondary growth method.23 The substitution of metal oxide host scaffolds provides an opportunity to tune the electron transport properties since both SnO2 and Zn2SnO4 matrixes offer higher electron mobility than that of the TiO2 matrix (ca. 100 to 200 cm2 V−1 S−1 for SnO2, ca. 10 to 15 cm2 V−1 S−1 for Zn2SnO4, ca. 0.1 to 10 cm2 V−1 S−1 for TiO2, respectively).38–40 Due to the different growth interfaces, the TiO2 branches grown on SnO2 and Zn2SnO4 macroporous scaffolds were different from TiO2 scaffolds. As illustrated in Fig. 2i–k, compared with rambutan-like MP-TiO2-TNW with randomly interlaced TiO2 nanowires (Fig. 2i), short and thicker TiO2 nanowires were grown densely and uniformly on the macroporous SnO2 scaffold forming a sunflower-like structure (MP-SnO2-TNW, Fig. 2j), and thick TiO2 nanorods were grown on the macroporous Zn2SnO4 scaffold forming a nest-like structure (MP-Zn2SnO4-TNW, Fig. 2k). The different nano-branch structure would affect the dynamic photo-generated electron transport of composite materials. According to light-intensity dependent measurement of electron transport time (τd) and electron lifetime (τr), it was found that the MP-SnO2-TNW based cells showed the fastest electron transport and slowest electron recombination among the three composite materials. This can be attributed to the highest electron mobility of the SnO2 macroporous scaffold and the short TiO2 nanowire branches which can provide not only a straightforward pathway for photo-generated electron injection, but also fewer electron recombination centers. On comparison, the electron transport on the MP-Zn2SnO4-TNW composite structure was hindered due to the random arrangement of nanowire branches which may increase the electron transport pathway, thus leading to the slowest electron transport, while the MP-TiO2-TNW based cells showed the shortest electron lifetime owing to the abundant recombination centers and surface trapping sites provided by the long thin TiO2 nanowires network. Both the hybrid structures showed enhanced specific surface area than the original macroporous structures. As a result, the two hybrid structure based photoanodes for DSSCs showed significant improvement in both Jsc and Voc, thus an improved conversion efficiency over those of their pristine macroporous structure based devices, that is, 7.06% for MP-SnO2-TNW and 6.62% for MP-Zn2SnO4-TNW, among the highest values recorded for both SnO2 and Zn2SnO4 based DSSCs.
These results demonstrate that the auxiliary secondary structures can effectively improve the surface area of macroporous hosts and also enhance the light scattering ability, thus leading to a pronounced light harvesting efficiency. Moreover, another merit is the quasi-1D/1D nano-branches may be conductive to electron transport given the fact that it can connect the adjacent pore structure more densely. This success makes it possible to engineer the structure and composition of photoanodes so as to achieve a high degree of integrated functionality. On the basis of this concept, an efficient multistacked photoanode with a hyperbranched tree-like TiO2 nanowires bottom layer (AHTNW), branched rambutan-like TiO2 hollow microspheres intermediate layer (MPT), and hyperbranched urchin-like TiO2 microspheres top layer (HTS) was prepared.41 The TiO2 nanotree bottom layer was selected to provide a direct electron transport pathway through 1D nano-building blocks and enable desirable fast electron extraction from nanowires to the FTO substrate; the TiO2 macropore-nanowire composite middle layer was aimed to get effective light-trapping efficiency through the hollow-hole structure and the hierarchical TiO2 microspheres top layer was selected to offer prominent light scattering ability. Surprisingly, a conversion efficiency of over 11% was obtained. As shown in Fig. 3a, this composite photoanode was constructed via layer-by-layer assembly of TiO2 nanotrees, macroporous spheres and hierarchical TiO2 microspheres first, and then a hydrothermal treatment was conducted to grow nano-branches to form a hyperbranched composite photoanode. After hydrothermal treatment, numerous secondary tiny TiO2 nano-branches with different diameters and aspect-ratios were grown on nanotree array layers, macroporous spheres and hierarchical microspheres, respectively (Fig. 3b). As expected, the secondary growth of nano-branches greatly improved the surface area of the original film. The optimized composite film with a thickness of 34 μm (18 + 8 + 8) exhibited a dye loading amount of 251.4 nmol cm−2, which was higher than that of the original multi-stack film. Although this value was a little lower than that of the P25 nanoparticle based film with the same thickness (338.6 nmol cm−2), a markedly high Jsc of 18.53 mA cm−2 superior to that of the latter cell was achieved, which was attributed to enhanced light harvesting efficiency of the hyperbranched composite photoanode that stemmed from the strong Mie scattering and the diffuse scattering effect of the hyperbranched composite structure. According to the monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves (Fig. 3c), both the pristine multi-stack film and the hyperbranched composite film showed higher conversion efficiencies than the nanoparticle based film due to the stronger light scattering ability; moreover, the more higher quantum efficiency for the hyperbranched composite film than the parent film confirmed its enhanced surface area for dye loading and a stronger light scattering effect thus leading to higher light harvesting efficiency. On the other hand, profiting from the 1D building blocks such as a nanotree array and 1D/quasi-1D nano-branches, etc., the hyperbranched composite film also exhibited superior electron transport properties to the nanoparticle based photoanode film, with both faster electron transport rate and longer electron lifetime, as shown in Fig. 3d. Although the electron recombination was serious in the hyperbranched composite film than the pristine multi-stack film due to its enlarged surface area which would bring about more recombination sites, an appreciable Voc of 827 mV was also observed, which in combination with the excellent Jsc value led to a high conversion efficiency of 11.01%. This result showed a successful example for promoting the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs by engineering the photoanode structure, so as to control the charge transfer, charge collection, and optical scattering simultaneously.
 Fig. 3  Multistacked 3D hyperbranched TiO2 photoanode.41 (a) Schematic map for the hyperbranched modification of the multilayered TiO2 photoanode; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of three-layer stacking of hyperbranched TiO2 photoanodes; (c) IPCE spectra and (d) electron transport time and electron lifetime as a function of light intensities for DSSCs fabricated using AHTNW + MPT + HTS, AHTNW + MPT + HTS-branches and TNP photoanode, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The host–guest concept can also be employed to construct a ZnO based composite photoanode. Recently, Tetreault et al. have reported a hierarchical 3D ZnO inverse opal (IO) macroporous photoanode coated with ZnO nanowires.42 The so-called macroporous ZnO IO prepared using the disordered poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) sphere film as the template, was used as the host scaffold to grow ZnO nanowire guests. As shown in Fig. 4a, the ZnO backbone of the macroporous structure is so thin (∼10 nm) that it only occupies a volume fraction of the photoanode film of ∼10–20%. It means a large amount void volume was left for the growth of secondary structures, implying great potential for surface area enhancement. After hydrothermal treatment, single crystal ZnO nanowires with approximately 200 nm in length and 20 nm in diameter were grown uniformly on the backbone of ZnO IO, forming an even composite structure (Fig. 4b and c). Finally, a dense TiO2 passivation layer was coated further onto the composite film to improve the chemical stability and inhibit the interfacial electron recombination of ZnO (Fig. 4d). Undoubtedly, the more dense composite structure would enhance the specific area of the photoanode film. According to the dye loading experiment, it was estimated that an increase in surface area of 21.5% was obtained after in situ growth of the single crystal ZnO nanowires on macroporous ZnO backbones. Therefore, an increased Jsc from 2.8 mA cm−2 for the parent ZnO IO film to about 3.8–3.9 mA cm−2 for the hydrothermally grown nanowire coated film was obtained, due to the enhanced dye loading. In addition, as shown in J–V curves (Fig. 4e), a largely improved Voc can also be achieved after coating with the TiO2 layer. This was attributed to the protection role of the TiO2 layer which can not only enhance the chemical stability but also reduce the interfacial recombination of the photogenerated electrons in ZnO with the oxidized species in the electrolyte, given the fact that ZnO photoanodes always suffer from their poor stability in the presence of dyes and serious interfacial recombination reaction which would lead to poor photovoltaic performances. According to transient measurements and impedance spectroscopy (IS), the TiO2 passivated photoanodes showed more than an order of magnitude lower (or higher) recombination rate (or electron lifetime) than the photoanodes without TiO2 decoration, confirming the positive function of the TiO2 layer. As a result, a Voc value of as high as 906 mV was obtained for the TiO2 passivated ZnO IO/ZnO nanowire composite photoanode, which in combination with the enhanced Jsc value led to a conversion efficiency of 2.38%. This result further illustrated that optimal light harvesting ability and efficient charge injection and collection can be achieved by engineering the nanostructure of the macroporous structure.
 Fig. 4  ZnO nanowire coated ZnO IO composite photoanodes.42 (a) SEM image of the parent ZnO IO film; (b and c) cross-sectional SEM images of the single crystal ZnO NWs coated ZnO host prepared via the hydrothermal process; (d) dense TiO2 layer passivated composite film, inset is the schematic representation of the 3D host–guest composite photoanode; (e) J–V curves of different photoanode based cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Except for 1D nano-branches, a 2D nanosheet was also a good choice to construct functional composite materials due to the fact that 2D nanostructures usually can provide excellent electronic, optical or chemical properties.43–47 Very recently, Kim et al. have synthesized a novel double-shell nanostructure with inner SnO2 hollow spheres coated by outer TiO2 nanosheets (SHS@TNS) for solid-state DSSCs.25 This hierarchical nanostructure was also constructed via a two-step process, in which SnO2 hollow spheres were synthesized first using sulfonated PS colloidal spheres as the template, and then TiO2 nanosheets were deposited on the SnO2 outer surface via solvothermal reactions. Confirmed by SEM and TEM images (Fig. 5a–c), a large amount of thin nanosheets with a exposed facet of (001) were successfully grown on the surface of the hollow sphere forming a surface modification layer, and the diameter of the composite spheres was 500 nm, which was much larger than the original PS template (350 nm). The formation of TiO2 nanosheets was determined by the diethylenetriamine added in the precursor solution, which can facilitate the electrostatic interactions between the tetrabutyl titanate precursor and the surface of SnO2 hollow spheres. The large number of TiO2 nanosheets can successfully enlarge the specific surface area of hierarchical composite spheres, which means high dye loading. When used as photoanode materials for DSSCs, the hierarchical SHS@TNS double-shell spheres were dispersed in a mesoporous TiO2 (OM-TiO2) film matrix to form a composite film (Fig. 5d). The OM-TiO2 film was prepared by using the self-assembly of the poly(vinylchloride)-g-poly(oxyethylene methacrylate) (PVC-g-POEM) graft copolymer as the template, which has been proved to provide large pores, high porosity, and good pore interconnectivity to facilitate the electrolyte permeation, especially for the solid state electrolyte with high viscosity.48–50 According to Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area analysis, the addition of hierarchical SHS@TNS spheres led to a significant increase in the surface area, from 73.5 m2 g−1 to 92.9 m2 g−1, due to the function of tiny TiO2 nanosheets, which was consistent with dye loading measurements. Moreover, the introduction of hierarchical hollow spheres improved the light scattering ability of composite films, that is, it showed improved reflection over the whole visible range compared to the parent OM-TiO2 film, confirmed by the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum. The enhanced surface area and light scattering ability would definitely lead to high light harvesting efficiency. On the other hand, the IMPS/IMVS results indicated that the hierarchical SHS@TNS sphere also showed a faster electron transport and suppressed electron recombination with higher diffusion coefficient, electron lifetime and diffusion length than the neat OM-TiO2 cell. These advantages made the hierarchical SHS@TNS sphere added OM-TiO2 composite film an attractive photoanode candidate for high efficient DSSCs. Using polymerized ionic liquid poly((1-(4-ethenylphenyl)methyl)-3-butyl-imidazolium iodide) (PEBII) as the solid-state electrolyte, combined with the suitable pore structure for electrolyte filling, a high-energy conversion efficiency of 8.2% was obtained, which was among the highest values of solid-state DSSCs.
 Fig. 5  SnO2 hollow sphere-TiO2 nanosheet (SHS@TNS) double-shell nanostructures.25 (a and b) SEM and (c) TEM images of SHS@TNS double-shell nanostructures; (d) SEM image of 10 wt% SHS@TNS dispersed in the OM-TiO2 film; (e) J–V curves of solid-state DSSCs fabricated with various photoanodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Considering the fabrication of the macroporous structure based on the template method with a tedious procedure and the possible collapse of the hollow structure caused by removing the templates, template-free methods were thereby pursued to synthesize the macroporous structure. In general, the template-free Ostwald ripening or self-template transform strategies were commonly used to prepare hollow spheres.51–54 These methods can also be used to construct a macroporous composite structure. A typical work was reported by Jiang and Xu et al. who prepared nanospindles assembled hierarchical TiO2 hollow spheres through a facile one-step hydrothermal method.55 In this process, the precursor for TiO2 was commercial P25 nanoparticles, which were converted to hollow spheres with the action of hydrogen peroxide and ammonia under hydrothermal conditions. As shown in Fig. 6a–e, the size of these well-crystallized anatase nanospindles ranges from 10 nm to 200 nm, and the diameters of the monodisperse assembled spheres are about 750 ± 30 nm, which can be further tuned from 400 nm to 1000 nm by changing the ammonia concentration of the precursor solution. The time-dependent investigation revealed that the growth of hierarchical spheres experienced an evolution process from amorphous spheres to well-crystallized hollow spheres (Fig. 6f). At the initial stage, the P25 nanoparticles were dissolved in precursor solution to form a Ti complex and condensed further forming amorphous microspheres. Then a nucleation process preferably happened on the spheres which subsequently grew along the 〈001〉 direction to form spindle-like anatase particles with the assistance of NH4+ in the reaction system which worked as a structural directing agent. Further reaction induced the decomposition of inner microspheres to support the growth of nanospindles, and finally the amorphous microspheres were completely converted to the hierarchical hollow spheres. Whatever, the hierarchical assembled structure of qausi-1D nanospindles showed a relatively high specific surface area of 84.9 m2 g−1, which in combination with their strong light scattering effect could provide a strong light harvesting ability when working as photoanodes for DSSCs. The photovoltaic performance measurements revealed that compared with TiO2 nanoparticles and commercial TiO2 large particles (300 nm in diameter), the special hierarchical hollow spheres can provide both high surface area for larger dye loading and the strong scattering effect; moreover, the well crystallized quasi-1D nanospindle building blocks could also improve the transport of photo-generated electrons, which finally led to an improved conversion efficiency of DSSCs. That is, η of 8.10% was obtained when these hierarchical macroporous spheres were used as a light scattering layer to construct a double-layer structured photoanode.
 Fig. 6  Hierarchical TiO2 hollow spheres prepared via one-step hydrothermal method.55 (a and b) SEM and (c–e) TEM images of the hollow structure assembled by anatase nanospindles; inset in (a) is the corresponding diameter distribution histogram. (f) The proposed growth mechanism for the evolution of hierarchical hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another work, Wang et al. used this method to prepare hierarchical macroporous TiO2 nanostructures.56 They developed a versatile targeted etching method to synthesize urchin-like mesoporous TiO2 hollow spheres (UMTHS) in a large scale. The synthesis procedure started with the preparation of amorphous hydrous TiO2 solid spheres (AHTSS), which were subsequently fluorinated and coated with PVP forming a core–shell structure (F–TiO2@PVP). Then a mild hydrothermal treatment was conducted to etch the amorphous microspheres, followed by a calcination process to finally convert to well-crystallized hierarchical TiO2 hollow spheres. This method separated the formation of spheres and the hollowing process into two steps, which made it convenient to control the final morphology. The pre-fabricated amorphous solid spheres had a uniform diameter of ∼490 nm consisting of TiO2 hydrate nanoparticles. The large amount of surface hydroxyl groups could be fluorinated and decorated by PVP through ligand exchange and hydrogen bonding, respectively. The PVP coating worked as a protecting layer that confines the etching process happening only inside the spheres to maintain the spherical structure. Detailed investigation disclosed that both the F/Ti molar ratios (RF) in the precursor and the hydrothermal reaction time played critical roles in the formation of the hierarchical hollow structure. With increase in the value of RF, the morphology of products evolved from solid to hollow spheres and further into isolated nanothorns disassembled from hollow spheres. Similarly, with the increase of reaction time, the solid amorphous spheres gradually transferred to hollow spheres assembled with well-crystallized anatase nanothorns. Moreover, the inner hollow structure can be tailored further to the yolk–shell structure (Fig. 7a). This structure was prepared by simply pre-filling polyethylene glycol (PEG) into the core of amorphous TiO2 solid spheres to hinder the etching process induced by F− during the hydrothermal process. Whatever, the as-prepared hierarchical macroporous structure can combine the excellent optical properties of the hollow structure, the enhanced surface area of the nanobranced structure, that is, a BET surface area of 128.6 m2 g−1, and the excellent charge carrier separation and electron transport performance of 1D single-crystal anatase nanothorns. These features made it a good candidate for photoelectrical applications. When working as photoanode materials for DSSCs, the UMTHS based cell showed a conversion efficiency of 5.5% using Co(bpy)33+/2+ electrolytes and Z907 dyes (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  Urchin-like mesoporous TiO2 hollow spheres (UMTHS) prepared via the targeted etching strategy.56 (a) TEM image of UMTHS with a yolk–shell structure; inset shows the sketch map of the nanostructure; (b) J–V curves of Z907 dye-sensitized UMTHS and P25 solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.2 Macroporous composite photoanode for QDSSCs
In addition to macroporous composite photoanode materials for DSSCs, a similar concept can be used to fabricate efficient QDSSCs. As an alternative to dye molecules, inorganic semiconductor QDs sensitizers have recently attracted much interest due to their unique photophysical and photochemical properties, such as size quantization property,57 multiexcitons effect,58,59 and high extinction coefficient.60 Given the fact that the extinction coefficient and the size of QDs are much greater than that of dye molecules, porous photoanodes with large pore structures are suitable to fulfill this job. A hierarchical heterogeneous macroporous Zn2SnO4–ZnO nanorod hybrid photoanode has been recently demonstrated for CdS/CdSe co-sensitized solar cells.61 The macroporous Zn2SnO4–ZnO nanorod hybrid photoanode was prepared through a two-step growth procedure: Zn2SnO4 nanoparticle coated PS colloidal sphere templates were employed to prepare macroporous films through a drop-casting process, and a subsequent hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods was carried out. Different from the TiO2 nanowire branches, the as-prepared ZnO nanorod branches were grown randomly on both inner and outer surfaces of Zn2SnO4 macropores, with a diameter of 80–120 nm and the length ranged from several hundreds of nanometers to 2 μm (Fig. 8a and b). The extra nano-branches can not only enhance the surface area of the film, but also facilitate the light scattering ability of the composite photoanode. According to the UV-vis diffused reflectance spectra (Fig. 8c), the Zn2SnO4–ZnO composite films show a higher reflectance value in the wavelength range from 400 to 800 nm than pristine Zn2SnO4, implying better light scattering ability for the former film. When used as photoanodes for QDSSCs, the CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitized composite film exhibited obvious higher absorption values throughout the visible region than the pristine macroporous photoanode, showing better light harvesting efficiency for this hybrid photoanode. Obviously, the improved light harvesting efficiency will lead to an apparent enhancement of Jsc (from 7.11 to 9.36 mA cm−2). The IPCE measurement also confirmed this result since the current value of the composite photoanode based cell was larger than that of the pristine Zn2SnO4 photoanode in the whole measured wavelength range from 380 nm to 750 nm, and it also displayed a red-shift to a longer wavelength of about 650–750 nm due to the light scattering effect (Fig. 8d). On the other hand, the Voc of Zn2SnO4–ZnO composite photoanode based cells was a little lower than that of pristine macroporous Zn2SnO4 based cells because the extra ZnO nanorods in the composite film possessed more trapping sites for electron recombination. However, the largely enhanced Jsc compensated for the inferior Voc behavior and thus led to promising power conversion efficiency. QDSSCs based on the optimized 9 μm thick composite photoanode film exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 2.08%, which was the highest value for the reported QDs sensitized solar cells based on the Zn2SnO4 photoelectrode.
 Fig. 8  Macroporous Zn2SnO4–ZnO nanorod composite photoelectrode for QDSSCs.61 (a and b) SEM images of the composite Zn2SnO4–ZnO film; (c) UV-vis diffused reflectance spectra and (d) IPCE curves of QDSSCs based on Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–ZnO photoanodes, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Except for the above-mentioned disordered templates, patterned colloidal sphere arrays can also be employed to prepare aligned hierarchical macroporous arrays. For instance, a monolayer array of an urchin-like ZnO nanostructure was reported by Elias et al.62 In a typical process, a layer of ordered monolayers of PS spheres was dip-coated on fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass first, followed by a plasma etching treatment to accurately control the size and distance between PS spheres. Then the template was coated with a thin layer of ZnO through atomic layer deposition (ALD) which can help fixing the PS template on the FTO surface, rendering the surface electrochemically active, and working as a block layer for electron recombination. Finally, an electrodeposition process was carried out to grow ZnO nanowires on the ZnO layer and subsequently remove the PS template to obtain the hollow structure. Fig. 9a–e shows the hierarchical nanostructure arrays prepared via the multi-step process. An individual assembly had an urchin-like structure with a hollow interior and numerous ZnO nanowires on the outer surface. The ZnO ALD layer well supported the hollow structure. Another merit of this structure was that the size of the urchin-like structure or the morphology of nanowires can be accurately controlled by experimental parameters, thus appropriately tuning the surface area and light scattering ability of the composite structure. For example, the interspacing between urchin-like structures can be tuned from 0 μm to 6.3 μm; the length of ZnO nanowires can vary from 300 nm to 1050 nm. Narrower interspacing and longer nanowires would result in larger surface area and stronger multiple light diffuse reflection and scattering, which can consequently enhance the effective light absorption of the CdSe QDs sensitized electrode (Fig. 9f). As shown in Fig. 9g, the CdSe QDs sensitized urchin-like ZnO nanostructure electrode was assembled into solar cells with CuSCN as the hole transport materials. The Jsc value of cells with different nanowire lengths increased gradually with increasing nanowire length which was consistent with the variation trend of effective absorbance. The conversion efficiency increased almost linearly from 0.37% to 1.33% just by increasing the ZnO nanowire lengths from 0.3 to 1 μm, which fully illustrated the advantages of hierarchical hollow structures.
 Fig. 9  Urchin-like ZnO nanowire built nanostructure.62 (a–e) SEM images of hierarchical ZnO urchin-like structures: (a) without and (b) with plasma etching treatment; (c–e) individual hollow urchin-like structures from a scratched part of the sample; scale bars: 2 μm; (f) effective absorption of the CdSe sensitized urchin-like ZnO film as a function of different nanowire lengths or different CdSe thicknesses; (g) J–V curves of cells based on urchin-like nanostructures with different nanowire lengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
In another work, Cheng et al. reported an urchin-like ordered hollow TiO2/ZnO nanorods nanostructure using a similar synthesis route, except a TiO2 ALD layer of 20 nm thick was pre-deposited on PS templates and a hydrothermal method was employed to grow ZnO nanorods.63 In this case, TiO2 was introduced to afford the further growth of ZnO nanorods and also active semiconductor materials for photoelectric applications. The as-prepared products showed a diameter of ∼1.8 μm with the nanorod branches of 20 nm in diameter and 200–300 nm in length. As expected, these highly branched spheres can provide a large surface area for sensitizer loading; moreover, the inner hollow TiO2 spheres and the outer ZnO nanorods can offer an enhanced light scattering ability. As a result, the CdS sensitized urchin-likeTiO2/ZnO photoanode generates a photocurrent of 3.6 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs Ag/AgCl, which was higher than that of either reference 2D TiO2/ZnO inverse opals or 1D ZnO nanowire arrays.
3. Macroporous composite photoanode materials for PEC cells
As an efficient alternative to photovoltaic conversion devices for solar energy conversion, PEC cells have attracted much attention in recent years due to their low cost, simple structure and processing technology.64,65 The key component of a PEC cell is the nano-structured photoanode which absorbs the incident photons to generate electron–hole pairs that are separated subsequently to induce the redox reaction. Therefore, similar to the photoanode for DSSCs, a promising photoanode for PEC cells should possess a large surface area for adequate active sites or high sensitizer loading, a wide solar spectral response and strong light scattering ability for good light harvesting efficiency, fast electron transport for photo-generated electron–hole pair separation and charge collection. Different structured photoanodes have been investigated for getting high PEC efficiency.66–72 Among the nano-structured photoanodes, hollow structured materials have attracted immense attention due to their inherent advantages of strong light scattering ability, fast mass transport property for good electrolyte permeation, etc. Various hollow structured photoanodes thereby were synthesized to meet this need, via the template method or non-template method.73–75 However, the highest efficiencies that have been reported so far still fall behind those of mesoporous nanoparticle films, mainly because of the low surface area of the macroporous structure. Construction of hierarchical macroporous materials is also an efficient solution.
Fan et al. first reported a ZnO nanowire coated TiO2 3D inverse opal (IO) hybrid photoanode for highly efficient PEC cells.24 The TiO2 IO/ZnO hybrid nanostructure was constructed by using TiO2 IO as the host template to grow ZnO nanowire brushes. The design concept of this composite structure aimed to enlarge the surface area of the macroporous photoanode to achieve higher sensitizer loading and larger contact interface areas with the electrolyte, and also enhance the light scattering effect. Fortunately, a satisfactory PEC efficiency was achieved. The 3D inverse opal nanostructure is a kind of hot photoanode material for photoelectric applications because it possesses a highly ordered pore structure and well interconnected shells, high porosity (∼75%), and the photonic crystal light localization effect.76–78 Using TiO2 IO as the host template, the entire inner macropores can be covered uniformly by the randomly aligned ZnO nanowires with a diameter of ∼30 nm. As shown in Fig. 10, the entire IO film is covered uniformly, and the TEM image shows that the crystalline ZnO nanowires grow directly and independently from the seed layer on the TiO2 macropores and no fusion of wires at their roots that commonly occurred during growth of ZnO nanowires can be observed. This structure made all the surface of nanowires being accessible. The quantitative analysis from the XRD characterization demonstrated that the CdS QDs loading in the nanobrush composite electrode was three times of that in the original TiO2 IO. In addition, these nanowires also induced strong diffuse reflectance, which in combination with the strong Mie scattering of the ordered macroporous structure contributed to a high light scattering ability. After sensitized by CdS QDs, the nanobrush composite photoanode showed lower diffuse reflection than CdS sensitized TiO2 IO, confirming a strong light harvesting efficiency resulting from the more sensitizer loading and effectively capturing the diffused light with minimum reflection losses. Therefore, the photocurrent density for the TiO2 IO/ZnO nanobrush composite photoanode based PEC cell was observed to be 6.2 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, superior to those of 3.6 and 2.9 mA cm−2 for the TiO2 IO and the ZnO nanowire array based cell, respectively (Fig. 10f). As confirmed by the IPCE test (Fig. 10g), the nanobrush composite photoanode based PEC cell showed the broadest photoresponse than the TiO2 IO and ZnO nanowire array, and the highest efficiency for the TiO2 IO/ZnO nanobrush composite structure was determined to be 60%, overwhelming the value of 30% for the referenced ZnO nanowire array due to the good light harvesting efficiency.
 Fig. 10  TiO2 IO/ZnO nanowire hybrid photoanode for PEC cells.24 (a and b) SEM images of the nanobrush coated hybrid structure; insets show the view of a single nanobrush structure, respectively; (c–e) TEM images of the nanobrush structure; (f) linear sweep voltammetry measurements of the CdS-sensitized photoanodes under illumination or in the dark; (g) IPCE spectra of different photoanodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Research by Fan et al. fully illustrated the indispensable role of large surface area and light scattering in improving the light harvesting efficiency of photoanodes. Combination of the hollow macroporous structure with 1D nanowire or nanorod branches to form the urchin-like composite structure was an efficient way to effectively integrate the functions of two kinds of materials which has been proven for DSSC applications.62 This structure also showed outstanding performance as a photoanode material for PEC applications.63,79–81 Kim et al. reported an urchin-like ZnO nanostructure for water splitting via omnidirectionally growing ZnO nanowires on the surfaces of the ZnO hemispheres.80 Compared with the planar ZnO thin film, the hollow hemisphere array and vertically aligned nanorod arrays, the 3D hierarchical urchin-like ZnO array structures showed higher light absorption efficiency and carrier collection efficiency due to their enhanced light trapping effect by multiple scattering, leading to high photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of 65% under UV wavelength and 0.48% under a solar simulator. Moreover, a conversion efficiency of 4.5% under a solar simulator can be achieved by sensitizing the hierarchical structure with CdS. Through a different synthesis route, hollow urchin-like tantalum-based oxide and (oxy)nitride nanostructures were fabricated for efficient visible-light water splitting.81 The synthesis method started with an in situ self-assembly wet-chemical process to prepare the urchin-like tantalum oxide (u-Ta2O5), followed by a thermal nitridation process to convert oxide to (oxy)nitride and finally nitride (Ta2O5/γ-TaON/β-TaON/Ta3N5). The formation of urchin-like Ta2O5 was critical to obtain hierarchical post-treatment products. As shown in Fig. 11a, according to the time-dependent morphology evolution, the growth of the urchin-like structure was started with etching of Ta powders forming Ta2O5 nanoparticles which further grew to nanorods and nanoneedles on the surface of the Ta powders. After the Ta was etched out, the urchin-like hollow structure was obtained. The surface of directly obtained Ta2O5 hollow spheres was assembled by numerous nanoneedles with an average diameter of ∼5 nm. After nitridation treatment at 850 °C, the morphology of the product did not change obviously except the nanoneedles became thicker with diameters up to 20–30 nm. Correspondingly, the BET surface area was reduced from 103.4 m2 g−1 for u-Ta2O5 to 58.2 m2 g−1 for γ-TaON/β-TaON and then increased to 78.2 m2 g−1 for u-Ta3N5, which can offer adequate available reaction active sites. As far as the photoelectrochemical activity of these hierarchical tantalum-based nanostructures was concerned, as shown in Fig. 11b, compared to commercial TaON (c-TaON), all urchin-like TaON samples exhibited a higher reproducible photocurrent. The activity of γ-TaON(u) was the highest with the photocurrent density being ∼2.5 times greater than that of c-TaON at 0.8 V vs. SCE, indicating that the larger surface area with combined effects of the crystal and electronic structures contributed to the enhanced photoelectric response.
 Fig. 11  Urchin-like Ta-based oxide and (oxy)nitride nanostructures.81 (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of hollow urchin-like Ta-based oxide and (oxy)nitride nanostructures; (b) photocurrent densities of different structured TaON photoanodes under visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to 1D/quai-1D and 2D nanobranches, nanoparticles have also been reported to decorate the macroporous structure to achieve a high surface area.82–84 For example, a gold nanoparticle-coated and surface-textured TiO2 IO (Au/st-TIO) structure was reported by Jang and co-workers to work as an efficient visible light photocatalyst for photoelectrochemical water splitting.82 This composite structure featured in the TiO2 nanoparticle decorated macroporous IO structure, so-called surface-textured TiO2 inverse opal (st-TIO), to achieve both adequate surface area and high photon trapping effects. Then Au nanoparticles were incorporated to further improve the visible light response via surface plasma resonance. As shown in Fig. 12a–c, after sol–gel treatment, TiO2 textures with a particle size of ∼7 nm were coated on the IO backbone, and the textures tend to aggregate to form mesoporous clusters. This hierarchical structure can effectively improve the active sites for photoelectric reaction and also big surface area for Au decoration of ∼30 nm in diameter. In fact, the BET surface area of TIO was increased from 33.9 m2 g−1 to 124.9 m2 g−1, which was even higher than the value (117 m2 g−1) of commercial P25 nanoparticles. This high value enables enhancing the absorption in the UV region compared to bare TIO. In addition, the photon trapping effect of macroporous TIO and enhanced surface plasma resonance in the Au–TiO2 interfaces also contributed to the light harvest in long wavelength range; as a result, the Au/st-TIO composite photoanode showed an improved light absorption in the entire wavelength region. When used as the photoanode for photoelectrochemical hydrogen generation (Fig. 12d), the st-TIO and Au/st-TIO composite structures exhibited maximum photocurrent densities of 0.58 mA cm−2 and 0.8 mA cm−2 at an applied bias of +0.5 V versus Ag/AgCl, which is 2.07 and 2.86 times higher than that of bare TIO, respectively, and both of them were also higher than that of the reference P25 sample (Fig. 12e).
 Fig. 12  Au nanoparticle-coated surface-textured TiO2 IO (Au/st-TIO) nanostructure.82 (a) SEM image of TiO2 IO networks; (b) SEM image of st-TIO networks with the TiO2 backbone coated with small TiO2 textures; inset is a magnified image; (c) SEM image of Au/st-TIO; inset is a magnified image; (d) schematic diagram showing the hydrogen generation mechanism of Au/st-TIO; (e) J–V curves of Au/P25 and Au/st-TIO structures under different conditions. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A similar concept was conducted by Reisner et al. to prepare efficient photoanodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting.83 In this case, the Al doped ZnO (AZO) inverse opal structure was used as the host template to grow BiVO4 nanoparticles, a visible-light-driven photocatalyst with a band gap of 2.4 eV. The macroporous AZO inverse opal (io-AZO) matrix was intended to provide a large interfacial surface area for catalyst loading and also address the photogenerated electron transport problems in BiVO4 photoanodes by providing a direct electron transport path, since the BiVO4 photoanode usually suffered from poor electron transfer and serious electron recombination. As illustrated in Fig. 13a, the io-AZO prepared by colloidal PS spheres opal template has a pore diameter of 300 nm. Therefore, the transport distance of photo-generated charge carrier from BiVO4 nanoparticles to the io-AZO network was therefore less than 150 nm, which was equal to or less than the charge carrier diffusion length in BiVO4 of approximately 100 to 200 nm. As a result, the photogenerated electrons can be readily collected by the conducting io-AZO network, and an enhanced PEC efficiency can be expected. Fig. 13b shows the linear voltammetry sweeps under back-side or front-side illumination of the electrodes. The controlled BiVO4 planar film showed big difference between the irradiation modes, while the BiVO4/io-AZO hetero-structure only showed 13% lower current density for the front-side illumination than the other illumination mode, indicating the efficient electron transport property in the hetero-structure photoanode. The transient photocurrent decay upon illumination measurement also showed that the transient decay time for the BiVO4/io-AZO hetero-structure electrode (4.6 s) was longer than that of the planar film (1.0 s), which was more than four times longer than the latter (Fig. 13c). Given the fact that a slower recombination rate gave rise to longer transient decay times, this result implied a lower charge carrier recombination rate in the hetero-structure photoanode.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the BiVO4/io-AZO heterostructure, where the conductive io-AZO network can readily collect the photogenerated electrons; (b) linear voltammetry sweeps under back-side or front-side illumination of the electrode. (c) Transient photocurrent decay that occurs immediately upon illumination at an applied potential of 1.0 V vs. RHE.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Conclusions and outlook
In conclusion, the hierarchical macroporous composite materials constructed by growing nano-building blocks onto the inner and outer surfaces of host macropores, show great advantages in working as photoanode materials for photoelectric conversions. A large surface area is essential to photoanode materials for solar energy conversion to allow for efficient sensitizer loading or provide adequate active sites. Although macroporous structured materials can reinforce the light harvesting efficiency through a strong light scattering effect, and also can facilitate the electrolyte permeation, the inherent low surface area inhibits their performances. In contrast, the extra small building blocks including 0D nanoparticles, 1D/quasi-1D nanorods, nanowires, and 2D nanosheets, etc., can not only effectively improve the surface area of composite materials, but also help in enhancing the light scattering ability of the macroporous structure. In addition, compared to nanoparticles, the 1D and 2D nanostructures can also supply with a good electron transport and electron collection properties. By virtue of these features, the macroporous composite materials show enhanced photon-electron conversion efficiency in DSSC, QDSSC and PEC cells, and will be a hot topic in solar energy conversion. It is also believed that the current macroporous composite materials should significantly enhance the photovoltaic performance of the recently well-developed perovskite solar cells.85–88
In addition to photoelectrical applications, the hierarchical macroporous materials also show potential in other energy applications, including LIBs,89,90 photocatalysis,91,92 and supercapacitor,93 and so on. For example, Lou et al. synthesized a series of hierarchical hollow materials via template or template-free methods, such as TiO2 or SnO2 nanosheet hollow spheres, which exhibited improved lithium storage capability as anode materials.94–96 Other hierarchical hollow cathode materials, such as MnO2,97 V2O5,98,99etc., were also reported. These hierarchical hollow structures can provide a large amount of active sites; their porous nature can also facilitate the electrolyte permeation and tolerate the volume change of Li+ insertion, leading to excellent performances. However, the nano-branches of these hierarchical hollow structures prepared via the assembly process are always on the surface of hollow spheres, the large inner void still exists, which is harmful to the total surface area. It is envisaged that the promise of this hierarchical composite structure can be further achieved when the inner surface of the hollow structure is effectively utilized by covering a secondary structure.
On the other hand, the improved performance of the hierarchical macroporous composite materials illustrates the significant role of secondary nano-branches in enhancing the surface area of materials. This concept can be adopted to improve the performance of 1D nanoarrays including nanowire, nanotube and nanorod arrays which also suffer from the low surface area.100–103 For example, we prepared a well-aligned TiO2 nanowire–nanosheet–nanorod hyperbranched array for high efficiency DSSCs.104 The secondary growth of nanosheets and third growth of nanorods on parent smooth nanowire arrays substantially enlarged the surface area, and a twofold increase of dye-loading was obtained compared with the parental counterpart; moreover, an enhanced light trapping and scattering ability was also achieved, leading to a high power conversion efficiency of 9.09%.
Evidently, the impressive performances can be achieved via engineering the properties of nanostructures by integrating suitable building blocks into the composite structure. Specially, hierarchical macroporous composite materials with the macroporous structure as the host coated with various 0–2D nanostructures as the guests have been recent research hot topics, which stimulate the great applications in Li ion batteries, photocatalysis, water splitting, supercapacitors, and solar cells. Although many constructive efforts have been made to design novel hierarchical macroporous composite materials so as to obtain excellent photoelectrochemical performances, work still lacks a comprehensive and deep understanding of the relationship between the structures and functionalities of composite materials, which is critical to achieve satisfactory functional materials.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial supports from the financial supports from the 973Program (2012CB821701), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91222201,51472274,21103236), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-11-0533), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the Program of the Pearl River Yong Talents of Science and Technology in Guangzhou (2014J2200025), the Program of Guangzhou Science and Technology (2014J4100016), and the NSF of Guangdong Province (S2013030013474).
Notes and references
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mihi, C. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5711–5714 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 CAS .
H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, X. Lai, J. E. Halpert, N. Yang, L. Yi, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Z. Tang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1046–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. He, B. X. Lei, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su, Y. P. Fang and D. B. Kuang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757–8761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Choi, D. H. Kim, H. S. Han, S. Shin, S. H. Hong and K. S. Hong, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 700–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kan, S. XinJian, K. Jung Kyu, L. Jae Sung and P. Jong Hyeok, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1939–1944 RSC .
X. Lin, F. Rong, X. Ji and D. Fu, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 59, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Deng, R. Yu, J. Chen, Z. Wang and X. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11894–11900 CAS .
X. Shi, K. Zhang, K. Shin, J. H. Moon, T.-W. Lee and J. H. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11717–11722 RSC .
J. Yu and X. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4902–4907 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160–1165 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, C. M. Hessel, H. Ren, R. Yu, Q. Jin, M. Yang, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 632–637 CAS .
J. Hu, M. Chen, X. Fang and L. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5472–5491 RSC .
X. Lai, J. E. Halpert and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604–5618 CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094–3103 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Ke, H. Y. Chen, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13274–13282 CAS .
E. S. Kwak, W. Lee, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1093–1099 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Kim and J. H. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5821–5825 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, H. L. Feng, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4816–4821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Karuturi, J. Luo, C. Cheng, L. Liu, L. T. Su, A. I. Y. Tok and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4157–4162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Ahn, D. J. Kim, W. S. Chi and J. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5037–5044 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15475–15489 RSC .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
Y. F. Wang, K. N. Li, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5940–5948 RSC .
J. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Han, S. Lee, H. Shin and H. Suk Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 546–550 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pang, H. Yang, C. X. Guo, J. Lu and C. M. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8832–8834 RSC .
X. Wu, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3565–3572 CAS .
J. Y. Liao, B. X. Lei, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5750–5757 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, B. X. Lei, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1352 Search PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, Y. F. Wang, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1892 Search PubMed .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jarzebski and J. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc. India, 1976, 123, C299–C310 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Y. T. J. Coutts, X. Li, W. P. Mulligan and X. J. Wu, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2000, 18, 2646–2660 Search PubMed .
B. Tan, E. Toman, Y. Li and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4162–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, H. S. Rao, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6437–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Labouchere, A. K. Chandiran, T. Moehl, H. Harms, S. Chavhan, R. Tena-Zaera, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel and N. Tetreault, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400217 Search PubMed .
W. Zhou, Z. Yin, Y. Du, X. Huang, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 140–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
Z. Yin, J. Zhu, Q. He, X. Cao, C. Tan, H. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300574 Search PubMed .
J. T. Park, D. K. Roh, R. Patel, E. Kim, D. Y. Ryu and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8521–8530 RSC .
S. H. Ahn, W. S. Chi, J. T. Park, J. K. Koh, D. K. Roh and J. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Huttner, H. Sai, U. Wiesner, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15839–15847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, J. Ge, Y. Sun, T. Zhang and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1832–1836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu and J. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 5860–5867 RSC .
W. Dapeng, Z. Feng, L. Jianming, D. Hui, L. Qi, J. Kai and X. Dongsheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11665–11671 RSC .
J. H. Pan, X. Z. Wang, Q. Huang, C. Shen, Z. Y. Koh, Q. Wang, A. Engel and D. W. Bahnemann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16827–16845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Yu, L. Qu, W. Guo and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Li, Y. F. Wang, H. S. Rao, W. Q. Wu, K. N. Li, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11865–11871 CAS .
J. Elias, M. Bechelany, I. Utke, R. Erni, D. Hosseini, J. Michler and L. Philippe, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 696–705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, H. Zhang, W. Ren, W. Dong and Y. Sun, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 779–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. A. Fujishima, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, L. Vayssieres, S. Shen, L. Guo, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang, B. R. Antoun and S. S. Mao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3889–3899 CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2005, 6, 24–28 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, Q. P. Luo, H. Y. Chen, X. Y. Yu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 1435–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, Z. Wang, Y. Du, X. Qi, Y. Huang, C. Xue and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5374–5378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, W. Li, J. Q. Wang, Y. Qu, Y. Yang, Y. Xie, K. F. Zhang, L. Wang, H. G. Fu and D. Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9280–9283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, X. Fu, L. Jing, P. Luan, Y. Feng and H. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300995 Search PubMed .
J. Zhou, G. H. Tian, Y. J. Chen, X. Y. Meng, Y. H. Shi, X. R. Cao, K. Pan and H. G. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2237–2239 RSC .
J. Cai, S. Li, Z. Li, J. Wang, Y. Ren and G. Qin, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 574, 421–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ao, J. Xu, D. Fu and C. Yuan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1812–1814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, X. Yin, A. Kvit and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2528–2535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Han, S. Lee, H. Shin and H. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 546–550 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Diguna, Q. Shen, J. Kobayashi and T. Toyoda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023116 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. A. Lee, N. M. Abrams, P. G. Hoertz, G. D. Barber, L. I. Halaoui and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14415–14421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ali, I. Shakir and D. J. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6474–6479 CAS .
H. Hoang Nhat, D. Nguyen Quoc, J. Kim and D. Kim, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5530–5538 RSC .
Z. Wang, J. Hou, C. Yang, S. Jiao, K. Huang and H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2134–2144 CAS .
K. Kwanghyun, P. Thiyagarajan, A. Hyo-Jin, I. K. Sun and J. Ji-Hyun, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6254–6260 RSC .
L. Zhang, E. Reisner and J. J. Baumberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1402–1408 CAS .
L. T. Su, S. K. Karuturi, J. Luo, L. Liu, X. Liu, J. Guo, T. C. Sum, R. Deng, H. J. Fan, X. Liu and A. I. Y. Tok, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N. G. Park and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 Search PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 487–492 CrossRef .
A. M. Cao, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4391–4395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. L. Wu, Y. G. Guo, Y. T. Zhong, X. Q. Cao, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1680–1686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Zou, X. Zou, T. Bai, Y. Liu, R. Gao, D. Wang and G. D. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7255–7262 RSC .
J. S. Chen, C. Chen, J. Liu, R. Xu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2631–2633 RSC .
S. Ding, T. Zhu, J. S. Chen, Z. Wang, C. Yuan and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6602–6606 RSC .
J. S. Chen, D. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8252–8254 RSC .
S. Ding and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3586–3588 RSC .
J. S. Chen, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9912–9924 RSC .
B. Li, G. Rong, Y. Xie, L. Huang and C. Feng, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6404–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Wu, A. Pan, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5669–5674 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pan, H. B. Wu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Rao, W. Q. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, H. Y. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Wu, H. S. Rao, H. L. Feng, H. Y. Chen, D.
B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 15–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chen, T.-L. Zhang, J. Fan, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9205–9211 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, Y. F. Xu, C. Y. Su and D. B. Kuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 644–649 CAS .
W. Q. Wu, H. L. Feng, H. S. Rao, Y. F. Xu, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3968 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Hong-Yan Chen	Hong-Yan Chen is an associate professor at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her Bachelor's degree in 2005 from Northeast Normal University and her PhD in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2010. Her current research interest lies in functional micro/nanomaterials, electrolyte materials for quasi-solid/solid state dye-sensitized solar cells, organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells.
Yang-Fan Xu	Yang-Fan Xu received his Bachelor's degree in Sun Yat-sen University in 2013 and now is a Masters degree candidate in Prof. Dai-Bin Kuang's group at School of chemistry and chemical engineering of Sun Yat-sen University. His current research interest focuses on the synthesis of hierarchical nanomaterials and their applications in photoelectrochemical cells.
Dai-Bin Kuang	Dai-Bin Kuang is a professor in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU). Dr Kuang received his PhD degree from Sun Yat-sen University (China) in 2003. He worked at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany) from 2003–2004 and also at Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (Switzerland) from 2004–2008 as a postdoctoral researcher. In 2008, he became a professor in SYSU. He has authored over 100 peer reviewed publications. His current research interest is in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in dye-sensitized solar cells, quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical cells.
Cheng-Yong Su	Cheng-Yong Su is the Cheung Kong Professor of Chemistry at Sun Yat-Sen University (SYSU). He obtained his PhD from Lanzhou University in 1996, joined Prof. Wolfgang Kaim's group at Stuttgart University in 2001 as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow, continued postdoctoral work with Prof. Hans-Conrad zur Loye at the University of South Carolina in 2002, and got promoted to full professor in SYSU in 2004. He is the author of over 200 peer reviewed publications and 6 book chapters. His current research interest is in the field of supramolecular coordination chemistry and materials, focusing on metal–organic materials, catalysis and nanoscience relevant to clean environment and energy.

Broader context
Photoelectric and photochemical conversions of solar energy are of great potential to meet the stringent energy demand in our modern life and society. Nanostructured photoelectrode materials are the key components of the promising photoelectricity and photochemistry devices such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs) and photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells. Multifunctional macroporous materials have attracted significant interest due to the fast mass transport, efficient electrolyte permeation, fast electron transport and strong light scattering effect. However, the inherent disadvantage of low specific surface area limits the further enhancement of photovoltaic performance. Hence, the design and synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite structures by growing nano-building blocks onto the inner and/or outer surfaces of macropore hosts have been the recent research hot topics. This review highlights recent advances in the synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite materials composed of zero-dimensional (0D) nanoparticles, 1D nanorods or nanowires, and 2D nanosheet guests grown on the macropore hosts and their applications in DSSCs, QDSSCs and PECs.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the two strategies for synthesis of hierarchical macroporous composite materials. (i) Two-step secondary growth procedure and (ii) one-step assembly growth procedure.	 

 	Fig. 2  Branched nanowire coated macroporous metal oxide photoanodes.23 (a–c) SEM and TEM images of MP-TiO2; (d–f) SEM and TEM images of MP-TiO2-TNW; (g) J–V curves and (h) EIS spectra of MP-TiO2, MP-TiO2-TNW, and P25 based cells; (i–k) schematic illumination of (i) rambutan-like TiO2–TiO2, (j) sunflower-like SnO2–TiO2, and (k) nest-like Zn2SnO4–TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 3  Multistacked 3D hyperbranched TiO2 photoanode.41 (a) Schematic map for the hyperbranched modification of the multilayered TiO2 photoanode; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of three-layer stacking of hyperbranched TiO2 photoanodes; (c) IPCE spectra and (d) electron transport time and electron lifetime as a function of light intensities for DSSCs fabricated using AHTNW + MPT + HTS, AHTNW + MPT + HTS-branches and TNP photoanode, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  ZnO nanowire coated ZnO IO composite photoanodes.42 (a) SEM image of the parent ZnO IO film; (b and c) cross-sectional SEM images of the single crystal ZnO NWs coated ZnO host prepared via the hydrothermal process; (d) dense TiO2 layer passivated composite film, inset is the schematic representation of the 3D host–guest composite photoanode; (e) J–V curves of different photoanode based cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  SnO2 hollow sphere-TiO2 nanosheet (SHS@TNS) double-shell nanostructures.25 (a and b) SEM and (c) TEM images of SHS@TNS double-shell nanostructures; (d) SEM image of 10 wt% SHS@TNS dispersed in the OM-TiO2 film; (e) J–V curves of solid-state DSSCs fabricated with various photoanodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  Hierarchical TiO2 hollow spheres prepared via one-step hydrothermal method.55 (a and b) SEM and (c–e) TEM images of the hollow structure assembled by anatase nanospindles; inset in (a) is the corresponding diameter distribution histogram. (f) The proposed growth mechanism for the evolution of hierarchical hollow spheres. Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Urchin-like mesoporous TiO2 hollow spheres (UMTHS) prepared via the targeted etching strategy.56 (a) TEM image of UMTHS with a yolk–shell structure; inset shows the sketch map of the nanostructure; (b) J–V curves of Z907 dye-sensitized UMTHS and P25 solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 8  Macroporous Zn2SnO4–ZnO nanorod composite photoelectrode for QDSSCs.61 (a and b) SEM images of the composite Zn2SnO4–ZnO film; (c) UV-vis diffused reflectance spectra and (d) IPCE curves of QDSSCs based on Zn2SnO4 and Zn2SnO4–ZnO photoanodes, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Urchin-like ZnO nanowire built nanostructure.62 (a–e) SEM images of hierarchical ZnO urchin-like structures: (a) without and (b) with plasma etching treatment; (c–e) individual hollow urchin-like structures from a scratched part of the sample; scale bars: 2 μm; (f) effective absorption of the CdSe sensitized urchin-like ZnO film as a function of different nanowire lengths or different CdSe thicknesses; (g) J–V curves of cells based on urchin-like nanostructures with different nanowire lengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  TiO2 IO/ZnO nanowire hybrid photoanode for PEC cells.24 (a and b) SEM images of the nanobrush coated hybrid structure; insets show the view of a single nanobrush structure, respectively; (c–e) TEM images of the nanobrush structure; (f) linear sweep voltammetry measurements of the CdS-sensitized photoanodes under illumination or in the dark; (g) IPCE spectra of different photoanodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 11  Urchin-like Ta-based oxide and (oxy)nitride nanostructures.81 (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of hollow urchin-like Ta-based oxide and (oxy)nitride nanostructures; (b) photocurrent densities of different structured TaON photoanodes under visible light irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Au nanoparticle-coated surface-textured TiO2 IO (Au/st-TIO) nanostructure.82 (a) SEM image of TiO2 IO networks; (b) SEM image of st-TIO networks with the TiO2 backbone coated with small TiO2 textures; inset is a magnified image; (c) SEM image of Au/st-TIO; inset is a magnified image; (d) schematic diagram showing the hydrogen generation mechanism of Au/st-TIO; (e) J–V curves of Au/P25 and Au/st-TIO structures under different conditions. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the BiVO4/io-AZO heterostructure, where the conductive io-AZO network can readily collect the photogenerated electrons; (b) linear voltammetry sweeps under back-side or front-side illumination of the electrode. (c) Transient photocurrent decay that occurs immediately upon illumination at an applied potential of 1.0 V vs. RHE.83 Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
