Surface plasmon polariton-induced hot carrier generation for photocatalysis   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR09280B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR09280B
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3010-3022Surface plasmon polariton-induced hot carrier generation for photocatalysis†

        
          
            Wonmi 
            Ahn
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel C. 
            Ratchford
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pehr E. 
            Pehrsson
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Blake S. 
            Simpkins
          
        
      *b
aNational Research Council Postdoctoral Associate, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA
bChemistry Division, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA. E-mail: blake.simpkins@nrl.navy.mil
Received 
      29th November 2016
    , Accepted 2nd February 2017First published on 3rd February 2017AbstractNon-radiative plasmon decay in noble metals generates highly energetic carriers under visible light irradiation, which opens new prospects in the fields of photocatalysis, photovoltaics, and photodetection. While localized surface plasmon-induced hot carrier generation occurs in diverse metal nanostructures, inhomogeneities typical of many metal–semiconductor plasmonic nanostructures hinder predictable control of photocarrier generation and therefore reproducible carrier-mediated photochemistry. Here, we generate traveling surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) at the interface between a noble metal/titanium dioxide (TiO2) heterostructure film and aqueous solution, enabling simultaneous optical and electrochemical interrogation of plasmon-mediated chemistry in a system whose resonance may be continuously tuned via the incident optical excitation angle. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first experimental demonstration of SPP-induced hot carrier generation for photocatalysis. We found electrochemical photovoltage and photocurrent responses as SPP-induced hot carriers drive both solution-based oxidation of methanol and the anodic half-reaction of photoelectrochemical water-splitting in sodium hydroxide solution. A strong excitation angle dependence and linear power dependence in the electrochemical photocurrent confirm that the photoelectrochemical reactions are SPP-driven. SPP-generated hot carrier chemistry was recorded on gold and silver and with two different excitation wavelengths, demonstrating potential for mapping resonant charge transfer processes with this technique. These results will provide the design criteria for a metal–semiconductor hybrid system with enhanced hot carrier generation and transport, which is important for the understanding and application of plasmon-induced photocatalysis.
Hot carrier generation by plasmon decay in photo-excited noble metal nanostructures extends the applicability of plasmonics beyond research which strictly focuses on its capability for subwavelength light localization.1,2 Upon absorption of a photon, surface plasmons – collective oscillations of free electrons – are created near the surface of noble metals and subsequently decay either radiatively, by re-emitting photons, or non-radiatively by a process such as Landau damping.3 The non-radiative decay of plasmons creates hot electrons and holes that may be used for chemical work.4,5 This process is referred to as plasmonic photocatalysis. The use of plasmon-induced hot carriers to provide chemical work was initially regarded as improbable because initial “hot” electrons, with energy comparable to the plasmon energy, only last for 10s of femtoseconds before decaying towards the Fermi level via, first, electron–electron scattering (on a 10–100 fs timescale), and then later by electron–phonon scattering (on a picosecond timescale).6–8 However, by interfacing metal nanostructures with a wide band-gap semiconductor such as TiO2, ZnO or WO3, hot carriers can be injected into the semiconductor, separated by the electric fields present at semiconductor surfaces, and survive long enough to drive chemistry.9,10 The use of plasmons to sensitize catalytic materials has significant practical implications as it enables room temperature photocatalysis using low intensity visible light, extending the use of some semiconductor photocatalysts that typically require high photon energy (UV range)11 and temperature for optimal reactivity.12 Such hybrid systems have been shown to enhance useful chemical reactions including water splitting,13 toxin degradation,14,15 CO2 reduction,16 and citrate oxidation.17,18
Research on plasmonic photocatalysis has already led to exciting schemes for plasmon-induced hot carrier generation. However, the most commonly used systems, metallic nanoparticle–semiconductor hybrid structures, rely on localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) supported on the nanoparticles.19–21 These systems often exhibit particle shape, size, and density variations,22 which result in a range of spectral resonances23 and field enhancements,24 and therefore, inhomogeneous hot-carrier generation. Theoretical studies verify that the hot carrier generation rate and energy distribution strongly depend on the particle size,25 shape,26 and local environment.25 The large structural variations present in most nanoparticle-based systems hinder the development of rigorous fundamental understanding of plasmon-induced hot carrier generation. Regular arrays of metal nanoantennas placed on top of a semiconductor layer27–29 comprise a well-controlled and deterministic system for hot carrier generation and study, but the SPR of an array is not tunable; continuous tunability of the SPR is important for evaluating the dependence of the hot carrier energy distribution and injection efficiency on the plasmon resonance energy and the alignment of hot carrier potentials with redox potentials of adsorbed molecules.
In this work, we show the applicability of a single broadband tunable structure, which supports traveling surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), for energy-tunable hot carrier generation and hot carrier-driven solution chemistry. SPPs launched at metal–dielectric interface via the Kretschmann geometry30 can be tuned in energy via illumination angle and span a wide range of the visible regime. Unlike nanoparticle-based systems where plasmonic LSPR fields are inhomogeneous, SPPs are homogeneous in-plane and generate uniform electric fields and hot carriers across the metal surface. These carriers can be injected into a thin layer of TiO2 grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) in order to extend carrier lifetime via charge separation and enhance catalytic reactions via catalytic states present on the TiO2 surface. We monitor hot carrier-driven photochemistry in a mixture of methanol and sodium hydroxide solution and a bare sodium hydroxide solution by interfacing the SPP system with an electrochemical cell and measure instantaneous photo-voltage and -current responses. Although theoretical research has been spurred by the potential of hot carrier generation through the decay of SPPs,26,31–33 and SPP photoexcitation of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of dye molecules has been demonstrated,34 experimental realization of a SPP-derived hot-carrier photocatalysis cell has not yet been achieved. This current work is the first experimental demonstration of SPP-induced energy-tunable hot carrier generation and its direct use for solution chemistry. Our results demonstrate the use of a flexible platform suitable for increasing basic understanding of plasmon-induced hot carrier generation and exhibit photon to reacted carrier conversion efficiencies of up to ∼0.01%, approaching those for nanoparticle-based systems. Furthermore, the resonance energy tunability of the SPP system extends the possibility of plasmon-induced direct charge injection for the activation of a targeted chemical bond23 without changing the geometry of the plasmonic nanostructures.
Results and discussion
Surface plasmon polariton supporting electrochemical cell: design and fabrication
In order to demonstrate SPP-induced hot carrier generation and photocatalysis, we fabricated an electrochemical cell that allows SPP resonance tuning by changing the incident excitation angle and simultaneous monitoring of the electrochemical response of the solution in contact with the metal–semiconductor surface (Fig. 1a–c). Our configuration essentially consists of a half-sphere lens coated with a gold (Au) or silver (Ag) film, mounted to an electrochemical cell. The Kretschmann geometry is utilized to launch SPPs at the metal surface. On top of the metal film is a thin layer of TiO2, grown by ALD, which serves to separate carriers and enhances photocatalytic reactions.35 We chose 10 nm as a target thickness for the TiO2 to ensure a continuous oxide layer,36 while limiting the SPP red-shift (Fig. S1†) and carrier relaxation, which both increase with greater TiO2 thickness.37 Compared with simulation, however, the thickness of the TiO2 films varies within a 10 ± 5 nm range, i.e. ∼7.5 nm on Au and ∼14 nm on Ag films due to slight thickness variations during ALD (Fig. S1†). As such, for a Cr/Au/TiO2 film (2/40/10 nm thickness) exposed to water, SPPs are supported in the spectral range of λ = 600–800 nm, with resonant excitation of a 785 nm SPP at ∼46°. Substituting Ag for Au shifts the resonant angle (dispersion curves found in Fig. S1†) and allows excitation of higher energy 532 nm SPPs, as will be discussed later. Fig. 1d shows a typical SPP dispersion curve for the Cr/Au/TiO2 films deposited on a half-ball lens in contact with water (measured shown as black and white contour plot and simulated response shown as red dotted line). This angle-dispersive response shows that a range of SPP resonances may be reached by simply altering the incident excitation angle. We used continuous wave (cw) lasers at 785 and 532 nm as our illumination sources. Continuous low-intensity illumination ensured constant generation of hot carriers from plasmon decay that can be used to drive solution chemistry.
 Fig. 1  A SPP-supporting electrochemical cell. A schematic diagram (a) and a photograph (b) of the plasmonic electrochemical cell. A metal (Cr/Au or Cr/Ag, 2/40 nm)/semiconductor (TiO2, 10 nm) film was deposited on the flat side of a high index half-ball lens (n = 2.0) and interfaced with a mixture of methanol (CH3OH, 0.5 M) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 0.1 M) solution. (c) A set-up for the electrochemical measurement. A Pt wire, Ag/AgCl electrode, and metal/semiconductor heterostructure act as a counter, reference and working electrode, respectively. A fiber coupled laser beam is impinged on the metal film through the half-sphere lens to launch SPPs at a tunable incident angle. (d) A SPP dispersion curve measured (black and white contour) for Cr/Au/TiO2 (2/40/10 nm) overlaid with a simulated dispersion curve (red dashed line) as a function of angle of incidence (θ, °) and wavelength (λ, nm). Reflectivity of light in the measured spectrum is scaled from 0 (black) to 1 (white). 
The metal/semiconductor heterostructure served as the working electrode in a three-electrode electrochemical cell that includes a Pt wire and Ag/AgCl electrode acting as the counter and reference electrodes, respectively (Fig. 1c). Each film was exposed to a mixture of methanol (0.5 M) and sodium hydroxide (0.1 M) solution, and open-circuit potential and photocurrent responses were recorded while we scanned the excitation angle through their respective resonance positions. Methanol oxidation was selected as a model reaction for our experiment because of its scientific38 and commercial importance for biodiesel39 and fuel cell40 applications. All electrochemical experiments utilized the methanol:sodium hydroxide solution except where we have noted the use of methanol-free sodium hydroxide solution (0.1 M) as a test bed for the oxygen evolution half-reaction of photocatalytic water splitting. For details pertaining to the fabrication of the electrochemical cell, electrochemical measurement, and SPP dispersion curve measurement, please refer to the Methods section.
Angular dependence of photovoltage verifies plasmon-driven process
Photoelectrochemical responses of the metal/semiconductor heterostructures were measured via chronopotentiometry and chronoamperometry, both under illumination and in the dark, which can differentiate photon-driven and dark electrochemical reactions of chemical species at the working electrode. Fig. 2 shows the measured open-circuit potential of a (a) Au/TiO2 and (c) Ag/TiO2 working electrode under intermittent illumination from a 785 nm laser (red shades) while the incident angle of light was tuned from θ = 39.6–55.6° and 40.7–56.7°, respectively. The resonant angle of excitation for 785 nm (‘SPP on angle’, θSPP, hereafter) was measured to be 45.6 and 46.7° for the two systems. Both Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2 exhibited negative photovoltages of a few hundred microvolts, indicating that negative charges are accumulated on those working electrode surfaces (i.e., positive charges are lost to the solution). This corresponds to hot holes driving an oxidation reaction in solution.
 Fig. 2  Dependence of photovoltage on the incident angle of light. Open-circuit voltage versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 and (c) Ag/TiO2. Angle of incident laser (λ = 785 nm; red shaded regions) was systematically varied with a 2° interval and SPP on-angles (θSPP) are indicated. Photovoltage values were measured by taking the voltage difference between equilibrated maximum and minimum at each angle, whose final equilibrated potential values were obtained by fitting the curves to a double-exponential function (see Fig. S2† for data processing details), and plotted against reflectivity measured at 785 nm for (b) Au/TiO2 and (d) Ag/TiO2. 
Of particular interest in Fig. 2a and c is the magnitude of the potential shifts occurring at different angles of excitation. Qualitatively, the photovoltage magnitude was maximized near the angle of resonant excitation of 785 nm SPPs (i.e., θSPP) for each metal. The angle-dependent photovoltage was then directly compared to the angle-dependent reflectivity measured at 785 nm, and we found it closely followed the spectral profile of the SPP resonances (Fig. 2b and d). Here the photovoltages were measured by taking the voltage difference between equilibrated potential values at each incident angle, whose final equilibrated potential values were obtained by fitting the curves to a double-exponential function (see Fig. S2† for data processing details). A slight shift between the incident angle producing the strongest photovoltage and θSPP of the SPP resonance spectrum may be attributable to the angular width of the incident laser beam convoluted with the asymmetric SPP resonance, which is broadened to higher angles.
Angle and power-dependent electrochemical current indicating hot carrier chemistry
While the angle-dependent photovoltages indicate a SPP-driven process, it does not, on its own, prove hot-carrier generation via SPP decay; plasmon-induced heating would also be consistent with the findings above (i.e., maximized at the SPP resonance angle). Nor does the photovoltage response unambiguously indicate an electrochemical reaction, since shifts of open-circuit potential can result from a simple capacitive rearrangement of charge at the working electrode surface. Therefore, we next investigated the electrochemical photocurrent. A non-zero steady-state current would verify a chemical reaction at the surface of the metal/TiO2 working electrode, and the power-dependent response can distinguish between the mechanisms of plasmonic heating and reactive carrier generation via SPP decay.
First, photocurrents were measured versus open-circuit potential under small biases of 0.15 (Au/TiO2) and 0.20 V (Ag/TiO2) with 785 nm laser illumination and recorded while θ was scanned from 40 to 56° (Fig. 3a and c). The area of laser illumination on the working electrode was estimated to be 2.5 × 106 μm2 for all current measurements. Both Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2 exhibited anodic photocurrent (consistent with the sign of the photovoltage presented earlier and the transfer of holes from the working electrode into the solution) upon laser irradiation (red shades). The photoresponse was characterized by an immediate current spike, attributed to an initial capacitive charging–discharging,17 followed by a relaxation to a steady-state value (∼10's of pA), which was taken as the steady-state photocurrent (indicated with arrows; see Fig. S2† for data processing details). Once again, a strong angle dependence was observed in the photocurrent response (Fig. 3a and c), and a correspondence was obtained between the reflectivity minimum, θSPP, and the maximum photocurrent (Fig. 3b and d). Together, these findings confirm that the resonant excitation of SPPs enhances both photovoltage and photocurrent responses, and that this response consists of holes transported from the metal/TiO2 working electrode to the solution, where oxidative chemistry occurs.
 Fig. 3  Dependence of photocurrent on the incident angle of light. Photocurrent versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 and (c) Ag/TiO2 with 785 nm laser irradiation (red shaded regions; an area of laser illumination was estimated to be 2.5 × 106 μm2 for all current measurements) whose incident angle was tuned with a 2° interval. Photocurrent values were measured by taking the current difference between equilibrated maximum and minimum currents at each angle without inclusion of capacitive spikes (see indicated regions in (a) and (c), and Fig. S2† for data processing details), then plotted along with angle-dependent reflectivity at 785 nm for (b) Au/TiO2 and (d) Ag/TiO2. Small positive biases of 0.15 and 0.20 V were applied to Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2, respectively. 
In the next step, we validated that the plasmon-driven electrochemical responses were indeed due to photo-carrier generation via SPP decay and not to a plasmon-mediated heating effect that could result in either thermal generation of carriers or energy transfer to nearby adsorbates and chemical reactions.41Fig. 4 shows photocurrent versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 and (c) Ag/TiO2 as a function of illumination power of 785 nm laser. The incident angle was fixed at θSPP and biases of 0.15 and 0.20 V were applied, respectively. Power intensities were varied from 3.9 × 101 to 5.0 × 103 W m−2 for Au/TiO2 and from 1.6 × 102 to 1.3 × 104 W m−2 for Ag/TiO2 by positioning neutral density filters in the light path. As shown in Fig. 4a and c photocurrents monotonically increased with increasing laser power, and as evidenced in Fig. 4b and d, increased either linearly or weakly sublinearly. A linear or sublinear dependence of photocurrent on the incident laser power rules out the possibility that the observed electrochemical responses were a thermally-driven process, as thermal effects would follow an exponential Arrhenius functionality.42 Moreover, considering the low intensity illumination used in the current work (maximum laser intensities of 5.0 × 103 W m−2 (5 times solar intensity) and 1.3 × 104 W m−2 (13 times solar intensity), for Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2, respectively), plasmonic heating is unlikely. A two-fold enhancement in reaction rate has been observed for an illumination intensity of ∼107 W m−2 (104 times solar intensity),43 which is 760 times our highest intensity. Furthermore, a temperature increase of <1 °C is predicted for our system under the conditions used (calculation shown in ESI†), which is insignificant compared to the reported temperatures used for plasmonic heating-induced chemical reactions, which range from 408 to 760 K.44,45 While the low-intensity illumination of our experiment suggests that the currents are generated by decay of the SPP into excited carriers, the observed power dependence strongly implicates this mechanism.46–48
 Fig. 4  Linear dependence of photocurrent on the source intensity. Photocurrent versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 (bias 0.15 V) and (c) Ag/TiO2 (bias 0.20 V) at θSPP. The shaded red areas indicate irradiation of 785 nm laser light with laser power intensities labelled (in W m−2). Power-dependent photocurrent values were plotted for each system in (b) and (d) and show linear dependence (dashed lines are linear fit to the photocurrent). 
We also demonstrate photocatalytic water splitting under visible light illumination (Fig. S3†). The Ag/TiO2 structure exhibits photovoltages and photocurrents, consistent with oxidative chemistry in aqueous hydroxide (0.1 M NaOH) alone. In aqueous base, the anodic half-reaction for water-splitting is49 2OH− ↔ H2O + ½O2 + 2e−.(1)
A strong angle dependence of both photocurrent (Fig. S3a and b†) and voltage (Fig. S3c†) of the Ag/TiO2 electrode proves again that the chemical reaction is plasmon-driven with hot holes driving an OH− oxidation reaction in solution.
Energy tunable hot carrier generation
The preceding results show that carriers generated via SPP decay can drive electrochemical oxidation. However, the signals and efficiencies (quantified below) were quite small. Conversion of SPPs into hot carriers has been predicted to be significantly less efficient than from localized surface plasmons, which exhibit enhanced surface scattering, greater availability of momentum, k, values, and shorter escape distances.7,50 However, the strength of using SPPs is their broad and continuous energy tunability. In a single metal film sample, such as those used in this work, one may generate plasmons with a select energy from a range that spans most of the visible simply by varying incident angle (see Fig. 1d and S1†). This energy tunability was demonstrated by examining another excitation source, a 532 nm laser, and applying it to the Ag/TiO2 system. As mentioned earlier, the Au/TiO2 films support SPPs in the spectral range of λ = 600–800 nm (Fig. 1d), but the Ag/TiO2 films support SPPs in the wider spectral range of λ = 520–800 nm, allowing resonant excitation of both 785 and 532 nm SPPs at 46.7° and 64.9°, respectively. Consistent with the results for 785 nm excitation (reproduced as red spectra in Fig. 5a and b), we observed photovoltage and photocurrent responses that tracked the angular dependence of the SPP resonance, at this new wavelength (green spectra in Fig. 5a and b), as well as power dependencies consistent with hot carrier-driven electrochemistry (Fig. 5c and d). The sign of the photovoltage and current indicated holes injected into solution just as described above for 785 nm illumination. Combining the results for 785 and 532 nm illumination into the plots of Fig. 5a and b directly shows that a single plasmonic structure can be tuned between two different resonances simply by altering excitation source and incident angle. This capability to generate SPPs spanning a range of energies and convert them into reactive carriers comprises a unique tool with which to study carrier energy-dependent processes such as resonant transfer of charge from a plasmonic metal to an available orbital in a proximal molecule.23
 Fig. 5  Energy tunable hot carrier generation for photocatalysis. (a) Photovoltage and (b) photocurrent values (filled circle) plotted with SPP resonances (solid line) at 785 (red) and 532 nm (green) for Ag/TiO2. Broader angle-dependent photovoltage and photocurrent responses observed with 785 nm illumination than with 532 nm illumination are due to a larger angular breadth of 785 nm laser than that of 532 nm laser. Reflectivity response is truncated to angles <∼67° due to apparatus limitations, but a simulated reflectivity response for 532 nm has been added as a black dashed line. (c, d) Photocurrents measured from Ag/TiO2 with increasing 532 nm laser power. 
The Ag/TiO2 system response under either 785 or 532 nm illumination was qualitatively similar. However, the efficiency was quite different. We calculated the photon to reactive carrier conversion efficiency as the ratio of the measured photocurrent (in units of electrons/second) to the number of photons incident on the half-sphere per second. This approach provided overall system efficiencies, which are presented in Table 1 (detailed example calculations presented in ESI†). We found that under 785 nm illumination, both the Au- and Ag-based systems exhibited efficiencies in the mid 10−7% but under the higher excitation energy provided by the 532 nm laser, the efficiency of the Ag/TiO2 system increased by 4 orders of magnitude to ∼0.005–0.01% approaching that observed for nanoparticle-based plasmonic catalysis.51–53 Theoretical efficiencies of 0.04% were estimated for a metal/semiconductor Schottky-barrier diode having a 100 nm thick metal (EF = 5.5 eV) at the maximum photon energy of 3.0 eV for TiO2.54 A calculated maximum efficiency of 1.48% was reported from a SPP-excited metal–insulator–metal geometry under assumptions of uniform distribution of hot carrier energy, no escape cone restriction and no carrier reflection.55 Again, we emphasize here that the opportunity presented by SPP-generated hot carriers resides in their broad tunability rather than efficiency, but under realistic working assumptions, our system approaches the theoretical efficiencies obtained under generous assumptions.
Table 1 Photon-to-hot carrier conversion efficiency




Working electrode
Laser (nm)
Efficiency (%)




Ag/TiO2
785
1.2 × 10−7–7.0 × 10−7


532
4.7 × 10−3–1.1 × 10−2


Au/TiO2
785
2.9 × 10−7–3.1 × 10−7




Mechanism for hot carrier-driven oxidation
The direct correlation between the photovoltage and SPP resonance spectrum and the power-dependence, all presented above, indicate that the electrochemical response is a SPP-derived photo-excited carrier phenomenon. The sign of the electrochemical response indicates holes moving from the metal/TiO2 working electrode to solution (or, equivalently, electrons moving from solution to the TiO2/metal) to perform OH− oxidation. This is the case for both the MeOH:NaOH and NaOH-only solutions since OH− oxidation is the first step in methanol oxidation.49 We postulate that holes generated from plasmon decay move from the metal or TiO2 to the solution where they react with adsorbed OH− and that, naturally, these carriers are created more abundantly at an angle resonant with SPP generation. We will discuss the possible charge transfer mechanisms with the aid of Fig. 6. The energies in this diagram are roughly to scale and show the work functions of Ag and TiO2 and the chemical reduction potential all relative to a normal hydrogen reference. Methanol oxidation involves the formation of intermediates, but we show OH− oxidation only in Fig. 6 since this is the first step in the methanol oxidation.38 Directly comparing the work functions of Ag and TiO2 suggests an ideal electron barrier of 0.6 eV, which is consistent with the electrochemically measured conduction band position for TiO2 at pH 7.56 The distribution of the generated hot carriers is not simple,32,33,50 however, the maximum energy a plasmon-generated carrier may attain equals the plasmon energy (i.e., the hottest hot hole will be hν below the Fermi level and hottest hot electron hν above the Fermi level). This scale is pictured for hot holes excited with 532 and 785 nm light (i.e., 2.3 and 1.6 eV) as green and red arrows in the Ag, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Band diagram for discussion of hot carrier transport. Results indicate holes from metal make their way to drive OH− oxidation. Detailed mechanisms are discussed in main text. Work functions of Ag and TiO2 and the chemical reduction potential for OH− oxidation (first step in the methanol oxidation) are all relative to a normal hydrogen reference. Hot holes excited with 532 and 785 nm light (i.e., 2.3 and 1.6 eV) are represented as green and red arrows in the Ag, respectively. An electron barrier of 0.6 eV is formed between Ag and TiO2. 
There are several possible mechanisms for charge transfer: (1) direct or trap-assisted tunneling of holes from the metal to solution, (2) diffusive transport of carriers through the TiO2 either via gap states or the valence band, and (3) plasmons decaying directly into promoted carriers from TiO2 defect states into the TiO2 conduction band. We now consider these in order. For the first process, direct tunneling from the metal to the solution is extraordinarily weak, with even the most generous assumptions resulting in a calculated tunneling probability of ∼10−22 (see ESI†). However, it is known that anatase TiO2 can host considerable distributions of trap states57,58 and, although transmission spectra for our TiO2 films showed no trap state absorption (Fig. S4†), photoluminescence excited with sub-bandgap light did produce weak but observable emission (Fig. S5†) verifying their presence. The approximate position and range of these traps is pictured as shaded white bands within the bandgap of TiO2. These traps may assist in tunneling making this mechanism possible but quantitative predictions of this process are beyond the scope of this study.
The second charge transfer process to consider is charge diffusion through the TiO2via either thermionic emission or trap states. Thermionic emission is reasonable to consider since the barrier facing the hottest holes under 2.3 eV excitation would be ∼0.3 eV. To test for the thermionic process, we carried out bias-dependent photocurrent measurements on Ag/TiO2 films under 785 and 532 nm illumination at their respective resonance angles. In Fig. 7, current–voltage characteristics for Ag/TiO2 working electrode with 785 (a, c) and 532 nm (b, d) laser irradiation are presented. Although the intensity of the 532 nm laser was ∼120 times lower than that of the 785 nm laser, the photocurrent was 17–37 times higher. Focusing on the higher energy 532 nm excitation, while the dark current exhibits exponential behavior (blue symbols), the photocurrent (difference between current under illumination and dark current, shown as green symbols) is approximately linear over the potential range examined. We interpret this as indicating that hot holes do not follow the exponential thermionic path but instead follow a simple resistive course. This response is consistent with hole diffusion through the TiO2 to the solution either via trap states or, if the predicted energy band alignment is incorrect, through the valence band. The voltage-dependent response under 785 nm illumination appears somewhat linear as well (see an inset of Fig. 7c) though the signal magnitude was much smaller and, therefore, less convincing.
 Fig. 7  Current versus forward bias applied to a Ag/TiO2 working electrode. Currents were measured with the irradiation of (a) 785 and (b) 532 nm laser (shaded regions; light current), as well as without light irradiation (dark current). Biases were varied 0–0.35 and 0–0.45 V for respective current measurement, and laser intensity was 500 W m−2 and 4 W m−2 for 785 and 532 nm laser, respectively. (c, d) Light- (red), dark- (blue), and photo-current (green circle) were plotted as a function of the applied bias (V). An inset in (c) shows a linear current–voltage response under 785 nm illumination. Photocurrent was calculated by taking the difference between light and dark current. 
The linear dependence of photocurrent with applied bias is consistent with diffusive transport of hot holes originating in the metal, but it is also consistent with the third mechanism we consider, photo-generated carriers originating from trap states in the TiO2. Though the photon energies used were not high enough to promote band to band transitions in the TiO2, decaying plasmons could excite electrons from trap states to the conduction band. The resulting trap state hole could migrate to the surface for oxidative chemistry while the conduction band electron traveled through the potentiometer circuit to the counter electrode. This would be similar to the charge transfer process seen by Gholamrezaie, et al.,34 for dye molecules assembled on a metal film. In considering this mechanism, we look closely at the power dependent photocurrent results for 785 nm (Fig. 4d) and 532 nm illumination (Fig. 5d). The power dependence under lower photon energy illumination appears weakly sublinear while that for higher photon energy excitation is clearly linear. This observed difference, coupled with the fact that the photo-oxidation efficiencies are vastly different under the two illumination conditions, suggests that there may be two different mechanism at work. Specifically, photocurrent generated under low energy excitation occurs through excitation of traps within the TiO2, which would lead to a sublinear power dependence due to trap depletion with increased illumination intensity. In contrast, the photocurrent under higher photon energy illumination is due to carriers generated in the metal and traveling, without barrier, to the solution for reaction. Although the data presented here cannot not rigorously distinguish between these processes, all of our data are fully consistent with this interpretation. We have further attempted to identify the origin of the photocarriers with a metal-free control experiment (i.e., only TiO2 on glass). The complete lack of photo-response for this system, shown in Fig. S6,† upon (a) 785 nm and (b) 532 nm laser irradiation makes it tempting to claim that no carriers originate in the TiO2. However, SPPs exhibit greater field intensity and enhanced absorption due to their lateral propagation direction compared to normal incident free space light, making this control experiment inadequate. Therefore, our results suggest that decay of 1.6 eV SPPs directly excites traps within the TiO2 while 2.3 eV SPPs decay into hot carriers in the metal which diffuse through the TiO2.
Conclusion
We created metal/semiconductor heterostructures on a half-sphere lens to generate reactive carriers through SPP decay and used them to drive solution-based oxidation of methanol and the anodic half-reaction of water-splitting. Our system facilitates a simultaneous optical and electrochemical interrogation of plasmon-mediated chemistry with SPP resonance that can be tuned across a broad optical range. We demonstrated a direct correlation between photovoltage and SPP resonance, confirming that the OH− oxidation is a plasmon-driven process, and further verified that this reaction is driven by photoexcited holes rather than a plasmonic heating effect, through angle and power dependent photocurrent measurements. Photon to reacted carrier conversion efficiencies as high as ∼0.01% were attained in our system. A broad spectral tunability of our SPP-supporting electrochemical cell provides new opportunities for the plasmon-induced direct charge injection, which requires a resonance tuning for the activation of a chemical bond of interest. A unique feature of SPP-induced energy tunability of our system may further increase the understanding of underlying mechanisms in plasmonic photocatalysis, revealing the dependence of the hot carrier energy distribution and injection efficiency on the plasmon resonance energy and the alignment of hot carrier potentials with redox potentials of adsorbed molecules in the future photocatalytic systems.
Methods
Materials
0.5 M methanol (JT Baker) and 0.1 M sodium hydroxide (Sigma-Aldrich) were prepared with deionized water. High index half-ball lenses (S-LAH79 Ohara, n = 2.0, diameter = 10.0 mm) were obtained from Edmund Optics and used without further cleaning. Glass cover slides were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Fisherfinest™ Premium Cover Glasses) and cleaned by sonication in a separate bath of acetone and isopropyl alcohol before use, and dried with N2 gas.
Fabrication of a SPP-supporting electrochemical cell
In order to launch SPPs, Cr/Au (or Cr/Ag) films with a thickness of 2/40 nm were deposited at deposition rates of 1.0/2.0 Å s−1, respectively, on a flat side of the half-ball lens using an electron beam evaporator (Temescal Model FC-2000). A Cr layer improved adhesion of the Au film to the half-ball lens without causing a significant broadening or shift of SPP resonances. After the metal deposition, O2 plasma cleaning was performed for 1 min to remove organic residues from the metal surface and improve adhesion of TiO2 to the metal film during atomic layer deposition (ALD System, Oxford Instruments). We used TDMAT and O2 as precursors to grow a layer of TiO2 on top of the metal film at 300 °C by alternating each precursor pulse and N2 gas purge steps. The film thickness was controlled by the number of ALD cycles and monitored by an ellipsometer (J. A. Wollam Co. Inc., EC-400, M-2000X) that is equipped with the ALD system. A reference glass cover slide deposited with 2/40 nm thick Cr/Au (or Cr/Ag) films was used to confirm the growth rate of TiO2 film and a typical TiO2 deposition rate of 0.54 Å per ALD cycle was obtained. TiO2 crystallinity was characterized by taking transmission (Craic Technologies, AX10) and Raman (WITec alpha300 excited by a 532 nm laser) spectra of the prepared TiO2 film, and both agree that anatase crystalline TiO2 films were obtained (Fig. S4†). Atomic force microscope images were taken from Cypher S (Asylum Research, Oxford Instruments). Fig. S7† shows that TiO2 serves to separate carriers and enhances photocatalytic reactions: while Au/TiO2 exhibited negative photovoltages of ∼0.109 mV in (a), the Au only system showed positive, and much smaller, photovoltages of only ∼0.025 mV on top of the decreasing background photovoltage signal in (b).
Electrochemical measurement
The metal and semiconductor deposited half-ball lens was then assembled in a home-made photocatalysis cell (Fig. 1b) and a potentiostat (Gamry Instruments) was used with Physical Electrochemistry Software (PHE 200TM) to measure instantaneous open-circuit potential photovoltages and chronoamperometry electrochemical reactions in a SPP-mediated photocatalysis cell. A Pt wire, Ag/AgCl electrode, and metal–semiconductor acted as a counter, reference and working electrode, respectively (Fig. 1c). Before photo-induced electrochemical measurements, electrodes were immersed in CH3OH/NaOH solution for ∼1–2 hours under N2 bubbling while open-circuit potential photovoltages were equilibrated. Once equilibrated, a fiber coupled laser beam was impinged on the metal film through a half-sphere lens to launch SPPs with tunable incident angle of light. We used two different lasers as light sources, 785 (OEM Laser Systems) and 532 nm (Blue Sky Research FiberTec). The photocatalysis cell was mounted on a home-built SPP rig, which allows for light to be incident upon the half-sphere at a chosen angle (BGM80 goniometer) with 0.001° accuracy. A fixed collection optic collected the reflected light over a ∼20° angular range, which determines the maximum range for a single angular scan. This system is controlled with a LabVIEW program.
SPP dispersion curve measurement
Reflectivity spectra at varying incident angle of white light (Ocean Optics, Halogen, HL-2000-FHSA) were recorded through an imaging spectrometer (Andor Shamrock) and a high-resolution imaging CCD (Andor, iXonEM). These spectra were compiled using a custom-written Igor program (Igor Pro. v6.3.7.2.) to plot SPP dispersion curves as a function of wavelength versus angle. SPP dispersion curves were normalized by a white light spectrum that was taken from the light reflected by a silver mirror.
Simulation of SPP dispersion curve
Reflectivity as a function of incident angle was calculated using a transfer matrix approach. Each layer of the multilayer (glass, Cr, Au or Ag, TiO2, water) was defined by its thickness and dielectric function. The dielectric function of the half-ball lens was taken as lossless with a spectrally-independent refractive index of 2. The spectrally-dependent dielectric function of Cr and TiO2 were taken from the WVASE software package.59 The optical constants for Au and Ag were gratefully taken from ab initio calculations.60
Acknowledgements
This research was performed while the author, Wonmi Ahn, held a National Research Council (NRC) Research Associateship award at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. The authors acknowledge I. Vurgaftman and J. J. Pietron for insightful comments and discussion, P. Narang for Au and Ag optical constants, and G. Beadie for guidance on developing transfer matrix calculations. The work was supported by the Office of Naval Research and the U. S. Naval Research Laboratory.
References
D. K. Gramotnev and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, Plasmonics beyond the Diffraction Limit, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Plasmonics for Extreme Light Concentration and Manipulation, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H.-J. Freund, Photochemistry on Metal Nanoparticles, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301–4320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, A Review of Surface Plasmon Resonance-Enhanced Photocatalysis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Plasmon-Induced Hot Carrier Science and Technology, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, Ultrafast Plasmon-Induced Electron Transfer from Gold Nanodots into TiO2 Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Narang, R. Sundararaman and H. A. Atwater, Plasmonic Hot Carrier Dynamics in Solid-State and Chemical Systems for Energy Conversion, Nanophotonics, 2016, 5, 96–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Plasmon-Induced Hot-Electron Generation at Nanoparticle/Metal-Oxide Interfaces for Photovoltaic and Photocatalytic Devices, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Plasmonic-Metal Nanostructures for Efficient Conversion of Solar to Chemical Energy, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Panayotov, P. A. DeSario, J. J. Pietron, T. H. Brintlinger, L. C. Szymczak, D. R. Rolison and J. R. Morris, Ultraviolet and Visible Photochemistry of Methanol at 3D Mesoporous Networks: TiO2 and Au–TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15035–15049 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical Photolysis of Water at a Semiconductor Electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Westrich, K. A. Dahlberg, M. Kaviany and J. W. Schwank, High-Temperature Photocatalytic Ethylene Oxidation over TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 16537–16543 CAS .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, An Autonomous Photosynthetic Device in which All Charge Carriers Derive from Surface Plasmons, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, T. Peng, X. Hu, Y. Nie, X. Zhou, J. Qu and H. He, Plasmon-Induced Photodegradation of Toxic Pollutants with Ag-AgI/Al2O3 under Visible-Light Irradiation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 857–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alvaro, B. Cojocaru, A. A. Ismail, N. Petrea, B. Ferrer, F. A. Harraz, V. I. Parvulescu and H. García, Visible-Light Photocatalytic Activity of Gold Nanoparticles Supported on Template-Synthesized Mesoporous Titania for the Decontamination of the Chemical Warfare Agent Soman, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. He, H. Y. Fang, J. M. Chen and S. Song, Highly Efficient and Stable Ag/AgIO3 Particles for Photocatalytic Reduction of CO2 under Visible Light, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10540–10544 RSC .
E. S. Thrall, A. P. Steinberg, X. Wu and L. E. Brus, The Role of Photon Energy and Semiconductor Substrate in the Plasmon-Meditated Photooxidation of Citrate by Silver Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26238–26247 CAS .
X. Wu, E. S. Thrall, H. Liu, M. Steigerwald and L. Brus, Plasmon Induced Photovoltage and Charge Separation in Citrate-Stabilized Gold Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12896–12899 CAS .
S. Mubeen, G. Hernandez-Sosa, D. Moses, J. Lee and M. Moskovits, Plasmonic Photosensitization of a Wide Band Gap Semiconductor: Converting Plasmons to Charge Carriers, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5548–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, A Plasmonic Photocatalyst Consisting of Silver Nanoparticles Embedded in Titanium Dioxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Marchuk and K. A. Willets, Localized Surface Plasmons and Hot Electrons, Chem. Phys. Perspective, 2014, 445, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, Influence of Excitation Wavelength (UV or Visible Light) on the Photocatalytic Activity on Titania Containing Gold Nanoparticles for the Generation of Hydrogen or Oxygen from Water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Boerigter, R. Campana, M. Morabito and S. Linic, Evidence and Implications of Direct Charge Excitation as the Dominant Mechanism in Plasmon-Mediated Photocatalysis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Plasmon Resonant Enhancement of Photocatalytic Water Splitting Under Visible Illumination, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manjavacas, J. G. Liu, V. Kulkarni and P. Nordlander, Plasmon-Induced Hot Carriers in Metallic Nanoparticles, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7630–7638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and A. O. Govorov, Optical Generation of Hot Plasmonic Carriers in Metal Nanocrystals: The Effects of Shape and Field Enhancement, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7606–7614 CAS .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Photodetection with Active Optical Antennas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chalabi, D. Schoen and M. L. Brongersma, Hot-Electron Photodetection with a Plasmonic Nanostripe Antenna, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1374–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ng, S. Dligatch, H. Amekura, T. J. Davis and D. E. Gómez, Waveguide-Plasmon Polariton Enhanced Photochemistry, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1582–1590 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kretschmann and H. Raether, Radiative Decay of Non Radiative Surface Plasmons Excited by Light, Z. Naturforsch., 1968, 23, 2135–2136 CAS .
M. Bernardi, J. Mustafa, J. B. Neaton and S. G. Louie, Theory and Computation of Hot Carriers Generated by Surface Plasmon Polaritons in Noble Metals, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Theoretical Predictions for Hot-Carrier Generation from Surface Plasmon Decay, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Nonradiative Plasmon Decay and Hot Carrier Dynamics: Effects of Phonons, Surfaces, and Geometry, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 957–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gholamrezaie, R. K. Vijayaraghavan and S. C. J. Meskers, Photovoltaic Action in a Self-Assembled Monolayer of Hemicyanine Dyes on Gold from Dissociation of Surface Plasmons, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 183303 CrossRef .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Understanding TiO2 Photocatalysis: Mechanisms and Materials, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Puurunen and W. Vandervorst, Island Growth as a Growth Model in Atomic Layer Deposition: A Phenomenological Model, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 7686–7695 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tada and M. Tanaka, Dependence of TiO2 Photocatalytic Activity upon
Its Film Thickness, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 360–364 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iwasita, Electrocatalysis of Methanol Oxidation, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3663–3674 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Yu, K. Scott, R. W. Reeve, L. Yang and R. G. Allen, Characterisation of Platinised Ti Mesh Electrodes using Electrochemical Methods: Methanol Oxidation in Sodium Hydroxide Solutions, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 2443–2452 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wasmus and A. Küver, Methanol Oxidation and Direct Methanol Fuel Cells: A Selective Review, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 461, 14–31 CrossRef CAS .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Thermo-Plasmonics: Using Metallic Nanostructures as Nano-Sources of Heat, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 171–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonn, S. Funk, Ch. Hess, D. N. Denzler, C. Stampfl, M. Scheffler, M. Wolf and G. Ertl, Phonon- Versus Electron-Mediated Desorption and Oxidation of CO on Ru(0001), Science, 1999, 285, 1042–1045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, Direct Photocatalysis by Plasmonic Nanostructures, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Adleman, D. A. Boyd, D. G. Goodwin and D. Psaltis, Heterogeneous Catalysis Mediated by Plasmon Heating, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4417–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fasciani, C. J. Bueno Alejo, M. Grenier, J. C. Netto-Ferreira and J. C. Scaiano, High-Temperature Organic Reactions at Room Temperature using Plasmon Excitation: Decomposition of Dicumyl Peroxide, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 204–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher, H. Xin and S. Linic, Visible-Light-Enhanced Catalytic Oxidation Reactions on Plasmonic Silver Nanostructures, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467–472 CAS .
J.-M. Herrmann, Heterogeneous Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and Applications to the Removal of Various Types of Aqueous Pollutants, Catal. Today, 1999, 53, 115–129 CrossRef CAS .
I. Goykhman, B. Desiatov, J. Khurgin, J. Shappir and U. Levy, Locally Oxidized Silicon Surface-Plasmon Schottky Detector for Telecom Regime, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2219–2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. DeSario, J. J. Pietron, D. E. DeVantier, T. H. Brintlinger, R. M. Stroud and D. R. Rolison, Plasmonic Enhancement of Visible-Light Water Splitting with Au-TiO2 Composite Aerogels, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8073–8083 RSC .
A. O. Govorov, H. Zhang, H. V. Demir and Y. K. Gun'ko, Photogeneration of Hot Plasmonic Electrons with Metal Nanocrystals: Quantum Description and Potential Applications, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 85–101 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa, P. Zhang, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Au/TiO2 Superstructure-Based Plasmonic Photocatalysts Exhibiting Efficient Charge Separation and Unprecedented Activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 458–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ng, J. J. Cadusch, S. Dligatch, A. Roberts, T. J. Davis, P. Mulvaney and D. E. Gómez, Hot Carrier Extraction with Plasmonic Broadband Absorbers, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4704–4711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Mechanisms and Applications of Plasmon-Induced Charge Separation at TiO2 Films Loaded with Gold Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Leenheer, P. Narang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Solar Energy Conversion via Hot Electron Internal Photoemission in Metallic Nanostructures: Efficiency Estimates, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 134301 CrossRef .
F. Wang and N. A. Melosh, Plasmonic Energy Collection through Hot Carrier Extraction, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5426–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. I. Micic, Y. Zhang, K. R. Cromack, A. D. Trifunac and M. C. Thurnauer, Trapped Holes on Titania
Colloids Studied by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 7277–7283 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Knorr, C. C. Mercado and J. L. McHale, Trap-State Distributions and Carrier Transport in Pure and Mixed-Phase TiO2: Influence of Contacting Solvent and Interphasial Electron Transfer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12786–12794 CAS .
L. V. Saraf, S. I. Patil, S. B. Ogale, S. R. Sainkar and S. T. Kshirsager, Synthesis of Nanophase TiO2 by Ion Beam Sputtering and Cold Condensation Technique, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 1998, 12, 2635–2647 CrossRef CAS .

WVASE Software Package, J.A. Woollam Co., Inc Search PubMed .

          A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Ab Initio Phonon Coupling and Optical Response of Hot Electrons in Plasmonic Metals, arXiv:1602.00625v2 2016 [physics.comp-ph].

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr09280bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A SPP-supporting electrochemical cell. A schematic diagram (a) and a photograph (b) of the plasmonic electrochemical cell. A metal (Cr/Au or Cr/Ag, 2/40 nm)/semiconductor (TiO2, 10 nm) film was deposited on the flat side of a high index half-ball lens (n = 2.0) and interfaced with a mixture of methanol (CH3OH, 0.5 M) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 0.1 M) solution. (c) A set-up for the electrochemical measurement. A Pt wire, Ag/AgCl electrode, and metal/semiconductor heterostructure act as a counter, reference and working electrode, respectively. A fiber coupled laser beam is impinged on the metal film through the half-sphere lens to launch SPPs at a tunable incident angle. (d) A SPP dispersion curve measured (black and white contour) for Cr/Au/TiO2 (2/40/10 nm) overlaid with a simulated dispersion curve (red dashed line) as a function of angle of incidence (θ, °) and wavelength (λ, nm). Reflectivity of light in the measured spectrum is scaled from 0 (black) to 1 (white).	 

 	Fig. 2  Dependence of photovoltage on the incident angle of light. Open-circuit voltage versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 and (c) Ag/TiO2. Angle of incident laser (λ = 785 nm; red shaded regions) was systematically varied with a 2° interval and SPP on-angles (θSPP) are indicated. Photovoltage values were measured by taking the voltage difference between equilibrated maximum and minimum at each angle, whose final equilibrated potential values were obtained by fitting the curves to a double-exponential function (see Fig. S2† for data processing details), and plotted against reflectivity measured at 785 nm for (b) Au/TiO2 and (d) Ag/TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 3  Dependence of photocurrent on the incident angle of light. Photocurrent versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 and (c) Ag/TiO2 with 785 nm laser irradiation (red shaded regions; an area of laser illumination was estimated to be 2.5 × 106 μm2 for all current measurements) whose incident angle was tuned with a 2° interval. Photocurrent values were measured by taking the current difference between equilibrated maximum and minimum currents at each angle without inclusion of capacitive spikes (see indicated regions in (a) and (c), and Fig. S2† for data processing details), then plotted along with angle-dependent reflectivity at 785 nm for (b) Au/TiO2 and (d) Ag/TiO2. Small positive biases of 0.15 and 0.20 V were applied to Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Linear dependence of photocurrent on the source intensity. Photocurrent versus time profiles of (a) Au/TiO2 (bias 0.15 V) and (c) Ag/TiO2 (bias 0.20 V) at θSPP. The shaded red areas indicate irradiation of 785 nm laser light with laser power intensities labelled (in W m−2). Power-dependent photocurrent values were plotted for each system in (b) and (d) and show linear dependence (dashed lines are linear fit to the photocurrent).	 
2OH− ↔ H2O + ½O2 + 2e−.	(1)

 	Fig. 5  Energy tunable hot carrier generation for photocatalysis. (a) Photovoltage and (b) photocurrent values (filled circle) plotted with SPP resonances (solid line) at 785 (red) and 532 nm (green) for Ag/TiO2. Broader angle-dependent photovoltage and photocurrent responses observed with 785 nm illumination than with 532 nm illumination are due to a larger angular breadth of 785 nm laser than that of 532 nm laser. Reflectivity response is truncated to angles <∼67° due to apparatus limitations, but a simulated reflectivity response for 532 nm has been added as a black dashed line. (c, d) Photocurrents measured from Ag/TiO2 with increasing 532 nm laser power.	 

Ag/TiO2	785	1.2 × 10−7–7.0 × 10−7
532	4.7 × 10−3–1.1 × 10−2
Au/TiO2	785	2.9 × 10−7–3.1 × 10−7

 	Fig. 6  Band diagram for discussion of hot carrier transport. Results indicate holes from metal make their way to drive OH− oxidation. Detailed mechanisms are discussed in main text. Work functions of Ag and TiO2 and the chemical reduction potential for OH− oxidation (first step in the methanol oxidation) are all relative to a normal hydrogen reference. Hot holes excited with 532 and 785 nm light (i.e., 2.3 and 1.6 eV) are represented as green and red arrows in the Ag, respectively. An electron barrier of 0.6 eV is formed between Ag and TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 7  Current versus forward bias applied to a Ag/TiO2 working electrode. Currents were measured with the irradiation of (a) 785 and (b) 532 nm laser (shaded regions; light current), as well as without light irradiation (dark current). Biases were varied 0–0.35 and 0–0.45 V for respective current measurement, and laser intensity was 500 W m−2 and 4 W m−2 for 785 and 532 nm laser, respectively. (c, d) Light- (red), dark- (blue), and photo-current (green circle) were plotted as a function of the applied bias (V). An inset in (c) shows a linear current–voltage response under 785 nm illumination. Photocurrent was calculated by taking the difference between light and dark current.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6nr09280b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
