Methanol fuel production from solar-assisted supercritical water gasification of algae: a techno-economic annual optimisation  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE00394A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00394A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 4913-4931Methanol fuel production from solar-assisted supercritical water gasification of algae: a techno-economic annual optimisation

        
          
            Alireza 
            Rahbari
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Alec 
            Shirazi
          
        
       and 

        
          
            John 
            Pye
          
        
      *
      School of Engineering, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia. E-mail: alireza.rahbari@anu.edu.au; john.pye@anu.edu.au
Received 
      17th March 2021
    , Accepted 14th August 2021First published on 16th August 2021AbstractMethanol synthesis offers a relatively fast transient response compared to other fuel synthesis technologies—a promising downstream alternative for solar-derived syngas. However, many non-intuitive design choices must be analysed to achieve an optimal techno-economic performance of this technology in the presence of variable solar energy. Using a combination of steady-state Aspen flowsheeting, dynamic simulation and techno-economic optimisation, this work presents the techno-economic performance of methanol production through solar-thermal supercritical water gasification (SCWG) of algae with three alternative methane reforming options. The syngas is conditioned for downstream use through either CO2 dumping or H2 addition. In a multi-objective optimisation, solar multiple and storage capacity are varied to minimise the levelised cost of fuel (LCOF) and maximise the capacity factor of the system. Results indicate that steam methane reforming (SMR) with CO2 dumping gives a minimum LCOF of ∼1.6 AUD per L. The lowest-cost reforming option changes if the cost of renewable H2 drops. Achieving high capacity factor (>98%) configurations requires large storage and causes LCOF to increase 4–5×. Scaling up the solar-thermal collector to 700 MWth yields LCOF reductions of ∼20% relative to the baseline 50 MWth scale, beyond which optical losses outweigh scaling benefits. Overall, the choice of methanol for downstream fuel synthesis appears to be beneficial due to its faster ramping and overall increased output compared to Fischer–Tropsch synthesis.
1. Introduction
The need to eliminate net anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions over the next four decades, as mandated by the Paris Agreement, and supported by numerous zero-emissions pledges from major countries in recent months, is a compelling reason for research on future renewable energy sources.1 Biomass has a significant potential role to play as a future energy source addressing the above concerns. However, low energy content and decentralised production are the main barriers of biomass. These challenges can be resolved by processing biomass into more energy-dense liquid transport fuels.2 Among the available candidates, methanol is considered a promising choice due to its advanced technology and well established infrastructure. The growing demand for methanol originates from its usage either as a chemical feedstock or a blending or complete substitute fuel in the transportation sector. As a marine fuel, Korea and Japan celebrated the first methanol-burning ship in 2016.3 Methanol is also used at large scale in a wide range of industries (most significantly for polymers, resins, paints and solvents).4,5 It is rich in hydrogen and can be utilised as a substitute for H2 in fuel cells or as a storage medium for H2. Based on the recent review paper by Tountas et al.,6 if methanol can be generated as efficiently as dimethyl ether from solar-assisted syngas, it is more appealing due to its commercial applications. Currently, methanol is mainly produced from natural gas—exhibiting 75% of the market—with high GHG emissions and the selling price of 0.41–0.51 AUD per L (354–450 EUR per tonne) in 2014 (ref. 7) and 0.44–0.51 AUD per L (430–490 USD per tonne) in 2020.8 Due to increasingly strong limits on CO2 emissions, the renewable and environmentally friendly production of methanol warrants further research and development. There are two pathways for green methanol production: (i) using CO2 obtained via direct air capture or from biogenic flue gases (for example from biomass combustion),† with additional hydrogen from water electrolysis, or (ii) using carbon derived from chemical processing of biomass.
A great deal of research has been conducted to explore different features of methanol production via the first pathway, involving hydrogenation of CO2 using renewable H2. This concept was first introduced by Olah et al.9 in the “methanol economy” concept. In continuation of this idea, a pilot plant of methanol production from this route—using CO2 emitted from factories and H2 obtained from water photolysis—was built in Osaka in 2008 with a capacity of 100 tonne methanol per year.10 Thereafter, a first large-pilot-plant scale “Carbon Recycling International” started its operation in Iceland in 2011 (ref. 11) with 5 million litres of methanol per year. Pérez-Fortes et al.12 cited a Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 6–7 for this integrated technology. Anicic et al.13 compared two techniques for methanol production from CO2: (i) direct synthesis of methanol from hydrogenation of CO2 and (ii) reverse water gas shift (RWGS) to convert CO2 to CO which is then hydrogenated to methanol. The first approach showed higher economic and energy efficiency.13 As such, Simões Van-Dal and Bouallou14 designed a system-level model in Aspen Plus based on the direct methanol synthesis with the absence of techno-economic analysis (TEA). The adopted model required 1.6 tonne of CO2 per tonne of produced methanol.‡
Pérez-Fortes et al.12 used the same model proposed by Simões Van-Dal and Bouallou14 and assessed the economical and environmental aspects of a plant with 440 ktmethanol per year representative size. From the techno-economic standpoint, the minimum selling price of methanol was 0.83 AUD per L (723.6 EUR per tonne) which was 1.8 times higher than the market price in 2014. The designed plant could be cost-effective if the cost of H2 was decreased by 2.13 times or the CO2 price was at least 323 AUD per tonne (222 EUR per tonne). In a recent research, Kim et al.15 evaluated the economic viability of green methanol generation using a combination of solar-powered thermochemical splitting of CO2 into CO, followed by a water gas shift (WGS) reaction—aiming for H2 production from CO—and a methanol synthesis unit. They estimated the methanol production cost of 1.26 AUD per L (1.22 USD per kg) using this pathway with an overall solar-to-methanol energy efficiency of 7.1%.
In a work by Cifre and Badr,16 the performance of two scenarios including CO2 recovery from either flue gases or atmosphere and biomass gasification using renewable H2 was compared in terms of energy conversion efficiency and production cost. It turned out that the biomass process was more efficient and cheaper than the CO2-based methanol pathway. Recently, Molino et al.17 discussed the biomass gasification technologies for biofuel production. The authors reported that the company, BioMCN, launched in 2017 produced 413 ktmethanol per year from wood chips. The TRL of this route was rated at 8 (i.e. first-of-a-kind commercial system).
In view of this discovery, research has been dedicated to the second pathway for green methanol production, where biomass acts as the carbon source. A system-level model presented by Mignard and Pritchard18 enhanced the conversion efficiency of biomass to biomethanol by up to 130% through adding H2 from a renewable source to adjust the H2:CO molar ratio in syngas for downstream methanol synthesis compared to the “traditional” technology, removing CO2 to condition the syngas. From the economic point of view, this process could compete with the “traditional” technology if the cost of electricity from any renewable source was lower than 6.4 cAUD per kW per h (0.044 EUR per kW per h). To facilitate the comparison between different scenarios for methanol production on the same basis of assumptions, Clausen et al.19 designed six configurations of the methanol plant out of which four of them were completely renewable. Based on the current technological availability, the “traditional” plant indicated the lowest methanol (i.e. 0.31 AUD per L (0.21 EUR per L)) followed by the combined gasification and electrolysis at 0.36 AUD per L (0.25 EUR per L) and hydrogenation of CO2 0.64 AUD per L (0.44 EUR per L)—assuming the renewable electricity price at 5.8 cAUD per kW per h (40 EUR per MW per h). Subsequent research was conducted by Hannula20 to compare the production cost of natural gas, gasoline and methanol from different reforming pathways including thermochemical (biomass gasification), electrochemical (CO2 hydrogenation) and hybrid (combination of thermochemical and electrochemical). The levelised cost of fuel (LCOF) for natural gas, methanol and gasoline was in the range of 0.41–0.84 AUD per L (18–37 EUR per GJ), 0.48–0.91 AUD per L (21–40 EUR per GJ) and 0.52–1.1 AUD per L (23–48 EUR per GJ), respectively. Among different production routes, thermochemical plant had the lowest cost followed by hybrid and electrochemical plants.
Despite theses promising findings regarding the second (biomass-based) pathways for methanol production, the prospect of using advanced biomass feedstocks such as microalgae as the source for biomethanol production is rarely considered in the literature. In its early stage of technological and economic assessment, microalgae demonstrate a great potential for carbon-neutral biofuel production21 and mitigation of GHG emissions, due to the rapid growth rate of algae,22 its higher productivity per unit area23 and its ability to be grown in salt water ponds on non-arable land.24 From the techno-economic standpoint, the minimum selling price of algae for 20% ash-free dry weight was reported to be 593–715 AUD per dry ton for 10-acre and 514–550 AUD per dry ton for 50-acre pond designs.25 A current review by Cheah et al.26 focused on biological CO2 capture using microalgae-based biorefinery (BRY). An important part of developing such a technology is the economical aspects to create a sustainable system. Wiesberg et al.27 compared the performance of microalgae-based BRY through gasification and CO2 hydrogenation route for methanol production. The life cycle assessment methodology proved that the BRY method had higher CO2 capture efficiency (73%) compared to amine-based process (48%). The authors stated that none of these options is currently feasible from a techno-economic standpoint. However, the long term economic overview by Wiesberg et al.27 indicated that the cumulative cash flow of a microalgae biorefinery outperformed that of carbon capture technology from 2029 onward, for the plants located in Brazil.
Apart from the type of feedstock, the gasification route plays a crucial role in conversion efficiency of biomass to syngas which is then supplied to the downstream methanol synthesis process. Conventional gasification, requires the mixing of high-temperature low-pressure steam with dry biomass feedstock.28 However, supercritical water gasification (SCWG), at high pressure and relatively moderate temperatures, can be applied directly with wet biomass.29 In supercritical conditions, water acts as a non-polar compound and dissolves organic substances, lowering char/tar formation, and improving CH4 and H2 yields.§ Ortiz et al.31 studied a process for methanol production through the SCWG process without undertaking the TEA evaluation. They optimised the design parameters to maximise the process efficiency subjected to an energy self-sufficiency constraint.
Unlike the former SCWG process, in which a portion of feedstock is combusted to attain the self-sufficient process (similar to the work by Ortiz et al.31), use of concentrated solar thermal (CST) as the driving heat source offers a renewable and carbon-free replacement to traditional routes with higher energy efficiency and syngas yield from the process. Experimental studies have been conducted at Xi'an Jiaotong University32–34 to investigate the performance of CST-SCWG in a plug-flow tubular cavity reactor. The fabricated gasifier contained a preheated section filled with pressurised water and a reaction zone for gasifying the feedstock in order to enhance the carbon gasification efficiency of the system. Further research from the same group35,36 reported a 73.1% thermal efficiency for the pilot solar-SCWG facility established in Ningxia with a peak CST of 163 kW. Watson et al.37 presented a simple one-dimensional model of the solar-powered SCWG reactor. The proposed model did not evaluate the design constraints of solar-SCWG reactor as well as the heat losses incurred in the reactor. Taking this model as a starting point, Venkataraman et al.38 modelled a 20 MWth solar SCWG reactor with focus on the challenges associated with the material constraints as well as the limitations in heat transfer in a supercritical medium. Further improvement would entail considering the kinetics of algae-fed SCWG and the non-uniform solar-flux distribution. Rahbari et al.39 developed a system-level design of algae-to-syngas via solar-SCWG-reformer. Three different reforming alternatives considered were steam methane reforming (SMR), auto-thermal reforming (ATR) and partial oxidation/dry reforming (PO/DR). The significant variation was the amount of supplemental H2 from photovoltaic electrolytic water-splitting (PV-electrolysis) to balance the H2:CO ratio for downstream applications. The authors suggested a detailed TEA assessment to evaluate the economic feasibility of these reforming alternatives.
A main challenge in the methanol production from solar-derived syngas lies in the dynamic modelling of the process-chain—tackling the disturbances occurring at upstream solar-gasification unit due to solar variability. There is a paucity of literature in this direction. Abrol and Hilton40 presented a predictive controller model for methanol production assuming varied inlet syngas flow rate probably achieved from the upstream solar-biomass-gasification process. However, the proposed model considered only the methanol synthesis for arbitrary vary syngas supply. There was no model of realistic solar-driven syngas plant and no model for the techno-economic assessment of the whole process. Subsequent research in this area by Bai et al.41 was concerned with the simultaneous generation of biomethanol and power using solar-driven biomass thermal gasification. The levelised energy cost of methanol was in the range of ∼0.45–0.54 AUD per L (∼440–520 USD per tonne), given a biomass price of 52.5 AUD per tonne (40 USD per tonne). The authors assumed 2000 hours of full productive operation per year and did not account for the dynamic performance of the plant, operational control states and ramp times of the gasification/methanol units.
To the best of authors' knowledge, there is no work in the literature on the system-level dynamic behaviour of solar-driven algae-to-methanol system. As such, this research presents a reliable dynamic model to account for the transient performance pattern and techno-economic feasibility of algae-CST-SCWG process for methanol production. An integrated system-level dynamic model of the system—including a steady-state model of the solar-SCWG gasification unit with three methane reforming options (i.e. SMR, ATR, PO/DR), syngas conditioning via CO2 dumping and H2 addition, a downstream methanol synthesis unit, syngas storage to smooth variations in solar transients on the downstream plant operation and control strategies implemented for the sub-components in the system—is described in Section 2. The method of TEA evaluation via LCOF—the most appropriate metric for solar fuel systems—is described in Section 3 to screen the feasibility of the proposed solar fuel systems. Section 4 describes the method of multi-objective optimisation considering LCOF and capacity factor as the two objective functions and solar multiple and storage hours as the two design variables. Section 5 discusses the results of steady-state Aspen models, annual system-level dynamic simulation, multi-objective optimisation, sensitivity analysis over the key economic variables and methanol reactor ramping time, and economies of scale. Section 6 summarises the key findings of this research.
2. Process description
This study aims to analyse the system-level dynamic performance and techno-economic optimisation of solar-SCWG-reforming of algae to produce carbon-neutral methanol fuel. To accommodate this, steady-state physical models of the gasification and methanol synthesis plants are developed in Aspen Plus software. To evaluate the dynamic performance of the proposed solar fuel plant, an energy-based system-level model is developed in OpenModelica using design and off-design performance curves extracted from the gasification and methanol units along with start-up and shut-down transients, modelled as fixed-duration periods. The major dynamics at the process level relate to the daily and seasonal variability of the solar resource, and the filling and emptying of the syngas storage unit which couples the two chemical processes.

Fig. 1 depicts the proposed solar fuel system for methanol production. Algae is modelled using an approximate chemical formula C7H12O3, based on analysis reported in literature.42 The heat of formation for algae is obtained from empirical correlation reported by. Eboibi et al.43 The nitrogen and phosphorous contents in algae are not considered due to the complexity of including these elements (and all of the associated side-reactions) in Aspen simulation. The SCWG-reforming of algae produces syngas with a H2:CO/CO2 ratio lower than the desired value for downstream methanol synthesis process (i.e. 2–2.1). As such, two scenarios are evaluated here for obtaining a methanol-synthesis-compatible H2:CO/CO2 ratio: (i) discarding a fraction of the biogenic carbon from algae in the form of CO2 (i.e.Fig. 1a), and (ii) supplying the make-up renewable-derived H2 from photovoltaic electrolysis (i.e.Fig. 1b). As seen in these figures, the plant consists of the solar field, the receiver (i.e. SCWG-reformer reactors), the syngas storage, and the methanol synthesis unit. As shown in Fig. 1, a weather data set for a given location is imported by the weather component. The SolarPILOT tool44 is used to calculate the optical efficiency of the 50 MWth solar field layout which is then incorporated in the heliostat model in the form of lookup table. The heliostats concentrate the solar radiation onto the receiver mounted on the top of a tower. The collected high-temperature heat is then used to drive the endothermic reactions taking place at the SCWG and reforming reactors. There is a syngas storage, acting as a buffer, in-between the SCWG and methanol synthesis units. Syngas dispatch from the tank to the methanol synthesis unit is controlled via a dispatch controller unit. Daily and nightly schedules are defined according to the solar irradiance availability in 24 hour-ahead perfect forecasting to reduce the number of methanol reactor restarts. The dispatched syngas from controller is directed into the methanol synthesis unit for methanol production. In the following sections, the performance of each unit is described.
 Fig. 1  The schematic diagram of methanol production via solar-driven SCWG: (a) syngas conditioning via CO2 dumping, (b) syngas conditioning via make-up carbon-free-H2 supply from a PV-driven electrolysis plant. 
2.1 Weather data
The weather component reads the typical meteorological year (TMY3 format) weather data—listing the meteorological data and solar radiation at hourly interval—for Geraldton, a coastal city in Western Australia, over a year period.45 This site was chosen due to the high annual average of solar resource (i.e. 2415 kW h m−2a) and easy access to sea water, which facilitates a high microalgae growth rate and ensures a continuous supply of the feedstock next to the plant. The weather component calculates the sun position angles relative to the earth-centre coordinates for each time step according to the formula proposed by Duffie and Beckman,46 and can be connected to any time-varying subcomponents within the proposed solar fuel system.
2.2 Heliostats and field layout
A central tower solar concentrator is assumed, due to the higher concentration ratios and the capability of withstanding higher pressures, consisting of sun-tracking heliostats which reflect the solar rays onto a central receiver. The generic solar field with a fixed size of 50 MWth solar-thermal heat input is designed using SolarPILOT software.44 A cavity receiver with a polar field is selected here due to the higher thermal efficiency. The field layout is then optimised based on the design variables including the performance of each heliostat on the annual basis, the number and position of heliostats in the solar field, the size of the receiver, the total height of the tower and the maximum allowable heat flux. The optimised solar field layout covers ∼7 hectares of land with 1872 square heliostats, each of them with ∼37 m2 reflective surface, aiming the rays at the receiver placed in a tower of 100 m height at a reference DNI of 1000 W m−2. A lookup table including the yearly optical efficiencies of the heliostat field relative to the solar elevation and azimuth angles is then created using SolarPILOT software and linked to the integrated plant model in OpenModelica.
2.3 Solar-SCWG-reformer flowsheet
The solar-SCWG-reformer plant is based on the earlier work of Rahbari et al.39 In this unit, the algae solution with 15.2 wt% is fed into the SCWG reactor (modelled by stoichiometric and equilibrium reactors in Aspen Plus) running at 24 MPa and 605 °C. It is assumed that 10% of the char stream is left unreacted, which is separated from the products. The yield gases from the gasifier are mainly composed of CO2, CH4 and H2 which are then converted into to the appropriate composition of synthesis gases including CO, CO2 and H2via the reformer reactor. Various reforming techniques explored in this research are steam methane reforming (SMR), autothermal reforming (ATR) and partial oxidation/dry reforming (PO/DR). These reformer options are modelled as an equilibrium reactor operating at 3 bar¶ and 1050 °C.47 The inlet streams into both the SCWG and reformer reactors are preheated by means of a high-level optimised heat exchanger network to maximise the heat recovery throughout the system. In order to design a heat exchanger network, the overall energy/exergy performance of SCWG-reforming process was iteratively calculated for various heat exchanger operating conditions, until an optimum design of the heat exchanger network was obtained using pinch analysis. This was followed by a detailed parametric study to obtain the optimised baseline configurations for each scenario. Further information about the optimisation process as well as operating parameters of the SCWG-reforming loop can be found in the previous work of the co-authors.39
In the earlier work of Rahbari et al.,47 the solar-syngas was integrated with the downstream FT unit for drop-in fuel production. In that case, the H2:CO ratio of 2.1:1 was used to condition the syngas for this application. However, in case of methanol synthesis route, the module M—defined as  with the optimal value of 2–2.1 (ref. 31)—is used to characterise the composition of inlet syngas into the methanol unit. Higher reaction rates and higher single-pass syngas conversion can be achieved at this ratio of module M. A small amount of CO2 in the syngas (i.e. up to 8% on a molar basis) acts as a promoter of the primary reaction and improves the catalyst activity. The gasification of algae with the chemical formula of C7H12O3 is carbon rich (M < 2–2.1). The syngas conditioning is attained through either partial capture of CO2 or supplementary H2 addition from PV-electrolysis. To achieve an optimised configuration, a detailed sensitivity analysis has been conducted to maximise the syngas yield and exergy efficiency of the system. Further details can be found in Rahbari et al.39
2.4 Syngas storage
The syngas produced from the solar-SCWG-reforming unit is stored at 3 bar and 75 °C in horizontal cylindrical pressure vessels with ellipsoidal heads. The heat loss and pressure drop in the storage tank are neglected. The dispatched syngas from the storage tank enters the downstream methanol synthesis unit.
2.5 Methanol synthesis flowsheet
The schematic diagram of methanol synthesis process is shown in Fig. 2. The Aspen Plus software is used for modelling the methanol plant. The Peng–Robinson equation of state with the van der Waals mixing rule are employed for thermodynamic property calculations. The methanol synthesis reactions are exothermic with high conversion rate over the range of 220–270 °C and high pressure up to 100 bar. Increasing the temperature above the threshold would damage the catalyst due to fusion and sintering, while operating the reactor at lower temperature would reduce the conversion rate. On the other hand, the methanol production is favoured by higher pressure but methanol reactions do not progress further at pressure above 80–85 bar. For this work, the operating temperature and pressure of the methanol reactor is chosen to be 250 °C and 85 bar.31
 Fig. 2  A schematic view of the methanol synthesis process. 
The methanol production unit is composed of three main subsystems: compressors, a methanol synthesis reactor and a distillation column. The inlet syngas is compressed to 85 bar via a two-stage compressor. There is a heat exchanger (HX1) in-between for intercooling the stream leaving the first compressor using the drained liquid from Drum2 (stream 15). The pressurised syngas (stream 4) is mixed with the recycle stream of unconverted gases (stream 12). The outcome stream (stream 5) is directed into the methanol reactor running at 250 °C.31 This reactor is simulated as a plug flow reactor (RPlug) model filled with Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 with the particle density 1775 kg m−3 and the void fraction of 0.5. The packed multi-tubular reactor has 12.2 m length and 36.75 mm diameter. The overall heat transfer coefficient is tuned to control the temperature of the reactor below 280 °C throughout the length as the upper limit tolerance temperature for well-functioning the catalysts. This value is set at 244 kcal h−1 m−2 K−1 (0.284 kW m−2 K−1) with constant reactor effluent temperature of 250 °C. The information about methanol reaction simulation in Aspen Plus is given in Appendix A.
The effluent from this reactor (stream 6) is used to preheat the recycled gases from a splitter (stream 11) by means of a heat exchanger (HX2). The high-temperature stream leaving HX2 is cooled down to 30 °C for condensation of the methanol and water which is then separated from the gaseous phase via a two-phase separator (drum1) modelled by ‘Flash2’ in Aspen. A fraction of the gaseous components (2.2%) is purged in the splitter to avoid the inert accumulation in the reactor mainly due to the CH4 (ref. 48) and the remaining gaseous products are recirculated back through HX2 to the methanol reactor for further conversion of CO to methanol. This is vital for enhancing the overall conversion efficiency of the syngas. The crude liquid mixture is then expanded to 1 bar via a pressure relief valve and conveyed to another ‘Flash2’ separator (drum 2) to remove the dissolved gases. The liquid stream from the second separator is heated to 90 °C to decrease the reboiler heat duty of the distillation column by ∼67% compared to the case with 32 °C temperature. The heat duty of the reboiler is generated from the methanol reactor. Stream 16 is fed into the distillation column simulated by a rigorous ‘RadFrac’ model in Aspen. The column has 14 stages with partial-vapor condensor model, kettle reboiler type and the reflux ratio of 1.5 times minimum the reflux ratio. The purity of methanol in the distillate stream is ∼99.7%. The distillate methanol leaving the top of the column is in the gaseous phase and cooled down to 32 °C to form liquid methanol.
2.6 Control strategies
The proposed solar fuel plant is equipped with robust control strategies to simulate the real-life performance of the key components in the system, overcome the challenges arising due to solar intermittency,|| and regulate the methanol production to a stable rate. The control logic has been implemented for different subcomponents in the system including solar field, receiver, methanol synthesis, dispatch controller and forecast scheduler. These control strategies are identical to those employed in the previous modelling of the “SMR (dumping)” configuration.50 The dynamic model of an energy-based system-level model developed in OpenModelica is available as a part of the SolarTherm repository,51 a free open-source simulation tool that provides a platform to prototype next-generation CSP designs and conduct system-level annual simulations. The key design and control parameters incorporated in the transient simulation of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations are summarised in Table 1. It should be noted that the model does not include the dynamics of ramping transients, but instead implements an assumed period where reactants are consumed and no useful syngas/methanol product is generated.
Table 1 Key technical and control-related input parameters for the transient simulation of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations




Parameter
Value





Design parameters



Field design power
50 MWth


Total area of the field (Afield)
69661.2 m2


Optical efficiency at design point (ηopt,des)
0.72


Energy-weighted optical field efficiency
0.53






Control parameters



Min part-load ratio at receiver
0.3


Min part-load ratio at methanol synthesis
0.2


Critically empty lb/ub trigger
0.1%/2% (of ST capacity)


Empty lb/ub trigger
1%/2% (of ST capacity)


Full lb/ub trigger
98%/99% (of ST capacity)


Δton,RC/Δtoff,RC
30 minutes52


Δton,MS/Δttrans,MS/Δtoff,MS
90 minutes52




3. Techno-economic analysis
The economic and energetic performance of the solar fuel plant is assessed using the two key metrics: levelised cost of fuel (LCOF) and capacity factor (CF). The LCOF is defined as the minimum selling price for fuel that results in a lifetime project net present value of zero, and can be calculated as shown in eqn (1) and CF is defined as the ratio of an actual fuel throughput in a given time to the hypothetical maximum output. The following equations are used to calculate LCOF and CF: (1) (2)where CTCI,n, Cop,n and FPYn are the total capital investment, total operational costs and fuel production for the nth year of the plant operation, respectively, r is the discount rate, N is the lifetime of the solar fuel plant, Vfuel,ann is the actual annual (methanol equivalent) fuel production of the plant and Vfuel,des is the potential annual fuel production at the nameplate capacity. In the present work, the plant lifetime, construction time, and the annual discount rate are assumed to be 30 years, 2 years, and 5%, respectively.47 The estimation of the capital and operational costs is given in the next section.
3.1 Total capital investment
The total capital investment (CTCI) of the integrated units is estimated using the nth plant scenario with a 30 year plant lifetime. The module costing approach based on the Guthrie method is implemented in this research.53 It is a well-established model for calculating the TCI of a new plant at an earlier stage of research. It includes a cost breakdown for estimating the installed cost from the purchase cost. The first step is to define the purchase cost of the plant. This can be done through the cost functions available in chemical engineering textbooks. Table 2 lists the size factor of each contributing component along with its respective references referring to the correlation used for cost estimation in the proposed solar fuel plant. For some units including pumps, compressors, heat exchangers, mixers and splitters, the purchase cost is calculated from Seider et al.53 There are some unique components such as solar field, SCWG and reforming reactors, and syngas storage which require proper seizing before cost estimation. The sizing and then purchase cost of these components is conducted according to methods described in the previous published paper by Rahbari et al.47 in 2016 cost year index.
Table 2 Capital cost calculation basis for the components of the solar fuel plant




Equipment type
Size factora
Source





a The purchase cost of each component has been estimated as a function of its respective size factor.





Pumps
Volumetric flow rate (m3 s−1)
Seider et al.53


Compressors & turbines
Nameplate power (kW)
Seider et al.53


Mixers & splitters
Volumetric flow rate (m3 s−1)
Seider et al.53


Heat exchangers
Heat transfer area (m2)
Seider et al.53


Syngas storage
Volume (m3)
Seider et al.53


Heliostat & installation
Reflective area (m2)
Saw et al.56


Tower
Thermal power (kW)
Saw et al.56


Methanol reactor
Mass flow rate (tonne per day)
Anicic et al.13


Distillation column
Mass flow rate (tonne per day)
Asif et al.54


CO2 separator
Weight (kg)
Rahbari et al.47


Solar-reforming reactor
Weight (kg)
Rahbari et al.57


Solar-SCWG reactor
Weight (kg)
Rahbari et al.47




For pricing some commercial components, methanol reactor and distillation column, such estimates can be adapted from the recent research by Anicic et al.13 and Asif et al.54 Since the design capacity of this system differs from Anicic et al.13 and Asif et al.,54 the capital cost of these components is computed from the following equation: (3)where C, C0, S, S0 and n are the new equipment cost, base quoted cost, new equipment size, base quoted size and scale factor, respectively. The unit costs are taken from different literature/years and chemical engineering plant cost index (CEPCI) is incorporated to update the investment cost to 2016 price level.55
In the module costing method, the installed cost is computed by the purchase cost multiplied by bare module factor to account for the direct and indirect costs associated with each component. This factor can be found in Seider et al.53 for most of the components. For heliostat field, storage and acid gas removal, the bare module factor is taken from Saw et al.56 Finally, the TCI is estimated from the bare model cost using the same methodology adopted by Rahbari et al.47 The annualised capital cost (CACC) of the whole plant (or any component of the plant) can be calculated from the CTCI as follows (4)
3.2 Variable and fixed cost
The variable cost, corresponding to the plant production rate, includes the raw material costs, consumables (electricity and catalysts) and by-products,** while fixed cost is independent to the plant operation and belongs to the salaries, taxes, general overhead and operational and maintenance costs. It is assumed that the production cost of algae includes a carbon credit for embedded negative environmental emissions during the algae growth. Therefore, there must be a penalty cost for CO2 emissions in case of SMR (dumping) scenario. The variable and fixed costs are summarised in Table 3. These costs are adjusted to a 2016 cost basis.
Table 3 Summary of variable and fixed costs




Parameter
Cost





Variable



Algae
0.61 AUD/kg (ref. 25 and 47)


Hydrogen
9.72 AUD/kg (ref. 47)


Water
2.6 AUD/m3 (ref. 58)


Oxygen
115.57 AUD/t(ref. 59)


Electricity
0.25 AUD/kWh (ref. 60)


Nickel catalyst
44.76 AUD/kg (ref. 61)


Methanol catalyst
76.58 AUD AUD/m³ of methanol (ref. 13)


Carbon tax for CO2 emissions
25.4 AUD/t(ref. 62)






Fixed



Number of operators
1 for 10–100 ton per day of product53


Annual wages
139000 AUD


Insurance and local taxes
2% of CTCI53


Operational and maintenance
2% of CTCI53




4. Multi-objective optimisation
In this research, the OpenModelica engine is coupled with DEAP,63 a powerful open-source Python-based multi-objective optimisation framework—using non dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II)—in order to conduct the optimisation of the proposed solar fuel plants. The LCOF (given in eqn (1)) and CF (given in eqn (2)) are considered as two competing objectives for the optimisation of the proposed solar fuel system. The optimisation of the plant is then conducted to minimise the LCOF and maximise the CF simultaneously, thereby determining a family of optimal designs for the plant, referred to as the Pareto front.†† The optimisation design variables are the plant solar multiple and the capacity of syngas storage. To implement this, a set of random values for the design parameters are selected in the Python-based optimisation script, which are then passed to the OpenModelica engine to run the system simulation. After each simulation is completed, the OpenModelica output file is imported to the Python environment in order to carry out the techno-economic analysis and ultimately the multi-objective optimisation of the plant, thereby returning the values of the objectives for a given set of design parameters. Unless a stopping criterion is reached, the design parameters are updated and sent to the OpenModelica environment in order for a new simulation to be conducted. The tuning parameters of the GA-based multi-objective optimisation approach used in this work are: population size: 150, selection process: tournament, tournament size: 2, crossover probability: 98%, and mutation probability: 2%.
5. Results and discussion
The steady-state Aspen model results, dynamic behaviour of the proposed plant at a system level, GA-based optimisation results based on minimising the LCOF, the influence of key economic variables as well as the methanol reactor ramping time on the LCOF, and economies of scale are discussed in the next sections.
5.1 Aspen model results
The polynomial performance curves of the gasification and methanol synthesis units are obtained from design and off-design simulations of the Aspen-based physical models. Fig. 3 shows the algae solution, renewable H2 (from PV-driven electrolysis plant) and syngas flow rates as well as the energy efficiency of the combined SCWG with each reformer as a function of incoming DNI. As observed in this figure, the SCWG-PO/DR scenario provides the highest syngas throughput and energy efficiency amongst the other reforming alternatives. However, this comes at the expense of highest rate of make-up H2 supply into the system. On the other hand, integrating the solar SCWG with solar SMR (dumping) configuration exhibits the lowest syngas production and energy efficiency without the need for make-up carbon-free H2. Fig. 4 illustrates the produced methanol mass flow rate from the exothermic methanol synthesis reactions as a function of incoming syngas. The syngas-to-methanol mass conversion efficiency is ∼96% (equivalent to ∼31% on the molar basis), which is in agreement with the results reported by Luyben.48
 Fig. 3  Polynomial performance curves as a function of incoming DNI, (a) algae solution, (b) PV-derived H2 make-up, (c) syngas output, (d) energy efficiency of the SCWG-reformer plant. 
 Fig. 4  Produced methanol mass flow rate as a function of syngas supply to the downstream unit. 
5.2 Dynamic results
In order to conduct the transient simulation of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations, the “dassl” and “homotopy” methods in OpenModelica are used as the integration and non-linear solvers, respectively. The time required for the computer to complete one annual performance simulation is 20 seconds—assuming a time-step of five minutes—and the time required for each optimisation case is ∼6 hours.

Fig. 5 represents the key performance variables at the receiver and methanol units along with their operating control states, respectively, for the solar SCWG with SMR dumping configuration over two representative three-day periods, one in summer and one in winter, assuming a solar multiple of 3.5 and storage hours of 15. As observed in this figure, the present energy-based system-level model satisfactorily predicts the dynamic behaviour of each configuration at part and full load operating states. Moreover, the syngas storage tank in-between the SCWG-reforming and methanol synthesis units mitigates the fluctuation of the solar resource and ensures the minimum on/off cyclings at the downstream end. Due to the 24 hour-beforehand dispatch scheduler used in this research, the syngas discharge rate is adjusted to minimise the shutdown times of the methanol unit. The algae/H2 consumption and methanol production rates drop in the wintertime due to the lower DNI availability in this season, leading to frequent on/off cyclings at the downstream methanol synthesis unit. The similar trends have been observed for other configurations. In the following section, a robust optimisation algorithm is implemented to obtain the optimal size of syngas storage and solar multiple required for maintaining the continuous operation of the downstream end.
 Fig. 5  Dynamic performance results of key parameters for the SMR (dumping) configuration over representative three-day periods in (a) summertime (10 January–13 January) and (b) wintertime (11 July–14 July), assuming a solar multiple of 3.5 and storage hours of 15. Here, RC, MS and ST stand for the receiver, the methanol synthesis and the syngas storage, respectively. 
5.3 Optimisation results
In order to optimise the performance of the system and obtain the optimal solution of the design variables (i.e. solar multiple and storage hours), the LCOF and CF were chosen as the main objective functions of this integrated system. The range of values assumed for the solar multiple and storage capacity were taken as 3–5 and 0–720 hours, respectively, determined through a parametric study. The upper bound of storage size (i.e. 720 hours) is already above a feasible capacity factor. Fig. 6 illustrates the Pareto front curves achieved from multi-objective optimisation process of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations. The vertical and horizontal axes denote the LCOF and CF, respectively. This figure clearly displays the trade-off between two conflicting objectives, where a higher CF results in higher LCOF of the plant. The Pareto optimal solutions for the captured plants exhibit three distinct regions. The area near point A specifies the optimal solution when the CF is considered as the only objective function, while the area near point C corresponds to the optimal results from the techno-economic standpoint. The final optimal area from the available solutions is reached with the aid of an ideal point—a hypothetical point at the intersection of minimum LCOF and maximum CF. It is impossible to set both objectives at their optimal solutions simultaneously as this point is not located on the Pareto curve. However, there is a middle region B considered as the desirable area as shown in Fig. 6. At this region, the proposed solar fuel plant configurations are expected to function economically and efficiently. It can be observed that the plant LCOF slightly rises with the increment in the CF up to ∼87.5%. Beyond this point, moving towards point A, the slope of the Pareto frontiers drastically gets steeper due to the significant increase in the capital and operating cost implications in such systems—offsetting the higher methanol output from the plant.
 Fig. 6  Pareto optimal solutions for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations: (a) SMR (dumping), (b) SMR, (c) ATR and (d) PO/DR. 
The annual performance/operation-related simulation results of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at three indicative optimal solutions on their respective Pareto frontier obtained from the multi-objective optimisation are listed in Table 4. As observed in this table, the maximum CF of ∼98.2–98.5% is achieved at point A with a high LCOF of ∼7.8–8.2 AUD per L, while the minimum LCOF of ∼1.6–2 AUD per L falls at point C with a CF of ∼72.5–73.5%, for different captured configurations. Although the methanol yield at point A increases by ∼8–12% as compared to point C, the optimal size of the syngas storage tank at this point is up to ∼30 times greater than those at point C. Meanwhile, the consumed clean-H2 and algae feedstocks at point A are both 1.1 times higher than point C. The significant increase in the capital/variable costs offset the higher methanol output from the plant—leading to a substantial increase in the LCOF by moving from point C to A (see Fig. 9 for further details on the contribution of each LCOF-driver component). Taking point C with minimum LCOF as a reference for comparing the annual performance results from the considered configurations reveals that the methanol yield obtained from PO/DR, ATR and SMR is 90%, 35% and 21% higher than SMR (dumping). The reason for this is mainly connected to SMR (dumping) scenario having the lowest syngas throughput as a result of dumping ∼19% carbon from the algae in the form of CO2.47 In addition, the complete/partial exothermic nature of PO/DR and ATR reforming reactions eliminates/minimises the need for a lower-efficiency CSP-powered reforming reactor39—decreasing the total heat losses from the ∼93–96 GW h per year CSP delivered to a dual receiver (i.e. including SCWG and reforming reactors). The PO/DR configuration is the largest consumer of clean-H2 and algae feedstocks followed by ATR, SMR and to some extent SMR (dumping)—the latter doesn't require the supplemental H2 from a renewable source for the upstream gasification plant. From the techno-economic standpoint, an LCOF of 1.61, 1.73, 1.83 and 1.96 AUD per L is achieved for SMR (dumping), SMR, ATR and PO/DR, respectively.‡‡ It should be noted that these values are approximately four to six times lower than the LCOF levels associated with a solar fuel plant using conventional Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (e.g. slurry bubble column reactors), which would require up to few days to achieve steady-state operation.50
Table 4 Annual performance simulation results of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at three indicative optimal solutions on their respective Pareto frontier obtained from the multi-objective optimisation




Parameter
SMR (dumping)
SMR
ATR
PO/DR


A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C





System design



Solar multiple (—)
5
4.5
3.97
5
4.5
4.01
5
4.5
4.09
5
4.5
4.20



t
ST (h)
719.46
48.20
19.15
719.97
53.20
19.55
719.93
55.60
19.62
719.96
58.10
20.20



V
ST (ML)
1426
106
48
1738
143
59
1955
168
65
2821
253
94



N
ST (—)
186
14
7
227
19
8
255
22
9
367
33
13






Annual performance



CSP delivered to RC (GW h per year)
103.6
96.4
95.8
104.0
97.1
95.7
104.3
96.7
94.0
104.9
102.9
92.7


Algae consumption (kt per year)
18.3
16.7
16.6
18.0
16.5
16.2
20.2
18.6
18.0
29.7
28.8
26.0


H2 consumption (kt per year)
0
0
0
0.88
0.80
0.79
1.30
1.19
1.15
2.74
2.52
2.39


CO2 emissions (kt per year)
7
6.4
6.3
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.21
0.20
0.19


Syngas produced (kt per year)
20.0
18.2
18.1
24.5
22.4
22
27.5
25.2
24.3
40.5
37.2
35.2


Methanol produced (kt per year)
18.0
17.2
16.7
21.9
21.0
20.2
24.7
23.8
22.5
35.4
34.1
31.6


Plant CF (%)
98.5
84.7
72.5
98.3
85.1
72.9
98.5
85.6
73.4
98.2
85.0
73.5


Total operational cost (M-AUD per year)
77.2
25.7
24.1
99.0
36.4
33.5
114.4
44.3
39.9
172.5
71.7
62.9


Total capital cost (M-AUD)
1470.3
204.0
151.8
1775.5
244.4
167.8
1999.7
285.0
190.0
2854.1
390.3
241.4


LCOF (AUD per L)
7.83
1.80
1.61
7.99
1.97
1.73
8.07
2.09
1.83
8.22
2.26
1.96




In order to monitor the performance of both syngas storage and the 24 hour-beforehand predictive dispatcher at the downstream unit, the breakdown of the operational control states at the methanol synthesis plant is illustrated in Fig. 7 for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their indicative optimal design points. As shown in this figure, the methanol reactor is in the productive operational state for ∼77.2–78.7% (i.e. ∼6800–6900 hours) at design point C for the captured scenarios. From this point to B and A, the operational hours is increased to ∼87.3–88.2% and ∼98.2–98.5% (i.e. ∼7600–7700 and ∼8600–8630 hours), respectively, which is attributed to the CF gradually becoming the dominant objective function. In addition, the number of unplanned shutdown periods of the downstream end is another key element to reflect the effectiveness of syngas buffer and predictive scheduler in moderating the solar fluctuations. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the methanol synthesis unit is shut down only 3 times at point A, while this occurs 30–46 and 73–91 times at points B and C, respectively—where the LCOF gradually gains dominance over the CF.
 Fig. 7  Aggregated durations of the operating control states at the downstream methanol reactor throughout the year for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their respective optimal design points. 
 Fig. 8  Number of shutdowns of the methanol synthesis unit throughout the annual simulation for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their respective optimal design points. 
To screen the techno-economic performance of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their indicative optimal solutions, the breakdown of the LCOF cost components—calculated from capital, variable and fixed costs—is displayed in Fig. 9. For the cases optimised for lowest overall LCOF, point C, the contributions due to capital costs are smaller than the contributions due to both fixed and variable costs, with capital cost fractions in the range 19.1–29.1%. As the capacity is increased (up to point B and then point A), the LCOF increases, and it can be seen that this increase is driven by a rapid increase in the capital cost in general, and the cost of the syngas storage in particular. This is occurring since systems optimised for a higher capacity factor require more storage in order to achieve continuous operation of the methanol synthesis plant for a larger portion of the year. The reductions in the size (and hence cost) of the methanol plant, consequent to the constraint of fixed solar field size, are much smaller than the increased costs of the storage. It is noted that at point A, with a capacity factor of >98%, the LCOF has risen by a factor of 4–5 compared to the LCOF-minimal point C. Meanwhile, looking across the columns in Fig. 9, the key difference is the variable cost associated with hydrogen, which is zero in the case of SMR (dumping), but up to 29.5% in the case of PO/DR. Overall, given the cost inputs in Table 3, the case providing the lowest LCOF of ∼1.6 AUD per L is at point C and with the choice of SMR (dumping), which allows for both small storage and no cost of additional hydrogen.
 Fig. 9  Breakdown of total annualised cost of the optimised plants, for three different cases: (a) maxmising capacity factor (corresponding to point 'A' on Fig. 6, (a) compromise (point 'B'), and (c) minimising LCOF (point 'C'). The four alternative reformer configurations are given for each case. 
The following section is dedicated to the sensitivity analysis over the key economic variables and methanol reactor ramping time at the optimal design point.
5.4 Sensitivity analysis

5.4.1 Influence of key economic variables. 
A comprehensive sensitivity analysis is carried out to identify the degree of change in the LCOF with respect to key economic parameters including the total capital cost, and algae and clean-H2 unit costs. Fig. 10 displays the sensitivity of the LCOF at design point C (i.e. minimum LCOF) for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations using a ±50% change in the reference cost of the foregoing elements. As illustrated in this figure, the major LCOF-driver component is the total capital investment, changing the LCOF by ∼±25%, ∼±21%, ∼±20% and ∼±17% in case of SMR (dumping), SMR, ATR and PO/DR, respectively. Moreover, varying the algae production cost by ±50% has the greatest leverage over the LCOF of SMR (dumping) scenario with ∼±15% followed by the SMR, ATR and PO/DR processes. The sensitivity of the plant LCOFs to the renewable H2 cost reveals that the PO/DR configuration is influenced most by the unit cost of this component (i.e. ∼±15%)—in that a large amount of make-up H2 is required for conditioning the syngas produced from the upstream gasification plant—followed by the ATR and SMR processes (i.e. ∼±11% and ∼±9%, respectively). Taking this observation a step further, it is possible to comment on the cost-competitiveness of the proposed H2-supported configurations through a more detailed sensitivity to the H2 price.
 Fig. 10  Sensitivity of plants LCOF at design point C with respect to the total capital cost, algae unit cost and renewable H2 unit price for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations. 

Fig. 11 displays the variation of the LCOF as a function of H2-production cost for the considered configurations at point C. As observed in this figure, the SMR, ATR and PO/DR scenarios intersect the SMR (dumping) configuration on condition that the H2 selling price is decreased by 43%, 58% and 61%—attaining a target price of 5.5, 4.1 and 3.8 AUD per kg, respectively—below which the aforementioned H2-supported configurations would become the most cost-effective solar fuel plant scenarios. Surprisingly, the LCOF of PO/DR process outstrips those of SMR and ATR alternatives unless the minimum selling price of clean-H2 drops by 80% (i.e. 2 AUD per kg)—reaching the LCOF of 1.44 AUD per L. Under the current economic environment, the market uptake of green methanol production from microalgae-fed solar-SCWG-reforming process can be further incentivised through employing the economies of scale (see Section 5.5).
 Fig. 11  Variation of LCOF sensitivity to the make-up H2 unit price for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations. 


5.4.2 Influence of methanol reactor ramping time. 
In this section, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to assess the techno-economic performance of the solar-gasified methanol fuels with respect to the methanol reactor ramping time. The period of ramp-up/transitioning duration is varied from 90 minutes52 to 12 hours while holding the ramp-down period constant (i.e. at 90 minutes). Fig. 12 illustrates the effect of ramping time of the methanol reactor on the LCOF, CF, annual liquid fuel throughput, solar multiple and syngas storage capacity at the optimal design point corresponding to the SMR (dumping) scenario. The zero ramping time duration (i.e. ideal case) indicates the instantaneous steady-state operational mode. The results reveal that the LCOF tends to increase up to 34.5% compared to the ideal case if the ramp-up/transitioning duration varies from 0 to 12 hours. This can be explained from the fact that more energy and feedstock is wasted at the methanol reactor without generating useful products at higher ramping times. Moreover, increasing the ramping duration of methanol reactor lowers the CF and liquid fuel throughput of the proposed solar fuel plants—leading to a maximum reduction of 7.8% and 28.0%, respectively. Another observation from this figure is the considerable shift in the optimum design choice of the plant (i.e. solar multiple and syngas storage capacity) to higher values at an increased ramping time, among which the storage size is more influenced by the variation in the methanol reactor ramping times than the solar multiple. This implies that the decreased size of the downstream plant less compromises its total productive operational hours as compared to increasing the syngas storage capacity. It should be noted that similar trends have been observed for other configurations.
 Fig. 12  Influence of the methanol reactor ramping time on the (a) LCOF, (b) capacity factor and annual fuel production, and (c) optimal values of solar multiple and syngas storage hours. 
Taken together, the results of the present study exhibit that a main driving source in the economic success of the solar fuel plants is to achieve the steady-state operation of the downstream end with a short start-up periods. The earlier analysis of the influence of FT ramping time on the overall performance of the solar fuel plant by the co-authors50 also suggested moving towards the micro-channel FT reactors with faster transition to the steady-state condition. Assuming 2 hours ramp-up/transitioning periods for this type of FT reactor obtained from the experimental study in the lab scale, the production cost of solar-driven FT liquid fuel plant was 3–4 times that of the fossil-based liquid fuels.47,50 Further research and development is required in order to gain sufficient insight into the ramping behaviour of this advanced design at a large-scale operation. In the absence of reliable ramping data, it is hard to comment on the future prospect of the solar-gasified FT fuels. On the other hand, methanol reactor provides a relatively faster transition to the steady-state operation.64 Although the minimum LCOF reported in this research is still 3 times the production cost of fossil methanol, switching from FT to methanol seems to offer a feasible option to eliminate the risk of long ramping times of conventional FT technologies due to the series of catalytic chemical reactions and uncertainty about the transient behaviour of the micro-channel FT reactors. This warrants on-going research in the solar-gasified methanol production pathway. Further opportunities for LCOF reduction of the proposed plant is discussed in the next section.

5.5 Economies of scale
As mentioned earlier, economies of scale are crucial for driving down the total LCOF and enhancing the cost-competitiveness of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations. Fig. 13 exhibits the interplay between the plant LCOF at point C (see Fig. 9c) and upscaling the field size. It should be noted that the optical efficiency of the heliostat field was evaluated at each CST design point using SolarPILOT, which was then fed into the heliostat model as a lookup table. The cost evaluation at an increased size is conducted through linear price scaling for the heliostats and variable cost parameters, as well as scaling exponents (according to eqn (3) with a scale factor of 0.65 and 0.8) for the capital cost of the remaining components. As seen in this figure, there is a lower/upper bound constraint on the LCOF corresponding to a change in the scaling factor from 0.65 to 0.8, accounting for a possible degree of change in the LCOF at larger scales. According to this figure, as the design thermal power of the receiver increases, the LCOF levels associated with all the proposed solar fuel plant configurations improve and reach a minimum at the field design power of ∼700 MWth, beyond which there is no further decrease in the plants LCOF as a result of increasing losses due to the atmospheric attenuation and, thus, reducing the overall optical efficiency of the solar field. This scale is feasible, as can be seen from the Noor III central tower plant constructed and now operational in Morocco with design power of 660 MWth.65 It is also observed that minimised LCOF levels of 1.24, 1.39, 1.48 and 1.62 AUD per L—assuming the scaling factor of 0.65—can be obtained at this turning point for SMR (dumping), SMR, ATR and PO/DR, respectively, leading to a 17–21% drop as compared to those at the base case scenario (i.e. at 50 MWth).
 Fig. 13  Impact of the solar field size on the LCOF levels of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their optimal design points. Broken and dotted lines correspond to the simulation results for 0.65 and 0.8 scaling factors (according to eqn (3)) and the vertical black line indicates a region with minimum LCOF. 
6. Conclusion
This paper presented a comprehensive annual simulation and techno-economic analysis of methanol production via solar-SCWG-reforming of algae. SMR (with and without CO2 dumping), ATR and PO/DR were considered as methane reforming options. The make-up renewable H2 from photovoltaic electrolysis was used to condition the algae-derived syngas for downstream use (except for the case of SMR (dumping) scenario). The polynomial performance curves obtained from the (design and off-design) steady-state simulations of the proposed configurations together with the controlling strategies for different subcomponents in a system—including operating state transitions, start-up and shut-down phases, storage dynamics and predictive syngas dispatch using a perfect one-day-ahead forecast scheduler—were used to explore the dynamic performance of the integrated plant in OpenModelica. A multi-objective GA-based optimisation technique was formulated to determine a set of optimal solutions for each configuration, where the LCOF and CF were simultaneously minimised and maximised, respectively. A case study was developed to apply this optimisation approach to the design of the proposed solar fuel systems installed in Geraldton, Australia. Finally, a sensitivity analysis was carried out to evaluate the influence of the economic factors, methanol reactor ramping time and economies of scale on the overall techno-economic profitability of the proposed plants.
The result of the optimisation study was a lowest-LCOF system providing methanol at a levelised cost of 1.6 AUD per L using the SMR-with-CO2-dumping reformer configuration, which requires no supplementary hydrogen. At this cost, the produced methanol is ∼3 times the cost of fossil-derived methanol, and the algae makes up 29.8% of the LCOF. The Pareto front analysis highlighted that systems with a larger investment in storage capacity could produce nearly constant methanol supply, but at a very much increased price of ∼8 AUD per L, with a capacity of 98.5% compared to 72.5% for the least-cost case.
Sensitivity analysis considered the cost of algae supply. A 50% reduction in algae cost would further reduce the methanol LCOF in the SMR-dumping case by 15%. Meanwhile, if the hydrogen cost was to reduce from the present-day cost of 9.72 AUD per kg to a future cost of 5.5 AUD per kg, then the optimal configuration would switch to one where H2 is added and no CO2 is dumped; at 2.0 AUD per kg, the configuration would change again to the more H2-intensive PO/DR configuration, at which the methanol price reduces to 1.5 AUD per L. A 50% reduction in capital costs in the solar-SCWG, storage and methanol synthesis plants would allow a further 25% reduction in the methanol LCOF. Faster ramping of the methanol reactor was also considered. Reducing ramping time from the assumed 1.5 h to zero would bring a further LCOF reduction of 9%. Upscaling the whole plant, based on a scaling exponent of 0.65, was also examined. Due to scaling limitations in the CSP system, the optimal size was 700 MWth, consistent with current commercial systems, and, and alone would reduce the LCOF from 1.6 AUD per L to 1.24 AUD per L.
Future improvements in the process described in this work would be necessary in order for it to approach parity compared to conventional fossil-based methanol production. Improved lower-cost algae production, reductions in the cost of renewable hydrogen and reductions in heliostat and tower costs for the CSP component would all significantly improve LCOF, as would scaling up the system. Analysis conducted here assumed a location with DNI of 2415 kW h m−2a, but locations with a DNI of >3000 kW h m−2a exist, such as in the Australian Pilbara region, and would greatly benefit LCOF. Finally, process configuration improvements including off-sun SCWG, replacing syngas storage with salt storage and reducing reactor size, and hybridised systems involving initial direct lipid extraction from the algae could provide lower-cost routes, but will need careful analysis, and if positive, would motivate some integrated experimental testing of a pilot-scale system.
Appendices
A Methanol reactor simulation
The kinetic model of methanol reactor is based on the model developed by Vanden Bussche and Froment,66 which includes methanol formation from CO2 and reverse water-gas shift reaction as shown in Table 5.
Table 5 Methanol reactions and kinetics expressions




Reaction
Reaction rate (mol kg−1cat s−1)
Δ° (kJ mol−1)




CO2 + 3H2 ↔ CH3OH + H2O



−49.33


CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O



41.12




In this table, ki, Pi, Keqi and Ka/b/c are the kinetic factor, partial pressure, equilibrium constants and adsorption constants, respectively. The RPlug reactor is modelled with the Langmuir–Hinshelwood–Hougen–Watson (LHHW) kinetic model in Aspen Plus. The kinetic factor (ki), equilibrium constants (Keqi) and adsorption coefficients (Ka/b/c) are given by: ki = k0,i × e−Ei/RT, i = 1, 2(5) (6)
The values implemented in Aspen Plus are given in Table 6.2 In order to evaluate the accuracy of the LHHW model, the same operating conditions and reactor dimensions by Vanden Bussche and Froment66 are used as the input to the RPlug model. Fig. 14 shows the mole fraction and temperature distributions along the reactor length for both the present model and the simulated results reported by Vanden Bussche and Froment.66 As seen, there is a good agreement between the values obtained from this model and the values reported by Vanden Bussche and Froment.66 This clearly indicates that the kinetics model implemented in the LHHW module accurately predicts the mole fraction and temperature distributions of the methanol reactor.
Table 6 Pre-exponential factor, activation energy and adsorption parameters used in the Aspen LHHW model




Variable

k
0,i


E

i







k
1

1.07 × 10−13 (kmol kg−1cat s−1 Pa−2)
−36696 (kJ kmol−1)



k
2

1.22 × 102 (kmol kg−1cat s−1 Pa−1)
94765 (kJ kmol−1)









A

i



B

i









47.415
−7059.73





−4.672
4773.26


lnKa
8.1471




lnKb
−6.4522
2068.44


lnKc
−34.9526
14928.92




 Fig. 14  Composition and temperature profiles versus dimensionless axial position (solid and broken lines correspond to the simulation results from this study and reported values by Vanden Bussche and Froment,66 respectively). 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by the Australian Government, through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA).
Notes and references

          IEA, Key World Energy Statistics, technical report, International Energy Agency,  2017 Search PubMed .

          L. E. Lücking, Master of Science Thesis, Delft University of Technology,  2017 .

          S. Daycock, Korea and Japan welcome the first methanol-fueled, ocean-going vessels,  2016, https://is.gd/onqg9R, accessed 22 03 2019 Search PubMed.

          L. Bromberg and W. K. Cheng, Methanol as an Alternative Transportation Fuel in the US: Options for Sustainable And/or Energy-Secure Transportation, Cambridge technical report, Massachusetts institute of technology,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, J.-P. Jones, G. K. Surya Prakash and G. A. Olah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995–8048 RSC .
A. A. Tountas, X. Peng, A. V. Tavasoli, P. N. Duchesne, T. L. Dingle, Y. Dong, L. Hurtado, A. Mohan, W. Sun, U. Ulmer, L. Wang, T. E. Wood, C. T. Maravelias, M. M. Sain and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2019, 1801903 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Kourkoumpas, E. Papadimou, K. Atsonios, S. Karellas, P. Grammelis and E. Kakaras, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16674–16687 CrossRef CAS .

          Methanex, Methanol Price Sheet (Europe), https://www.methanex.com/our-business/pricing, accessed 22 03 2019 Search PubMed.

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, Beyond Oil and Gas : the Methanol Economy, Wiley-VCH,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Mitsui Chemicals Inc., Mitsui Chemicals to establish a pilot facility to study amethanol synthesis process from CO2,  2008, https://www.mitsuichem.com/en/release/2008/080825e.htm, accessed 22 03 2019 Search PubMed.
E. A. Quadrelli, G. Centi, J. L. Duplan and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1194–1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pérez-Fortes, J. C. Schöneberger, A. Boulamanti and E. Tzimas, Appl. Energy, 2016, 161, 718–732 CrossRef .
B. Anicic, P. Trop and D. Goricanec, Energy, 2014, 77, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
É. Simões Van-Dal and C. Bouallou, J. Cleaner Prod., 2013, 57, 38–45 CrossRef .
J. Kim, C. A. Henao, T. A. Johnson, D. E. Dedrick, J. E. Miller, E. B. Stechel and C. T. Maravelias, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3131–3132 Search PubMed .
P. G. Cifre and O. Badr, Energy Convers. Manage., 2006, 48, 519–527 CrossRef .
A. Molino, V. Larocca, S. Chianese and D. Musmarra, Energies, 2018, 11, 1–31 CrossRef .
D. Mignard and C. Pritchard, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2008, 86, 473–487 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Clausen, N. Houbak and B. Elmegaard, Energy, 2010, 35, 2338–2347 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hannula, Biomass Bioenergy, 2015, 74, 26–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aziz and I. Nuran Zaini, Energy Procedia, 2017, 142, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Demirbas, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 3473–3480 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Liao, Y. Wu, X. Ma and L. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 22730–22742 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chiaramonti, M. Prussi, M. Buffi, A. M. Rizzo and L. Pari, Appl. Energy, 2017, 185, 963–972 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Davis, J. Markham, C. Kinchin, N. Grundl, E. C. D. Tan and D. Humbird, NREL Report, NREL/TP-5100-64772,  2016 Search PubMed .
W. Y. Cheah, T. C. Ling, J. C. Juan, D. J. Lee, J. S. Chang and P. L. Show, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 215, 346–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Wiesberg, G. V. Brigagão, J. L. de Medeiros and O. de Queiroz Fernandes Araújo, J. Environ. Manage., 2017, 203, 988–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Castello, B. Rolli, A. Kruse and L. Fiori, Energies, 2017, 10, 1–17 CrossRef .

          M. J. Antal, Jr, S. Manarungson and W. S. Mok, Hydrogen from Renewable Resources Research, Hawaii National Energy Institute, Honolulu, HI,  1990, pp. 1.1–1.12 Search PubMed .
R. K. Balasubramanian, T. T. Yen Doan and J. P. Obbard, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 215–216, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. G. Ortiz, A. Serrera, S. Galera and P. Ollero, Fuel, 2013, 105, 739–751 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Lu, L. Guo, X. Zhang and P. Xiao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7134–7141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, L. Zhao and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 14349–14359 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liao, L. Guo, Y. Lu and X. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 13038–13044 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, H. Jin, Z. Ge, Y. Lu and C. Cao, Sci. China: Technol. Sci., 2015, 58, 1989–2002 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, H. Jin and Y. Lu, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2015, 96, 144–150 CrossRef CAS .

          L. A. Watson, J. D. Pye and G. J. Burgess, SolarPACES,  2012, pp. 1–9 .
M. Venkataraman, A. Rahbari and J. Pye, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1850, 100017 CrossRef .
A. Rahbari, M. B. Venkataraman and J. Pye, Appl. Energy, 2018, 228, 1669–1682 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abrol and C. M. Hilton, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2012, 40, 117–131 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bai, Q. Liu, J. Lei, H. Li and H. Jin, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 102, 190–201 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guan, C. Wei and P. E. Savage, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 3140 RSC .
B. E. Eboibi, D. M. Lewis, P. J. Ashman and S. Chinnasamy, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 170, 20–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Solar Power tower Integrated Layout and Optimization Tool (SolarPILOT),  2018, https://www.nrel.gov/csp/solarpilot.html/, accessed 23 Jul 2018 Search PubMed.

Weather data file for Geraldton, https://energyplus.net/weather-location/, accessed 2018-07-24 Search PubMed.

          J. A. Duffie and W. A. Beckman, Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes, Wiley, 4th edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
A. Rahbari, A. Shirazi, M. B. Venkataraman and J. Pye, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 184, 636–648 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Luyben, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 6150–6163 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Logie, J. D. Pye and J. Coventry, Sol. Energy, 2018, 160, 368–379 CrossRef .
A. Shirazi, A. Rahbari, C.-A. Asselineau and J. Pye, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 192, 71–87 CrossRef CAS .

SolarTherm repository on GitHub, https://github.com/SolarTherm/, accessed 2021-02-26 Search PubMed.
U. Ash-Kurlander, O. Martin, L. D. Fontana, V. R. Patil, M. Bernegger, C. Ondelli, J. Pérez-Ramírez and A. Steinfeld, Energy Technol., 2016, 4, 565–572 CrossRef CAS .

          W. D. Seider, J. Seader, D. R. Lewin and S. Widagdo, Product and Process Design Principles: Synthesis, Analysis and Design, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 3rd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Asif, X. Gao, H. Lv, X. Xi and P. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 2726–2741 CrossRef CAS .

Chemical Engineering Magazine, http://www.chemengonline.com/, accessed 2018-07-06 Search PubMed.

          W. Saw, G. Nathan, P. Ashman, A. Kaniyal, P. Guo, J. Hinkley, J. Pye, W. Lipiński, A. Weimer, A. Gentleman, O. Maselli, G. Metha, T. Nann, G. Andersson, R. Karunagaran, C. Doonan, D. Losic, A. Bayon, R. McNaughton, E. Stechel and A. Steinfeld, Solar Fuels Scoping Study, ASTRI technical report,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Rahbari, A. Shirazi, M. B. Venkataraman and J. Pye, Appl. Energy, 2021, 288, 116620 CrossRef CAS .

Department of Agriculture and Water Resources, http://www.agriculture.gov.au/, accessed 2018-07-06 Search PubMed.
I. J. Okeke and S. Mani, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2017, 11, 472–487 CrossRef CAS .

          Australian Energy Regulator, https://www.aer.gov.au/, accessed 06 07 2018.
R. M. Swanson, A. Platon, J. A. Satrio and R. C. Brown, Fuel, 2010, 89, S11–S19 CrossRef CAS .

The Clean Energy Regulator of Australia, http://www.cleanenergyregulator.gov.au/, accessed 2018-07-06 Search PubMed.

DEAP evolutionary computation framework package in Python, https://github.com/DEAP/deap, accessed 2018-08-24 Search PubMed.

          J. Hinkley, J. Hayward, R. McNaughton, J. Edwards and K. Lovegrove, Concentrating Solar Fuels Roadmap: Final Report, CSIRO Final report ARENA project 3-A018,  2016 Search PubMed .
S. Relloso and Y. Gutiérrez, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1850, 030041 CrossRef .
K. M. Vanden Bussche and G. F. Froment, J. Catal., 1996, 161, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Flue gases can also be obtained from coal power stations or cement kilns, but the use of these gases cannot form part of a truly renewable pathway, since net emissions will still occur when the methanol product from those gases is finally consumed.‡ The CO2 abatement potential was higher than the theoretical minimum of 1.4 tonne of CO2 per tonne of produced methanol after calculating the CO2 balance of the plant—accounting for the CO2 fed into and rejected from the methanol plant, the emissions arising from the supply of thermal energy and electricity to the process, and the CO2 abatement potential by supplying the by-product oxygen from water electrolysis to a nearby chemical plant that was otherwise generated using electricity from the coal-fired power station.§ In gasification of microalgae, SCWG can convert all of the organic components from the algae into syngas. This is attractive in comparison to options such as lipid extraction, which can only convert a ∼20–40% of the collected biomass.30¶ A relatively low pressure is selected here, compared to the ∼15–30 bar used in conventional steam reforming of natural gas, in order to maximise the conversion of relatively expensive algae-derived methane into syngas.|| Intermittency in the solar resource can potentially result in rapid changes to heat flux and temperature in the on-sun SCWG reactor, resulting in high thermal stresses and accelerated creep-fatigue damage.49 This can be addressed by defocussing the solar collector to avoid rapid variations, but at a cost to system output. Indirect SCWG using a heat transfer fluid, thermal storage, and an off-sun reactor is an alternative approach not considered here.** Hydrogen, algae and electricity are all assumed to be available as needed, at a fixed cost per unit supplied. This is reasonable, because all three inputs are rate-controlled by solar irradiance, and correlate closely to the times when the CSP-driven SCWG and SMR reactors are operational. A future analysis of the separate PV-H2, algae and CSP dynamics could be considered to examine this in more detail.†† On the Pareto front, there will exist no design that reduces LCOF without decreasing CF, nor any design that increases CF without increasing LCOF. The overall best design must finally be chosen by including additional decision-making information that allows the competing priorities to be weighed.‡‡ The LCOF identified here is similar to that reported by Kim et al.15 The key difference is that Kim et al.15 followed the first pathway (as noted in Section 1, using CO2 as the carbon source) and is based on methanol production using a combination of solar-powered thermochemical splitting of CO2 into CO, followed by a water gas shift (WGS) reaction—aiming for H2 production from CO—and a methanol synthesis unit. However, the present work follows the second pathway (using biomass-derived carbon), and evaluates the solar-powered gasification of algae into syngas followed by a downstream methanol unit.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The schematic diagram of methanol production via solar-driven SCWG: (a) syngas conditioning via CO2 dumping, (b) syngas conditioning via make-up carbon-free-H2 supply from a PV-driven electrolysis plant.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic view of the methanol synthesis process.	 


Design parameters

Field design power	50 MWth
Total area of the field (Afield)	69661.2 m2
Optical efficiency at design point (ηopt,des)	0.72
Energy-weighted optical field efficiency	0.53


Control parameters

Min part-load ratio at receiver	0.3
Min part-load ratio at methanol synthesis	0.2
Critically empty lb/ub trigger	0.1%/2% (of ST capacity)
Empty lb/ub trigger	1%/2% (of ST capacity)
Full lb/ub trigger	98%/99% (of ST capacity)
Δton,RC/Δtoff,RC	30 minutes52
Δton,MS/Δttrans,MS/Δtoff,MS	90 minutes52
	(1)
	(2)


Pumps	Volumetric flow rate (m3 s−1)	Seider et al.53
Compressors & turbines	Nameplate power (kW)	Seider et al.53
Mixers & splitters	Volumetric flow rate (m3 s−1)	Seider et al.53
Heat exchangers	Heat transfer area (m2)	Seider et al.53
Syngas storage	Volume (m3)	Seider et al.53
Heliostat & installation	Reflective area (m2)	Saw et al.56
Tower	Thermal power (kW)	Saw et al.56
Methanol reactor	Mass flow rate (tonne per day)	Anicic et al.13
Distillation column	Mass flow rate (tonne per day)	Asif et al.54
CO2 separator	Weight (kg)	Rahbari et al.47
Solar-reforming reactor	Weight (kg)	Rahbari et al.57
Solar-SCWG reactor	Weight (kg)	Rahbari et al.47
	(3)
	(4)


Variable

Algae	0.61 AUD/kg (ref. 25 and 47)
Hydrogen	9.72 AUD/kg (ref. 47)
Water	2.6 AUD/m3 (ref. 58)
Oxygen	115.57 AUD/t(ref. 59)
Electricity	0.25 AUD/kWh (ref. 60)
Nickel catalyst	44.76 AUD/kg (ref. 61)
Methanol catalyst	76.58 AUD AUD/m³ of methanol (ref. 13)
Carbon tax for CO2 emissions	25.4 AUD/t(ref. 62)


Fixed

Number of operators	1 for 10–100 ton per day of product53
Annual wages	139000 AUD
Insurance and local taxes	2% of CTCI53
Operational and maintenance	2% of CTCI53

 	Fig. 3  Polynomial performance curves as a function of incoming DNI, (a) algae solution, (b) PV-derived H2 make-up, (c) syngas output, (d) energy efficiency of the SCWG-reformer plant.	 

 	Fig. 4  Produced methanol mass flow rate as a function of syngas supply to the downstream unit.	 

 	Fig. 5  Dynamic performance results of key parameters for the SMR (dumping) configuration over representative three-day periods in (a) summertime (10 January–13 January) and (b) wintertime (11 July–14 July), assuming a solar multiple of 3.5 and storage hours of 15. Here, RC, MS and ST stand for the receiver, the methanol synthesis and the syngas storage, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Pareto optimal solutions for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations: (a) SMR (dumping), (b) SMR, (c) ATR and (d) PO/DR.	 



System design

Solar multiple (—)	5	4.5	3.97	5	4.5	4.01	5	4.5	4.09	5	4.5	4.20

t
ST (h)	719.46	48.20	19.15	719.97	53.20	19.55	719.93	55.60	19.62	719.96	58.10	20.20

V
ST (ML)	1426	106	48	1738	143	59	1955	168	65	2821	253	94

N
ST (—)	186	14	7	227	19	8	255	22	9	367	33	13


Annual performance

CSP delivered to RC (GW h per year)	103.6	96.4	95.8	104.0	97.1	95.7	104.3	96.7	94.0	104.9	102.9	92.7
Algae consumption (kt per year)	18.3	16.7	16.6	18.0	16.5	16.2	20.2	18.6	18.0	29.7	28.8	26.0
H2 consumption (kt per year)	0	0	0	0.88	0.80	0.79	1.30	1.19	1.15	2.74	2.52	2.39
CO2 emissions (kt per year)	7	6.4	6.3	0.13	0.12	0.12	0.14	0.14	0.13	0.21	0.20	0.19
Syngas produced (kt per year)	20.0	18.2	18.1	24.5	22.4	22	27.5	25.2	24.3	40.5	37.2	35.2
Methanol produced (kt per year)	18.0	17.2	16.7	21.9	21.0	20.2	24.7	23.8	22.5	35.4	34.1	31.6
Plant CF (%)	98.5	84.7	72.5	98.3	85.1	72.9	98.5	85.6	73.4	98.2	85.0	73.5
Total operational cost (M-AUD per year)	77.2	25.7	24.1	99.0	36.4	33.5	114.4	44.3	39.9	172.5	71.7	62.9
Total capital cost (M-AUD)	1470.3	204.0	151.8	1775.5	244.4	167.8	1999.7	285.0	190.0	2854.1	390.3	241.4
LCOF (AUD per L)	7.83	1.80	1.61	7.99	1.97	1.73	8.07	2.09	1.83	8.22	2.26	1.96

 	Fig. 7  Aggregated durations of the operating control states at the downstream methanol reactor throughout the year for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their respective optimal design points.	 

 	Fig. 8  Number of shutdowns of the methanol synthesis unit throughout the annual simulation for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their respective optimal design points.	 

 	Fig. 9  Breakdown of total annualised cost of the optimised plants, for three different cases: (a) maxmising capacity factor (corresponding to point 'A' on Fig. 6, (a) compromise (point 'B'), and (c) minimising LCOF (point 'C'). The four alternative reformer configurations are given for each case.	 

 	Fig. 10  Sensitivity of plants LCOF at design point C with respect to the total capital cost, algae unit cost and renewable H2 unit price for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations.	 

 	Fig. 11  Variation of LCOF sensitivity to the make-up H2 unit price for the proposed solar fuel plant configurations.	 

 	Fig. 12  Influence of the methanol reactor ramping time on the (a) LCOF, (b) capacity factor and annual fuel production, and (c) optimal values of solar multiple and syngas storage hours.	 

 	Fig. 13  Impact of the solar field size on the LCOF levels of the proposed solar fuel plant configurations at their optimal design points. Broken and dotted lines correspond to the simulation results for 0.65 and 0.8 scaling factors (according to eqn (3)) and the vertical black line indicates a region with minimum LCOF.	 

CO2 + 3H2 ↔ CH3OH + H2O	

	−49.33
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O	

	41.12
ki = k0,i × e−Ei/RT, i = 1, 2	(5)
	(6)


k
1
	1.07 × 10−13 (kmol kg−1cat s−1 Pa−2)	−36696 (kJ kmol−1)

k
2
	1.22 × 102 (kmol kg−1cat s−1 Pa−1)	94765 (kJ kmol−1)



	47.415	−7059.73


	−4.672	4773.26
lnKa	8.1471	

lnKb	−6.4522	2068.44
lnKc	−34.9526	14928.92

 	Fig. 14  Composition and temperature profiles versus dimensionless axial position (solid and broken lines correspond to the simulation results from this study and reported values by Vanden Bussche and Froment,66 respectively).	 
Footnotes
† Flue gases can also be obtained from coal power stations or cement kilns, but the use of these gases cannot form part of a truly renewable pathway, since net emissions will still occur when the methanol product from those gases is finally consumed.
‡ The CO2 abatement potential was higher than the theoretical minimum of 1.4 tonne of CO2 per tonne of produced methanol after calculating the CO2 balance of the plant—accounting for the CO2 fed into and rejected from the methanol plant, the emissions arising from the supply of thermal energy and electricity to the process, and the CO2 abatement potential by supplying the by-product oxygen from water electrolysis to a nearby chemical plant that was otherwise generated using electricity from the coal-fired power station.
§ In gasification of microalgae, SCWG can convert all of the organic components from the algae into syngas. This is attractive in comparison to options such as lipid extraction, which can only convert a ∼20–40% of the collected biomass.30
¶ A relatively low pressure is selected here, compared to the ∼15–30 bar used in conventional steam reforming of natural gas, in order to maximise the conversion of relatively expensive algae-derived methane into syngas.
|| Intermittency in the solar resource can potentially result in rapid changes to heat flux and temperature in the on-sun SCWG reactor, resulting in high thermal stresses and accelerated creep-fatigue damage.49 This can be addressed by defocussing the solar collector to avoid rapid variations, but at a cost to system output. Indirect SCWG using a heat transfer fluid, thermal storage, and an off-sun reactor is an alternative approach not considered here.
** Hydrogen, algae and electricity are all assumed to be available as needed, at a fixed cost per unit supplied. This is reasonable, because all three inputs are rate-controlled by solar irradiance, and correlate closely to the times when the CSP-driven SCWG and SMR reactors are operational. A future analysis of the separate PV-H2, algae and CSP dynamics could be considered to examine this in more detail.
†† On the Pareto front, there will exist no design that reduces LCOF without decreasing CF, nor any design that increases CF without increasing LCOF. The overall best design must finally be chosen by including additional decision-making information that allows the competing priorities to be weighed.
‡‡ The LCOF identified here is similar to that reported by Kim et al.15 The key difference is that Kim et al.15 followed the first pathway (as noted in Section 1, using CO2 as the carbon source) and is based on methanol production using a combination of solar-powered thermochemical splitting of CO2 into CO, followed by a water gas shift (WGS) reaction—aiming for H2 production from CO—and a methanol synthesis unit. However, the present work follows the second pathway (using biomass-derived carbon), and evaluates the solar-powered gasification of algae into syngas followed by a downstream methanol unit.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
