Selectivity in trace gas sensing: recent developments, challenges, and future perspectives  - Analyst (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1AN02070F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1AN02070F
(Critical Review)
Analyst, 2022, 147, 1024-1054Selectivity in trace gas sensing: recent developments, challenges, and future perspectives

        
          
            Puspendu 
            Barik
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Manik 
            Pradhan
          
          
        
      *ab
aTechnical Research Centre, S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, JD Block, Sector-III, Salt Lake City, Kolkata – 700106, India. E-mail: puspendub@bose.res.in; manik.pradhan@bose.res.in
bDepartment of Chemical, Biological and Macromolecular Sciences, S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, JD Block, Sector-III, Salt Lake City, Kolkata – 700106, India
Received 
      15th November 2021
    , Accepted 15th February 2022First published on 16th February 2022AbstractSelectivity is one of the most crucial figures of merit in trace gas sensing, and thus a comprehensive assessment is necessary to have a clear picture of sensitivity, selectivity, and their interrelations in terms of quantitative and qualitative views. Recent reviews on gas sensors/techniques are limited to specific sensors, sensors with unconventional materials, various technological exploitation, or specific applications. However, the selectivity is either unexplored in most cases or explained concerning the materials/techniques involved in a demonstration. Therefore, there is a pressing need to identify the possible ways to improve the selectivity of a gas sensor/technique with low or zero cross-sensitivity to other compounds/gases present in the working environment. Analytical techniques involving spectroscopic and mass-spectrometry-based methods are excellent in selectivity but have limited applicability for field deployment compared to the miniatured solid state sensors. Solid state sensors are the mainly studied gas sensors due to their flexibility, portability, and cost-effectiveness, and being technologically favorable but suffer from low selectivity in harsh and humid environments. This review will evaluate the limitations and possible solutions to selectivity issues in a wide variety of gas sensors. Here, we have discussed the gas-sensor technologies and underlying sensing mechanisms in two main groups – spectroscopic and non-spectroscopic. Recent state-of-the-art techniques and fundamental challenges are discussed to improve the selectivity and other gas sensor indicators and future perspectives.Puspendu BarikDr Puspendu Barik received his Ph.D. (2013) in Physics from Visva-Bharati. He has also worked as Dr D. S. Kothari Postdoctoral Fellow (2016–2019) at IISc, Bangalore, India, and Instituto de Ciencias Fisicas, Mexico, for his postdoctoral work (2014–2016). His research interests consist of SERS, nanocomposites, photonic–plasmonic structures, evanescent waves, plasmonic luminescent solar concentrator devices, gas sensing materials using plasmonic nanocomposites. He has co-authored more than 30 publications, including journals, book chapters, reviews.Manik PradhanDr Manik Pradhan is currently an Associate Professor at S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata, India. He obtained his PhD from the University of Bristol, UK. He did his postdoctoral studies at University of Cambridge, UK and Stanford University, USA. His research includes chemical spectroscopy, molecular physics, trace gas sensing and applications of laser spectroscopy in environmental and biomedical sciences. He is the recipient of WIDF-Innovation Award (USA), Dorothy Hodgkin Award (UK), Dayawati Rastogi Lecture Award (India), Sigma-Aldrich Award (Korea) and Isaac Newton Trust Fellowship (UK). He is a Fellow of the Institute of Physics (FInstP), Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), and the Linnean Society of London (FLS), UK. He has authored and co-authored more than 70 research articles, several reviews, patents and book chapters.
1. Introduction
Sensing trace gases and environmental gaseous pollutants is crucial to ensuring a safe workplace and a healthy environment. Moreover, sensors with remarkable portability, detection limits, sensitivity, and selectivity are the primary demand of modern technology. The long journey of gas sensors started from its traditional use in coal mines (Davy lamp, 1816) to a variety of the latest application, including indoor/outdoor quality control, industry, upper atmosphere, security, detection of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), and many more. Most importantly, the state-of-the-art gas sensors must be responsive, safer, simple in operating, portable, economical, and highly selective to target gas at low ppb to ppm (parts-per-billion/million by volume) concentrations in the presence of the complex and unknown gas environment. Apart from the performance of gas sensors, the latest application demands portability of sensors and Internet-of-Things (IoT), enabled to make it suitable for industry and household uses. A gas sensor's performance is ascertained on several indicators or figures of merits such as sensitivity, selectivity, response time, energy consumption, reversibility, gas absorption capacity, and manufacturing cost. The choice of analytical technique is even more critical to enhancing the selectivity of gas sensors to identify the target gas present at low concentrations in the surroundings. Besides, gas sensors must satisfy the condition of stability and reproducibility, which may be tampered with by many factors like design errors, structural changes, doping of foreign contaminants in due course of time, chemical reaction with gas, changes in the surroundings. However, few efforts have been put to improve the selectivity of trace gas sensing; instead, the sensitivity increases much faster. Therefore, more research needs to be accomplished to improve the selectivity of the gas sensors that must have low or zero cross-sensitivity to other gases in the working environment.
So far, there is no single technique or sensing material that fulfills all the sensing requirements of trace gas with high sensitivity, selectivity, stability, and detection limit. Years of research in gas sensors have offered various techniques, methods, and sensing materials for trace gas sensing that have excellent sensitivity to specific gas or gases. Thus, a wide range of techniques/sensors have been investigated and developed over the past decades – (i) spectroscopic techniques: mostly cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy (CEAS), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS), (ii) non-spectroscopic techniques/sensors: gas chromatography – mass spectrometry (GC-MS), solid state gas sensors, electrochemical cells, metal oxide semiconductor (MOS), conductive polymers, carbon/graphene-based sensors, resonators, mechanical, chemical sensors, calorimetric gas sensors. During the last decade, several review articles discussed the gas sensors specific to the type of sensors,1–3 sensor with different materials,4–12 and the diversity of technologies used,13–17 or specific to a particular application.18–23 Among all available techniques/sensors, the performance of the spectroscopic technique (mostly absorption-based techniques) in trace gas sensing is convincing in more excellent selectivity.16,24,25 It is noteworthy that MOS gas sensors offer high sensitivity even below ppm or less and are the most investigated group of sensors. There are some popular approaches of achieving selectivity in metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) gas sensors – use of nanomaterial or quantum dots (QDs) for its high surface to volume ratio, changing the sensing elements, creating heterojunctions, catalysts or promoters to improve the output signal, and to enhance adsorption or chemisorption, modulating the external parameter, e.g., temperature, crystal facet, use of certain surface additives, doping by noble metals/heteroatoms.4,5,21,26–28 But the interference caused by changes in relative humidity misleads the sensitivity of analyte gas. Recent reviews cover the operating principles, performance of sensors, the sensitivity, application of different types of MOSs, including new nanostructure, fabrication techniques, and application in many fields.4,5,21,27–32 Still, it lacks selectivity in gas sensing after many years of research. However, various techniques like surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS),33–35 combination of SERS and GC,36–38 show high selectivity for pesticides, toxic or radioactive cations/anions, drugs and pharmaceuticals, heavy metals, ionic nutrients, and explosive materials in solid/liquid phase as well as sensitivity below ppb level. Similarly, other gas sensors, e.g., calorimetric, conductometric, potentiometric, catalytic, and resistive sensors, have been developed and used in many applications over the past few decades.15,18,39–41 Some of the sensor techniques and sensor materials are already commercialized in miniature or large-scale form, which provides a decent sensitivity but suffers from poor selectivity in the presence of moister and other gases. Therefore, one of the researchers’ significant challenges is maintaining high selectivity for a gas sensor to a target gas molecule.
Different sensing techniques must be combined to overcome the selectivity limitations of a single sensor for detecting analyte gas in a gas mixture as it does in an electronic nose or E-nose. Effective material design, data processing algorithms, sorption filters, and proper techniques are the basic requirements for improving selectivity in gas sensing. From a mathematical perspective, the selectivity indicates that one sensor i produce a change of Δyi with the change of the concentration of an analyte gas i, Δxi where yi is the response measured by the sensor i.42 Therefore, the sensitivity of the sensor i can be written as Sii = ∂yi/∂xi, where the partial sensitivities (Sij) are zero for all i ≠ j (the sensors i, the analyte gases in gas mixture j). High selectivity of a gas sensor means that it has capability to discriminate between all the n gases of a gas mixture (a, b, c, ……., n) and to detect them independently from constituent gases. For real example, the selectivity can be expressed as , where all the cross sensitivities are Sij and potentially disturbing components are xj.43,44 The range of selectivity R{sel} is R{sel} = (0……+1), whereas for practical use, smaller values <0.9 represent insufficient selectivity for a gas sensor.
The review will systematically present a comprehensive discussion on selectivity in gas sensing for a single technique or sensor. Here, the review will focus on the selectivity in sensing a target gas molecule and how to improve by employing different techniques/sensing elements. Therefore, the fundamental properties of gas like mass, charge, absorption, and adsorption, considered for sensing and improving selectivity, will be discussed thoroughly. Some state-of-the-art techniques, materials, and methods are presented here to enhance selectivity using several spectroscopic and non-spectroscopic sensors/techniques. The possible solutions and techniques for the selective detection of analyte gas are properly addressed here in each of the following sections. Lastly, a conclusion and an overall perspective on the selectivity issues will be presented. The review might help understand the fundamentals for improving the selectivity in trace gas sensing and may help design an intelligent sensor/technique with better selectivity of a target gas in an unknown or harsh environment.
2. Fundamentals of gas sensor and gas sensing techniques
Gas sensors or detectors can detect/identify different gasses and generate an electrical signal corresponding to various gases. Gas sensors are several kinds based on the sensing element, e.g., metal–oxide, optical, electrochemical, capacitance, acoustic. The target gas may alter the fundamental properties of the sensing materials, or it will have some specific intrinsic properties such as optical signatures, conductivity. The most common gas sensors based on output signal are optical, electrical, mechanical, calorimetric, magnetic, and electrochemical. When the sensing material or the sensor is exposed to the target gas/gas mixture, there will be a variation in physical properties, e.g., change in work function (Δφ), permittivity (Δε), refractive index (Δn), bandgap (ΔEg), electrical conductivity (Δσ), Hall voltage (ΔVH), and shift in frequency (Δf). The variation in physical properties can be converted into a detectable electrical signal via standard electrical components, e.g., change in resistance (ΔR), capacitance (ΔC), inductance (ΔL), current (ΔI), voltage (ΔV), frequency (Δf), and phase (Δϕ). On the other hand, several methods or techniques can detect or identify the gas, e.g., GC-MS, various absorption-based optical techniques. The selectivity of gas sensing is much different in both approaches (gas sensor vs. gas sensing technique). However, the review will focus on the selectivity issue of existing techniques or sensors, the possible approaches for the betterment of the selectivity, and the future directions.
Selectivity (specificity is being used interchangeably and synonymously) of gas sensors/techniques is defined as the ability to detect a target gas in a gas mixture with low or zero cross-sensitivity. Limit of detection (LOD), a common term in analytical chemistry, particularly in gas chromatography, is the lowest possible amount of gas in a test sample that could be reliably differentiated. LOD is sometimes mistaken for sensitivity. However, sensitivity and LOD have been applied alternately to characterize gas sensors. The gas sensing techniques or sensors are based on fundamental physical properties, as shown in Table 1. Here, we divide it into two broad categories – spectroscopic and non-spectroscopic. The detection limit of each technique or sensor depends on the physical parameters and their variation with the presence of target gas. For example, metal oxide sensor (MOS) type sensors are used in the industry due to their low cost, durability, simplicity, flexibility in production, and capability to detect multiple gases up to ppm-level. In contrast, optical sensors/techniques are employed to detect further to ppt level. However, the selectivity can be improved by understanding the relationship between the physical properties and the sensor output signals.
Table 1 Classification of gas sensors/techniques by their operating principle




Broad categories
Sensors/techniques
Physical properties
Source of the output signal
The detection limit (LOD)a





a The detection limits are purely apparent as it exclusively depends on the analyte gas and surrounding environment. However, the approximate values shown in the table depict the minimum possible value (with examples), which can be measured by the techniques for target gases. The numerical in superscript show the examples of gas sensors which indicates the approximate detection limit of the methodology for a target gas. Abbreviation: Cavity ringdown spectroscopy (CRDS), cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy (CEAS), gas chromatography – mass spectrometry (GC-MS), surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), surface plasmon resonance (SPR), quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), magnetostatic surface waves (MSSW) – delay line (DL).





Spectroscopic techniques
Optical
Absorption
Absorbance, which is altered by the trace gas, e.g., in CRDS, CEAS techniques
∼100 ppt (ref. 45–47)


Scattering
Caused by the trace gas molecule, e.g., SERS
∼1 ppb (ref. 48 and 49)


Reflectivity
Change of reflectivity of the surface which adsorbs the trace gases
∼1 ppm (ref. 50)


Fluorescence
Change of fluorescence intensity/wavelength
∼25 ppb (ref. 51–53)


Luminescence
Emission by the gas itself or the chemical reaction with the material


Refractive index
Trace gases modify the refractive index of the medium with respect to vacuum
∼50 ppm (ref. 54 and 55)


SPR
The change of reflectivity due to the resonance EM field at the metal-dielectric interface
∼1 ppm (ref. 56)


Non-spectroscopic techniques
GC-MS
Mass, charge, velocity
Measuring the mass-to-charge ratio of the atomic and molecular composition of inorganic and organic materials both qualitatively and quantitatively
∼1 ppb (ref. 57)


Calorimetric
Heat
Change of temperature due to reaction or adsorption
∼100 ppm (ref. 58)


Thermal Conductivity
Change of thermal conductivity of analyte gases with respect to air


Gravimetric or mechanical
Mass or frequency
Change of mass or frequency due to adsorption, e.g., QCM
∼50 ppb (ref. 59–60)


Acoustic wave
Changes in the velocity of acoustic wave
∼10 ppb (ref. 61 and 62)


Impedance spectrometry
Conductivity
Change of conductivity in the presence of trace gas
∼100 ppm


Impedance
Change of impedance of the solid-state sensor
∼10 ppm6 (ref. 63)


Resistance
Change of resistance of a substance is measured in the presence of external gas, e.g., chemiresistors
∼100 ppm (ref. 15 and 64)


Capacitance
Change of dielectric constant is measured
∼1 ppm (ref. 65 and 66)


Electrochemical
Potential difference
Change of electrode potential in the presence of gas with respect to reference electrodes
∼1 ppm (ref. 67 and 68)


Current

e.g., Clark-sensor, where a change of current is measured due to modified electrode by the presence of trace gas.


Magnetic
Hall effects
Hall co-efficient for the active sensor materials in the presence of gas
∼1 ppm (ref. 69 and 70)


Magnetic permeability
Change of magnetic inductance due to gas or reaction of the core material with the gas
∼50 ppm (ref. 69)


Magnetic – catalytic
Change in Gibbs free energy
∼80 ppb (ref. 71)


Ionization
Ionization current
A current produced by charges produced by the bombardment of the gas molecules by the incident high energy UV photons
∼10 ppm (ref. 72)




The performance and novelty of a gas sensor or technique are determined by several factors or parameters (i.e., the figure of merits of gas sensors). Numerous studies show that sensitivity and selectivity may be improved at the expense of other parameters. Still, the selectivity is not remarkable for miniatured gas sensors or in the IoT-enabled gas sensors. However, some optical or mass spectrometric techniques may offer high selectivity with the vast and expensive sensor design discussed later. This review will discuss the selectivity of a gas sensor or technique without compromising the other parameters. In recent days, researchers have been putting much effort into enhancing the selectivity of a gas sensor or technique and the other parameters to be used in any environmental condition.
3. Gas sensing mechanisms and selectivity
This section provides a comprehensive discussion on gas molecules’ fundamental and indirect properties, which must be considered and perfected to enhance the selectivity in the gas sensing techniques. Thousands of gas sensors have been available in recent years where the change of physical properties in the presence of target gas molecules (as mentioned in Table 1) decide the selectivity and sensitivity. Mainly demonstrated physical properties of gas molecules for a gas sensor or technique are mass and charge (in GC-MS), vibrational properties (in spectroscopic sensors, e.g., CEAS), sorption (in solid state sensors, filters), diffusion (in solid state sensors), and many secondary properties of gases such as chemical activity.
3.1. Mass and charge
The mass of an individual gas molecule/element is more prosaic for mass spectrometry than its molecular/atomic weight. The formation of ions from neutral gas molecules is unique for different gases. The ions can be separated based on the various trajectories and time of flight of moving ions with the different mass-to-charge ratio in electrical and/or magnetic fields, which is governed by the Lorentz force (, where q, ,  and  are the charge, velocity of the charged ions, electric and magnetic field, respectively). Interestingly, the controlled fragmentation of ions yields exciting information about the structure and elemental compositions of target gas molecules and their isotopologues quantitatively. The selectivity in mass spectrometry is directly dependent on the resolution (R = M/ΔM, where M is the mass number), which can be defined by its ability to separate ions from adjacent mass numbers. Let us consider an ion of mass, m, and charge, q is accelerated with a constant voltage V into the uniform magnetic field B of collimating magnets () with a circular/helical path with a radius of curvature, r. One can derive a simple equation for mass to charge ratio as m/q = B2r2/2V, which indicates that the separation of ions can be accomplished by the variation of the radius of curvature, and/or variation of either B or V. High resolution and accurate mass determination can be possible by combining electric field with a constant/variable magnetic field.
Mass spectrometry (MS) is an analytical tool helpful in figuring out the mass-to-charge ratio and identifying the isotopes, ions with slightly different mass in a composite sample, as shown in Fig. 1. Broadly, mass spectrometers can be categorized by the detection components such as magnetic field deflection (alone or combined with electric field), quadrupoles (single, triple, ion-trap), time-of-flight (TOF), quadrupole time of flight (Q-TOF), Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) and others. Proper configuration of ionization techniques and detection systems, e.g., Q-TOF leads to the high-resolution output. Selecting the proper detector can increase the selectivity and sensitivity below the ppb level for gases.
 Fig. 1  Pictorial diagrams of the standard beam mass analyzers. (a) Time-of-flight (TOF) spectrometry is used as ions of different mass-to-charge have different velocities, and the detector senses them at various times. (b) A double-focusing analyzer is made of electric and magnetic sectors. (c) A quadrupole mass analyzer allows ions of a single mass-to-charge to keep stable trajectories to the detector. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2003. 
3.2. Rotation, vibration and electronic properties
A gas molecule in space may have different types of energy, e.g., rotational energy due to the rotation about its center of gravity, vibrational energy due to the regular displacement of its atoms from its equilibrium positions, electronic energy due to the electrons associated with the atoms and bonds.74 These energies of a molecule are quantized, and the molecule can exist in various energy levels. The molecules may jump from one energy level to another by absorbing or releasing a finite amount of energy limited by the selection rules. The interaction of a photon of frequency ν with the gas molecule may lead to the transfer of the energy (ΔEph) to the molecule. The energy can be transferred in a different form of energy of the molecule (eqn (1)) via – (i) translational energy (ΔEtran): the energy is not quantized, and it is determined by the change of temperature of the molecule, (ii) rotational energy (ΔErot): the rotational energy is quantized, and it induces rotation in the molecules, (iii) vibrational energy (ΔEvib): the vibrational energy is quantized, and the molecule can vibrate with respect to the equilibrium position, and (iv) electronic energy (ΔEelec): the energy is also quantized and is leading to the transition between molecular orbitals. According to the first law of thermodynamics, we can write the equation of energy of the photon as:75 ΔEph = hν = hω = ΔEtran + ΔErot + ΔEvib + ΔEelec(1)where the comparative values of the energies are ΔEelec ≫ ΔEvib ≫ ΔErot. The time scale of the interaction for electronic, vibrational, and rotational transitions are of the order of ∼10−15 s, ∼10−14 s and ∼10−12–10−13 s, respectively. However, a molecule absorbs or emits a photon of specific energy in a situation where the molecule has two energy states separated by the same amount of energy, and the excitation must be quantum mechanically favorable. According to time-dependent perturbation theory, the following equation expresses the probability of absorbing photon by a molecule as: Wf←i ∝ |f|μz|i|2Ez2(2)where, f|μz|i is the matrix element of the transition dipole moment. The initial and excited molecular states are denoted by the letters i and f, respectively (eqn (2)). Here, the light polarization vector is parallel to the laboratory Z axis. The molecule's absorption, emission, and scattering of a photon create molecular spectra, the fingerprint of molecular identity, molecular structure, dipole/quadrupole moments, and bond strength. The rotational spectra fall in the microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The molecule has a rotational energy level, provided it must have some permanent electric dipole moment. This imposes a limitation on the applicability of microwave spectroscopy for the characterization of gas molecules by taking pure rotational spectra. A simple diatomic or more complex molecules have both rotation and vibration simultaneously. The pure vibrational spectrum lies in IR region due to the anti-symmetrical stretch, bending mode vibration of the molecules.
In contrast, the electronic spectrum falls in the visible and NIR region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In general, the trace gas possesses weaker line-strengths or low absorption coefficients in the near-IR region or visible range. Therefore, the spectroscopic techniques rely on the absorption in the mid-IR range (wavelength: 1–20 μm, as shown in Fig. 2), where the trace gases have strong fundamental rotational-vibrational (ro-vibrational) transitions and hence possess significant absorption coefficient.75 Therefore, one can get the highest selectivity for gas sensing by high resolution ro-vibrational spectroscopic technique as gas molecules have specific mid-IR absorption (Fig. 2). In this mid-IR region, one can find an absorption line for a target gas where other gases/water molecules do not overlap with the absorption lines. Therefore, the availability of the excitation laser sources is the only concern for the more excellent selectivity for a target gas.
 Fig. 2  Absorption spectra of trace gases extracted from the high-resolution transmission molecular absorption (HITRAN) database.76 
3.3. Photoacoustic properties
The photoacoustic (PA) signal generation by a gas molecule involves three steps: the gas molecules’ absorption of the electromagnetic wave, subsequent relaxation process, and forming an acoustic wave into the gaseous medium. Various relaxation channels may occur for an individual gas molecule, including radiative transition in the form of luminescence, non-radiative energy transfer between two molecules and/or conversion of energy to translational energy of the molecule. Collisional relaxation is the dominating process over radiative relaxation at a particular temperature and pressure. The incident photon energy is converted to rovibrational and translational energy of the gas molecules. Hence, the increase in translational energy of the molecules heats the gas. Thus, an acoustic wave is formed with the modulation of the intensity of the excitation light source. A proper microphone/sensor can detect the photoacoustic wave. Like absorption spectrum, the intensity of the photoacoustic spectrum at the exciting wavelength is proportional to the molar optical absorption coefficient (α) of the light-absorbing components, i.e., the gas molecules. The expression for the intensity of PA signal from the direct photoacoustic setup is expressed as:3 I = PsSaCcellαηCn(3)where I is the Fourier component of the acoustic sensor signal (e.g., from the capacitive microphone at the frequency of light); PS is the optical power of incident light source; Sa is the sensitivity of the acoustic sensor; Ccell is the photoacoustic cell constant; η is the heat conversion efficiency of the absorbed light; Cn is the number density of the molecules.3,16
Furthermore, the normalized noise equivalent absorption parameter (NNEA) is an important indicator to assess the performances of different photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS) sensors concerning detecting an analyte gas. NNEA is reliant on the optical power of incident light sources (Ps), the signal integration time (t), and the minimum detectable absorption coefficient (αmin) by the following equation:78 (4)
The NNEA is independent of the target gas molecules, and it serves as an indicator for the comparison of the various PAS systems. αmin = α/SNR (cm−1) can be calculated using the HITRAN database, knowing the targeted wavelength, SNR, trace gas pressure, and temperature, where SNR is the signal to noise ratio (SNR). A suitable photoacoustic cell and a susceptible acoustic sensor may enhance the selectivity of specific gas molecules if the most appropriate optical sources are available. Fig. 3 shows the best noise equivalent concentrations (NEC, i.e., minimum detection limits represent the sensitivity) for various target gas molecules as a function of the incident laser wavelength in the UV–Vis, near-IR, mid-IR, and THz spectral ranges for quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy (QEPAS) that was employed to detect gas so far.77,79–82
 Fig. 3  The best noise equivalent concentrations (NEC) for various target gas molecules as a function of the incident laser wavelength in QEPAS technique. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Elsevier Ltd., copyright 2020. 
3.4. Refractive index
All trace gases and vapors have a specific refractive index. Refractive index can be a measuring parameter for the selective detection of target gas molecules. The amount of a trace gas in a gas mixture is very low (<ppm), and hence long interaction path is required for selective detection of a target gas by optical technique measuring the refractive index. Photonic crystals (PhC) need a small interaction path to detect target gas molecules at low concentration.83–85 PhC consists of a periodic arrangement of dielectric layers. It will produce a photonic bandgap, which limits the light of specific wavelengths or frequencies to pass through.84 The diffraction of light is observed in PhCs and can be explained by Bragg's law:86 2dncosθ = mλ(5)where d is the spacing between two planes in the periodic lattice, n is the effective refractive index PhC, θ is incidence angle, m is the diffraction order, and λ is the wavelength of incident light. The incident light of a specific wavelength will be reflected when it matches the photonic bandgap. The average value of the refractive index (neff) of the photonic nanoarchitectures can be approximately expressed according to theory as:84 (6)where ni and Vi are the refractive index and volume fraction of individual dielectric layers of PhC. The effective refractive index increases when the air gap inside the PhC is replaced by the target gas molecules. This leads Bragg's peak to a longer wavelength. The same effect will be observed due to an increase in the spacing between two planes in the periodic lattice (d) because of swelling by the target gas molecules. Moreover, gas sensing can be possible by making photonic crystal waveguides and cavities. This type of gas sensor is often called a refractive index (RI) gas sensor. Porous silicon, Bragg stacks, colloidal crystals, and inverse opal are the common PhC for RI gas sensors. However, a specific PhC with desired properties is needed to detect a trace gas selectively.
3.5. Adsorption
When a solid surface is brought in contact with the gas, the molecules from the gas begin to gather at the solid surface.87 This phenomenon is called the adsorption of gas. It depends on the nature of the gas, the pressure of the environment, the temperature of the solid surface, and the surface area of the solid in contact. The term ‘adsorption’ of gas on the solid surface implies that gas molecules accumulate in the interfacial layer, but ‘desorption’ denotes the opposite process. In this context, adsorption isotherm is the graphical interpretation of equilibrium relation between the quantity of the adsorbed material (adsorbate) by the solid surface (adsorbent) and the pressure or concentration in the gas phase at a constant temperature. The isotherm is the primary source of information on the adsorption process. Adsorption occurs either in the form of physical adsorption (physisorption) of gas molecules on the solid surface due to universal van der Waals interactions or in the form of a chemical process (chemical adsorption or chemisorption). However, physisorption possesses low adsorption enthalpy (20–40 kJ mol−1), whereas enthalpy of chemisorption is high (80–400 kJ mol−1) as it involves chemical bond formation. Both the process may occur simultaneously under specific conditions. The adsorption technique may be used as a sieve to filter out specific gas, and it can be used as a prefilter technique for solid state gas sensors. However, the physical adsorption has no practical significance in terms of selectivity for gas sensing, as in most instances, van der Waals interactions cannot distinguish between various gas molecules. It may provide good sensitivity for gas molecules without compromising other factors.

Adsorption in sorption filters. 
Analyte gases either adsorb (physisorption) onto the filter or are absorbed in the filter to enhance the selectivity of a gas sensor.88 The adsorption depends on the chemical surface group, available surface area, and pore size distribution of the filter, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The selective detection of relatively inert gas molecules, e.g., H2, CO, or CH4, can be achieved using non-polar filters like activated carbon, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Here, the non-specific dispersion forces are directly proportional to the molecular weight of target gas molecules.89 On the contrary, the polar filters interact with the gas molecules mainly through dipole–dipole interactions and hydrogen bonding. Hence trace gas molecules like alcohols, carbonyls, aldehydes can be selectively filtered out by the polar filters, e.g., activated alumina, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The polar filters are also strong absorbers of water, minimizing the impact of humidity in the selectivity. The adsorption process (i.e., physisorption) occurs through weak (10–100 meV) and reversible interaction forces (i.e., van der Waals) between the absorbent and the target gas molecules.90 However, the adsorption capacity is characterized by the breakthrough curve. Proper flow rate, temperature, and adsorbent loading can control the filter materials’ breakthrough volume and maximum amount of adsorption. The relative humidity is ubiquitous in most applications, and water adsorption lowers the breakthrough time subject to the hydrophilicity of the filter material. However, chemical adsorption occurs for catalytic filters, and it usually needs some heating to improve selectivity. These filters can work for low analyte concentrations and high or varying humidity as specific chemical interactions are involved.
 Fig. 4  The essential properties of filters: surface chemical groups, surface area, and pore size distribution. (b) The schematic shows the mechanism of activated carbon (non-polar) filters for sensing low molecular weight gases present in VOC. (c) Mechanism of activated alumina filter (polar) for the adsorption of gas molecules. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 


Adsorption and mass. 
The adsorption process may help find the target gas selectively by an indirect method considering mass as the fundamental physical properties of the target gas molecule. Molecular adsorption on the surface of piezoelectric material (Quartz) produces a minor change in the crystal's mass. This technique figures out the selective detection of a target gas. A quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) resonator can measure the mass change accurately and has recently been used for gas sensor devices. The change in mass is linearly proportional to the change in the defined oscillation frequency controlled by a well-known equation called the Sauerbrey equation91 as expressed by: (7)where, Δm is the change of mass, Δf is the change oscillation frequency of oscillating piezoelectric material, f0 is the resonant frequency, C is a constant depending on the property of the QCM, ρ is the density of the crystal, and μ is the shear modulus of the crystal. Still, the fabrication technology limits the technique's applicability to enhance sensitivity and selectivity, where frequencies above 100 MHz are challenging to reach.27 Moreover, the signal-to-noise ratio at higher frequency limits the LOD of the technique. However, choosing appropriate piezoelectric and piezoresistive materials for the adsorption of gas molecules may enhance selectivity in gas sensing applications.


Adsorption and band structure. 
The optical band gap (Eg) of a material (especially 2D materials) changes owing to the adsorption of the target gas molecule. It is reflected in the change of electrical conductivity (σ) of the materials, and hence, the concentration of gas can be estimated. Due to adsorption, the electrical conductivity (σ) of the materials changes, and the expression for the electrical conductivity is given by the equation below.92 (8)where, σ0 is a constant, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the thermodynamic temperature of the material. Therefore, we can calculate the change in the Eg by measuring the change in electrical conductivity due to adsorption of a target gas molecule. Hence, selective determination of gas molecules is possible to a certain extent.


Adsorption and gas permeability. 
Gas permeability through polymer membrane involves adsorption, diffusion, and desorption. The fundamental idea of gas sensor design is using conducting polymer or similar materials.27 Fick's laws93 describes the gas diffusion process on the polymer surface or polymer membrane on a macroscopic (continuum) level. According to Fick's law, the net mass (m) flow rate of gas molecules diffusing through the polymer membrane depends on the concentration of gas (C), diffusion coefficient (D), and thickness of the polymer. The sensor response in terms of change of resistance can be expressed as follows:27,94 (9)and (10)where, ΔR is the change in resistance in the presence of the target gas, R0 is the resistance in the absence of target gas, K is the binding constant, and Rsat is the resistance at saturation. Selectivity relies on the fact that the diffusion coefficient (D) has a distinct value for different gases at certain temperatures and pressure. The sensor response can be understood in terms of the change of resistance of the sensing elements.27,94


Adsorption: ionosorption and reduction–reoxidation. 
At present, two well-known models describe the gas sensing mechanism of MOS sensors – (i) the ionosorption model: the space-charge effects or the changes in the electric surface potential are developed as a result of the gas adsorption, ionization, redox reactions, and (ii) the oxygen-vacancy model: a change of oxygen stoichiometry occurs owing to the reaction between oxygen vacancies and gas molecules, and their reduction–reoxidation mechanism.31 The sensing mechanism of MOS-based sensors based on the current models and theories depicts different influencing factors, e.g., the particle size,95 pore size,96 grain boundary,97 heterojunction,98 defect structure,99,100 could be beneficial to the improvement of the sensing properties.31 The sensing properties of MOS sensor are decided by three main factors – the receptor function, transducer function, and utility factor, as shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  The image explains the gas sensing mechanism by the n- and p-type MOSs. The sensing properties are decided by three factors – the receptor function, transducer function, and utility factor.31,101 Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
The effect of grain size in sensing a gas molecule by the MOS materials has been proved by many recent investigations in both theory and experiments. In semiconductors, the amount of the space-charge layer (LS) depends on the Debye length (LD) as:102 (11)where e, VS, k, and T are electron charge, surface potential, Boltzmann constant, and thermodynamic temperature of the semiconductor, respectively.103 The expression for Debye length104 of a semiconductor is (12)where, ε, and ND are dielectric constant and the net density of dopants, respectively. The Debye length is a material property and depends on the net density of dopants in extrinsic semiconductors where mobile charge carriers screen out electric fields in semiconductors. For example, a typical dopant density of 1015 to 1017 cm3 induces the Debye length of the order of 1–10 nm.103,105 The sensitivity of MOS gas sensor is inversely proportional to grain or crystallite size (d). For low grain sized materials where d < 2LS, the electrical conductivity decreases sharply due to the intracrystalline conductivity and eventually highest gas sensitivity can be acquired. The change of the electrical conductivity of n-type MOS materials can be explained by the changes in depletion layers and potential barriers at grain boundaries. On the other hand, a charge-carrier transport channel will be formed in the hole accumulated layer for p-type MOS materials. Moreover, the gas sensing ability of MOS materials not only depends on the crystallite or particle size but the porosity significantly influences the gas sensing performances of porous materials in comparison to particle size.27,31 The utility factor, as shown in Fig. 5, involves the gas diffusion process and the sensing of target gases during the response and recovery process, which mainly depends on the pore size. Gas diffusion through a porous material involves surface diffusion, Knudsen, and molecule diffusion.106,107 Though all the diffusion process increase with the pore size, Knudsen diffusion dominates in mesoporous sensing materials. The diffusion constant (DK) can be expressed as:31 (13)where, T is the absolute temperature, r is the pore radius, R is the ideal gas constant, and M is the molecular weight of diffusing gas. Therefore, porous MOS materials show enhanced sensitivity in detecting target gas molecules. The Knudsen diffusion constant (DK) depends significantly on the molecular weight, and hence different gas molecules could be identified selectively by altering the pore size of the MOS sensing materials. However, the MOS sensor shows high sensitivity to various gases, but the selectivity is poor and needs more research. The nanowire structure of semiconductors provides improved selectivity; for example, ZnO nanowire shows good selectivity for reducing and oxidizing gases.108 Humidity has a drastic effect on the MOS sensors, and hence an efficient humidity-independent, room-temperature sensing material must be needed for practical application. Selectivity may improve for MOS gas sensors without compromising sensitivity by manipulating the morphological structure and defect structure of metal oxides or modulating the phase of the oxide semiconductors.

4. Techniques for the improvement of selectivity
To date, selectivity in trace gas sensing remains the focus of the latest research, though researchers attain a sensitivity level of ppbv or even lower concentration. In most cases, the sensors were demonstrated for ppmv or lower gas concentration or an environment containing an equivalent concentration of constituent gases. However, all the types of gas sensing techniques or sensors, whether spectroscopic or non-spectroscopic, suffer from low selectivity when exposed to higher concentrations of constituent gas or moister. Nevertheless, we can achieve good selectivity by selecting the appropriate, suitable, and complex techniques for a gas or gas mixture. However, a trace gas can be identified primarily in two different ways – (i) Direct techniques: trace gas should have intrinsic or unique properties such as optical absorption, emission, or other physical properties. Hence, selectivity will be higher for direct techniques as the intrinsic properties of the gas show variation with the concentration. Among these techniques, spectroscopic techniques based on multiple absorptions (like CEAS) always produce better results in terms of the selectivity issue. (ii) Indirect techniques: The properties of some materials or material system or device must change in the presence of trace gases induced by chemical reaction/adsorption along with the variation of external parameters, e.g., temperature, pressure, resistance, conductivity, and field. Hence, the selectivity will be compromised for these measurement techniques as the error comes from two separate systems. Recently, several analytical techniques have been used for trace gas detection, e.g., spectroscopic,109–111 calorimetric,40,112 acoustic,3 electrical,5,113,114 electrochemical,15,27 photonic integrated circuits (PICs),25 which have resulted in a significant increase in sensitivity, reaching even ppt range along with reasonable selectivity at predefined conditions. Still, selectivity and zero cross-sensitivity continue to be fundamental research challenges after many years of research.115–118 The conventional techniques or sensors available to detect trace gas suffer from many drawbacks and selectivity. However, good selectivity from a simple, robust, and cost-effective gas sensor or technique is still the researcher's dream. Table 2 presents a few examples of gas sensing where the researchers can detect the target gas selectively. However, not a single sensing material/sensor/technique is efficient in humid environments and selectively detects target gas. In addition, no comprehensive studies were included in the demonstrations to detect the target gas selectively in a harsh environment, i.e., the amount of other constituent gases may vary in an extensive dynamic range. Nevertheless, the optical gas sensors may detect the target gases in a complex environment if suitable laser excitation sources are available for absorption-based techniques. Moreover, sorption filters, pre-concentrators, sensor arrays, and multicomponent data analysis may improve the selectivity of an existing sensor or technique. In the following sections, most common techniques/methods for the improvement of selectivity will be discussed though thousands of unconventional techniques/innovations show selective detection of analyte gases.
Table 2 Some recent demonstrations of trace gas sensing to enhance selectivity. Though many articles have shown the selective detection of trace gases, few examples are presented here (only for LOD ∼ ppm or less). There is no conflict of interest in choosing the articles in the table below




Gas sensor types
Materials/techniques
Detection limit
Response time/temperature
Selectivity
Ref.


Target gas
Environment of




Abbreviations: RT – room temperature; OF-CEAS – optical feedback cavity-enhanced absorption spectroscopy; QEPAS – quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy; CEPAS – cantilever-enhanced photo-acoustic spectroscopy; MPD-PTS – mode-phase-difference photothermal spectroscopy; YSZ – yttria-stabilized zirconia, QCM – quartz crystal microbalance; PAA – polyacrylic acid; PA – propanoic acid; HA – hexanoic acid; HPA – heptanoic acid; OA – octanoic acid (OA).




Optical Gas sensors
OF-CEAS
17 ppb
RT
NH3
H2O, CO2

119



OF-CEAS
0.9 ppt
180 ms/RT
NO
N2

120



QEPAS
90 ppb
1 s/RT
CH4
N2

77



CEPAS
119 ppq
32 min/RT
HF
Air (10% humidity)

78



PAS
31 ppb
400 s/RT
C2H2
N2

121



MPD-PTS
500 ppt
100 s/RT
C2H2
N2

122



Solid state gas sensors
(GaxIn1−x)2O3 NPs
50 ppb
1 s/200 °C
Formaldehyde
Acetone, ethanol, toluene, methanol, air (35% humidity)

123



p-Type Mn3O4 nanorods
40 ppm
116 s/RT
NO2
CO, NH3, CH4, benzene, toluene, and acetone

124



Cu-Doped ZnO nanoellipsoids
10 ppm
13 s/150 °C
NH3
Acetone, LPG, CO2, SO2

125



Al-Doped ZnO NPs
10 ppm
2 s/500 °C
Acetaldehyde
NO, NO2, trimethylamine, CO, NH3, toluene, benzene

126



WO3 nanoplates
1 ppm
∼50 s/100 °C
NO2
NO, CO, CO2, NH3, SO4, LPG, acetone, and moisture

127



MoO3 microsheets
100 ppm
3 s/275 °C
Triethylamine
Ethanol, acetone, formaldehyde, methanol, benzene, toluene, and H2S

128



Au/MoS2
50 ppm
∼2000 s/70 °C
NO2
Ethanol, H2, NH3

129



MoS2/SnO2
0.5 ppm
∼6.8 min/340 °C
NO2
H2, CO, H2S and NH3

130



MoS2/ZnO
50 ppm
260 °C
CH3CH2OH
Methanol, NH3, benzene, toluene

131



In2O3–rGO
30 ppm
4 min/RT
NO2
H2, CH4, ethanol, methanol, CO

132



CuO nanoplatelet
40 ppm
RT
NO2
IPA, NH3, H2S, CO, and CH4

63



Pd/θ-Al2O3 & Pt/α-Al2O3
500 ppm
∼60 s/400 °C
H2
CH4

133



MoS2
<1 ppm
10 s/RT
ethanol
O2, water vapor and ethanol

134



Sensor array
Pt, NiO and Au@Pyrex glass chip
4%
30 min/RT
NH3, CO, H2S
N2

135



Pure and Fe doped In2O3 nanofibers
5 ppm
250–450 °C

p-Xylene, toluene, benzene, ethanol, formaldehyde
Air

136



p-NiO/n-SnO2 hetero junctions
20 ppm
200 °C
NO2
H2, Dry air

137



SnO2/MOx hetero structure
10 ppm
<60 s
Ethanol, acetone, and xylene
Dry air

138



Filters
Filter –Pt/Al2O3 sensor – Si/WO3
50 ppb
55 s
Acetone
CO, isoprene, NH3, ethanol, H2

139



Filter – Cr2O3 sensor – SnO2
100 ppb
9 s
Ethylene
NH3, dimethylamine, formaldehyde, ethanol, CO, trimethylamine

140



Filter – ZnO sensor – Si/WO3
250 ppb
—
Acetone, benzene, H2, CH4, toluene
Ethanol, formaldehyde

141



Filter – zeolite LTA sensor – Zn1−xCuxO
50 ppb
<1 min
NO
Acetone, CO2, ethanol, H2, NH3

142



Filter – activated alumina sensor – Pt/SnO2
5 ppb
10 s
Isoprene
Acetone, ethanol, methanol, NH3

143



Pattern recognition
AuPd|YSZ|Pt
20 ppm
450–500 °C
NO
NO2, C3H6, C3H8, NH3

144



Catalyst-loaded ZnO nanofibers
5 ppm
450 °C
Acetone
NO, CO, NH3, toluene

145



LSPR sensor array
10–50 ppm
RT
PA, HA, HPA, OA
Dry air

146



Others
PAA-coated QCM
50 ppm
RT
NH3
NO2, SO2, H2S, ethanol, acetone, formaldehyde, tetrahydrofuran

147



Dual transduction gas sensor
12 ppm
RT
Pentanol
Methanol, ethanol, acetone, tetrahydrofuran

148



μGC and Pd-doped SnO2 NPs
1 ppm
2 min/RT
Methanol
Ethanol (up to 62000 ppm), acetone, H2

149





As evident by Table 2, selective gas sensing is possible by modern spectroscopic techniques, including PAS owing to the inherent ro-vibrational signature of the target gas, mass spectroscopy owing to the mass of the target gas molecules, and solid-state sensors for its selectivity for specific target gas. The development of techniques and sensors will be discussed in the following sections. Though many materials and methods are available for selective detection of the target gas, the direct and indirect methods, techniques, and sensors will be considered here in a generalized way.
4.1. Spectroscopic techniques

Absorption-based techniques. 
Most of the optical gas sensors are based on Beer-Lambert's law150 where the attenuation of light passing through a medium is directly proportional to the concentration of the medium and the path length. It denotes a linear relationship between the absorbance (A), the concentration (c), molar absorption coefficient or molar absorptivity (ε), and path length (l) in gas medium. The absorbance is defined via the incident intensity (I0) and transmitted intensity (I) by: (14)
The base 10 is typically used in analytical chemistry and for liquid phase samples. We will use base e throughout as the review only explore trace gas sensing.24 This equation depicts that the concentration of gas is inversely proportional to the path length. Hence, the path must be increased to detect an ultra-low concentration of gas in optical gas sensors. A typical optical gas sensor consists of: (i) a monochromatic or polychromatic wave source of intensity I0, (ii) a gas cell or optical cavity or multi-pass cells of length l, (iii) a suitable detector to detect the transmitted wave of intensity I(λ), e.g., photodiode, thermopile, or pyroelectric, or an acoustic detector. The gas molecules absorb at different regions: (i) UV region (200–400 nm) for electronic transition, (ii) near-infrared region (NIR, 700 nm – 2.5 μm) for molecular vibrational and rotational transition, and first harmonic generation, (iii) mid-IR region (2.5–14 μm) for molecular vibrational and rotational transition, and fundamental electronic transition. The direct absorption techniques, which is the most common techniques with simple optical configuration, provide low sensitivity (absorbance ∼10−3) because of interference from 1/f noise and intensity fluctuation. The easiest solution for enhanced sensitivity and selectivity is to reduce the noise and increase the absorbance in the measurement system. Employing wavelength/frequency modulation spectroscopy, a reasonably high absorbance of ∼10−5 can be achieved. Wavelength modulation spectroscopy detects the gas absorption harmonics by simultaneously scanning and modulating the laser frequency.151,152 Selectivity will be improved in measuring low absorbance by suppressing 1/f noise significantly by shifting the detection band to high frequency. Frequency modulation spectroscopy is capable of sensitive and rapid measurement of the absorption or dispersion associated with narrow spectral features, and it can monitor time-varying absorption changes with a temporal resolution in the ns regime.153 Modulation spectroscopy measures a difference signal directly proportional to the concentration of gas and, it allows for shifting a measured signal to a higher frequency region, hence providing a larger signal-to-noise ratio and higher sensitivity.154 Several cavity-enhanced spectroscopies (CES) or cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy (CEAS) are applied to achieve highly sensitive absorbance of ∼10−7–10−9. There are three modes of CES as depicted in Fig. 6 – (i) Cavity Ring-Down Spectroscopy (CRDS): it is used to measure gas-phase absorbers, aerosols due to low scattering and can achieve a path length of kilometers,155,156 (ii) Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy (ICOS): in contrast to cw (continuous wave)-CRDS, the laser light is not locked on each cavity mode and produce dense mode structure.157,158 The main advantage is that it is possible to use without limitations regarding ring-down time or mode matching. (iii) Cavity Attenuated Phase Shift Spectroscopy (CAPS): the intensity of a cw source is modulated at a particular frequency which is like ring downtime as in CRDS.159 Therefore, multi-pass absorption techniques like CRDS and ICOS have more advantages than conventional single-pass absorption techniques, and additionally, measurements are performed in the time domain, which eventually increases the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).155
 Fig. 6  A generalized pictogram shows the essential elements of a cavity enhanced spectroscopy (CES) instrument, including a light source, detector, and high reflectivity (HR) mirrors. There are several variations of CEAS spectroscopy characterized by the time and intensity domain. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
CES techniques are limited by the availability of tunable laser light at the appropriate wavelength where the target gas will absorb and the availability of high reflectance mirrors at those wavelengths. CESs are powerful analytical techniques to obtain both high selectivity and sensitivity for a target trace gas. Using the same principle, gas sensors designed with infrared light source and detector are generally known as nondispersive IR (NDIR) sensors along with their variations by changing the detector (acoustic, photoacoustic) and spectral regions. Apart from these well-known techniques, several variations of absorption spectroscopy have been used in recent years to detect trace gases and VOCs. Some notable examples are optical feedback cavity enhanced absorption spectroscopy (OF-CEAS),119 tunable diode laser spectroscopy (TDLS),24 photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS),24,161 quartz-enhanced PAS (QEPAS),77,79,81,162 differential optical absorption spectroscopy (DOAS),163–165 noise-immune cavity-enhanced optical heterodyne spectroscopy (NIC-EOHS),166 two-tone frequency modulation spectroscopy (TTFMS),167–169 and broadband cavity-enhanced spectroscopy (BB-CEAS).46,170
Modern spectroscopic techniques are mainly studied for trace gas sensing due to their use in real-time measurements, the efficacy of non-invasive and accurate detection in a combustion environment or a complex gas mixture.171 In a gas mixture including water vapor, one of the main challenges is identifying the target gas in the presence of background absorption lines arising due to water vapor. Moreover, the relative strength of the absorption lines increases with temperature and hence increases the chance of overlapping absorption lines. The wavelength modulation spectroscopy (WMS) technique can overcome the difficulties of detecting trace gas. However, the accuracy and selectivity of gas sensing using mid-IR spectroscopic techniques depend on the noise, repeatability, and reproducibility. For laser-based techniques, noise and repeatability play a significant role in generating errors in the final measurements. Therefore, researchers must have an excitation source in the mid-IR range with good stability and repeatability. Another approach is to make the techniques independent of the intensity of the source as researchers do in spectroscopic techniques like CRDS.155
Du et al. has summarized single- and multi-component simultaneous detection of hydrocarbon or trace gases using mid-IR absorption techniques, and the detection limits range from ppb to ppm level with good selectivity.172 In these spectroscopic techniques, several advanced mid-IR laser sources were used such as quantum cascade lasers (QCL, ∼4–10 μm), inter-band cascade lasers (ICL, ∼3–6 μm), vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSEL, 1–3 μm), as well as several advanced detectors, were employed, e.g., quantum heterostructure detector,173–176 avalanche photodiode (APD),177,178 new types of gas cells.179–184 Therefore, the sensitivity and selectivity depend on the quality of the sources and detectors indirectly. Thus, selectivity can be improved by utilizing the same spectroscopic technique but using a new laser source operating at a unique wavelength where a target gas would only absorb in the presence of other constituent gases. In the same way, the modern state-of-the-art detector may resolute the closely valued signals of different gases in the mixture, and thus, the selectivity will improve.


Photo-acoustic spectroscopy (PAS). 
PAS is an indirect absorption technique where the incident continuous or pulsed laser light produces a heating effect in an absorbing medium via non-radiative relaxation processes and hence produces a photoacoustic signal as depicted in Fig. 7(a). The sensitivity in conjunction with portability would be an excellent combination for sensing trace gases to ppq level. The photo-acoustic spectroscopy (PAS)3,14,16,24,185,186 technique combines acoustic measurements with optical spectroscopy to measure the concentration of gases and provides the sensitivity and detection limit approximately independent of the laser-gas interaction length.3 In comparison to conventional gas sensing techniques such as mass spectroscopy, gas chromatography, and IR transmission spectroscopy, PAS is a portable and cost-efficient alternative. PAS offers the following main advantages: (i) it needs only short pathlengths, (ii) a simple detector like the microphone is needed at room temperature with a wavelength-independent responsivity, (iii) scattering does not produce any severe effects in the sensitivity, and (iv) it has extensive dynamic range. Still, the sensitivity and selectivity of PAS is limited due to several reasons: (i) a high-quality broadband optical excitation source is needed with a spectrally resolved detection or an illumination method, (ii) limited use of a capacitive microphone as a detector in the electro-magnetic interface, (iii) requires sufficient sampling pressures (≈ 100 Torr − 1 atm) for the generation of the acoustic waves with sufficient intensity which limits the selectivity in some cases, (iv) needs a high-quality preamplifier to enhance the low photoacoustic signal.16,187–190 The photoacoustic signal will be observed when the non-radiative transition occurs in the target gas molecules due to excitation by the light source. In recent years, several variations of state-of-the-art PAS are available to achieve an attractive sensitivity of parts-per-quadrillion by volume (ppqv) – quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy (QEPAS) or in-plane quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy (IP-QEPAS),191–193 quartz-enhanced photothermal spectroscopy (QEPTS),194–196 cantilever-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy (CEPAS),78,197 near-infrared photoacoustic spectroscopy (NIR-PAS),190,198,199 dynamic photoacoustic spectroscopy (DPAS)200,201 and dual-comb photoacoustic spectroscopy (DCPAS) or optical frequency comb photoacoustic spectroscopy (OFC-PAS).202–204
 Fig. 7  A schematic shows the basic setups of direct PAS. (a) The basic configuration of PAS where a modulated light source generates the PA signal and a sound transducer detects the amplitude, (b) modification of acoustic wave can be accomplished by an acoustic resonator, (c) a quartz tuning fork (QTF) may serve as a cheaper narrow bandwidth resonator, (d and e) a multi-pass cell or optical resonator may multiply the PA signal to increase the optical power. Reproduced from ref. 16 under Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. 
The selectivity in direct PAS setups is limited by the spectral function of the source and non-radiative decay channels of the target gas molecules. On the other hand, the light source's emission spectrum must coincide with the absorption spectrum of the target gas for the indirect PAS setups. The potential for miniaturization of PAS setup with reasonable selectivity and sensitivity can be achieved via several approaches – (i) the use of acoustic resonator will enhance the signal to noise ratio (few works have been done so far) as shown in Fig. 7(b) and hence increase the selectivity indirectly, (ii) indirect PAS, i.e., photoacoustic NDIR setups can show improved selectivity in its miniaturized form like the use of QTF as cited in Fig. 7(c), (iii) the increase of absorption path length provides further enhanced sensitivity and selectivity as shown in Fig. 7(d and e), (iv) development of mid-IR laser source will solve the selectivity issue so that the target-specific wavelength can be used.


Photonic crystals. 
Optical signal detection has proved a promising approach to improve selectivity, achieve higher sensitivity, stability, and real-time detection system. However, there is no scope for immediate commercialization of optical sensors/techniques due to the high cost and relatively large sensor device (to maintain a long optical path). The use of mirrors can reduce the interaction volume; still, the overall cost cannot be lowered because of the huge cost of optical components and their fabrication processes. In this perspective, PhCs may be an alternative approach to obtain an optical gas sensing system that offers compact, portable, remote sensing, robust, and low-cost gas sensors (though sensitivity cannot be achieved much like other optical sensors). Still, a limited number of PhCs have been demonstrated so far, and hence there is a huge scope of research in the field to improve the selectivity by optical techniques. PhC sensor depends on the change of refractive index due to analyte gas (eqn (6)), and hence it is also termed refractive index sensors. Goyal et al. reviewed the recent progress in the PhC sensors for trace gas sensing applications.83 The response time of PhC sensors is short, and their performance is insensitive to temperature, electrical interferences, and environment change.83,84 The alteration of the photonic bandgap of PhCs due to analyte gas at low concentration is the main challenge for the selective detection of analyte gas.84,205–208 Therefore, maximum change of photonic bandgap by an analyte gas must be the primary concern in the fabrication of PhCs to improve selectivity. Recent experimental and theoretical demonstrations show that high sensitivity and high-quality factor can be achieved by using different PhC sensor configurations/sensors209,210e.g., PhC waveguide,211,212 PhC nanoresonator,213,214 PhC cavity,215,216 polymeric PhC,217 1-D PhC,218,219 2-D PhC,83,220 3-D PhC,221 plasmonic PhC,222 MEMS PhC,223 porous PhC,224 and PhC fiber.164,225,226

4.2. Non-spectroscopic techniques

Gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC-MS). 
Gas chromatography (GC) is an analytical technique to detect small molecular weight compounds in the gas phase with high accuracy and specificity. GC separates gaseous substances based on dividing a stationary phase from a gas phase.227 GC can be divided into gas–solid (adsorption) and gas–liquid (partition) chromatography. The sensitivity, selectivity, and speed of GC are correlated. To obtain good selectivity, one must compromise with other factors, i.e., sensitivity and speed of operation. The resolution of GC can be expressed in terms of capacity (k), separation factor or selectivity (α), and efficiency (N ∝ L) as , where L is the column length. Thus, GC-MS analytical technique combines gas chromatography and mass spectrometry to detect the small number of trace gases with high selectivity. In this technique, first-order selectivity comes from GC, and second-order selectivity comes from the mass resolution by the MS analytical technique.228,229 GC-MS technique has been widely used to detect trace gases, VOCs, trace amounts of chemicals since its discovery and shows high selectivity up to ppb level.230–232 Recent advanced mass spectrometric techniques like GC-MS and selective ion flow tube-mass spectrometry (SIFT-MS) or selected ion-monitoring mass spectrometry (SIM-MS) are widely used for their specificity, selectivity, and sensitivity for gas sensing. However, these techniques are suffered from complicated instrumentation, time-consuming measurement, non-compact, and expensiveness. It can also be applied to detect samples in the form of solid, liquid, and gas which may be smaller and volatile molecules, e.g., trace gases, aromatics, steroids, fatty acids, and hormones. However, it is limited to thermally stable, non-polar, and volatile compounds with a selectivity of ppb level using multiple detectors. However, this sensitive, robust, and reliable technique requires expensive, bulky equipment, highly trained personnel, and time-consuming pre-concentration of samples. Hence, it will not fit the requirement of modern IoT-enabled trace gas sensing devices or screening tools like e-nose. Still, we are using this technique to detect trace gases with good selectivity through its limitations.
A decades-old technique like a miniaturized or micro gas chromatograph (μGC) is now connected to a mass spectrometer (MS) that shows higher sensitivity and selectivity for the analysis of gases and VOCs.233–237 μGC-MS technique involves several repetitive modules of μ-GC and a quadrupole mass spectrometer for identifying target gases. Each module consists of a micro-injector or pre-concentrator for sample introduction, a micromachined chromatographic column for gas separation, and a non-destructive thermal conductivity micro-detector (μ-TCD) or array of detectors. Regmi and Agah discussed in their comprehensive review236 about the μGC, and pointed out that the selectivity, i.e., the separation efficiency, depends mainly on the geometry of the column, the types of stationary phase, the properties of carrier gas, and the quality of detectors. Researchers must focus on the development of μGC owing to lower power consumption, versatile stationary phase materials, and wearable capabilities in the future.

4.3. Solid state gas sensor and sensing materials
Solid state gas sensors are a class of sensor family where the sensing mechanism involves an interaction (either chemical or physical adsorption) of the target gas with the sensing element in the form of film or other structure and conversion of the sensed signal by the sensor (as discussed in Table 1) into an electrical or other output signal for recognition. MOS sensors can have a detection limit of a large range, as depicted in Fig. 8(a). The sensing elements could be metal oxide, polymer, and carbon-based structures in the form of solid or liquid. Most sensing mechanisms rely on the change of impedance/resistance, temperature, and mechanical properties. That is why the solid-state sensors suffer from low selectivity due to moister and other constituent gases in common environmental conditions.
 Fig. 8  (a) The detection limit of MOS sensors. Reproduced from ref. 238 Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) The dependence of crystal facet on the sensitivities of Ethanol for ZnO hexagonal nanoplates and nanorods at 300 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Model structure of metal heteroatom-doped In2O3, and the Fermi levels of different metal heteroatom-doped In2O3. Reprinted from ref. 240 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
In most cases, the issue with the moister can be avoided by using a higher operating temperature (>100 °C). Moreover, different solid state gas sensors have different responses to the target gas, e.g., linear, exponential, logarithmic, power-law, and many more. Humidity has a drastic effect on the MOS sensors, and hence an efficient humidity-independent room-temperature sensing material must be needed for practical applications.
However, the MOS sensor exhibits high sensitivity to various gases, but the selectivity is poor and needs more in-depth research. Selectivity of MOS gas sensors may improve either by selecting materials/composites with selective gas adsorption or by improving sensitivity (i.e., sensing performance) of existing MOS materials so that it is possible to selectively resolute every constituent gas. Several researchers have discussed in recent review4,10,26–28,114,220 about the possible strategies to improve the sensing performance of MOS-based gas sensors – (i) Exposer of high-energy crystal facets: High energy crystal facets of MOS materials have higher surface energy and more defect sites (leads to more active physicochemical properties) as evident by experiments and first-principles calculations.241–243 It is beneficial for gas sensing owing to two factors – gas adsorption and electron transport. Fig. 8(b) shows an example of a high-energy crystal facet in gas sensing for ZnO nanoplates and nanorods. (ii) Modification with noble metals: Proper doping of noble metals like Au, Ag, Pt, and Pd can improve the gas response of MOS materials. The improvement occurs due to the higher adsorption capacity by lowering the adsorption activation energy,244,245 the electronic sensitization, i.e., forming a Schottky barrier between the metal and MOS materials,246–248 and the chemical sensitization where the target gas adsorbs on the metal cluster, dissociates and produces active atomic species.249–251 (iii) Doping of metal heteroatom: The electron depletion layer will dominate on the surface of the entire grain as heteroatoms replace the metal atoms in MOS materials. Therefore, the addition of heteroatom causes the reduction in grain size, modification of porosity, specific surface area, and energy band structure.252–254Fig. 8(c) shows an example of the modification of band structure to different heteroatoms for In2O3. In recent years, typical heteroatoms, e.g., Ga, Al, La, Ce, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cr, Fe, Y are mainly demonstrated in MOS sensors for sensing formaldehyde, ethanol, H2S, NO2, acetone, xylene, CH4 with a detection limit in ppmv range operating below 300 °C. (iv) Formation of oxide heterojunctions: A single MOS material has its maximum limit of gas sensing, but heterojunctions, a combination of two or more MOS materials, may enhance the gas sensing performances owing to the complementary properties of two or more materials. The reasons behind the improved sensing properties are more adsorption, formation of depletion layers, and the modification of band structure. (v) AC impedance measurement: Combining the real and imaginary part of the impedance offers more reliable data to enhance selectivity than common DC measurements in most MOS sensors. Moreover, the technique addresses three-parameter space, i.e., material/structure, frequency, and temperature, which helps to improve selectivity and reduce noise.28 (vi) QDs based sensor fabrication: the spatial confinement of charge carriers develops unique electrical and optical properties in semiconductor QDs, which show a promising gas sensing performance for application in chemiresistive devices. In this perspective, researchers are developing the fabrication process and studying the functionalities of metal oxide, chalcogenide, and carbon-based QDs.8,23 (vii) Formation of new nanostructures: it is observed that a variety of modified nanostructures, e.g., nanowires, nanotubes, core–shell nanostructures, nanoneedle, nanosheets, and nanofibers of common nanomaterials are showing good response to a target molecule with better sensitivity as well as selectivity. Therefore, newer nanostructures may pave the way for the improvement of selectivity in trace gas sensing.
Moreover, selectivity in gas sensing by a solid-state sensor primarily depends on the proper selection of sensing material. During the last few decades, many efficient sensing materials were developed and demonstrated in solid-state gas sensors, which show good sensitivity and moderate selectivity. The schematic in Fig. 9 shows an overall picture of the evolution of sensing materials during the last fifty years. Metal oxides (MOx) are mainly demonstrated crystalline ionic compounds for gas sensing for years. MOx can show metallic, semiconductor, or insulator characteristics controlling its stoichiometry, size, structure, and doping concentrations. Apart from metal oxides, several other sensing materials like nitrides (B3N4, Zn3N2, Ga3N4), sulfides (ZnS, Cu2S), ferrites (ZnFe2O4, CoFe2O4, LaFeO3, MnFe2O4), transition metal dichalcogenides (SnS2, MoS2, ZnSe), and new alternatives (phosphorene, PhCs, ferrocene, organic field-effect transistors, quantum dots).10,11,84,255 However, very few new sensing materials were developed in the last three years; instead, a modified version of the existing sensing materials or combination of materials or a miniaturization form were used to improve the sensitivity and selectivity. To avoid difficulties in solid state sensors, more in-depth research and demonstration (if possible, then in situ or real-time measurements) must be conducted. The appropriate gas sensing mechanisms with respect to sensing materials must be proposed to understand the gas sensing performance more accurately and comprehensively. The proper knowledge of selective chemical or physical adsorption for MOS materials by evaluating the underlying mechanisms may help to enhance selectivity in gas sensing.
 Fig. 9  A schematic view of the evolution of sensing materials during last five decades. Reproduced from the ref. 10 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2021. 
The sensing of a trace gas by a semiconducting material is based on two basic mechanisms – (i) surface adsorbed oxygen ions (O2−, O−, and O2−) mechanism where the conductivity of the n/p type sensing material increases (decreases) under exposer of reducing (oxidizing) gases, like CO, CH3CH2OH, H2, (NO2, O3, SO2), (ii) charge transfer mechanism where the resistance of sensing materials changes due to the interaction between the sensing materials and the adsorbed gases.6,27,129,255 2D materials act as charge acceptors or donors, and the target gas is recognized via a charge transfer mechanism or alteration of electrical conductivity. Due to the physisorption of gases, the charge transfer mechanism can be envisaged by the enhancement or quenching of PL from 2D materials. A first-principles study on monolayer MoS2 shows that it can adsorb various gas molecules like H2, O2, H2O, NH3, NO, NO2, CO and act as charge acceptors, except NH3.255,256 2D materials like intrinsic graphene,257,258 graphene oxide (GO),258–263 reduced graphene oxide (r-GO),264–268 some layered inorganic analogs of graphene such as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, e.g., MoS2, MoSe2, MoTe2, WS2, WSe2, VS2, ReS2, SnS2), layered III–VI semiconductors, layered metal oxides, phosphorene, germanane, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) are a potential candidate for sensing NO2,259,260,266 H2,257,261 O2, H2S, NH3,263,264 NO,268 CO2,267 SO2,262 CH3OH owing to their semiconducting properties, high surface-to-volume ratio, and tuneable bandgaps.6,129,255,269 Moreover, metal decorated 2D materials268 exhibit an increase in sensitivity with a comparable response time at room temperature as shown in Fig. 10.27,129,255 Similarly, metal oxide decoration130,270 on the 2D material exhibit high sensitivity, excellent selectivity, and repeatability as it does for SnO2 nanocrystal (NC)-decorated crumpled MoS2 nanosheet where it shows high selectivity to NO2 under a practical dry air environment.130
 Fig. 10  Gas sensing responses for (a) pristine MoS2, (b) Pd-decorated MoS2, (c) Au-decorated MoS2 toward 500 ppm C2H5OH, 500 ppm H2, 500 ppm NH3, and 50 ppm NO2 as a function of operating temperature. Schematic illustrations of (d) sensitization of pristine MoS2 by Pd and Au and (e) formation mechanisms of Pd hydride. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Springer Nature Switzerland AG, copyright 2019. 
The efficiency of 2D-materials-based gas sensors relies on the oxygen-containing functional groups as they are the active sites for gas adsorption and improve the sensing performance significantly. Various gas sensing devices can be made of 2D materials,6,102,255,271e.g., chemiresistors,272,273 field-effect transistors (FETs),274–278 layered semiconductor heterojunction,279–281 surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors,282,283 conductometric semiconducting gas sensors,284 impedance sensors.285 Several theoretical studies show that 2D material-based gas sensors can achieve a detection limit of ppb levels and inclusion of cleansing system by using UV light, the detection limit can reach up to ppt level. Moreover, the addition of a pre-concentrator device with the gas sensor is helpful to lower the detection limits of gas sensors. In addition, chemical modification of 2D materials with doping of transition metals, surface functionalization with metal, metal oxides, and polymers, surface treatment, generation of defects can improve the sensitivity, selectivity due to synergetic interactions between these modifiers, the 2D materials, and the target gas molecules. Still, 2D materials may behave similarly with the adsorption of different gas molecules and sensors show ambiguous results in the presence of trace amount of water vapor in the environment. This is the reason why researchers demonstrated their 2D material gas sensing device either in dry air environment or in inert atmosphere to test the selectivity of the sensors.6 Hence, the selectivity can be improved by tuning the operating temperature, humidity filters, annealing temperature programming, device configuration, sensor array formation. However deep understanding of the emission properties (e.g., PL in TMDs) via charge transfer mechanism between the adsorbed gas and the 2D materials may require enhancing the selectivity. A new generation of gas sensors, 2D sensor arrays and multivariable 2D sensor (multi-response mechanisms to different gases) arrays combined with data collection, modelling, and pattern recognition/machine learning may further increase selectivity which remains a key issue for their commercialization from academic research to industrial scale (in IoT and an automated sensor system).
4.4. Indirect techniques
The previous sections discuss spectroscopic, non-spectroscopic techniques and solid-state sensors (rely on sensing materials). The selectivity of existing technology can be improved by combining with some unconventional approaches, e.g., a combination of sensors, preconcentration of analyte gas, filtering the gas mixture, choosing proper data processing algorithms, and pattern recognition.

Pre-concentrator. 
Pre-concentrator is an indirect technique to increase the selectivity of gas sensors. One of the primary reasons behind the low selectivity for gas sensors is the availability of target gas in a gas mixture at an extremely low concentration which may interfere with the signal-to-noise ratio to estimate the outcome. Therefore, one must increase the concentration of analyte/target gas before the measurements so that the output signal must show detectable intensity in comparison to noise. In this scenario, the pre-concentrator mechanism plays an important role, and it accumulates analyte gas of interest as much as possible before analysis by a detector in a gas sensor. The pre-concentrator element itself is a trap for gases either by adsorption or absorption for gas sensing purposes. The pre-concentrator materials must involve a porous material or a chemically reactive layer of material so that the maximum amount of surface will be available for gasses for sorption. The performance of the pre-concentrator depends on various factors – namely, the efficiency, i.e., the fraction of target gas retained in it, the concentration factor, i.e., the factorial increase in the target gas concentration, and the dead volume, i.e., the volume of the target gas lost during one cycle of the sorption-desorption process. Pre-concentrators are made of several structures and shapes, e.g., capillaries, planar micro-machined valve, granules surface, flow-through channels, micro-electromechanical system (MEMS), specific requirements of the detectors.
In recent years, various pre-concentrator materials have been used in gas sensors to enhance sensitivity and selectivity. NDIR, PAS, MOSs, electrochemical, and photoionization detectors are the most common low-cost and portable detectors that rarely achieve extremely low LOD and suffer from low selectivity for a particular VOC or trace gas in a gas mixture. The pre-concentrators can enhance VOC sensors’ sensitivity (below ∼ppb) and selectivity to solve this problem. Years of research helps to develop suitable low-cost and efficient pre-concentrators like nanoporous silica,286 carbon molecular sieve membrane (CMSM),287 Zeolite NaY,288 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),27,289–291 and many more.292,293 Porous systems like MOFs and zeolites are mainly studied pre-concentrator materials in recent days due to their very high surface area (in some cases more than 1000 m2 g−1) in the sensing of H2O, O2, NOx, CO, CO2, hydrocarbons and VOCs, NH3, H2S, SO2, and H2.27,294,295 The working principle of a typical preconcentration using MOFs is illustrated in Fig. 11. First, the target gas is adsorbed by the pre-concentrator materials from a mixture of many molecules, including the target molecules in low concentrations during the sampling period. Then the target gas is released by subsequently heating the pre-concentrator material. MOFs, which may form one-dimensional, two-dimensional, or three-dimensional structures, can adsorb polar and non-polar molecules by their holes and channels with spatial and chemical uniformity due to molecular sieve interactions and chemical-specific interactions.295 Moreover, MOFs show excellent sorbent properties due to their interaction with the target gas via coordination bonding, p-complex formation, hydrogen bonding, and acid-based/electrostatic interactions.296–299
 Fig. 11  Schematics of the working principle of pre-concentrator using MOFs. Here, ΔT represent the increase in temperature of the MOFs to facilitate the desorption process. Reprinted from ref. 295 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2020. 
The use of pre-concentrator elements with spectroscopic techniques may show more excellent selectivity for target gas molecules in a harsh environment or in situ target gas characterization. However, a few studies have been done on gas sensing by using pre-concentrators with rational conditions and selecting suitable evaluation metrics. Therefore, more research needs to be demonstrated to properly use pre-concentrator elements with any gas sensors to enhance selectivity in the immediate future. In addition, the researcher must focus on the MOFs or porous polymers or similar materials which have excellent properties like adsorption performance, large specific surface area and porosity, large active centers, surface functionalization of the porous materials with different surface chemistries, and flexible channel structure to differentiate between different target gases. Furthermore, researchers must concentrate on the suitable adsorption metrics under the actual environmental condition for pre-concentrators to estimate the target gas selectively. At present, some research reports have been published on the combination of sensors and smart modern homes to develop indoor air quality sensor systems.300


Filters. 
Filters represent one of the best approaches to improve the selectivity of gas sensors that were first demonstrated in the 90's.88,301 The filters control the composition of analyte gas in a gas mixture before reaching the sensors by placing it on the top/front of the sensors. The practical and flexible nature of filters may play a significant role in overcoming the selectivity issue for portable and cost-effective sensor fabrication by utilizing the adsorptive nature of target gas molecules. Filters are mainly categorized into three groups – adsorptive, size-selective, and catalytic – with four basic configurations of packed-bed, overlayer (shell formation on top of the sensing materials), membrane (on the top of sensing materials), and separation column.88 In a recent tutorial review,88 authors describe filters’ research frontiers and opportunities to improve selectivity. Fig. 12 shows the performance of gas sensors with filters in overlayer and membrane configuration.
 Fig. 12  (a) Zinc oxide (ZnO) and zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) core–shell heterostructures.88,302 Semiconductor@MOF sensor exhibits selective gas response for reducing gases with different molecule sizes without (b) and with (c) ZIF-8 shell, which works like a sieve to improve the selectivity of formaldehyde sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of microporous zeolite layer supported on porous Al2O3.88,303 Sensor response of non-selective Pd-doped SnO2 sensor without (e) and with (f) a zeolite Mobile-Five (MFI)/Al2O3 membrane. Reprinted from ref. 303 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. 
The selectivity can be improved by deploying the sorption, size-selective, and catalytic filters with the existing gas sensors. The selectivity of the gas sensors can be altered using the sorption type filters in the following ways – (i) Upgradation of adsorbent materials: the adsorbent materials must have high porosity and surface area, specialized surface polarity for chemical functionalization. To design a filter with preferred properties, the pore size of the filters and molecular size of analyte gas must consider for selective detection. Some common filters are activated carbon (100–2000 m2 g−1), activated alumina (100–500 m2 g−1), MOFs (100–1000 m2 g−1), porous polymers (10–1000 m2 g−1), zeolites (500–800 m2 g−1), and silica gel (500–800 m2 g−1. Modifying specific surface area via heat, chemical treatment, or plasma/microwave treatment is the first step towards improving selectivity.304–306 (ii) Polar and non-polar adsorbent: Suitable selection of non-polar filters (e.g., carbon-based filters) or polar (e.g., activated alumina, silica gel, metal–organic pastes) can reduce the possibility of the interference signals due to VOCs or moister in a gas mixture, respectively and hence selectivity can be improved for other trace gases.307–309 Polar adsorbent interact with analyte molecules dipole–dipole, and hydrogen bonding which is favorable to remove alcohols, carbonyls, ketones, aldehydes specifically from a gas mixture, e.g., activated alumina can adsorb alcohols, ketones, and ammonia unaffecting hydrophobic hydrocarbons.310 (iii) Gas specific adsorption: An ideal filter must adsorb a specific gas irrespective of other analyte gases in a gas mixture. Gas specific adsorption filter can support outstanding selectivity and a detection limit of ∼ppbv for a gas sensor, e.g., rapid and selective detection of NH3 by nanostructured porous (78%) CuBr films at room temperature (90% relative humidity, RH) with excellent selectivity among ethanol, acetone, H2, CH4, isoprene, acetic acid, formaldehyde, methanol, and CO.311 (iv) Filters as GC columns: Sorption filters like a GC column detect analyte gas sequentially in time with excellent selectivity among the multi-analyte mixture. The drawbacks of the GC column can be overcome by the miniaturization of the column, low sample, and dead volumes so that the response time and the detection limit will be a few seconds and ∼pptv range, respectively.312,313 GC-sensor, a combination of a portable gas sensor and micro GC column, can be fabricated on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) using planar columns with both photoionization (PID) and thermal conductivity detectors (TCD).314,315 The simple and packed bed sorption column may show high selectivity and excellent sensitivity up to ppbv, e.g., the Tenax TA column can separate formaldehyde selectively (∼5 ppbv at 40% RH) from H2, CH4, CO, methanol, acetaldehyde, ethanol, and acetone.316
The size-selective filters can separate analyte gases according to analyte molecules’ kinetic diameter (depends on the mean free path and the number density). This kind of filter acts as a molecular sieve with a pore diameter of ∼2 nm. The main drawback of the filter is the interference coming from the analyte molecules that have a diameter less than the pore size and the target analyte molecule. Therefore, selective detection is possible in the following ways – (i) Use of multiple filters: The target can be separated selectively if the sensor system operates in combination with multiple filters. It reduces the chance of any interference from constituent analytes present in the gas mixture. (ii) Target specific pore size: MOFs and covalent organic frameworks (COF) possess pore size, which depends on crystal structure and the composition of the material. Therefore, precise control over the pore size of engineered MOFs and COFs can be used for selective adsorption of analyte molecules.317–319 (iii) Permeability: Permeability of the analytes in the filter material depends on the size of analyte molecules, inversely proportional to the thickness of filter and defect concentrations. Irrespective of such constraints, improved selectivity can be achieved by fabricating thin and defect-free size-selective filters and microporous material embedded in the polymer matrix.320–323 (iv) Controlling pore size: Pore size control can be advantageous for selective penetration of analyte molecules through filter materials. The pore size can be altered by heat (thermal coupling),324,325 physical326 and chemical treatments,327 and the encapsulation of ions or nanoparticles.1,328,329 (v) Filter configuration: Overlayer and membrane configuration of size-selective filters offers both advantages and disadvantages for selective detection of analytes as shown in Fig. 12. Overlayer configurations are primarily suitable for room temperature operations to avoid catalytic interference due to the interaction of microporous materials with the analytes at elevated temperatures.330 Whereas membrane filters are free-standing, suitable for any sensors like electrochemical, optical, and solid-state sensors. The membrane can be used for selective detection of analytes only after reducing the high diffusion resistance.
Catalytic filters are an essential class of filters for selective detection of analyte molecules. The fundamental operation of catalytic filter involves the suppression via adsorption or conversion into inert species of the analytes in gas mixture except for the target analyte. However, it needs some heat for the selective detection of analytes as various analytes have a different operational temperatures. Some influential factors control the selectivity of the catalytic filters – (i) Concentration of analyte and humidity: As filters involve catalytic reaction, the concentration analyte, presence of hundreds of interferents, and the humidity play an essential role in the selective detection of the analyte.331–333 Therefore, the operation at elevated temperature may reduce the interference due to humidity. (ii) Metal ions: Incorporation of noble metals, e.g., Ag, Au, Pd, Pt, Rh, may enhance the surface area, acidity, or surface hydrophobicity of filter materials to improve the catalytic activity so that it enhances the selectivity indirectly.334–337 (iii) Target specific physical properties: The selectivity can be improved by exploiting the catalyst interactions,338–340 surface acidity and basicity,141,341,342 removal of conversion products343–345 and higher sensitivity of target analyte by a specific filter.346–348 (iv) Filter configuration: Catalytic filters are fabricated as overlayer configurations on the top of sensing materials so that the sensor efficiency (delayed response) is somehow conceded. An additional inert layer of Al2O3 or SiO2 may solve the problem.349,350 However, optimization of overlayer thickness may balance the sensitivity and selectivity of the sensor.
Modern sensors are using the benefits of filters to enhance the selectivity significantly in the detection of VOCs (sorption filters), alkanes and acetone (catalytic filters), and hydrogen, formaldehyde (size-selective filters). Selectivity tuning can be possible with the use of engineered filters – sorption, size-selective and catalytic – via exploitation of various physical properties of analytes and filter materials. We hope several new filter materials will emerge soon to make an ideal sensor sensible to specific analyte molecules.


Gas sensor arrays. 
Single sensor design can detect single target gas molecules by identifying the change of chemical/physical parameters. In recent years, gas sensor arrays came into the picture to simultaneously realize the concept of smart sensors with multiple gas sensing capabilities. The improvement of selectivity of gas sensor arrays can explain by the following – (i) material design: the analyte gas may produce a simultaneous change of multiple intrinsic properties, e.g., its electrical, dielectric, and piezoelectric properties.114,351 This may help in the selective determination of the analyte gas from a mixture of the gas environment as every gas produces characteristic pattern signatures, (ii) distinctly selective sensor elements: the sensor element, ideally with orthogonal features, detects gases in low concentration, and absorbs enough gas at a higher rate (low response time) due to a large number of sensing elements as it does for arrays made of nanowires, nanorods, and nanofibers (high surface to volume ration for 1D nanostructures), 2D materials, e.g., graphene, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD or TMDC) monolayers.88,114 However, the general-purpose chemical/physical sensor arrays inspired by the vertebrate olfactory system are a potential alternative to costly sensing materials and analytical instrumentation, which remains prevalent to researchers all the time.21,102,352 Moreover, the sensor arrays address complex sensing tasks by employing individual low-performing sensing elements limited by the univariate output (unable to assess the target gas concentration in the presence of other gases). Sensor arrays can solve the limitation of selectivity, i.e., an array of non-specific sensors, owing to their complementary information from the individual sensor element. This is analogous to the mathematical concept of a low-resolution version of the multivariate data where multivariate regression technique can extract individual components from a mixture of others. Numerous articles demonstrated that oxide semiconductors, metals, and other material-based sensors could detect some gases with reasonable sensitivity during the last few years. Still, their selectivity remains insufficient for realistic environments, including several pollutants, moister, and a mixture of gases. Moreover, the easiest solution is that sensors must differentiate between target gases like H2S, H2, and NO2 at room temperature by assessing the different sensing patterns via a gas sensor array, as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustrations of a chemical-sensitive field-effect transistor (CS-FET) chip and experimental characterization of individual CS-FETs. (A) Optical microscope image of a single CS-FET with a Pd–Au sensing layer and micro heaters, (B) CS-FET array with different selective sensing layers, (C) enlarged image of single CS-FET, (D) cross-sectional TEM image of CS-FET as shown in (C). Scale bars, 250 μm. (E and F) Sensor response for H2S gas by Pd–Au CS-FET, (G and H) Sensor response for H2 gas by NI-Pd CS-FET, (I and J) Sensor response for NO2 gas by Ni CS-FET. The terms used in the figure represent as sensor response (ΔG/G0), the response time (t90; time taken for the sensor to reach 90% of its peak value from baseline), and recovery time (t50; time taken for the sensor to recover within 50% of its initial baseline). Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial license from the ref. 353 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. 


Pattern recognition and data processing. 
In recent years, the multivariate pattern recognition technique is proving itself as a prospective and implicit technique to enhance the selectivity in gas sensing or gas sensing arrays. Combining gas sensor array and pattern recognition technique can enhance selectivity and be termed as smart gas sensing technology that would detect, analyze, quantify, and achieve high measurement accuracy of a target gas in a complex environment with multiple gases and get more thoughtful conclusions.102,118,354–357 For example, a MOS sensor with moderate selectivity could show enhanced selectivity in target gas detection if one analyzed the dataset with a proper recognition algorithm. Some recent advanced approaches can be applied for analysis of datasets (gas sensor response drift) such as principal component analysis (PCA)358 or partial least squares (PLS) algorithm for drift component correction (CC), component correction by common principal component analysis (CC-CPCA),358 discrete wavelet transform (DWT),359,360 statistical signal shape analysis (SSA) algorithm,355 partial least squares – discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) method,361,362 data normalization, polynomial curve fitting (PCF) technique for gas sensor signal processing,355,363 and Fourier or wavelet transformation.364 For example, statistical shape space pre-processing improves the selectivity of gases identification using an artificial neural network-based machine learning algorithm for MOS sensors.355 Pattern recognition techniques do not improve the sensitivity of sensing material, but help improve selectivity and sensitivity by adequately analyzing the dataset. All sensing materials have their limitations, and hence its sensitivity/selectivity may not be able to extend beyond a limit. In this scenario, pattern recognition is an alternative technique that may further improve the selectivity of target gas.

5. Conclusions and future perspective
Though several gas sensing materials, sensors, and techniques were developed in recent years, selectivity and repeatability continue to be the key challenges to researchers. A thorough research endeavor is necessary to improve selectivity in trace gas sensing systems with an immediate effect. Moreover, the miniatured gas sensors working at room temperature with ultra-low-power consumption are highly desirable for recent applications in IoT-enabled devices. Among all the techniques, spectroscopic sensing techniques are primarily discussed in the literature due to their extreme selectivity for trace gases by identifying their rovibrational characterization peaks in the NIR region. However, the overlapping with the absorption peaks corresponding to water is the main limitation to detecting the correct peak for identifying target gas, and hence a precise excitation laser wavelength is the prerequisite to obtain the desired selectivity. Lack of exact excitation wavelength, costly components of sensing setup, and the large system size are the main drawbacks to implementing such advanced spectroscopic techniques for routine analysis of trace gases and VOCs. Recently some miniatured spectroscopic techniques were developed, but they are suffered from low sensitivity and selectivity.
As an alternative approach, PAS shows good selectivity as well as cost-effectiveness too. Nevertheless, PAS techniques also suffer from the non-availability of optical excitation sources. The development of new NIR laser sources will solve the selectivity and sensitivity of gas sensing in the coming years. However, more research must be done to reduce the size, cost, and enhancement of sensitivity and selectivity of spectroscopic techniques to detect trace gas quickly and efficiently. Similarly, GC-MS is a powerful and effective technique for identifying trace gas with more excellent selectivity but requires expensive, bulky equipment, highly trained personnel, and time-consuming preconcentration of samples. μGCs connected to a mass spectrometer (MS) to analyze trace gases and VOCs show higher sensitivity and selectivity. Selectivity will be improved by the proper alteration and modification of pre-concentrators/injectors, separation columns, stationary phases, and detectors of μGC setup.
Solid state sensors are commonly studied gas sensors due to their flexibility, portability, cost-effectiveness, and being technologically favorable. The sensors are operated at moderate temperature for better sensitivity and selectivity, limiting real-time detection and effective energy utilization. Therefore, microstructure modulation of sensing materials with carbon-based nanomaterials (e.g., graphene derivatives, carbon nanotubes) could be suitable for modifying the operating temperature, sensitivity, selectivity, recovery rate, and dependence on the humidity. In recent years, the growing interests in 2D materials for trace gas sensing applications need more research to enhance the efficiency of 2D-materials-based gas sensors, which depend on the oxygen-containing functional groups and improve selectivity significantly. The mechanism behind the chemical adsorption or physical adsorption for sensing materials can explain the selectivity for a specific gas. The use of filter materials (sorption, size-selective and catalytic) and sensing materials prove themselves as a practical alternative approach to enhance selectivity in sensing analyte gases. Thus, the comprehensive study and proper explanation of the mechanism of such adsorption process may open multiple applicability of this kind of sensors for the selective detection of trace gases in a realistic environment. Recent demonstrations of gas sensors with higher sensing performances based on the impedance, the hall effect, the work function may find a way to enhance selectivity in solid state gas sensors, leading to their mass commercialization in the future. The comprehensive research on enhancing the sensitivity and selectivity of p-type MOS materials compared to n-type MOS could be beneficial for detecting trace gases in low concentrations (VOCs, gas detection in harsh environments) due to their low humidity dependence and the high catalytic activity.
In most cases, several constituent gases apart from the target gas and the water content in the realistic environment are the main limitations of getting good selectivity irrespective of sensing techniques, mostly overlooked or not clearly explained in the literature. Therefore, researchers must consider the harsh practical environment where the gas sensor would be installed and tune the technique or sensing materials accordingly. Furthermore, the response–recovery curves of target gases are not always even for all gases. Explaining this behavior may help to detect a target gas more selectively. Therefore, pattern recognition techniques would be helpful to improve selectivity in combination with the existing technologies. In this context, combining the gas sensor array and pattern recognition technique might open many research pursuits that may help discover the ideal recipe to achieve the highest sensitivity and selectivity in an environment consisting of multiple gases. In conclusion, a collaborative effort from chemistry, physics, material science, electronics, and artificial intelligence will undoubtedly bring a bright future for trace gas sensors with excellent selectivity.
Author contributions
P. B. collects references, organizes images, and writes manuscripts; M. P. supervises and modifies the manuscript and participate in all discussions.
Data availability statement
Data sharing does not apply to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding from the Technical Research Centre (TRC) [No. All1/64/SNB/2014(C)] of the S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata for this work.
References
T. Zhou, Z. Qin, X. Wang, C. Wu, X. Tang, T. Zhang, H. Wang, C. Xie and D. Zeng, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11045–11048 RSC .
D. Popa and F. Udrea, Sensors, 2019, 19, 2076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, W. Chen and P. Wang, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2020, 1–28 Search PubMed .
A. Dey, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2018, 229, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponzoni, C. Baratto, N. Cattabiani, M. Falasconi, V. Galstyan, E. Nunez-Carmona, F. Rigoni, V. Sberveglieri, G. Zambotti and D. Zappa, Sensors, 2017, 17, 714 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Donarelli and L. Ottaviano, Sensors, 2018, 18, 3638 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Raeyani, S. Shojaei and S. Ahmadi-Kandjani, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 015608 CrossRef CAS .
V. Galstyan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2021, 1152, 238192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, K. Tao, Y. Guo, Z. Li, X. Wang, Z. Luo, S. Feng, C. Du, D. Chen, J. Miao and L. K. Norford, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600319 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Malik, V. K. Tomer, Y. K. Mishra and L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 021301 CAS .
N. K. Chowdhury and B. Bhowmik, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 73–93 RSC .
Z. Ma, W. Shi, K. Yan, L. Pan and G. Yu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6232–6244 RSC .
Z. Z. Li, C. Li, J. Yu, Z. Z. Li, X. Zhao, A. Liu, S. Jiang, C. Yang, C. Zhang and B. Man, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 9174 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 1822 CrossRef .
V. Balasubramani, S. Chandraleka, T. S. Rao, R. Sasikumar, M. R. Kuppusamy and T. M. Sridhar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 037572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Palzer, Sensors, 2020, 20, 2745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Kuchmenko and L. B. Lvova, Chemosensors, 2019, 7, 39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aarya, Y. Kumar and R. K. Chahota, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2020, 30, 269–290 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghosh, C. Zhang, S. Q. Shi and H. Zhang, Clean: Soil, Air, Water, 2019, 47(8), 1800491 Search PubMed .
F. I. M. Ali, F. Awwad, Y. E. Greish and S. T. Mahmoud, IEEE Sens. J., 2019, 19, 2394–2407 CAS .
X. Zhou, Z. Xue, X. Chen, C. Huang, W. Bai, Z. Lu and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3231–3248 RSC .
Z. Bielecki, T. Stacewicz, J. Smulko and J. Wojtas, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 5111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, Z. Huang, J. Liu, Z. Hu, J. Zhang, G. Zhang, F. Yi, S. Jiang, J. Lian, J. Yan, J. Zang and H. Liu, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1048–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hodgkinson and R. P. Tatam, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2013, 24, 012004 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hänsel and M. J. R. Heck, J. Phys. Photonics, 2020, 2, 012002 CrossRef .
H. Ji, W. Zeng and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22664–22684 RSC .
G. W. Hunter, S. Akbar, S. Bhansali, M. Daniele, P. D. Erb, K. Johnson, C.-C. Liu, D. Miller, O. Oralkan, P. J. Hesketh, P. Manickam and R. L. Vander Wal, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 037570 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Moseley, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2017, 28, 082001 CrossRef .
A. Mirzaei, H. W. Kim, S. S. Kim and G. Neri, Chemosensors, 2019, 7, 56 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao and T. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 604–633 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Qin, D. Zeng and C. Xie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6313–6329 RSC .
Z. Hua, Z. Qiu, Y. Li, Y. Zeng, Y. Wu, X. Tian, M. Wang and E. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 3541–3549 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Rae and I. Khan, Analyst, 2010, 135, 1365 RSC .
H. Tang, C. Zhu, G. Meng and N. Wu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, B3098–B3118 CrossRef CAS .
G. Barbillon, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Carron and B. J. Kennedy, Anal. Chem., 1995, 67, 3353–3356 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Heaps and P. R. Griffiths, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59, 1305–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Weißenbacher, J. Frank and H. D. Wanzenböck, Analyst, 1998, 123, 1057–1060 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Yao, A. A. Haidry, T. Plecenik, L. Xie, L. Sun and Q. Fatima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 21114–21132 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aldhafeeri, M.-K. Tran, R. Vrolyk, M. Pope and M. Fowler, Inventions, 2020, 5, 28 CrossRef .
P. Srinivasan, M. Ezhilan, A. J. Kulandaisamy, K. J. Babu and J. B. B. Rayappan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 15825–15847 CrossRef CAS .
K. Danzer, Fresenius. J. Anal. Chem., 2001, 369, 397–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vessman, R. I. Stefan, J. F. van Staden, K. Danzer, W. Lindner, D. T. Burns, A. Fajgelj and H. Müller, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 1381–1386 CAS .
H. Kaiser, Fresenius’ Z. Anal. Chem., 1972, 260, 252–260 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lang, U. Macherius, H. Zimmermann, S. Glitsch, M. Wiese, J. Röpcke and J.-P. H. van Helden, Sensors, 2018, 18, 2058 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zheng, C. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang and F. Tittel, Sensors, 2018, 18, 3646 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Varma, D. S. Venables, A. A. Ruth, U. Heitmann, E. Schlosser and S. Dixneuf, Appl. Opt., 2009, 48, B159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, S. Zong, Y. Zhang, Z. Qian, Y. Liu, K. Zhu, L. Li, N. Li, Z. Wang and Y. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Oh, R. De and S.-Y. Yim, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2018, 49, 800–809 CrossRef CAS .
W. Maziarz, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 361–370 CrossRef CAS .
I. Urriza-Arsuaga, M. Bedoya and G. Orellana, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 2231–2238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. P. Lustig, S. Mukherjee, N. D. Rudd, A. V. Desai, J. Li and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3242–3285 RSC .
G. Yang, X. Jiang, H. Xu and B. Zhao, Small, 2021, 2005327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pevec and D. Donlagic, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 23868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Sensors, 2018, 18, 941.
A. Paliwal, A. Sharma, M. Tomar and V. Gupta, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 679–685 CrossRef CAS .
T. Majchrzak, W. Wojnowski, M. Lubinska-Szczygeł, A. Różańska, J. Namieśnik and T. Dymerski, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1035, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Goto, T. Itoh, T. Akamatsu, Y. Sasaki, K. Sato and W. Shin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 571–580 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. Xiang, Y. Chen, Z. Duan and J. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 248, 820–828 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 307, 111984 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, X. Xu, S. Han, C. Cai, H. Du, H. Zhu, X. Zu and Y. Fu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 304, 127395 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kwak, Y. Lei and R. Maric, Talanta, 2019, 204, 713–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Oosthuizen, D. E. Motaung, A. M. Strydom and H. C. Swart, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 18035–18048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tonezzer, L. T. T. Dang, H. Q. Tran and S. Iannotta, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 2785–2793 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, J. Tao, N. Li, A. Karmakar, C. Tang, H. Cai, S. J. Pennycook, N. Singh and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14089–14094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bindra and A. Hazra, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 6129–6148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khan, M. Rao and Q. Li, Sensors, 2019, 19, 905 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, X. Wang, L. Li and J. Yu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, B610–B619 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Shinde and C. S. Rout, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 1551–1568 RSC .
M. Shafiei, F. Hoshyargar, N. Motta and A. P. O'Mullane, Mater. Des., 2017, 122, 288–295 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Xu, H. Yu and X. Li, in 2015 Transducers - 2015 18th International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS), IEEE,  2015, pp. 630–633 .
S. Arunachalam, R. Izquierdo and F. Nabki, Sensors, 2020, 20, 1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Glish and R. W. Vachet, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2003, 2, 140–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. N. Banwell and E. M. McCash, Fundamentals for Molecular Spectroscopy, McGraw-Hill, 4th edn.,  1994 Search PubMed .

          C. N. Banwell, Fundamentals of molecular spectroscopy, McGraw-Hill, London, 2nd edn.,  1972 Search PubMed .

          I. E. Gordon, HITRANonline line-by-line search: 1. Select Molecules, https://hitran.org/lbl/, (accessed 26 December 2020).
A. Sampaolo, G. Menduni, P. Patimisco, M. Giglio, V. M. N. Passaro, L. Dong, H. Wu, F. K. Tittel and V. Spagnolo, Fuel, 2020, 277, 118118 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tomberg, M. Vainio, T. Hieta and L. Halonen, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1848 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Giglio, A. Zifarelli, A. Sampaolo, G. Menduni, A. Elefante, R. Blanchard, C. Pfluegl, M. F. Witinski, D. Vakhshoori, H. Wu, V. M. N. Passaro, P. Patimisco, F. K. Tittel, L. Dong and V. Spagnolo, Photoacoustics, 2020, 17, 100159 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Giglio, A. Elefante, P. Patimisco, A. Sampaolo, F. Sgobba, H. Rossmadl, V. Mackowiak, H. Wu, F. K. Tittel, L. Dong and V. Spagnolo, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 4271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Patimisco, G. Scamarcio, F. Tittel and V. Spagnolo, Sensors, 2014, 14, 6165–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Patimisco, A. Sampaolo, H. Zheng, L. Dong, F. K. Tittel and V. Spagnolo, Adv. Phys. X, 2017, 2, 169–187 CAS .
A. K. Goyal, H. S. Dutta and S. Pal, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 203001 CrossRef .
H. Xu, P. Wu, C. Zhu, A. Elbaz and Z. Z. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6087 RSC .
Y.-H. Chen, W.-H. Shi, L. Feng, X.-Y. Xu and M.-Y. Shang-Guan, Superlattices Microstruct., 2019, 131, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Weissman, H. B. Sunkara, A. S. Tse and S. A. Asher, Science, 1996, 274, 959–963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Thommes, K. Kaneko, A. V. Neimark, J. P. Olivier, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, J. Rouquerol and K. S. W. Sing, Pure Appl. Chem., 2015, 87, 1051–1069 CAS .
J. van den Broek, I. C. Weber, A. T. Güntner and S. E. Pratsinis, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 661–684 RSC .

          A. Stone, The Theory of Intermolecular Forces, Oxford University Press,  2013 Search PubMed .

          F. Rouquerol, K. S. W. SIng, G. Maurin, J. Rouquerol and P. Llewellyn, Adsorption by Powders and Porous Solids, Elsevier, Second.,  2014 Search PubMed .
G. Sauerbrey, Z. Phys., 1959, 155, 206–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Zanatta, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 11225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. McGregor, C. K. Whitney and R. L. Hamilton, Text. Res. J., 1965, 35, 279–280 CrossRef .

          J. W. Gardner and P. N. Bartlett, Electronic Noses: Principles and Applications, Oxford University Press, United Kingdom,  1999 Search PubMed .
N. Yamazoe and K. Shimanoe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, J85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, X. Ding, D. Zeng, S. Zhang and C. Xie, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 186, 640–647 CrossRef CAS .
I. Castro-Hurtado, C. Malagù, S. Morandi, N. Pérez, G. Mandayo and E. Castaño, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 1146–1153 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Zhang, J. Yin, L. Li, L.-X. Zhang and L.-J. Bie, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 202, 500–507 CrossRef CAS .
M.-W. Ahn, K.-S. Park, J.-H. Heo, J.-G. Park, D.-W. Kim, K. J. Choi, J.-H. Lee and S.-H. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 263103 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, C. Xie, S. Zhang, S. Zhang and Y. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18097–18109 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yamazoe and K. Shimanoe, J. Sens., 2009, 2009, 1–21 CrossRef .
J. Dai, O. Ogbeide, N. Macadam, Q. Sun, W. Yu, Y. Li, B.-L. Su, T. Hasan, X. Huang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1756–1789 RSC .

          N. Yamazoe and N. Miura, in Chemical Sensor Technology, Elsevier,  1992, pp. 19–42 Search PubMed .
J. Mizsei, Sens. Actuators, B, 1995, 23, 173–176 CrossRef CAS .
V. Demarne, A. Grisel, R. Sanjinés, D. Rosenfeld and F. Lévy, Sens. Actuators, B, 1992, 7, 704–708 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sakai, N. Matsunaga, K. Shimanoe and N. Yamazoe, Sens. Actuators, B, 2001, 80, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, X. Li, C. Wang, W. Yu and Z. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 3225–3236 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, W. Pang, Z. Feng, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Sun, J. J. Yang and D. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 238, 357–363 CrossRef CAS .
B. Prabowo, A. Purwidyantri and K.-C. Liu, Biosensors, 2018, 8, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. McHale, A. Hecobian and A. P. Yalin, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 5523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bogue, Sens. Rev., 2015, 35, 133–140 CrossRef .
N. Illyaskutty, O. Kansizoglu, O. Akdag, B. Ojha, J. Knoblauch and H. Kohler, Chemosensors, 2018, 6, 22 CrossRef .
J. M. Rzaij and A. M. Abass, J. Chem. Rev., 2020, 2, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang and P.-X. Gao, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 55 CrossRef .
Z. Branković and Y. Rostovtsev, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1537 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Smulko, M. Trawka, C. G. Granqvist, R. Ionescu, F. Annanouch, E. Llobet and L. B. Kish, Sens. Rev., 2015, 35, 340–347 CrossRef .
M. Weber, O. Graniel, S. Balme, P. Miele and M. Bechelany, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9(11), 1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, F. Farha, Q. Li, Y. Wan, Y. Xu, T. Zhang and H. Ning, Sensors, 2019, 19, 3760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Z. Tan and X. Long, Sensors, 2019, 19, 3686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Richard, D. Romanini and I. Ventrillard, Sensors, 2018, 18, 1997 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Liu, F. Jin, M. Guo, Y. Chen and Q. Yu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 290, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, Y. Zhao, H. Bao, H. L. Ho, W. Jin, S. Fan, S. Gao, Y. Wang and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, B. Jiang, Q. Yu, X. Kou, P. Sun, F. Liu, H. Lu, X. Yan and G. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9600–9611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kortidis, H. C. Swart, S. S. Ray and D. E. Motaung, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 285, 92–107 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ganesh, E. Durgadevi, M. Navaneethan, V. L. Patil, S. Ponnusamy, C. Muthamizhchelvan, S. Kawasaki, P. S. Patil and Y. Hayakawa, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 269, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yoo, D. Li, H. J. Rim, S. Cho, H.-S. Lee and W. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 883–888 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shendage, V. L. Patil, S. A. Vanalakar, S. P. Patil, N. S. Harale, J. L. Bhosale, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, D. Wei, S. Zhang, X. Chuai, P. Sun, F. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. Gao, X. Liang and G. Lu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 15111–15120 RSC .
J. M. Suh, Y.-S. Shim, K. C. Kwon, J.-M. Jeon, T. H. Lee, M. Shokouhimehr and H. W. Jang, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2019, 15, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Huang, J. Chang and J. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 2305–2313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, P. Song, S. Zhang, Z. Yang and Q. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 662, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gu, R. Nie, D. Han and Z. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 219, 94–99 CrossRef CAS .
N.-H. Park, T. Akamatsu, T. Itoh, N. Izu and W. Shin, Sensors, 2014, 14, 8350–8362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. Thong, D. S. H. Chan and C. Zhu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2017, 255, 28–33 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Isaac, L. Schlag, S. Katzer, H. Nahrstedt, J. Reiprich, J. Pezoldt, T. Stauden and H. O. Jacobs, Mater. Today: Proc., 2020, 33, 2451–2457 CAS .
C.-S. Lee, H.-Y. Li, B.-Y. Kim, Y.-M. Jo, H.-G. Byun, I.-S. Hwang, F. Abdel-Hady, A. A. Wazzan and J.-H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 285, 193–200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kwon, J.-S. Yoon, Y. Lee, D. Y. Kim, C.-K. Baek and J. K. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1663–1670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, L. Yang, Z. Wang, D. Liu, L. Luo, X. Zhu, Y. Xi, Z. Yang, N. Han, F. Wang and Y. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 283, 793–801 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Weber, H. P. Braun, F. Krumeich, A. T. Güntner and S. E. Pratsinis, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, Y. K. Moon, T. Kim, S. Park, K. B. Kim, Y. C. Kang and J. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Güntner, I. C. Weber and S. E. Pratsinis, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 1058–1067 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Galioglu, I. Karaduman, T. Çorlu, B. Akata, M. A. Yıldırım, A. Ateş and S. Acar, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 1356–1368 CrossRef CAS .
J. van den Broek, A. T. Güntner and S. E. Pratsinis, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 677–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tsui, A. Benavidez, P. Palanisamy, L. Evans and F. Garzon, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 673–684 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Cho, S.-J. Kim, S.-J. Choi, J.-S. Jang and I.-D. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 243, 166–175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shang, C. Liu, M. Watanabe, B. Chen and K. Hayashi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, H. Yu, J. Cai, Z. Li and F. Dong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 243, 1042–1045 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, W. Xuan, A. Bermak, F. Boussaid, C.-Y. Tsui and J. Luo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 278, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. van den Broek, S. Abegg, S. E. Pratsinis and A. T. Güntner, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Swinehart, J. Chem. Educ., 1962, 39, 333 CrossRef CAS .
G. Galbács, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2006, 41, 259–303 CrossRef .
C. Yang, L. Mei, H. Deng, Z. Xu, B. Chen and R. Kan, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 12137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Bjorklund, Opt. Lett., 1980, 5, 15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Bomse, A. C. Stanton and J. A. Silver, Appl. Opt., 1992, 31, 718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maithani and M. Pradhan, J. Chem. Sci., 2020, 132, 114 CrossRef CAS .
A. O'Keefe and D. A. G. Deacon, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1988, 59, 2544–2551 CrossRef .
J. Morville, S. Kassi, M. Chenevier and D. Romanini, Appl. Phys. B, 2005, 80, 1027–1038 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Baer, J. B. Paul, M. Gupta and A. O'Keefe, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2002, 75, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Wood and J. R. Charest, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10266–10273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Brown, H. An, M. Lee, J.-H. Park, S.-D. Lee, D. L. Fibiger, E. E. McDuffie, W. P. Dubé, N. L. Wagner and K.-E. Min, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 200, 529–557 RSC .
S. Dello Russo, S. Zhou, A. Zifarelli, P. Patimisco, A. Sampaolo, M. Giglio, D. Iannuzzi and V. Spagnolo, Photoacoustics, 2020, 17, 100155 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Giglio, G. Menduni, P. Patimisco, A. Sampaolo, A. Elefante, V. M. N. Passaro and V. Spagnolo, Phys. Status Solidi, 2019, 216, 1800552 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Dong, H. Xia, Z. Zhang and J. Li, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 210, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Paul, K. Ahmed, V. Dhasarathan, F. A. Al-Zahrani, M. N. Aktar, M. S. Uddin and A. H. Aly, Alexandria Eng. J., 2020, 59, 5045–5052 CrossRef .
A. Al-Jalal, W. Al-Basheer, K. Gasmi and M. S. Romadhon, Measurement, 2019, 146, 613–617 CrossRef .
G. Zhao, T. Hausmaninger, W. Ma and O. Axner, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 29454 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, X. Li, Z. Meng and Y. Feng, Opt. Commun., 2018, 427, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, S. Jia, Y. Wang and Z. Tang, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 2816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stuhr, N. Faßheber and G. Friedrichs, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 26499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, M. Qin, B. Ouyang, W. Fang, X. Li, K. Lu, K. Tang, S. Liang, F. Meng, Z. Hu, P. Xie, W. Liu and R. Häsler, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2018, 11, 4531–4543 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Mitra, in Infrared Spectroscopy - Principles, Advances, and Applications, IntechOpen,  2019 Search PubMed .
Z. Du, S. Zhang, J. Li, N. Gao and K. Tong, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, K. S. Jeong and P. Guyot-Sionnest, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11707–11714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. El-Tokhy, I. I. Mahmoud and H. A. Konber, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2009, 41, 933–956 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. de l'Isle, Opt. Eng., 2011, 50, 061013 CrossRef .
T. Asano, C. Hu, Y. Zhang, M. Liu, J. C. Campbell and A. Madhukar, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 2010, 46, 1484–1491 CAS .
A. Singh and R. Pal, Def. Sci. J., 2017, 67, 159 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, V. Srivastav and R. Pal, Opt. Laser Technol., 2011, 43, 1358–1370 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mohamed, F. Zhu, S. Chen, J. Strohaber, A. A. Kolomenskii, A. A. Bengali and H. A. Schuessler, Appl. Opt., 2013, 52, 7145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kühnreich, M. Höh, S. Wagner and V. Ebert, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2016, 87, 023111 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ren, W. Jiang and F. K. Tittel, Appl. Phys. B, 2014, 117, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, L. Wang, T. Tan, G. Wang, W. Zhang, W. Chen and X. Gao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 1000–1005 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo and L. Sun, Appl. Opt., 2018, 57, 1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tuzson, M. Mangold, H. Looser, A. Manninen and L. Emmenegger, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 257 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Bell, Am. J. Sci., 1880, s3–20, 305–324 CrossRef .
A. G. Bell, Science, 1881, os-2, 242–253 CrossRef .

          F. K. Tittel, D. Richter and A. Fried, in Solid-State Mid-Infrared Laser Sources, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2003, pp. 458–529 Search PubMed .

          F. J. M. Harren and S. M. Cristescu, in Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry, Wiley,  2019, pp. 1–29 Search PubMed .
A. Elia, P. M. Lugarà, C. Di Franco and V. Spagnolo, Sensors, 2009, 9, 9616–9628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Dumitras, M. Petrus, A.-M. Bratu and C. Popa, Molecules, 2020, 25, 1728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, Y. Liao and F. Fang, Appl. Spectrosc., 2019, 000370281986646 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Sun, A. Zifarelli, H. Wu, S. Dello Russo, S. Li, P. Patimisco, L. Dong and V. Spagnolo, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 13922–13929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, S. Qiao, P. Patimisco, A. Sampaolo, Y. Wang, F. K. Tittel and V. Spagnolo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 061101 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krzempek, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 2826 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. He, Y. Tong, X. Yu and F. K. Tittel, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, 32103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Ma, Y. Hu, S. Qiao, Y. He and F. K. Tittel, in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics, OSA, Washington, D.C.,  2020, p. SF1N.7 Search PubMed .
T. Tomberg, T. Hieta, M. Vainio and L. Halonen, Analyst, 2019, 144, 2291–2296 RSC .
K. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Liu and Q. Yu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 283, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, H. Huan, W. Li, A. Mandelis, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Yin, Y. Wu and X. Shao, Photoacoustics, 2021, 21, 100228 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. M. Wynn, M. L. Clark and R. R. Kunz, in Advanced Photonics 2015, OSA, Washington, D.C.,  2015, p. SeW2B.3 Search PubMed .
C. M. Wynn, S. Palmacci, M. L. Clark and R. R. Kunz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 184103 CrossRef .
J. T. Friedlein, E. Baumann, K. A. Briggman, G. M. Colacion, F. R. Giorgetta, A. M. Goldfain, D. I. Herman, E. V. Hoenig, J. Hwang, N. R. Newbury, E. F. Perez, C. S. Yung, I. Coddington and K. C. Cossel, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sadiek, T. Mikkonen, M. Vainio, J. Toivonen and A. Foltynowicz, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 27849–27855 RSC .

          J. T. Friedlein, G. Ycas, F. R. Giorgetta, D. Herman, K. C. Cossel, E. Baumann, N. R. Newbury and I. Coddington, in Optical Sensors and Sensing Congress (ES, FTS, HISE, Sensors), OSA, Washington, D.C.,  2019, p. FW4B.4 Search PubMed .
J. Fan, L. Qiu, Y. Qiao, M. Xue, X. Dong and Z. Meng, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 665119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Imanian, M. Noori and A. Abbasiyan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 345, 130418 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. Bai, J. Xie, L. Zhang, K. Lei, B. Liu, C. Wang, L. Zhu and G. Wang, Opt. Mater., 2020, 109, 110320 CrossRef CAS .
S. Amrehn, X. Wu and T. Wagner, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 191–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cardador, D. Vega, D. Segura, T. Trifonov and A. Rodríguez, Photonics Nanostructures - Fundam. Appl., 2017, 25, 46–51 CrossRef .

          S. Biswas, S. Guin and N. R. Das, in Advances in Computer, Communication and Control. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems,  2019, pp. 459–467 Search PubMed .
A. Anamoradi and K. Fasihi, Superlattices Microstruct., 2019, 125, 302–309 CrossRef CAS .
C. Consani, C. Ranacher, A. Tortschanoff, T. Grille, P. Irsigler and B. Jakoby, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 274, 60–65 CrossRef CAS .
O. Habli, Y. Bouazzi and M. Kanzari, Prog. Electromagn. Res. C, 2019, 92, 251–263 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Jannesari, T. Grille and B. Jakoby, Gas sensing with a high-quality-factor photonic crystal ring resonator, in the Proceedings Volume 10242, Integrated Optics: Physics and Simulations III, 1024205,  2017, https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2265618 Search PubMed.
A. Afsari, M. J. Sarraf and F. Khatib, Optik, 2021, 227, 165664 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Lv, S. E, B. Han and Ya-nan Zhang, Phys. Status Solidi, 2019, 256, 1900221 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Shen, Q. Wang, M. Lin, Z. Ouyang and Q. Liu, Materials, 2020, 13, 1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Zaki, A. Mehaney, H. M. Hassanein and A. H. Aly, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 17979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-F. Wan, Y. Xu, Z.-W. Zhou, D. Zhang and H.-F. Zhang, IEEE Sens. J., 2021, 21, 2846–2853 Search PubMed .
J. Cao, Q. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, H.-D. Yu, X. Huang and W. Huang, Research, 2021, 2021, 1–38 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Zhu, J. Feng, M. Xue, Z. Meng, L. Qiu and N. Mondele Mbola, Microchem. J., 2020, 157, 105074 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Ignatov and A. M. Merzlikin, Adv. Opt. Technol., 2020, 9, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Li, Q. Chao, Z. Gu, S. Song, Y. Zhou, S. Zheng, L. Xu, Y. Da Chua, Q. Zhang, H. Cai, D. Zhang, Q. J. Wang and L. Y. T. Lee, in MOEMS and Miniaturized Systems XX, eds. W. Piyawattanametha, Y.-H. Park and H. Zappe, SPIE,  2021, p. 20 Search PubMed .
A. K. Goyal, H. S. Dutta and S. Pal, Optik, 2020, 223, 165597 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee and P. S. Ashish Chouhan, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2020, 1531, 012038 CrossRef .
K. Nazeri, F. Ahmed, V. Ahsani, H.-E. Joe, C. Bradley, E. Toyserkani and M. Jun, Sensors, 2020, 20, 2807 CrossRef PubMed .
L. S. Ettre, Pure Appl. Chem., 1993, 65, 819–872 CAS .

          F. G. Kitson, B. S. Larsen and C. N. McEwen, Gas Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry, Elsevier,  1996 Search PubMed .

          R. P. W. Scott, Introduction to Analytical Gas Chromatography, Revised and Expanded, CRC Press, 2nd edn.,  2017 Search PubMed .
P. S. Chauhan and S. Bhattacharya, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 26076–26099 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lourenço, S. Bergin, J. Hodgkinson, D. Francis, S. E. Staines, J. R. Saffell, C. Walton and R. P. Tatam, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 8700 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Gould, T. Wieczorek, B. de Lacy Costello, R. Persad and N. Ratcliffe, J. Breath Res., 2017, 12, 016009 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Akbar, M. Restaino and M. Agah, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2015, 1, 15039 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Collin, G. Serrano, L. K. Wright, H. Chang, N. Nuñovero and E. T. Zellers, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 655–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zampolli, I. Elmi, F. Mancarella, P. Betti, E. Dalcanale, G. C. Cardinali and M. Severi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 322–328 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Regmi and M. Agah, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 13133–13150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, C. R. Vilorio, A. R. Hawkins and M. L. Lee, Talanta, 2018, 188, 463–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Neri and N. Donato, in Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, American Cancer Society, Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2016, pp. 1–12 Search PubMed .
Y. V. Kaneti, Z. Zhang, J. Yue, Q. M. D. Zakaria, C. Chen, X. Jiang and A. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11471–11480 RSC .
H. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Shi, G.-D. Li, L. Sun and X. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29795–29804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wu, F. Tian, Z. Liu, X. Xue, J. Zhang and J. Zu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 1154–1159 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Y. Wu, M. Zhou, H. Zhang, C. Lv, Y. Zheng and F. He, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44306–44312 RSC .
Z. Xie, N. Han, W. Li, Y. Deng, S. Gong, Y. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Chen, Phys. Status Solidi, 2017, 214, 1600904 CrossRef .
R. Zhou, X. Lin, D. Xue, F. Zong, J. Zhang, X. Duan, Q. Li and T. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 260, 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xue, P. Wang, Z. Zhang and Y. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 296, 126710 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, H. Fu, Y. Tian, Q. Xie, S. Xiong, D. Han, H. Zhang and X. An, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 296, 126696 CrossRef CAS .
R.-J. Ma, X. Zhao, X. Zou and G.-D. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 863–870 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Shim, D. H. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, Y. H. Kim, S. H. Nahm, C.-Y. Kang, J.-S. Kim, W. Lee and H. W. Jang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 213, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Jeon, Y.-S. Shim, S. D. Han, D. H. Kim, Y. H. Kim, C.-Y. Kang, J.-S. Kim, M. Kim and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17939–17945 RSC .
T. H. Kim, A. Hasani, L. Van Quyet, Y. Kim, S. Y. Park, M. G. Lee, W. Sohn, T. P. Nguyen, K. S. Choi, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 286, 512–520 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, D. Cai, Y. Liu, D. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Li, Q. Li and T. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 193, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J. Hu, G.-D. Li, Q. Gao, C. Wei and X. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4692–4700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Mani and J. B. B. Rayappan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 223, 343–351 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mani and J. B. B. Rayappan, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 582, 414–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, C. Jiang and S. Wei, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 021304 Search PubMed .
Q. Yue, Z. Shao, S. Chang and J. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 425 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Vedala, D. C. Sorescu, G. P. Kotchey and A. Star, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2342–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tian, X. Liu and W. Yu, Appl. Sci., 2018, 8, 1118 CrossRef .
M. Donarelli, S. Prezioso, F. Perrozzi, L. Giancaterini, C. Cantalini, E. Treossi, V. Palermo, S. Santucci and L. Ottaviano, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 035018 CrossRef .
Y. R. Choi, Y.-G. Yoon, K. S. Choi, J. H. Kang, Y.-S. Shim, Y. H. Kim, H. J. Chang, J.-H. Lee, C. R. Park, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Carbon, 2015, 91, 178–187 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, B. Singh, J.-H. Park, S. Rathi, I. Lee, S. Maeng, H.-I. Joh, C.-H. Lee and G.-H. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 194, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shen, D. Wang, R. Liu, X. Pei, T. Zhang and J. Jin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 537–540 RSC .
Y. H. Kim, J. S. Park, Y.-R. Choi, S. Y. Park, S. Y. Lee, W. Sohn, Y.-S. Shim, J.-H. Lee, C. R. Park, Y. S. Choi, B. H. Hong, J. H. Lee, W. H. Lee, D. Lee and H. W. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19116–19125 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, N. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Liu, S. Shen and C. Peng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 251 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Wang, Y. Hu, J. J. Zhao, L. L. Zeng, X. M. Tao and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17415–17420 RSC .
L. T. Duy, T. Q. Trung, A. Hanif, S. Siddiqui, E. Roh, W. Lee and N.-E. Lee, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025062 CrossRef .
S. Muhammad Hafiz, R. Ritikos, T. J. Whitcher, N. Md. Razib, D. C. S. Bien, N. Chanlek, H. Nakajima, T. Saisopa, P. Songsiriritthigul, N. M. Huang and S. A. Rahman, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 193, 692–700 CrossRef .
W. Li, X. Geng, Y. Guo, J. Rong, Y. Gong, L. Wu, X. Zhang, P. Li, J. Xu, G. Cheng, M. Sun and L. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6955–6961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, X. Liu, J. Zhang and M. Kumar, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Kumar, T. Murugesan, A. Dash, C.-H. Hsu, S. Gupta, A. Manikandan, A. kumar Anbalagan, C.-H. Lee, N.-H. Tai, Y.-L. Chueh and H.-N. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 536, 147933 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. N. Demon, A. I. Kamisan, N. Abdullah, S. A. M. Noor, O. K. Khim, N. A. M. Kasim, M. Z. A. Yahya, N. A. A. Manaf, A. F. M. Azmi and N. A. Halim, Sens. Mater., 2020, 32, 759 CAS .
E. C. Nallon, V. P. Schnee, C. Bright, M. P. Polcha and Q. Li, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, Y. Xu, L. Zheng, C. Yang, N. Pinna, X. Liu and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, M. Zhao, W. Zhu, Z. Liu, G. Wang, S. Tang, D. Chen, J.-M. Lee, S. Yang and G. Ding, Mater. Lett., 2020, 277, 128343 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zong, Q. Li, X. Chen, C. Liu, L. Li, J. Ruan and S. Mao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50610–50618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Im, A. AlMutairi, S. Kim, M. Sritharan, S. Kim and Y. Yoon, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2930–2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pham, G. Li, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis and A. Mulchandani, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3196–3205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dedkov and E. Voloshina, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11416–11426 RSC .
Q. Li, X. Zhu, H. Song, W. Chen, Q. Zhang and H. Peng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 514, 145823 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, C. Lv, D. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, C. Ó. Coileáin, Z. Wang, Z. Jiang, K.-M. Hung, C.-R. Chang and H.-C. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26746–26754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xuan, M. He, N. Meng, X. He, W. Wang, J. Chen, T. Shi, T. Hasan, Z. Xu, Y. Xu and J. K. Luo, Sci. Rep., 2015, 4, 7206 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Achour, G. Attia, C. Zerrouki, N. Fourati, K. Raoof and N. Yaakoubi, Sensors, 2020, 20, 4994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. K. Perkins, A. L. Friedman, E. Cobas, P. M. Campbell, G. G. Jernigan and B. T. Jonker, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 668–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chemie, 2015, 127, 14525–14528 CrossRef .
W. Winter, C. Day, J. Prestage and T. Hutter, Analyst, 2021, 146, 109–117 RSC .
H.-Y. Kuo, W.-R. Cheng, T.-H. Wu, H.-J. Sheen, C.-C. Wang and C.-J. Lu, Chemosensors, 2021, 9, 104 CrossRef CAS .
R. Goldoust and S. Rahbarpour, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 6, 015506 CrossRef .
J. Lee, J. Lee and S.-H. Lim, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 392, 122145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Wilhelm, M. Rieger, J. Hürttlen, M. Wittek, C. Alépée, M. Leidinger and T. Sauerwald, Procedia Eng., 2016, 168, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leidinger, M. Rieger, D. Weishaupt, T. Sauerwald, M. Nägele, J. Hürttlen and A. Schütze, Procedia Eng., 2015, 120, 1042–1045 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leidinger, T. Sauerwald, C. Alépée and A. Schütze, Procedia Eng., 2016, 168, 293–296 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. McCartney, Y. Zrodnikov, A. G. Fung, M. K. LeVasseur, J. M. Pedersen, K. O. Zamuruyev, A. A. Aksenov, N. J. Kenyon and C. E. Davis, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 1167–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Leidinger, M. Rieger, T. Sauerwald, C. Alépée and A. Schütze, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 236, 988–996 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lai, Z. Wang, L. Qin, Y. Fu, B. Li, M. Zhang, S. Liu, L. Li, H. Yi, X. Liu, X. Zhou, N. An, Z. An, X. Shi and C. Feng, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 427, 213565 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, Y.-R. Lee, H.-Y. Kim and W.-S. Ahn, Polyhedron, 2018, 154, 343–349 CrossRef CAS .
F.-J. Ma, S.-X. Liu, D.-D. Liang, G.-J. Ren, F. Wei, Y.-G. Chen and Z.-M. Su, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 3034–3039 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Shi, W.-X. Li, W.-H. Zhang and J.-P. Lang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 8627–8633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, Q. Sun, F. Xue and D. Lin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 195, 124–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schieweck, E. Uhde, T. Salthammer, L. C. Salthammer, L. Morawska, M. Mazaheri and P. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 94, 705–718 CrossRef .
S. R. Morrison, Sens. Actuators, 1987, 12, 425–440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, H. Fan, M. Li and L. Ma, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Güntner, S. Abegg, K. Wegner and S. E. Pratsinis, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 916–923 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, B. Gao, Y. Yao, J. Fang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Chen and L. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 240, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shen, Z. Li and Y. Liu, Recent Pat. Chem. Eng., 2008, 1, 27–40 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alemán, G. Fabregat, E. Armelin, J. J. Buendía and J. Llorca, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6515–6533 RSC .
X. Zhang, B. Gao, A. E. Creamer, C. Cao and Y. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 338, 102–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schweizer-Berberich, S. Strathmann, W. Göpel, R. Sharma and A. Peyre-Lavigne, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 66, 34–36 CrossRef CAS .
T. Graunke, K. Schmitt and J. Wöllenstein, J. Sens., 2016, 2016, 1–22 CrossRef .
R. H. R. Castro and D. V. Quach, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2012, 116, 24726–24733 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Güntner, M. Wied, N. J. Pineau and S. E. Pratsinis, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903390 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, E. B. Myers, H. X. Tang, S. J. Aldridge, H. C. McCaig, J. J. Whiting, R. J. Simonson, N. S. Lewis and M. L. Roukes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3899–3903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Skog, F. Xiong, H. Kawashima, E. Doyle, R. Soto and D. R. Gentner, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 1318–1327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Terry, J. H. Jerman and J. B. Angell, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1979, 26, 1880–1886 Search PubMed .
S. Zampolli, I. Elmi, G. C. Cardinali, L. Masini, F. Bonafè and F. Zardi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 305, 127444 CrossRef CAS .
J. van den Broek, D. Klein Cerrejon, S. E. Pratsinis and A. T. Güntner, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qiu, M. Xue and G. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6116–6140 RSC .
S.-Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .

          M. A. Ruiz, A. Sua and F. Tian, in Encyclopedia of Interfacial Chemistry, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 646–671 Search PubMed .
N. Kosinov, J. Gascon, F. Kapteijn and E. J. M. Hensen, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 499, 65–79 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo and M. Kanezashi, Membranes, 2021, 11, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kang, L. Fan and D. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10073–10091 RSC .
C. Chi, X. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Qian, Z. Hu, J. Dong and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2921–2927 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katsuki and K. Fukui, Sens. Actuators, B, 1998, 52, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vilaseca, J. Coronas, A. Cirera, A. Cornet, J. R. Morante and J. Santamaria, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 124, 99–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. O'Hern, M. S. H. Boutilier, J.-C. Idrobo, Y. Song, J. Kong, T. Laoui, M. Atieh and R. Karnik, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1234–1241 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, G. He, S. Huang, L. F. Villalobos, M. Dakhchoune, H. Bassas and K. V. Agrawal, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav1851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Sezginel, S. Keskin and A. Uzun, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 1139–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Walton, M. B. Abney and M. Douglas LeVan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 91, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .

Catalysts for Fine Chemical Synthesis, ed. E. G. Derouane, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2006 Search PubMed .
M. Phillips, Anal. Biochem., 1997, 247, 272–278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Panov and J. J. Fripiat, J. Catal., 1998, 178, 188–197 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kikuchi, S. Maeda, K. Sasaki, S. Wennerström and K. Eguchi, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 232, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Y. Xu, Q. Feng and D. Y. C. Leung, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 2649–2669 RSC .
R. J. Farrauto, M. Deeba and S. Alerasool, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 603–613 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 673–689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Liu, Y. Deng, G. Liu, Y. Chen and J. Yang, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2016, 5(1), 147–181 CAS .
H. H. Kung, M. C. Kung and C. K. Costello, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 425–432 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Oliaee, A. Khodadadi, Y. Mortazavi and S. Alipour, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 147, 400–405 CrossRef CAS .
J. JoŢca, J. Harmel, L. Joanny, A. Ryzhikov, M. L. Kahn, P. Fau, B. Chaudret and K. Fajerwerg, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 357–363 CrossRef .
T. Mallat and A. Baiker, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3037–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Jeong, J. S. Lee, E. L. Tae, Y. J. Lee and K. B. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 10128–10132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Jeong, J.-W. Yoon, T.-H. Kim, H.-M. Jeong, C.-S. Lee, Y. Chan Kang and J.-H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1446–1454 RSC .
P. Clément, S. Korom, C. Struzzi, E. J. Parra, C. Bittencourt, P. Ballester and E. Llobet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4011–4020 CrossRef .
H.-M. Jeong, S.-Y. Jeong, J.-H. Kim, B.-Y. Kim, J.-S. Kim, F. Abdel-Hady, A. A. Wazzan, H. A. Al-Turaif, H. W. Jang and J.-H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41397–41404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, Z. Hua, X. Tian, X. Li, Z. Qiu, C. Zhang, M. Wang and E. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 1291–1299 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Saberi, Y. Mortazavi and A. A. Khodadadi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 206, 617–623 CrossRef CAS .
G. Korotcenkov, B. K. Cho, V. Brinzari, L. B. Gulina and V. P. Tolstoy, Ferroelectrics, 2014, 459, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Frietsch, F. Zudock, J. Goschnick and M. Bruns, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 65, 379–381 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Kwon, D. H. Yun, H.-K. Hong, S.-R. Kim, K. Lee, H. Y. Lim and K. H. Yoon, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 65, 327–330 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hierlemann, A. J. Ricco, K. Bodenhöfer, A. Dominik and W. Göpel, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 3696–3708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Johnson and S. L. Rose-Pehrsson, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2015, 8, 287–310 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Fahad, H. Shiraki, M. Amani, C. Zhang, V. S. Hebbar, W. Gao, H. Ota, M. Hettick, D. Kiriya, Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh and A. Javey, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602557 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, T. Du, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang and Q. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1960 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Krivetskiy, M. D. Andreev, A. O. Efitorov and A. M. Gaskov, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 329, 129187 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licen, A. Di Gilio, J. Palmisani, S. Petraccone, G. de Gennaro and P. Barbieri, Sensors, 2020, 20, 1887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Song, W. Ye and Z. Fan, J. Semicond., 2019, 40, 111601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ziyatdinov, S. Marco, A. Chaudry, K. Persaud, P. Caminal and A. Perera, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 146, 460–465 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, N. Zhan, L. Jia, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Powder Technol., 2018, 329, 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xiao, Q. Hu and J. Li, Measurement, 2019, 146, 479–489 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y. Xu, L. Meng, X. Chen, L. Yuan, Q. Cai, W. Shi and G. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 311, 127924 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Nespecaa, J. F. V. L. Munhoza, D. L. Flumignanb and J. E. de Oliveira, Fuel, 2018, 215, 204–211 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Ye, M. Ueland, S. L. Forbes and S. W. Su, Sens. Actuators, A, 2019, 287, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gwiżdż, A. Brudnik and K. Zakrzewska, Metrol. Meas. Syst., 2015, 22(1), 3–12 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Puspendu Barik	Dr Puspendu Barik received his Ph.D. (2013) in Physics from Visva-Bharati. He has also worked as Dr D. S. Kothari Postdoctoral Fellow (2016–2019) at IISc, Bangalore, India, and Instituto de Ciencias Fisicas, Mexico, for his postdoctoral work (2014–2016). His research interests consist of SERS, nanocomposites, photonic–plasmonic structures, evanescent waves, plasmonic luminescent solar concentrator devices, gas sensing materials using plasmonic nanocomposites. He has co-authored more than 30 publications, including journals, book chapters, reviews.
Manik Pradhan	Dr Manik Pradhan is currently an Associate Professor at S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata, India. He obtained his PhD from the University of Bristol, UK. He did his postdoctoral studies at University of Cambridge, UK and Stanford University, USA. His research includes chemical spectroscopy, molecular physics, trace gas sensing and applications of laser spectroscopy in environmental and biomedical sciences. He is the recipient of WIDF-Innovation Award (USA), Dorothy Hodgkin Award (UK), Dayawati Rastogi Lecture Award (India), Sigma-Aldrich Award (Korea) and Isaac Newton Trust Fellowship (UK). He is a Fellow of the Institute of Physics (FInstP), Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC), and the Linnean Society of London (FLS), UK. He has authored and co-authored more than 70 research articles, several reviews, patents and book chapters.


Spectroscopic techniques	Optical	Absorption	Absorbance, which is altered by the trace gas, e.g., in CRDS, CEAS techniques	∼100 ppt (ref. 45–47)
Scattering	Caused by the trace gas molecule, e.g., SERS	∼1 ppb (ref. 48 and 49)
Reflectivity	Change of reflectivity of the surface which adsorbs the trace gases	∼1 ppm (ref. 50)
Fluorescence	Change of fluorescence intensity/wavelength	∼25 ppb (ref. 51–53)
Luminescence	Emission by the gas itself or the chemical reaction with the material
Refractive index	Trace gases modify the refractive index of the medium with respect to vacuum	∼50 ppm (ref. 54 and 55)
SPR	The change of reflectivity due to the resonance EM field at the metal-dielectric interface	∼1 ppm (ref. 56)
Non-spectroscopic techniques	GC-MS	Mass, charge, velocity	Measuring the mass-to-charge ratio of the atomic and molecular composition of inorganic and organic materials both qualitatively and quantitatively	∼1 ppb (ref. 57)
Calorimetric	Heat	Change of temperature due to reaction or adsorption	∼100 ppm (ref. 58)
Thermal Conductivity	Change of thermal conductivity of analyte gases with respect to air
Gravimetric or mechanical	Mass or frequency	Change of mass or frequency due to adsorption, e.g., QCM	∼50 ppb (ref. 59–60)
Acoustic wave	Changes in the velocity of acoustic wave	∼10 ppb (ref. 61 and 62)
Impedance spectrometry	Conductivity	Change of conductivity in the presence of trace gas	∼100 ppm
Impedance	Change of impedance of the solid-state sensor	∼10 ppm6 (ref. 63)
Resistance	Change of resistance of a substance is measured in the presence of external gas, e.g., chemiresistors	∼100 ppm (ref. 15 and 64)
Capacitance	Change of dielectric constant is measured	∼1 ppm (ref. 65 and 66)
Electrochemical	Potential difference	Change of electrode potential in the presence of gas with respect to reference electrodes	∼1 ppm (ref. 67 and 68)
Current	
e.g., Clark-sensor, where a change of current is measured due to modified electrode by the presence of trace gas.
Magnetic	Hall effects	Hall co-efficient for the active sensor materials in the presence of gas	∼1 ppm (ref. 69 and 70)
Magnetic permeability	Change of magnetic inductance due to gas or reaction of the core material with the gas	∼50 ppm (ref. 69)
Magnetic – catalytic	Change in Gibbs free energy	∼80 ppb (ref. 71)
Ionization	Ionization current	A current produced by charges produced by the bombardment of the gas molecules by the incident high energy UV photons	∼10 ppm (ref. 72)

 	Fig. 1  Pictorial diagrams of the standard beam mass analyzers. (a) Time-of-flight (TOF) spectrometry is used as ions of different mass-to-charge have different velocities, and the detector senses them at various times. (b) A double-focusing analyzer is made of electric and magnetic sectors. (c) A quadrupole mass analyzer allows ions of a single mass-to-charge to keep stable trajectories to the detector. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2003.	 
ΔEph = hν = hω = ΔEtran + ΔErot + ΔEvib + ΔEelec	(1)
Wf←i ∝ |f|μz|i|2Ez2	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Absorption spectra of trace gases extracted from the high-resolution transmission molecular absorption (HITRAN) database.76	 
I = PsSaCcellαηCn	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  The best noise equivalent concentrations (NEC) for various target gas molecules as a function of the incident laser wavelength in QEPAS technique. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Elsevier Ltd., copyright 2020.	 
2dncosθ = mλ	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  The essential properties of filters: surface chemical groups, surface area, and pore size distribution. (b) The schematic shows the mechanism of activated carbon (non-polar) filters for sensing low molecular weight gases present in VOC. (c) Mechanism of activated alumina filter (polar) for the adsorption of gas molecules. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 5  The image explains the gas sensing mechanism by the n- and p-type MOSs. The sensing properties are decided by three factors – the receptor function, transducer function, and utility factor.31,101 Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)



Optical Gas sensors	OF-CEAS	17 ppb	RT	NH3	H2O, CO2	
119

OF-CEAS	0.9 ppt	180 ms/RT	NO	N2	
120

QEPAS	90 ppb	1 s/RT	CH4	N2	
77

CEPAS	119 ppq	32 min/RT	HF	Air (10% humidity)	
78

PAS	31 ppb	400 s/RT	C2H2	N2	
121

MPD-PTS	500 ppt	100 s/RT	C2H2	N2	
122

Solid state gas sensors	(GaxIn1−x)2O3 NPs	50 ppb	1 s/200 °C	Formaldehyde	Acetone, ethanol, toluene, methanol, air (35% humidity)	
123

p-Type Mn3O4 nanorods	40 ppm	116 s/RT	NO2	CO, NH3, CH4, benzene, toluene, and acetone	
124

Cu-Doped ZnO nanoellipsoids	10 ppm	13 s/150 °C	NH3	Acetone, LPG, CO2, SO2	
125

Al-Doped ZnO NPs	10 ppm	2 s/500 °C	Acetaldehyde	NO, NO2, trimethylamine, CO, NH3, toluene, benzene	
126

WO3 nanoplates	1 ppm	∼50 s/100 °C	NO2	NO, CO, CO2, NH3, SO4, LPG, acetone, and moisture	
127

MoO3 microsheets	100 ppm	3 s/275 °C	Triethylamine	Ethanol, acetone, formaldehyde, methanol, benzene, toluene, and H2S	
128

Au/MoS2	50 ppm	∼2000 s/70 °C	NO2	Ethanol, H2, NH3	
129

MoS2/SnO2	0.5 ppm	∼6.8 min/340 °C	NO2	H2, CO, H2S and NH3	
130

MoS2/ZnO	50 ppm	260 °C	CH3CH2OH	Methanol, NH3, benzene, toluene	
131

In2O3–rGO	30 ppm	4 min/RT	NO2	H2, CH4, ethanol, methanol, CO	
132

CuO nanoplatelet	40 ppm	RT	NO2	IPA, NH3, H2S, CO, and CH4	
63

Pd/θ-Al2O3 & Pt/α-Al2O3	500 ppm	∼60 s/400 °C	H2	CH4	
133

MoS2	<1 ppm	10 s/RT	ethanol	O2, water vapor and ethanol	
134

Sensor array	Pt, NiO and Au@Pyrex glass chip	4%	30 min/RT	NH3, CO, H2S	N2	
135

Pure and Fe doped In2O3 nanofibers	5 ppm	250–450 °C	
p-Xylene, toluene, benzene, ethanol, formaldehyde	Air	
136

p-NiO/n-SnO2 hetero junctions	20 ppm	200 °C	NO2	H2, Dry air	
137

SnO2/MOx hetero structure	10 ppm	<60 s	Ethanol, acetone, and xylene	Dry air	
138

Filters	Filter –Pt/Al2O3 sensor – Si/WO3	50 ppb	55 s	Acetone	CO, isoprene, NH3, ethanol, H2	
139

Filter – Cr2O3 sensor – SnO2	100 ppb	9 s	Ethylene	NH3, dimethylamine, formaldehyde, ethanol, CO, trimethylamine	
140

Filter – ZnO sensor – Si/WO3	250 ppb	—	Acetone, benzene, H2, CH4, toluene	Ethanol, formaldehyde	
141

Filter – zeolite LTA sensor – Zn1−xCuxO	50 ppb	<1 min	NO	Acetone, CO2, ethanol, H2, NH3	
142

Filter – activated alumina sensor – Pt/SnO2	5 ppb	10 s	Isoprene	Acetone, ethanol, methanol, NH3	
143

Pattern recognition	AuPd|YSZ|Pt	20 ppm	450–500 °C	NO	NO2, C3H6, C3H8, NH3	
144

Catalyst-loaded ZnO nanofibers	5 ppm	450 °C	Acetone	NO, CO, NH3, toluene	
145

LSPR sensor array	10–50 ppm	RT	PA, HA, HPA, OA	Dry air	
146

Others	PAA-coated QCM	50 ppm	RT	NH3	NO2, SO2, H2S, ethanol, acetone, formaldehyde, tetrahydrofuran	
147

Dual transduction gas sensor	12 ppm	RT	Pentanol	Methanol, ethanol, acetone, tetrahydrofuran	
148

μGC and Pd-doped SnO2 NPs	1 ppm	2 min/RT	Methanol	Ethanol (up to 62000 ppm), acetone, H2	
149

	(14)

 	Fig. 6  A generalized pictogram shows the essential elements of a cavity enhanced spectroscopy (CES) instrument, including a light source, detector, and high reflectivity (HR) mirrors. There are several variations of CEAS spectroscopy characterized by the time and intensity domain. Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  A schematic shows the basic setups of direct PAS. (a) The basic configuration of PAS where a modulated light source generates the PA signal and a sound transducer detects the amplitude, (b) modification of acoustic wave can be accomplished by an acoustic resonator, (c) a quartz tuning fork (QTF) may serve as a cheaper narrow bandwidth resonator, (d and e) a multi-pass cell or optical resonator may multiply the PA signal to increase the optical power. Reproduced from ref. 16 under Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The detection limit of MOS sensors. Reproduced from ref. 238 Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) The dependence of crystal facet on the sensitivities of Ethanol for ZnO hexagonal nanoplates and nanorods at 300 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239 Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Model structure of metal heteroatom-doped In2O3, and the Fermi levels of different metal heteroatom-doped In2O3. Reprinted from ref. 240 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 9  A schematic view of the evolution of sensing materials during last five decades. Reproduced from the ref. 10 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 10  Gas sensing responses for (a) pristine MoS2, (b) Pd-decorated MoS2, (c) Au-decorated MoS2 toward 500 ppm C2H5OH, 500 ppm H2, 500 ppm NH3, and 50 ppm NO2 as a function of operating temperature. Schematic illustrations of (d) sensitization of pristine MoS2 by Pd and Au and (e) formation mechanisms of Pd hydride. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Springer Nature Switzerland AG, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematics of the working principle of pre-concentrator using MOFs. Here, ΔT represent the increase in temperature of the MOFs to facilitate the desorption process. Reprinted from ref. 295 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Zinc oxide (ZnO) and zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) core–shell heterostructures.88,302 Semiconductor@MOF sensor exhibits selective gas response for reducing gases with different molecule sizes without (b) and with (c) ZIF-8 shell, which works like a sieve to improve the selectivity of formaldehyde sensing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of microporous zeolite layer supported on porous Al2O3.88,303 Sensor response of non-selective Pd-doped SnO2 sensor without (e) and with (f) a zeolite Mobile-Five (MFI)/Al2O3 membrane. Reprinted from ref. 303 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustrations of a chemical-sensitive field-effect transistor (CS-FET) chip and experimental characterization of individual CS-FETs. (A) Optical microscope image of a single CS-FET with a Pd–Au sensing layer and micro heaters, (B) CS-FET array with different selective sensing layers, (C) enlarged image of single CS-FET, (D) cross-sectional TEM image of CS-FET as shown in (C). Scale bars, 250 μm. (E and F) Sensor response for H2S gas by Pd–Au CS-FET, (G and H) Sensor response for H2 gas by NI-Pd CS-FET, (I and J) Sensor response for NO2 gas by Ni CS-FET. The terms used in the figure represent as sensor response (ΔG/G0), the response time (t90; time taken for the sensor to reach 90% of its peak value from baseline), and recovery time (t50; time taken for the sensor to recover within 50% of its initial baseline). Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial license from the ref. 353 with permission from American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
