Impact of perovskite solar cell degradation on the lifetime energy yield and economic viability of perovskite/silicon tandem modules   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00143C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00143C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1439-1447Impact of perovskite solar cell degradation on the lifetime energy yield and economic viability of perovskite/silicon tandem modules†

        
          
            Jiadong 
            Qian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marco 
            Ernst
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Nandi 
            Wu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Andrew 
            Blakers
          
        
      
Research School of Engineering, The Australian National University, Canberra ACT 2600, Australia. E-mail: marco.ernst@anu.edu.au
Received 
      7th March 2019
    , Accepted 11th April 2019First published on 23rd April 2019AbstractWith continuously increasing power conversion efficiency, metal halide perovskite solar cells have emerged as promising candidates for high-efficiency silicon based tandem solar cells in two-terminal monolithic integration and four-terminal mechanical stack architectures. The stability of perovskite solar cells is currently one of the major challenges for perovskite/silicon tandem devices and is improving rapidly. However, different degradation rates of perovskite cells and silicon cells in a tandem solar module can affect the overall module degradation. The lifetime energy yield and economic viability of perovskite/silicon tandem modules strongly depend on the degradation rates of perovskite cells. In this paper we present a simulation study of the long term power and energy yield of perovskite/silicon tandem modules under different perovskite cell degradation scenarios. We also estimate the efficiency and cost requirements for the economic feasibility of two- and four-terminal tandem modules. We determine that to maintain 80% of the initial power in a tandem module after 25 years, the maximum permissible perovskite top cell degradation rates are 0.9% per year in a two-terminal configuration and 1.3% per year in a four-terminal configuration for a realistic perovskite cell degradation scenario. We project that a future perovskite/silicon tandem module can produce over 10% more lifetime energy than a single-junction silicon module in 2025 assuming a tandem cell efficiency reaches of 28% and a modest perovskite cell degradation rate of 2% per year. Finally, we estimate the levelized cost of energy for both two- and four-terminal tandem modules. In the case of a degradation rate of 2% per year of the perovskite cell and 50% additional cost for the tandem structure compared to single-junction modules, we find that power conversion efficiencies of 28.7% and 27.6% enable the economic viability of two- and four-terminal perovskite/silicon tandem modules. Our study demonstrates the quantitative impact of perovskite cell degradation on the long-term performance of silicon based tandem modules, and will provide guidance for future commercialization of perovskite/silicon tandem solar modules.
Introduction
Organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite (PSK) solar cells have rapidly improved in recent years with the highest reported efficiency reaching 23.7%.1 With a bandgap greater than 1.5 eV, perovskite solar cells are promising candidates for the top layer material for silicon (Si) based tandem photovoltaic (PV) devices. The current best-performing PSK/Si tandem solar cells have achieved efficiency records of 28%2 and 26.7%3 with two- and four-terminal structures respectively. A two-terminal (2T) tandem cell is typically fabricated by monolithically connecting the top solar cell to a bottom cell in series, while a four-terminal (4T) tandem cell consists of a top cell mechanically stacked on the bottom cells without conductive contact. PSK/Si tandem cells with a theoretical efficiency of about 45% with both 2T and 4T structures4 have shown great potential as next generation photovoltaic devices. In contrast, the current single-junction Si cell's efficiency record of 26.7%5 is approaching the Shockley–Queisser limit of 29.43%.6
Meanwhile, the stability of PSK solar cell and PSK/Si tandem cell has also been drastically improved when exposed to illumination cycles, heat and humidity in several studies.7–11 Encapsulated 2T PSK/Si tandem cells with an efficiency of 23.6% are reported to withstand a 1000 hour damp heat test at 85 °C and 85% relative humidity, a standard reliability test for commercial Si solar modules,7 with less than 10% degradation in performance. Both the advancement in power conversion efficiency (PCE) and device stability are necessary for PSK/Si tandem cells to be commercialized in PV modules and take a significant market share.
One advantage of the PSK/Si tandem cell is the potential to leverage of the existing Si solar cell production facilities. With a total annual production volume of 90.7 GW in 201712 the PSK/Si tandem cell may be able to take advantage of the economies of scale of the Si-wafer-based PV cells. While the process of fabricating the PSK top cell entails additional cost, the share of module cost in the total capital cost of a utility-scale PV power plant is steadily decreasing and is expected to reach as low as 39% by 2025.13 Therefore, the increased cost of a tandem module compared to a single-junction Si module may be less significant in the future. Song et al. analyzed the manufacturing process of pure perovskite solar modules with low-cost materials and fabrication techniques.14 A levelized costs of energy (LCOE) for the studied perovskite solar module was estimated to be 4.84 to 7.90¢ per kW per h in the US assuming a perovskite degradation rate of approximately 0.5% per year. As the device stability remains among the most critical issues for perovskite solar cells, the assumption of a degradation rate comparable to commercial crystalline silicon (c-Si) modules is unlikely to hold and may be misleading in the LCOE estimation of perovskite and perovskite/silicon tandem modules. Our work focuses on the long-term degradation of perovskite/silicon tandem modules, which has a similarly critical impact on the economic viability of perovskite/silicon tandem technology as the manufacturing costs. Instead of referring to the IEC standard, which is suitable and validated for single-junction silicon solar modules with well-studied degradation properties, we quantify the impact of perovskite device stability on the energy yield of tandem modules.
The total lifetime energy produced by PSK/Si tandem modules is affected by the performance under real operating conditions15 as well as the module degradation rate. Existing PV module degradation studies often use statistical methods to analyze the operational data of PV systems.16,17 With advanced data filtering, the annual degradation rates of PV modules' maximum power (Pmp) along with short-circuit current (Isc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and fill factor (FF) can be evaluated.18,19 According to the literature, PV modules using either Si-based or thin-film based technologies have a median degradation rate of 0.5% per year.18,19 Based on the projected module power over lifetime, the LCOE of currently existing commercial PV module have been estimated and used for an indication of the economic viability of the PV module technologies in previous studies.20,21
Only limited study has been published that investigates the impact of operating conditions on the degradation of PSK solar cells22 and several reliability assessments are proposed for commercial PSK solar modules.23 Crucial for economic viability of PSK/Si tandem devices is the combined degradation rate, which depends on the device configuration, the individual degradation rates of PSK and Si solar cells, and the type of degradation. However, to the best of the author's knowledge, the impact of these effects on lifetime energy yield and economic viability have not yet been reported.
This work fills this gap and investigates the impact of two critical issues involved in the combined degradation mechanism of PSK/Si tandem cells.
First, 2T tandem cells are commonly optimized by matching the maximum power current of both sub-cells to minimize current mismatch losses. However, different electrical degradation rates of the sub-cells can cause an increasing current mismatch and consequently a decrease in tandem efficiency. Second, optical degradation of the PSK top cell affecting the transmitted light to the bottom cell may cause increase of the current at the silicon cells. Such current gain could have different effects depending on the cell configurations. Previous studies have shown such optical degradation may occur simultaneously with the electrical degradation at PSK solar cells.24
In this study, we set up three representative degradation scenarios for PSK cell driven by different device parameters. The resulting power degradations for two- and four-terminal PSK/Si tandem modules are simulated considering the impact of electrical and optical degradation mechanisms.
We estimate the maximum permissible annual degradation rates of the PSK top cells for two- and four-terminal tandem modules to comply with an industry-typical total module performance warranty of 80% of the original value after 25 years. The tandem module power is integrated over 25 years to estimate the lifetime energy yield.
Finally, we take future technology advancements into account and calculate the LCOE for possible improved PSK/Si tandem modules. The LCOE of tandem modules is compared with a projected mainstream silicon PV module in different scenarios considering future tandem efficiencies and additional costs of manufacturing.
This work investigates in particular the effects of different degradation rates of perovskite and silicon solar cells in a tandem structure. The degradation properties of individual cells in a tandem configuration have an equally critical influence on the predicted energy yield as the manufacturing costs of perovskite modules and thus a significant influence on the economic viability of PSK/Si tandem technologies.
Experiment and method

Fig. 1 illustrates two- and four-terminal tandem modules with sandwich structures where the PSK and Si cells are encapsulated by EVA and glass. The 2T module has a similar configuration to a conventional 72-cell crystalline silicon (c-Si) PV module, where each tandem solar cell consists of a PSK top cell stacked monolithically on a c-Si bottom cell of the same size. The solar cells in the 4T module are a hybrid of 44 long and thin PSK top cell strips commonly found in commercial thin-film PV modules and 72 conventional c-Si bottom cells.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of configurations for two-terminal and four-terminal tandem modules. 
We modeled the two- and four-terminal tandem cells based on the current PSK record solar cell efficiencies.3,25 The PCE, cell geometry and the number of cells in a module are tabulated in Table 1. Detailed electrical properties are listed in Table S1 (ESI†).
Table 1 PCEs, cell geometries and the number of cells in a module for the simulated 2T and 4T tandem module configurations








PCE (%)
Geometry (cm × cm)
Number in module




2T
PSK
14.1
15.6 × 15.6
72


Si (filtered)
11.2
15.6 × 15.6
72


Tandem
25.3
15.6 × 15.6
72


4T
PSK
17.1
191.6 × 2.08
44


Si (filtered)
9.6
15.6 × 15.6
72


Tandem
26.7
N/A
N/A




The detailed simulation methods for module power and cell degradation are described in the ESI.† In brief, the PSK and Si cells' current and voltage (I–V) characteristics are simulated with the single-diode model26 and solved explicitly using the Lambert W function.27 Before the degradation analysis, we simulate a nominal power rating of 442 W for the 2T module and 467 W for the 4T module.
In this work, three components of module degradation are considered independently: the encapsulation materials (EVA and glass), the Si cells and the PSK cells. Optical and electrical degradation of layers between the PSK and Si solar cells are aggregated into the degradation of PSK cells. Further indirect effects are neglected, such as mechanical damage due to thermal expansion.
Detailed simulated degradation rate values and ranges for each component are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The degradation rates of the encapsulation's transmittance and the Si bottom cells are assumed to be constant and equal to the reported values for field-tested c-Si PV modules.19 The average Isc decrease of 0.26% per year found in the monitored modules is assumed to attribute to neutral-density transmittance reduction of the encapsulation material due to delamination and discoloration.17,28 Thus, the total irradiation absorbed by PSK and Si cells in both 2T and 4T modules would also experience a reduction of 0.26% per year in the simulation. In addition, the Si cells are assumed to have an FF degradation of 0.09% per year and a Voc degradation of 0.03% per year, leading to a Pmp degradation of 0.4% per year.19
PSK solar cell degradation
For the PSK cell degradation, different types of I–V characteristic changes may have different impact on the operation of the tandem device.
To obtain a realistic degradation case of PSK cells that are used for Si based tandem cells, we conducted an accelerated degradation experiment using an in-house fabricated high-band-gap PSK cell. The PSK sample cell was fabricated using the identical process as reported by Duong et al.11 In brief, the perovskite material is quadruple cation Rb-FA0.75MA0.15Cs0.1PbI2Br and a cell structure of FTO/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/passivation layer (PCBM + PMMA)/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au is used. All layers are solution processed and finished with 100 nm of evaporated gold. The I–V curve of the fabricated PSK cell before degradation is presented in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Degradation of the un-encapsulated PSK cells is performed at 65 °C in air and 35% humidity. The measured cell I–V curves after various degradation times are normalized and plotted in Fig. 2a and corresponding electric cell parameters are shown in Fig. 2b. Although the experiments were carried out using in-house fabricated PSK cells that have relatively low fill factors, the simulation study was conducted based on current most efficient 2T and 4T perovskite/silicon tandem cells.3,25 The experiment results are only used to obtain a typical perovskite cell degradation characteristic.
 Fig. 2  (a) Normalized I–V curves of an un-encapsulated PSK cell after various degradation times at 65 °C in air and 35% humidity. (b) Corresponding electrical cell parameters after various degradation times. 
The experimental results show a cell power degradation driven by a combination of significant decrease of FF and Isc and a small reduction in Voc. A degradation scenario S1 is therefore set up in Fig. 3 to represent the realistic PSK cell degradation. The degradation rates of FF, Isc and Voc are adjusted by changing the series resistance (Rs), photo-current (Iph) and saturation current (I0) in the single-diode equation. In addition, two extreme scenarios are simulated where the PSK cell power degradation is dominated by Isc decay in S2 and Voc decay in S3, as illustrated in Fig. 3 as well. The Isc and Voc reduction in the two extreme scenarios also causes changes in FF.
 Fig. 3  Deterioration of electrical parameters for the three PSK cell degradation scenarios simulated in this work. 
The degradation of PSK solar cells in potential tandem modules may vary with different PSK absorber materials, tandem designs, module configurations and operating environment. The three scenarios discussed in this work aim to cover both realistic and extreme cases with either most severe or no current limitation by the degraded PSK solar cells.
Variation of the optical properties of solar cells is often correlated with the change in the photo-current density (Jph), or short-circuit current density (Jsc), at the same irradiance. A Jsc decrease in the PSK top cell (ΔJsc(PSK)) can result from an increase in surface reflection, a decrease of light absorption and changes to the internal quantum efficiency (IQE).
For simplification, we assume unchanged IQE and surface reflectance over the lifetime of the PSK solar cells. Any reduction in light absorption after degradation of the PSK top cell is then attributed to an increase in transmitted light to the Si bottom cell. With these assumptions, we can establish a linear relationship between ΔJsc(PSK) and the increase of light transmitted to the silicon bottom cell. Then, by assuming the Si bottom cells experience no degradation of the external quantum efficiency (EQE),29,30 a coefficient fτ is defined to represent the ratio between ΔJsc(PSK) and the increase of the short-circuit current of the Si cells (ΔJsc(Si)). The short-circuit current density of the Si cell at time t, Jsc(Si)t, can then be expressed as:   is the initial photo-current density and rc(Si) is the current degradation rate of the Si cell. rencp is the transmittance reduction rate of the module encapsulation and  represents the intrinsic Jsc(PSK) degradation in absence of the effect of optical degradation in the encapsulation materials.
A fτ value of 0 represents the case that the transmittance of PSK cell remains constant and independent with the Jsc(PSK) changes. When the fτ value equals to 1, the Jsc(PSK) degradation is solely caused by the additional light transmission, which is then completely converted to an increase of Jsc(Si).
The fτ value is calculated from the measured EQE of the Si cell and transmittance of the experimental PSK sample cell before and after accelerated degradation and is given by:  Δϕ(λ) and EQE(λ) are the difference in the irradiation transmitted through the PSK cell and the spectral EQE of the Si cell, as plotted in Fig. 4a. Δϕ(λ) is calculated as following.  Δτ(λ) is the transmittance change of the PSK cell and GAM1.5g(λ) is the AM 1.5G solar spectrum, as depicted in Fig. 4b. E(λ) is the photon energy and equals to (h × c)/λ, where h is Planck's constant and c is the speed of light.
 Fig. 4  (a) EQE of the bottom Si cell and change of irradiance at the Si cell. (b) Measured transmittance changes of the sample PSK cell and AM 1.5G solar spectrum. (c) Illustration of optical transmittance before and after degradation of the perovskite cell. 
The ratio of loss in Jsc(PSK) and expected gain of Jsc(Si) yields a fτ value of 0.89 for the PSK sample cell. We note that fτ for tandem modules depends on the PSK cell material and may also change over time.
Results & discussion
State of the art
The impact of the PSK top cell degradation rate is simulated for two- and four-terminal tandem modules over 25 years lifetime in weekly time steps. The 25 year period is currently the most-used PV module warranty length for 80% of the minimal rated power output. According to the historical data, commercial PV systems have a median power degradation of 13% after 25 years of operation.17
In Fig. 5 we simulate the relative module power (degraded power divided by nominal power) over module operating lifetime. A fτ value of 0.89 from the experiment is used, with more simulated results using fτ = 0 and 1 presented in Fig. S2–S4 (ESI†). The y-axis represents the PSK top cell power degradation rate (rPSK). To minimize the impact of the non-linearity of rPSK over time as in Fig. 3, the average degradation rate calculated from regression over the system lifetime is used.
 Fig. 5  Normalized tandem module power impacted by varying rPSK over 25 years for the three degradation scenarios. An fτ value of 0.89 based on experiment results is used for simulation. The dotted lines represent the permissible degradation rate consistent with 80% relative end-of-life efficiency. 
Representative contour lines are labelled with the relative power reduction of the tandem modules. For all PSK degradation rates in three scenarios, the simulated results show that the tandem modules perform at 100% normalized power at year 0 and gradually deteriorate over time. As expected, higher rPSK values result in accelerated power degradation for both 2T and 4T modules in all scenarios.
The highest permissible rPSK values for the two tandem module configurations to maintain at least 80% of their initial power in the end of year 25 are labelled and marked with white dashed lines in Fig. 5. The PSK cells used for tandem modules would require meeting these degradation rates to fulfil the current standard 25 year warranty. Overall the permissible rPSK values are lower in a 2T module than a 4T module for all the simulated scenarios. 0.9% per year of PSK cell power degradation in a 2T module is allowed in the realistic case S1, while a 4T module can tolerate a PSK cell degradation rate of up to 1.3% per year.
The difference between the two module configurations results from the current degradation of the PSK cells, which leads to a current mismatch in a 2T module. For S2, where the PSK degradation is driven by Isc decrease, the rPSK is to be less than 0.5% per year for a 2T module to maintain 80% of the initial power rating after 25 years. In the voltage driven degradation case S3, the impact of rPSK values are similar for 2T and 4T tandem modules.
For a PV module, an overall degradation rate of 0.8% per year would result in 20% power reduction after 25 years. For 2T modules in S1 and S2, the current degradation of the PSK cell would further limit the operation current of the Si cell in addition to the encapsulation degradation despite the additional light transmission. Therefore, the highest permissible rPSK in these two scenarios is lower than the overall permissible degradation rate of a PV module.
While the tandem module power rating at the end of lifetime is critical, it is also important to show the energy yield curve over time to estimate the accumulated lifetime yield. The tandem module energy yield at time t (ElifetimeSi) can be calculated as following:Etandemt = Ptandemt × CTM × G

P
tandem

t
 is the maximum module power at time t as previously simulated and presented in Fig. 5. The cell-to-module ratio CTM and the incident irradiation G may vary across module designs and operating locations.
As an example, we plot the energy yield curves over time in Fig. 6a and b for the 2T and 4T tandem modules, in the realistic degradation case S1 with fτ = 0.89. The module energy yield curves with four rPSK values from 0.6% to 3.5% per year are plotted. The area below the energy yield curve equals to the accumulated lifetime energy yield of the tandem module. In comparison, the energy yield of two reference modules that only use the Si bottom cells from the two tandem modules are also plotted in red solid lines. The Si cell efficiencies are based on the reported Si cell efficiencies in the record tandem cells (22.5% PCE in a 2T module and 21% PCE in a 4T module).3,25 Although the two tandem modules outperform the corresponding Si modules during early operation, the energy yield of Si modules may surpass the tandem modules in late years for high rPSK cases. Over lifetime, it is therefore possible that a PSK/Si tandem module with high rPSK values would generate less total energy than using only the more stable Si bottom cells.
 Fig. 6  (a & b) Energy yield of two- and four-terminal tandem modules for different PSK degradation rates over a lifetime of 25 years in comparison with the energy yield of a single-junction silicon module. The c-Si module power degradation rate is 0.4% per year. (c & d) Normalized lifetime energy yield of two- and four-terminal tandem modules with variable rPSK and fτ for degradation case S1. A future energy discount rate d = 5% per year is used. 
The lifetime energy yield of tandem modules (Elifetimetandem) is compared with the Si modules (ElifetimeSi) using the corresponding Si bottom cells. Energy produced in the future is discounted with a discount rate d = 5% in this study. For the realistic degradation case S1, multiple fτ values are simulated to study the effect of PSK cell optical degradation. The simulation results are presented in Fig. 6c and d using the normalized yield calculated as following.  ts is the designed module lifetime, which is 25 years in this case. PSit is the power of the corresponding Si modules at time t. We neglect the impact of spectral mismatch, angular effects and operating temperature in this study. As reported by Hörantner & Snaith, the impact of operating conditions on the expected energy yield is similar between PSK/Si tandem cell and single-junction Si cell.15
Representative contour lines are plotted and labelled with the normalized yields. The 100% lines are the breakeven conditions for the tandem modules to produce the same amount of energy over 25 years with the corresponding Si modules. The regions to the left of the breakeven lines represent cases of sufficiently low PSK degradation rates for tandem modules to have an increase in lifetime energy yield. In contrast, for regions to the right of the 100% lines the PSK cell degradation limits the lifetime energy yield to values below the single-junction Si modules.
The 2T tandem module shows a much lower sensitivity to the fτ value than the 4T module. This is due to the current mismatch between the two monolithically connected sub-cells limiting the Si cell current. With fτ = 0.89, a 25.3% 2T tandem module would produce less total energy over lifetime than the module using 22.5% Si single-junction cells if the PSK cells degrade more than 2% per year. In contrast, the Si cells in the 4T tandem module are not affected by the electrical degradation of the PSK top cell and have improved Jph that correlates with the fτ.
Outlook to 2025
After simulating the lifetime energy yield of modules using current most efficient PSK/Si tandem cells, the next question is how the advancement of PSK/Si tandem cell efficiency would improve the lifetime energy yield of the tandem modules in the future. We conduct an analysis on evaluating the trade-off between the tandem cell efficiency and the degradation rate of the PSK top cells. Such analysis is strongly dependent on the future energy discount rate as a high discount rate would favour high-efficient tandem modules which produce more energy in the first few years. Here, we use the same discount rate d = 5% as before.
The simulated module lifetime energy yields are compared with the projected mono c-Si PERC PV modules in 2025 when Si-based tandem modules are expected to gain noticeable market share.13
Instead of using the electrical properties of the Si bottom cells as reported for recent tandem cell efficiency records,3,25 we assume 23.3% efficient Si bottom cells in 2025.13 We simulate Ptandemt and then Elifetimetandem using the same realistic PSK degradation case S1 as in previous simulations and the experimentally determined fτ value of 0.89. The Si cell degradation rate is assumed to be 0.4% per year.
The lifetime performance of the tandem modules (Elifetimetandem) are compared with the mainstream mono c-Si PERC module in 2025 (ElifetimePERC(2025)). With a cell efficiency of 23.3%, a 72-cell PERC module in 2025 is projected to yield a power rating of 405 W. The simulated lifetime yield ratio (Elifetimetandem/ElifetimePERC(2025)) is presented in Fig. 7. By comparing the PSK/Si tandem module and the single-junction PERC module using the same Si cells, we can directly quantify the energy gain of utilising the PSK tandem technologies. The simulation results including other two electrical degradation cases S2 and S3 are provided in Fig. S5 (ESI†).
 Fig. 7  Ratios between Elifetimetandem of the 2T and 4T modules and the projected lifetime energy yield of a 405 W c-Si PERC module. The PERC modules are assumed to degrade by 0.4% per year. A future energy discount rate d = 5% per year and fτ = 0.89 are used. 
The 100% contour lines in the two plots show the breakeven situations where the additional PSK top cells produce no additional lifetime energy to the Si bottom cells. For a 2T tandem module with 26% cell efficiency, the highest permissible PSK cell degradation rate is about 2% per year to produce more energy than a PERC module in 2025. Like the previous simulation results, the Si cells in the 4T tandem module are unaffected by the electrical degradation of the PSK top cells. Therefore, the contour lines are flatter, indicating a lower sensitivity of module energy yield to the PSK cell degradation rate.
Furthermore, we marked three examples on the plots for trade-off between tandem efficiency and PSK degradation rate:
(1) Tandem cell efficiency = 26%, rPSK = 1% per year.
(2) Tandem cell efficiency = 28%, rPSK = 2% per year.
(3) Tandem cell efficiency = 30%, rPSK = 3% per year.
The simulated lifetime energy yields are labelled on the plots. For the cases studied, 1% additional PSK degradation rate can be approximately compensated by 2% higher PCE of tandem cells in a 2T module. In a 4T module, such cell efficiency improvement considerably outweighs the higher degradation rate of PSK cells.
Lastly, we take a further step and calculate the LCOE produced by a 2T and a 4T PSK/Si tandem module in 2025, using the following equation:31    Ct is the cost at time t. The detailed component costs are tabulated in Table S3 (ESI†), including capital cost and operating and maintenance (O&M) cost based on the projected values in the ITRPV report (2018).13 All the capital costs are assumed to occur at the beginning of module operation and the O&M cost is charged yearly with a discount rate d = 5% per year. The capital costs include ‘soft costs’ of permits and financing as well as system costs consisting of the costs of PV modules, inverters, wiring, mounting and land.
For the absolute values of the lifetime energy yield of tandem modules, we use a CTM power ratio of 1.006 based on the projected value in 202513 and the average irradiation in Perth, Australia at the optimal tilt angle of 45 kW h m−2 per week, estimated using the method described in the literature.32 The latitude and annual solar insolation in Perth are tabulated in Table S4 (ESI†) along with other major cities in the world.
We assume that both 2T and 4T tandem modules can be produced through an adaption of the PERC module manufacturing process with an additional capital cost of CPSK. The LCOE of a PSK/Si tandem module is therefore a function of CPSK and the tandem module power that affects the cost of modules, inverters and O&M cost.
The LCOEs of tandem modules are compared with the mono c-Si PERC module in 2025, whose LCOE is estimated to be 3.3 cents per kW per h based on the previously stated degradation, insolation and cost assumptions, tabulated in Table S3 (ESI†). The LCOE ratios between the tandem modules and PERC modules are depicted in Fig. 8 for the following four scenarios:
 Fig. 8  Simulated LCOE ratios between a PSK/Si tandem module with variable PCEs and a 405 W PERC module in 2025. Four cases are illustrated for 2T and 4T tandem configurations with different rPSK and CPSK values. 
• Optimistic scenario: the tandem cell module can be adapted from the PERC module with negligible cost (CPSK = 0%) and rPSK = 1% per year.
• Mixed scenario 1: CPSK = 50% and rPSK = 1% per year.
• Mixed scenario 2: CPSK = 50% and rPSK = 2% per year.
• Conservative scenario: CPSK = 50% and rPSK = 3% per year.
The area below the LCOE ratio = 1 is highlighted in green and represents the situation where the LCOE of the tandem module drops below the LCOE of the PERC module in 2025 and therefore would be economically viable in the market. The curves above LCOE ratio = 1, within the red area, are the cases where single-junction Si PERC modules are more economic than tandem modules.
In the optimistic scenario where the PSK cells in the tandem module degrade by 1% per year and the adoption to tandem technologies adds no additional cost, the minimum tandem module efficiency to achieve lower LCOE than the reference PERC module in both the two- and four-terminal configurations is 24.5% for both 2T and 4T configurations.
With higher rPSK and CPSK values, higher tandem cell efficiencies are required for both configurations to produce the same LCOE, represented by a shift of the LCOE ratio curve to the right in the figure. The distance of curve shift indicates the sensitivity of the module LCOE to either the CPSK or rPSK increase.
In the 2T module, the lowest breakeven tandem cell PCE increases by 2.7% due to the additional CPSK in the mixed scenario 1, and further increases by 1.5% and 2.9% for higher rPSK = 2% and 3% respectively. The ‘enabling’ tandem PCE for the 4T module increases by 2.5% for 50% increase of CPSK from the optimistic scenario. Whereas, a higher rPSK = 2% or 3% would only further require 0.7% and 2% tandem cell PCE in mixed scenario 2 and the conservative scenario. Thus, while the LCOE of 2T and 4T modules show similar sensitivity to the additional tandem structure processing cost, the lowest ‘enabling’ tandem cell PCE for the 4T module is less sensitive to higher PSK cell degradation rates.
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a study on how different degradation rates and modes of PSK top cells in PSK/Si tandem modules affect the long-term operation of such modules. Three electrical degradation cases and the light transmittance degradation of the PSK cells were simulated.
To meet the current industry warranty requirement and maintain 80% of the initial performance of a 2T tandem module after 25 years of operation in the field, the maximum PSK cell degradation rates are 0.5% to 0.9% per year, depending on degradation mode. The permissible PSK cell degradation rates are higher in a 4T module ranging between 0.8% and 1.3% per year, due to the absence of a current mismatch effect. A PSK cell degradation rate of over 2% per year would diminish the lifetime energy gain from the additional 2.7% tandem cell PCE in a 2T tandem configuration compared to the 22.7% efficient Si bottom cells.
The lifetime energy yield of tandem modules was simulated considering future efficiency improvements and compared with a projected mainstream c-Si PERC module in 2025, when Si based tandem modules are expected to start mass production. We found that every 1% increase in the annual degradation rate of perovskite cells offsets the gain in energy yield by a 2% improvement in cell efficiency in a 2T module. In a 4T module, a 1% increase in the degradation rate would offset the gain in energy yield by a 1% increase in efficiency, indicating a lower sensitivity to PSK cell degradation.
Crucial for the industrial feasibility of tandem modules are the additional fabrication costs, which are reflected in the LCOE values. We estimated that in 2025, a PSK/Si tandem module with 28.7% efficient 2T tandem cells or 27.6% efficient 4T tandem cells can be economically competitive if the perovskite cells degrade by maximum of 2% per year and the additional cost of a tandem module is 50% of the cost of a PERC module. These simulation results should provide evidence for future commercialization and deployment feasibility of PSK/Si tandem modules.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Best Research-Cell Efficiency chart, accessed Feb 28, 2018, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-reserch-cell-efficiencies.pdf Search PubMed.

          Oxford PV perovskite solar cell achieves 28% efficiency, https://www.oxfordpv.com/news/oxford-pv-perovskite-solar-cell-achieves-28-efficiency, accessed Feb 28, 2018.
C. O. R. Quiroz, Y. Shen, M. Salvador, K. Forberich, N. Schrenker, G. D. Spyropoulos, T. Heumüller, B. Wilkinson, T. Kirchartz, E. Spiecker, P. J. Verlinden, X. Zhang, M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3583–3592 RSC .
M. H. Futscher and B. Ehrler, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 863–868 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, K. Yoshikawa, H. Uzu and D. Adachi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 08RB20 CrossRef .
A. Richter, M. Hermle and S. W. Glunz, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1184–1191 Search PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17009 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Asghar, J. Zhang, H. Wang and P. D. Lund, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 131–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Baranwal, S. Kanaya, T. A. N. Peiris, G. Mizuta, T. Nishina, H. Kanda, T. Miyasaka, H. Segawa and S. Ito, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, J. Li, X. Liang and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17473–17479 RSC .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. -C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y.-B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .

          Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems, ISE, Photovoltaic Report, https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/ise/de/documents/publications/studies/Photovoltaics-Report.pdf Search PubMed.

ITRPV working group International technology roadmap for photovoltaic (ITRPV) – 2017 Results, Technical Report,  March, 2018 Search PubMed.
Z. Song, C. L. McElvany, A. B. Phillips, I. Celik, P. W. Krantz, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, D. Apul and M. J. Heben, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1297–1305 RSC .
M. T. Hörantner and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1983–1993 RSC .
D. C. Jordan, C. Deline, S. R. Kurtz, G. M. Kimball and M. Anderson, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2018, 8, 525–531 Search PubMed .
D. C. Jordan and S. R. Kurtz, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 317–323 Search PubMed .
W. Luo, Y. S. Khoo, J. P. Singh, J. K. C. Wong, Y. Wang, A. G. Aberle and S. Ramakrishna, IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2018, 8, 16–22 Search PubMed .
D. C. Jordan and S. R. Kurtz, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 12–29 Search PubMed .
S. B. Darling, F. You, T. Veselka and A. Velosa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3133–3139 RSC .

          National Renewable Energy Laboratory, System Advisor Model, Version 2017.9.5, https://sam.nrel.gov/ Search PubMed .
K. Domanski, E. A. Alharbi, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and W. Tress, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and P. Hacke, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 459–465 CrossRef .
A. Marronnier, H. Lee, H. Lee, M. Kim, C. Eypert, J.-P. Gaston, G. Roma, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy and Y. Bonnassieux, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 178, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sahli, J. Werner, B. A. Kamino, M. Bräuninger, R. Monnard, B. Paviet-Salomon, L. Barraud, L. Ding, J. J. Diaz Leon, D. Sacchetto, G. Cattaneo, M. Despeisse, M. Boccard, S. Nicolay, Q. Jeangros, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 820–826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. A. Green, Solar Cells: Operating Principles, Technology and System Applications, pn Junction Diode, University of New South Wales, Sydney,  1998, pp. 62–83 Search PubMed .
A. Jain and A. Kapoor, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 81, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .

          International Energy Agency, Assessment of Photovoltaic Module Failures in the Field,  May 2017 Search PubMed .
S. Bae, W. Oh, K. D. Lee, S. Kim, H. Kim, N. Park, S.-I. Chan, S. Park, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Energy Sci. Eng., 2017, 5, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tayyib, J. O. Odden and T. O. Saetre, Energy Procedia, 2013, 38, 626–635 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huld, R. Müller and A. Gambardella, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 1803–1815 CrossRef .

          W. Short, D. J. Packey, and T. Holt, A manual for the economic evaluation of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies. University Press of the Pacific,  1995, accessed Dec 16, 2018; https://www.nrel.gov/docs/legosti/old/5173.pdf Search PubMed.

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00143cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of configurations for two-terminal and four-terminal tandem modules.	 

2T	PSK	14.1	15.6 × 15.6	72
Si (filtered)	11.2	15.6 × 15.6	72
Tandem	25.3	15.6 × 15.6	72
4T	PSK	17.1	191.6 × 2.08	44
Si (filtered)	9.6	15.6 × 15.6	72
Tandem	26.7	N/A	N/A

 	Fig. 2  (a) Normalized I–V curves of an un-encapsulated PSK cell after various degradation times at 65 °C in air and 35% humidity. (b) Corresponding electrical cell parameters after various degradation times.	 

 	Fig. 3  Deterioration of electrical parameters for the three PSK cell degradation scenarios simulated in this work.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EQE of the bottom Si cell and change of irradiance at the Si cell. (b) Measured transmittance changes of the sample PSK cell and AM 1.5G solar spectrum. (c) Illustration of optical transmittance before and after degradation of the perovskite cell.	 

 	Fig. 5  Normalized tandem module power impacted by varying rPSK over 25 years for the three degradation scenarios. An fτ value of 0.89 based on experiment results is used for simulation. The dotted lines represent the permissible degradation rate consistent with 80% relative end-of-life efficiency.	 
Etandemt = Ptandemt × CTM × G

 	Fig. 6  (a & b) Energy yield of two- and four-terminal tandem modules for different PSK degradation rates over a lifetime of 25 years in comparison with the energy yield of a single-junction silicon module. The c-Si module power degradation rate is 0.4% per year. (c & d) Normalized lifetime energy yield of two- and four-terminal tandem modules with variable rPSK and fτ for degradation case S1. A future energy discount rate d = 5% per year is used.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Ratios between Elifetimetandem of the 2T and 4T modules and the projected lifetime energy yield of a 405 W c-Si PERC module. The PERC modules are assumed to degrade by 0.4% per year. A future energy discount rate d = 5% per year and fτ = 0.89 are used.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Simulated LCOE ratios between a PSK/Si tandem module with variable PCEs and a 405 W PERC module in 2025. Four cases are illustrated for 2T and 4T tandem configurations with different rPSK and CPSK values.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9se00143c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
