Mass production of a 3D non-woven nanofabric with crystalline P3HT nanofibrils for organic solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE23987F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE23987F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 910-917Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMass production of a 3D non-woven nanofabric with crystalline P3HT nanofibrils for organic solar cells†

        
          
            Jin Young 
            Oh‡
, 
      
        
          
            Tae Il 
            Lee‡
, 
      
        
          
            Woo Soon 
            Jang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Soo Sang 
            Chae
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jee Ho 
            Park
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hyun Woo 
            Lee
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jae-Min 
            Myoung
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Hong Koo 
            Baik
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seoul, Republic of Korea. E-mail: thinfilm@yonsei.ac.kr; jmmyoung@yonsei.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-312-5375;   Tel: +82-2-2123-2838
Received 
      6th November 2012
    , Accepted 3rd January 2013First published on 4th January 2013AbstractA strategy for the in line mass production of a three-dimensional (3D) non-woven nanofabric consisting of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils, created by in situ cooling of the transportation line to feed a P3HT solution for a coating tool, was introduced. The required cooling-temperature with respect to the feeding rate for the overall nanofibril creating process and the yield of the nanofibrils in solution with various organic solvents were determined. Considering the influence of a change in the temperature on the status of the precipitated nanofibrils until feeding it into the spray nozzle, the margin of the surviving nanofibrils at a certain temperature was also investigated. To verify the superiority of our strategy and present directions regarding its application to industry, arrays of organic solar cells based on a 3D non-woven nanofabric structure consisting of P3HT nanofibrils were designed and fabricated using our in situ process combined with a spray-coating system. As a result, through the in situ cooling process, a considerable solar energy harvesting efficiency near 4%, which is a state-of-the-art value in a bi-layer-based solar cell, was obtained.

Broader context
For the practical application, a process with such lengthy steps is useless considering what is known as the Takt time, which is important in the mass-production industry. Here, for the mass production of a three-dimensional (3D) non-woven nanofabric consisting of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils, we introduced an in situ fabrication process including cooling to drive the precipitation of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils in an organic solvent within several seconds during the course of the transportation process to feed the raw material into a spray coater. Additionally, to verify the superiority of our strategy and present directions regarding its application to industry, arrays of bi-layer solar cells based on a 3D non-woven nanofabric structure consisting of P3HT nanofibrils were designed and fabricated using our in situ process combined with a spray-coating system. As a result, through the in situ cooling process, a considerable solar energy harvesting efficiency near 4%, which is a state-of-the-art value in a bi-layer-based solar cell, was obtained.

1 Introduction
Creating single-crystal nanofibrils of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) is considered to be an essential requirement to instill a greater hole transporting ability in an electronic device.1,2 Since the performance of such devices strongly depends on the hole conductivity during their operation, many research groups, to satisfy this requirement, have studied how to form the nanofibrils efficiently.3
A conventional method to produce nanofibrils is solvent annealing after coating a thin amorphous P3HT film onto a substrate.4 With solvent annealing, the monomers of P3HT that randomly aggregate in the amorphous film can be given enough energy to migrate and crystallize because the P3HT monomers are given enough mobility for self-assembly under the partially dissolved state maintained by the diffusion of solvent molecules into the amorphous film. The activated monomers spontaneously assemble and form a nano-scale crystalline phase known as P3HT nanofibrils. This strategy has been widely adopted in P3HT-based organic electronics to achieve superior device performance.
Recently, to improve the crystallinity of P3HT nanofibrils in comparison with the above-mentioned methods, a strategy to prepare the nanofibrils in the solution phase was introduced.5–8 This solution-phase self-assembly approach uses the difference in the solubility of P3HT in good and poor solvents to form the nanofibrils. When the solubility is limited in a marginal solvent, the monomers of P3HT easily aggregate among themselves, resulting in one-dimensional (1D) growth of the π-conjugated polymers because the weakened interaction between the polymer and solvent leads to strong π–π interaction between the monomers of P3HT.9–12 However, despite obtaining high-quality P3HT nanofibrils and simplifying the process, several hours or more are required to complete the growth through this process.
Practically, a process with such lengthy steps is useless considering what is known as the Takt time, which is important in the mass-production industry.13 Here, for the mass production of a three-dimensional (3D) non-woven nanofabric consisting of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils, we introduce an in situ fabrication process including cooling to drive the precipitation of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils in an organic solvent within several seconds during the course of the transportation process to feed the raw material into a spray coater. The required cooling temperature with respect to the feeding rate to complete the formation of the nanofibrils and the yield of the nanofibrils in solution with various organic solvents were determined. Considering the influence of a change in the temperature on the status of the precipitated nanofibrils until it is fed into an ink-jet printing head or a spray nozzle, the margin of the surviving nanofibrils at a certain temperature was also investigated. To verify the superiority of our strategy and present directions for its application in industry, a bi-layer solar cell based on a 3D non-woven nanofabric structure consisting of many P3HT nanofibrils was fabricated. This was realized using our in situ process combined with a spray coating system. As a result, a solar cell showing considerable solar energy harvesting efficiency near 4% was obtained.
2 Results and discussion
2.1 
          In situ production of P3HT nanofibrils

Fig. 1 illustrates an outline of our in situ process schematically. The raw material of P3HT is initially dissolved with the organic solvent m-xylene at 40 °C, after which the bright orange solution is transferred to the stock room of a spray coater maintained near room temperature. By simply cooling the solution using a −20 °C ethanol-based double-jacket circulation system while transferring it, P3HT nanofibrils which change the color of the solution to purple are gradually produced in the inner space of the transport pipe. All steps are continuously conducted within one minute. The key principle when producing the nanofibrils is based on the rapid decreasing solubility of P3HT by cooling its solution. The reduction of the solubility accelerates the anisotropic π–π interaction between P3HT molecules resulting in crystalline nanofibrils.14
 Fig. 1  Out-line of the in situ process including the cooling-driven precipitation of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils in a solvent within several seconds during the course of transportation while feeding the raw material into the spray system. 
The essential factors in this process for a practical application are how quickly the nanofibrils can be produced and how stable the nanofibrils are in the thermal environment until reaching the coating system through a single pipeline. To manage this property, the cooling and heating margins related to the production and maintenance of the nanofibrils were determined through two sequential experimental designs as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the in situ formation of the P3HT nanofibrils using a cooling jacket and transferring to the coating system in a heating jacket. (b) The changes of the solution temperature and the features of the P3HT nanofibrils in the cooling jacket with the feeding rate of the P3HT solution. (c) Dissolution aspect of P3HT nanofibrils during the transfer in a heating jacket at various aging times and heating temperatures. 
Actually, the P3HT solution (0.25 wt% in m-xylene) was flowed through the cooling and heating double jacket in succession, as shown in Fig. 2a. The change of the temperature of solution in the cooling zone was checked using a thermocouple, and the change of the solution's UV-vis spectrum, which indirectly provides information related to the feature of the precipitants in the P3HT solution (see ESI Fig. S1†), was also measured. When passing through the cooling zone, P3HT nanofibrils were successfully produced in the solution when the real temperature was only below −6 °C, as exhibited in Fig. 2b. To cool the solution below this critical temperature, the optimum feeding rate, important in terms of the productivity of this process, should be determined. As the feeding rate decreases, the phase of the P3HT precipitant changes from amorphous to crystalline, as shown in Fig. 2b. When the feeding rate is in the range of ∼4 to ∼2 ml min−1, the conformation of the P3HT precipitant is altered from a random coil to a nanorod structure. The P3HT nanofibrils were successfully produced when the feeding rate was only below ∼2 ml min−1, which was the maximum feeding rate to produce P3HT nanofibrils using a −20 °C cooling line with a volume of 0.8 ml.
Because our strategy to obtain P3HT nanofibrils is based upon the thermo-solubility limit in a solvent, the nanofibrils can be re-dissolved when the solution temperature increases to a certain value at which the solubility limit is disentangled. Therefore, the surrounding temperature margin when transporting the previously obtained nanofibrils to a coating system should be determined. The solution passing through the cooling zone was consecutively transported in the heating zone. With various aging times and heating temperatures, the maintenance margin was determined, as exhibited in Fig. 2c. When 30 min was considered as the total transport time to the coating system in our in situ process, the conformation of the P3HT nanofibrils was maintained up to 35 °C. However, as the heating temperature exceeded 35 °C with additional aging time, the P3HT nanofibrils gradually dissolved and transformed into nanorods and an amorphous phase. If the transport time can be reduced to less than 5 min, the temperature margin will increase to 50 °C.
In view of the production yield of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils, to investigate the formation and dissolution of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils as a function of the solvent property during in situ cooling and heating, various organic solvents such as chlorobenzene, toluene, and m-xylene were investigated. Fig. 3 shows the crystallinity change of P3HT nanofibrils depending on the solvent property, which represents the production of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils. The crystallinity of P3HT solution was obtained using an empirical equation that was derived from simple linear combination of amorphous and crystal P3HT absorbance spectra.15 λP1 = 452.46 + 1.47 exp(XC/0.27)(1)where λP1 and XC are the main absorbance peak of P3HT solution and the crystallinity of P3HT, respectively. The UV-vis absorbance spectra depending on the solvent property during cooling and heating of solution were summarized in ESI Fig. S2.† Although increasing the P3HT concentration of the solution enhanced the production yield of crystalline P3HT, chlorobenzene-based solution showed a poor yield of crystalline P3HT, whereas toluene-based solution exhibited a significantly increased yield of crystalline P3HT during the cooling of the solution. However, in the case of heating, the crystalline P3HT in the toluene-based solution was almost re-dissolved at 40 °C. In contrast, m-xylene-based solution showed robust resistance for dissolving crystalline P3HT as well as the highest yield of crystalline P3HT during cooling and heating.
 Fig. 3  
In situ crystallinity change of P3HT nanofibrils depending on the solvent property (a) chlorobenzene, (b) toluene, and (c) m-xylene. 
2.2 
          In line fabrication of bi-layer organic solar cells using in situ production of P3HT nanofibrils
Mass production of P3HT nanofibrils based on our in situ process is possible, thus presenting an in line fabrication process for organic solar cells with a short Takt time. Because a simpler and faster fabrication process for organic solar cells can lower the device manufacturing cost, in other words lowering the cost per watt, our process will likely receive much attention in the organic solar cell literature and industry.16 Accordingly, before further discussing the in line process, a brief summary of nano-structure adoption in current organic solar cell technology is needed. The first successful application of the P3HT nanostructure was in a bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell.17–22 Although the BHJ structure showed higher performance than any other structures, the difficulty in controlling the morphology of the p–n junction that is essential to further increase the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was pointed out.23–26 Consequently, to surpass the performance of the BHJ, many researchers have intensively studied various junction structures based on the bi-layer configuration, which is structurally systematic to control of the morphology of donor and acceptor.27–32 For example, Cho et al. employed vertically aligned P3HT nanorods using an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template in a bi-layer organic solar cell to maximize the donor–acceptor contact area, making it as large as that in the BHJ process.29 In addition, they showed that the one-direction alignment of P3HT nanorods can feasibly shorten the length of the current path, which is related to the carrier transportation resistance. However, despite such advantages, the PCE was lower (over 1%) in comparison with that of the BHJ. Recently, a few groups including Russell et al. reported a unique organic solar cell that showed a higher PCE than any other previous bi-layer configuration based on the inter-diffusion of the donor into the acceptor layer.29–35 The basic principle of this idea is that during thermal annealing, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) molecules interpenetrate toward the P3HT side through an amorphous P3HT region where the PCBM has high miscibility with P3HT.36 As a result, a nano-scale interpenetrating-network amorphous P3HT region where the PCBM has high miscibility with P3HT, resulting in a nano-scale interpenetrated network with P3HT.
As a result, a nano-scale interpenetrating-network with a large donor–acceptor area in a bi-layer was generated. Although the approach to increase the donor–acceptor contact area in a bi-layer structure is desirable, it has the same problem as the BHJ structure in terms of its control of the morphology of the p–n junction because the final feature of the junction in this structure is randomly determined spontaneously according to the thermodynamics. As a solution for this issue, a bi-layer organic solar cell adopting a three-dimension (3D) non-woven nano structure consisting of the P3HT nanofibrils was fabricated through an in line process based on the mass production of P3HT nanofibrils. According to the quantity of the P3HT nanofibrils used, which were several micrometers in length and 15 nm in diameter, the morphology of the 3D non-woven structure as an active layer of a solar cell can be easily controlled. Therefore, if this non-woven structure is well designed, the theoretical optimum distance between the donor and the acceptor known to be ∼20 nm to generate high free-carrier density will be realized.37,38 Additionally, the crystalline P3HT nanofibril building blocks of the non-woven fabric serve as expressways for transporting holes from many p–n junctions to an external electrode. For the best 3D non-woven structure, the dimensions of each P3HT nanofibril were optimized by controlling the P3HT concentration in the solution from 0.1 to 0.75 wt% (see ESI Fig. S3‡).
A high-density nanofabric structure with sharp facets was observed at 0.25 wt%. Over 0.25 wt%, the layers appeared as a film rather than as a porous non-woven fabric structure because the un-precipitated amorphous P3HT in the highly concentrated solution filled the spaces between the nanofibrils. On the other hand, a low-density non-woven fabric with thick P3HT nanofibrils was observed at a lower concentration below 0.25 wt% because the absolute number of the nanofibrils was insufficient. Finally, the thickness of the 3D non-woven nanofabric structure was controlled by the total quantity of the 0.25 wt% P3HT solution. Fig. 4a shows the increasing thickness of the non-woven structure after increasing the input quantity of the P3HT solution including the nanofibrils. The 3D non-woven nanofabric structure was preserved up to an input of 1.5 ml, whereas the morphology gradually became film-like when the deposition exceeded 1.5 ml (see Fig. 4b–d).
 Fig. 4  (a) The thickness of a 3D non-woven nanofabric as a function of the amount of P3HT nanofibril solution used in the spin-coating process. SEM images of (b) 0.5 ml, (c) 1.5 ml and (d) 2.5 ml. 
A bilayer solar cell configuration based on this 3D non-woven nanofabric structure consisting of P3HT nanofibrils is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5. As an electron-blocking layer, an ultra-thin P3HT layer (15 nm) was introduced on the PEDOT:PSS-coated indium tin oxide glass substrate to avoid direct contact between the PCBM and the PEDOT:PSS layer. This 3D non-woven nanofabric structure was then placed on the P3HT buffer layer. Finally, the PCBM layer (∼30 nm) was immersed into the 3D non-woven structure. Before and after PCBM infiltration, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the morphologies of the non-woven structure-based hetero-junction as an active layer were inserted, as shown in Fig. 5. Clearly, the distribution of the PCBM comprehensively covered the non-woven structure.
 Fig. 5  Overall process of the fabrication of a 3D non-woven nanofabric-based organic solar cell. As shown in the inset AFM and TEM images, a 3D non-woven structure consisting of P3HT nanofibrils was clearly observed and after the PCBM coating process, and it was confirmed that the non-woven structure is maintained. The schematic figure in step 3 illustrates the ideal operation of the 3D non-woven nanofabric-based organic solar cell under illumination conditions. 
To characterize the 3D non-woven structure-based hetero-junction, its microstructure and optical property were investigated. The crystallinity was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). This result is shown in Fig. 6a. As a control, a thermally annealed planar film configuration was compared to our non-woven nanofabric structure. The control exhibited lower crystallinity than the nanofabric structure; after introducing PCBM, the crystallinity was maintained in the case of the P3HT nanofibril nanofabric, whereas it was significantly reduced in the case of the P3HT planar film as shown by the tendency of the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) value of (100) in Fig. 6a. This result implies that a solvent does not damage the robust 3D non-woven nanofabric frame during the PCBM coating process. The optical properties were measured by means of UV-vis spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 6b, the 3D non-woven nanofabric structure showed higher photon absorption and a greater red shift of the main peak with enhanced shoulder peaks (∼550 nm, ∼605 nm) compared to the P3HT planar film. After PCBM coating, the UV-vis spectra revealed significant differences in optical absorption properties between the 3D non-woven nanofabric and the planar structure. Compared to the thermally annealed planar film based bi-layer configuration, the 3D non-woven nanofabric structure based configuration exhibited a greater red shift of the main peak, which implies an enhancement of the π–π stacking of the P3HT chain in the nanofibril frame. Moreover, the photoluminescence (PL) emissions of both structures were measured to evaluate the effective area of the donor–acceptor junction, which generally drives the PL quenching, as exhibited in Fig. 6c. The PL emission of the planar film-based bi-layer was quenched at 47% and the emission was further quenched to 65% after thermal annealing due to the increased area of the donor–acceptor interface by thermal inter-diffusion. Meanwhile, the quantity of the quenching in the 3D non-woven nanofabric-based configuration increased tremendously to 92%. This dramatic reduction of the PL emission peak intensity likely originated from the increase in the area of the donor–acceptor junction after introducing the 3D nanofabric structure. After thermal annealing, the quenching value of the nanofabric structure increased slightly to 96%.
 Fig. 6  (a) Out-of-plane X-ray diffraction spectra as a function of the incident angle at 2θ for the planar P3HT film and the non-woven P3HT nanofabric with and without a PCBM layer after annealing. The inset figure shows the tendency of the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the peak of the (100) index for each condition. (b) UV-vis absorbance spectra of the bi-layer for the planar P3HT/PCBM and non-woven P3HT/PCBM, respectively. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of the P3HT single-layer film, bi-layer using planar P3HT/PCBM and non-woven P3HT/PCBM. (d) Representative current density–voltage (J–V) curves for each photovoltaic device under standard conditions (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5). 
The solar energy harvesting performances for the 3D non-woven nanofabric and planar film configuration bi-layer solar cells, which were designed with a photoactive layer of 100 nm, are summarized in Table 1. In the planar film case, the PCE significantly increased from 0.94% to 2.51% after thermal annealing. This result is related to the upswing of the short circuit current density (Jsc) and the fill factor (FF), which was caused by the increase in the donor–acceptor area and the enhancement of the crystallinity of P3HT during thermal annealing. In contrast, in the case of the 3D non-woven nanofabric, the device exhibited a higher PCE (2.64%) in spite of the lack of thermal annealing as compared to that of the thermally annealed planar film-based bi-layer device. This result stems from the un-annealed 3D non-woven fabric structure with the larger donor–acceptor area compared to the planar film structure both before and after the heat treatment. Further thermal annealing increased the PCE (3.97%) mainly due to the increased FF base pertaining to the J–V characteristics of devices (Fig. 6d). The electrical contact resistance between the electrodes and the photoactive layer was likely reduced during thermal annealing. As a result, the superior crystallinity and free-exciton generating properties of the 3D non-woven nanofabric-based configuration were reflected in its enhanced solar cell performance compared to the planar film configuration.
Table 1 Representative photovoltaic characteristics for each bi-layer structure




Bi-layer structure



J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
PCE (%)




Planar
Pristine
−3.97
0.57
0.42
0.941


Annealed
−7.14
0.60
0.59
2.512


Non-woven
Pristine
−8.76
0.60
0.50
2.642


Annealed
−9.91
0.62
0.62
3.972




Additionally, for the 3D non-woven nanofabric configuration introduced here to investigate the optimum thickness of its photoactive layer, the nanofabric P3HT layer was controlled from 30 nm to 150 nm while retaining the ratio (7:3) of the P3HT and PCBM thicknesses. Based on the result of the energy harvesting performances (see ESI Fig. S4†), the PCE increase thereafter was saturated when the thickness reached 70 nm. This was due to the tradeoff relationship between the increased photon absorption and the reduced porosity of the P3HT nanofabric layer as shown in Fig. 4 while increasing the thickness.
Recapping the highlight of this work, we realized a bi-layer solar cell with a 3D non-woven nanofabric structure through an in line spray coating process including our in situ cooling step. Fig. 7a shows an image of the overall system. A real-time video of the process can be found in ESI Video S1.‡ Utilizing an in line process with the capability of creating a patternable coating over a large area, we fabricated an array of solar cells, and the devices showed a considerable PCE (3.74%) in comparison with the aforementioned device created by spin coating (Fig. 7b). With further optimization of the spray process, we anticipate an improvement in the device efficiency, making the 3D non-woven-based fabric approach immediately applicable for the construction of organic material-based polymer solar cells.
 Fig. 7  (a) A camera image representing the in line spray coating system used to produce a 3D non-woven nanofabric with P3HT nanofibrils as formed by in situ cooling the solution feeding line. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curve of a patterned device fabricated via this in line spray coating system. The schematic diagram inset exhibits the configuration of the device and the SEM image presents the morphology of the 3D non-woven structure formed using this spray system. 
3 Experimental
3.1 Device fabrication
The substrates of the solar cells used in this study were ITO-coated glass (15 Ω per square, 170 nm). The substrates were cleaned in a standard manner through a series of ultrasonic baths in trichloroethylene, acetone and isopropyl alcohol for 10 min each. The substrates were dried in a 100 °C vacuum oven for 10 min after N2 blowing. To increase the wettability of the PEDOT:PSS (Clevios, Baytron P) and eliminate residual organic impurities, the substrates were treated with UV–ozone for 30 min. PEDOT:PSS was coated onto the cleaned ITO-substrates (40 nm) and they were annealed at 140 °C for 10 min in air. To prevent undesirable contact between the PEDOT:PSS and PCBM molecules, an ultra-thin P3HT layer was coated onto the PEDOT:PSS layer. The non-woven structure consisting of P3HT (Reike Metal, regioregularity > 95%, molecular weight ∼50000 MW) nanofibrils was formed on the P3HT-coated substrate by the following sequence: a 0.25 wt% P3HT solution fully dissolved in m-xylene at 40 °C was injected in a cooling double jacket using a syringe pump (feeding rate: 1 ml min−1), and 50 μl of the solution was dispensed from the nozzle of the cooling double jacket onto the PEDOT:PSS-coated substrate. The thickness of the non-woven structure was controlled by the spin-coating times. We obtained the non-woven structure with a thickness of 70 nm for use as the main active layer after 30 trials of the spin-coating or spray-coating method. After drying the residual solution of the non-woven layer, a 30 nm PCBM layer which filled in the nanoporous non-woven layer was spin or spray-coated using dichloromethane and m-xylene solvents onto the non-woven structure. Subsequently, the substrates were annealed at 150 °C for 5 min. Finally, 8 Å of LiF and 100 nm of Al were thermally evaporated under a high vacuum (below 5 × 10−6 torr). The size of device was 5.4 mm2.
3.2 Spray-coating method
The dual-nozzle spray deposition (external diameter: 1.2 mm, internal diameter: 0.6 mm, N2 gas flux: 5 l min−1, distance between the nozzle and the substrate: 15 cm) of the active solution was conducted on the various substrates.
3.3 Measurement
Optical analyses of the film and solution were performed using a UV-vis spectrophotometer (Jasco, V-570), and a PL spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, LS55). The crystallinity of the planar and non-woven layers was analyzed using an out-of-plane XRD spectrometer (Rigaku, Ultra IV) and the morphology of the layers was measured by means of AFM (Asylum Research MFP-3D-SA, tapping mode), SEM (JEOL, JSM-7001F) and TEM (HR-TEM, JEOL JEM-2011HC, operated at 120 kV). The thickness of all of the layers was measured by both a surface profiler (KLA-Tencor, AS500) and an ellipsometer (Nano view, SE MG-1000 Vis). The performance of the photovoltaic devices (J–V characteristic) was assessed using a Keithley 236 source meter at 100 mW cm−2 and AM 1.5 conditions from an Oriel 300 W solar simulator calibrated using an Oriel standard Si reference cell.
4 Conclusions
In conclusion, for the mass production of a 3D non-woven nanofabric consisting of P3HT nanofibrils, an in line fabrication process including the in situ formation of nanofibrils with high crystallinity by means of a cold precipitating process, which takes place during the transport of the feeding solution through a cooled line toward the coating equipment, was introduced. The speed at which the P3HT nanofibrils are produced and how stably they are sustained at a certain temperature were investigated in an effort to minimize the time and cost of the in line process given that these considerations are important in every mass-production industry. The morphology of the P3HT nanofibril layer, including its density and the thickness, was controlled by the P3HT concentration in the solution and its quantity in the solution. Using this in line process, a 3D non-woven nanofabric consisting of a P3HT nanofibrils-based configuration of a bi-layer solar cell was invented to validate the novelty of our strategy as well as to guide its direction for application to industry, with the final product realized using the in line process combined with a spray coating system. As a result, a solar cell showing considerable solar energy harvesting efficiency near 4%, which is a state-of-the-art value in a bi-layer-based solar cell, was obtained.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant (2012-0008721) founded by the Government of Korea (MEST) and WCU (World Class University) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (R32-20031).
Notes and references
J. A. Lim, F. Liu, S. Ferdous, M. Muthukumar and A. L. Briseno, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 14–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Briseno, S. C. B. Mannsfeld, S. A. Jenekhe, Z. Bao and Y. Xia, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 38–47 CrossRef .
S. B. Jo, W. H. Lee, L. Qiu and K. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4244–4260 RSC .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, S. G. Lee, H. S. Lee, D. Kwak, D. H. Lee and K. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2338–2343 RSC .
J.-H. Kim, J. H. Park, J. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, M. Sim, C. Shim and K. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7398–7405 RSC .
J. S. Kim, J. W. Lee, J. H. Park, C. Shim, M. Sim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 480–486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. D. Bettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1377–1384 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. D. V. Rughooputh, S. Hotta, A. J. Hegger and F. Wulem, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1987, 25, 1071–1078 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshino, P. Love, M. Onoda and R. I. Sugimoto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 27, L2388 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kiriy, E. Jahne, H. J. Adler, M. Schneider, A. Kiriy, G. Gorodyska, S. Minko, D. Jehnichen, P. Simon, A. A. Fokin and M. Stamm, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 707–712 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Park, H. S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, D. Kwak, J. H. Cho and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1200–1206 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Takt_time
        .
J. Y. Oh, T. I. Lee, J.-M. Myoung, U. Jeong and H. K. Baik, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1066–1071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Oh, M. Shin, T. I. Lee, W. S. Jang, Y. Min, J.-M. Myoung, H. K. Baik and U. Jeong, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7504–7513 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Nguyen, H. Hoppe, T. Erb, S. Günes, G. Gobsch and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1071–1078 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marrocchi, D. Lanari, A. Facchetti and L. Vaccaro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8457–8474 CAS .
C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653–5667 CAS .
Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juska and R. Ősterbacka, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 677–696 CAS .
X. Yang and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 1353–1362 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, M. P. Nikiforov and S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8045–8074 CAS .
H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 CAS .
F. A. Castro, H. Benmansour, C. F. O. Graeff, F. Nuesch, E. Tutis and R. Hany, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5504–5509 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Ko, J. R. Tumbleston, L. Zhang, S. Williams, J. M. DeSimone, R. Lopes and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2742–2746 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, Y. Park, D. Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. K. Kim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 540–545 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Kim, J.-S. Kim, J. C. Cho, M. Shtein, L. J. Guo and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 123113 CrossRef .
F. Yang, M. Shtein and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
R. Otero, D. ÉCija, G. Fernández, J. M. Gallego, L. Sánchez, N. Martin and R. Miranda, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2602–2607 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Liu, C. Wang, A. Nakahara and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2071–2078 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Lee, P. E. Schwenn, A. R. G. Smith, H. Cavaye, P. E. Shaw, M. James, K. B. Krueger, I. R. Gentle, P. Meredith and P. L. Burn, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 766–770 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D.-G. Choi, K.-J. Lee, S. H. Im, O. O. Park and J. H. Park, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1376–1380 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Treat, M. A. Brady, G. Smith, M. F. Toney, E. J. Kramer, C. J. Hawker and M. L. Chabinyc, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 82–89 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Watkins, A. B. Walker and G. L. B. Verschoor, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1814–1818 CrossRef CAS .
Lei, Y. Yao, A. Kumar, Y. Yang and V. Ozonlins, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 024504 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee23987f‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
For the practical application, a process with such lengthy steps is useless considering what is known as the Takt time, which is important in the mass-production industry. Here, for the mass production of a three-dimensional (3D) non-woven nanofabric consisting of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils, we introduced an in situ fabrication process including cooling to drive the precipitation of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils in an organic solvent within several seconds during the course of the transportation process to feed the raw material into a spray coater. Additionally, to verify the superiority of our strategy and present directions regarding its application to industry, arrays of bi-layer solar cells based on a 3D non-woven nanofabric structure consisting of P3HT nanofibrils were designed and fabricated using our in situ process combined with a spray-coating system. As a result, through the in situ cooling process, a considerable solar energy harvesting efficiency near 4%, which is a state-of-the-art value in a bi-layer-based solar cell, was obtained.


 	Fig. 1  Out-line of the in situ process including the cooling-driven precipitation of crystalline P3HT nanofibrils in a solvent within several seconds during the course of transportation while feeding the raw material into the spray system.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the in situ formation of the P3HT nanofibrils using a cooling jacket and transferring to the coating system in a heating jacket. (b) The changes of the solution temperature and the features of the P3HT nanofibrils in the cooling jacket with the feeding rate of the P3HT solution. (c) Dissolution aspect of P3HT nanofibrils during the transfer in a heating jacket at various aging times and heating temperatures.	 
λP1 = 452.46 + 1.47 exp(XC/0.27)	(1)

 	Fig. 3  
In situ crystallinity change of P3HT nanofibrils depending on the solvent property (a) chlorobenzene, (b) toluene, and (c) m-xylene.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The thickness of a 3D non-woven nanofabric as a function of the amount of P3HT nanofibril solution used in the spin-coating process. SEM images of (b) 0.5 ml, (c) 1.5 ml and (d) 2.5 ml.	 

 	Fig. 5  Overall process of the fabrication of a 3D non-woven nanofabric-based organic solar cell. As shown in the inset AFM and TEM images, a 3D non-woven structure consisting of P3HT nanofibrils was clearly observed and after the PCBM coating process, and it was confirmed that the non-woven structure is maintained. The schematic figure in step 3 illustrates the ideal operation of the 3D non-woven nanofabric-based organic solar cell under illumination conditions.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Out-of-plane X-ray diffraction spectra as a function of the incident angle at 2θ for the planar P3HT film and the non-woven P3HT nanofabric with and without a PCBM layer after annealing. The inset figure shows the tendency of the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the peak of the (100) index for each condition. (b) UV-vis absorbance spectra of the bi-layer for the planar P3HT/PCBM and non-woven P3HT/PCBM, respectively. (c) Photoluminescence spectra of the P3HT single-layer film, bi-layer using planar P3HT/PCBM and non-woven P3HT/PCBM. (d) Representative current density–voltage (J–V) curves for each photovoltaic device under standard conditions (100 mW cm−2, AM 1.5).	 

Planar	Pristine	−3.97	0.57	0.42	0.941
Annealed	−7.14	0.60	0.59	2.512
Non-woven	Pristine	−8.76	0.60	0.50	2.642
Annealed	−9.91	0.62	0.62	3.972

 	Fig. 7  (a) A camera image representing the in line spray coating system used to produce a 3D non-woven nanofabric with P3HT nanofibrils as formed by in situ cooling the solution feeding line. (b) Current density–voltage (J–V) curve of a patterned device fabricated via this in line spray coating system. The schematic diagram inset exhibits the configuration of the device and the SEM image presents the morphology of the 3D non-woven structure formed using this spray system.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee23987f
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
