Nanostructured conducting polymers for energy applications: towards a sustainable platform  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR08803H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR08803H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6921-6947Nanostructured conducting polymers for energy applications: towards a sustainable platform

        
          
            Srabanti 
            Ghosh
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Thandavarayan 
            Maiyalagan
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Rajendra N. 
            Basu
          
        
      *a
aCSIR - Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, 196, Raja S.C. Mullick Road, Kolkata-700032, India. E-mail: ghosh.srabanti@gmail.com; rnbasu@cgcri.res.in
bSchool of Chemistry, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK
Received 
      11th December 2015
    , Accepted 24th February 2016First published on 25th February 2016AbstractRecently, there has been tremendous progress in the field of nanodimensional conducting polymers with the objective of tuning the intrinsic properties of the polymer and the potential to be efficient, biocompatible, inexpensive, and solution processable. Compared with bulk conducting polymers, conducting polymer nanostructures possess a high electrical conductivity, large surface area, short path length for ion transport and superior electrochemical activity which make them suitable for energy storage and conversion applications. The current status of polymer nanostructure fabrication and characterization is reviewed in detail. The present review includes syntheses, a deeper understanding of the principles underlying the electronic behavior of size and shape tunable polymer nanostructures, characterization tools and analysis of composites. Finally, a detailed discussion of their effectiveness and perspectives in energy storage and solar light harvesting is presented. In brief, a broad overview on the synthesis and possible applications of conducting polymer nanostructures in energy domains such as fuel cells, photocatalysis, supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries is described.
1. Introduction
The concept of conducting polymers (CPs) emerged in recent decades and continues to attract the scientific community.1,2 Research in this area is continuing to grow with the objective of tuning the intrinsic properties of nanodimensional CPs to offer multiple functionalities. Hence, primarily driven by the opportunity to develop novel multifunctional materials on one hand, and sustainable technologies on the other, several successful approaches have been explored to develop conducting polymer nanostructures (CPNs). Many excellent reviews regarding the development of CPs such as polyaniline, polymer film electrodes and their characterization have been published.3–7 Moreover, the sensing and device applications of CPs have also been reviewed.8–11 However, the preparation, characterization and application of CPNs in the energy domain are still at the foreground of research activity.12–14 Consequently, there is a need for a deeper understanding of the availability of novel polymer nanostructures, the development of models of the materials’ behavior and technologies aimed at optimizing and implementing their active function in applications. Specifically, we present an overview of the different methods commonly employed in the fabrication of CPNs and hybrid composites. We also discuss the characterization of CPNs using microscopy and other techniques as well as their application in the fields of energy storage and conversion, and electrocatalysis.
The initial work on CPs was instigated by three Nobel laureates (A. J. Heeger, H. Shirakawa, and A. G. MacDiarmid).15,16 They discovered an increase of nearly 10 orders of magnitude in the electrical conductivity of polyacetylene (PA) when it was doped with iodine or other acceptors.17 As shown in Fig. 1, conducting polymers include polyacetylene (PA), polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANI), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) etc. Since then, CPs have received increasing attention in both fundamental research and various application fields in recent decades.
 Fig. 1  Molecular structure of some representative conducting polymers. 
Compared to bulk polymers, CPNs displayed superior performances for energy storage and conversion which is associated with the nanoscale size giving a superior electrical conductivity, high surface area, high carrier mobility, improved electrochemical activity and good mechanical properties etc. Numerous synthetic strategies have been developed to obtain various conductive polymer nanostructures such as nanoparticles (NPs), nanowires, nanofibers, and nanotubes etc., and high-performance devices based on these nanostructured polymers have been realized.12–14
This review covers recent progress in the wet-chemical development of conducting polymer nanostructures and hybrid strategies based on the functional associations of semiconductors and metals via template synthesis routes, including soft and hard template methods. Controlling the dimensions of each component permits engineering of the electronic energy state within the nanoscale architecture, which makes conducting polymers very useful for energy applications, such as photovoltaics, catalysis, solar energy harvesting, fuel cells, batteries and electrochemical supercapacitors etc. This review highlights the current status of the representative applications of CPNs as active electrode materials for energy conversion and energy storage applications with a strong emphasis on recent literature examples. Finally, this review ends with a summary and some perspectives on the challenges and opportunities in this emerging area of research.
2. Synthesis
Conventionally, CPs have been synthesized via the chemical or electrochemical oxidation of monomers, followed by coupling of the charged monomers to produce the polymer chains, which is the simplest system. However, CPNs have been fabricated with the help of templates during the polymerization process. This section covers two main approaches for the controlled synthesis of CPNs and CP based hybrid nanocomposites as well as heterostructures, which are the template-based synthesis and the template-free synthesis. The template-based synthesis is the most commonly used for producing morphology and size tunable nanostructures which are expected to be the most important for device applications. As a result, there has been a considerable improvement in the large-scale production of CPNs in recent years with different approaches, such as the conventional hard-template method, soft-template method and template-free synthesis etc.18–20
2.1. Template-based synthesis
The template-based synthesis of polymer nanostructures is particularly discussed and concluded to be one of the efficient strategies for synthesizing various CPNs with control of the morphology and size.

2.1.1. Conventional hard-template method. 
The hard template route has been identified as the most common technique for the synthesis of CPNs, employing templates such as track-etch polycarbonate (PC) or polyester (PE) membranes and anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membranes.21–23 Additionally, other solid porous materials, such as zeolites,24 silica-based mesoporous molecular sieves,25 oxides,26 polyoxometallates,27 and synthesized nanostructures28 can be used in the hard template synthesis of CPNs.29 The polycarbonate PTM (PC-PTM) and the AAO membranes were applied for both the chemical and electrochemical synthesis of a wide range of controllable nanorods, nanofibers, and nanotubes of CPs such as PEDOT,30 PANI,31 PPy,32,33 P3HT,34 PPV etc.35 This was first developed by Martin and became a widely used method with high controllability for producing nanowires or tube nanostructures. Furthermore, the dimensions of the deposited nanostructures can be easily controlled by regulating the template pores and deposition conditions. Using non-connected AAO porous membranes as a template, the synthesis of the CP happened inside the isolated pores, replicating the shape of the void space in the templates and consequently, aligned 1D nanotube and nanowire structures are usually achieved after removing the template scaffold (Fig. 2a). Liu et al. reported the formation of coaxial nanowires within the 200 nm diameter pores of an AAO template as a result of the simultaneous growth of core MnO2 and shell PEDOT by electrochemical deposition (Fig. 2b).36 On the other hand, the nanowire or nanotube arrays fabricated from mesoporous silica are inter-connected by small pillars formed in the micro- or mesopores of the silica pore walls. Bein et al. prepared conducting filaments of PANI in the 3 nm wide hexagonal channel of the aluminosilicate MCM-41.37 There is another hard template, namely, a reactive template that has potential for the synthesis of CPs of different sizes and shapes. The method is a simple, one-step procedure, based on redox reactions using inorganic nanostructures, such as the V2O5 fibers or MnO2 nanowires. Manohar et al. described the chemical oxidative synthesis of bulk quantities of micron long, 100–180 nm diameter nanofibers of electrically conducting PEDOT in the form of powders using a V2O5 nanofiber seed template.38 Pan et al. developed a reactive template strategy by using manganese oxide nanowires for the synthesis of PANI nanotubes.39 Lu et al. synthesized PPy nanotubes by using the complex of FeCl3 and methyl orange which can initiate the polymerization of PPy monomers and direct the growth of PPy into nanotubes.40 Moreover, Li et al. obtained one-dimensional V2O5/PANI core–shell nanobelts by using a V2O5 nanobelt as a reactive template.41 However, the majority of these approaches involve multi-step synthetic routes to pre-modify the core templates, and to remove the template by either heating, or chemical treatment. The overall process is tedious and not suitable for large-scale production. Additionally, the subsequent removal of the template may result in the deformation of the as-prepared CPNs. In comparison to hard templates, the soft template approach is relatively straightforward.
 Fig. 2  (a) Image courtsey of Ran Liu's personal webpage, Penn State Department of Chemistry. (b) Growth mechanisms of heterogeneous nanostructured MnO2/PEDOT by coelectrodeposition of MnO2 and PEDOT on ring-shaped and flat-top electrodes. Reproduced, with permission, from ref.36, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the mechanism of the soft-template synthesis of different conducting polymer nanostructures: (i) micelles acting as soft-templates in the formation of nanotubes. Micelles were formed by the self-assembly of dopants, and the polymerization was carried out on the surface of the micelles; (ii) nanowires formed by protection of the dopants. The polymerizations were carried out inside the micelles; (iii) monomer droplets acting as soft-templates in the formation of micro-spheres; and (iv) polymerization on the substrate producing aligned nanowire arrays. Nanowires were protected by the dopants, and polymerization preferentially occurred on the tips of the nanowires. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 48, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic representation of the electrochemical polymerization of liquid crystalline EDOT–PDPPA. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 64, American Chemical Society. (e) HAADF-STEM image of stepwise electropolymerization for the fabrication of longitudinally integrated conducting polymer nanowires of PEDOT–PPy segmented nanowires in the PEO114-b-PMA(Az)67 template. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 65, American Chemical Society. (f) Depiction of peptide amphiphile (PA) self-assembly in the presence of EDOT monomers. The self-assembly yields nanostructures with hydrophobic cores that sequester the organic monomer from aqueous solution. Confined oxidative polymerization of EDOT once partitioned should occur predominately within these hydrophobic regions, resulting in encapsulated conductive polymers. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 66, Wiley-VCH. 


2.1.2. Soft-template method. 
The soft-template approach is a relatively simple fabrication process that includes micro-/mini-emulsion polymerization, reversed-microemulsion, layer-by-layer self-assembly and block copolymer mediated fabrication etc.42–47 The soft-template method based on the self-assembly of surfactants is typically employed for the synthesis of shape-controlled CPNs as shown in Fig. 2c.48–50 Wan et al. discovered that PANI nanowires could be synthesized by in situ doping polymerization in the presence of β-naphthalene sulfonic acid (β-NSA) as the dopant without the need of any membrane.51 Zhang et al. reported various PPy nanostructures in the presence of various anionic, cationic, or non-ionic surfactants with various oxidizing agents.52 In the emulsion polymerization route, the shape and dimensions of the CPNs are highly dependent on their micellar state, either in the isolated or in the aggregated state. Jayakannan et al. obtained a coral-like morphology of PPy nanospheres in the presence of aggregated templates at a higher surfactant concentration, whereas at a lower surfactant concentration the weakly aggregated micelles produced well-defined PPy nanospheres of 150–800 nm.53
Shinkai et al. reported the preparation of a porphyrin-based 1D assembly by linking the porphyrin units using the polymerization of butadiyne in the gel state.54 Morin et al. recently reported the synthesis of conjugated nanowires prepared by the topochemical polymerization of butadiynes in the xerogel state.55 Li et al. developed an in situ sacrificial oxidative template route for the bulk synthesis of two-dimensional nanorings and flat hollow capsules of PANI nanostructures.56 Manohar and co-workers reported the synthesis of clip-like nanostructures of PPy, PANI, and PEDOT using an anionic oxidant/cationic surfactant complex as a template.57 The judicious combination of the main parameters, such as the surfactants, oxidizing/doping agents, pH, temperature, and other structure-directing agents, provides infinite possibilities for fabricating nanostructures with desirable morphologies.
A self-organized template, lyotropic liquid crystal (LC) with mesophases (hexagonal or lamellar phases) was utilized for the synthesis of anisotropic conducting polymer nanostructures which cannot be achieved using traditional bulk or solution polymerizations.58,59 Hulvat et al. developed a new method for the fabrication of hexagonally ordered fibrillar PEDOT nanostructures in hexagonal LC using the electropolymerization technique.60,61 Remita and co-workers developed swollen hexagonal mesophases composed of oil-swollen tubes with tunable diameters, which are stabilized by a monolayer of surfactant and cosurfactant molecules, that have been used to effectively control the morphology and the size of the nanostructures.62 Ghosh et al. reported a single-step preparation of PEDOT nanostructures with spindle-like or vesicle-like shapes in the hydrophobic domains of hexagonal mesophases via chemical oxidative polymerization of EDOT monomers using FeCl3 as the oxidizing agent.63 Ghosh et al. also reported the controlled synthesis of micrometer long nanofibers of conducting poly(diphenylbutadiyne) (PDPB) nanofibers that were synthesized in the oil tubes of the hexagonal mesophases by photo-induced radical polymerization using a chemical initiator or by gamma irradiation. The diameter of the nanofibers can be varied from 5 to 25 nm in a controlled fashion, and is directly determined by the diameter of the oil tube of the doped mesophases, thus proving a direct templating effect of the mesophase. Moreover, controlling the liquid-crystalline phase, depending on the composition which ranges from columnar to lamellar or cubic phases, can direct the dimensionality and the morphology of the nanoobjects grown in situ as shown in Fig. 2d.64 Komiyama et al. also developed a block-copolymer-templated (a chemical affinity template) electropolymerization technique in order to form PPy and thiophene derivative based CPNs (Fig. 2e).65 Stupp and coworkers described methods to chemically and electrochemically synthesize CPs within bioactive aqueous gel matrices formed by a peptide amphiphile.66,67Fig. 2f illustrates the formation of a hydrophobic lipid environment due to the self-assembly of the peptide amphiphile into cylindrical nanostructures, providing a reservoir for the uptake of the hydrophobic EDOT monomer, which can consequently be utilized for polymerization in the confined region. Other syntheses through biomolecules are discussed by Kumar et al. and Niu et al.68,69 DNA molecules provide attractive soft templates for the controlled fabrication of CPNs.70 Hassanien et al. described the preparation of DNA-templated polyindole nanowires, Moon et al. reported the formation of highly uniform conductive PPy nanowires with a DNA template and Ma et al. discussed the preparation of PANI nanowires on Si surfaces fabricated with DNA templates.71–73 Richardson-Burns et al. developed a polymerization of PEDOT around living cells and described a neural cell-templated CP coating for microelectrodes and a hybrid conducting polymer–live neural cell electrode.74 Pomposo et al. also reported the enzymatic synthesis of PEDOT nanostructures.75 Niu et al. described the synthesis of one-dimensional composite nanofibers via the head-to-tail assembly of the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) as well as in situ polymerization of PANI on the surface of the TMV.76 Other templates can serve as both the oxidant and sacrificial template for the chemical oxidative polymerization, e.g., Pahovnik et al. described the synthesis of PANI nanostructures using ionic liquids as soft templates and Li et al. reported PANI nanorings and flat hollow capsules synthesized by in situ sacrificial oxidative templates using a V2O5/H2O2/H3PO4 mixture.77,78 It is important to note that subtle changes in the polymerization parameters often result in drastic differences in the morphology of the resulting CPNs. Zhu et al. developed the synthesis of rambutan-like hollow spheres of PANI by a self-assembly method in the presence of perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOSA), which served as the dopant and soft template, and induced superhydrophobicity at the same time.79 Park et al. developed a technique for the anisotropic growth control of PANI nanostructures, specifically nanospheres, nanorods, and nanofibers by employing a polymeric stabilizer, poly(N-vinylpyrrolidone). The polymerization rate became slower in the presence of the stabilizer (the rate constants calculated at the initial stage decreased with increasing concentration of the stabilizer), yielding PANI nanostructures with lower aspect ratios, and the stabilizer sterically restricted the directional fiber growth mechanism governing PANI chain growth in aqueous solution.80

2.2. Template-free synthesis
The template-free method is considered to be a simple, straightforward and cost effective technique for the synthesis of CPNs without the need of a template or post-treatment for template removal.81,82 Additionally, uniform nanostructures are formed, which are easily scalable and reproducible. Template-free synthetic strategies such as interfacial polymerization (self-assembly), electrospinning and radiolysis are briefly discussed. Various CPNs such as nanotubes, nanofibers, hollow spheres, etc. were successfully synthesized by the template-free method. Typically, PANI with one dimensional (1D) morphology in aqueous solution has been intensively investigated to fabricate 1D PANI nano structures in the absence of templates.83 Dind et al. and Park et al. reported a one-pot surfactant-free route to synthesize PANI hollow nanospheres using controllable incontinuous nanocavities.84,85 Furthermore, an oriented nanowire was also prepared through controlled nucleation and growth during a stepwise electrochemical deposition process without using any structure controlling agent.86 Tseng et al. developed a site-specific electrochemical method for the fabrication of individually addressable PPy, PANI and PEDOT nanowires on microelectrode junctions.87 Similarly, Ramanathan et al. created arrays of individually addressable CP nanowires of controlled dimensions and high aspect ratios with site-specific positioning, alignment and chemical compositions.88 Up to now, a range of PANI nanostructures such as nanotubes,89,90 nanowires or fibers,91,92 have been prepared by the template-free method.

2.2.1. Self-assembly or interfacial polymerization. 
The interfacial polymerization (IP) technique is useful for synthesizing CPNs via oxidative coupling processes at low temperatures and with limited side reactions, and can avoid the use of catalysts or phase transfer agents. This involves step polymerization of two reactive monomers or agents, which are dissolved, respectively, in two immiscible phases and the reaction takes place at the interface of the two liquids. Interestingly, mass and charge diffusion through a liquid–liquid interface control the crystallinity, size and shape of CPNs.93–96 Huang et al. used an aqueous–organic interfacial polymerization method for the synthesis of high quality PANI nanofibers having diameters of 30–50 nm under ambient conditions.97 Haldorai et al. described IP as a reliable non-template approach with an easy synthesis and economic viability for synthesizing poly(aniline-co-p-phenylenediamine) [poly(Ani-co-p-PD)] nanorods via a microwave-assisted aqueous–ionic liquid interfacial oxidative polymerization in the presence of acid dopants.98 Du et al. have reported the formation of PANI nanotubes under various synthesis conditions without templates.99 Nuraje et al. also described the interfacial crystallization of conductive polymers at the liquid–liquid interface, allowing PANI and PPy polymers to form single crystalline nanocrystals in a rice-like shape in the dimensions of 63 nm × 12 nm for PANI and 70 nm × 20 nm for PPy.100,101 Ma et al. reported unique aligned PANI belts doped with dodecatungstosilic acid (H4SiW12O40) that were synthesized by the interfacial control method which demonstrated a superior performance in the conductivity.102


2.2.2. Electrospinning. 
Electrospinning is one of the most efficient techniques to create continuous and aligned conducting polymer nanofibers and composites under a high electric field.103 Electrospinning occurs with the development of a jet when the repulsion forces of a charged solution overcome the surface tension of the solution under a high electrostatic field. Finally, the spun fibers are deposited commonly as a non-woven web on a collector. MacDiarmid et al. reported the fabrication of PANI nanowires with sub-100 nm diameters doped with DL-camphorsulfonic acid.104 Chronakis et al. reported electrospun PPy/PEO nanofibers with diameters in the rage of about 70–300 nm with improved electrical conductivity and Choi et al. reported a method of fabricating electrospun PEDOT:poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS)/PVP nanofibers.105,106 Feng et al. also reported the fabrication of aligned PEDOT fibers and tubes based on electrospinning and oxidative chemical polymerization.107 The electrospinning process appears to be the single method that can produce continuous long nanofibers; however, in order to assist in the fiber formation, non-conducting polymers or supports are usually added which lower the conductivity of the electrospun composite fibers.


2.2.3. Radiolysis. 
Alternatively, γ-irradiation has been used extensively to generate nanostructured materials under ambient temperature and pressure.108,109 In comparison to other methods, some of the advantages of the radiation initiated polymerization over conventional methods are: (i) the absence of foreign matter, such as the initiator, catalyst, etc.; (ii) polymerization at room temperature or in the solid state; (iii) the rate of the initiation step can easily be controlled by varying the dose rate; and (iv) the initiating radicals can be produced uniformly by γ-irradiation. Pillalamarri et al. developed the radiolytic synthesis of PANI nanofibers with diameters of 50–100 nm and lengths of 1–3 μm as well as nanorods with typical lengths between 5 and 10 μm and diameters of 250–500 nm.110 Karim et al. also reported the synthesis of highly uniform conducting PPy with particle sizes of 100–500 nm by an in situ gamma radiation (60Co γ-ray)-induced chemical oxidative polymerization method.111 Huang et al. developed an one pot method for polyaniline/silver composites under γ-irradiation which revealed that the PANI nanofibers were formed by the reaction of aniline cation radicals formed by the reaction of the aniline cation and ˙OH, and the Ag NPs were formed by the reaction of Ag+ and e−aq.112 Recently Remita's group reported a series of radiolytic syntheses of PEDOT nanostructures and also studied the mechanism in detail. Lattach et al. developed self-assembled hydrophilic PEDOT nanostructures via an oxidation process initiated by HO˙ radicals produced by water radiolysis without using chemical initiators.113 In continuation of that work, a detailed study of the effect of oxidizing agents on radiolytic PEDOT polymerization has been reported by Remita and co-workers. Interestingly, HO˙ radicals led to PEDOT–OH globular nanostructures with hydrophilic properties and N3˙ radicals enabled the formation of amphiphilic PEDOT–N˙ fibrillar nanostructures.114 Cui et al. reported the radiation-induced reduction (action of e−aq under a N2 atmosphere) polymerization route for the synthesis of PEDOT nanostructures.115 Cui et al. also reported the template free synthesis of spherical PPy NPs using a radiolytic method as a novel approach.116 Coletta et al. also reported a new alternative method based on electron beam irradiation for the synthesis and detailed mechanistic studies of PEDOT nanostructures using time-resolved absorption spectroscopy coupled with pulsed radiolysis.117 This “fast” technique offers several advantages: it enables, via the pulsed electron accelerator, (i) the generation of oxidizing species in the aqueous irradiated medium in a very short time, (ii) quantitative knowledge of the concentration of the oxidizing species, (iii) the appearance and disappearance of the transient species produced during EDOT oxidation to be followed in real-time by absorption spectroscopy and the estimation of the rate constants of the involved consecutive reactions. By combining the experimental and theoretical study it was demonstrated that, in air and under a N2O atmosphere, HO˙-induced oxidation of EDOT implies the formation of a transient species, namely an EDOT˙+ cation radical, which dimerizes and deprotonates leading to a stable product, namely an EDOT2 dimer. This result proves that PEDOTox growth is not a chain reaction. On the contrary, it proceeds through a step-by-step mechanism made up of the following recurrent steps: oxidation/activation, a growth/chain length increase and deprotonation. The quantitative synthesis of PEDOTred polymers throughout a reduction–polymerization process also implies a step-by-step mechanism and requires the use of two hydrated electrons per EDOT molecule.

2.3. Conducting polymer hydrogels
Hydrogels are polymeric networks that have a high level of hydration and three-dimensional (3D) microstructures and can be made electrically conductive by embedding various CPs which combine the unique properties of hydrogels with the electrical and optical properties of semiconductors.118–121 Conducting polymer hydrogels (CPHs) are a class of unique materials that synergize the advantages of conducting polymers and polymer hydrogels. The CPHs have hierarchically porous nanostructures crosslinked in a three-dimensional (3D) way, which afford their stable mechanical, unique chemical and physical, and outstanding electrochemical properties for potential use in electrochemical applications, including long-term energy storage devices, lithium-ion battery (LIB) electrodes, electrochemical capacitors (ECs), biofuel cells, printable electronic devices, and biosensors.122–126 Different CPs such as PEDOT, PANI, PPy and PTh can be used as the electrical backbone of the material.127–131 A PANI hydrogel free of insulating polymers has been synthesized by using phytic acid as both the gelator and the dopant to directly form a gel network,132 an amphiphilic thiophene derivative hydrogel with unusual two dimensional building blocks has been synthesized in one step via a combination of oxidative coupling polymerization and non-covalent crosslinking133 and a PPy nanotube hydrogel with controlled morphology has been synthesized by oxidative polymerization in the presence of dye molecules as templates.134 Other interesting CP based materials, aerogels, are a novel class of highly porous nanomaterials that have unique physicochemical properties such as ultra-low density, large specific area, disordered open pores, elaborate 3D networks, etc.135,136 Zhang and co-workers reported a series of CP aerogels based on PEDOT/poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS); however, the existence of the required non-conducting PSS would significantly limit the application of PEDOT/PSS aerogels.137,138 However, they developed a new method based on an emulsion template for the synthesis of CP aerogels by supercritical drying or freeze drying of the as-synthesized PEDOT-S/PEDOT hydrogels with superior adsorption capacity and enhanced electrochemical capacitance as shown in Fig. 3a.139Fig. 3a–f show that the waterborne EDOT derivative, sodium 4-(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxin-2-yl)-methoxy-butane-1-sulfonate (EDOT-S), serves as a reactive surfactant to disperse and stabilize the hardly soluble EDOT to form a stable emulsion. The resulting emulsion, acting as a sol, was converted into a hydrogel by triggering the oxidative coupling polymerization of both EDOT-S and EDOT with the oxidizing agent. After using supercritical CO2 or freeze drying the resulting hydrogel precursor, the PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel was obtained successfully. A typical SEM image, as shown in Fig. 3g, indicates that the resulting aerogel is rich in hierarchical pores of 2–50 nm and these macropores are randomly self-assembled by the interconnected sphere-like nanostructures. There is a huge challenge to make CP hydrogels elastic due to the inherent rigidity of the conjugated macromolecular chains resulting from the delocalized p-electron system. Recently, Lu et al. reported the preparation of elastic, conductive, PPy hydrogels and sponges.140 The PPy hydrogel could be compressed by ≥70% and return to its original shape in 30 seconds as shown in Fig. 3h–j. From the compressive stress versus strain curves for the PPy hydrogels along the loading direction during loading–unloading cycles at ε = 10–70%, the compressive stress returned to the origin after unloading for each strain ε (Fig. 3k).
 Fig. 3  Emulsion-template strategy for the synthesis of conducting polymer aerogels: (a) digital photos of the EDOT-S stabilized EDOT emulsion, (b) PEDOT-S/PEDOT hydrogel and (c) PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel and schematic diagrams of the (d) EDOT-S stabilized EDOT emulsion, (e) PEDOT-S/PEDOT hydrogel and (f) PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel. (g) SEM image of supercritical CO2 dried PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel. Panels (a)–(g) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 139, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (h–j) Elasticity of PPy hydrogel. Macroscopic visualization, showing that the PPy hydrogels recover their original shape after compression ≥70%. (k) σ versus ε curves for PPy hydrogels along the loading direction during loading–unloading cycles at ε = 10–70%. Digital photos showing the fast removal of (l and m) methyl orange, (n) victoria blue and (o) brilliant yellow from wastewater with the elastic PPy hydrogels in syringes. Panels (h)–(o) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 140, Nature Publishers. 
2.4. Conducting polymer based composites
Polymer nanocomposites have attracted considerable research interest due to their unique physicochemical properties that cannot be obtained with the individual components, and their potential for versatile applications ranging from environmental remediation, energy storage and novel catalysts to biomedical applications etc.141–143 CP based composite materials are also gaining importance due to their synergistic and hybrid properties derived from several components.144 Composites of noble metals and CPs exhibit many excellent properties because of the combination of different functional components in a single unit. It has been reported that CPs are usually employed as a supporting matrix to incorporate noble metal NPs for catalytic applications.145–148 Zhang et al. developed highly dispersed composite gold core/polythiophene shell NPs with the potential for electronic device applications.149 Shi et al. simply synthesized Au–PEDOT core–shell nanocables by the one-step interfacial polymerization of EDOT (in the organic phase) and HAuCl4 (in the aqueous phase).150 Chang et al. also conducted the synthesis of Ag–PPy core–shell NPs with an average core diameter of 36 nm and a shell thickness of 13 nm via a simple one-pot synthesis,151 O'Mullane et al. prepared PANI–Pt nanocomposites by the spontaneous reduction of K2PtCl4 with PANI that can be further processed into thin films that show electrocatalytic properties in both acidic and neutral aqueous media.152 Gao et al. also reported the even distribution of Pd nanostructures deposited on PANI surfaces through an in situ reduction of Pd(NO3)2 by PANI.153 Shih et al. showed that the morphologies of Pt nanostructures deposited on PANI surfaces largely depend on the doping state of the membranes; Pt aggregates that are assembled from smaller NPs are formed on doped PANI membranes while, in contrast, sheet-like Pt structures are deposited on undoped PANI membranes.154 These bottom-up approaches offer an efficient and simple route for the fabrication of nanostructured metal/conducting polymer composites. Interestingly, metal NPs supported on CPs have shown enhanced catalytic performances due to the effective surface areas and the synergistic coupling effect between the two components. Yang et al. reported a soft-template method that allows the one-pot synthesis of ring-like PPy/Pd nanocomposites via the redox reaction between PdBr42− and the Py monomer as shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  TEM image of PPy/Pd composite nanorings. Schematic diagram of the fabrication of PPy/Pd composite nanorings. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 146, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The probable mechanism of formation of composite nanorings is proposed as shown in Fig. 4. An insoluble complex of (CTA)2PdBr4 formed between a noble metal compound, sodium tetrachloropalladate, and a cationic surfactant, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), with lamellar mesostructures was used as a template and the composite nanorings were synthesized via the redox reaction between PdBr42− and the monomer. After complete polymerization, PPy/Pd composite nanorings were formed. Moreover, these nanocomposites have shown a wide range of tailor-made applications. Platinum NPs have been incorporated into a PANI matrix resulting in a composite that is useful for the electrochemical process of hydrogen evolution.155 An original ‘second-order-template’ method has been proposed for the fabrication of Ni and PANI nanotube composite nanowires within the pores of an alumina template, and then nickel nanowires were deposited into these nanotubules.156 Drury et al. also studied the fabrication and characterization of silver/PANI composite nanowires in porous anodic alumina.157 Gold NP based CP composites can be used as substrates for surface enhanced Raman scattering.158,159 Palladium, gold and platinum NP based CP nanocomposites illustrated superior catalytic activity,160–165 and biosensing,166–170 therapeutic,171,172 and water treatment applications.173 Moreover, incorporating semiconductor nanocrystals into CPs can complement the visible light absorption range of the polymers as well as allow sensitizing or immobilization of the semiconductor nanocrystals for renewable energy applications such as heterojunction-type photovoltaics and photocatalysis.174–176 A significant effort has been devoted to create heterojunction materials that contain a conducting polymer layer as well as an inorganic layer. It is challenging to design heterostructures with the appropriate morphology-related orientation and band position of each semiconductor and polymer unit within the heterostructure. Appropriate band gap alignment in combination with easy solution-processability makes this material a promising candidate for energy harvesting applications. Here, we discuss the synthesis and characterization of the unique heterojunction between conjugated polymers and semiconductor NPs. For example, PDPB nanofibers were coupled with ZnO NPs and the photocurrent response to visible light and photocatalysis applications along with other conjugated polymer based heterojunctions has been summarized.177–180
3. Characterization
The characterization of CPNs is closely tied to the synthetic technique. Electron microscopy, optical spectroscopy and scattering techniques are widely used. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) continues to provide valuable information about the morphology of polymer nanostructures and composite materials. A wide variety of complimentary methods are also available, including atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and cryo-TEM etc. As these methods continue to improve, it will be possible to have a more complete understanding of the relationship between the polymer nanostructure and their macroscopic properties, for example, through infrared absorption using a combined technique, namely, AFMIR. The use of cyclic voltammetry for studying the electronic states of CPs is also promising and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy can be used to study the energy storage and dissipation properties of CPs, which is reviewed in detail.181 The electrical conductivity of the polymer films can be measured using a Kelvin four-point probe technique. In this section, the latest advancements in the characterization of CP-based functional nanomaterials for sustainable development in energy conversion and storage are reviewed.
3.1. Advanced characterization techniques (AFM and AFMIR)
Atomic force microscopy has been extensively used to investigate the surface morphology, roughness, phase segregation, packing of the polymer chains and conformation and mapping the distribution of the electric charges etc. of conducting polymers. Taranekar et al.182 studied the formation of unique ‘nanoscale’ morphologies due to phase-segregation of polysiloxane domains and cross-linked PPy from the AFM images. Pruneanu et al.183 studied the self-assembly of DNA-template PPy nanowires using the noncontact mode. Another widely used application of dynamic modes using electrical force microscopy (EFM) provides the possibility of probing the localized charge distribution, surface potential, and doping profiles at the surface.184,185 Takami et al. measured the conductivity of polydiacetylene thin films using double-tip scanning tunneling microscopy.186 Scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (KPM), which identifies the local surface potential, offers the possibility of distinguishing between regions with different chemical natures or compositions.187 For example, Semenikhin et al.188 studied the evidence of local structural inhomogeneity and non-uniform dopant distribution in conducting polybithiophene (PBT) and the origin and characterization of the structural inhomogeneity and local potential distribution of CP have been studied by other groups using KFM.189 Significant progress has been reported in the AFM characterization of CPNs. Tseng et al. reported the electrical bistability of PANI nanofiber/gold NPs using a conductive atomic force microscope.190 For example, in a previous study developed by Kobayashi et al. single NPs of poly(2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4 phenylenevinylene) (MEH-PPV) have been characterized using simultaneous atomic force microscopy (AFM) and fluorescence microspectroscopy.191 The tip of the AFM probe is used to apply local pressure to individual CP NPs and the fluorescence microscope is simultaneously monitoring changes in the fluorescence spectral shifts and emission intensities. The two force curve–intensity traces that result as a function of time are shown in Fig. 5a and more than 70% of all particles showed an increase of fluorescence intensity. The emitted light intensity was spectrally separated into blue and red components Iblue and Ired, respectively (Fig. 5b), as detected by two photodetectors, and the NP exhibits a pronounced blue shift at the contact point of the tip with the particle surface, which is reversed upon retraction of the tip. The phenomena are interpreted in terms of the local disturbance of the MEH-PPV chain conformation by the probe tip and the contact of the sharp probe tip (with a tip radius of 7 nm) with the particle surface causes local conformational disruption of the MEH-PPV chains near the tip as shown in Fig. 5c. Ghosh and co-workers have also been able to directly observe the polymer regions via AFM topography imaging and then rapidly acquire high-resolution local chemical spectra at selected regions on the sample by the AFMIR technique using a nanoIR instrument with a tunable pulsed laser as the IR source (Fig. 5d–g and h–j).192 When the sample absorbs the IR laser pulse, it warms via a photothermal effect, resulting in a rapid thermal expansion of the absorbing region of the sample. Consequently, the thermal expansion pulse impacts the tip of the AFM cantilever and causes it to oscillate. As the amplitude of oscillations is proportional to the absorption, it is possible to record local infrared absorption spectra and make chemical maps by scanning the surface at a given wavelength. The surface topography of the PDPB nanostructures showed that well dispersed fibers formed during deposition on the ZnSe substrates as shown in Fig. 5d.
 Fig. 5  Simultaneous AFM and fluorescence microscopy study: (a) two examples of simultaneously measured force curve (blue) and fluorescence intensity (black) traces on single MEH-PPV nanoparticles. (b) Fluorescence spectrum (black) of a MEH-PPV nanoparticle and transmission spectrum (blue) of a dichroic mirror used to spectrally separate the emission into blue (Iblue) and red (Ired) components. (c) Scheme of the proposed model. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 191, American Chemical Society. (d) Topographic image of PDPB nanofibers by conventional AFM. AFMIR mappings of the photo-induced PDPB polymer nanostructures synthesized in the swollen hexagonal phase measured at different fixed wavenumbers: 1490 cm−1 (e), 2146 cm−1 (f) and 3054 cm−1 (g). (h–j) NanoIR spectra recorded at three different spectral regions of the PDPB polymer. Panels (d)–(j) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 192, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 5e shows the IR absorption signal measured by the cantilever when the laser is set at 1494 cm−1. The brighter purple colors indicate regions of stronger IR absorption at this particular wavenumber and the absorption intensity discriminates the polymer domains which are distinct from the low-intensity background (green color). The spectral region at 2300–2000 cm−1 of the triple bond stretching was thoroughly analyzed and the disappearance of the monomer band at 2146 cm−1 after irradiation demonstrates that the polymerization is complete (Fig. 5g). A strong signal is measured when the wavenumber is fixed at 3054 cm−1 which originates from the benzene ring in the PDPB polymer (Fig. 5h). The combination of the nanoscale probe from an atomic force microscope with a tunable IR source provides simultaneous measurements of the nanoscale morphology along with chemical composition mapping (Fig. 5h–j) and confirms the presence of PDPB polymer nanostructures on the substrate.
3.2. TEM characterization and understanding the mechanism of formation
Transmission electron microscopy is a useful tool for studying the formation of CPNs. Liu et al. reported direct imaging of the in situ electrochemical deposition of PEDOT using TEM with an electrochemical liquid flow cell. PEDOT deposition began preferentially at the edge of the glassy carbon anodes and then oligomers were observed to form near the electrode surfaces (Fig. 6a).193 As the reaction continued, both the nucleation of new domains as well as the growth of pre-existing PEDOT deposits was observed (Fig. 6b), leading to systematic increases in film thickness and roughness (Fig. 6c). Moreover, EDS mapping can be used to confirm the elemental composition of the deposited thin film. The elemental mapping results for sulfur, carbon, oxygen (both PEDOT and counterion) and chlorine (from the counterion) with their expected distribution are shown in the inset of Fig. 6c.193 The morphology of CPNs in aqueous solution can be observed by freezing the system at equilibrium through cryo-TEM, without phase transition and possible aggregation resulting from drying procedures.194 A series of reports have been published by Remita and co-workers utilizing cryo-TEM for the characterization of CPNs.195–197
 Fig. 6  Bright field TEM images of in situ electrochemical deposition of PEDOT: (a) early stage in the process (immediately after initial CV deposition on the bench) showing the dark PEDOT depositing from an aqueous solution onto a 20 μm wide glassy carbon working electrode (anode) supported on a thin silicon nitride membrane; (b) later stage in the process (after subsequent constant voltage deposition), showing the increased thickness and formation of rough protrusions at the edge of the PEDOT film; (c) higher magnification view of the rough edge of the PEDOT film after further deposition. Inset: EDS elemental mapping after in situ electrochemical deposition of PEDOT: secondary electron image; sulfur (PEDOT); carbon (PEDOT and glassy carbon working electrode); chlorine (perchlorate dopant); oxygen (PEDOT and perchlorate dopant). Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 193, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) In situ solution 1H NMR spectra monitoring the temporal changes in the nucleation of polyaniline in 0.10 M SDS at 298.3 K. (e) Schematic representation of the nucleation for polyaniline in SDS rod-like micelles. Panels (d) and (e) are reproduced from ref. 198, American Chemical Society. 
There is another interesting report on in situ monitoring of the nucleation of PANI NPs from micelles using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).198 Wu et al. studied the nucleation of polymeric NPs covering the generation of the clusters and the forthcoming aggregation to the nuclei by in situ1H NMR experiments as shown in Fig. 6d. The changes from aniline tetramers, water (HOD) as well as SDS, have been followed in order to correlate the signal transitions from each species in time sequence. A continuous downfield shift is observed for the HOD peak due to the acceptance of the protons released during the formation of aniline oligomers, then the resonance from the bulk water shifts upfield continuously even though the total shift is only 4.0 Hz as shown in Fig. 6d. Additionally, a new broad peak at 4.86 ppm, possibly from aniline tetramers, appeared. This suggests the local environment of the bulk water (4.83 ppm) is enriched with some compounds containing more electron-donating groups, and an extra water phase has been formed. Based on NMR results, the nucleation of PANI in the rod-like micelles has been proposed to occur as shown in Fig. 6e. The tetramers are identified as the actual nucleation agents in this process and the co-operation of the tetramer deprotonation and the fusion of the protective SDS micelles causes the steady nucleation. The nucleation proceeds with the translocation of the protonated tetramers from the micelles to the aqueous bulk, deprotonation of the oligomers to induce the micellar fusion, and intermolecular packing to form nascent nuclei.
3.3. Electrochemical characterization
Electrochemical measurements have been used for evaluation of the position of energy levels and the band gap of the CPs. Electrochemical techniques are also useful for investigating the reversibility, stability and rearrangements of the polymer films deposited on the electrode. Voltammetry measurements give information regarding redox properties, the oxidation and reduction potentials. The oxidation corresponds to electron extraction from the highest occupied molecular orbital, HOMO, level and can be correlated to the ionization potential, whereas the reduction potential is associated with electron affinity and indicates the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, LUMO, level.198,199 In cyclic voltammetry (CV), the current is measured while the voltage is continuously varied (linear sweep). The input parameters are therefore the initial and final voltages and the scan rate, while the output parameters are the voltage values at which the peaks occur and the current intensities. For some polymers, either anodic or cathodic signals are not well resolved. In such cases, differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) and square wave voltammetry (SWV) techniques, where the current is measured before and after each potential step change (staircase voltammetry), can be used. The combination of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) with CV provides a powerful tool to understand the electrochemical characteristics of CPs, including the double-layer capacitance, diffusion impedance, determination of the rate of charge transfer, charge transport processes and solution resistance.200–202 To develop CPs, including PANI, PPy, PTh and their derivatives, as electrode materials for specific applications, such as batteries, fuel cells and interfaces, CV can be used to explore the capacity of the charge transfer density and the integrated surface area of the CV graph corresponds to the capacity of the charge transfer through the polymeric film. EIS allows the investigation of charge and mass transport kinetics and charging processes taking place within the analyzed material and at the active interfaces of the system. The generalized transmission line circuit model predicts the relevant impedance features of CPs in terms of a Nyquist plot203 based on a mathematical approach. The two semi-circles at the highest frequencies, induced by the processes at the metal–polymer and polymer–solution interfaces, are not always detectable. Often one or even one-half of a semi-circle is obtained that partially overlaps with another, depending on the characteristics of the interfacial processes in terms of the energy (resistance) to overcome at the relevant interface. Moreover, due to non-homogeneous separation surfaces these semi-circles are deformed.204 The stability can be checked by the Kramers–Kronig transformation and the results can be interpreted as an equivalent circuit (EC) model. Self-made fitting programs can normally be used to construct a quantitative fitting by adopting the correct electrical circuit; however, the obtained parameters do not have physical equivalents. Therefore, it is difficult to extract information about the electrode reaction mechanism.205 The EIS and CV measurements by Abidian and co-workers showed that PEDOT film and PEDOT nanotube coatings had a lower impedance and higher charge capacity density (CCD) than PPy film and PPy nanotube coatings deposited with the same deposition charge density.206,207

Fig. 7a shows the CV graph of a PPy film, a PEDOT film, PPy nanotubes, and PEDOT nanotubes and the charge-capacity density (CCD) increased from 0.105 mC cm2 (bare iridium) to 1608.3 mC cm2 for the PPy film, 1845.3 mC cm2 for the PPy nanotubes, and 2409.4 mC cm2 for the PEDOT nanotubes. The electrochemical impedance spectra demonstrated that both the PEDOT film and PEDOT nanotubes had lower impedance across the frequency range due to the higher electrical conductivity of PEDOT compared to PPy (Fig. 7b). The phase plot of the impedance spectroscopy (Fig. 7c) showed that both the uncoated and coated electrodes were capacitive in the low frequency range (<10 Hz) and suggests that PEDOT nanotubes act as a capacitive material for frequencies > 1 kHz and as a Faradaic (resistive) material for frequencies < 1 kHz. Fig. 7d shows a detailed equivalent circuit model of PPy nanotubes comprising a solution resistance RS, a CP coating capacitance CC, a pore resistance RPore, a double layer interface capacitance CPE, a charge transfer resistance Rt, and a finite diffusion impedance ZT.
 Fig. 7  (a) CV profile of nanostructured conducting polymers at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, bare iridium (squares), PPy film (stars), PPy nanotubes (triangles), PEDOT film (diamonds), and PEDOT nanotubes (circles). (b) Bode plot of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy over a frequency range of 1–105 Hz. (c) Phase plot of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy over a frequency range of 1–105 Hz showing that both the uncoated and coated electrodes were capacitive in the low-frequency range (<10 Hz). Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 206, Wiley-VCH. (d) Equivalent circuit model of electrode–CP–electrolyte interface. The circuit elements are: solution resistance (RS), coating capacitance (CC), pore resistance (Rpore), double layer interface impedance ZCPE, charge transfer resistance Rt, and finite diffusion impedance ZT. Panel (d) is reproduced, with permission, from ref. 207, Elsevier Ltd. 
4. Applications
After obtaining CPs in the nano-dimension with the preferred morphology, their exceptional electrical, charge transport, optical and redox electrochemical properties make them suitable candidates for applications in the energy domain. Some excellent reviews can be found in the literature which summarize the advances in this field.208–210 For example, functional nanostructured materials can be used as catalysts or catalyst supports, electrodes in energy conversion and storage applications such as solar light harvesting, fuel cells, solar cells, lithium batteries, and electrochemical supercapacitors. Representative achievements in the area of energy applications of CPNs are summarized in detail in this review.
4.1. Energy conversion device

4.1.1 Fuel cells. 
Fuel cells are attractive energy conversion devices, especially for portable applications, that convert chemical energy directly to electrical energy. At the anode, the fuel (e.g., hydrogen) is oxidized to produce protons and electrons. The protons travel across a proton conducting medium or a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) which separates the anode from the cathode in the case of a proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC). In current fuel cell technology, cost, performance and durability issues still remain big challenges. This can directly be related to the material choice and design. The electrocatalyst is an important key material in fuel cells. However, the catalyst currently used in PEMFCs is based on platinum, which suffers from low activity and poor durability. The basic requirement of the electrocatalyst support is that it should have high electronic conductivity, a large specific surface area and good electrochemical stability. To address these issues, CPN based electrocatalysts were developed with high activity and excellent stability. Dispersion and size distribution of NP catalysts are achieved on CPNs for maximum exploitation and fast kinetics which tend to provide a way to decrease the catalyst loading.211–213 Ghosh et al. showed that, in comparison to their bulk counterparts, CP nanostructure supported catalytic materials can display improved electrode activities for ethanol oxidation which can be useful for direct ethanol fuel cells (DFFCs).213 A series of Pt NP based electrocatalysts supported on CPs have been used for the electrocatalytic oxidation of methanol. The electrocatalytic activity of the CPNs must be greater than that of the corresponding bulk polymer because of the smaller specific surface area in the latter case. The effects of electrocatalysts on the performance of DMFCs have been extensively studied, and CP, PPy, PANI, poly(3-methylthiophene) and poly(o-phenylenediamine) with 1D-nanostructures have become good candidates as electrocatalyst supports.214–218 Rajesh et al.214 developed template synthesised polyaniline nanotubule supported platinum catalyst NPs for methanol oxidation. The activity of the Pt incorporated template synthesized PANI (Pt/PANITemp) was compared with that of Pt deposited on conventionally synthesized PANI (Pt/PANI) and Pt loaded on Vulcan XC-72R carbon. The template-based PANI nanotubular electrode showed higher activity but also accommodated more Pt than the template-free PANI electrode. Template-free PANI nanofibres (PANI NFs) with diameters of about 60 nm were synthesized by interfacial polymerization and uniform smaller Pt NPs of around 1.8 nm diameter were deposited onto the PANI NFs by an ethylene glycol reduction method.215 The Pt/PANI NF catalyst showed a higher electrochemical active surface area and higher methanol oxidation reaction catalytic activity than the Pt/C for direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs). Zhou et al.216 studied nanorod-like composites of PANI/cobalt porphyrin as noble-free catalysts in fuel cells and they showed good electrocatalytic performances. Poly(N-acetylaniline) (PAANI) nanorods, a substituted polyaniline CP, were successfully used as an electrocatalyst support for fuel cell catalysts.217 The Pt/PAANI/GC electrode shows enhanced electrocatalytic activity towards methanol oxidation compared to Pt alone. Rajesh et al.218 also synthesized nanostructured PPy using an alumina membrane as the template and electrodeposited platinum by the galvanostatic square wave (GSW) method on conducting nanotubules of PPy. The activity for methanol oxidation and the stability of the Pt incorporated PPy nanotubule electrode was higher than for the Pt deposited on the conventional PPy film. PPy nanofibers were synthesized by interfacial polymerization and well-dispersed PtNPs anchored well onto the PPy nanofibers as characterized by TEM, and the average diameter of these particles was ca. 2.5 nm (Fig. 8a).219 A Pt NP supported PPy nanofiber catalyst exhibited a higher catalytic activity (14.1 mA cm−2), significantly higher than that of carbon nitride (CNx) nanofiber supports (7.0 mA cm−2), and the commercial carbon black powder of Vulcan XC-72 (XC-72) supports (4.6 mA cm−2) (Fig. 8b). A PPy nanofiber supported Pt catalyst shows higher catalytic activity for methanol oxidation and CO-poisoning tolerance.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of nanofibrillar PPy/Pt catalyst (inset: the size distribution histogram of the Pt nanoparticles), and (b) cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of nanofibrillar PPy/Pt, nanofibrillar CNx/Pt, and XC-72/Pt catalysts in 1.0 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with 1.0 M CH3OH (inset: the section from 0.2–0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl of the CV curves). Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 217, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM image of poly(3-methylthiophene) nanocones (without Pt). (d) Variation of current density with time in 1 M H2SO4/1 M CH3OH at +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 220, Elsevier Ltd. 
Rajesh et al.220 developed a template assisted electrochemical synthesis and characterization of conducting poly(3-methylthiophene) (PMT) nanocones on carbon cloth, using an alumina membrane template. The HR-TEM images (Fig. 8c) of the template synthesized PMT distinctly show a well arranged hollow cone-in-cone and cone-over-cone structure with the outer diameter of the nanocone almost matching the pore diameter of the template used (200 nm). The electro-oxidation of methanol for the Pt incorporated template-synthesized nanocone electrode starts at a lower potential (190 mV more negative) but also exhibited higher activity in both the forward and reverse scans compared to the Pt incorporated template-free PMT electrode. The chronoamperometry results (Fig. 8d) indicated that the PMT nanocone supported Pt electrodes have higher stability than Pt supported on carbon and on conventional synthesized PMT. Maiyalagan221 synthesized nanostructured poly(o-phenylenediamine) using an alumina membrane as the template and electrodeposited platinum particles by potential cycling on poly(o-phenylenediamine) nanotubules. The electrocatalytic activity of this Pt incorporated template synthesized poly(o-phenylenediamine) nanotube electrode was found to be about 13 times larger than that of a conventionally synthesized poly(o-phenylenediamine) electrode with the same metal loading. The nanotubular morphology of the poly(o-phenylenediamine) electrode provides an effective dispersion of Pt NPs, which facilitates the easier access of methanol to the catalytic sites, thus leading to an increased activity and a higher stability. However, the investigation of nanostructured conducting polymers applied to fuel cells is still in its early stage and therefore more studies are needed on the scale-up feasibility. Also CPN supports can be employed only for low temperature fuel cells due to thermal degradation issues, as the conducting polymer was not stable above 100 °C.


4.1.2. Photocatalysis for solar energy conversion and environmental protection. 
The environmental pollution issues prompted the search for potential solutions to clean up water and environmental detoxification by exploring clean energy routes through photocatalysis. Sunlight can be harnessed as an unlimited source of energy and absorbing sunlight requires a semiconductor catalyst; in particular, TiO2 is leading the field.222 However, semiconductor oxide based catalysts are active under ultraviolet light, which accounts for only ∼4% of the incoming solar energy and thus causes the overall process not to be viable for solar energy utilization. Up to now, tremendous efforts have been made in developing more abundant visible light, which accounts for about 43% of the incoming solar energy, active photocatalysts.223–225 Li et al. prepared sub-10 nm rutile titanium dioxide NPs for efficient visible-light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen production.226 However, modified materials for photocatalytic activity in visible light that are sufficiently stable and efficient for practical use have not yet been realized. CPNs provided attractive advantages including high conductivity, good electrochemical activity, large specific surface area, and short and direct pathways for charge transport, which increases the energy conversion performance. Recently, Ghosh et al. demonstrated that CPN based photocatalysts (visible light-activated catalysts) may become as useful as inorganic semiconductor catalysts in ultraviolet light and also offer intriguing opportunities for future research because of their responses to visible light. PEDOT nanostructures, having a narrow band gap (E = 1.69 eV) and an excellent ability to absorb light in the visible and near infrared region, demonstrate unprecedented photocatalytic activities for water treatment without the assistance of sacrificial reagents or noble metal co-catalysts and have turned out to be better than TiO2 as the benchmark catalyst.227 The first experimental evidence of a visible light responsive photocatalytic activity of poly(diphenylbutadiyne) (PDPB) nanofibers by photoirradiation for water depollution has been reported.228 It has to be noted that the photocatalytic activity of PEDOT nanospindles has been found to be even higher than PDPB nanofibers under UV and visible light for phenol and MO degradation (Fig. 9); 100% of phenol is degraded with PEDOT nanospindles after 240 min irradiation under visible light, while only 64% of phenol is degraded with PDPB. The novel CPN based photocatalysts are very stable with cycling and can be reused without an appreciable loss of activity. The key to the success of efficient solar energy conversion is the development of high performance materials having a well matched photoabsorption with the solar spectrum (visible light-harvesting capability), efficient photoexcited charge separation to prevent electron–hole recombination and an adequate energy of charges that carry out the photodegradation of dyes and other toxic molecules.
 Fig. 9  Comparative photocatalytic activity of PEDOT vesicles, PEDOT nanospindles, PDPB nanofibers, commercial P25 TiO2 and Ag–TiO2 for photocatalytic degradation of (a and b) phenol and (c and d) methyl orange (MO) under UV (a and c) and visible light (>450 nm) (b and d) irradiation. Panels (a)–(d) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 227, Nature Publishers. (e) Topographic image of photosynthesized PDPB nanofibres by conventional AFM after degradation of methyl orange. (f) NanoIR mappings of the PDPB nanostructures after photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange as measured at a fixed wavenumber (3054 cm−1) after five cycles. The signal obtained at 3054 cm−1 in the chemical mapping, which originates from the benzene ring in the PDPB polymer, does not change after degradation. (g) Recycling and stability of the PDPB nanofibres after photocatalytic degradation of MO and phenol up to five cycles measured under visible light irradiation of 240 min duration. (h) Schematic representation of the photocatalytic mechanism and energy level calculation of polymer structures by density functional theory. Energy diagram representing the evaluated HOMO and LUMO levels of the PDPB polymer and the photocatalysis mechanism with charge separation in nano-PDPB, with electron reducing oxygen and hole oxidizing water; the holes and generated oxidative radicals can oxidize organic pollutants (noted as M); V. B. and C. B. represent the valence band and the conduction band of PDPB polymer, respectively. Panels (e)–(h) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 228, Nature Publishers. 
The integration of a semiconductor nanocrystal with a narrow band gap at CP heterojunctions has been shown to be an effective means of promoting charge carrier separation and improving visible-light activity. However, the reported photo-conversion efficiency is small.229–231 As the interfacial area is critical in achieving a favorable charge separation, it is essential to incorporate nanoscale units in the heterojunctions. Hence, designing heterostructures with the appropriate morphological orientation and band position of the semiconductor and the polymer unit is challenging. Very recently, Sardar et al. reported the formation of a unique nanoheterojunction using PDPB nanofibers with ZnO NPs to explore the effective charge separation from the polymer to the semiconductor nanocrystals.232 There is very limited direct experimental evidence to establish the photoinduced charge transfer mechanism at the heterostructure interface. By virtue of having the intrinsic photoluminescence (PL) of ZnO from defect state emission as well as CP from different oligomeric and polymeric chains, a deep understanding of the interfacial carrier dynamics at the nanoheterojunction has been unraveled by steady state and ultrafast spectroscopic studies, suggesting the co-sensitization of ZnO NPs by multiple states of polymer nanofibers originated from oligomeric and polymer chain units as shown in Fig. 10a and b. The intensity of the emission peak of the PDPB nanofibers decreases considerably and is red shifted when the polymers are attached to the ZnO NPs. The shift is due to the strong electronic interaction and energy level alignment at the nanoheterojunction as shown in Fig. 10c and e. The picosecond resolved fluorescence decays (Fig. 10c–f) of the PDPB–ZnO light harvesting nanoheterojunction (LHNH) shows a significantly shorter lifetime of 30 ps (74%) as compared to that of PDPB (140 ps; 45%). The observed decrease in lifetime can be correlated to the electron transfer process from the PDPB oligomers to the ZnO NPs. The charge separation from the polymeric chain of PDPB to the ZnO NPs is also monitored from steady state and time resolved spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 10b and d, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic presentation of the co-sensitization of different PDPB oligomers to ZnO NPs and the molecular structure of the PDPB polymer; (b) the interfacial carrier dynamics at the heterojunction showing the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange in aqueous solution. Steady state and time resolved spectroscopy of PDPB nanofibers and the PDPB–ZnO light harvesting nanoheterojunction. (c) Photoluminesence spectra of PDPB and PDPB–ZnO at an excitation wavelength of 409 nm and (d) corresponding decay profiles of PDPB and PDPB–ZnO at 520 nm (excitation at 409 nm). (e) Photoluminesence spectra of PDPB and PDPB–ZnO at an excitation wavelength 633 nm and (e) corresponding decay profiles at 660 nm (excitation at 633 nm). The inset shows the excitation spectra monitored at 520 nm and 660 nm, respectively. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 232, Nature Publishers. 
The steady state emission peak decreases and is red shifted to 665 nm for the PDPB–ZnO LHNH upon excitation at 620 nm. As shown in Fig. 10d, the fluorescence decay curve for PDPB upon excitation at 633 nm shows an intrinsic buildup with a rise component of 290 ps (monitored at 660 nm due to delocalization of electrons in the conjugated polymeric chain). The emission decay curve of PDPB is fitted with a rise followed by a single exponential decay function with a lifetime of 1.58 ns. However, the decay curve of PDPB–ZnO LHNH deviates from single exponential to biexponential showing one significantly shorter lifetime 30 ps (87%) and a longer lifetime of 1.24 ns (13%). Hence, the efficient photoinduced charge separation takes place at the nanoheterojunction where electrons are transferred from the CP nanofibers to the ZnO NPs and holes remain in the polymer. The manifestation of efficient charge separation has been realized with an ∼5 fold increase in the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in comparison to the polymer nanofiber counterpart under visible light irradiation (Fig. 10b). The ease of solution based synthesis and good photocatalytic activity of PDPB–ZnO make them promising functional nanostructures for environmental applications.


4.1.3. Photovoltaics and solar cells. 
Photovoltaic devices convert solar energy directly into electrical energy and organic photovoltaic devices, including polymer solar cells (PSCs) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), provide a low-cost alternative to conventional solid-state photovoltaics.233,234 While these energy conversion and storage devices are promising for sustainability, there are many limitations which prevent the commercialization of these energy conversion technologies. The importance of organic photovoltaic technologies is rapidly increasing because the devices are made from abundant elements and are also flexible which is useful for large-scale applications. In DSSCs, intimate contact is required between the sensitizer dye, the semiconducting medium and the hole-conducting medium as shown in Fig. 11a. Typically, a porous electrode is fabricated with sintering crystalline titania NPs, and is sensitized by a monolayer of dye molecules. Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) such as fluorine doped tin oxide SnO2:F (FTO) or indium-tin oxide (ITO) are used for the fabrication of both the photoanode and the counter electrode (cathode, CEs), and contribute significantly to the cost of DSSCs. The CEs in liquid-junction DSSCs serve as an electron transfer agent as well as the regenerator of the redox couple. In order to accelerate electrochemical charge transfer reactions, the TCO surface should be modified, typically by platinum which is a fairly good benchmark electrocatalyst. During the last two decades significant efforts have been made to develop metal free sensitizers, counter electrodes and catalysts for cheap and clean energy sources. Conducting polymer based materials are envisaged to be an alternative to Pt electrodes as they are inexpensive, play a dual role as the substrate and the catalyst, and exhibit high electrical conductivity, electrochemical stability and high catalytic activity for DSSCs.235–239 As an interesting example, PEDOT nanofibers with high electrical conductivity (∼83 S cm−1) could efficiently reduce triiodide (I3− ions) to enhance both the current density and fill factor. The fabricated DSSCs using PEDOT nanofibers produced a PCE of 9.2%, much higher than the 6.8% PCE for a bulk PEDOT CE and even higher than the 8.6% PCE of the conventional platinum.240 PEDOT reduced the heterogeneous charge transfer resistance and mass transport related limitations of the photocurrent resulting in superior power conversion efficiencies. Of all the CP based CEs, PANI based CEs have more attractive prospects due to their low cost and comparably good performance but, due to the instability, self-oxidation and carcinogenic properties of PANI, it is not suitable for large scale application.241 One-dimensional CPNs were mostly demonstrated as high performance electrocatalysts.242,243 There are various kinds of other CP carbon nanostructures, such as PEDOT nanotube arrays,244 porous PANI nanotubes,245 PPy NPs,246 nanostructured PPy and PANI thin films,247,248 PANI nanotubes,249 ultrathin PPy nanosheets,250 PPy nanotube membranes,251 PANI nanobelts252 and PANI/Pt nanofiber composites.253,254 Trevisan et al. employed PEDOT nanotube arrays as high performing CEs for dye sensitized solar cells as shown in Fig. 11b. PEDOT nanotubes presented a performance that was as good as the conventional platinized counter electrodes, or even better depending on the electrolyte. The increase in the effective area of the PEDOT nanotube CEs improved their performance compared with their dense and flat counterparts. PEDOT nanotube CEs presented a higher catalytic effect with I−/I3− redox than platinized CE, exhibiting a photoconversion efficiency as high as 8.3% as shown in Fig. 11c. In addition to their use in dye-sensitized solar cells, CPs such as PEDOT can also serve as viable hole extracting materials in polymer solar cells as shown in Fig. 11d. The porous PEDOT nanofibers provided a high interface to enhance both hole extraction and transport.255 Compared with the conventional spin-coated PEDOT–PSS at the same thickness, a 30% improvement in the fill factor was observed with the PEDOT nanofiber-modified ITO electrode incorporated with a spin-coated P3HT–PCBM photoactive layer to fabricate PSCs.256 In order to enhance the photovoltaic performance of the bulk heterojunction device, nanofiber networks have been utilized which increase the charge separation and transport.257 Anisotropic CPNs are extensively utilized as solid active donors to blend with the acceptor components for attaining nanoscale phase separation of the active layer in PSCs.258,259 P3HT nanowires or nanofibers with good crystallinity, high carrier mobility, excellent dispersibility in organic solvents and favorable optical absorption spectrum have been extensively employed as donors in PSCs.260,261 Kim et al. showed that an interconnected network of highly oriented P3HT nanowires self-assembled together with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) have a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.23% with the P3HT nanowire/PCBM blend solution as an active layer (Fig. 11d and e).262
 Fig. 11  (a) Operating principles and energy level diagram of a dye-sensitized solar cell with a polymer cathode. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 263, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM images of a PEDOT NT counter electrode, top and cross section views. (c) J–V curves of the analyzed dye sensitized cells using different counter electrodes and electrolytes. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 244, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of a solar cell device with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT nanowires/PCBM/Ca/Al. (e) AFM image of a P3HT nanowire/PCBM blend film. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 262, Wiley VCH. 

4.2. Energy storage devices
Li-ion batteries are a leading candidate for energy storage devices and are widely used for portable devices, from cell phones to laptops and are a useful technology of choice for hybrid electric vehicles. A new direction for fabricating robust, high-performance lithium-ion batteries and active electrode materials for electrochemical capacitor applications using advanced conducting polymer porous nanostructures with high electrical conductivity, large surface area, structural tunability and hierarchical porosity for rapid mass/charge transport is discussed in this section.264–270

4.2.1. Supercapacitors. 
Electrochemical capacitors store significantly less energy than batteries but are capable of very rapid charge and discharge, making them promising for both stationary and automotive applications. Depending on the charge storage mechanism, they are classified into two types: electric double-layer capacitors based on carbon electrodes that house the electrostatic charge, and pseodocapacitors that employ a material such as a metal oxide that undergoes Faradaic redox reactions to enable the charge storage. Since this review is focused on CP nanostructures, the discussion is limited to CP based electrochemical capacitors as well as hybrid materials via the direct incorporation of other pseudocapacitance materials. Conductive polymers, including PANI, PPy, PEDOT and their derivatives, have high specific capacitances but suffer from poor cyclic stability due to mechanical instability caused by material swelling and shrinking during the charging and discharging process. Hence, there is an urgent need for CPNs and their composites in the construction of supercapacitors with high specific capacitances and good cycling stabilities. Nanostructured CP materials with high alignments are essential in supercapacitors since they provide high surface areas and short diffusion path lengths to ions, leading to high performances. A large group of well-defined PPy nanowire arrays were fabricated by facial electropolymerisation, and their electrochemical performance was compared with disordered nanowire networks and compact films. PPy nanowire arrays showed a remarkable capacitance of 566 F g−1 and retained 70% of the initial capacitance after hundreds of charge–discharge cycles (Fig. 12a–f), while the capacitance values of nanowire networks and PPy films were about 414 F g−1 and 378 F g−1 (Fig. 12e). The ion transport rate is greatly influenced by the morphology of the CPs (Fig. 12d). The electrochemical properties of the conducting PPy nanowire were remarkably increased due to the ordered nanostructures with efficient charge transport and a reduced ion transport owing to a shortened diffusion length.271
 Fig. 12  SEM images of (a) PPy film, (b) PPy nanowire network, and (c) PPy nanowire arrays. (d) Model describing ion transport pathways for films, nanowire networks and nanowire arrays. (e) Specific capacitances, and (f) stability of PPy with different morphologies. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 271, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Among the CPNs, PANI is a well studied material as it possesses a much higher theoretical capacitance compared to PPy owing to its multiple redox states. Nanostructured PANI/CNT composites are also widely investigated as high performance electrodes for supercapacitors.272–274 The in situ polymerization of PANI nanowires on the surface of CNT yarn resulted in a very high specific capacitance and long cycle life with ∼91% of its original value after 800 charge–discharge cycles. The increased specific capacitance is due to strong π–π interactions between the π-electrons of PANI and the graphitic π-electrons of CNTs and is responsible for the enhanced charge transfer.272 Meng et al.273 developed a flexible paper-like supercapacitor assembled from PANI-coated CNT networks. The specific capacitance of this flexible supercapacitor is 332 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. The advantage of CPNs is that the density of the total device is low (1.18 g cm−3), resulting in a low weight for the electrode with an outstanding flexibility, making it surpass the current commercial supercapacitor. Wei, Han and colleagues investigated a hierarchical nanocomposite of PANI nanowire arrays on graphene oxide sheets which exhibited a high specific capacitance of 227 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 and a long cycle life with ∼92% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles compared to pure PANI (∼74% capacitance retention).275 3D porous reduced graphene oxide supported PANI nanowires display better supercapacitive performances in terms of the specific capacitance (∼1024 F g−1 with good stability over 5000 cycles). It is considered that this excellent supercapacitor performance is mainly due to active PANI nanofibers with a large specific surface area and the unique 3D structure of the graphene backbone offering facile conducting pathways for charge transportation.276


4.2.2. Lithium ion battery electrodes. 
Li-ion batteries are particularly interesting due to their relatively high energy densities compared to other types of batteries, but a major constraint is the intrinsic diffusivity of lithium ions. In this regard, nanomaterials with shorter diffusion paths are chosen which would increase the rate of lithium insertion or reduction and enhance electron transport as well as provide a high surface area. Silicon is considered one of the most promising anode materials for high-performance Li-ion batteries. However, a dramatic volume change (∼300%) during full charge/discharge cycling, led to a severe capacity decay and poor cycling stability for intimate contact with the electrolyte. Liu et al. reported a new direction for fabricating robust, high-performance lithium-ion batteries using three-dimensional (3D) ternary silicon NP/CP/carbon nanotube hybrid anode materials for Li-ion batteries (Fig. 13a).277Fig. 13a and b show the discharge capacity of the ternary electrode and the first discharge capacity of the ternary electrode reached as high as ∼3600 mA h g−1, approximately 10 times higher that of the commercial graphite anode (372 mA h g−1). The ternary electrode achieved a stable discharge capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 over 1000 cycles with a capacity retention of ∼86% and the Coulombic efficiency increased to 99% and stabilized at ∼99.5% in the subsequent cycles. The improved cycling performance and life-span of the electrode could be attributed to the stabilized Si NPs which were well confined within the 3D conductive framework that was composed of both 3D PPy hydrogels and SWCNTs. Fig. 13c shows the SEM image of the cycled ternary electrode which suggests the polymeric coating on the Si NP surface was well maintained after the cycling test as confirmed in Fig. 13d. Overall, the cycling performance of the ternary electrode is significantly improved compared to previously reported Si anodes due to the enhanced electronic conductivity, and shortened pathway length for ion transport contributed from CP.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of a 3D Si/PPy/carbon nanotube (CNT) ternary electrode. Each Si nanoparticle is encapsulated within a thin polymeric coating layer and closely incorporated within the conductive PPy framework. The CNTs act both as the wrapping layer and conductive backbone, which further enhance the integration of the SiNP/conductive polymer framework and electrical conductivity of the electrode. The cycling performance and structural characterization of the hybrid electrodes after long-term cycling: (b) electrochemical cycling performance of three different electrodes, Si/PPy/CNT (red), Si/PPy (green), and Si/PVDF (black), and the Coulombic efficiency of the Si/PPy/CNT electrode (blue) under deep charge/discharge cycles from 1 V to 0.01 V versus Li/Li+ at a current rate of 3.3 A g−1; (c) the discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency versus cycle number for the Si/PPy/CNT ternary electrode were examined during the galvanostatic charge/discharge at a constant charge capacity limited to 1000 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 8.6 A g−1; (d) SEM image of the composite anode after cycling with the SEI layer removed; (e) TEM image of the extensively cycled composite anode with the SEI layer removed and elemental mapping of the designated area (marked in a rectangle). Panels (a)–(e) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 277, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Taken together, designing and fabricating novel CPN based electrode materials can overcome current limitations. Xia et al. developed the synthesis of Co3O4–PANI core–shell nanowire arrays and the composite anodes exhibited a superior Li-ion storage capability compared to the bare Co3O4 nanowire arrays.278 Liang et al. developed PPy nanotubes as conductive matrices to support sulfur cathodes in lithium–sulfur batteries.279 Further, surface chemical modification or molecular-level modification can be applied to enhance the mechanical and electrical properties of CPNs along with surface passivation to avoid undesirable reactions in order to improve the performance of nanostructured conductive polymer-based electrodes.280

5. Origin of exciting multifunctionality in CP nanostructures
The controlled synthesis of nanometer-scale conducting polymers is a fascinating objective in materials science. CP NPs are formed by self-assembling the as-designed molecular building blocks via the weaker intermolecular interactions between adjacent molecules, such as hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking and hydrophobic interactions. This section highlights the fundamental understanding of the relationship between structural properties and the electrochemical as well as optoelectronic performances of CPs in the nano regime. A dramatic change in various physicochemical properties, such as electrical, thermal, mechanical, electrical and optical, has been realized in nanoscale dimensions compared to the bulk counterparts.281 The performance of the CPN is expected to be better in comparison to the bulk counterpart, since polymer nanostructures have light weights, high surface areas, unique optoelectronic properties, high conductivity, stability, flexibility and processibility.12–14 The CPNs show high electrical conductivity and high electrochemical activity, as compared to their macrogranular structure or self-supporting films.282,283 For example, the electrical conductivity of the PDPB nanostructures obtained by gamma irradiation is 0.13 S cm−1, which is several orders of magnitude higher than the conductivity of bulk polyacetylene, 10−11 S cm−1.284 Morever, due to the air sensitivity of bulk polyacetylene, the stability of the bulk polymer films in air is limited. The conductivity of PDPB nanofibers is found to increase slightly with the decrease of the diameter of the nanofibers. The improved ordering of the unidirectional polymer chains resulted in a greatly increased conductivity. As another example, PANI NPs with a smaller size of 4 nm and high crystallinity demonstrated a conductivity of 85 S cm−1 due to the highly compact and ordered structure of the PANI chains.285 The star-shaped PANI showed higher electrical conductivity than the corresponding homopolymers, originating from the three-dimensional and nanostructured morphologies of the star-shaped polymers, which allows sufficient overlapping of π-orbitals.286 Several studies report a correlation between the morphology and electrical conductivity of CPNs.287,288 The interconnected nanoscale CP nanofibers offer a greater effective surface area and porosity compared with those of the agglomerated polymer and may facilitate the transport of electrons and ions. The self-assembled interconnected one dimensional PPy nanofibers demonstrated enhanced interchain charge transport which resulted in greatly enhanced conductivity and pseudocapacitance compared with pristine PPy.289 Consideration of the nanoscale effect on the photophysical properties of CP is important for their practical utilization in light-emitting or photovoltaic devices.258–262 In general, the absorption spectra and corresponding emission spectra red shifted with increasing inter- and intrachain interactions, which are usually dominant in bulk materials such as thin films or aggregates.290 In contrast, a long red tail in an overall blue-shifted absorption spectrum was observed for CP NPs which is usually associated with a multitude of chain conformations and locally variable degrees of order. The size-dependent optical and electronic properties of CP NPs with continuous bathochromic absorption and significantly enhanced emission behaviors, which is drastically different from the macromolecular building blocks, can be used in novel organic nanodevices in a cost-effective way.291 It is important to note that in contrast to inorganic semiconductor NPs where particle size is comparable to or smaller than the Bohr radius of the Wannier excitons, the smaller Frenkel excitons in organic semiconductors are associated with the extended π-conjugation systems, whose exciton size can be tuned by both chemical alteration of the π-conjugated molecular structures and their intermolecular interactions.292 Notably, exciton transfer in nanofiber aggregates occurred mainly through interchain hops from chromophores on the aggregate surface to the aggregate core, due to the higher level of crystallinity, which is important for organic electronic applications.293 Many efforts were devoted to the morphology control of CPs which enhanced both the light absorption and the charge transport to achieve high efficiency photovoltaic devices at low cost. For example, P3HT nanowires or nanofibers have been mostly explored as donors in PSCs because they combine the advantages of an ideal size (ca.10–50 nm diameters, which are within the exciton diffusion length range), a good crystallinity, a high carrier mobility, an excellent dispersibility in organic solvents and a favorable optical absorption spectrum.294 A notable example is that the morphology and size of CPNs have a close relationship with the oxidation level and conjugation length.295 It has been reported that carrier mobility and concentration, the ordered structure of polymer chains and the oxidation level of PEDOT contribute greatly to the controlled enhancement of the thermoelectric performance of the PEDOT nanostructures.296 The electrical conductivity and the power factor follow the same sequence of bulk PEDOT < globular nanoparticle < nanorod or ellipsoidal nanoparticle < nanotube < nanofiber. Another example is CP hydrogels with unique 3D hierarchical porous nanostructures, which are suitable as active electrode materials, resulting in high electrical conductivity for rapid mass/charge transport for electrochemical capacitors or as functional binder materials for high-energy lithium-ion batteries.209 Hence, compared with their bulk forms, nanostructured conductive polymers exhibit improved physicochemical properties and shortened pathways for charge, mass or ion transport, which is ideal for applications in energy-related fields.
6. Conclusions and future directions
To conclude, we summarized the fabrication techniques as well as the characterization of nanoscale conducting polymer structures for solar light harvesting and energy storage applications. CPNs demonstrate excellent mobility, solubility, small band gaps, a large absorption enhancement and the possibility to tailor the morphology make them superlative candidates for various applications in the energy domain. Moreover, CPNs have the unique feature of hybridization with other classes of nanostructures (for example, inorganic semiconductors and metals) to generate novel hybrid nanocomposites with multifunctional properties. The characterization of CP nanostructures has also progressed significantly and is now pushing the limits of nanomaterial characterization techniques. Using integrated characterization techniques such as combined STM with TEM, AFM with FTIR and combined fluorescence spectroscopy with electron microscopy techniques, may help in understanding advanced nanomaterials and their development towards applications. The possibility of combining the electrocatalytic properties of metal nanostructures and CPs with significant photochemical properties opens a range of novel applications as well as the need for understanding the relationship between these properties. The application of CPNs in the fields of electrocatalysis, energy storage and conversion has been presented. CPNs offer unique and tremendous opportunities in solar light harvesting and further improvements to fabrication techniques may contribute to the implementation of future generations’ solar cells and devices. For visible light active photocatalysis using hybrid composites, structural and band gap engineering are both necessary to further improve the light absorption from the solar spectrum. Future study and development are required for efficient solar cell performances. CPNs have successfully been used as counter electrodes with a cobalt based redox shuttle to give a better result than the benchmark platinized cathode. The understanding of electrochemical charge transfer at the surface is key to optimization of these solar cells. Additionally, the mechanism of electrocatalysis on the CP surface is still not explored well in the literature. Many fundamental questions remain to be answered about how nanoscale conducting polymers significantly differ from those in the bulk. How does the chemical reactivity of materials differ at the nanolevel and how do the ionic and electronic conductivities couple and behave at the nanolevel? How can the different properties of CPs and their composites be used to increase the power and energy efficiencies of devices? Moreover, a significant problem to be solved is the development of a low-cost, large scale synthesis of CP based nanocomposites for their use in practical battery, fuel and solar cell systems.
Abbreviations

CPConducting polymer
NPsNanoparticles
CPNsConducting polymer nanostructures
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PPyPolypyrrole
PANIPolyaniline
PThPolythiophene
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene)
PDPBPoly diphenylbutadiyne
PPVPoly(p-phenylenevinylene)
PMTPoly(3-methylthiophene)
AAOAnodic aluminum oxide
PTMParticle track-etched membranes
AFMAtomic force microscopy
LHNHLight harvesting nanoheterojunction
PSCsPolymer solar cells
DSSCsDye-sensitized solar cells
TCOConducting transparent oxides
ITOIndium-tin oxide
CECounter electrode
PEMFCsPolymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
CNxCarbon nitride
DMFCsDirect methanol fuel cells
DEFCsDirect ethanol fuel cells
LIBsLithium-ion batteries

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Director, CSIR-CGCRI for his kind permission to publish the work. One of the authors (SG) is thankful to Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), India, for providing CSIR-Senior Research Associate (Scientists’ Pool Scheme) award.
Notes and references
S. Gunes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Inzelt, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1711–1718 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirchmeyer and K. Reuter, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2077–2088 RSC .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397–2409 RSC .
S. Bhadra, D. Khastgir, N. K. Singha and J. H. Lee, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 783–810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Zhang, D. Zhang and Y. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2006, 134, 9–19 CrossRef .
J. Wang and D. Zhang, Adv. Polym. Technol., 2013, 32, E323–E368 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .
D. W. Hatchett and M. Josowicz, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 746–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. McQuade, A. E. Pullen and T. M. Swager, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 2537–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Janata and M. Josowicz, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 19–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
J. Pecher and S. Mecking, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6260–6279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682–732 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ito, H. Shirakawa and S. Ikeda, J. Polym. Sci., 1974, 12, 11–20 CAS .
H. Shirakawa, E. Louis, A. MacDiarmid, C. Chiang and A. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 16, 578 RSC .
A. J. Heeger, Angew, Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2591–2611 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, H. Qiu, C. Dou, Y. Li, L. Pu, J. Xu and Y. Shi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 2636–2657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Martin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
S. Il Cho and S. B. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 699–707 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961–1966 CAS .
C. R. Martin, R. Parthasarathy and V. Menon, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1309–1313 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee and S. J. Park, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7487–7556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Treuba, M. A. L. Montero and J. Rieumont, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 4341–4349 CrossRef .
M. S. Cho, H. J. Choi and W. S. Ahn, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 202–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Sui, L. Zhang, M. Wan, Y. Wei and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2854–2857 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Kulesza, M. Chojak, K. Miecznikowski, A. Lewera, M. M. Malik and A. Kuhn, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 510–526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Steinmetz, S. Kwon, H. J. Lee, E. Abou-Hamad, R. Almaric, C. GozeBac, H. Kim and Y. W. Park, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 431, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jackowska, T. Aleksander, A. T. Bieguński and M. Tagowska, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 437–443 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Han and S. H. Foulger, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3092 RSC .
J. Fei, Y. Cui, X. Yan, Y. Yang, K. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3714–3718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De Vito and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 1738–1741 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rahman and M. K. Sanyal, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3956–3960 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. O'Brien, A. J. Quinn, D. Iacopino, N. Pauget and G. Redmond, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3237S RSC .
D. Bearden, J. P. Cannon and S. A. Gold, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2200–2205 CrossRef .
R. Liu, J. Duay and S. B. Lee, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5608–5619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Wu and T. Bein, Science, 1994, 264, 1757–1759 CAS .
X. Zhang, A. G. MacDiarmid and S. K. Manohar, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5328–5330 RSC .
L. J. Pan, L. Pu, Y. Shi, S. Y. Song, Z. Xu, R. Zhang and Y. D. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 461–464 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Dai and Y. Lu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 629–633 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Li, C. Q. Zhang, H. R. Peng and K. Z. Chen, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1841–1845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jang and H. Yoon, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11484–11489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jang, J. Bae and E. Park, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, M. Choi, K. J. Lee and J. Jang, Macromol. Res., 2008, 16, 85–102 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anilkumar and M. Jayakannan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7706–7715 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Jones, K. Y. Cheng, R. J. Holmes and T. P. Lodge, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 599–601 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Ahn, Y. Lee, H. Choi, M. S. Kim, K. Im, S. Noh and H. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xia, Z. Wei and M. Wan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 341, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Anilkumar and M. Jayakannan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 728–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Anilkumar and M. Jayakannan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 11614–11624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. X. Wan, Y. Q. Shen and J. Huang, Chinese Patent, 981099165,  1998 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Song and Z. Kiu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1158–1165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Antony and M. Jayakannan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 12772–12780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shirakawa, N. Fujita and S. A. Shinkai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4164–4165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Néabo, S. Rondeau-Gagné, C. Vigier-Carrière and J. F. Morin, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3446–3452 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, H. Peng and K. Chen, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9319–9323 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, S. Poyraz, S. P. Surwad and S. K. Manohar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13158–13159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Néabo, K. I. S. Tohoundjona and J. F. Morin, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 1358–1361 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Forney, C. Baguenard and C. A. Guymon, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2950–2960 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Hulvat and S. I. Stupp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 778–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Hulvat and S. I. Stupp, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 589–592 CrossRef CAS .
G. Surendran, M. S. Tokumoto, E. Pena dos Santos, H. Remita, L. Ramos, P. J. Kooyman, C. V. Santilli, C. Bourgaux, P. Dieudonné and E. Prouzet, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1505–1514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, H. Remita, L. Ramos, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, P. Beaunier, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert and S. Remita, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 1106–1115 RSC .
N. K. Sadanandhan, S. J. Devaki, R. K. Narayanan and M. Cheriyathuchenaaramvalli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18028–18037 CAS .
H. Komiyama, M. Komura, Y. Akimoto, K. Kamata and T. Iyoda, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4972–4982 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Tovar, B. M. Rabatic and S. I. Stupp, Small, 2007, 3(12), 2024–2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hsu, G. L. Cvetanovich and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3892–3389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nagarajan, J. Kumar, F. Bruno, L. A. Samuelson and R. Nagarajan, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 3049–3052 CrossRef .
Z. Niu, J. Liu, L. A. Lee, M. A. Bruckman, D. Zhao, G. Koley and Q. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3729–3733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Wang, Q. Liu and B. Ding, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hassanien, M. Al-Hinai, S. A. F. Al-Said, R. Little, L. Ŝiller, N. G. Wright, A. Houlton and B. R. Horrocks, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2149–2159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Moon, H. J. Kim, N. H. Kim and Y. J. Roh, Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 3180–3184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, J. Zhang, G. Zhang and H. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7097–7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Richardson-Burns, J. L. Hendricks, L. K. Povlich, B. Foster, D. Kim and D. C. Martin, Biomater., 2007, 28, 1539–1552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rumbau, J. A. Pomposo, A. Eleta, J. Rodriguez, H. Grande, D. Mecerreyes and E. Ochoteco, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 2, 315–317 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Niu, M. A. Bruckman, S. Q. Li, L. A. Lee, B. Lee, S. V. Pingali, P. Thiyagarajan and Q. Wang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6719–6724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pahovnik, E. Žagar, K. Kogej, J. Vohlídal and M. Žigon, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1381–1390 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Peng and K. Chen, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9319–9323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, D. Hu, M. Wan, L. Jiang and Y. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2092–2096 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Park, T. Kim, J. Huh, M. Kang, J. E. Lee and H. Yoon, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7624–7633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2926–2932 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, R. Jamal, L. Zhang, M. C. Wang and T. Abdiryim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 557–565 CrossRef PubMed .
H. D. Tran, J. M. D'Arcy, Y. Wang, P. J. Beltramo, V. A. Strong and R. B. Kaner, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3534–3550 RSC .
H. J. Ding, J. Y. Shen, M. X. Wan and Z. J. Chen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Park, T. Kim, J. Huh, M. Kang, J. E. Lee and H. Yoon, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7624–7633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Lin, L. Liang, J. A. Voigt, D. L. Huber, Z. R. Tian, E. Coker, B. Mckenzie and M. J. Mcdermott, Chem. – Eur. J., 2003, 9, 605–611 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Chan, R. R. Carlson, Y. Luo, G. L. Ge, R. S. Ries, J. R. Heath and H. R. Tseng, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1693–1697 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramanathan, M. A. Bangar, M. Yun, W. Chen, A. Mulchandani and N. V. Myung, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1237–1239 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zhang, Y. Z. Long, Z. J. Chen and M. X. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 693–698 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Ding, J. Y. Shen, M. X. Wan and Z. J. Chen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2008, 209, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Ding, M. X. Wan and Y. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 465–469 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Ding, Y. Z. Long, J. Y. Shen and M. X. Wan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 115–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dallasa and V. Georgakilas, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 224, 46–61 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yuan, L. Zhang, L. Hou, J. Lin and G. Pang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24773–24776 RSC .
H. Ma, Y. Luo, S. Yang, Y. Li, F. Cao and J. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12048–12053 CAS .
T. Li, Z. Qin, B. Liang, F. Tian, J. Zhao, N. Liu and M. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 177, 343–351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, S. Virji, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 314–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Haldorai, T. Zong and J.-J. Shim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 127, 385–390 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Du, J. L. Zhang, B. X. Han, Z. M. Liu and M. X. Wan, Synth. Met., 2005, 155, 523–526 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nuraje, K. Su, N.-l. Yang and H. Matsui, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 502–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Su, N. Nuraje, L. Zhang, I. W. Chu, R. M. Peetz, H. Matsui and N. L. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 669–672 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Ma, Y. Q. Luo, S. Yang, Y. Li, F. Cao and J. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12048–12053 CAS .
Z. M. Huang, Y. Z. Zhang, M. Kotaki and S. Ramakrishna, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2003, 63, 2223–2253 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. MacDiarmid, W. E. Jones Jr., I. D. Norris, J. Gao, A. T. Johnson Jr., N. J. Pinto, J. Hone, B. Han, F. K. Ko, H. Okuzaki and M. Llaguno, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 27–30 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Chronakis, S. Grapenson and A. Jakob, Polymer, 2006, 47, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Choi, J. Lee, J. Choi, D. Jung and S. E. Shim, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 1415–1421 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Feng, J. Wu, W. Cho, M. K. Leach, E. W. Franzd, Y. I. Naimd, Z.-Z. Gug, J. M. Corey and D. C. Martin, Polymer, 2013, 54, 702–708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. W. T. Spinks and R. J. Woods, An Introduction to Radiation Chemistry, Wiley, New York, 3rd edn,  1990 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh, A. Datta and A. Saha, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 355, 130–138 CrossRef .
S. K. Pillalamarri, F. D. Blum, A. T. Tokuhiro, J. G. Story and M. F. Bertino, Radiolytic Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 227–229 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Karim, C. J. Lee and M. S. Lee, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2007, 18, 916–920 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, L. Shi, Q. Zhu, J. Zou and T. Chen, Chin. J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 23, 701–706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lattach, A. D. Besseau, J.-M. Guigner and S. Remita, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2013, 82, 44–53 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lattach, C. Coletta, S. Ghosh and S. Remita, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 208–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cui, C. Coletta, R. Rebois, S. Baiz, M. Gervais, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert, A. Dazzi and S. Remita, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2016, 119, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, C. Coletta, A. Dazzi, P. Lefrançois, M. Gervais, S. Néron and S. Remita, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14086–14094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Coletta, Z. Cui, P. Archirel, P. Pernot, J. L. Marignier and S. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 5282–5298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Krupenkin, T. Taylor, A. Fratzl and P. Aizenberg, J. Science, 2007, 315, 487–490 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Green, S. Baek, L. A. Poole-Warren and P. J. Martens, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2010, 11, 014107–014120 CrossRef .
N. Mano, J. E. Yoo, J. Tarver, Y.-L. Loo and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7006–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dai and Y. Jia, Polymer, 2011, 52, 2550–2558 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Xia, R. Xie, X. J. Ju, W. Wang, Q. Chen and L. Y. Chu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2226–2236 Search PubMed .
R. Temmer, R. Kiefer, A. Aabloo and T. Tamm, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15216–15219 CAS .
P. Y. Chen, M. D. Nasim Hyder, D. Mackanic, N. M. D. Courchesne, J. Qi, M. T. Klug, A. M. Belcher and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5101–5107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, B. Liu, L. Pan and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2856–2870 CAS .
D. Mawad, E. Stewart, D. L. Officer, T. Romeo, P. Wagner, K. Wagner and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2692–2699 CrossRef CAS .
R. Du and X. T. Zhang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2012, 28, 2305–2314 CAS .
L. Chen, B. Suhk, M. Nishino, J. P. Gong and Y. Osada, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 1232–1236 CrossRef CAS .
P. Marcasuzaa, S. Reynaud, F. Ehrenfeld, A. Khoukh and D. J. Chitosan, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 1684–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Dai, X. Jiang, S. Hua, X. Wang and Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4279–4281 RSC .
L. Pan, G. Yub, D. Zhaia, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liue, H. Wang, B. C.-K. Tee, Y. Shia, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Du, Y. Xu, Y. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Zhang and G. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6287–6289 RSC .
D. Wei, X. Lin, L. Li, S. Liang, S. Shang, M. C. Yuen and Y. Yu, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 2832–2836 RSC .
K. H. Kim, M. Vural and M. F. Islam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2865–2869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Biener, M. Stadermann, M. Suss, M. A. Worsley, M. M. Biener, K. A. Rose and T. F. Baumann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 656–667 CAS .
X. T. Zhang, D. W. Chang, J. R. Liu and Y. J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5080–5085 RSC .
X. T. Zhang, C. Y. Li and Y. J. Luo, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1915–1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Sui, B. Xu, H. Duan and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8579–8584 RSC .
Y. Lu, W. He, T. Cao, H. Guo, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, Z. Shao, Y. Cui and X. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5792–5799 Search PubMed .
C. Yang, H. Wei, L. Guan, J. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Yan, X. Zhang, S. Wei and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14929–14941 CAS .
S. Ghosh, A. Hussein Khan and S. Acharya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6022–6033 CAS .
S. Ghosh, D. Ghosh, P. Kumar Bag, S. C. Bhattacharya and A. Saha, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1139–1148 RSC .
R. Gangopadhyay and A. De, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 608–622 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Tseng, J. Huang, J. Ouyang, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1077–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Z. Zhang, G. Nie, C. Wang and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 83–86 CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Lu, S. Poyraz, X. Wang, Y. Yu, J. Scott, J. Smith, M. J. Kim and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3872–3879 RSC .
J.-H. Choi, K.-W. Park, H.-K. Lee, Y.-M. Kim, J.-S. Lee and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2781–2789 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, F. Wang, F. Chen and G. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1039–1042 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Lu, C. Li, J. Y. Shen, Z. J. Chen and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5926–5931 CAS .
M. Chang, T. Kim, H. W. Park, M. Kang, E. Reichmanis and H. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4357–4365 CAS .
A. P. O'Mullane, S. E. Dale, J. V. Macpherson and P. R. Unwin, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1606–1607 RSC .
Y. Gao, C. A. Chen, H. M. Gau, J. A. Bailey, E. Akhadov, D. Williams and H. L. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2839–2844 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Shih, D. Williams, N. H. Mack and H. L. Wang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 14–16 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzeszczuk and P. Poks, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 4171–4177 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Cao, C. Y. Tie, Z. Xu, J. M. Hong and H. Sang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1592–1594 CrossRef CAS .
A. Drury, S. Chaure, M. Kröll, V. Nicolosi, N. Chaure and W. J. Blau, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4252–4258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mondal, U. Rana and S. Malik, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10457–10465 CAS .
S. Dutt, P. Felix Siril, V. Sharma and S. Periasamy, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 902–908 RSC .
S. Fujii, S. Matsuzawa, H. Hamasaki, Y. Nakamura, A. Bouleghlimat and N. J. Buurma, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 2436–2447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Song, C. Satheeshkumar, J. Park, J. Ahn, T. Premkumar, Y. Lee and C. Song, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 6566–6571 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fujii, S. Matsuzawa, Y. Nakamura, A. O. T. Teratani, K. Akamatsu, T. Tsuruoka and H. Nawafune, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6230–6239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Kumar, C. S. Kumar, J. Mathiyarasu and K. L. Phani, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 3401–3408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Soni, C. Mouli Pandey, S. Solanki and G. Sumana, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45767–45774 RSC .
U. Mandi, A. S. Roy, B. Banerjee and S. K. Manirul Islam, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42670–42681 RSC .
X. Li, Y. Gao, J. Gong, L. Zhang and L. Qu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 69–73 CAS .
M. Choudhary, S. K. Shukla, A. Taher, S. Siwal and K. Mallick, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 2852–2858 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, J. Ma and Z. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 33, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
E. Park, O. S. Kwon, S. J. Park, J. S. Lee, S. You and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1521–1526 RSC .
W. Jia, L. Su and Y. Lei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 30, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Rong, Z. Ma and H. Han, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 307–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Boomi, H. G. Prabu and J. Mathiyarasu, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2014, 72, 18–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bhaumik, J. Hyoung, R. Choi, R. I. McCrindle and A. Maity, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 425, 75–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2568–2580 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, M. Safdar and J. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
P. Reiss, E. Couderc, J. De Girolamo and A. Pron, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 446–489 RSC .
T. Zhou, S. Tan, Y. Guo, L. Ma, M. Gan, H. Wang, X. Sun and H. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 652, 358–363 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petrella, M. Tamborra, M. L. Curri, P. Cosma, M. Striccoli, P. D. Cozzoli and A. Agostiano, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1554–1562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, L. Bao, D. Wang, X. Li and J. An, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25806–25815 CAS .
Y.-W. Su, W.-H. Lin, Y.-J. Hsu and K.-H. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 4427–4442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ates, Prog. Org. Coat., 2011, 71, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
P. Taranekar, X. Fan and R. Advincula, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7943–7952 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pruneanu, S. A. F. Al-Said, L. Dong, T. A. Hollis, M. A. Galindo, N. G. Wright, A. Houton and B. R. Horrocks, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2444–2454 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Barisci, R. Stella, G. M. Spinks and G. G. Wallace, Synth. Met., 2001, 124, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takami, J. Mizuno, M. Akai-kasaya, A. Saito, M. Aono and Y. Kuwahara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16353–16356 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Martin, D. W. Abraham and H. L. Wickramasinghe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 52, 1103–1105 CrossRef .
O. A. Semenikhin, L. Jiang, T. Iyoda, K. Hashimoto and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 18603–18606 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. O'Neil, B. Shaw and O. A. Semenikhin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9253–9269 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Tseng, J. Huang, J. Ouyang, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1077–1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kobayashi, S. Hirata and M. Vacha, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2591–2596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, L. Ramos, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, S. Remita, P. Beaunier and H. Remita, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8311–8320 RSC .
J. Liu, B. Wei, J. D. Sloppy, L. Ouyang, C. Ni and D. C. Martin, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 897–900 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lattach, C. Coletta, S. Ghosh and S. Remita, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 208–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cui, C. Coletta, A. Dazzi, P. Lefrancois, M. Gervais, S. Neron and S. Remita, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14086–14094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cui, C. Coletta, R. Rebois, S. Baiz, M. Gervais, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert, A. Dazzi and S. Remita, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2016, 119, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Admassie, O. Inganäs, W. Mammob, E. Perzon and M. R. Andersson, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 614–623 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, K. Liu, L. Lu, Q. Han, F. Bei, X. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Wu and W. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9477–9484 CAS .
S. J. Higgins, K. V. Lovell, R. M. Gamini Rajapaksea, N. M. Walsby and M. Wals, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2485–2489 RSC .

          E. Barsoukov and J. R. Macdonald, Impedance Spectroscopy: Theory, Experiment, and Applications, Wiley Interscience, Hoboken, NJ,  2005 Search PubMed.
M. D. Levi, Y. Gofer, D. Aurbach and A. Berlin, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 433–444 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Abidian and D. C. Martin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 573–585 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Johnson, D. C. Read, P. Christensen, A. Mamnet and R. D. Armstrong, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 364, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Macdonald, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 1483–1492 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Harrington and B. E. Conway, Electrochim. Acta, 1987, 32, 1703–1721 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Abidian, J. M. Corey, D. R. Kipke and D. C. Martin, Small, 2010, 6, 421–429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Abidian and D. C. Martin, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 1273–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin and Q. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 179–218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, S. Peng and G. Yu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12796–12806 RSC .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
X. Yuan, X. L. Ding, C.-Y. Wang and Z. F. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1105–1124 CAS .
K. Cong, M. Ritter, S. Stumpf, B. Schrçter, U. S. Schubert and A. Ignaszak, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 2567–2573 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, A.-L. Teillout, D. Floresyona, P. de Oliveira, A. Hagège and H. Remita, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 4951–4959 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rajesh, K. R. Thampi, J. M. Bonard, H. J. Mathieu, N. Xanthopoulos and B. Viswanathan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A404–A407 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, L. Xu, W. Li, M. Waje and Y. Yan, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5254–5259 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, C. M. Li, J. Li and J. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18578–18583 CAS .
C. Jiang and X. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rajesh, B. Thampi, K. R. Bonard, J. M. Mathieu, H. J. Xanthopoulos and N. B. Viswanathan, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2022–2023 RSC .
Y. Ma, S. Jiang, G. Jian, H. Tao, L. Yu, X. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Hu and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 224–229 CAS .
B. Rajesh, K. R. Thampi, J. M. Bonard, A. J. McEvoy, N. Xanthopoulos, H. J. Mathieu and B. Viswanathan, J. Power Sources, 2004, 133, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maiyalagan, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 443–450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Yan, T. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Gong and N. Guan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5881–5891 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ghosh, K. A. Natalie, S. Remita, L. Ramos, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau and H. Remita, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, K. A. Natalie, L. Ramos, S. Remita, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert and H. Remita, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 505–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 3481–3485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, L. Bao, D. Wang, X. Li and J. An, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25806–25815 CAS .
Z. Pei, L. Ding, M. Lu, Z. Fan, S. Weng, J. Hu and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9570–9577 CAS .
S. Sardar, P. Kar, H. Remita, B. Liu, P. Lemmens, S. K. Pal and S. Ghosh, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Roncali, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 147–160 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 9, 174–179 CrossRef .
H. Tian, Z. Yu, A. Hagfeldt, L. Kloo and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9413–9422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Hardin, H. J. Snaith and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 161–169 CrossRef .
J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, F. Kessler, T. Moehl, S. Ahmad, T. Bessho, A. Marchioro, E. Ghadiri, J.-E. Moser, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 631–639 CrossRef PubMed .
H. N. Tsao, J. Burschka, C. Yi, F. Kessler, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4921–4924 CAS .
K. Saranya, Md. Rameez and A. Subramania, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 66, 207–227 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Lee, K. Do, Y. W. Lee, S. S. Jeon, C. Kim, J. Ko and S. S. Im, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21624–21629 RSC .
Q. Li, J. Wu, Q. Tang, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and L. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1299–1302 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Liu and H. Shimizu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5949–5956 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fan, X. Mei, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 143103 CrossRef .
R. Trevisan, M. Döbbelin, P. P. Boix, E. M. Barea, R. Tena-Zaera, I. Mora-Seró and J. Bisquert, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 781–784 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Park, S. J. Kim, R. Gomes and A. Bhaumik, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Q. Li, L. Fan, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and S. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 172–176 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, L. Chen and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4644–4649 RSC .
J. Zhang, T. Hreid, X. Li, W. Guo, L. Wang, X. Shi, H. Su and Z. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3664–3668 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin and R. A. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 726–731 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Hwang, D. Song, S. S. Jeon, T. H. Han, Y. S. Kang and S. S. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 859–867 CAS .
T. Peng, W. Sun, C. Huang, W. Yu, B. Sebo, Z. Dai, S. Guo and X. Z. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14–17 CAS .
Z. Lan, J. Wu, S. Gao, J. Lin, M. Huang and X. Chen, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2014, 25, 343–346 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, J. Wu, M. Zheng, Q. Tang, Q. Liu, J. Lin and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4062–4064 RSC .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, Small, 2009, 5, 1869–1876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Huang, Z. Y. Ho, D. Kekuda, C. W. Chu and K. C. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19125–19130 CAS .
E. Nasybulin, S. Wei, M. Cox, I. Kymissis and K. Levon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4307–4314 CAS .
L. Li, D. L. Jacobs, Y. Che, H. Huang, B. R. Bunes, X. Yang and L. Zang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1383–1390 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berson, R. De Bettignies, S. Bailly and S. Guillerez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1377–1384 CrossRef CAS .
T. Salim, S. Sun, L. H. Wong, L. Xi, Y. L. Foo and Y. M. Lam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9459–9468 CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao, J. Huang and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3126–3140 RSC .
S. S. V. Bavel, E. Sourty, G. D. With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Kim, J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, C. Shim, M. Sim and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 480–486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, J.-H. Yum, Z. Xianxi, M. Graotzel, H. J. Butt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1654–1658 RSC .
L. P. Soares, C. Checkles, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3414–3419 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Anothumakkoola, R. Sonia, S. N. Bhange and S. Kurungot, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1339–1347 Search PubMed .
Q. Lu, Q. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang and F. Wang, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, G. Yu, L. Pan, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1943–1946 Search PubMed .
T. Liu, L. Finn, M. Yu, H. Wang, T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, B. Liu, L. Pan and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2856–2870 CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Peng and G. Yu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12796–12806 RSC .
J. Y. Huang, K. Wang and Z. X. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 2, 1117–1121 RSC .
K. Wang, P. Zhao, X. Zhou, H. Wu and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16373–16378 RSC .
C. Meng, C. Liu, L. Chen, C. Hu and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, P. Luan, Q. Shao, H. Dong, J. Li, J. Chen, D. Zhao, L. Cai, W. Zhou and X. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8726–8733 CAS .
J. Xu, K. Wang, S. Z. Zu, B. H. Han and Z. Wei, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Kulkarni, U. M. Patil, I. Shackery, J. S. Sohn, S. Lee, B. Park and S. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4989–4998 CAS .
B. Liu, P. Soares, C. Checkles, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3414–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, D. Chao, X. Qi, Q. Xiong, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4562–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, Y. Liu, Z. Wen, L. Huang, X. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6951–6955 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, L. Peng, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6684–6696 RSC .
F. S. Kim, G. Ren and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 682–732 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramanathan, M. A. Bangar, M. H. Yun, W. Chen, A. Mulchandani and N. V. Myung, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1237–1239 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Tran, D. Li and R. B. Kaner, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1487–1499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakanishi, H. Matsuda and M. Kato, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1984, 105, 77–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jang, J. Ha and S. Kim, Macromol. Res., 2007, 15, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
B. Massoumi, N. Aalia and M. Jaymand, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 107680–107693 RSC .
W. Łużny and E. Bańka, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 425–429 CrossRef .
W. Li, Q. Zhang, G. Zheng, Z. W. Seh, H. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5534–5540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Ding, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7736–7741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Schwartz, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 141–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, M.-Y. Han, K. Y. Mya, Y. Wang and Y.-H. Lai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10350–10355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, W. Yang, J. Yao, L. Xi, X. Yang and Z. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 15439–15444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Tapping, S. N. Clafton, K. N. Schwarz, T. W. Kee and D. M. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7047–7059 CAS .
B. Friedel, C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3389–3392 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, J.-Y. Hoon and J. Jang, Small, 2007, 3, 1774–1783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, G. Chen, X. Wang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20896–20902 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structure of some representative conducting polymers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Image courtsey of Ran Liu's personal webpage, Penn State Department of Chemistry. (b) Growth mechanisms of heterogeneous nanostructured MnO2/PEDOT by coelectrodeposition of MnO2 and PEDOT on ring-shaped and flat-top electrodes. Reproduced, with permission, from ref.36, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the mechanism of the soft-template synthesis of different conducting polymer nanostructures: (i) micelles acting as soft-templates in the formation of nanotubes. Micelles were formed by the self-assembly of dopants, and the polymerization was carried out on the surface of the micelles; (ii) nanowires formed by protection of the dopants. The polymerizations were carried out inside the micelles; (iii) monomer droplets acting as soft-templates in the formation of micro-spheres; and (iv) polymerization on the substrate producing aligned nanowire arrays. Nanowires were protected by the dopants, and polymerization preferentially occurred on the tips of the nanowires. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 48, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic representation of the electrochemical polymerization of liquid crystalline EDOT–PDPPA. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 64, American Chemical Society. (e) HAADF-STEM image of stepwise electropolymerization for the fabrication of longitudinally integrated conducting polymer nanowires of PEDOT–PPy segmented nanowires in the PEO114-b-PMA(Az)67 template. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 65, American Chemical Society. (f) Depiction of peptide amphiphile (PA) self-assembly in the presence of EDOT monomers. The self-assembly yields nanostructures with hydrophobic cores that sequester the organic monomer from aqueous solution. Confined oxidative polymerization of EDOT once partitioned should occur predominately within these hydrophobic regions, resulting in encapsulated conductive polymers. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 66, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Emulsion-template strategy for the synthesis of conducting polymer aerogels: (a) digital photos of the EDOT-S stabilized EDOT emulsion, (b) PEDOT-S/PEDOT hydrogel and (c) PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel and schematic diagrams of the (d) EDOT-S stabilized EDOT emulsion, (e) PEDOT-S/PEDOT hydrogel and (f) PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel. (g) SEM image of supercritical CO2 dried PEDOT-S/PEDOT aerogel. Panels (a)–(g) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 139, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (h–j) Elasticity of PPy hydrogel. Macroscopic visualization, showing that the PPy hydrogels recover their original shape after compression ≥70%. (k) σ versus ε curves for PPy hydrogels along the loading direction during loading–unloading cycles at ε = 10–70%. Digital photos showing the fast removal of (l and m) methyl orange, (n) victoria blue and (o) brilliant yellow from wastewater with the elastic PPy hydrogels in syringes. Panels (h)–(o) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 140, Nature Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM image of PPy/Pd composite nanorings. Schematic diagram of the fabrication of PPy/Pd composite nanorings. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 146, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Simultaneous AFM and fluorescence microscopy study: (a) two examples of simultaneously measured force curve (blue) and fluorescence intensity (black) traces on single MEH-PPV nanoparticles. (b) Fluorescence spectrum (black) of a MEH-PPV nanoparticle and transmission spectrum (blue) of a dichroic mirror used to spectrally separate the emission into blue (Iblue) and red (Ired) components. (c) Scheme of the proposed model. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 191, American Chemical Society. (d) Topographic image of PDPB nanofibers by conventional AFM. AFMIR mappings of the photo-induced PDPB polymer nanostructures synthesized in the swollen hexagonal phase measured at different fixed wavenumbers: 1490 cm−1 (e), 2146 cm−1 (f) and 3054 cm−1 (g). (h–j) NanoIR spectra recorded at three different spectral regions of the PDPB polymer. Panels (d)–(j) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 192, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Bright field TEM images of in situ electrochemical deposition of PEDOT: (a) early stage in the process (immediately after initial CV deposition on the bench) showing the dark PEDOT depositing from an aqueous solution onto a 20 μm wide glassy carbon working electrode (anode) supported on a thin silicon nitride membrane; (b) later stage in the process (after subsequent constant voltage deposition), showing the increased thickness and formation of rough protrusions at the edge of the PEDOT film; (c) higher magnification view of the rough edge of the PEDOT film after further deposition. Inset: EDS elemental mapping after in situ electrochemical deposition of PEDOT: secondary electron image; sulfur (PEDOT); carbon (PEDOT and glassy carbon working electrode); chlorine (perchlorate dopant); oxygen (PEDOT and perchlorate dopant). Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 193, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) In situ solution 1H NMR spectra monitoring the temporal changes in the nucleation of polyaniline in 0.10 M SDS at 298.3 K. (e) Schematic representation of the nucleation for polyaniline in SDS rod-like micelles. Panels (d) and (e) are reproduced from ref. 198, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) CV profile of nanostructured conducting polymers at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, bare iridium (squares), PPy film (stars), PPy nanotubes (triangles), PEDOT film (diamonds), and PEDOT nanotubes (circles). (b) Bode plot of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy over a frequency range of 1–105 Hz. (c) Phase plot of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy over a frequency range of 1–105 Hz showing that both the uncoated and coated electrodes were capacitive in the low-frequency range (<10 Hz). Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 206, Wiley-VCH. (d) Equivalent circuit model of electrode–CP–electrolyte interface. The circuit elements are: solution resistance (RS), coating capacitance (CC), pore resistance (Rpore), double layer interface impedance ZCPE, charge transfer resistance Rt, and finite diffusion impedance ZT. Panel (d) is reproduced, with permission, from ref. 207, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of nanofibrillar PPy/Pt catalyst (inset: the size distribution histogram of the Pt nanoparticles), and (b) cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of nanofibrillar PPy/Pt, nanofibrillar CNx/Pt, and XC-72/Pt catalysts in 1.0 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with 1.0 M CH3OH (inset: the section from 0.2–0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl of the CV curves). Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 217, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM image of poly(3-methylthiophene) nanocones (without Pt). (d) Variation of current density with time in 1 M H2SO4/1 M CH3OH at +0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 220, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  Comparative photocatalytic activity of PEDOT vesicles, PEDOT nanospindles, PDPB nanofibers, commercial P25 TiO2 and Ag–TiO2 for photocatalytic degradation of (a and b) phenol and (c and d) methyl orange (MO) under UV (a and c) and visible light (>450 nm) (b and d) irradiation. Panels (a)–(d) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 227, Nature Publishers. (e) Topographic image of photosynthesized PDPB nanofibres by conventional AFM after degradation of methyl orange. (f) NanoIR mappings of the PDPB nanostructures after photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange as measured at a fixed wavenumber (3054 cm−1) after five cycles. The signal obtained at 3054 cm−1 in the chemical mapping, which originates from the benzene ring in the PDPB polymer, does not change after degradation. (g) Recycling and stability of the PDPB nanofibres after photocatalytic degradation of MO and phenol up to five cycles measured under visible light irradiation of 240 min duration. (h) Schematic representation of the photocatalytic mechanism and energy level calculation of polymer structures by density functional theory. Energy diagram representing the evaluated HOMO and LUMO levels of the PDPB polymer and the photocatalysis mechanism with charge separation in nano-PDPB, with electron reducing oxygen and hole oxidizing water; the holes and generated oxidative radicals can oxidize organic pollutants (noted as M); V. B. and C. B. represent the valence band and the conduction band of PDPB polymer, respectively. Panels (e)–(h) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 228, Nature Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic presentation of the co-sensitization of different PDPB oligomers to ZnO NPs and the molecular structure of the PDPB polymer; (b) the interfacial carrier dynamics at the heterojunction showing the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange in aqueous solution. Steady state and time resolved spectroscopy of PDPB nanofibers and the PDPB–ZnO light harvesting nanoheterojunction. (c) Photoluminesence spectra of PDPB and PDPB–ZnO at an excitation wavelength of 409 nm and (d) corresponding decay profiles of PDPB and PDPB–ZnO at 520 nm (excitation at 409 nm). (e) Photoluminesence spectra of PDPB and PDPB–ZnO at an excitation wavelength 633 nm and (e) corresponding decay profiles at 660 nm (excitation at 633 nm). The inset shows the excitation spectra monitored at 520 nm and 660 nm, respectively. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 232, Nature Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Operating principles and energy level diagram of a dye-sensitized solar cell with a polymer cathode. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 263, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM images of a PEDOT NT counter electrode, top and cross section views. (c) J–V curves of the analyzed dye sensitized cells using different counter electrodes and electrolytes. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 244, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of a solar cell device with the configuration of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT nanowires/PCBM/Ca/Al. (e) AFM image of a P3HT nanowire/PCBM blend film. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 262, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of (a) PPy film, (b) PPy nanowire network, and (c) PPy nanowire arrays. (d) Model describing ion transport pathways for films, nanowire networks and nanowire arrays. (e) Specific capacitances, and (f) stability of PPy with different morphologies. Reproduced, with permission, from ref. 271, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of a 3D Si/PPy/carbon nanotube (CNT) ternary electrode. Each Si nanoparticle is encapsulated within a thin polymeric coating layer and closely incorporated within the conductive PPy framework. The CNTs act both as the wrapping layer and conductive backbone, which further enhance the integration of the SiNP/conductive polymer framework and electrical conductivity of the electrode. The cycling performance and structural characterization of the hybrid electrodes after long-term cycling: (b) electrochemical cycling performance of three different electrodes, Si/PPy/CNT (red), Si/PPy (green), and Si/PVDF (black), and the Coulombic efficiency of the Si/PPy/CNT electrode (blue) under deep charge/discharge cycles from 1 V to 0.01 V versus Li/Li+ at a current rate of 3.3 A g−1; (c) the discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency versus cycle number for the Si/PPy/CNT ternary electrode were examined during the galvanostatic charge/discharge at a constant charge capacity limited to 1000 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 8.6 A g−1; (d) SEM image of the composite anode after cycling with the SEI layer removed; (e) TEM image of the extensively cycled composite anode with the SEI layer removed and elemental mapping of the designated area (marked in a rectangle). Panels (a)–(e) are reproduced, with permission, from ref. 277, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
CP	Conducting polymer
NPs	Nanoparticles
CPNs	Conducting polymer nanostructures
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PPy	Polypyrrole
PANI	Polyaniline
PTh	Polythiophene
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
PDPB	Poly diphenylbutadiyne
PPV	Poly(p-phenylenevinylene)
PMT	Poly(3-methylthiophene)
AAO	Anodic aluminum oxide
PTM	Particle track-etched membranes
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
LHNH	Light harvesting nanoheterojunction
PSCs	Polymer solar cells
DSSCs	Dye-sensitized solar cells
TCO	Conducting transparent oxides
ITO	Indium-tin oxide
CE	Counter electrode
PEMFCs	Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
CNx	Carbon nitride
DMFCs	Direct methanol fuel cells
DEFCs	Direct ethanol fuel cells
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
