Li-alloy based anode materials for Li secondary batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B919877F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B919877F
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115-3141Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsLi-alloy based anode materials for Li secondary batteries

        
          
            Cheol-Min 
            Park
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jae-Hun 
            Kim
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hansu 
            Kim
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Hun-Joon 
            Sohn
          
          
        
      *d
aEnvironmental Energy Technologies Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
bChemical and Materials Science Centre, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA
cEnergy Laboratory, Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics, Giheung, Gyeonggi-do 449-712, Korea
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Research Centre for Energy Conversion and Storage, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. E-mail: hjsohn@snu.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 2 885 9671;   Tel: +82 2 880 7226
Received 
      25th January 2010
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      1st July 2010
    AbstractResearch to develop alternative electrode materials with high energy densities in Li-ion batteries has been actively pursued to satisfy the power demands for electronic devices and hybrid electric vehicles. This critical review focuses on anode materials composed of Group IV and V elements with their composites including Ag and Mg metals as well as transition metal oxides which have been intensively investigated. This critical review is devoted mainly to their electrochemical performances and reaction mechanisms (313 references).
Cheol-Min Park
Cheol-Min Park received his MS (2005) and PhD (2009) (supervisor: Prof. Hun-Joon Sohn) in the Department of Materials Science & Engineering (DMSE) of Seoul National University. He also worked as a researcher at LG Chem. Ltd. Battery Research Institute (2005–2006). Currently, he is working as a postdoctoral researcher at Environmental Energy Technologies Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. His research interests are focused on synthesis and investigation of new alternative electrode materials for rechargeable Li-ion batteries. He was awarded the Electrochemical Society (ECS) Korea Student Award (2009) and the DMSE Best Graduate Student Awards (2008 & 2009).
Jae-Hun Kim
Jae-Hun Kim is a Postdoctoral Researcher at National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in USA. He received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University (Korea). His PhD dissertation title is “Electrochemical characteristics of Si-based composite anode materials for lithium rechargeable batteries” (Advisor: Professor Hun-Joon Sohn). After postdoctoral work at the University of Idaho (USA), he has been working for NREL since 2008. His current research interests are focused on synthesis and characterization of nanostructured electrode architectures and materials for lithium batteries and supercapacitors.
Hansu Kim
Dr Hansu Kim is currently a senior research engineer at Energy Lab in the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), which is central research organization of Samsung Electronics in Korea. He received BS, MS, and PhD degree in Department of Mineral and Petroleum Engineering from Seoul National University in 2000 under the supervision of Professor Hun-Joon Sohn. His research is mainly focused on nanostructured alloy-type anode materials for next generation lithium secondary batteries and printable flexible battery for the future mobile device applications.
Hun-Joon Sohn
Hun-Joon Sohn received his BS and MS degrees in metallurgical engineering from Seoul National University. Also he earned his PhD from University of Utah in Salt Lake City, USA in 1980. He did his postdoctoral work at the same University and joined Seoul National University in 1982. Currently he is the POSCO Chair Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU. His research interests involve electrochemical behaviors of materials under various conditions and recently has mainly focused on the development and characterization of anode materials for the Li secondary batteries.
1. Introduction
Increasing global energy demand along with the limited supply of fossil fuels and mandates to minimize CO2 emissions has increased demand for alternative energy sources such as nuclear energy, wind power, solar cells, tidal power, fuel cells, and batteries. The trend to adopt clean and renewable energy is increasing around the world and requires innovative research of the chemistry and physics of materials. Among the alternative energy sources, Li-ion batteries have played a key role competing with Ni-MH batteries to supply power for small electronics since Sony launched the first generation Li-ion battery in the early 1990s.1 Recently, Li-ion batteries have predominantly provided the electrical power necessary to operate small portable electronic devices such as cellular phones, laptop computers, and camcorders. In addition, they have been used in both HEVs (hybrid electric vehicles) and back-up electricity storage units for renewable energy sources which require a large unit. In 2008, sales of Li rechargeable batteries reached 10 billion dollars,2 and sales are expected to grow dramatically if Li-ion batteries can be successfully implemented in HEVs or PEVs (plug-in electric vehicles).
A Li-ion battery is mainly composed of a carbonaceous anode (generally graphite), a carbonate-based organic electrolyte with a Li-containing salt (e.g. LiPF6), and a Li metal oxide cathode (generally LiCoO2). Li ions are intercalated and deintercalated between graphite and LiCoO2 through the electrolyte during discharge and charge, respectively. Since the demand for safe Li-ion batteries exhibiting high power, large capacity, and high rate capability is ever increasing, research has been carried out worldwide to find new electrode materials to replace the currently used materials.
Since Dey demonstrated that Li metal can electrochemically alloy with other metals at room temperature in an organic electrolyte electrochemical cell,3 Li-alloying reactions with metallic or semi-metallic elements and various compounds have been investigated during the past few decades. Although these alloying materials provide a larger specific capacity than graphite (372 mAh g−1), except for a few transition metal oxides, they generally suffer from a large irreversible capacity at the first cycle and poor cycling behavior due to a large volume change during cycling. If the microstructure of the electrode materials can be designed properly, the volume change during discharge (lithiation) and charge (delithiation) would be compromised to some extent. In 1997, Fuji announced its Stalion battery, which employed an amorphous tin composite oxide (TCO) anode,4–6 but it was not commercialized because of its large irreversible capacity during the first cycle. Since then, Sony developed its Nexelion battery7 in 2005 using an anode material mainly composed of a Sn/Co/C composite with Ti metal synthesized by a high energy mechanical milling (HEMM) process. Not only composite materials, but also nanosized particles and nanostructured materials have also been suggested in order to alleviate the mechanical strain generated due to the volume change as the Li ions are inserted to and extracted from the host electrode materials. Several review articles in this field including fuel cells and supercapacitors with emphasis on nanosized particles and nanostructured materials are available in the literature.8–21
In this critical review article, we mainly focus on the Group IV (Si, Sn, etc…) and Group V elements (P, Sb, etc…) and their composites including Ag and Mg metals as well as some of the transition metal oxides which have been investigated as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.
2. Group IV elements/composites
Among the various Li alloy elements, Group IV elements such as Si and Sn have been the main focus as Li alloying metals owing to the high capacity Li-rich binary alloys. The crystal structures of Group IV elements are demonstrated in Fig. 1(a) and their gravimetric and volumetric capacities are shown in Fig. 1(b). The theoretical capacities were calculated based on the maximum Li-containing phase of the Li–Si binary phase diagram (Li22Si5) and each Li metal binary phase as suggested by Goward et al. (Li17M4 [M = Ge, Sn, and Pb] rather than Li22M5).22 In this section, the electrochemical properties of the Group IV elements and their composite materials as anodes in Li-ion batteries are reviewed.
 Fig. 1  Crystal structures and capacities of Group IV elements. (a) Crystal structures of cubic Si (blue), cubic Ge (green), tetragonal Sn (red), and cubic Pb (orange). (b) Gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), Si (Li4.4Si), Ge (Li4.25Ge), Sn (Li4.25Sn), and Pb (Li4.25Pb). 
2.1 Silicon (Si)
Si has been considered as one of the most attractive anode materials for Li-ion batteries because it has the highest gravimetric and volumetric capacity and is also abundant, cheap, and environmentally benign. However, it showed capacity fading due to mechanical failure of the active material caused by the large volume expansion/contraction during the discharge/charge reactions. In order to overcome this problem, various approaches have been applied such as the use of active-inactive binary alloys and Si dispersion in active and/or inactive matrices. In this subsection, the reaction mechanism of a pure Si anode with Li is first described, followed by the Si–M (active/inactive metal or compound) system and its carbon composites. Finally, the electrochemical properties of SiO and its composites are reviewed.

2.1.1 Pure Si. 
The electrochemical lithiation of Si electrodes has been investigated by several groups.23–33 Electrochemical reactions of lithium with silicon at elevated temperatures have demonstrated that the reactions follow the equilibrium Li–Si binary phase diagram, forming intermetallic compounds such as Li12Si7, Li7Si3, Li13Si4, and Li22Si5, which show distinct voltage plateaus for each two-phase region.24 Typical voltage profiles of powder Si anodes (Aldrich, 325 mesh) for the first two cycles at room temperature are presented in Fig. 2.34 Contrary to the high temperature behaviors and equilibrium phase diagram, there is only a two-phase region at about 0.1 V (vs. Li/Li+) during the first discharge process. Several authors have reported that crystalline silicon becomes an amorphous Li–Si alloy when Si reacts electrochemically with Li.27–29 Limthongkul et al. proposed an electrochemically driven solid-state amorphization mechanism.28 In 2004, the electrochemical lithiation mechanism at room temperature was reported in detail by two groups.30,31 From their ex situ and in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses results, the reaction mechanism was explained as follows.30–32
 Fig. 2  Voltage profiles of Si powder electrodes for the first and second discharge/charge cycles. 
During discharge: Si (crystalline) + xLi+ + xe− → LixSi (amorphous) + (3.75 − x)Li+ + (3.75 − x)e−(1) → Li15Si4 (crystalline)(2)During charge: Li15Si4 (crystalline) → Si (amorphous) + yLi+ + ye− + Li15Si4 (residual)(3)In the two-phase region, crystalline Si becomes an amorphous Li–Si alloy (1) and the amorphous phase suddenly crystallizes as a Li15Si4 phase around 50 mV vs. Li/Li+ (2). There is another two-phase region during the delithiation process and the final product is amorphous Si (3). Due to electrical disconnection of the active material caused by a severe volume change, there are some amounts of the residual Li15Si4 phase after the first delithiation, which results in a large irreversible capacity. When Li ions are inserted into the amorphous Si during the second cycle, two sloping voltage plateaus are observed, which indicates single phase regions. After the second cycle, reactions (2) and (3) shown above are repeated and the reversible capacity fades.
To understand the reasons for the poor cycling stability of Si negative electrodes, the failure mechanism was investigated.33 During the Li extraction process, the dealloying reaction is not completed due to the increased internal resistance that is caused by a loss of the contact area between Si and the carbon particles, which are a conducting agent. This is caused by volume contraction of the Si particles after expansion in the previous Li–Si alloying process. The authors proposed that the cycle performance of the Si electrodes could be improved either by applying pressure on the cells or loading more conducting agent materials. The effects of Si particle size and conducting additives on cycling stability were demonstrated.35–38 Li et al. reported that a nano-Si (78 nm) powder anode showed a better capacity retention than normal Si powder (passed through 250 mesh) due to the smaller volume variation by the distribution of nanoparticles.35 Liu et al. also showed that increasing the conducting additive content and reducing the particle size played important roles in improving the cyclability of the electrodes.36 The effect of conducting polymers as a buffer matrix was also evaluated by Guo et al.37 and Chew et al.38 Nano-Si/polypyrrole (PPy) composites were prepared by HEMM37 and chemical polymerization,38 respectively. It was found that the PPy conducting polymer matrix was effectively acting to increase the electrical conductivity and to prevent the mechanical degradation of the Si electrode by buffering the volume changes.
In attempts to accommodate the volume change during discharge/charge processes and to improve the first coulombic efficiency and cycle performance, several electrode architectures other than powders have been suggested. Porous silicon electrodes with one-dimensional (1D) channels were fabricated using an electrochemical etching process.39 The channel structure of the porous silicon electrode remained the same after 35 cycles. Nest-like hollow Si nanospheres were also prepared by Ma et al.40 The authors explained that the enhanced rate capability and cycle performance of the electrode could be attributed to the prevention of Si aggregation on the nanometre scale by the nest-like Si nanospheres. And Cui and co-workers recently reported vertically-aligned Si nanowire arrays on a current collector.41 It was proposed that this architecture could provide better accommodation of large volume changes, direct 1D electrical pathways for efficient charge transport, and elimination of extra weight for binders and conducting additives. A reversible capacity of over 3000 mAh g−1 was maintained for up to 10 cycles with little capacity fade. The electrochemical cycling methods to control capacity or to limit the voltage window were also demonstrated to improve the cycling stability of pure Si electrodes.42,43


2.1.2 Si–M systems (M: active/inactive metal or compound). 
Intermetallic compounds (Si-active metal and Si-inactive metal) as anode materials have received attention from several groups.44–51 Metallic magnesium and silver are active to Li, forming Li-metal alloys electrochemically. Anani and Huggins reported that Li ternary silicides (Li–Metal–Si) have a more favorable voltage profile and a higher reversible capacity than Li–Si binary alloys based on thermodynamic calculations.44,45 The electrochemical characteristics of Mg2Si were investigated at ambient temperature.46–49 The reaction mechanism of Li insertion into Mg2Si was proposed by Kim et al. based on XRD and Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) as follows.47 Mg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LixMg2Si(4) LixMg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LicriticalMg2Si → LisaturatedMg2Si + Mg + Li–Si alloy(5) Mg + xLi+ + xe− → Li–Mg alloy(6)First, Li is inserted into the octahedral site of the Mg2Si antifluorite structure to form LixMg2Si (4). When the amount of inserted Li reaches the critical value, LicriticalMg2Si begins to decompose into LisaturatedMg2Si, Mg, and Li–Si alloy phases (5). Finally, further Li insertion results in the formation of a Li–Mg alloy (6). During the Li removal process, the reverse reactions are expected to occur. On the other hand, different insertion mechanisms of Li into Mg2Si were also proposed by Moriga et al. and Roberts et al.48,49 In their studies, formation of Li2MgSi was observed instead of LixMg2Si. The Mg2Si electrodes showed the same rapid capacity fading due to material pulverization by the large volume changes. The electrochemical properties of CaSi2 were also evaluated as Si-active metal intermetallic compound anodes.50 Based on the predicted Ca–Si–Li phase diagram at room temperature, the following reaction is expected. 10.8Li + CaSi2 → Li2Ca + 2Li4.4Si(7)Although the capacity of ball-milled CaSi2 was larger than that of as-sieved CaSi2 due to its smaller particle size and/or amorphous nature, neither the as-sieved nor ball-milled CaSi2 showed potential as an alternative anode material.
Apart from the Si-active metal compounds, Si-inactive metal compounds such as NiSi and FeSi were also examined as alternative anode materials by Wang et al.51 Considering Ni and Fe as inactive elements to Li, the following reaction mechanisms were proposed for the reactions of NiSi and FeSi with Li. xLi+ + xe− + NiSi → LixSi + Ni ↔ Ni + Si + xLi+ + xe−(8) xLi+ + xe− + FeSi → LixSi + Fe ↔ Fe + Si + xLi+ + xe−(9)Here, Ni or Fe is expected to act as a buffering matrix for the formation of LixSi in the subsequent cycles. For NiSi, the first discharge capacity was 1180 mAh g−1, which corresponds to the insertion of 3.82 mol of Li and the initial coulombic efficiency was 80%. Although these intermetallic compound electrodes showed better cyclability than a Si powder electrode, there was still capacity fading caused by the large volume change. The electrochemical lithiation/delithiation properties of CoSi2, FeSi2, NiSi2, and SiB3 were also reported.29
Another approach to suppress Si volume expansion during cycling which has been attempted is to generate composite materials which consist of finely dispersed Si particles in an inactive matrix. This inactive matrix is expected to act as a buffering material to accommodate the volume change of Si, resulting in enhanced cycle performance. Metallic compounds such as TiN and TiB2 were employed as inactive host matrices by Kumta and co-workers.52,53 Si-inactive compound nanocomposites consisting of amorphous Si and a nanocrystalline matrix were synthesized using HEMM. The anode materials showed reversible capacities of 300–400 mAh g−1 up to 15–20 cycles with a relatively good capacity retention. The authors also demonstrated that pre-milling of the inactive component increased the stability in terms of capacity of the nanocomposite electrodes due to homogeneous distribution of the induced stress during the discharge/charge processes.53 However, the reversible capacities were still low compared to their theoretical values of 700–900 mAh g−1. This was explained by noting that some of the Si particles were embedded in the nanocomposite after prolonged milling which led to electrochemical inactivity of the Si.54
SiAg anode materials formed by a mechanical alloying process were investigated by Hwang et al.55 The SiAg powders appeared to consist of a uniform dispersion of Si in a ductile Ag matrix. The electrode prepared by milling for 50 h showed a reversible capacity of 280 mAh g−1 after 50 cycles with little capacity fading. To enhance the electrical conductivity of Si powder, Cu-deposited Si powder negative electrodes were prepared by Kim et al.56 Electroless Cu deposition on etched Si followed by annealing were carried out for the adhesion of Cu and Si. The first reversible capacities of the electrodes ranged between 1400 and 2300 mAh g−1. Although the Cu–Si electrodes exhibited improved cyclability compared to bare Si anodes due to the conductivity enhancement, the Cu coating on Si was not effective enough to achieve capacity retention over 15 cycles.


2.1.3 Si–(M)–C systems. 
The total single cell capacity (mAh g−1) of Li-ion batteries can be calculated by considering the cathode capacity (CC), anode capacity (CA), and specific mass of other cell components (e.g. electrolyte, separator, and case).57,58 With cathode capacities of 140 (conventional) and 200 mAh g−1 (new high capacity cathode systems, see ref. 59 and references therein), the total cell capacity as a function of CA is shown in Fig. 3.58 As seen in the figure, there are two regions. There is a region where the total capacity increases relatively quickly (CA of 300–1000 mAh g−1) and the other region has a plateau-like slope (CA above 1000 mAh g−1). This means that a noticeable improvement in the specific capacity of Li-ion batteries is possible if carbonaceous anodes can be replaced with alternative anode materials having a capacity of about 1000 mAh g−1.57,58 From this point of view, Si-inactive matrix composites are very attractive because they can easily have capacity values around 1000 mAh g−1 when the composites contain about 30% active Si, whose specific capacity is 3580 mAh g−1 for Li15Si4. Although the systems discussed in the previous sections including nano-Si powders, NiSi, Si–TiN, and Cu-coated Si showed better cycle performances than a pure Si anode, they are not ready for practical applications. Recently, much work on Si–C composites has been reported. When a matrix such as graphite and pyrolyzed carbon was used to replace the inactive matrix, some promising results have been obtained in terms of initial coulombic efficiency, high reversible capacity, and cycling stability. Carbon is expected to play an important role in electrode reliability owing to its relative softness, small volume change during Li insertion, and good electronic conductivity. In this subsection, Si–(M)–C systems will be discussed.
 Fig. 3  Total capacity of a Li-ion cell as a function of anode capacity (CA), including the masses of other required internal components and the case. The capacities of the cathodes (CC) are considered to be 140 and 200 mAh g−1 (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).58 
In the 1990s, Dahn and co-workers investigated Si–C–(O) composite anode materials prepared by thermal pyrolysis of various polymers containing silicon and carbon.60,61 The electrochemical performance of the composites was explained by a Si–C–O Gibbs phase diagram.61 The reversible capacities through the SiO1.3 line in the phase diagram increased from 340 mAh g−1 for pure carbon to a maximum of about 900 mAh g−1. In the amorphous Si–C–O glass, carbon was found to provide conducting pathways for Li ions and electrons. However, the presence of oxygen in the composite electrodes resulted in a high irreversible capacity. Si–C composites were also prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) using oxygen-free silicon/carbon sources.62 Nanodispersed silicon (2–6 wt% in the composites) in carbon showed an improved initial coulombic efficiency, increased reversible capacities of 360–500 mAh g−1, and good cyclability over 30 cycles. Although mass production of materials by CVD may not be economical, it was demonstrated that the nanodispersion of alloying elements within a carbon matrix is a potential method to produce high capacity anode materials.
Si–C composites synthesized by simple ball milling, which allows easy control of homogeneity, compositions, and particle size throughout the sample, were also examined.63,64 Carbon-containing Si nanoparticles were prepared by ball milling of graphite and silicon mixtures.63 In the ball-milled C0.8Si0.2 material (Si 20 at.%), the first reversible capacity was 1039 mAh g−1 and a capacity of 794 mAh g−1 was maintained after 20 cycles. However, the initial irreversible capacity was greater than 100%. The initial coulombic efficiency could be improved by controlling the milling conditions. Nanocrystalline Si–Mesocarbon microbeads (MCMB) composites prepared by ball milling for 5, 10, and 20 h were tested as negative electrodes by Liu and co-workers.64 In this work, the ball milling process was used to disperse nano-Si in the MCMB matrix. When the ball milling time was increased, a better dispersing effect was obtained but the MCMB spherical particles were broken up, which resulted in irreversible reactions due to the increased surface area of the MCMB powders and the formation of a passivating film. As a result, the 10 h milled sample showed the best performances such as a reversible capacity of 1066 mAh g−1 with an initial cycling efficiency of 90.7% and about a 65% capacity retention after the 25th cycle.
The effects of a carbon coating on Si powders for improving the anode performances were investigated by Yoshio et al.65,66 Carbon-coated Si was prepared by thermal vapor deposition (TVD) using benzene, which showed a first reversible capacity of 737 mAh g−1, a coulombic efficiency of 92.1%, and little capacity fading up to 50 cycles.65 These results could be attributed to the carbon coating which not only suppressed the electrolyte decomposition on the Si-based electrode surface but also provided integral and continuous electrical contact networks around the Si particles. However, gradual capacity fading was observed upon extended cycling, which was explained to be due to irreversible accumulation and trapping of Li ions in some Li–Si alloys which were formed electrochemically.66
Si-graphite-pyrolyzed carbon composites were prepared by pyrolysis of pitch or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) embedded with graphite and silicon powders.67,68 After optimization of the pitch, graphite, and silicon components, a relatively high initial coulombic efficiency of 81% was obtained.67 Si–C composites by pyrolyzing PVC showed a maximum first cycle efficiency of 85% and a reversible capacity of about 700 mAh g−1 with good cyclability up to 30 cycles.68 In both papers, pyrolyzed carbon was found to act as a matrix and binder for graphite and silicon particles. The graphite addition improved the dispersion uniformity of the Si nanoparticles, reduced the hysteresis between the discharge and charge voltage profiles, and enhanced the initial reversibility.
The combination of an intermediate ball milling step in between two pyrolysis reactions using PVC was introduced to produce the composite, in which multiphase Si–C cores were homogeneously distributed within a pyrolyzed carbon matrix.69 The composite showed better electrochemical performances than samples prepared by two pyrolysis reactions (without milling) and one pyrolysis reaction followed by a milling step. It is worth noting that the uniform distribution of Si particles in the carbon matrix was important for maintaining the mechanical stability of the electrodes during cycling.
Apart from ball milling and pyrolysis, Si–C composites have been synthesized using carbon gels.70,71 Si-graphite composite anodes prepared by Si dispersion in a sol–gel graphite (SGG) matrix were evaluated.70 The electrodes showed a reversible capacity of 832 mAh g−1 with an initial coulombic efficiency of 80.5% and about an 88% capacity retention at the 25th cycle. This could be attributed to an open 3D structure of the SGG matrix, which cushioned the volume change of the Si particles. Nanostructured Si–C composites were synthesized by dispersing nano-Si powders in a carbon aerogel and subsequent carbonization.71 A reversible capacity of 1450 mAh g−1 was maintained up to 50 cycles with little fading, which may be due to homogeneous distribution of Si nanoparticles in an amorphous carbon matrix.
A different method to produce a Si-graphite composite was used by Holzapfel et al.72,73 Nano-Si particles (50 nm72 and 10–20 nm73) were deposited on Timcal KS-6 graphite by a pyrolysis process using mono silane (SiH4). A Si-graphite composite anode with 20 wt% Si showed initial discharge and charge capacities of 1350 and 1000 mAh g−1, respectively. After 100 cycles, the reversible capacity was greater than 900 mAh g−1. The excellent cyclability was explained to be due to the small silicon particle size, good adherence to the graphite surface, and homogeneous distribution of the nanosized Si particles on graphite. However, the initial coulombic efficiency of 74% must be increased for commercial applications.
Si–M–C composites in which an inactive element or compound (M) was introduced have been investigated.74–80 Inert components such as Al2O3,74 TiN/TiB2,75 Fe,76 Cu,77,78 and Ni79,80 were found to play roles in improving the Si particle adhesion to the carbon matrix, mechanical integrity of electrodes, and enhanced electrical conductivity. A nano-Si dispersed in oxide was synthesized by mechanochemical reduction from a mixture of SiO and Al using ball milling.74 A carbon-coated composite obtained by ball milling of Si dispersed in oxide and graphite following pyrolysis showed a reversible capacity of 525 mAh g−1 over 40 cycles with little fading. This was explained by the uniform distribution of Si in the inactive oxides and carbon coating. Si–M–C composites (M: TiB2 and TiN) prepared by ball milling of M and Si, and subsequent embedding with pyrolyzed carbon from PVC demonstrated a large capacity (about 600 mAh g−1) and good cycling stability.75 The co-milling components (M) were found to play a role in the enhancement of rate capability and cycle performance. A carbon-coated Si–Cu3Si–Cu composite prepared by simple precipitation and pyrolysis was evaluated as an anode material.77 Cu3Si was simultaneously formed from electrodeposited Cu on Si particles during the pyrolysis reaction. The improved cycling stability of the composite could be attributed to the roles of Cu3Si such as high electrical conductivity and good adhesion to Si and the carbon coating. Si–Ni-graphite composites were also synthesized using arc-melting followed by ball milling.79 Enhanced cycling performances of the composites were proposed to be due to the better accommodation of the volume change due to the presence of NiSi and NiSi2 phases, and disordered graphite layers.
Some architectures of Si–C composite materials different from conventional powders have been recently reported.81–84 Three-dimensional (3D) porous bulk silicon particles were synthesized by thermal annealing and etching of a mixture of butyl-capped Si gels and SiO2 nanoparticles.81 The carbon-coated Si composite, which had a highly porous and interconnected structure, showed a reversible capacity of about 2500 mAh g−1 at a 1 C rate after 100 cycles due to its better accommodation of large strains without pulverization during electrochemical Li insertion/extraction. Several types of Si and Si–C periodic macroporous materials based on an inverse opal structure (Fig. 4) were investigated as Li-ion battery anodes by Esmanski and Ozin.82 Among them, a carbon–silicon composite prepared by deposition of amorphous Si thin layers (50 nm) on carbon inverse opals using CVD demonstrated a high reversible capacity of about 2400 mAh g−1, greater than a 80% capacity retention after 145 cycles, and good rate capability. The authors explained that high macroporocity coupled with the amorphous nature of Si may be beneficial for reducing stress from large volume changes during cycling. Mesoporous Si–C core–shell nanowire materials were prepared using a SBA-15 template by Kim and Cho.83 The 1D nanowire material with a diameter of 6.5 nm showed a first reversible capacity of 3163 mAh g−1, a coulombic efficiency of 86%, and a capacity retention of 87% after 80 cycles. C–Si core–shell nanowires of amorphous Si on carbon nanofibers were synthesized by CVD.84 In this composite, the carbon core is expected to function as a mechanical support for the Si shell and an electrical conducting pathway. The core–shell electrodes showed a Li storage capacity of about 2000 mAh g−1 with good cycle performance.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of the nanocrystalline Si inverse opal structure (A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, “Silicon Inverse-Opal-Based Macroporous Materials as Negative Electrodes for Lithium Ion Batteries” Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).82 


2.1.4 SiO and its composites. 
SiO (silicon monoxide) has been considered as a candidate for the anode material in Li-ion batteries.34,85–92 The absolute volume change of SiO should be smaller than that of Si during discharge/charge processes because the material contains a relatively small amount of active Si compared to pure Si. Moreover, the oxygen containing compounds formed by Li insertion are expected to play a matrix role for the alleviation of volume changes. The microstructure of solid SiO is still controversial in the literature with two proposed structural models (see ref. 93 and references therein). One model is the random bonding model with a continuous random network of Si(2+) and oxygen in silicon monoxide. The other model is the random mixture model with two separate phases, Si(0) and SiO2(4+). This model implies that the reaction mechanism of SiO with Li is not straight forward while tin oxides are known to directly become Li–Sn alloys and Li2O during Li insertion.

Fig. 5 shows typical voltage profiles of the SiO electrode (Aldrich, 325 mesh) for the first and second cycles with the corresponding differential capacity plots (DCP).34 Two distinctive peaks at 0.24 V (vs. Li/Li+) and 0.08 V are observed upon lithiation. Also, during the second Li insertion, the smaller peak at 0.24 V reappears indicating that the reversible and irreversible reactions of SiO with lithium occur simultaneously. During the first lithium extraction, there are also two broad peaks. It was reported that the irreversible capacity for the first cycle was associated with the participation of oxygen in SiO and the large volume change.85–88 The reaction mechanism of SiO with Li has been investigated by several groups using various analytical tools.85–88 The structures of SiO and lithiated SiO were examined using neutron elastic scattering.86 Analyses of the radial distribution functions indicate that the inserted lithium reacted with the metallic silicon in SiO to form Li–Si alloys along with partial consumption of Li to form lithium oxide. The formation of Li–Si alloys, Li2O, and Li silicates after the first Li insertion into SiO was reported by performing X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),87 solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),34,88 high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM),34 and electrochemical dilatometry.88 However, the quantitative (stoichiometric) ratio of the final products and the reversibility of the lithium oxide and lithium silicates are still not clear due to the complex microstructure of SiO. Recently, the kinetics of the electrochemical Li insertion/extraction in SiO were investigated using ac impedance spectroscopy.89 The charge transfer in SiO was found to be very fast compared to other insertion materials.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical behaviors of a SiO electrode: (a) voltage profiles for the first and second discharge/charge cycles, and (b) corresponding differential capacity plots. 
A pure SiO electrode is also known to demonstrate poor cycle performance owing to mechanical failure due to the drastic volume change during cycling. To overcome this problem, similar approaches (e.g. syntheses of carbon composites) with Si have been performed.90–92 Si nanocluster-SiOx–C composites were synthesized using the disproportionation of SiO and the polymerization of furfuryl alcohol.90 During heat treatment for carbonization, SiO was simultaneously transformed into nano Si and amorphous SiO2 phases in a process known as disproportionation.94 The nano Si (2–10 nm) dispersed composite demonstrated a reversible capacity of about 700 mAh g−1, a first coulombic efficiency of about 68%, and good capacity retention up to 200 cycles. The good cyclability was attributed to the uniform distribution of nano Si in the silicon oxide phase retained by the carbon matrix. A SiO–C composite was prepared by ball milling and pyrolysis of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA).91 A reversible capacity of 800 mAh g−1 with an initial coulombic efficiency of 76% was obtained from the composite material. The disproportionation of SiO in the presence of PVA was also confirmed by XRD and NMR. This approach was found to be a good method for reducing the first irreversible capacity when compared to pure SiO. The composite showed a good cycling stability up to 100 cycles, which was explained by the stable microstructure of the Si nanocrystals in amorphous silicon oxide and the effect of the pyrolyzed carbon. SiO-graphite composites prepared by simple ball milling were evaluated as negative electrodes.92 Although the composite milled for 24 h showed a reversible capacity of about 690 mAh g−1 at the 30th cycle with a good capacity retention, the first irreversible capacity (55%) needs to be reduced.
As reviewed above, much research effort has been done to produce the Si-based electrodes to meet the requirements for commercialization. Although Si shows the poor cyclability due to the low electrical conductivity and the large volume changes during cycling, it has the highest theoretical specific capacity among Li-alloy anodes. This indicates that there is enough room for conducting additives or matrices to increase the conductivity and to alleviate the volume changes, achieving the gravimetric capacity of around 1000 mAh g−1. Recently, some promising results have been reported on Si–Carbon composite materials which showed excellent cycling stability with high capacities. However, the materials have still some problems such as high costs aroused from difficulty of syntheses and high initial irreversible capacities caused by high surface area and residues from chemical syntheses. It is desirable to use low-temperature and/or solid-state syntheses routes for the commercial application. These issues should be addressed in the future work.

2.2 Tin (Sn)
Electrochemical lithiation of Sn at elevated temperatures carried out by Wen and Huggins95 showed that Sn reacted with lithium to yield seven different Li–Sn line phases within the Li–Sn phase diagram: Li2Sn5, LiSn, Li7Sn3, Li5Sn2, Li13Sn5, Li7Sn2, and Li22Sn5. Recently, the most lithium rich Li–Sn alloy phase, Li22Sn5, was correctly identified as Li17Sn4 by crystallographic studies.22,96 Based on the end member (Li17Sn4) of the Li–Sn alloy phase, 4.25 atoms of lithium can be accommodated into each Sn atom and its maximum gravimetric capacity is 959.5 mAh g−1 with a working potential of about 0.5 V (vs. Li/Li+). Fig. 6 compares the voltage profiles of electroplated tin, tin metal powder, and graphite electrodes. The electroplated Sn electrode at room temperature delivered a capacity of 940 mAh g−1, which is close to the theoretical capacity of a Sn electrode.97,98 Although Sn has a lower gravimetric capacity than Si and metallic lithium, Sn is an attractive anode material due to its volumetric capacity of about 2000 mAh cm−3, which is higher than that of even metallic Li and is comparable to Si.98 However, like other Li-alloying materials, its commercial use is limited by its comparatively poor capacity retention due to mechanical degradation such as cracking and pulverization caused by large volume changes that occur in the coexisting Li–Sn intermetallic phase region during cycling. This behavior was noted by Dey in his early publication regarding Li-alloying metals in 1971.3
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical behaviors of various Sn electrodes (solid line: electrodeposited Sn, dashed line: Sn powder, dotted line: graphite) (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).97 

In situ atomic force microscopy observations of the patterned Sn electrode showed irreversible morphological changes and the above mentioned electrochemical pulverization of Sn during discharge and charge which led to the breakdown of the electrical conduction pathways in the electrode as well as physical degradation of Sn, thereby causing the capacity fading.99In situ stress measurements of the electroplated Sn film revealed that the Sn electrode underwent a stress transition during cycling and the induced stresses were released by creating cracks within the Sn film electrode.100 These in situ studies showed the morphological changes of the Sn electrode with their underlying mechanics during cycling. The main reason for the drastic capacity fading of the Sn electrode can be attributed to inhomogeneous large volume changes associated with the formation of a Li–Sn intermetallic phase.

2.2.1 Sn-based oxide materials and their composites. 
Since Fuji showed that an amorphous tin-based composite oxide had a reversible capacity more than twice that of graphite,4–6 much research has been devoted to high capacity Sn-based oxide materials including SnO2, SnO, and Sn-based composite oxides. The basic reaction mechanisms of Sn-based oxide materials have been reported as follows.101,102 SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O + 4.4Li+ + 4.4e− ↔ Li4.4Sn + 2Li2O(10) SnO + 2Li+ + 2e− → Sn + Li2O + 4.4Li+ + 4.4e− ↔ Li4.4Sn + Li2O(11)At the first lithiation, Sn–O bonding is irreversibly dissociated by the introduction of lithium ions and electrons, forming Li2O and metallic Sn that are responsible for the reversible capacity of the Sn oxide anode through the alloying/dealloying reaction with lithium up to the theoretical limit of Li4.4Sn. Recently, the detailed mechanism of Li2O formation in Sn oxides determined by electrochemical measurements and AES suggested that Li2O was formed at 0 V,103 not at ∼0.8 V as reported previously.101,102 The Sn-based oxide anode showed an improved capacity retention compared to metallic Sn, which was mainly ascribed to the resulting composite structure consisting of electrochemically active Sn and an inactive lithium phase such as Li2O. Li2O acted as a matrix where the reduced Sn phase was finely dispersed and thereby prevented the aggregation of Sn atoms. However, upon repeated cycles, Sn phases surrounded by the Li2O matrix arising from delithiation of the Li–Sn alloy phase showed a tendency to aggregate with each other into large particles104 which have been directly observed by HRTEM.105,106 Coarsening of Sn particles after prolonged cycles caused a large volume change and destruction of the Li2O matrix phase, which eventually degraded the capacity retention of the Sn oxide anode.
To improve the capacity retention of Sn oxide anodes, it is crucial to suppress the aggregation of Sn atoms into larger particles during cycling. Control of the cut-off voltage for delithiation was highly effective in suppressing the coarsening of Sn particles that mainly occurred in the delithiation process from a Li–Sn intermetallic phase to Sn.102 However, restriction of the delithiation could not prevent a decrease of the reversible capacity of the Sn oxide anode. To enhance the capacity retention of Sn oxide anodes without restrictive use of the energy density, various strategies have been suggested such as the introduction of inactive elements in the Sn oxide,107–111 the use of amorphous Sn-based glass materials,6,112–116 and physical modification of size and morphology.117–124 Some of the approaches resulted in improvement of the capacity retention of the Sn-based oxide anode material. Compositional modification of the Sn oxide by introduction of inactive elements to lithium such as Mo, B, Si, and Al has been found to improve the cycling stability of Sn oxide anodes to some extent. However, crystalline Sn-based oxides modified by inactive elements have not demonstrated sufficient electrochemical performance for commercial use in Li-ion batteries since they failed to prevent aggregation of Sn atoms in the electrode material and to suppress capacity fading. Significant enhancement of the capacity retention of Sn-based oxides has been obtained by the use of a glassy Sn-based composite oxide. Tin-based amorphous composite oxides containing glass-forming elements (B, P, Al, etc.) reported by Idota et al.6 are typical examples of this approach. These amorphous solids contained Sn(2+) as an electrochemically active center for alloying/dealloying reactions with lithium. Also, oxygen bonded to other glass-forming element networks which limited the size of Sn clusters and allowed fast Li-ion diffusion and delocalization of the Sn(2+) active center. For example, Fuji's composition of Sn1.0B0.5P0.5Al0.4M0.1O3.7 (M: alkaline metals such as K) showed 90% of its initial specific capacity (650 mAh g−1) after 100 cycles.6 However, amorphous tin composite oxide still has some drawbacks and exhibits a low initial coulombic efficiency and a lower volumetric capacity than crystalline tin oxides.6,115
Physical modification of Sn-based oxide anode materials has also been found to significantly improve their capacity retention.117–124 One might reasonably expect that down-sizing of the Sn oxide anode to the nanoscale can reduce the absolute volume changes in Sn oxide material. SnO2 nanoparticles with a size of about 3 nm prepared by a hydrothermal method have been reported to show excellent cycle performance over 60 cycles with an initial capacity of 740 mAh g−1, as shown in Fig. 7.118 HRTEM analysis combined with ex situ XRD analysis revealed that SnO2 nanoparticles with about 3 nm Sn nanoparticles underwent a reversible volume change without aggregation into larger Sn clusters during cycling. Similar approaches utilizing nanostructured SnO2 such as nanorods, nanowires, and nanotubes have shown improved capacity retentions compared to bulk SnO2.119–124
 Fig. 7  Cycle-life performance of SnO2 nanoparticles as a function of (a) size (3, 4, and 8 nm) and (b) electrode composition (SnO2:binder:carbon black at weight ratios of 6:2:2 and 8:1:1). The charge cutoff voltage was 1.2 V (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).118 
Another noteworthy physical modification of Sn-based oxide anode materials was providing free volume within the materials as a buffer against volume changes during cycling. Sn-based oxides with an ordered mesoporous structure,125–129 nanotubular structure,119,122 and SnO2 hollow micro/nanosphere120,130,131 have also demonstrated highly stable cycle performances over prolonged cycles. Small angle X-ray scattering and HRTEM studies on ordered mesoporous tin phosphate showed pore contraction and expansion during the alloying and dealloying reactions with lithium implying that the pores of ordered mesoporous tin phosphate played a role in absorbing and releasing the volume change of the electrode material associated with lithiation and delithiation, respectively.126 However, even though some Sn-based oxide materials showed promising anodic performances such as high capacity and excellent capacity retention, they failed to replace the graphite anode in commercial Li-ion batteries mainly due to their low coulombic efficiency at the first cycle. As mentioned above, Sn-based oxide materials can not avoid irreversible Li2O formation at the initial lithiation, which causes a high irreversible capacity for the first cycle and requires a surplus of cathode material to compensate for the irreversible reaction occurring at the anode, eventually leading to a decrease in the energy density of the full cell.


2.2.2 Sn–M systems (M: active/inactive metal or compound). 
In order to avoid the highly irreversible reaction of Li2O formation in the first cycle, oxygen should be replaced with another element which does not cause an irreversible electrochemical reaction at the first lithiation. Sn-based intermetallic compounds (MxSn; M = Co, Cu, Mn, Fe, Ce, Mg, Sb, etc…) and multiphase Sn–M alloys are examples which have been explored.132–144 Their electrochemical discharge and charge reactions are similar and the basic mechanisms can be expressed as follows.
During the first discharge: MxSn + 4.25Li+ + 4.25e− → xM + Li4.25Sn(12)During the first charge and the subsequent cycles: xM + Li4.25Sn ↔ MxSn + Sn + 4.25 Li+ + 4.25 e−(13)On the first discharge, similar to Sn oxide materials, the Sn–Metal bond is dissociated into pure M and Sn, which reacts with lithium forming a Li–Sn alloy phase. In the case of M which alloys with lithium such as Sb and Mg, further reaction of M with lithium was observed.135–137,143,144 Although Sn intermetallic compounds underwent complete decomposition into M and the Li–Sn alloy phase at the fully lithiated state, the detailed lithiation mechanism is very complicated and depends on the crystal structure of the mother compounds. For example, Cu6Sn5 showed a topotactic-like transformation to fcc Li2CuSn (lithiated zinc-blende structure) and, thereafter, formed an intermediate solid solution of Li2+xCu1–xSn (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) before extruding all the Cu to yield a Li–Sn alloy phase.134,145 During the delithiation reaction, the reconstruction of a Cu6Sn5 intermetallic phase was observed in an in situ XRD analysis. However, this may cause a large volume change in the electrode associated with re-incorporation of the extruded Cu to form a Li2CuSn phase. The reaction mechanism of Cu6Sn5 can be expressed as follows.134 First step: 10Li + Cu6Sn5 ↔ 5Li2CuSn + Cu(14) Second step: xLi + Li2CuSn ↔ Li2+xCu1−ySn + yCu (0 < x < 2.4, 0 < y < 1)(15) Third step: (2.4–x)Li + Li2+xCu1−ySn ↔ Li4.4Sn + (1 − y)Cu(16)In Sn2Fe, in contrast to the reversible structural changes of Cu6Sn5 during cycling, partial recombination of Sn and Fe occurred during charging, indicating that some of the Fe atoms acted as an inactive phase.133 As may be expected, Sn intermetallic compounds showed a higher initial coulombic efficiency than Sn oxide materials due to the absence of irreversible reactions such as Li2O formation. However, their capacity retention was not satisfactory for utilization in commercial Li-ion batteries. Large volume changes in Sn-based intermetallic compounds during cycling may account for their poor cycle performance.
Multiphase Sn–M alloys can be classified into the following two groups: (i) active/inactive composite where an inert matrix phase holds Sn-based reacting components during cycling such as Sn2Fe and SnFe3C,146,147 and (ii) all-active multiphase alloys that react consecutively with lithium into multi-reacting phases at the first lithiation such as Sn–Sb, Sn–Ag, and Sn–Sb–Ag alloys.135–137,148–152 All-active multiphase alloy materials showed a stable capacity retention, which may be attributed to the resulting composite after the first lithiation. Strong expansion of a more reactive phase in the composite can be buffered by a less active matrix. Thus, the extent of mechanical degradation in the overall electrode material may be small. For example, a Sn/SnSb multiphase alloy reacted with lithium consecutively and will be discussed in section 3.2.2. The capacity retention of a SnxSb1−x alloy was found to be inversely proportional to the particle size and submicron SnSbx alloys have been reported to demonstrate excellent capacity retention over prolonged cycles, which confirms the above stated requirements. However, the use of small particles has been reported to cause a similar problem as Fuji's TCO, which was a high irreversible capacity at the first cycle arising from the increased surface area and impurities such as oxide and hydroxide resulting from the reaction of the small alloy particles with the solvent during their preparation.137,148 Despite various efforts to improve the initial coulombic efficiency, the results were still unsatisfactory for use in commercial Li-ion batteries.
The active/inactive composite alloy proposed by Mao et al.147 has gained much attention due to its ability to improve cycle performance by buffering the expansion of the Sn-based active component with an inert matrix phase. Composites of a lithium-reactive Sn2Fe intermetallic phase/inert SnFe3C intermetallic phase prepared by HEMM showed that the grain size of the two phases was about 10 nm and relatively stable cycling over several tens of cycles was observed. A material with 24% Sn2Fe (by weight), 72% SnFe + C, and 4% C had a specific capacity of about 200 mAh g−1 and exhibited no capacity fade over 80 cycles.147In situ XRD and electrochemical characterization of these composites revealed the roles of the two components. All of the Sn atoms in Sn2Fe reacted with lithium while SnFe3C did not react with lithium, and the cycle performances of the composites were directly proportional to the amount of SnFe3C, which clearly supports the concept of an “active/inactive composite”. Various inert phases have been suggested as a component in Sn-based nanocomposites and some of them proved to significantly improve the capacity retention for over one hundred cycles.138,153–156 For example, Ag–Sn–Fe active/inactive nanocomposites prepared by HEMM were reported to maintain about 280 mAh g−1 over 300 cycles.155 Moreover, lithium reactive components have also been extended to other lithium alloying materials including Si, Ge, and Al. However, the use of inert matrix phases, especially an intermetallic phase and transition metals, tended to decrease the gravimetric capacity of Sn-based nanocomposite materials.


2.2.3 Sn–(M)–C systems. 
Among the inert matrix phases explored for active/inactive nanocomposites, carbonaceous materials have been extensively investigated due to their high electrical conductivity, good mechanical compliance, and the ability to store lithium with a small volume expansion. Several carbonaceous materials including graphite, carbon nanotubes (CNT), amorphous carbon, ordered mesoporous carbon, and graphene157–183 have been exploited as an inert and conductive matrix in Sn-based anode materials, thus providing various Sn/C composite anode materials with different microstructures. Carbon-coated Sn-based nanoparticles with a core–shell type morphology showed a remarkable improvement of capacity retention compared to bare Sn nanoparticles. Amorphous carbon-coated Sn nanoparticles maintained about 98% of their initial capacity (677 mAh g−1) after 50 cycles, while bare Sn nanoparticles showed drastic capacity fading. This behavior was ascribed to the carbon shell which prevented mechanical degradation of the Sn nanoparticles by retarding the aggregation of Sn nanoparticles.160 The role of the carbon matrix phase to maintain the initial microstructure of Sn/C composites with the large volume change of Sn has also been recognized in other Sn/C composite anode materials. Sn particles embedded in an amorphous carbon prepared by infiltrating tetraethyltin into milled polystyrene resin powder showed a capacity of 480 mAh g−1 with stable capacity retention for 30 cycles.169 Further improvement of a Sn-confined carbon matrix was achieved by reducing the size of Sn particles from about 200 nm to 50 nm using a newly designed synthetic procedure involving pyrolysis of an organic tin precursor-infiltrated organic gel under an Ar atmosphere, as shown in Fig. 8.170,171 The resulting Sn/C composite had a reversible capacity of 500 mAh g−1 without capacity fading after 200 cycles and the full cell combined with a LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode showed a highly stable cycle performance over 100 cycles.170 However, the use of non-graphitized carbon caused a decrease in the energy density of the Sn-based anode material due to its high irreversible capacity at the first cycle as well as the low density of amorphous carbon that may lead to a decrease of the volumetric capacity of the Sn/C composite anode.
 Fig. 8  TEM image of a Sn–C composite material. The figure reveals that the size of the tin particles is about 50 nm at the surface but only a few nanometres (less than 10 nm) in the bulk of the material, resulting in an average particle size of 30 nm (G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, “Nanostructured Sn–C Composite as an Advanced Anode Material in High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries” Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).170 
Many research groups have focused on CNTs as a matrix phase to support a Sn-based active phase due to its excellent mechanical strength, high electrical conductivity, large surface area, and its internal void space to buffer volume changes.175–183 Sn-based nanoparticles including SnO2, Sn, and its alloy phases either coated on the outside surface of CNTs or filled inside the tubes have been prepared. Some of them have shown promising performances which can be attributed to their microstructure where the volume changes of the Sn-based active domain can be easily absorbed by the ductile CNT matrix surrounding the active phase. For example, a Ag–Fe–Sn/CNT nanocomposite prepared by HEMM exhibited excellent cycle performance over 300 cycles.183 However, in addition to the high cost of CNTs, the application of CNTs may give rise to decreased energy density of the electrode owing to the high irreversible lithium storage in the carbon nanotubes at the first cycle.
Sony announced the first commercialization of an amorphous Sn-based composite anode that contained cobalt and carbon.7,184 Based on the combination of the above stated material concepts, i.e., active/inactive composite, intermetallic compound, and the use of carbon as an inert and conductive matrix, this material was designed to have a nanostructure of nanosized Sn–Co nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix.7,184 It should be noted that this material also contained Ti but the actual role of Ti in this nanocomposite has not been disclosed. The atomic scale structure of the amorphous tin cobalt material was characterized using the pair distribution function (PDF) method which can probe the local atomic scale structure by examining atomic correlations. Using this method, it was found that the material has approximately the same local bonding structure as Sn–Co.185Fig. 9 shows SEM and HRTEM images for this material which reveal individual metal particles about 5 nm in size, while the overall size of the nanostructured particles was on the order of a micrometre.185 As mentioned above, in the discharge step, it was likely that the soft carbon matrix absorbed the expansion of Sn-based active nanograins without coarsening of the Sn-based reactant domain or mechanical degradation. Despite its remarkable performance and successful commercialization of amorphous Sn–Co–C composite anodes, Co is very expensive and needs to be replaced with cheaper metals in order to be adopted in cost sensitive applications such as large scale Li-ion batteries for electric vehicles and electrical energy storage systems for renewable energy uses.17 In this regard, various Sn–M–C (M = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Ni, and Cu) composite anodes have drawn much attention in recent years.186–192 Although some of these Co-free Sn–M–C composites exhibited improved cyclabilities compared to their carbon-free Sn–M alloys, their cyclabilities were inferior to the cyclability of Sn–Co–C. Partial replacement of Co with other transition metals has also gained attention. Sn–Co–Ni–C and Sn–Co–Fe–C composites have shown promise to reduce production costs by decreasing the amount of cobalt content.192
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of an amorphous tin–cobalt anode: (© The Electrochemical Society, reprinted with permission).185 
Besides the commercial success of Nexelion battery by Sony, considerable advances in Sn-based anode materials, as reviewed here, could be achieved by the combination of various strategies such as the use of inactive phase, composite with carbon, and down-sizing of active phase to improve electrochemical performances. However, these Sn-based anode materials that showed the excellent capacity retention delivered a gravimetric capacity ranging from 300–500 mAh g−1, and further improvement in material design should be needed to take full advantage of Li–Sn alloying reactions. Efficient and cost effective technologies for the preparation of Sn-based materials would be also important not only for mobile devices but also for electric vehicles and large scale electricity storage units for renewable energy sources.

2.3 Germanium (Ge) and lead (Pb)
Ge and Pb can accommodate lithium up to Li17M4 (M: Ge, Pb), which was recently corrected by single crystal studies.22 However, they have not gained much attention due to the high cost of Ge and the possible toxicity of Pb. On the other hand, they have some advantages over Si and Sn and have been considered in high capacity anode materials.

2.3.1 Ge and its composites. 
The Li–Ge system has a theoretical capacity of 1568 mAh g−1 (Li17Ge4), which is 44% of the theoretical Li–Si capacity. However, in contrast to Si, Ge has the benefit of forming a minimal amount of native oxide in its outermost layer and the diffusivity of lithium in Ge is 400 times greater than that of lithium in Si at room temperature.193 In the electrochemical alloying reaction of Ge particles with lithium at room temperature, two distinct potential plateaus reflecting the phase transformation reaction into a more lithiated Li–Ge intermetallic phase were observed. Based on the ex situ XRD and HRTEM analyses, a three step reaction mechanism of Ge with lithium was suggested as follows.194 Ge → Li9Ge4 → Li7Ge2 → Li15Ge4 + Li22Ge5(17)However, Baggetto and Notten argued that the final product during the first discharge would be the Li15Ge4 phase only.195 The Ge electrode showed drastic capacity fading within 10 cycles due to a large volume change of about 390% at the first lithiation similar to other Group IV elements (Si and Sn) described above. Similar approaches used with Si and Sn were applied to nanostructured Ge to produce materials including Ge thin films and their composites. Some of the materials have shown promising electrochemical performances as anode materials.194,196–201 For example, Ge nanoparticles embedded in a carbon composite obtained from the pyrolysis of butyl-capped Ge nanoparticles showed a specific capacity of 1067 mAh g−1 and maintained about 88% of its initial capacity after 30 cycles.199 Ge nanowires grown directly on stainless steel foil were found to have a specific capacity of 1141 mAh g−1 with a stable cyclability over 20 cycles and a high power rate up to 2 C rate.200 More importantly, the Ge nanowires remained intact and connected to the current collector after cycling. These promising behaviors of the Ge nanowires can be attributed to its specific electrode configuration of direct fabrication of the one-dimensional Ge on the current collector, which may enable facile strain relaxation and material durability during cycling, short Li diffusion distances, and good electrical conduction. Despite the impressive behaviors of Ge-based anode materials stated above, issues related to production cost should be addressed for their commercial use as an anode material in Li-ion batteries.


2.3.2 Pb and its composites. 
Based on the final product of the Li–Pb alloy system, Li4.25Pb, the theoretical capacity of Pb is 549 mAh g−1, which is much lower than the other Group IV elements (Si, Sn, and Ge). However, the volumetric energy density of a Pb electrode calculated from the fully lithiated Li–Pb alloy phase is about 1780 mAh cm−3, which is comparable to Sn and Ge. Although Pb has some advantages as an electrode material including a high volumetric energy density and low cost, only a few studies have been reported on Pb-based anode materials in Li-ion batteries due to the toxicity associated with the use of Pb. Lead oxide and its composites with carbon have been investigated as anode materials. The composites showed improved electrochemical performances compared to bare lead oxide.202–204 However, a high irreversible capacity at the first cycle and poor capacity retention of these materials make them unsuitable for commercial use and further improvement is required.

3. Group V elements/composites
Group V elements (P, As, Sb, and Bi except for N2) known as pnicogen or pnictogen have interesting crystalline structures comprised of puckered layered planes, as shown in Fig. 10(a). These crystalline features provide available paths for facile Li diffusion. Also, Group V elements have low atomic packing factors (APF, P (ca. 30%), As (ca. 35%), Sb (ca. 39%), and Bi (ca. 41%)) indicating that these elements have large voids for the accommodation of Li ions.205 Additionally, Group V elements have rich alloy phases with Li (Li3P, Li3As, Li3Sb, and Li3Bi), which provide high capacities when used as anodes in Li-ion batteries (Fig. 10(b)). In addition, Group V elements can form many binary compounds with other metals and much work has been reported using pnicogen-based materials as the anodes in Li-ion batteries. In this section, Group V element-based materials and their nanocomposites are summarized when tested as the anode materials for high performance Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 10  Crystal structures and capacities of Group V elements: (a) crystal structures of orthorhombic P (purple), rhombohedral As (yellow), rhombohedral Sb (green), and rhombohedral Bi (blue), and (b) gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), P (Li3P), As (Li3As), Sb (Li3Sb), and Bi (Li3Bi). 
3.1 Phosphorus (P)

3.1.1 Black P and its composites. 
Phosphorus has three main allotropes: white, red, and black.206 Among these allotropes, orthorhombic black P exhibits a layer structure similar to that of graphite, which is currently used as an anode material in Li-ion batteries. Although black P has an interesting structure, black P-based systems for Li-ion batteries have not been studied until recently because the synthesis of black P is very difficult and only amorphous red P is commercially available. Recently, black P synthesized by transforming commercially available amorphous red P into orthorhombic black P using HEMM was tested as an anode material in Li-ion batteries.207 The electrochemical behaviors of red P and black P were different from each other, as shown in Fig. 11(a). Although black P showed enhanced electrochemical performance compared to red P, the first coulombic efficiency was only 57%, which is mainly due to the semiconducting nature of black P. To compensate for the poor electronic conductivity of black P, a black P/C nanocomposite was prepared by further HEMM. The electrochemical behaviors of the black P/C composite were improved compared to red P and black P electrodes (Fig. 11(a)). Also, the black P/C composite electrode showed a high initial coulombic efficiency of 90%. The electrochemical reaction mechanism of black P was suggested as follows (Fig. 11(b)).207 During discharge: Black P → LixP → LiP→ Li2P → Li3P(18) During charge: Li3P → Li2P → LiP → LixP → Black P(19)
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical behaviors and reaction mechanism of black P: (a) voltage profiles of red P, black P, and black P/C composite, (b) differential capacity plot, ex situ XRD patterns (numbers correspond to the voltage point indicated in DCP), and HRTEM image of LiP phase formed at 0.78 V during the first discharge (C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, “Black Phosphorus and Its Composite for Lithium Rechargeable Batteries” Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).207 


3.1.2 P-based intermetallics and their composites. 
Among the P-based compounds evaluated for anodes in Li-ion batteries, most studies have been focused on the binary metal phosphides. Metal phosphides, MPy (M = Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Sn and y = 1, 2, 3, 4), can be largely divided into the following two categories when reacted with Li. Insertion reaction: MPy + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixMPy(20) Conversion reaction: MPy + 3Li+ + 3e− ↔ yLi3P + M(21)The formation of LixMPy by the insertion reaction showed good electrochemical behaviors and provided stable crystalline structures, which is advantageous for high performance anode materials. However, the phosphides based on the insertion reaction collapsed within a few cycles or were transformed by another conversion reaction by the full discharge/charge reactions. On the other hand, the conversion reaction provided nanocrystallites of Li3P and M. The nanocrystallites produced by the conversion reaction have an advantageous feature from the aspect of less severe structural stress.
Souza et al. demonstrated a topotactic crystalline transformation in the solid state, which demonstrated intercalation of lithium into MnP4 at a low potential.208 They suggested that a topotactic first-order transition between different but related crystal structures at room temperature took place by the following electrochemical redox process. MnP4 + 7Li+ + 7e− ↔ Li7MnP4(22)The P–P bonds in the MnP4 structure were cleaved during Li insertion to produce crystalline Li7MnP4 and could be reformed after Li extraction to MnP4 (Fig. 12), thereby acting as an electron storage reservoir. In the field of Li-ion batteries, this topotactic intercalation is an interesting concept involving facile covalent bond breaking within the crystalline solid state that can be reversed by the electrochemical reaction.
 Fig. 12  The relation of the layered structure of MnP4 to the antifluorite structure of Li7MnP4 and the proposed mechanism for the transformation. (© Science, reprinted with permission).208 
Since this discovery, Li insertion/extraction in P-based intermetallic compounds has been investigated as a possibility in Li-ion batteries. Although materials using topotactic concepts showed excellent electrochemical behaviors, the host structure was destroyed by successive cycling or it must be used within a controlled voltage window. Recently, another topotactic Li insertion/extraction was demonstrated in a hexagonal VP electrode cycled within 0–2 V (vs. Li/Li+) without control of the voltage windows.209 The VP was prepared using a HEMM technique and it showed a high volumetric capacity (the 1st discharge and charge capacities were about 1990 and 1452 mAh cm−3, respectively) and excellent cycling behavior (capacity retention of the discharge capacity for the first cycle was approximately 80% over 250 cycles). On the basis of ex situ XRD and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), the topotactic Li insertion/extraction reaction in VP was suggested as the following. VP + Li+ + e− ↔ LiVP(23)Besides VP, VP4 and VP2 were also investigated as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.210,211 The VP4 electrode was electrochemically characterized during cycling.210 A four-step reduction process was proposed: a topotactic insertion in VP4, a phase transformation into the cubic Li6VP4 phase (isostructural of Li7VP4 phase), Li3P and VP formation by decomposition, and another lithium insertion into VP at a low potential. Gillot et al. investigated the Li electrochemical reactivity of amorphous and crystalline VP2 synthesized by ball-milling, and ball-milling and heat treatment at 600 °C, respectively.211 On the basis of XRD, HRTEM, and NMR, the results with the VP2 electrode showed that the Li reactivity mechanism differed from the classical conversion reaction since neither V nanoparticles nor the formation of Li3P were detected. They suggested the possibility of a change in the nature of the redox center upon lithiation from a cation (M) to an anion (P).
Gillot et al. and Boyanov et al. also reported the electrochemical behaviors of cubic and monoclinic NiP2 polymorphs (Fig. 13).212,213 Cubic and monoclinic NiP2 were synthesized by ball-milling and heat treatment, respectively. Monoclinic and cubic NiP2 electrodes demonstrated insertions of 5.9 and 5.0 Li+ per formula unit, respectively. During discharge, only 5.0 Li+ per formula unit could be removed from the monoclinic NiP2 electrode and 4.2 Li+ from the cubic NiP2 electrode, leading to reversible capacities of 1000 mAh g−1 and 840 mAh g−1, respectively. An interesting point with their electrodes is that two NiP2 polymorphs have different electrochemical reaction mechanisms with Li. The Li reaction in the cubic NiP2 electrode was explained by the following conversion reaction into Ni and Li3P (Fig. 13(a)).212
 Fig. 13  Electrochemical behaviors of NiP2 polymorphs: (a) voltage profile and cycle behavior (inset graph) of monoclinic NiP2 and (b) voltage profile and cycle behavior (inset graph) of cubic NiP2 (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).212 
During the first discharge: NiP2 (cubic) + 6Li → 2Li3P + Ni(24)However, they suggested another route for the Li reaction in the monoclinic NiP2 electrode by the following reactions (Fig. 13(b)).213
During the first discharge: NiP2 (monoclinic) + 2Li → Li2NiP2 + 4Li → Ni + 2Li3P(25)The two NiP2 polymorphs, cubic and monoclinic, showed different reaction mechanisms during discharge, which demonstrated that the crystallography of the host materials was a significant factor in determining the Li reaction.
Many research groups studied ZnxP2 (X = 1, 3) as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.214–217 Bichat et al. prepared Zn3P2 powders by various solid-state synthetic routes.214 The Li insertion mechanism into the Zn3P2 electrode involved two distinct but parallel reversible pathways. The first pathway implies exclusively phosphide phases (Zn3P2, LiZnP, Li4ZnP2, and Li3P) while the second pathway involved only Li–Zn alloys (Zn, LiZn4, and LiZn). Also, monoclinic ZnP2 and tetragonal ZnP2 electrodes were investigated as anodes for Li-ion batteries. Hwang et al. investigated the electrochemical Li reaction of the monoclinic ZnP2 electrode216 which showed the successive formation of Li2.67ZnP2 → LiP, LiP5, Zn → LiZnP phases during the discharge process. The Li reaction with the tetragonal ZnP2 was investigated using a ZnP2/C nanocomposite electrode.217 The first discharge and charge capacities of the ZnP2/C electrode were 1340 mAh g−1 and 1107 mAh g−1, respectively, and the initial coulombic efficiency was about 83%. The Li reaction mechanism of the tetragonal ZnP2 was suggested as follows.
During the first discharge: ZnP2 → LiZnP + LiP → Li3P + LiZn(26)During the first charge: Li3P + LiZn → LiZnP + LiP → LiZnP (+P) → ZnP2(27)Additionally, the ZnP2/C nanocomposite electrode showed good cyclability with a capacity of about 350 mAh g−1 over 100 cycles along with a high rate capability by controlling the voltage window.
Kim et al. synthesized a layer-structured Sn4P3 by HEMM and tested it as an anode material for Li-ion batteries.218 The Sn4P3 electrode showed high first discharge and charge capacities of 1130 mAh g−1 and 900 mAh g−1, respectively. They suggested the following discharge reaction: Sn4P3 → Li2Sn4P3 → Sn + (LiP5 + LiP7) → Sn + LiP → Li4Sn + Li3P. Also, the Sn4P3 electrode showed good cyclability and retained a fairly large capacity of 370 mAh g−1 up to 50 cycles within a limited voltage window. A Sn-enriched solid solution consisting of a Sn4+δP3 phase219 was also synthesized and demonstrated better electrochemical performances than the Sn4P3 electrode. On the other hand, Leon et al. studied the reaction mechanism of a Sn4P3 electrode using 7Li and 31P MAS-NMR and 119Sn Mössbauer spectroscopy techniques and suggested the following reactions.220
During discharge: Sn4P3 + 9Li → 4Sn + 3Li3P(28)(Sn4P3 + 3Li → 4Sn + 3LiP, 3LiP + 6Li → 3Li3P) 4Sn + 17Li → Li17Sn4(29)Recently, a thin film Sn4P3 electrode was fabricated by reactive pulsed laser deposition and its electrochemistry with Li was investigated.221
As metal phosphide/phosphorus composites, TiP2/P composites with various Ti/P molar ratios (1:1, 1:2, and 1:4) were synthesized by HEMM and tested as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.222 Although the TiP2/P composites with Ti/P molar ratios of 1:1 and 1:2 did not show any electrochemical reactivity with Li, both the TiP2 and P in the composite with a Ti/P molar ratio of 1:4 reacted with Li, resulting in a reversible capacity of 1422 mAh g−1. Ex situ XRD and XAS analyses showed that the TiP2/P composite transformed into a cubic Li10.5TiP4 phase without decomposing into Ti and Li3P during the initial Li insertion. TiP2/P (Ti:P = 1:4 mol) composite ↔ Li10.5TiP4 (cubic)(30)Subsequent cycling showed a reversible insertion/extraction process of Li to and from the Li10.5TiP4 phase, accompanied by the loss/recovery of the long-range cubic order. The cubic Li10.5TiP4 phase showed good cycling performance with a large capacity of 625 mAh g−1 over 80 cycles when the amount of reacted Li was suitably controlled. This work represents a unique study of metal phosphide/phosphorus composite materials.
As a good example of the conversion reaction, a CoP3 electrode was studied by Pralong et al.223 The CoP3 electrode showed a reversible capacity of 400 mAh g−1 at an average potential of 0.9 V (vs. Li/Li+) via the conversion reaction (Fig. 14). The initial uptake of Li formed highly dispersed cobalt clusters embedded in a Li3P matrix. The extraction of Li from an ion-conductive Li3P matrix on charging yielded nano-particles of LiP and Co as in the following equations.223 During discharge: CoP3 + 9Li+ + 9e− → 3Li3P + Co(31) During charge: Co + 3Li3P → Co + 3LiP + 6Li+ + 6e−(32)However, Alcántara et al. suggested a different reaction mechanism of the CoP3 electrode.224 Although the first discharge reaction was the same as the reaction shown above, they proposed that the reversible reaction between Li3P and P was possible during the charging step.
 Fig. 14  Potential/composition curve during the first galvanostatic cycling of a CoP3 electrode performed at a 10 C rate in the 1.7–0.2 V potential window (Inset: Projection of the CoP6 octahedra along the [001] direction in the structure of CoP3) (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).223 
InP and GaP electrodes with a zinc blende structure are other examples of conversion reactions.225 Their reaction mechanisms were suggested by ex situ XRD, which showed the formation of Li–In/Li–Ga alloys and amorphous Li3P during discharge. On charging, Li was extracted from both a LixM (M = In and Ga) alloy and Li3P. InP showed a reversible capacity of about 475 mAh g−1 in the voltage range between 0.2 and 1.5 V (vs. Li/Li+), whereas GaP exhibited a poor capacity retention compared to InP.
Compared to binary metal phosphides, stable ternary phase systems such as Li2CuP226 and LixMP4 (M = Ti, V, and Mn)227–231 were suggested as anodes for Li-ion batteries. They showed a reversible ordered/disordered phase transformation accompanied by structural rearrangements during repeated Li insertion/extraction. These materials exhibited an improved capacity retention due to the structural stability of the MPx host matrix.
Besides the above mentioned studies, many phosphorus-based researches have been reported using the concept of insertion and conversion reactions. In summary, materials showing the insertion reaction include MnP4,208 VPx (X = 1,2,4),209–211 FePx (X = 1,2),232,233 NiP2 (monoclinic),212,213 and ZnxP2 (X = 1,3),214–217 and materials exhibiting conversion reactions include CoP3,224,225 NiP2 (cubic),213 InP,225 GaP,225 CuP2,234 and Cu3P.235 These metal phosphides have interesting crystalline structures for Li accommodation and diffusion resulting in various Li reaction mechanisms and good electrochemical performances.
As mentioned above, to satisfy the need for high-performance anode materials, considerable work has been devoted to the P-based anodes. Although P-based anodes show the low electrical conductivity and relatively high reaction potential of ca. 1.0 V (vs. Li/Li+), they have interesting crystalline structures and high capacities resulted from a high theoretical capacity of pure P (2596 mAh g−1). And the low electrical conductivity can be also overcome using carbon composite materials. These advantages of P-based anodes enable to facilitate new concept anodes having good electrochemical properties.

3.2 Antimony (Sb)

3.2.1 Sb and its composites. 
Antimony (Sb) forms alloy phases with Li such as Li2Sb and Li3Sb. The gravimetric and volumetric capacities of Sb are 660 mAh g−1 (Li3Sb) and about 1890 mAh cm−3, respectively, indicating potential as an anode material for Li-ion batteries. Recently, some different architectures have been reported for Sb/C composite materials.
Dailly et al. prepared nano-Sb/graphite composites by various reduction methods and the results showed relatively stable cycle behaviors with a charge capacity of about 500 mAh g−1.236 In addition, a Sb/C nanocomposite prepared by HEMM was reported.237 The Sb/C nanocomposite showed better electrochemical charge/discharge behavior than Sb, and the reaction mechanism with Li was suggested as the following. During discharge: Sb → Li2Sb → Li3Sb(33) During charge: Li3Sb → Sb(34)Similar electrochemical reaction results were reported by Wang et al. and Hewitt et al. using a pure Sb electrode at various temperatures.238,239 Additionally, an Sb/C/graphite composite prepared by further HEMM with Sb/C nanocomposite and graphite was suggested.237 The Sb/C/graphite electrode showed a first discharge capacity of 528 mAh g−1 with a good capacity retention of 86% over 100 cycles. However, a disadvantage of this material was its poor initial coulombic efficiency (67%) caused by the graphite structure which was partially broken during HEMM. Besides these materials, other Sb/C composite materials including Sb/CNT, Sb/PAN (polyacrylonitrile), and morphology controlled Sb/C were also tested as anode materials for Li-ion batteries.175,240,241


3.2.2 Sb-based intermetallics and their composites. 
Like the MPy systems, the Li reaction of metal antimonides, MSby (M = Ti, V, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn with y = 1, 2, 3), can also be largely classified into the following two reaction categories when reacted with Li. Insertion reaction: MSby + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixMSby(35) Conversion reaction: MSby + 3Li+ + 3e− ↔ yLi3Sb + M(36)As an example of the insertion reaction, an intermetallic InSb compound with a zinc blende-type (diamond) structure as a host structure for Li was reported.239,242 Based on the XRD results, the reaction of InSb with Li was suggested as the following.242 xLi + Li2InSb ↔ Li2+xIn1−xSb + xIn (xmax = 1)(37)Although Vaughey et al. mentioned that the above results of InSb could open up possibilities for identifying other zinc blende insertion electrodes, Hewitt et al. suggested another reaction mechanism of InSb electrodes using an in situ XRD method.238,239 They insisted that only 0.27 Li atoms per InSb may be intercalated during a sharp drop in the cell potential followed by decomposition of the ternary phase as follows. xLi + InSb → LixInSb (xmax = 0.27)(38) (3−x)Li + LixInSb → Li3Sb + In(39) In + Li → InLi + 0.75 Li → InLi1.75(40)The reactions during the first charge were the reverse of the reactions shown above. Li intercalation was possible with only about 5% of the overall capacity and it appears that the reactivity of the elements, as opposed to the structure, was the most significant factor in determining the degree to which InSb can act as an intercalation host.
Copper antimonide (Cu2Sb) was also investigated as an alternative anode material for Li-ion batteries.243,244 The Cu2Sb was prepared by HEMM and its reaction mechanism with Li was summarized as the following process. xLi + Cu2Sb ↔ LixCu2−ySb + yCu(41)The Cu2Sb electrode showed stable cyclability with a rechargeable capacity of 290 mAh g−1. This good electrochemical performance was explained by two main factors. Firstly, a strong structural relationship exists among Cu2Sb, Li2CuSb, and Li3Sb. Secondly, the finely divided copper extruded from Cu2Sb provided good electrical conductivity during discharging and charging, thereby providing an electrode with a low cell impedance and fast reaction kinetics.
The electrochemical reactions of Li with ZnxSby intermetallic compounds such as Zn4Sb3 and ZnSb have been reported.245,246 Recently, quasi-intercalation behavior in ZnSb was suggested.246 The quasi-intercalation was defined as a process in which a layered structure transformed into another layered structure of host atoms and periodic Li arrays through electrochemical recrystallization upon lithiation. Orthorhombic ZnSb has a puckered layer structure, in which Zn and Sb atoms are connected by screw-type layered chains along the b-axis (Fig. 15(a)). The quasi-intercalation of Li between ZnSb and LiZnSb is illustrated schematically in Fig. 15(a). Li was inserted into the puckered hexagonal channels during lithiation, which transformed to regular hexagonal channels and induced rearrangement to the layered Zn–Sb planes and periodic Li arrays through the cleavage and recombination of puckered Zn–Sb chains. When utilizing the quasi-intercalation of Li into the ZnSb phase to form the LiZnSb phase, the test electrode showed excellent electrochemical behavior such as a fast rate capability and stable cycle behavior over 1000 cycles (Fig. 15(e,f,g)). The reaction mechanism of the ZnSb electrode during the first and second cycles was suggested as follows.246
During the first cycle: 1st discharge: ZnSb → LiZnSb → Li3Sb + Zn → Li3Sb + LiZn(42) 1st charge: Li3Sb + LiZn → Li3Sb + Zn → Li2ZnSb → Li2−xZnSb (0 ≤ x ≤ 2)(43)During the second cycle: 2nd discharge: Li2−xZnSb → Li2ZnSb → Li3Sb + Zn → Li3Sb + LiZn(44) 2nd charge: Li3Sb + LiZn → Li3Sb + Zn → Li2ZnSb → Li2−xZnSb (0 ≤ x ≤ 2)(45) Fig. 15  Quasi-intercalation of layered materials: (a) Quasi-intercalation of layered ZnSb, (b) P, and (c) As electrodes. (d) Ex situ XRD and (e)–(g) electrochemical performances of the layered ZnSb electrode between 0.8 and 2.0 V (vs. Li/Li+) (C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, “Quasi-Intercalation and Facile Amorphization in Layered ZnSb for Li-ion Batteries” Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 47. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).246 Using the quasi-intercalation concept for black P, an excellent capacity retention of almost 100% after 100 cycles along with a high capacity of about 600 mAh g−1 were obtained by controlling the voltage range between black P and LiP due to the similarity of the black P and LiP crystalline structures (Fig. 15(b)).207,246
The electrochemical reaction of MnSb (NiAs-type structure) with Li was investigated by in situ XRD.247,248 Lithiation of MnSb proceeded via formation of an intermediate LiMnSb phase before transforming to Li3Sb with Mn extrusion. On delithiation, the XRD data showed solid-solution behavior between Li3Sb and LiMnSb, which was caused by the strong structural relationship between these two compounds (Fig. 16). MnSb electrodes showed a reversible capacity of 330 mAh g−1 when cycled between 1.5 and 0 V, where the reaction of Li with MnSb can be summarized as follows.247
During discharge: MnSb + Li → LiMnSb(46) LiMnSb + 2xLi → Li1+2xMn1−xSb + xMn (0 < x < 1)(47)The electrochemical reactivity of CoSb3 with Li was studied.249–252 The reaction mechanism of the CoSb3 electrode was suggested as the following conversion reaction leading to the formation of a composite made of Co and Li3Sb nanocrystallites during discharge.249
During discharge: 3CoSb3 + 9Li+ + 9e− → 3Li3Sb + 3Co(48)During charge: 3Li3Sb + 3Co → 3Sb + 3Co + 9Li+ + 9e−(49) Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the proposed structural sequence for the electrochemical reaction of Li with MnSb: (a) MnSb (NiAs), (b) MnSb (intermediate zinc blende-type structure), (c) LiMnSb (distorted antifluorite type structure), and (d) Li3Sb (© The Electrochemical Society, reprinted with permission).247 However, Tarascon et al. insisted that the reconstruction of CoSb3 during charge was possible on the basis of in situ XRD, microscopy, and magnetic measurements.250 This reconstruction involves successive formation of the Li3Sb → Li2Sb → Sb phases followed by a chemical reaction between Co and Sb nanograins. As an example, in a CoSb3 electrode, the bulk electrode materials can be transformed to form nanocrystallites by the conversion reaction during the discharge and charge reactions.
Among various Sb-based intermetallic compounds, SnSb has gained much attention,135–137,148–150 since SnSb electrodes have several advantageous features including: (1) both Sn and Sb metals react with Li providing a high capacity, (2) volume expansion can be controlled by distributing a ductile Sn phase during cycling, (3) the reaction voltages of Sn and Sb are different, which provides electrical connection of the remained Sn or Sb by formation of Li–Sn or Li–Sb phases during discharging and charging, and (4) the reconstruction reaction of SnSb during charge is possible. The following electrochemical reaction mechanism of SnSb was suggested.253,254
During the first discharge: 1st step: SnSb + 3Li → Li3Sb + Sn(50) 2nd step: Li3Sb + Sn + 4.25Li → Li3Sb + Li17Sn4(51)During the first charge, the reverse sequence of the above reactions occurred. To obtain enhanced electrochemical performance of SnSb, many groups reported various nanostructured composites using different carbon sources and various synthetic tools.254–256 Among the various nanostructured SnSb/C composite materials, a mechano- and electrochemically controlled SnSb/C nanocomposite was recently reported254 which involved transforming micron-sized Sn and Sb powders into 10 nm (by mechanochemical control) and 2–3 nm (by electrochemical control) SnSb nanocrystallites that were uniformly distributed within a carbon matrix. This SnSb/C nanocomposite showed a highly reversible reaction with Li, a high charge capacity of 706 mAh g−1, a good initial coulombic efficiency of 81%, and a high capacity of above 550 mAh g−1 over 300 cycles.
Amorphous (or nanocrystalline) composite materials have been considered as alternative high performance electrode materials for rechargeable Li batteries. However, amorphous composite materials still have problems such as complex synthetic procedures, long synthesis times, unnecessary impurities, difficulty of synthesis, and high cost. Recently, interesting methods such as alloying-dealloying and facile amorphization have been suggested as new alternative solutions for high performance Li-ion batteries.246,257–259 An Sb/Al4C3/C nanocomposite was reported by the following alloying and dealloying reactions using HEMM.257
Alloying reaction: Al + Sb → AlSb (ΔG0 = −47.721 kJ mol−1, 298 K)(52)Dealloying reaction: 4AlSb + 3C → 4Sb + Al4C3 (ΔG0 = −3.682 kJ mol−1, 298 K)(53)The Sb/Al4C3/C nanocomposite was composed of nanocrystalline Sb and amorphous Al4C3 phases, which were distributed uniformly in an amorphous carbon matrix.257 This nanocomposite electrode showed a highly reversible reaction with Li, a high capacity of 687 mAh g−1, a good initial coulombic efficiency of 85%, and a high capacity retention above 520 mAh g−1 over 200 cycles. As another nanocomposite from the alloying-dealloying reaction shown above, a Sb/TiC/C nanocomposite was reported by similar alloying between Sb and Ti (heat treatment) and dealloying reactions with carbon (HEMM).258 When tested as an anode for Li-ion batteries, the Sb/TiC/C nanocomposite exhibited good electrochemical performance including a high initial coulombic efficiency of 87% and a long cycle retention of 83% after 100 cycles. This transformation method for the conversion of micrometre-sized metal powders to their nanocomposites utilizing alloying and dealloying reactions257,258 will support their use in many other applications that require uniformly distributed nanocomposite materials.
Amorphous (nanocrystalline)-based composites using the facile amorphization concept were also reported.246,259 This concept uses the mechanical properties of layered materials and the HEMM mechanism. Layered materials are facilely transformed to amorphous composites by HEMM. It is difficult for the layer-structured materials to have slip systems (composed of slip directions and planes) along the designated axis. The HEMM technique plastically deforms the particles, which leads to work hardening and fracture upon impact forces at high temperatures above 200 °C and high pressures on the order of 6 GPa.260 Considering both the HEMM mechanism and the mechanical properties of layered ZnSb, an amorphous (nanocrystalline) ZnSb/C composite was reported.246 The amorphous ZnSb/C composite electrode showed a high energy density, a good initial coulombic efficiency, long cyclability over 200 cycles, and fast rate capability. Recently, as another example of the facile amorphization behavior, an amorphous Sb2S3/C composite was reported.259 The amorphous Sb2S3/C electrode showed a high charge capacity of 757 mAh g−1, a good coulombic efficiency of 85% for the first cycle, and a high capacity larger than 600 mAh g−1 over 100 cycles. Also, the electrochemical reaction mechanism of Sb2S3 in the amorphous Sb2S3/C composite can be expressed as follows.259
During discharge: Sb2S3 → LixS + Sb → Li2S + Sb → Li2S + Li3Sb(54)During charge: Li2S + Li3Sb → Li2S + Sb → Sb2S3(55)It was suggested that the above Sb2S3/C electrode can be applicable as dual electrodes, e.g. the anode in Li-ion batteries or the cathode in Li/S batteries, by controlling the voltage windows on the basis of above reaction mechanism.
Besides the above mentioned studies, many Sb-based intermetallics and their nanocomposites have been reported. Like metal-phospides, many researches of antimony-based intermetallic compounds have been reported using the concept of insertion and conversion reactions. Materials demonstrating insertion reactions are InSb,239,242 AlSb,261 Cu2Sb,243,244 ZnSb,246 Zn4Sb3,245 Ag3Sb,262 MnSb,247,248 Mg3Sb2,263 and FeSb2.264 Materials demonstrating conversion reactions include CoSb3,249–252 TiSb2,258,265 VSb2,265 CrSb2,266 NiSb2,267 and SnSb.135–137,148–150 As mentioned previously, the formation of LixMSby by the insertion reaction showed good electrochemical behaviors. However, most metal antimonides collapsed during insertion of Li resulting in the transformation to another conversion reaction. On the other hand, the conversion reaction provides nanocrystallites of Li3Sb and M during cycling, which have the advantageous feature of reduced structural stress.
As reviewed above, many researches on Sb-based nanocomposites and Sb-based intermetallics have been reported to obtain good electrochemical performances. Although the Sb electrodes show a relatively low theoretical capacity (660 mAh g−1) and large volume change during cycling, it has a high volumetric capacity (1890 mAh cm−3) and interesting crystalline structures by syntheses of metal-antimonide intermetallics like P-based anodes. Considering the various insertion and conversion reactions resulted from the interesting crystalline structures of Sb-based anodes, the nanostructured Sb-based or metal–Sb intermetallics-based composites would be promising anode materials for Li-ion batteries.

3.3 Bismuth (Bi) and arsenic (As)
Bi and As can accommodate lithium up to Li3M (M: Bi and As). However, they have not gained much attention due to the relatively small gravimetric capacity of Bi and the possible toxicity of As. On the other hand, they have some advantageous features and have been considered as anode materials.

3.3.1 Bi and its composites. 
Li can react with Bi, which has a gravimetric capacity of 386 mAh g−1 and a high volumetric capacity of about 1760 mAh cm−3 (Li3Bi). There have been several studies focusing on the electrochemical behaviors of a thin layer Bi, nano-sized Bi, and Bi/C composite electrodes.268–270 Among the Bi-based anodes, the Bi/C nanocomposite electrode showed enhanced electrochemical charge/discharge behavior compared to a Bi electrode.268 On the basis of the enhanced reversibility of Bi in the Bi/C nanocomposite electrode, the electrochemical reaction mechanism of Bi was suggested as follows.268 During discharge: Bi → LiBi → Li3Bi(56) During charge: Li3Bi → LiBi → Bi(57)Additionally, as an attempt to enhance the electrochemical properties of Bi, a Bi/Al2O3/C nanocomposite produced by the mechanochemical reduction of Bi2O and Al was also tested. The Bi/Al2O3/C nanocomposite electrode showed even better cyclability than Bi and Bi/C nanocomposite electrodes. The enhanced electrochemical behaviors are based on the concept of an active-inactive matrix within the carbon matrix and the mechanical strengthening of the active material during cycling. Although the gravimetric capacity of Bi is small, the high volumetric capacity of Bi provides the possibility to use Bi as a new anode material for Li-ion batteries since the volumetric capacity is as important as the gravimetric capacity for the practical application of battery systems in electronic mobile devices.


3.3.2 As and its composites. 
Among the Group V elements, As and its alloys are very useful materials in many electronic device applications, although As is well known for its toxicity. As has a similar structure to black P and has a puckered layered crystalline structure somewhat resembling that of graphite. Like other Group V elements, As also can react with Li, which has a gravimetric capacity of 1073 mAh g−1 (Li3As) and a high volumetric capacity of about 2200 mAh cm−3. Although some studies of As-based anodes for Li-ion batteries have been reported, the Li–As reaction mechanism has not been shown.227,229 Recently, the reaction of As with Li was reported using an As/C nanocomposite.205 A pure As electrode showed very poor electrochemical reversibility with Li, probably due to its semiconducting nature. The As/C nanocomposite electrode showed enhanced electrochemical charge/discharge behavior and the electrochemical reaction mechanism of As and Li was suggested as follows.205 During discharge: As → LiAs → Li2As → Li3As(58) During charge: Li3As → Li2As → LiAs → As(59)Also, quasi-intercalation of Li between the As and LiAs phases was suggested.205,246 The rhombohedral As structure has puckered layer planes and similarity to the monoclinic LiAs structure. During discharge, Li was inserted into the puckered layer gaps and induced cleavage of the As–As bonds due to the expansion between the layered gaps (Fig. 15(c)). Using the quasi-intercalation reaction between As and LiAs, the As/C nanocomposite electrode showed good cyclability with a relatively large capacity of about 330 mAh g−1 over 300 cycles in the voltage range between 2.0 V and 0.85 V (corresponding to the As and LiAs phases, respectively). Although As is toxic, As can also form many binary intermetallic phases with other metals like P, which means that it is possible to use As as an anode material in Li-ion batteries.

4. Other elements
Besides Group IV and V elements, some elements such as Mg, Al, Ga, In, Ag, Au, Zn, Cd, etc., can alloy with Li.8–21 Although these elements have not gained much attention, it is possible to use them as anode materials for Li-ion batteries. Among the above mentioned elements, the reaction mechanism of Ag and Mg anodes with Li is briefly reviewed in this section.
4.1 Silver (Ag)
Ag can alloy with Li at a low operating voltage and it has a broad Li-in-Ag solid solution phase and various intermetallic phases. Ag shows the highest electrical and thermal conductivities of all the elements. Because of these merits, Ag has been investigated for use in Li-ion batteries as a conducting agent, a thin film, a nanostructure, and as a component in Ag–M (M = Si, Sn, Sb, etc…) compounds.55,151,152,155,262,271–273
Recently, the electrochemical behavior of Ag with Li was investigated with various particle sizes and under different current densities.273 When tested at a current density of 10 mA g−1, the electrochemical behavior of a nano-Ag electrode showed a highly reversible reaction with Li resulting in first discharge and charge capacities of 1158 and 727 mAh g−1, respectively. The electrochemical reaction mechanism of Ag alloying and dealloying with Li was suggested as follows.273
During discharge: Ag → (Ag) → β (LiAg) → γ3 (Li9Ag4) → γ3 (shifted Li9Ag4 phase) + γ2(60)During charge: γ2 + γ3 (shifted Li9Ag4 phase) → γ3 (Li9Ag4) → β (LiAg) → (Ag) → Ag(61)In these reactions, (Ag) and the greek letters indicate solid solution phases with different amounts of Ag. On account of its high thermal and electrical conductivity, Ag has many possible applications in Li-ion batteries.
4.2 Magnesium (Mg)
Mg is one of the many candidate elements in Li–M alloy anode materials. Mg has broad Li-in-Mg(α) and Mg-in-Li(β) solid solution phases and it also displays a very low operating voltage. However, Mg is covered with an oxide layer, which contributes to the its poor Li kinetic behaviors. Therefore, few Li–Mg systems for Li-ion battery application have been studied including Li–Mg alloys at high temperature,274 Li–Mg solid solution alloy cerment,275 Mg-based intermetallics,46–49,143,263 Mg hydride,276 and Mg/C composite.277 Among these materials, the Mg/C composite electrode showed a possible reaction with Li at room temperature.277 The Mg/C composite prepared by HEMM showed better rate capability and cyclability than a pure Mg electrode. The phase changes during the electrochemical Li–Mg alloying/dealloying reaction were suggested as follows.277 Mg → α (Mg-rich phase) → β (Li-rich phase)(62)Despite this interesting Li–Mg solid solution reaction, detailed electrochemical behavior within the α or β region has not been reported.
5. Transition metal oxides
Various transition metal oxides have been extensively studied as potential anode materials for Li-ion batteries mainly due to stability and safety concerns despite the fact that their charge potentials and capacities are relatively high and small, respectively, compared to a graphite anode. The transition metal oxides can be classified into two groups based on the reaction mechanism during the first discharge: (i) insertion reaction of Li into the lattice of the electrode material without basic structural changes of the host material and (ii) conversion reaction with a complete decomposition of Li2O and inactive transition metal. These two reaction mechanisms can be expressed as follows. Insertion reaction: MOx + yLi+ + ye− ↔ LiyMOx(63) Conversion reaction: MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O(64)In these reactions, M represents a transition metal.
In this section, transition metal oxide anode materials will be briefly discussed based on the type of the reaction mechanism with Li.
5.1 Transition metal oxides with insertion reaction
Several transition metal oxides including WO2, MoO2, and LixFe2O3 can store Li by the insertion reaction. These materials were suggested as anode materials for Li-ion batteries about thirty years ago.278 However, carbonaceous materials have been used as the anode materials for commercial Li-ion batteries since these oxides have a low specific capacity and poor cyclability for Li insertion and extraction.279–281 Recently, transition metal oxides as anode materials have gained a renewed interest due to the increased demand for new anode materials to fulfil requirements for large scale batteries.

5.1.1 Li4Ti5O12 and TiO2. 
Ti-based oxide anode materials have attracted much attention due to their advantages which include excellent stability, low cost, and being environmentally benign.282 In particular, spinel Li4Ti5O12 has been widely studied as a promising anode to meet the requirements of Li-ion batteries for emerging applications such as electric vehicles and large scale electrical energy storage systems for renewable energy sources.283–290 Li4Ti5O12 is known to accommodate Li with a theoretical capacity of 175 mAh g−1 according to the following reaction. [Li]8a[Li1/3, Ti5/3]16d[O4]32e + e− + Li+ ↔ [Li2]16c[Li1/3, Ti5/3]16d[O4]32e(65)In this reaction, the subscripts correspond to the number of equivalent sites with the Wyckoff symbols for the space group Fd-3m.
Despite a high working potential and a relatively low specific capacity (Fig. 17),283 Li4Ti5O12 has some advantages as an anode including: (1) excellent cycle performance arising from its crystal structure where Li ions can be inserted and extracted without generating strain, (2) improved safety without Li plating on the electrode under extreme conditions such as low temperature below 0 °C, and (3) high rate capability without electrolyte decomposition during cycling.
 Fig. 17  Typical voltage profile and cycle performance (inset) of a Li4Ti5O12 electrode at 21 °C and a 1/30 C discharge rate (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).283 
Recently, Li4Ti5O12 nanowires demonstrated a first discharge capacity of 165 mAh g−1 at a 0.1 C rate and 93% capacity retention at a 10 C rate.290 Due to these advantages, Li4Ti5O12 has been employed as an anode for super charge ion batteries (SCiB) by Toshiba.291 However, the low density (mass per volume) of Li4Ti5O12 combined with the nanostructuring caused a decrease of the volumetric energy density.
TiO2 is also of great interest as an anode material due to its relatively larger theoretical capacity (335 mAh g−1 for LiTiO2) as compared to Li4Ti5O12 (175 mAh g−1). Various TiO2 polymorphs have been investigated and anatase TiO2 and TiO2–B have been reported to store and extract Li ions through the insertion reaction. Although rutile and brookite TiO2 have been known to be inactive to Li, recent reports have demonstrated reversible Li insertion and extraction in their nanostructural states.292–295 For example, rutile TiO2, the most thermodynamically stable polymorph, has been known to store negligible amounts of Li which may be attributed to kinetic restrictions caused by the highly anisotropic diffusion of Li ions in rutile TiO2. However, it was found that the amount of Li inserted in rutile TiO2 dramatically increased with a decrease of the particle size. As the particle size was reduced from about a micrometre to 10 nm, the amount of Li inserted per TiO2 increased from 0.1 to 0.8. This result may be attributed to the improved Li transport kinetics and Li surface storage of the nanometre-sized particles.292 On the other hand, the large surface area of nanosized TiO2 led to an increase of the irreversible capacity at the first cycle.292
Recently, TiO2–B has drawn much attention since nanostructured TiO2–B demonstrated promising performance.296,297 TiO2–B nanowires were found to have a specific capacity of 305 mAh g−1 (Li0.91TiO2) with a superior capacity retention as well as a good rate capability.296,297 TiO2–B has a relatively more open structure compared to other TiO2 polymorphs, which enables facile transport of Li ions in TiO2–B, which thus results in remarkable anode performances. However, further improvements of the TiO2–B anode material are needed to increase the volumetric energy density because the density of TiO2–B (3.73 g cm−3) is relatively low compared to other polymorphs.298


5.1.2 MoOx, WO2, and Fe2O3. 
MoO2 with a distorted rutile structure can accommodate Li through the insertion reaction forming LixMoO2 (0 < x < 1) with a theoretical capacity of about 209 mAh g−1 (LiMoO2). A MoO2 electrode showed two potential plateaus at about 1.5 V and 1.3 V (vs. Li/Li+) during lithiation which indicates that three different single phases existed in LixMoO2. Although MoO2 showed a capacity and working potential comparable to Li4Ti5O12, the phase transition of LixMoO2 from an monoclinic phase (0 < x < 0.5) to an orthorhombic phase (0.45 < x < 0.79) was believed to cause the poor cycle performance.279,299 By contrast, MoO3 is well known as a lithium intercalation compound and has been investigated as a cathode material for rechargeable Li batteries.300–302 However, it was found that MoO3 can accommodate lithium through the conversion reaction and has a theoretical capacity of 1,117 mAh g−1 as an anode material in the potential range down to 0 V. Na-doped MoO3 was found to have a high specific capacity of 940 mAh g−1, but this material demonstrated poor capacity retention.281 MoO3 nanoparticles prepared by hot wire CVD showed a reversible capacity of 630 mAh g−1 as well as durable high rate capability and no capacity degradation over 150 cycles between 3.5 V to 0.005 V at a 0.5 C rate. For comparison, the capacity quickly faded when using micrometre-sized particles.303 Recently, partially reduced MoO3−y prepared by ball milling showed a significantly improved cyclability compared to bulk MoO3, which can be attributed to the smaller crystallite size and/or low crystalline nature.304
WO2 has the same crystal structure and lithium storage mechanism as MoO2 and demonstrated a lower working potential (below 1 V) than MoO2, which is a very attractive feature as an anode. However, apart from its poor cycle performance,280,299 WO2 underwent irreversible decomposition when the amount of Li inserted reached one mole of Li per WO2 (LiWO2).280
Fe2O3 has also been investigated as an anode material. However, its reversibility was very poor and decomposition of the propylene carbonate used as a solvent in the electrolyte occurred during lithiation.305
There are several key factors affecting the Li storage reaction path of the transition metal oxides such as their crystal structure, thermodynamics, and kinetic parameters which imply that physical and chemical modification of transition metal oxides can alter their Li storage mechanism. Indeed, MoO2 is known to be lithiated only by the insertion reaction and can uptake further lithium by either raising the reaction temperature306 or reducing the particle size,307–309 which might enhance the heterogeneous charge transfer kinetics and facilitate solid state diffusion of Li and oxygen in the transition metal oxide. Recently, ordered mesoporous MoO2 prepared by hard templating showed similar results including a kinetically hindered conversion reaction of the MoO2 electrode with Li at room temperature,306 which was believed to be related to the reduction of the size of the transition metal oxide down to the nanometre scale that could shorten the diffusion path of Li and increase the active surface area of the electrode material. There has been much work investigating the effect of nanocrystalline transition metal oxides as anode materials. Among these, rutile RuO2 demonstrated exceptional Li storage behavior depending on its size and crystallinity.310 Nanocrystalline RuO2 had a specific capacity of 1,110 mAh g−1, which corresponds to the storage of 5.5 Li per RuO2, with an initial coulombic efficiency of 98%.310

5.2 Transition metal oxides with conversion reaction
As mentioned above, reversible Li ion storage could be achieved in transition metal oxides, MOx (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, etc…). These oxides were converted to a metallic state with formation of Li2O at the first lithiation, and reversibly returned to their initial state after the subsequent delithiation.311 The number of electrons involved in the conversion reaction depends on the oxidation state of the transition metal and is more than one, which is in contrast to the generally less than 1 for Li in the insertion reaction since Li was accommodated into the vacant sites of the transition metal oxide frameworks. This strategy to utilize all the possible oxidation states of the transition metal component enables attaining high energy densities of the electrodes. These transition metal oxides showed high reversible Li storage capacities of 400–1000 mAh g−1 and good cyclic performances with an average working potential of 1.8–2.0 V (vs. Li/Li+), as shown in Fig. 18.311,312
 Fig. 18  Voltage-composition profiles for various transition metal oxide electrodes (M = Co, Ni, Fe, and Cu). Discharge and charge tests at a rate of 0.2 C between 0.02 and 3 V (© The Electrochemical Society, reprinted with permission).312 
HRTEM studies clearly showed the detailed microstructure of the resulting transition metal/Li2O nanocomposite in which 2–5 nm metal grains were embedded in an amorphous Li2O matrix. This was generally agreed to be related to the abnormal electrochemical reactivity of Li2O at room temperature.311,313 The theoretical gravimetric capacities and their final phases when fully reacted with Li through the conversion reaction are listed in Table 1. 
Table 1 Theoretical capacities and final phases of various transition metal oxide anode materials which react with Li through the conversion reaction

Transition metal oxideTheoretical capacity (mAh g−1)Final phasea Either reacted at the elevated temperature (120 °C) or when the nanostructured materials were used.FeO746Li2O, FeCoO715Li2O, CoNiO718Li2O, NiCuO674Li2O, CuCr2O3529Li2O, CrMoO2838Li2O, MoaMoO31117Li2O, Mo
However, despite their high specific capacities and good cyclabilities, these transition metal oxide materials are still not sufficient for commercial use due to their high working potentials as an anode, low coulombic efficiency at the first cycle, and the large potential hysteresis between discharge and charge, which might cause a decrease of the power efficiency of the batteries.
6. Conclusions
We have briefly reviewed alloy-based anode materials composed of Group IV and V elements and their composites including Ag and Mg metals as well as some transition metal oxides which have been intensively investigated as anode materials for Li-ion batteries. Despite their higher energy densities than carbonaceous anode materials, the use of Li-alloying materials as alternative anodes has generally been hindered by their poor capacity retention due to huge volume changes during the discharge/charge reaction. Various compositions and strategies to design a highly reliable anode material addressing large volume changes and induced mechanical stresses have been suggested. Some of the materials show promise to make a significant breakthrough towards commercialization. For example, a tin-based amorphous composite anode in Nexelion batteries made by Sony resulted from the deliberate combination of several material concepts such as active/inactive composite, intermetallic compound, and the use of carbonaceous material as a matrix phase.
Recently, emerging applications such as electric vehicles, large scale electrical storage systems, and future mobile devices have created a strong demand for high performance anode and cathode materials. However, in order to meet the requirements for these new applications, reliability and low production costs of Li alloy-based anode materials are also important factors. These requirements may be achieved through a properly designed electrode material with the use of cheaper material and production process, suitable electrode design in terms of microstructure and composition to minimize volume changes in the electrode, and maintaining the electrical conduction pathways of the electrode during cycling. Although this review discusses physical and chemical modification of electrode materials to improve electrochemical performance, further investigation of these approaches is required. Nevertheless, further improvements related to safety issues under extreme conditions and high rate capabilities are also needed.
Nanostructuring of transition metal oxides demonstrated promising electrochemical behaviors including: high capacity that could not be obtained at the micrometre scale, structural stability, high rate capability, and excellent capacity retention. However, a high irreversible capacity and working potential as well as a relatively low electrode density associated with the nanostructure still limit their commercial use as anode materials.
Since binder material which holds electrode material as well as conducting agent in the electrode have been found to substantially increase the mechanical reliability of Li alloy-based anode materials during cycling, research in this area should also be performed.
In order to solve the above mentioned problems of Li alloy-based anodes and transition metal oxides without sacrificing their inherent advantages, we believe that multidisciplinary approaches including electrochemistry, solid state chemistry, polymer chemistry, and nanochemistry should be carried out.
References
T. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, Prog. Batteries Solar Cells, 1990, 9, 209 Search PubMed .
LIB-related Study Program 08-09, 2009, Institute of Information Technology, Ltd. Japan.
A. N. Dey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1547 CAS .

          Y. Idota, US Pat., 5 478 671,  1995 .

          H. Tomyama, Jpn Pat., 07-029608,  1995 .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/News/Press/200502/05-006E/index.html
        .
J. O. Besenhard, J. Yang and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 87 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novak, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS .
M. Broussely, P. Biensan and B. Simon, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 31 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Julien, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2003, 40, 47 CrossRef .
J. L. Tirado, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2003, 40, 103 CrossRef .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, S. Beattie, M. Morcrette, K. Edstrom, J.-C. Jumas and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3759 RSC .
M. S. Wittingham, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5424 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kaskhedikar and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2664 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, D. Choi, S. Kerisit, K. M. Rosso, D. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Graff and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 588 CrossRef CAS .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Goward, N. J. Taylor, D. C. S. Souza and L. F. Nazar, J. Alloys Compd., 2001, 329, 82 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Boukamp, G. C. Lesh and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 725 CAS .
C. J. Wen and R. A. Huggins, J. Solid State Chem., 1981, 37, 271 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Weydanz, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens and R. A. Huggins, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 237 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gao, S. Sinha, L. Fleming and O. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 816 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Zhang, D. Yu, Y. J. Mo and N. Pei, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 181 CrossRef CAS .
P. Limthongkul, Y.-I. Jang, N. J. Dudney and Y.-M. Chiang, Acta Mater., 2003, 51, 1103 CrossRef CAS .
A. Netz, R. A. Huggins and W. Weppner, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 95 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac and L. Christensen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A93 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Hatchard and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A838 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A156 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ryu, J. W. Kim, Y. E. Sung and S. M. Oh, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A306 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-H. Kim, PhD Dissertation, Seoul National University,  2006 Search PubMed .
H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen, Z. Wu and Y. Liang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 547 CrossRef CAS .
W.-R. Liu, Z.-Z. Guo, W.-S. Young, D.-T. Shieh, H.-C. Wu, M.-H. Yang and N.-L. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2005, 140, 139 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Guo, J. Z. Wang, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 448 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chew, Z. P. Guo, J. Z. Wang, J. Chen, P. Munroe, S. H. Ng, L. Zhao and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 941 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Shin, J. A. Corno, J. L. Gole and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2005, 139, 314 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, F. Cheng, J. Chen, J. Zhao, C. Li, Z. Tao and J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4067 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac and L. J. Krause, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A103 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, R. Ruffo, S. S. Hong, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 34 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anani and R. A. Huggins, J. Power Sources, 1992, 38, 351 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anani and R. A. Huggins, J. Power Sources, 1992, 38, 363 CrossRef CAS .

          C. K. Huang, S. Surampudi, A. I. Attia and G. Halpert, US Pat., 5 294 503,  1994 .
H. Kim, J. Choi, H.-J. Sohn and T. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4401 CrossRef CAS .
T. Moriga, K. Watanabe, D. Tsuji, S. Massaki and I. Nakabayashi, J. Solid State Chem., 2000, 153, 386 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Roberts, E. J. Cairns and J. A. Reimer, J. Power Sources, 2002, 110, 424 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wolfenstine, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 241 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Wang, L. Sun, D. H. Bradhurst, S. Zhong, S. X. Dou and H. K. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2000, 88, 278 CrossRef CAS .
I.-S. Kim, P. N. Kumta and G. E. Blomgren, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 493 CrossRef .
I.-S. Kim, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A157 CrossRef CAS .
I.-S. Kim, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A248 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Hwang, H.-Y. Lee, S.-W. Jang, S.-M. Lee, S.-J. Lee, H.-K. Baik and J.-Y. Lee, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A97 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Kim, J. H. Ryu, K. T. Lee and S. M. Oh, J. Power Sources, 2005, 147, 227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshio, T. Tsumura and N. Dimov, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 10 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Wilson, J. N. Reimers, E. W. Fuller and J. R. Dahn, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 74, 249 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xing, A. M. Wilson, K. Eguchi, G. Zank and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2410 CAS .
A. M. Wilson and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 326 CAS .
C. S. Wang, G. T. Wu, X. B. Zhang, Z. F. Qi and W. Z. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2751 CAS .
G. X. Wang, J. Yao and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A250 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshio, H. Wang, K. Fukuda, T. Umeno, N. Dimov and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1598 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dimov, S. Kugino and M. Yoshio, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 1579 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wen, J. Yang, B. F. Wang, K. Wang and Y. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. F. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Y. Xie and Z. S. Wen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, K. Hanai, J. Yang, N. Imanishi, A. Hirano and Y. Takeda, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 168, 61 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niu and J. Y. Lee, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A107 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Wang, J. H. Ahn, J. Yao, S. Bewlay and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Holzapfel, H. Buqa, W. Scheifele, P. Novak and F. M. Petrat, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1566 RSC .
M. Holzapfel, H. Buqa, F. Krumeich, P. Novak, F. M. Petrat and C. Veit, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A516 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Lee and S.-M. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 465 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hanai, Y. Liu, N. Imanishi, A. Hirano, M. Matsumura, T. Ichikawa and Y. Takeda, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 156 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Lee and S.-M. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 649 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 557 CrossRef CAS .
B.-C. Kim, H. Uono, T. Satou, T. Fuse, T. Ishihara, M. Ue and M. Senna, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A523 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, Y.-J. Lee, S. Rajendran, M.-S. Song, H.-S. Kim and J.-Y. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5561 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, D. Im and S. G. Doo, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 588 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, B. Han, J. Choo and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 10151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3688 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Cui, Y. Yang, C. M. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Takeda, N. Imanishi, C. Capiglia, J. Y. Xie and O. Yamamoto, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 152–153, 125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nagao, H. Sakaguchi, H. Honda, T. Fukunaga and T. Esaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1572 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miyachi, H. Yamamoto, H. Kawai, T. Ohta and M. Shirakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2089 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kim, S. Park and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A1112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A26 CrossRef CAS .
T. Morita and N. Takami, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A425 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, H.-J. Sohn, H. Kim, G. Jeong and W. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 456 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Doh, C.-W. Park, H.-M. Shin, D.-H. Kim, Y.-D. Chung, S.-I. Moon, B.-S. Jin, H.-S. Kim and A. Veluchamy, J. Power Sources, 2008, 179, 367 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hohl, T. Wieder, P. A. van Aken, T. E. Weirich, G. Denninger, M. Vidal, S. Oswald, C. Deneke, J. Mayer and H. Fuess, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2003, 320, 255 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mamiya, H. Takei, M. Kikuchi and C. Uyeda, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 229, 457 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wen and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1181 CAS .
C. Lupu, J. G. Mao, J. W. Rabalais, A. M. Guloy and J. W. Richardson, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 3765 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tamura, R. Ohshita, M. Fujimoto, S. Fujitani, M. Kamino and I. Yonezu, J. Power Sources, 2002, 107, 48 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tamura, R. Ohshita, M. Fujimoto, M. Kamino and S. Fujitani, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A679 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Beaulieu, T. D. Hatchard, A. Bonakdarpour, M. D. Fleischauer and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1457 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mukaibo, T. Momma, Y. Shacham-Diamand, T. Osaka and M. Kodaira, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A70 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 1997, 144, 2045 CAS .
I. A. Courtney and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 2943 CAS .
Y.-J. Kim, H. Lee and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2125 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Courtney, W. R. McKinnon and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 59 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, R. Retoux, U. Herterich and D. M. Schleich, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1 CAS .
J.-H. Kim, G.-J. Jeong, Y.-W. Kim, H.-J. Sohn, C. W. Park and C. K. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1544 CrossRef CAS .
J. Morales and L. Sanchez, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 1640 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, E. M. Kelder, L. Chen and J. Schoonman, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Morales and L. Sanchez, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 126, 219 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. E. Moubtassim, J. I. Corredor, J. L. Tirado and C. P. Vincente, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 47, 489 CrossRef .
C. W. Kwon, G. Campet, J. Portier, A. Poquet, L. Fournès, C. Labrugère, B. Jousseaume, T. Toupance, J. H. Choy and M. A. Subramanian, Int. J. Inorg. Mater., 2001, 3, 211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Xiao, J. Y. Lee, A. S. Yu and Z. L. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3623 CrossRef CAS .
H. Morimoto, M. Nakai, M. Tatsumisago and T. Minami, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3970 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, D. E. King, P. N. Kumta and G. E. Blomgren, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 4411 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Mansour, S. Mukerjee, X. Q. Yang and J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 869 CrossRef CAS .
F. Robert, F. Morato, J. Chouvin, L. Aldon, P. E. Lippens, J. O. Fourcade, J.-C. Jumas, B. Simon and P. Biensan, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 581 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, C. R. Martin and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 316 CrossRef .
C. Kim, M. Noh, M. Choi, J. Cho and B. Park, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Y. Lee and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3899 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, F. Su, J. Y. Lee and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17832 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, G.-X. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, D. Wexler, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 750 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Kim, I.-S. Hwang, S. J. Kwon, H.-Y. Kang, K.-S. Park, Y.-J. Choi, K.-J. Choi and J.-G. Park, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3041 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, Y.-M. Kang, G.-X. Wang, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 455 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim, D. Son, T.-G. Kim, J. Cho, B. Park, K. S. Ryu and S. H. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5987 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, G.-S. Park, E. Kim, J. Kim, S.-G. Doo and J. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1633 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim, M. G. Kim, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 771 RSC .
J. K. Shon, H. Kim, S. S. Kong, S. H. Hwang, T. H. Han, J. M. Kim, C. Pak, S. Doo and H. Chang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6727 RSC .
S. Han, B. Jang, T. Kim, S. M. Oh and T. Hyeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Sun, B. Chen and D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 14836 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Kepler, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 307 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mao, R. A. Dunlap and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 405 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. L. Fransson, E. Norstrom, K. Edstrom, L. Haggstrom, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A736 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Wachtler, M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Takeda, N. Imanishi, J. Y. Xie and O. Yamamoto, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 133, 189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wachtler, M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 189 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Beaulieu and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3237 CAS .
D. Larcher, L. Y. Beaulieu, O. Mao, A. E. George and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Vaughey, J. Owejan and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A220 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zhang and Y.-Y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1466 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakaguchi, H. Honda, Y. Akasaka and T. Esaka, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 50 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, D. G. Kim, H.-J. Sohn and T. Kang, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 144, 41 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, A. S. Prakash, J. Saint, M. Morcrette and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5502 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, L. Y. Beaulieu, D. D. MacNeil and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1658 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mao and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 423 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mao, R. L. Turner, I. A. Courtney, B. D. Fredericksen, M. I. Buckett, L. J. Krause and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 3 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wachtler, M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, J. Power Sources, 2002, 105, 151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 90, 281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Takeda, N. Imanishi and O. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4009 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, M. Wada, S. Yoshida, K. Ishihara, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1129 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rönnebro, J. Yin, A. Kitano, M. Wada, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A152 CrossRef CAS .
L. Beaulieu, D. Larcher, R. A. Dunlap and J. R. Dahn, J. Alloys Compd., 2000, 297, 122 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mukaibo, T. Sumi, T. Yokoshima, T. Momma and T. Osaka, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A218 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, M. Wada, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A583 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Beattie and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, C542 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lee, R. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2000, 90, 70 CrossRef .
M. Egashira, H. Takatsuji, S. Okada and J.-I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2002, 107, 56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Y. Lee and B.-H. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A563 CrossRef CAS .
M. Noh, Y. Kwon, H. Lee, J. Cho, Y. Kim and M. G. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1926 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. He, J. Ren, C. Jiang and C. Wan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A320 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiang, S. Zhang, X. Qiu, W. Zhua and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 503 CrossRef CAS .
C. Arbizzani, S. Beninati, M. Lazzari and M. Mastragostino, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 635 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. He, L. Wang, J. Ren, C. Jiang and C. Wan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1859 CrossRef CAS .
I. Grigoriants, L. Sominski, H. Li, I. Ifargan, D. Aurbach and A. Gedanken, Chem. Commun., 2005, 921 RSC .
K. T. Lee, Y. S. Jung and S. M. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5652 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, K. T. Lee, J. H. Ryu, D. Im and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1452 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chang, S.-J. Liu, J.-J. Wu and C.-H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16423 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A44 CrossRef CAS .
G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, G. Derrien, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3169 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, Y.-S. Hu, L. Zhi, D. Wu, I. Lieberwirth, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Small, 2007, 3, 2066 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1660 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Paek, E. Yoo and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 72 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Chen, J. Y. Lee and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2003, 41, 959 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Guo, Z. W. Zhao, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1392 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Chen, J. Y. Lee and Z. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 260 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. C. Zeng and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 645 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, J.-S. Cai, Y. He, F.-S. Ke and S.-G. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 950 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7039 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. D. Cress, R. A. DiLeo and R. P. Raffaelle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 638 RSC .
Y. Wang, M. Wu, Z. Jiao and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, M. Wada, Y. Kitano, S. Tanase, O. Kajita and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1341 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Ishihara, S. Mizutani and H. Inoue, US Pat., 0 115 734,  2006 .
Q. Fan, P. J. Chupas and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A274 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn, R. E. Mar and A. Abouzeid, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A361 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. W. Todd, R. E. Mar and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1998 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. W. Todd, R. E. Mar and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, G. Mulas and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 928 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Lee, S. Yoon, C.-M. Park, J.-M. Lee, H. Kim, D. Im, S.-G. Doo and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 54, 364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, J.-M. Lee, H. Kim, D. Im, S.-G. Doo and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2699 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Ferguson, M. L. Martine, A. E. George and J. R. Dahn, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 794 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Fuller and J. C. Severiens, Phys. Rev., 1954, 96, 21 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoon, C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A42 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baggetto and H. I. Notten, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A169 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pereira, M. Balasubramanian, L. Dupont, J. McBreen, L. C. Klein and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1118 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Peña, I. Sandu, O. Joubert, F. S. Pascual, C. O. Areán and T. Brousse, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Graetz, C. C. Ahn, R. Yazami and B. Fultz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A698 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, H. Kim, S.-G. Doo and J. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A343 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 307 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cui, L. Gu, L. Zhi, N. Kaskhedikar, P. A. van Aken, K. Müllen and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3079 CrossRef CAS .
M. Martos, J. Morales, L. Sanchez, R. Ayouchi, D. Leinen, F. Martin and J. R. R. Barrado, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2939 CrossRef CAS .
M. Martos, J. Morales and L. Sanchez, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 615 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ng, J. Wang, K. Konstantinov, D. Wexler, J. Chen and H. K. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A787 CrossRef CAS .

          C.-M. Park, PhD Dissertation, Seoul National University,  2009 Search PubMed .

          D. E. C. Corbridge, Phosphorus: An Outline of its Chemistry, Biochemistry and Technology, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 5th edn,  1995 Search PubMed .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. S. Souza, V. Pralong, A. J. Jacobson and L. F. Nazar, Science, 2002, 296, 2012 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, Y.-U. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5566 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-U. Kim, B. W. Cho and H.-J. Sohn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1475 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gillot, M. Ménétrier, E. Bekaert, L. Dupont, M. Morcrette, L. Monconduit and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 877 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gillot, S. Boyanov, L. Dupont, M.-L. Doublet, M. Morcrette, L. Monconduit and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6327 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boyanov, J. Bernardi, E. Bekaert, M. Ménétrier, M.-L. Doublet and L. Monconduit, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 298 CrossRef CAS .
M.-P. Bichat, J.-L. Pascal, F. Gillot and F. Favier, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6761 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. V. M. Satya Kishore and U. V. Varadaraju, J. Power Sources, 2005, 144, 204 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hwang, M. G. Kim, Y. Kim, S. W. Martin and J. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3161 RSC .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6319 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-U. Kim, C.-K. Lee, H.-J. Sohn and T. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A933 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-U. Kim, S.-I. Lee, C. K. Lee and H.-J. Sohn, J. Power Sources, 2005, 141, 163 CrossRef CAS .
B. León, J. I. Corredor, J. L. Tirado and C. Pérez-Vicente, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1829 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wu and Z.-W. Fu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A22 CrossRef CAS .
S.-G. Woo, J.-H. Jung, H. Kim, M. G. Kim, C. K. Lee, H.-J. Sohn and B. W. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1979 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pralong, D. C. S. Souza, K. T. Leung and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 516 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alcántara, J. L. Tiradoa, J. C. Jumas, L. Monconduit and J. Olivier-Fourcade, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 308 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. V. M. Satya Kishore and U. V. Varadaraju, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 594 CrossRef CAS .
O. Crosnier, C. Mounsey, P. Subramanya Herle, N. Taylor and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4890 CrossRef .
M. L. Doublet, F. Lemoigno, F. Gillot and L. Monconduit, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morcrette, F. Gillot, L. Monconduit and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A59 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Bichat, F. Gillot, L. Monconduit, F. Favier, M. Morcrette, F. Lemoigno and M.-L. Doublet, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gillot, L. Monconduit, M. Morcrette, M.-L. Doublet, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3627 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gillot, L. Monconduit and M.-L. Doublet, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5817 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boyanov, J. Bernardi, F. Gillot, L. Dupont, M. Womes, J.-M. Tarascon, L. Monconduit and M.-L. Doublet, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3531 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. C. Silva, O. Crosnier, G. Ouvrard, J. Greedan, A. Safa-Sefat and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A162 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, J. Yang, J. Xie, B. Wang and Z. Wen, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 480 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pfeiffer, F. Tancret, M.-P. Bichat, L. Monconduit, F. Favier and T. Brousse, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 263 CrossRef .
A. Dailly, J. Ghanbaja, P. Willmann and D. Billaud, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 977 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, S. Yoon, S.-I. Lee, J.-H. Kim, J.-H. Jung and H.-J. Sohn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A917 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, I. D. Raistrick and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 457 CAS .
K. C. Hewitt, L. Y. Beaulieu and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A402 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, W. Pu, L. Wang, J. Ren, C. Jiang and C. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3651 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, G. Derrien, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 339 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Vaughey, J. O'Hara and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 13 CrossRef .
L. M. L. Fransson, J. T. Vaughey, R. Benedek, K. Edström, J. O. Thomas and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochem. Commun., 2001, 3, 317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morcrette, D. Larcher, J.-M. Tarascon, K. Edström, J. T. Vaughey and M. M. Thackeray, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5339 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Zhao and G. S. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 891 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 47 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. L. Fransson, J. T. Vaughey, K. Edström and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A86 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ionica, P. E. Lippens, J. O. Fourcade and J.-C. Jumas, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 478 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alcántara, F. J. Fernández-Madrigal, P. Lavela, J. L. Tirado, J. C. Jumas and J. Olivier-Fourcade, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2517 RSC .
J.-M. Tarascon, M. Morcrette, L. Dupont, Y. Chabre, C. Payen, D. Larcher and V. Pralong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, X. Zhao, G. Cao, Y. Zhong and M. Zhao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 542, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grugeon, S. Laruelle, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Solid State Sci., 2003, 5, 895 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Fernandez-madrigal, P. Lavela, C. Pérez Vicente, J. L. Tirado, J. C. Jumas and J. Olivier-Fourcade, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2962 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 6367 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, S. A. Needham, G.-X. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, J.-S. Park, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2406 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Takeda, C. Capiglia, X. D. Liu, N. Imanishi and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 56 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3169 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A46 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, Y. Hwa, N.-E. Sung and H.-J. Sohn, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1097 RSC .
C. Suryanarayana, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2001, 46, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. Honda, H. Sakaguchi, Y. Fukuda and T. Esaka, Mater. Res. Bull., 2003, 38, 647 CrossRef CAS .
H. Honda, H. Sakaguchi, I. Tanaka and T. Esaka, J. Power Sources, 2003, 123, 216 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Vaughey, L. Fransson, H. A. Swinger, K. Edström and M. M. Thackeray, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 64 CrossRef CAS .
C. Villevieille, B. Fraisse, M. Womes, J.-C. Jumas and L. Monconduit, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 324 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, L. Y. Beaulieu, O. Mao, A. E. George and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1703 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Fernández-Madrigal, P. Lavela, C. Pérez-Vicente and J. L. Tirado, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 501, 205 CrossRef CAS .
C. Villevieille, C.-M. Ionica-Bousquet, B. Ducourant, J.-C. Jumas and L. Monconduit, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 388 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xianming, T. Nishina and I. Uchida, J. Power Sources, 2002, 104, 90 CrossRef .
O. Crosnier, T. Brousse, X. Devaux, P. Fragnaud and D. M. Schleich, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 169 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, S. Yoon, S.-I. Lee and H.-J. Sohn, J. Power Sources, 2009, 186, 206 CrossRef CAS .
G. Taillades and J. Sarradin, J. Power Sources, 2004, 125, 199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, L. C. Yang, L. J. Fu, M. Xu, W. J. Liu, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2006, 17, 587 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, H. Jung and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, M. Liu, D. Naik and J. L. Gole, J. Power Sources, 2001, 92, 70 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Richardson and G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oumellal, A. Rougier, G. A. Nazri, J.-M. Tarascon and L. Aymard, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 916 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, Y.-U. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1451 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Murphy, F. J. Di Salvo, J. N. Carides and J. V. Waszczak, Mater. Res. Bull., 1978, 13, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn and W. R. McKinnon, Solid State Ionics, 1987, 23, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sleigh and W. R. McKinnon, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 45, 67 CrossRef CAS .
F. Leroux, G. R. Goward, W. P. Power and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 1, 255 CrossRef .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818 RSC .
K. M. Colbow, J. R. Dahn and R. R. Haering, J. Power Sources, 1989, 26, 397 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ferg, R. J. Gummov, A. de Kock and M. M. Thackeray, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L147 CAS .
T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda and N. Yamamoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1431 CAS .
K. Zaghib, M. Simoneau, M. Armand and M. Gauthier, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 300 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan and M. Grätzel, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A39 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nahahara, R. Nakajima, T. Matsushima and H. Majima, J. Power Sources, 2003, 117, 131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Z. Wen, X. Zhu and Z. Lin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and J. Cho, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A81 CrossRef CAS .
Toshiba SCiBTM, http://www.scib.jp/en/.
Y.-S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y.-G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421 .
E. Baudrin, S. Cassaignon, M. Koesch, J.-P. Jolivet, L. Dupont and J.- M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 337 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Reddy, M. S. Kishore, V. Pralong, U. V. Varadaraju and B. Raveau, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A29 CrossRef .
C.-M. Park, W.-S. Chang, H. Jung, J.-H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. Garcia and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862 CrossRef .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 501 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, D. Choi, S. Kerisit, K. M. Rosso, D. Wang, J. Zhang, G. Graff and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 588 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Aubom and Y. L. Barberio, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 638 CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 315 CAS .
J. O. Besenhard, J. Heydecke, E. Wudy, H. P. Fritz and W. Foag, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 8, 61 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonino, L. P. Bicelli, B. Rivolta, M. Lazzari and F. Festorazzi, Solid State Ionics, 1985, 17, 21 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, R. Deshpande, P. A. Parilla, E. Whitney, D. T. Gillaspie, K. M. Jones, A. H. Muhan, S. Zhang and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jung, S. Lee, D. Ahn, A. C. Dillon and S.-H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 286 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham, D. M. Pasquariello and E. B. Willstaedt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 743 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ku, Y. S. Jung, K. T. Lee, C. H. Kim and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A688 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, S. Yang, Z. Yi, J. Sun and Y. Zhou, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 93, 395 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Yang, Q. S. Gao, Y. H. Zhang, Y. Tang and Y. P. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, B. Guo, S. A. Corr, Q. Shi, Y.-S. Hu, K. R. Heier, L. Chen, R. Seshadri and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4215 CrossRef CAS .
P. Balaya, H. L. Kienle and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 621 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1212 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, L. Dupont, P. Poizot, J.-B. Leriche and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1266 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Cheol-Min Park
	Cheol-Min Park received his MS (2005) and PhD (2009) (supervisor: Prof. Hun-Joon Sohn) in the Department of Materials Science & Engineering (DMSE) of Seoul National University. He also worked as a researcher at LG Chem. Ltd. Battery Research Institute (2005–2006). Currently, he is working as a postdoctoral researcher at Environmental Energy Technologies Division of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. His research interests are focused on synthesis and investigation of new alternative electrode materials for rechargeable Li-ion batteries. He was awarded the Electrochemical Society (ECS) Korea Student Award (2009) and the DMSE Best Graduate Student Awards (2008 & 2009).

Jae-Hun Kim
	Jae-Hun Kim is a Postdoctoral Researcher at National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) in USA. He received his BS, MS, and PhD degrees in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University (Korea). His PhD dissertation title is “Electrochemical characteristics of Si-based composite anode materials for lithium rechargeable batteries” (Advisor: Professor Hun-Joon Sohn). After postdoctoral work at the University of Idaho (USA), he has been working for NREL since 2008. His current research interests are focused on synthesis and characterization of nanostructured electrode architectures and materials for lithium batteries and supercapacitors.

Hansu Kim
	Dr Hansu Kim is currently a senior research engineer at Energy Lab in the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), which is central research organization of Samsung Electronics in Korea. He received BS, MS, and PhD degree in Department of Mineral and Petroleum Engineering from Seoul National University in 2000 under the supervision of Professor Hun-Joon Sohn. His research is mainly focused on nanostructured alloy-type anode materials for next generation lithium secondary batteries and printable flexible battery for the future mobile device applications.

Hun-Joon Sohn
	Hun-Joon Sohn received his BS and MS degrees in metallurgical engineering from Seoul National University. Also he earned his PhD from University of Utah in Salt Lake City, USA in 1980. He did his postdoctoral work at the same University and joined Seoul National University in 1982. Currently he is the POSCO Chair Professor in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at SNU. His research interests involve electrochemical behaviors of materials under various conditions and recently has mainly focused on the development and characterization of anode materials for the Li secondary batteries.

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structures and capacities of Group IV elements. (a) Crystal structures of cubic Si (blue), cubic Ge (green), tetragonal Sn (red), and cubic Pb (orange). (b) Gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), Si (Li4.4Si), Ge (Li4.25Ge), Sn (Li4.25Sn), and Pb (Li4.25Pb).	 

 	Fig. 2  Voltage profiles of Si powder electrodes for the first and second discharge/charge cycles.	 
Si (crystalline) + xLi+ + xe− → LixSi (amorphous) + (3.75 − x)Li+ + (3.75 − x)e−	(1)
→ Li15Si4 (crystalline)	(2)
Li15Si4 (crystalline) → Si (amorphous) + yLi+ + ye− + Li15Si4 (residual)	(3)
Mg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LixMg2Si	(4)
LixMg2Si + xLi+ + xe− → LicriticalMg2Si → LisaturatedMg2Si + Mg + Li–Si alloy	(5)
Mg + xLi+ + xe− → Li–Mg alloy	(6)
10.8Li + CaSi2 → Li2Ca + 2Li4.4Si	(7)
xLi+ + xe− + NiSi → LixSi + Ni ↔ Ni + Si + xLi+ + xe−	(8)
xLi+ + xe− + FeSi → LixSi + Fe ↔ Fe + Si + xLi+ + xe−	(9)

 	Fig. 3  Total capacity of a Li-ion cell as a function of anode capacity (CA), including the masses of other required internal components and the case. The capacities of the cathodes (CC) are considered to be 140 and 200 mAh g−1 (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).58	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of the nanocrystalline Si inverse opal structure (A. Esmanski and G. A. Ozin, “Silicon Inverse-Opal-Based Macroporous Materials as Negative Electrodes for Lithium Ion Batteries” Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1999. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).82	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical behaviors of a SiO electrode: (a) voltage profiles for the first and second discharge/charge cycles, and (b) corresponding differential capacity plots.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical behaviors of various Sn electrodes (solid line: electrodeposited Sn, dashed line: Sn powder, dotted line: graphite) (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).97	 
SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O + 4.4Li+ + 4.4e− ↔ Li4.4Sn + 2Li2O	(10)
SnO + 2Li+ + 2e− → Sn + Li2O + 4.4Li+ + 4.4e− ↔ Li4.4Sn + Li2O	(11)

 	Fig. 7  Cycle-life performance of SnO2 nanoparticles as a function of (a) size (3, 4, and 8 nm) and (b) electrode composition (SnO2:binder:carbon black at weight ratios of 6:2:2 and 8:1:1). The charge cutoff voltage was 1.2 V (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).118	 
MxSn + 4.25Li+ + 4.25e− → xM + Li4.25Sn	(12)
xM + Li4.25Sn ↔ MxSn + Sn + 4.25 Li+ + 4.25 e−	(13)
First step: 10Li + Cu6Sn5 ↔ 5Li2CuSn + Cu	(14)
Second step: xLi + Li2CuSn ↔ Li2+xCu1−ySn + yCu (0 < x < 2.4, 0 < y < 1)	(15)
Third step: (2.4–x)Li + Li2+xCu1−ySn ↔ Li4.4Sn + (1 − y)Cu	(16)

 	Fig. 8  TEM image of a Sn–C composite material. The figure reveals that the size of the tin particles is about 50 nm at the surface but only a few nanometres (less than 10 nm) in the bulk of the material, resulting in an average particle size of 30 nm (G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, “Nanostructured Sn–C Composite as an Advanced Anode Material in High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries” Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).170	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of an amorphous tin–cobalt anode: (© The Electrochemical Society, reprinted with permission).185	 
Ge → Li9Ge4 → Li7Ge2 → Li15Ge4 + Li22Ge5	(17)

 	Fig. 10  Crystal structures and capacities of Group V elements: (a) crystal structures of orthorhombic P (purple), rhombohedral As (yellow), rhombohedral Sb (green), and rhombohedral Bi (blue), and (b) gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), P (Li3P), As (Li3As), Sb (Li3Sb), and Bi (Li3Bi).	 
During discharge: Black P → LixP → LiP→ Li2P → Li3P	(18)
During charge: Li3P → Li2P → LiP → LixP → Black P	(19)

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical behaviors and reaction mechanism of black P: (a) voltage profiles of red P, black P, and black P/C composite, (b) differential capacity plot, ex situ XRD patterns (numbers correspond to the voltage point indicated in DCP), and HRTEM image of LiP phase formed at 0.78 V during the first discharge (C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, “Black Phosphorus and Its Composite for Lithium Rechargeable Batteries” Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).207	 
Insertion reaction: MPy + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixMPy	(20)
Conversion reaction: MPy + 3Li+ + 3e− ↔ yLi3P + M	(21)
MnP4 + 7Li+ + 7e− ↔ Li7MnP4	(22)

 	Fig. 12  The relation of the layered structure of MnP4 to the antifluorite structure of Li7MnP4 and the proposed mechanism for the transformation. (© Science, reprinted with permission).208	 
VP + Li+ + e− ↔ LiVP	(23)

 	Fig. 13  Electrochemical behaviors of NiP2 polymorphs: (a) voltage profile and cycle behavior (inset graph) of monoclinic NiP2 and (b) voltage profile and cycle behavior (inset graph) of cubic NiP2 (© The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission).212	 
NiP2 (cubic) + 6Li → 2Li3P + Ni	(24)
NiP2 (monoclinic) + 2Li → Li2NiP2 + 4Li → Ni + 2Li3P	(25)
ZnP2 → LiZnP + LiP → Li3P + LiZn	(26)
Li3P + LiZn → LiZnP + LiP → LiZnP (+P) → ZnP2	(27)
Sn4P3 + 9Li → 4Sn + 3Li3P	(28)
(Sn4P3 + 3Li → 4Sn + 3LiP, 3LiP + 6Li → 3Li3P)
4Sn + 17Li → Li17Sn4	(29)
TiP2/P (Ti:P = 1:4 mol) composite ↔ Li10.5TiP4 (cubic)	(30)
During discharge: CoP3 + 9Li+ + 9e− → 3Li3P + Co	(31)
During charge: Co + 3Li3P → Co + 3LiP + 6Li+ + 6e−	(32)

 	Fig. 14  Potential/composition curve during the first galvanostatic cycling of a CoP3 electrode performed at a 10 C rate in the 1.7–0.2 V potential window (Inset: Projection of the CoP6 octahedra along the [001] direction in the structure of CoP3) (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).223	 
During discharge: Sb → Li2Sb → Li3Sb	(33)
During charge: Li3Sb → Sb	(34)
Insertion reaction: MSby + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixMSby	(35)
Conversion reaction: MSby + 3Li+ + 3e− ↔ yLi3Sb + M	(36)
xLi + Li2InSb ↔ Li2+xIn1−xSb + xIn (xmax = 1)	(37)
xLi + InSb → LixInSb (xmax = 0.27)	(38)
(3−x)Li + LixInSb → Li3Sb + In	(39)
In + Li → InLi + 0.75 Li → InLi1.75	(40)
xLi + Cu2Sb ↔ LixCu2−ySb + yCu	(41)
1st discharge: ZnSb → LiZnSb → Li3Sb + Zn → Li3Sb + LiZn	(42)
1st charge: Li3Sb + LiZn → Li3Sb + Zn → Li2ZnSb → Li2−xZnSb (0 ≤ x ≤ 2)	(43)
2nd discharge: Li2−xZnSb → Li2ZnSb → Li3Sb + Zn → Li3Sb + LiZn	(44)
2nd charge: Li3Sb + LiZn → Li3Sb + Zn → Li2ZnSb → Li2−xZnSb (0 ≤ x ≤ 2)	(45)

 	Fig. 15  Quasi-intercalation of layered materials: (a) Quasi-intercalation of layered ZnSb, (b) P, and (c) As electrodes. (d) Ex situ XRD and (e)–(g) electrochemical performances of the layered ZnSb electrode between 0.8 and 2.0 V (vs. Li/Li+) (C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, “Quasi-Intercalation and Facile Amorphization in Layered ZnSb for Li-ion Batteries” Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 47. © Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission).246	 
MnSb + Li → LiMnSb	(46)
LiMnSb + 2xLi → Li1+2xMn1−xSb + xMn (0 < x < 1)	(47)
3CoSb3 + 9Li+ + 9e− → 3Li3Sb + 3Co	(48)
3Li3Sb + 3Co → 3Sb + 3Co + 9Li+ + 9e−	(49)

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the proposed structural sequence for the electrochemical reaction of Li with MnSb: (a) MnSb (NiAs), (b) MnSb (intermediate zinc blende-type structure), (c) LiMnSb (distorted antifluorite type structure), and (d) Li3Sb (© The Electrochemical Society, reprinted with permission).247	 
1st step: SnSb + 3Li → Li3Sb + Sn	(50)
2nd step: Li3Sb + Sn + 4.25Li → Li3Sb + Li17Sn4	(51)
Al + Sb → AlSb (ΔG0 = −47.721 kJ mol−1, 298 K)	(52)
4AlSb + 3C → 4Sb + Al4C3 (ΔG0 = −3.682 kJ mol−1, 298 K)	(53)
Sb2S3 → LixS + Sb → Li2S + Sb → Li2S + Li3Sb	(54)
Li2S + Li3Sb → Li2S + Sb → Sb2S3	(55)
During discharge: Bi → LiBi → Li3Bi	(56)
During charge: Li3Bi → LiBi → Bi	(57)
During discharge: As → LiAs → Li2As → Li3As	(58)
During charge: Li3As → Li2As → LiAs → As	(59)
Ag → (Ag) → β (LiAg) → γ3 (Li9Ag4) → γ3 (shifted Li9Ag4 phase) + γ2	(60)
γ2 + γ3 (shifted Li9Ag4 phase) → γ3 (Li9Ag4) → β (LiAg) → (Ag) → Ag	(61)
Mg → α (Mg-rich phase) → β (Li-rich phase)	(62)
Insertion reaction: MOx + yLi+ + ye− ↔ LiyMOx	(63)
Conversion reaction: MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O	(64)
[Li]8a[Li1/3, Ti5/3]16d[O4]32e + e− + Li+ ↔ [Li2]16c[Li1/3, Ti5/3]16d[O4]32e	(65)

 	Fig. 17  Typical voltage profile and cycle performance (inset) of a Li4Ti5O12 electrode at 21 °C and a 1/30 C discharge rate (© Science Direct, reprinted with permission).283	 

 	Fig. 18  Voltage-composition profiles for various transition metal oxide electrodes (M = Co, Ni, Fe, and Cu). Discharge and charge tests at a rate of 0.2 C between 0.02 and 3 V (© The Electrochemical Society, reprinted with permission).312	 


FeO	746	Li2O, Fe
CoO	715	Li2O, Co
NiO	718	Li2O, Ni
CuO	674	Li2O, Cu
Cr2O3	529	Li2O, Cr
MoO2	838	Li2O, Moa
MoO3	1117	Li2O, Mo

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
